LD. 92 XVI
2,000

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

SIXTEENTH REPORT

(OFFICIAL TRUSTEES ACT, 1973)

November, 1960

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW) -

Price Rs. 0:55 nP. or 10d.

PRINTED IN INDIA BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS,
NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 1961


CHAIRMAN
T. L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR. LAW COMMISSION.
5, Jor Bagh, New Delhi-3,
November 25, 1960.

Shri Asoke Kumar Sen, हि
Minister of Law, Government of India,
New Delhi.

My Dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Sixteenth
Report of the Law Commission on the Official Trustees Act.

2. The revision of the Law relating to Official Trustees was
referred by the Law Ministry to the previous Commission and
had been just taken up by it. After the constitution of the
present Commission, the subject was entrusted to Shri P. Satya-
narayana Rao. The draft Report prepared by him was
considered by the Commission at its meeting held on the 18th
March, 1960, and was revised in accordance with the decisions
taken therein. The revised draft Report was circulated to the
State Governments and other persons interested for opinion.
The opinions received from them were considered by the Com-
mission at its meeting held on the 15th October, 1960. It was
left to the Chairman and Shri P. Satyanarayana Rao to finalise
the Report in the light of the decisions taken at the meeting.

3. The Commission wishes to acknowledge: the services
rendered by Shri P. M. Bakshi, Deputy Draftsman, in connec-
tion with the preparation of the Report.

Yours sincerely,
व. L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR.


REPORT ON THE OFFICIAL TRUSTEES ACT, 1913

PARAGRAPHS

iL

9-19,

CONTENTS
PARTI
GENERAL
Historical background - . . . . . . .
Scope of revision « + . . . . . . .

Suggestions of Governments of West Bengal and Madras

Insertion of a provision similar to s. 22 of the Administrator-
General’s Act. :

Insertion of a provision similar to s. 26 of the Administrator~
General’s Act. . . .

Insertion of provisions similar to ss, 30 and 57 of the Administra-
tor-General’s + . . . .

Insertion of a provision similar to s. 28 (2) of the Administrator-
General’s Act - . . . + .

Official Trustee as guardian of property of minors and lunatics -

PART वा

PROPOSALS RELATING TO SECTIONS

Preamble, and sections 7 to end . . . . . .
Appendix . 6 6 6 eee > oe
APPENDIX

ApPENDIX—Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendments .

oo

9-1०


REPORT ON THE OFFICIAL TRUSTEES ACT, 1913
PARTI
GENERAL _

1. The office of Official Trustee was constituted in India
during the days of the East India Company by Act 17 of
1843. As the preamble to that Act indicates clearly, the
office was created to save “the property of infants, feme co-
verts and others vested in trustees, from the peculiar risks
to which they were exposed not only from the insolvency of
the trustees, but from the frequent difficulties occasioned by
their death, or absence or incapacity to act”. The history of
the legislation relating to the office till the passing of the
present Official Trustees Act in 1913 has been traced suc-
cinctly by Kinney! in his introduction to the Official Trus-
tees Act, and it is needless to repeat it here.

2. The Official Trustees Act has been in force for more
than forty-five years. It is on the whole a comprehensive
and weil-drafted piece of legislation and no difficulties have
been felt in the interpretation of the various sections of
the Act. We.are of the opinion that the Act does not require
any substantial changes.

We have examined the provisions of the (English) Public
Trustee Act, 1906 and the case-law thereunder to find out
whether any useful changes can be made in our Act in the
light of the same and we are satisfied that no such changes
are necessary,

In England, the Lord Chancellor appointed, in 1954, a
Committee “to consider the work of the Public Trustee and
to advise whether any changes should be made in his func-
tions or methods of business or in the financial conditions
under which he operates”. In keeping with its terms of
reference the Committee dealt with the organisational and
financial aspects of the office and made recommendations
with a view to placing the Public Trustee in a sound finan-
cial position, We are not concerned with these aspects of
the office: of Official Trustee, and the recommendations of
the Committee? are therefore of little use for our purpose.

3. In 1952, at the instance of the Government of West
Bengal, the then Administrator-General and Official
Trustee of West Bengal made a study of the Official Trustees
Act and submitted a list of suggestions to be considered in

1Kinney : Law relating to Administrators-General and Official Trustees,
pages 95—99.

’Report of the Committee of Enquiry into the Public Trustee Office,
md. 9755.

Historical

background,

Scope of
revision.

Suggestions
of Govern-
ments of

West Bengal
and Madras.


2

the course of the revision of the Act. These suggestions
were sent to the Central Government, which circulated the
same among the various State Governments for their com-
ments. The Government of Madras in its reply made cer-
tain additional suggestions and these were also communi-
cated to the various States for their comments. These sug-
gestions and the comments are considered below.

Insertion of 4. The first suggestion made by the Government of

a ine ta West Bengal is that a provision on the lines of section 22 of

see of the the Administrator-General’s Act should be incorporated in

Administra- the Official Trustees Act.

tor~GeneraP’s

Under section 22 of the Administrator-General’s Act,

1913, whenever an Administrator-General applies for letters
of administration under the Act, it is sufficient if the peti-
tion states certain matters mentioned in the section’. This
provision, in effect, dispenses with the necessity of men-
tioning all the particulars under sections 277 and 278 (1) of
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 as also the submission of
any separate affidavit? which may be required under the
rules made by the High Court or under s. 19-I of the Court
Fees Act, 1870. While under the Administrator-General’s
Act, the occasions for filing such petitions may be* numer-
ous, we find that in the case of Official Trustee, such
occasions would be rare. .

Section 22 of the Administrator-General’s Act runs as follows :—

‘22, Whenever any Administrator-General applies for letters of
administration in accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shall be
sufficient if the petition required to be presented for the grant of such
letters states,

9) the time and place of the death of the deceased to the best
of the knowledge and belief of che petitioner ;
(#) the names and addresses of the surviving next-of-kin of the
deceased, if known ;
(iif) the particulars and value of the assets likely to come into
the hands of the petitioner ;
Ge) particulars of the liabilities of the estate, if known.”.
*See In the goods of Mc. Comisky, 20 Cal. 879. ‘This case, though
decided under Act II of 1874 is a good authority as the relevant provisions of
the 1874 Act have been reproduced in the present Act.

*Petitions for letters of administration under the Administrator-General’s
Act can be presented in the following cases :—

(a) Compulsory petitions in the case of non-exempted persons having
assets exceeding two thousand rupees, where no other person has applied
for administration—section 95

@) Petitions under orders of the High Court in respect of assets
eft within the Presidency Towns, where there is apprehension of mis-
appropriation, deterioration, ete,—section 70:

(©) Petitions under orders passed by the High Court in respect of
assets in the Presidency;Towns pending determination of rights of successtort,
section 41 (1) read with section 11(2)(6):

(d) Petitions limited to military estates—section 173

(© Petitions under the general provisions of sections 6, 7, 8, 77 and
31, ete,


3

Under the Official Trustees Act, the only possibility’ in
which the Official Trustee may become an executor . is
under section 7(6) which states that the Official Trustee
shall not administer the estate of a deceased person unless
he is expressly appointed as sole executor and sole trustee
under the will of such person. He cannot be appointed
under this provision as an executor, simpliciter, but he can
be appointed only if there isa trust created by will in
which he will be appointed as the sole executor and sole
trustee under the will. In such a case, he will have to apply
for a probate in case the probate is obligatory. There is no
possibility of his applying for letters of administration in
the other cases in which the Administrator-General can
apply. The Government of Madhya Bharat was against the
proposal made by the Government of West Bengal. Cases
where a trustee is appointed as the sole executor and sole
trustee under will would be rare and in such cases there is
no harm if he files an affidavit as required by section 19-I of
the Court-fees Act or under rules made by the High Court.
For a remote contingency of that type we think it unneces-
sary to engraft a provision similar to section 22 of the
Administrator-General’s Act in the Official Trustees Act.
Besides, it would seem to be in keeping with the pattern of
the Act to treat the Official Trustee as standing, generally
speaking, in the same position as a private executor and a
private trustee.

5. The second suggestion made by the Government of Insertion of
West Bengal is that a provision similar to section 26 of the sinter to
Administrator-General’s Act! may be incorporated in the 5, 26 of the
Official Trustees Act. Section 26 of the Administrator- Administra—
General's Act empewers the Administrator-General _ to tor-General’s
decide the claims of ithe creditors and others against the“
estate of deceased in the course of the administration of
the assets of the deceased.

*Section 26 of the Administrator-General’s Act reads thus :

“26. (1) When the _Administrator-General_has given the pres-
cribed notice for creditors and others to sendinto him their claims against
the estate of the deceased, he shall, at the expiration of the time therein
named for sending in claims be at liberty to distribute the assets or any
part thereof in discharge of such lawful claims as he has notice of.

(2) He shall not be liable for the assets so distributed to any person
of whose claim he had not notice at the time of such distribution.

(3) No notice of any claim which has been sent in and has been re-
jected or disallowed in part by the Admiinistrator-General shall affect
him unless proceedings to enforce such claims are commenced within
one month after notice of the rejection or disallowance of such claim
has been given in the prescribed manner and unless such proceedings
are prosecuted without unreasonable delay.

(4) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any creditor
or other claimant to follow the assets or any part thereof in the hands
of the persons who may have received the same respectively.

(5) In computing the period of limitation for any suit, appeal or
application under the provisions of any law for the time being in’ force,
the period between the date of submission of the claims of a creditor to
the Administrator-General and the date of the final decision of the Ad.
ministrator-General on such claim shall be excluded.”.


Insertion of
provisions
similar to ss.
30 and 51
of the Ad-
ministrator -
General’s
Act.

4

We cannot agree with the suggestion. Leaving aside for
a moment the exceptional case under section 70) of the
Official Trustees Act, the functions of the Official Trustee
are entirely different from those of the Administrator-
General. The Official Trustee has merely to carry out the
execution of the trust for which he is the trustee and the
question of deciding the claims of creditors against the crust
seldom arises. All that he has to do is to pay the bene-
ficiaries what is due to them under the trust and, if any
difficulty arises, to apply to the High Court for directions.
He stands, generally speaking, in the same position as a
private trustee under the Indian Trusts Act. If a private
trustee has no power to decide and adjudicate upon any
claims under the Trusts Act, there is no reason to vest such
a power in the Official Trustee. Where the Official Trustee
happens to be the sole executor and trustee under section
7(6) of the Official Trustees Act, he stands, so far as the
executorial functions are concerned, in the same position
as an ordinary executor and holds the estate as trustee after
the administration is completed and the residue ascertained'.

By way of contrast it may be noted that the functions
of the Administrator-General are different in nature. The
proceedings before him are to a certain extent really a
substitute for a suit for the administration of the estate,
and it is on this that his powers and duties are based’. We,
therefore, arrive at the conclusion that there is no justifica-
tion for incorporating the provisions of section 26 of the
Administrator-General’s Act in the Official Trustees Act.

6. We pass on to consider the suggestions made by the
Government of Madras. The first suggestion is to the effect
that provisions similar to sections 30 and 51 of the
Administrator-General’s Act may be inserted in the Official
Trustees Act. Whilst section 30 of that Act empowers an
Administrator-General to take evidence on oath, section 51
provides the penalty for giving false evidence on oath. As
already pointed out*, the Administrator-General has certain
judicial or quasi-judicial functions to perform and, therefore,
there is full justification for clothing him with the power
to take evidence on oath. On the other hand, the Official
Trustee has no such functions to discharge. Indeed, it will
be contrary to the basic approach of the Official Trustees
Act, which envisages the Official Trustee as standing on
practically the same footing as a private trustee or private

गुफा question—“ When an executor becomes the trustee where he is
appointed as executor and trustee under the will” has been considered in a
number of cases—See in this connection Raghavalu Naidu and Sons v. Com=
missioner of Income-Tax, A.ILR., 1950, Mad. 790.

2He has, for example, to administer the estate and decide claims of cre-
ditors and legates when he obtains letters of administration under the various
provisions already noted—See para. 4, foot-note.

35968 para. 4, supra, and also ss. 31-32 of the Administrator-General’s
Act.


5

executor, to clothe the Official Trustee with judicial pow-
ers. We cannot, therefore, accept the suggestion, notwith-
standing the fact that tae provisions in question have 9९९७
inserted in the Official Trustees Act in its application to
West Bengal, by an amending Act’.

7. The second suggestion made by the Government of Insertion of

Madras is that the provisions of section 28(2) of the Admin- simular te 8.
istrator-General's Act may be incorporated in the Official 28(2)! of the
Trustees Act. This sub-section lays down that applications Administra
for directions of the High Court under the Act may be tor-General’s
made by the Administrator-General or any person interest- 10%
ed in the assets or in the due administration thereof. With
regard to persons who may apply for directions to the High
Court under the Official Trustees Act, provision has been
made in secticn 26 of the Act?. That section provides that
the Official Trustee or any person beneficial! Fy interested
may apply. In the case of a trust the only persons entitled
to due administration are the beneficiaries and none else.
There is, therefore, no necessity to provide separately for
persons “interested in the due administration” as in section
28(2) of the Administrator-General’s Act. In those cases
where the Official Trustee is acting under section 7(6), the
wide provisions of section 302 of the Indian Succession Act
can be availed of. We do not, therefore, recommend any
change in section 26 of the Official Trustees Act.

8. The third Suggestion made by the Government of Official
Madras is that the Official Trustee may be empowered to aastce ot
accept the guardianship of the Property of minors and luna- हक 0
tics. In Omar Tyab v. Femail Tyab®, Rangnekar J. observed: minors and

itics.
“In my opinion the Official Trustee would be a suitable
$ person to be appointed the guardian of pro erty of
a minor in such cases. He has got a well set-up
establishment... .. for the purpose.”.

In this connection, it may be mentioned that in New
Zealand the Public Trustee may be appointed a guardian
of any infant by any deed or will or by the Court‘. We
were, at one time, inclined to adopt the suggestion of the
Government of Madras. But, from the comments received
from some State Governments and Official Trustees it would
appear that the Official Trustee would not have time to
take over such work, particularly because in some States
he is only a part-time officer or ig a person who, while hold-
ing some substantive post, acts as Official Trustee in addi-
tion. If that be the case, the provision, even if ‘inserted,
would remain a dead letter. Accordingly, we have consi-
dered it unnecessary to incorporate any such provision.

See the Official Trustees (Bengal Amendment)—Act,
24.63 the Official Trustees Act.
*A.J.R. 1928, Bom. 69.

1941.

‘Report of the Commttee of Inquiry into the Public Trustee Offic
Cmd. 9755, page 30. (App. IV, item 15). ©


Preamble,

Sections 1
and 2.

Section 3.

PART IL
PROPOSALS RELATING TO SECTIONS

9. The preamble merely repeats what is stated in the
long title, and should be omitted.

10. Section 1 does not require any change. In section 2
the definition of High Court should be omitted, leaving the
matter to be governed by the definition in the General
Clauses Act.

वा, This section has been omitted by the Adaptation of
Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956. We think, however, that this
section should be restored. Besides the power to invoke
the jurisdiction of High Court under section 25 of the Act,
the Official Trustee may have also to approach the District
Court, as section 7 of the Act confers upon him the same
powers and enjoins the sarne duties and liabilities and so
makes him subject to the control and orders of the Court
in the same manner as any other trustee acting in the
same capacity. Further, in the discharge of his duties as
Official Trustee, he stands in the same position as a private
trustee, and he may have to invoke the jurisdiction of the
district court under the Trusts Act also. It will be very
inconvenient for him to move the several district courts in
respect of different properties situated in their respective
jurisdictions. It will be more convenient, from the point
of view of the Official Trustee, to enable him to approach
the High Court even in respect of those matters, without
the necessity of going to the district courts. For this pur-
pose, we think that the section should be restored', confer-
ring upon the High Court jurisdiction not only under this
Act, but also the jurisdiction which the district courts will
have under the Trusts Act. It has been suggested that the
section should be expressed in a different way, to make the
intention clear. Accepting this suggestion, we have re-
drafted the section’. The concurrent jurisdiction of the
district court need not of course be affected, and this may
be made clear.

2The section as it stood before the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order,
1956, was as follows :— :

“ For the purposes of this Act the High Court shall have jurisdiction
throughout the State.”

"See the Appendix.


तप

12. The qualifications for the appointment of the Official Section 4.
Trustee require to be changed. The mention of Barristers
as a separate class has become out of date. Section 4(2)(a)
may, therefore, be deleted.

Under section 4(2)(9) no qualification is imposed under
the Act as to the standing of the Advocates, Attorneys, etc.
This may have been due to the paucity at the time of pass-
ing the Act of persons of any standing willing to take up
the post. Conditions have changed now. In keeping with
the nature of functions of the Official Trustee, we recom-
mend that a minimum of seven years’ standing should be
prescribed. The reference to vakils may be deleted. Under
the legislation now in hana relating to legal practitioners,
Advocates will be enrolled by the Bar Councils and hence
the expression “cf High Court” will be unnecessary as
regards Advocates,

Section 4(2) (c) has become obsolete, as it refers only
to persons holding the office of Deputy at the commence--
ment of the Act!. It should be omitted.

We are of the opinion that it is unfair to exclude Depu-
ties altogether from the category of persons eligible for
appointment as Official Trustee. As the Deputy can and
does sometimes perform the functions of the Official
Trustee, we consider it reasonable to provide that a person
who has worked for a specified period as a Deputy should
be eligible for appointment as Official Trustee. “We need
hardly add that in case of persons appointed.as Deputies in
accordance with the qualifications recommended by us, the

7 ease is much stronger. We recommend that sub-clause (c)
of section 4(2) may be deleted and in its place a provision
may be introduced to the effect that a person. who has
worked as a Deputy for a. period of five years is eligible for
appointment as Official Trustee. (This will apply to present
incumbents also).

Under section 4(2) (9), a person already in the service
of the Government may be appointed as Official Trustee in
a State other than West Bengal, Madras or Bombay. This
provision was made on the ground that it would be difficult
to get persons with legal qualifications in those States.
Whatever may have been the position in 1918, the reason
cannot hold good now. We, therefore, recommend that the
elause may be deleted.

A fruitful source of recruitment for filling up the post
of Official Trustee is the State Judiciary.. We recommend
that a person who has for at least ten years been. a
member of the Judicial Service of a State may also be
made eligible for appointment as Official Trustee.

Wiz, 1913


Section 5.

Sections
6—12,

Sections
1318,

Section 19,

Sections
20—24,

Section 25.

Sections 26
to end.

Appendix.

8

18. No qualifications have been prescribed for appoint-
ment as Deputy. Since the Deputy can, under the Act dis-
charge any of the duties and exercise any of the powers of
the Official Trustee, it is only proper that some qualifica-
tions should be prescribed. We recommend that no person
shall be appointed as a Deputy unless he has for at least
three years been an advocate or an attorney of a High
Court or has for a like period been a member of the
Judicial Service of a State.

14. No change, except that in section 10(3), the refer-
ence to the Trustees etc. Act (now repealed) may
omitted, and in section 12, “infant” may be replaced by
“minor”.

15. Small drafting changes have been proposed in sec-
tions 138, 15 and 17,as can be seen from the proposed
amendments.1 The remaining sections need no change.

16. Sub-section (2) of this section has been slightly
altered by the Official Trustee (Bengal Amendment) Act,
1940, and the amendment seems to be reasonable. The same
may be adopted.

17. No change.

18. In section 25, it has been suggested that the word
“interest” should be replaced by “income”. We agree.
“Interest” is limited to income from money, while “income”
is much wider and will include all classes of income, parti-
cularly income from property. We accept the suggestion.

19. No change.

20. With a view to presenting a clear picture of the pro-
posals made by us in this Report, we have, in the Appendix,
shown our proposals in the form of draft amendments to
the existing Act.

1. T. L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR

(Chairman)

2. P. SATYANARAYANA RAO le
3. L. 5. MISRA |
4. 5. 8. RAJAGOPAUL +3
5. S. CHAUDHURI g
6. N. A. PALKHIVALA J 3

9. BASU

Joint Secretary.
New Deum;

The 18th November, 1960.

See the ‘Appendix.


APPENDIX

Proposals as shown in the
form of draft amendments.

(This is a tentative draft only)

2 of 1913. The preamble to the Official Trustees Act, 1913, (herein- Preamble,
after referred to as the principal Act), shall be omitted.

In section 2 of the principal Act, clause (2) shall be Section 2.
omitted.

After section 2 of the principal Act, the following Section 3
section shall be inserted, namely:— (New).

2 of 1882. “3. The High Court shall, in respect of proceedings Extent of
under this Act and the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, taken jurisdiction
by or against the Official Trustee, be a competent &

Court for the whole area subject to its civil appellate
jurisdiction:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be
construed as affecting the jurisdiction of any district
court.”.

In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), Section 4-
the following sub-section shall be substituted!, namely:—

“(2) No person shall be appointed to the office of
the Official Trustee unless he—

(a) has for at least seven years been an
advocate; or

(b) has for at least seven years been an
attorney of a High Court; or

(c) has for at least ten years been a member of
the judicial service of a State; or

(d) has for at least five years held the office
of Deputy Official Trustee.”.

Section 5 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as Section 5.
sub-section (1) of that section, and after sub-section

1Compare article 217 of the Constitution. Contrast section 4, BombaY
Public Trusts Act, 1950.

An Explanation on the lines of the Explanation to article 217 (2) of the
Constitution is considered unnecessary.


Secti ०.

Section 12,

Section 13.

Section 15.

Sectio 17

Section 19,

Section 25.

10

(1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(2) No person shall be appointed as a Deputy
under this section unless he—

(a) has for at least three years been an
advocate; or

(b) has for at least three years been an
attorney of a High Court; or

(c) has for at least three years been a member
of the judicial service of a State.”.

In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),
the words and figures “the Trustees’ and Mortgagees’
Powers Act, 1866, or” shall be omitted.

In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)
for the word “infant!”, the word “minor” shall be substi-
tuted.

In sub-section (2) of section 13 of the principal Act,—

(a) the words “or Deputy Official Trustee” shall
be omitted;

(b) for the words “the Official Trustee’s personal
knowledge”, the words “his personal knowledge” shall
be substituted.

In section 15 of the principal Act, the words “revenues
of the”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted.

In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) the proviso to sub-section (1) shall be omitted;

(b) in sub-section (2), the words “the revenues of”
shall be omitted.

In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for
clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely?:—

“(a) whether the accounts have been audited in
the prescribed manner, and whether, so far as can be
ascertained by such audit, the accounts contain a full
and true account of everything which ought to be
contained therein;”.

In section 25 of the principal Act, for the word “inter-
est”, the word “income” shall be substituted.

1Necessary change in the marginal note can be made without formal
amendment.

Cf. the amendment made by section 3, of the Official Trustees (Bengal
Amendment) Act, 1940 (Bengal Act 12 of 1940).

GMGIPND—T. S. Wing—33  M. of Law—3-2-1961—2000