C

67101 171

a

rym

71 TTT

{

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORT

ON

AMENDMENTS TO THE ALL INDIA
COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
ACT, 1987 (ACT 52 OF 1987)

1998



D.O.No.6(3) (45) /98-LC(LS)

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 001
TEL. : 3384475

Residence :

1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI 110011
- हि TEL. : 3019465

JUSTICE
8. .. JEEVAN REDDY
Chairman, Law Commission of India

Dear Dr.M.Thambi Durai, August 6, 1998

: I am forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Sixtieth
he Report on “Amendments to the All India Council for Technical
Education Act, 1987 (Act 52 of 1987)".

. The subject was taken up suo moto by the Commission in
pursuance of the terms of reference of the Government’s order
r under which the Law Commission of India was constituted.
. This report addresses itself primarily to ensure
न coordinated and integrated development of technical education
। and for maintenance of standards in the context of the
ad objectives of the All India Council for Technical Education
Act, 1987. Among other clauses under section 10 of the Act,
~ the power of the Council specified in clause (k) relates to
ते grant approval for starting new technical institutions and for
introduction of new courses or programmes in consultation with
हा the agencies concerned. The exercise of this power and

function pre-supposses the ensuring of the coordinated and
integrated development of technical education in consultation
on with the concerned authorities viz., affiliating university
and the concerned State Government. Since the Supreme Court
of India has interpreted the said provision in a particular
manner clothing the AICTE with absolute powers, the Commission
was induced to take up this matter suo motu in order to remove
न the doubts which have cropped up in view of the decisions of

the Supreme Court referred in para 3.1 of the report. The
- subject is of great importance from the point of view of
ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical
education, in the true spirit and to allay the apprehension
that the AICTE enjoys absolute power in matters specified in
the said clause, excluding any say of the affiliating
university or State Government therein nothwithstanding with
the statutory requirement of consultation with the concerned
agencies. The importance of technical education in the
present day world and particularly in the Indian context needs
no emphasis.

With regards,

on Yours sincerely,
) ot
[mds
हा u
ee (B.P.JEEVAN REDDY )
Dr.M.Thambi Durai,

ec Hon'ble Minister of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs, -

Shastri Bhavan,

NEW DELHI.



oT

ry

€

CHAPTER I

CHAPTER IT

CHAPTER IIT

CHAPTER 1५

<

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER YI

ANNEXURE I

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

PURPOSE OF THE AICTE ACT, 1987 AND
THE EXISTING LAW

ATTENTION NOT DRAWN TOWARDS THE
MATERTAL WORDS IN CLUASE (k) OF
SECTION 10 IN CASES BEFORE THE
SUPREME COURT

GENERAL FEATURES OF RESPONSE ON THE
WORKING PAPER

RECOMMENDATIONS

CONCLUSTONS

ANNEXURES

WORKING PAPER ON AMENDMENTS TO THE ALL
INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
ACT, 1987 (ACT 52 OF 1987)

PAGE

34

NO

w

1
»

1
99

५2

५2
a


CHAPTER-I

INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Fifteenth Law Commission was constituted with

the following, inter alia, terms of reference: -

"To revise the Central Acts of general importance

so as to simplifying them = and to remove

anomalies, ambiguities and inequitie

This report addresses itself primarily to ensure

coordinated and integrated development of technical

education and for Maintenance of standards in the

context of the

objectives of the All India Council for

Technical Education Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to

as the Act). Amongst other clauses under Section 10 of

the Act, the power of the Council specified in clause

(k) relates to grant approval for starting new technical

institutions and for introduction of new courses or

Programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned.

The exercise of this Power and function presupposes the

ensuring of the coordinated and integrated’ deve lopment.

of technical aducation, The Supreme Court of India has

interpreted the said Provision in 68 particular manner

discussed in succeeding chapter III and it is the

interpretation placed by the Supreme Court on clause (k)

Of section 10 that has induced the Law Commission of

India to take up this matter suo motu. Certain doubts



have cropped up in view of the decisions of the Supreme
Court (see pr.3.1, infra) wherein the court held that
the power to grant approval for starting new technical
institutions and for introduction of new courses or
programmes is vested with the Council. It may be
pointed out that the true import of the expression "in
consultation with the agencies concerned" occurring in
section 10(k) of the AICTE Act did not receive adequate
focus and consideration by the honourable Supreme Court
in the said cases. The subject is of great importance
from the point of view of ensuring the coordinated and
integrated development of technical education in the
true spirit to allay the apprehension that the AICTE
enjoys the absolute power in the matters specified in

the said clause excluding any say of the affiliating

university or the State Government therein
notwithstanding the statutory requirement of
consultation with the concerned agencies. The

importance of technical education in the present-day
world and particularly in the Indian context needs no

emphasis.

1.2 Working Paper

The Commission had prepared and circulated a
working paper (Annexure-I) for eliciting the views of
interested persons and bodies (paragraph 4.1, infra) the

Commission is grateful to all those who have responded



by sending their views on the working paper.
the comments received will be given in a later

IV of this Report.

A gist of

Chapter -


CHAPTER-IT

PURPOSE OF THE AICTE ACT, 1987 AND THE EXISTING LAW

The AICTE Act, 1987, hereinafter referred to as
*the Act’, was enacted by the Parliament in the year
1987 to provide for the establishment of ‘an All India
Council for Technical Education with a view to the
proper planning and coordinated development of the
technical education system throughout the country, the
promotion of qualitative improvement of such education
in relation to planned quantitative growth and the
regulation and proper maintenance of norms and standards
in the technical education system and for matters
connected therewith. The Council is also required to
regulate and ensure proper maintenance of norms and
standards in the technical education system. The
Council is further required to evolve suitable
performance appraisal system incorporating such norms
and mechanism in enforcing their accountability. It is
also required to provide guidelines for admission of
students and has power to withhold or detonative grants
and to derecognise the institutions where norms and
standards laid down by it and directions given by it
from time to time are not followed.

The Council has been constituted under Section 3
of the Act comprising of the specified persons/bodies.
It discharges the functions as enunciated under Section

10 of the Act as discussed elsewhere in this report.


OBJECTS AND REASONS OF THE ACT:-

The statement of objects and reasons of the Act

are reproduced below from the provisions of the Bill:

“The All India Council for Technical
Education (AICTE) was set upon in 1945 by a
Government resolution as a National Expert Body
to advise the Central and the State Governments
for ensuring the coordinated development of
technical education in accordance with approved
standards. During the first three decades the
Council functioned quite effectively and there
was phenomenal development of technical education
in this period. However, in recent years, a
large number of private engineering colleges and
polytechnics have come up in the complete
disregard of the guidelines laid down by the
AICTE. Most of these institutions have serious
deficiencies in terms of even the rudimentary
infrastructure neces ary for imparting proper
education and training. Barring some exceptions,
there is scant regard for maintenance of
educational standards.

2. Taking into account the growing erosion of
standards, the Council at its meeting held in
1981 came to the conclusion that a stage had been
reached when it should be vested with statutory
Powers to regulate and maintain standards of
technical education in the country. In pursuance
of these and other recommendations, a National
Working Group was set up in November, 1985 to
look into the role of the AICTE. The National
Working Group recommended that in order to enable
the AICTE to play its role effectively, it shall
have to be vested with necessary statutory
authority. The National Policy on Education,
1986 also stipulated that the AICTE will be
vested with statutory authority for planning,
formulation and the maintenance of norms and
standards, accreditation, funding or priority
areas, monitoring and evaluation, maintaining
parity of certificates and awards and ensuring
the coordinated and integrated development of
technical and management education.

3. The 8111 seeks to provide statutory powers
to the All India Council for Technical
Education to ensure:

i) Proper planning and coordinated development
of the technical education system throughout
the country.


ii) promotion of qualitative improvement of
technical education in relation of planned
qualitative growth, and

iii) regulation of the system and proper
maintenance of norms and standards.

Accordingly, the power and function assigned
to the AICTE, inter alia, provide laying down
norms and standards for programmes and
institutions, giving approval for setting up of
technical institutions, prescribing guidelines
for admission of students and the charging of
fees, and inspecting and evaluating institutions
periodically with a view to maintaining standards
and to provide recognition or withhold
recognition of programmes and institutions. As
part of this overall coordination and development
responsibilities, the AICTE will also give grants
to institutions for identified development
Purposes. In addition, the AICTE will promote
innovation, research and development, linkages
with industry and greater access toa technical
education by women, handicapped and the weaker
sections of the society.”

Section 10 occurring in CHAPTER III of the Act
sets out the powers and functions of the Council. Since
this report is concerned only with clause (k) in Section
10, only the relevant portion of Section 10 is set out
hereinbelow. It reads:

“10. It shall be the duty of the Council to take
all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring
coordinated and integrated deve lopment of
technical education and maintenance of standards
and for the purposes of performing its functions
under this Act, the Council may .......eceec neues
(k) grant approval for starting new technical
institutions and for introduction of new courses
or programmes in consultation with the agencies
concerned".
(Emphasis laid)

Section 11 empowers the Council to cause
inspection of any institutions, university or their

departments to ascertain the financial needs of


technical institutions and universities and also to
ascertain the standards of teaching, examination and
research in such institutions. Section 22 confers the
rule making power upon the Central Government to carry
out the purposes of the Act while Section 23 empowers
the Council to make regulations for the very same
purpose.

It would be evident from a reading of the objects
and reasons appended to the Bill, the Preamble to the
Act and Section 10 of the Act that the primary purpose
of the Council is to ensure coordinated and integrated
development of technical education and maintenance of
standards. This is the oft-repeated theme and objective
of the Act. The several powers specified in Section 10
including the power specified in clause (k) are
subsidiary to the said purpose and object. Indeed, it
is possible to reach Section 10(k) as saying that the
power to grant approval for starting new technical
institutions, etc., is to be exercised only when it is
necessary for ensuring the coordinated and integrated
development of technical education and for maintenance
of standards. It is also worth mentioning that the
expression “technical education” is not defined in the
Act. In the interest of preserving University autonomy
and with a view to avoid inconsistency between the Act
and the various University Acts in force all over the
country, it may be possible to read the expression
“technical institution" as not including technical

colleges. Be that as it may, the Supreme Court of India


=

has interpreted the said provision in a particular
manner and it is the interpretation placed by the
Supreme Court on clause (k) of Section 10 that has
induced the Law Commission to take up this matter suo

motu and submit this report suggesting an amendment.


CHAPTER-IIT

ATTENTION NOT DRAWN TOWARDS THE MATERIAL WORDS IN CLAUSE NOT DRAWN TOWARDS THE MATERIAL WORDS IN CLAUS

{K) OF SECTION 10 IN CASES BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT OF SECTION 10 IN CASES BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT

3.1 In UNNI KRISHAN UNNI KRISHAN J.P. AND OTHERS v. STATE OF

ANDHRA PRADESH & OTHERS ((1993) 1 SCC 645), decided by a

Constitution Bench, the broad scheme of the Act was
considered in paras 189 and 190. After noticing the
relevant clauses in Section 10 of the Act, the Court

observed:

“Section 3 of the Act provides for the
establishment of the Council while Section 10
specifies the functions of the Council. Apart
from directing generally that the Council shall
take all such steps as it may think fit for
ensuring coordinated and integrated development
of technical education and maintenance of
standards, the Act specifically empowers the
Council, inter alia, to "(j) fix norms and
guidelines for charging tuition and other fees;
(kK) grant approval for starting new technical
institutions and for introduction of new courses
or programmes in consultation with the agencies
concerned, and (hn) take all necessary steps to
Prevent commercialisation of technical education.
it_is true, there is no express provision in the is true, there is no express provision in the
Act which says that no engineering college or any which says that no engineering college or an
other college or institution imparting technical college or institution imparting technical
education shall be established except with the shall_be established except with the
permission of the Council. But this may be for of the Council. But this ma for
the reason that such a power was intended to be reason that such a power was intended _t
exercised by the Council itself if 10 thinks b the Council itself if it thinks
necessary to do so. We are of the opinion that
the vast powers conferred upon the Council by
Section 10, including those specified above, do
extend to and entitle it to issue an order to the
above effect. It can also say that even in the
existing institutions, no new course, faculty or
class shall be opened except with its
approval....”



Unfortunately, no adequate focus and
consideration was endowed upon the words “in
consultation with the agencies concerned” occurring at
the end of clause (k) of Section 10 or upon the
subsidiary nature of the clause to the main object
underlying the Act - much less upon the meaning and
scope of the expression “technical institutions”
probably for the reason that in case the Court was
merely concerned with examining the general scheme of
the Act and the facts of the cases before the Court did
not call for an examination of the aforesaid words

eccurring in clause (k) of Section 10.

3.2 In the State of Tamil Nadu and Another of Tamil Nadu and Another v.

Adhiyaman Educational & Research Institute and Others Educational & Research Institute and Others

(1995) 4 800 104, a two-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court
examined at length the scheme and sweep of the Act as
well as the scheme and ambit of two State enactments,
namely, Tamil Nadu Private Colleges (Regulation) Act,
1976 (and the rules made thereunder) and the Madras
University Act, 1923 (and the rules and statues made
thereunder). The Court held that the Act is relatable
to and has been enacted under and in Pursuance of Entry
66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution. The Court also found that
the aforesaid two Tamil Nadu enactments were relatable
to Entry 25 of List III and accordingly held that in so
far as the said enactments occupy the field occupied by

the Act, the State enactments are void and inoperative


by virtue of Article 254 of the Constitution of India.
It was pointed out that the said enactments had not
obtained the assent of the President as contemplated by
clause (2) of the said Article. The observations made
in para 27 of the judgment (page 124) are relevant and

are being extracted hereinbelow. Dealing with the

conflict between T.N. Private Colleges (Regulation) Act

and the Act, the Court observed:

“27. The provisions of the State Act enumerated
above show that if it is made applicable to the
technical institutions, it will overlap and will
be in conflict with the provisions of the Central
Act in various areas and, in particular...... aes
granting approval for starting new technica

institutions and for introduction of new courses
or programmes ..... What is further, the primary
object of the Central Act, as discussed earlier,
is to provide for the establishment of an All
India Council for Technical Education with a
view, among others, to plan and coordinate the
development of technical education system
throughout the country and to promote the
qualitative improvement of such education and to
regulate and properly maintain the norms and
standards in the technical education system which
is a subject within the exclusive legislative
field of the Central Government as is clear from
Entry 66 of the Union List in the Seventh
Schedule. All_the other provisions of the Act
have been made in furtherance of the said
objectives. They can also be deemed to have been
enacted under Entry 25 of List III. This being
so, the provisions of the State Act which impinge
upon the provisions of the Central Act are void
and, therefore, unenforceable.......... "

(Emphasis laid)

While examining the conflict between the Act and
the Madras University Act, the Court made the following
observations in para 30:

“A comparison of the Central Act and the

University Act will show that as far 88 the
institutions imparting technical education are


concerned, there is a conflict hetween and
overlapping of the functions of the Council and
the University. Under Section 10 of the Central
Act, it is the Council which is entrusted with
the power, particularly . granting approval
for starting new technical institutions or
introducing new courses or programmes......
Thus, so far _as these matters are concerned, in 380 far hese matters are concerned, in
the case of the institutions imparting technical case of the institutions impartin technical
education, it is not the University but it is the is not the University but it is the
Central Act and the Council created under it
which will have the jurisdiction. To that
extent, after the coming into operation of the
Central Act, the provisions of the University Act
will be deemed to have become unenforceable in
case of technical colleges like the engineering
colleges,.... The provisions of the University
Act regarding affiliation of technical colleges
like the engineering colleges and the conditions
For grant and continuation of such affiliation by
the University, shall, however, remain operative
but the conditions that are prescribed by the the conditions that are rescribed ४9 the
University for grant and continuance of for rant and continuance of
i affiliation will have to be in conformity with
norms and guidelines prescribed by the
Council in respect of matter entrusted to it
under

(Emphasis supplied)

Unfortunately again, in this decision too, no

proper focus was endowed upon the last words in clause

(k) of tion 10, namely, “in consultation with the
agencies concerned” nor upon the other matters relevant

in construing

10 and clause (k

therein.

Evidently, they were

specifically brought to the
notice of the Court while considering the issue of power
to grant approval for the establishment of a technical
institution, It may be noted that according to the Act,
the power and function of the Council to grant approval
for starting new technical institutions and for
introduction of new courses or programmes is not
absolute or exclusive; the Act contemplates this power

being exercised in consultation with the agencies

concern and only for achieving the main purpose and



[1 61 179 111 [11 1 es Ge De ae De ed

—

if

1

rc

r
L
rc

r

cy ory

object of the Act. The “agencies concerned" must
necessarily include the University which has to grant
affiliation and the State Government wherever there is a
State enactment governing or touching upon the grant of
approval for starting new technical institutions and for

introduction of new courses or programmes.

3.3 Effect of the decisions of the Supreme Court ०0

the role of Universities with regard to function

under clause (k) of Section 10

The restriction placed upon the University not to
stipulate any condition for affiliation different from
the conditions imposed by the Council renders the
Universities mere appendages to the Council and their
powers nugatory. So far as the State Governments are
concerned, their statutory powers under the State
enactments like the Tamil Nadu Act of 1976 are
completely rendered ineffective and unenforceable. It
is arguable whether the Act contemplated such a serious
and all-pervasive consequence and to say that had it
intended to do so, it would have expressed its intention

in clearer and emphatic language.

3.4 In practice how the decisions of the Supreme

Court is being understood: -

However, the decision of the Supreme Court in
State of Tamil Nadu & Another v. Adhiyaman Educational

and Research Institute and others (supra) is being


interpreted and understood as conferring upon the
council the sole, exclusive and absolute power in the
matter of grant of approval for starting new technical
institutions including engineering colleges and for
introduction of new courses or Programmes in existing
technical institutions. In other words, the University
and the State Governments have been left with no say in
the matter. Though the words “in consultation with the
agencies concerned" do occur in clause (k), they are
being ignored in the light of the aforesaid decision.
AS a matter of practice also, it appears, the Council
first grants the permission to start a technical
institution or a new course or Programme and it 183 only
thereafter that the institution approaches the
University for grant of affiliation. The University
thinks that it is faced with a "fiat accompli". It is
well to recall that prior to the enactment of 1987 Act,
and particularly the decision of the Supreme Court
aforesaid, the grant of approval for establishing a new
technical institution or for starting new courses or
Programmes in existing technical institutions was within
the exclusive domain of the University and/or the State
Government. But, after the enactment of the said Act
and particularly after the judgment aforesaid, the State
Government has been excluded altogether from the arena
and the role of the University has also been reduced
almost to nothing. Having obtained the approval from
the Council, the institutions are demanding affiliation

as a matter of right. It is this position which the Law


-: 15 :-

Commission thought was not consistent with the spirit
and object of the 1987 Act nor with the “University

autonomy" nor with the provisions of the various State

enactments.
3.5 Relevant constitutional provisions and their
effect:-

In this connection, it may be recalled that
*Education’ was previously in the State List and it is
only by virtue of the 42nd Amendment that the subject of
Education was brought into the Concurrent List. Prior
to the said Amendment Act the power of Parliament, in
the matter of education, was confined to Entries 63 to
66 in List I. Entry 63 deals with certain specified
Universities like Banaras Hindu University, Aligarh
Muslim University and Delhi University while Entry 64
deals with institutions for scientific or technical
education financed by the Government of India wholly or
in part and declared by Parliament by Jaw to be
institutions of national importance. Entry 65 deals
with Union agencies and institutions for professional,
vocational and scientific or technical training,
Promotion of special studies or research and scientific
or technical assistance in the investigation or
detection of crime. Entry 66 which is the only relevant
entry in this behalf reads: “Coordination and
determination of standards in institutions for higher

education or research and scientific and technical


institutions”. In other words, prior to the 42nd
Amendment Act, the power of the Parliament was confined
only to coordination and determination of standards in
the institutions mentioned in Entry 66 while the
‘Education’, as a subject, was solely within the sphere
of the States. By virtue of the said Amendment Act, the
Parliament has been empowered to make a Taw on the
subject of education as well which necessarily means
that any law made by a State Legislature, whether prior
to or after the Parliamentary enactment, inconsistent
with the Parliamentary enactment, is void to the extent
of inconsistency. It is this principle which has been
relied upon by the Supreme Court in Adhiyaman case and
in yet another later decision in Thirumuruga Kirupananda
Variyar Thavathiru Sundara Swamigal Medical Educational
Charitable Trust v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors (1996(2)
SCALE 103) to hold that the provisions of the State
enactments including University enactments, in so far as
they are inconsistent with 1987 Act are void by virtue
of Article 254 of the Constitution. It appears that the
State enactments including those pertaining to the
Universities have not obtained the assent of the
President within the meaning of clause (2) of Article
254. As a matter of fact, however, several enactments
made by State Legislatures require the permission of the
State Government for establishing an educational
institution which may include a technical institution as
well. Similarly, State enactments pertaining to

Universities (Ci.e., State enactments establishing


Universities within their respective territories)
empower the Universities to stipulate such conditions
for grant of affiliation by the University as they think

appropriate consistent with the enactment.

3.6 Need to clarify the aforesaid doubts: -

It is obvious from the scheme and content of 1987
Act, that the said Act did not contemplate the undoing
of all the aforesaid State enactments and to confer
exclusive power upon the Council to grant approval for
starting technical institutions or for starting new
courses and programmes in the existing institutions
though it may be that is said to be the unintended
effect. In the above situation, the Law Commission has
been of the opinion that it is not advisable to
eliminate the Universities and the State Governments
altogether in the matter of grant of approval. It has
been also of the opinion that conferment of absolute
authority on the individual or agency in such important
matters is not conducive to public good. The Law
Commission has also been of the opinion that it is
necessary to emphasise and restore the concept of
"University autonomy’ and its power as well as the role
of the State Governments in the matter. The Law
Commission also took notice of the provisions contained
in Sections 108 to 106 of the Indian Medical Council Act
(and similar provisions in the Dentists Act) and the

Regulations made thereunder which confer the power to


grant approval for establishing a medical college upon
the Central Government alone no doubt in consultation
with the affiliating University, Indian Medical Council

and the concerned State Government.

3.7 Gist of the questionnaire:-

Accordingly, a questionnaire was prepared and
circulated by the Law Commission. The questionnaire

(Annexure-I) was to the following effect:

“(a) Whether the proposed amendment should be in

the following manner:

"(k) grant approval for starting new
technical institutions and for introduction
of new courses or programmes --

(i) in consultation with the agencies
concerned, and

(ii) in the case of institutions proposed to
be affiliated or already affiliated to
a University, with the concurrence of
that University.’

(b) Whether the existing Section 10(k)
should be deleted and instead a new Section
10A on the lines ‘of Section 10-A of the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 cited
above, should be incorporated to carry out
these functions?

(c) Whether there is necessity of making
any other radical changes in the Act to
achieve the objectives for improving the
technical education in the country?”


CHAPTER-IV

GENERAL FEATURES OF RESPONSE ON THE WORKING PAPER

4.1 In response to the above questionnaire the
Law Commission has received a large number of responses.
The All. India Council for Technical Education,
Association of the Indian Universities representing the
Universities in the country, State Governments of
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Punjab and West Bengal, the All India
Management Association, Indian Society for Technical
Education, the Director General of Employment &
Training, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, the
Ministry of Urban Affairs, Government of India, the
Ministry of Industry (Industrial Development),
Government of India and the University Grants Commission
(U.G.C.) have sent their responses which are analysed

hereunder:

The Council has staunchly opposed any move for
amending the Act. The Council has stated that the Act
and the Regulations made thereunder by it do provide for
consultation with the agencies concerned and in
particular with the affiliating Universities and the

State Governments and that in fact the Council is



consulting them in every case of approval. Accordingly,
the Council says that the proposal put forward by the
Law Commission should be dropped. The Council has
further stated that so far as the affiliation of
colleges is concerned it is the exclusive prerogative of
the Universities and that is in no way interfered with
by the 1987 Act. Similarly, it is stated, in respect of
polytechnics it is the State Government or the
Directorate of Technical Education which has the right
to affiliate them and their programmes and that power
too has not been interfered with in any manner by the

1987 Act.

4.2 Government of Punjab and West Bengal

These two Governments have supported the first
alternative (a) in the questionnaire issued by the Law

Commission.

4.3 Governments of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir

and Orissa.

These three Governments have opted for proposal
(b) contained in the questionnaire of the Law
Commission. In other words, these Governments want the
Present clause (k) in Section 10 be deleted and in its
place a new Section on the lines of Section 10-A of the

Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 be incorporated.



4.4 Governments of Tamil Nadu and Kerala

These two Governments have stated that besides
the Council and the University concerned, the State
Governments should also have a= say in the matter of
establishment of technical institutions while
affiliation should be left to the University concerned.
According to them, the consent of State Government
should be obtained before any technical institution is
allowed to be established or any new course or programme
is allowed to be introduced in an existing technical
institution. Subject to the above, the Tamil Nadu
Government has supported proposal (a) in the

questionnaire.

4.5 Association of Indian Universities

After receiving the questionnaire from the Law
Commission the AIU appears to have communicated the said
questionnaire to 811 the Universities in the country.
Many of the Universities have sent their responses to
the AIU which in turn has apprised the Law Commission of
the said views. While some of the Universities have
supported proposal (a), some other Universities have
supported proposal (b) in the questionnaire. All the
Universities, however, have agreed that the power to
grant approval for establishing technical institutions
or for permitting introduction of new courses/programmes
should not be left to the Council and not, at any” rate,

to the Council exclusively. They have pleaded strongly



for the concept of ’University autonomy’ and have also
explained the significance of the role of the State
Governments in the said matter. By and large, their
submission is that while establishment of technical
institutions must be left to the State Governments,
affiliation and introduction of new courses/programmes

should be within the exclusive domain of the University.
Some of the Universities, however, have put
forward certain definite proposals which may be

mentioned in brief.

4.5.1 The North Gujarat University has submitted that

as a matter of policy the Council should operate only at
the macro level while the Universities should be allowed
freely to operate at the micro level. In other words,
according to this University, the Council should concern
itself only with the coordination and maintenance of
standards of education, inspection and monitoring of the
quality of instruction but not with the establishment of
the technical institutions, introduction of new courses
or with the affiliation. These matters, says the
University, must be left to the Universities and the
State Governments, as the case may be, as provided in

the relevant State enactments.

4.5.2 The Kumoan University has submitted that by

conferring the power of establishment of technical

institutions upon the Council, the University autonomy



has practically been destroyed which, according to it,
is wholly undesirable. It has also submitted that under
the Council’s regime there has been a mushroom growth of
technical institutions which has in no way contributed
to the maintenance of standards and quality of

education.

4.5.3 The Satya 581 Institute of Higher Learning has

expressed the apprehension that the Council may be
influenced by the philosophy of the market place as
against the Universities which are wedded to the pursuit
of knowledge. The University must be left free to
evolve its own syllabi and courses of study, etc. It
has also expressed an apprehension that unless checked
now, the Universities will be reduced to the position of

hand-maiden of a regulatory authority.

4.5.4 The Kuvempu University has submitted that the
Council should have no say whatsoever in the matters
within the seisin of University according to the
concerned University Act. According to this University,
the Universities should be left free to affiliate as
well as to permit the establishment of colleges,

universities and courses.

4.5.5 The Osmania University has submitted that a

University is an independent and autonomous body created
by a statute and has been conferred with exclusive power

to permit the establishment of colleges and introduction


of courses under the Act. This power of the University
should in no way be taken away, says this University.
It is also submitted that power to start institutions
and courses cannot be vested in the Council and that it
is structurally not equipped to deal with the said

aspect.

4.5.6 Devi Ahalya University has submitted that while

the establishment of technical institutions should be
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the University, the
Council should concern itself only with inspection and
maintenance and coordination of standards of education

in these institutions.

4.6 811 India Management Association India Management Association

This association has supported proposal (a) in
the questionnaire. At the same time it has suggested
that the Jaw should provide a time limit for grant of
approval or refusal as the case may be, of affiliation
by the University and for grant of permission by the
University and/or by the State Government. It has also
suggested that the Council should create a monitoring
body, preferably presided over by a retired High Court
Judge, to keep an eye upon and to monitor the standards

of education in the technical institutions in the

country.


4.7 Indian Society for Technical Education Education

This Society has supported proposal (a) in the

questionnaire.

4.8 Director General __of Employment & Training, Trainin

Ministry of Labour, Government of India.

The Directorate has supported proposal (a) in the

questionnaire.

4.9 Ministry of Urban Affairs, Government of India

has supported proposal (b) in the questionnaire.

4.10 Ministry of Industry (Industrial Development). of _Industr Industrial Development

Government of India:

This Ministry has taken the view that apart from
others, the Ministry of Industry should also be
consulted before granting approval for the establishment
of a technical institution or for introduction of new

courses.

4.41 The University Grants Commission: The U.G.C.

has expressed the view that while the Council should
concern itself only with coordination and maintenance of
standards, the State Governments should be empowered to

permit the establishment of technical institutions and


that the affiliation as well as introduction of new
courses should be within the exclusive province of the

University.


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATION

5.1 Need for reform of law:- The various view points
Placed before the Commission have been considered.
While it is not possible to agree with all the differing
and varying view points, it appears abundantly clear
that clause (k) in Section 10 of the Act does require to
be amended and clarified. Of course, it is not possible
nor desirable to say that the expression "technical
institution" should be so defined as to exclude
engineering and other technical colleges from its
purview. In view of the dominant object and purpose
underlying the Act, it is not possible or desirable to
exclude institutions of higher learning from its ambit.
At the same time, it is eminently desirable and
necessary to balance the power of the Council with the
powers of the Universities and the State Governments.
The various State enactments which provide for the
permission of the State Government for the establishment
of these institutions and the University enactments
which empower the Universities to stipulate appropriate
conditions for affiliation and for introduction of new
courses/programmes, should be respected, no doubt, in
consonance with the dominant and primary object and
purpose of the Act. At the same time it is necessary to
introduce an element of openness, transparency and

fairness in the working of the Council, University and



the State Government concerned. None of them should be
allowed to sit over a proposal indefinitely. Each of
them should exercise its power keeping in mind the cause
of education and public good. They should also be free

to devise policy decisions on questions like the number
of technical institutions to be permitted in a State,
region or district (to check mushroom growth as has
happened in the case of legal education in some States

Vike Andhra Pradesh). They should accord equal rights

to alt in the matter of establishment of technical

institutions and other allied matters irrespective of
caste, creed or religion. No preference or special
rights should be recognised for the reason that
considerations of caste, creed or religion have no
relevance to the tablishment of, or to the quality of
education imparted in a technical institution,
5.2 Recommenda Accordingly, the Law Commission

recommends that present clause (k) in Section 10 of the
India Councit for Technical Education Act be deleted
and the subsequent clauses in Section 10. be

appropriately re-alphabeted and a new section - Section

10

d to the following effect:

७४10-82. Grant of approval 0" starting of approval for startin

ct

technical institutions seennical institutions and new Courses and Programmes new Courses and Programmes:

(1) 4 person desiring to establish a new

technical institution shall apply to the Council for

approval in accordance with the Provisions of this Act



and the Rules and the Regulations made thereunder, The
Council shall dispose of the application according to
Jaw within four months of the receipt of the application
Provided the application complies with all the
requirements of law. If there are any defects in the

application (or if it is found to be incomplete in any

the application
removal of such

and disposed of

such receipt.
(2)a) The application mentioned in
sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a letter of

consent from the concerned State Government or the

Administrat

jon Terri

as the case may

Government shalt ommunicate its

as the case may be, to the applicant
within a period of 90 days of the receipt of the

application,

Ce) In the application contemplated by
jon (4) is found to be defective (or incomplete

compliance with any of the provisions of the Taw

or the Rules applicable in that behalf) the same shall



time-limit and the consequence provided in clause (0) of
this sub-section shall not operate. The period of 90
days shall again be calculated from the date of receipt
of the application after removing the defects.

(3) (a) Where the technical institution
Proposed to be established proposes to affiliate itself
to a University, the application contemplated by
sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a letter of the
University, agreeing to consider the request of the

institution for

oy

ffiliation after it obtains the
approval from the Council. In such a case, the approval
granted by the Council shall become effective and
operative only on the grant of affiliation by the
University, whether provisional or final.

(b) The provisions contained in clauses (b) and
(c) of sub-section (2) shall apply equally in the case
of an application for grant of affiliation to be
submitted after obtaining the approval of the Council
Provided that the time limit in the case of University
shall be 180 days.

(4) No

institution shall commence
functioning except after obtaining the approval of the
Council under this section and the affiliation of the
concerned University wherever affiliation is proposed

with a University.


CHAPTER-VI

SONCLUSTON

6.1 The Law Commission recommends that present clause

(६) in Section 10 of the All India Council for Technical

in

eted and the subsequent clause

wn

Section 10 be appropriately re-alphabeted and 4 new

section - Section 10-A, be inserted to the following

srane of approval for starting

bechnica: institutions and new Courses and Programmes:

(1) A person desiring to establish a new
technical institution shall apply to the Council for
approval in accordance with the provisions of this Act
the Rules and the Regulations made thereunder. The
Council? shall dispose of the application according to
Jaw within four months of the receipt of the application

provided the applic

n complies with all the

requ

aw. If there are any defects in the
application (or if it is found to be incomplete in any
respect) the same shall be pointed out to the applicant
within a period of three months and if the application
is received by the Council after removal of such
defects, the same shall be dealt with and disposed of

according to law within four months of such receipt.


(2)(a) The application mentioned in
sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a letter of
consent from the concerned State Government or the
Administration of the Union Territory, as the case may
be;

(09) An application for grant of consent made to
a State Government shall be considered fairly and
promptly and in accordance with law in force” in the
State. The State Government shall communicate its
consent or refusal, as the case may be, to the applicant
within a period of 96 days of the receipt of the
application.

(c) In case the application contemplated by
sub-section (1) is found to be defective (or incomplete
for non-compliance with any of the provisions of the Jaw
Or the Rules applicable in that behalf) the same shall
be communicated to the applicant within 90 days of the
receipt of the application. In such a case, the

time-limit and the consequence provided in clause (b) of

ot
pad

S sub-section shal? not operate. The period of 90
days shall again be calculated from the date of receipt

of the application after removing the defects.

3)(a) Where the technical institution
Proposed to be established proposes to affiliate itself
to a University, the application contemplated by
sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a letter of the
University, agreeing to consider the request of the
institution for affiliation after it obtains the

approval from the council. In such a case, the approval



granted by the Council shall become eff
operative only on the grant of affiliat
University, whether provisional or final.

(b) The provisions contained in claus

c) of sub-section (2) shall apply equally

of an application for grant of affiliat
submitted after obtaining the approval of t
provided that the time limit in the case of
shall be 180 days.

(4) No technical institution shal}
functioning except after obtaining the appr

Council under this section and the affiliati

concerned

with a Unive

SILA SETH)(RETD) (OR.N.M.GHATATE) (R
i

Ie
MEMBER MEMBER MEMB

ective and

jon by the

es (b) and
in the case
jon to be
he Councit
University

.

commence

oval of the


- 34 =

~ ANNEXURE-T

< “ F.No.6(3) (45) /98-LC(LS)

= विधि आयोग

7 LAW COMMISSION

~ "फल 800०७: & भारत सरकार
Secretary to the Govt. of India SO ERNE er INDIA

~ wteaed Tol. 3383382
SHASTRI BHAWAN

~ नई दिल्‍ली
NEW DELHI-110 001

January 29, 1998

To

(as per list enclosed)

ne ‘ <ubject:- Working Paper on amendments to the All India Council
for Technical Education Act, 1987 (Act 52 of 1987).

Sir/Madam,

The Law Commission of India has been entrusted, inter
alia, with the task of revising the Central Acts so as to simplify
हा them and to remove anomalies, ambiguties and inequities. In
दि pursuance thereof, the Commission intends to undertake a study of

the AICTE Act, particularly Clause (k) of Section 10 thereof to
- allay the apprehensions that All India Council for Technical

Education enjoys the vast powers in the matter specified in the
~ said clause notwithstanding the statutory requirement of
consultation with the concerned agencies.

Accordingly, the Law Commission has drawn up a Working
Paper containing the questionnaire for the purpose and is
i interested to have the views of all interested persons/bodies on
the subject. A copy of the Working Paper is enclosed.

न 2. The Commission would, request you to convey your views on

the questionnaire so as to reach the Commission at the earliest
~ and in any case not later nen ae ला Worki later than 15th March, 1998. The Commission
would also be grateful, if copies ० this Working Paper are made
and distributed to the concerned with a request to directly
transmit their views to the Law Commission.

Yours faithfully,
~ Pinto 0S.

न Encl: As stated
(R.L. Meena)



working, 2.ALL India. Council

Technis

52.9

A IBT.),

Lek Background of the Paper:-

This paper is primarily concernéd with making
amendment (as proposed in para 2.8 infra) in clause (1९) of

Section 40 of the All India Council for Technical Education

Act, 1987 which specifies one of the functions of the ALL

[India Council for Technical Education (8101६) ४1७... fo arant
approval for starting new technical inshiturions and 9 fer

Introduction of new courses or programmes in consultation with

a amendment is conceived

the agencies concerned. The prope

to allay the apprehension that AICTE enjovs the absolute power

in the matters specified in the said sub

ause excluding any

say of the affiliating university therein notwithstanding the

statutory requirement of consultation with the concerned
agencies. Such doubts -have cropped up in view of the

decisions of tne Supreme Court in cases (see -pr.2

> infra)

wherein the court held that the power to grant approval for

starting new te al institutions ane for  intreduekion et

new courses or programmes i

with the Qouneil. Ito may
be pointed out that the true import of the expression “in
consultation with the agencies concerne|" oecuering in section

ais

1011९) of the AICTE Act did not r adequate focus and



consideration by the honourable Supreme Court in the said

cases.

1.2

The AICTE Act, 1987, hereinafter referréd to as °*the

Act", was enacted by the Parliament ‘in the year 1987 to

provide for the establishment of an All. India Council for

Technical Education with a view to the proper planning and

coordinated development of the technical education system

Ehroughout the country, the promotion of qualitative

improvement of such education in relation to planned

quantitative growth and the regulation and proper maintenance

of norms and standards in the technical education anel

For mat

er connected therewith. The Qouncil is 815० required

to requlate and ensure proper mainte

mance Of norms सात

standards in the technical education उजाला The Council 15

Further required to evolve suitable performance appraisal

incorporating such norms and mechanism in enforcing

their accountability. It is also required to provide

guidelines for admission of, students and has power to withhold

or discontinue grants and to derecognise the institutions

where norms and standards laid down by it and directions given

by iL From time to vime are not followed.

fhe Council has been constituted under Section 3 of

the Act comprising of the specified ns “bodies

charges the functions as enunciated Shion Luoof che

Act az discussed elsewhere in this pape



The statement of objects and reasons of the act are

reproduced below from the provisions of the Bill:

“The All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE) was set up in 1945 by 4 Government resolutian
as a National Expert body. to advice the Central and
the State Governments for ensuring the co-ordinated

development of technical education in accordance with

approved standards. Ouring the first three decad

the Council functioned quite effectively and there was
phenomenal development of technical education in this
period. However, in recent years, a large number of

private engineering colleges and polytechn

have
ceme up in complete disregard of the quidelines. laid

down by the AICTE. Most of these institutions have

ious deficiencies in terms of even the rudimentary
infrastructure necessary for imparting proper
education and training. Garring some exceptions.

there is scant regard for maintenance of educational

andards.

>

faking into account the  crowined ei लव हवा ot

standards, the Council at its meeting heid iis Lost
came ho the conclusion thar «a ade fac been 1) ececherct
when it should be vested with statutory Powers (0

reaulate and maintain standards ot Lechuiecal edaeatiai


in the country. In pursuance of these and other

recommendations, a National Working Group was set up”

in November 1985 to look into the role of the AICTE.
The National Working Group recommended that in order
to enable the AICTE to play its role effectively, it
shall have to be vested with necessary statutory
authority. The National Policy on Education. 1986,
also stipulated that the AICTE. will be vested with
statutory authority for planning, formulation and the

maintenance of norms and standards, accreditation,

funding of priority areas, monitoring and evaluation.

maintaining parity of certificates and awards and
ensuring the co-ordinated and intearated deve iopment
of technical and management education.

Be The Bill eks to provide statu tory powers ०

the Ali India Council for lechnical education

to ensure:

(1) proper planning and co-ordinated development
of the technical education system throuqhout
the country.

(iid promotion of qualitative improvement oF
technical education in relation of planned
quantitative growth, and

(153) regulation : of the system and proper

maintenance of worms sane steiner eds.


Accordingly, the power and functions assigned to the
AICTE, inter alia, provide laying down norms and
standards for programmes and institutions, giving
approval for setting up of technical institutions,
prescribing guidelines for admission of students and
the charging of fees, and inspecting and evaluating
institutions periodically with a view to maintaining
standards and to provide recognition or withhold
recognition of programmes and institutions. AS part
of this overall co-ordination and development
responsibilities. the A [CTE will also give qrants एफ
institutions for identified developmental purposes .
In addition, the ALCTE will promote innovation.
research and development, Linkages with 0115७ and
greater access to technical education by women ,

handicapped, and the weaker sections of the society.”


iliating

function..of the 0101 ६...

bnical. institution:

programnes

2.1 Section 10 occurring in Chapter (IL sets out the
powers and functions of the Council. The act provides for
abtaining consultation by the Council from the concerned
agencies, which includes the affiliating university also, for
granting approval for starting new technical institutions and
for introduction of new courses or proaranmes. in so far as

is relevant for the present purpose, Section 10 reads as

follows: 5
"LO. It shall be the duty of the Council ko take all
such steps as it may think Fit for ensuring
co-ordinated and integrated development of technical
education and maintenance of standards and for the
purposes of performing its functions under this Act,
the Council may ...... (kK) grant approval for
starting new technical institutions and for
introduction of new courses or programmes. in
consultation with the agencies concerned:"

(Emphasis laid)



Section 11 empowers the Council to cause inspection of

any institution, university or their departments to ascertain
the financial needs of technical institutions and universities

and also to ascertain the standards of teaching, examination

and research in such institutions.

Ik may not be necessary to notice the other provisions
of the Act except Sections 22 and 23. Section 22 empowers the
Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Act, while Section 23 empowers the Council to make

regulations for the very same purpose.

2.2 Attention not drawn. tewards. th

material words in

clause (ki of Section 10 in

before the Supreme

Cour:

In Unni Krishnan. ooJ.P.and UObhbers vw. Stabe of Andhra

Pradesh, and Others [(1993) Lo 989.0.0. 645] idecided by a

Constitution Bench), the broad scheme of the Act was

considered in paras 189 and 47०. after noticing the relevant

clauses in Section 10 of the Act. the Court observed: ~

“Section 3 of the Act provides for the establishment o
the Council while Section 10 specifies the functions
of the Council. Apart from directing generally that
the Council shall take all such steps as it may think
fit for ensuring coordinate and integrated development |
of technical education and inaintenance of standards,

the Act specifically
contd...



“t
सह
90
ey

- empowers the council, inter alia, to “(j)} fix norms
and guidelines for charging tuition and other fees:
_ CK). grant approval for starting -new technical
institutions and for introduction of new courses or

programmes in consultation with the agencies

concerned, and (n) take all necessary to prevent

Laps
commercialisation of technical education. Lt is true.
there is no express provision in the Act which says

that no engineering college or any other college or

institution imparting technical education shall be

established except with the permission of the Council.

But this may be for the rea

son that such a power was
intended to be exercised by the Council itself if it
thinks necessary to do so. We are of the apinien that

the vast powers conferred upon the (01116 il by Se en

10, including those specified above. deo axtend to and
entitle it to issue an order to the above effect. It

can also say that even in the existing institutions,

no new course, Faculty or class shall be opened except

with its approval.

Unfortunately, no adequate focus and consideration was

endowed upon the words “in consultation with the ageng

concerned’ occurring at the end of clause (k) of Section 10
probably for the reason that in that case the Court was merely

concerned with examining the general 3 heme of the Act and the



facts. of the cases before the Court did not call for an
है रा :
examination of the aforesaid words occurring in clause (k) of

Section: 10.

In the State of. Tamil. Naduand Another. v-

Educational..&

Institute and Others. (1995) 4 S.C.C.
Loa, the two-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court examined at
length the scheme and sweep of the Act as well as the scheme
and ambit of two State enactments. namely, Tamil Nadu Private
Colleges (Regulation) Act, 1776 (and the rules made
thereunder} and the Madras University Act, 1923 (and the rules
and statutes made thereunder). The Court held that the Act is
relatable to and has been enacted under and in pursuance of
Entry 66 of List 1 and Entry 25 of List 111 of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution. The Court also found that the

aforesaid two Tamil Nadu enactments were rely

table to Entry 25
of List [1 and accordinaly held that in so far as the said
enactments occupy the field occupied by the act, the State
enactments are void and inoperative by virtue of article 254
of the Constitution of India. It was pointed: out that the
said enactments had not obtained the assent of ‘the President
as contemplated by clause (2) of the said article. The
observations made in para 27 of the judgment (page 124) are
relevant and are being extracted out below, dealing with the
conflict between T.N.Private Colleges (Regulation) Act and the
Acti-

“27. The provisions of the State Act enumerated above

show that if it is made applicable to the technical

institutions, it will overlap and will be in conflict


~:10:-

with the provisions of the Central Act in various
areas and, in-particular,...... granting approval for
starting new technical institutions and for
introduction of new courses or programmes...... What
is further, the primary object of the Central Act, as
discussed earlier. is to provide for the establishment
of an ALL India council for Technical Education with a
view, among others, to plan and coordinate the
development of technical education system throughout
the country and to promote the qualitative improvement
of such education and to regulate and properly

maintain the norms and

ndards in the technical
education system which is a subjeqt within the
exclusive legislative field of the Central Government
as is clear from Entry 66 of the Union List in the

Saventh Schedule. All the other provisions of the ¢

have.been made in furtherance of the said objectives.
They can also be deemed to have been. enacted under
Entry 25 of List 111. this being so, the provisions
of the State Act which impinge upon Fhe provisions of
the Central Act are void and, therefore,

unenforceable....

(Emphasis laid)

While examining the conflict between the Act and the
Madras University act, the Court made the Following
observations in para 30:~

“& comparison of the Central Act and the University

Act will show that as far as the institutions



४४३३4 :-

imparting technical education are concerned cnereis
a conflict between and overlapping of the functions of
the Council and the University. Under Section 10 -of
the central Act, it is the Council which entrusted
with the power, particularly ........ granting
approval for starting new technical institutions or
introducing new courses or programmes ......... Thus,
so far as these matters are concerned, in the case of
the institutes imparting technical education, it is
net the University Act and the University but it is
the Central Act and the Council created under it which
will have the jurisdiction. To that extent, after the
coming into operation of the Central Act, the
provisions of the University act will be deemed to
have become unenforceable in case of technical
colleges like the enaineering colleges .... The
provisions of the University act regarding affiliation
of technical colleges like the engineering colleges
and the conditions for grant and continuation of such
affiliation by the University shall. however, remain
operative but the conditions that are prescribed by
the University for grant and continuance of
affiliation will have to be in conformity with the
norms and guidelines prescribed by the Council in
respect of matters entrusted to it under Section 10 of

the Central Act.”


~2h2s-

Unfortunately ‘again, in this decision too, no ‘proper
focus was endowed upon the last words ‘in clause (k) of Section

io, namely. “in consultation with the agencies concerned” .

Evidently, they were not specifically brought to the notice of

the Court while considering the issue of power to grant
approval for the establishment of a technical institution. I[t
may be noted that according to the Act, the power and Function
of the Council to grant approval for starting new technical
institutions and for introduction of new courses or programmes
is not absolute or exclusive: the Act contemplates this power

being exercised “in consultation with the agencies concerned” .

the “agencies concerned”  inust necessarily include the
University which has to grant affiliation and the State

Government wherever there is

a State enactment governing or
touching upen the grant of approval for starting new technical
institutions and For introduction of new courses or

programmes.

2.3 Effect, of the decisions of the Supreme Court..on. the
role of Universities with regard. to function. under

clause (k) of Section Lo:

The effect of the latter decison of the Supreme Court
in the State.of Tamil. Nadu. and another v- Adhiyaman.

al

& Research Institute and Others. however, is that
the AICTE has been made the sole, exclusive and the absolute
authority in the matter of grant of approval for starting new
technical institutions and for introduction of new courses or

programmes in existing technical institutions. Prima facie,



it appears that the University and the State Government’ have
been excluded from projecting their views in the matter of
granting approval for starting new technical institutions and.
for introduction of new courses or programmes. Such state of
affairs does not appear to be consistent with the express
provisions of the AICTE Act as cited above. Such a course
would have the effect of whittling down the autonomy of the
university and the important role of the State Governments.
It is true that it was because of the onset of the decline in
standard of technical education that the said Act was brought
into force and hence the role of the Council came into beina.
But. this circumstance cannot render the role of the
universities and the State Governments nugatory in expressing

their side of the view, in this regard.

The important role of the universities in this regard
can be pointed out in a nutshell. Unless affiliation is
granted by a university, no institution including technical

institution can survive. as pointed out in Unni. Krishnan J.P.

& Others v. State of Andhra Pradesh. (supra) neither the

constituent colleges (af the University) nor affiliated
colleges (private educational institutions) conduct ‘their own
examinations. They prepare the students for the examination
to be held by the affiliating university and the degrees or
certificates are also granted by the affiliating universities
(see para 204 of the judgment). The primary importance and
the crucial role of the affiliating university cannot,

therefore, be ignored or under estimated. Affiliation is

neither a matter of course nor is it an empty formality.



Affiliation is the life-blood of any educational institution
of this nature. Without it, no technical institution can

exist.

Wniversity concerning

..eensideration:According to the 1992
amendment to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the power
to permit the establishment of a medical college is vested in
the Central Government. The provisions in Section LOA to 100
and the guidelines issued thereunder show that before
permitting such establishment, the opinion and views of Indian

Medical Council and the concerned university is also obtained.

An extract of relevant provisions of Section 300 af
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the Regulations made

thereunder is quoted below for reference:

“"10-A. Permission for establishment of new medical

college, new course of study, etc.-

(1). .--

(2) (a) Every person or medical college shall, for the
purpose of obtaining permission under sub-section (1),
submit to the Central Government a scheme in
accordance with the provisions of Clause (b) and the
Central Government shall refer the scheme to the
Council for its recommendations.

(b)...-- . .


(4) The Central Government may, after considering the
scheme and recommendations of the . Council under
sub-section (3) and after obtaining, where necessary,
such other particulars as may be considered necessary
by it from the person or college concerned, and having
regard to the factors referred in sub-section (7)
either approve (with such conditions, if any, as it
may consider necessary) or disapprove the scheme = and
ary such approval shalt be a permission under

sub-section (1):

Provided that no ;

cheme shall be disapproved by the
Central Government except after giving the person or college
concerned rceaasanable opportunity of beina heard:

The term “person” is explained in this section to include

“university”.

Para 3 of the Regulations made tinder 5 on LoA,
which are called “Establishment of New Medical Colleges,
opening of Higher Courses of Study and Increase of Admission
Capacity in Medical Colleges Regulations, 1993" prescribes the
qualifying criteria. Insofar as relevant, the said para reads
as follows: “The eligible organisations shall abide by Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 as modified from time to time and
the Regulaltions framed thereunder and shall qualify.to apply

for. permission. to establish new medical colleges only.if. the

Folle

ga.conditions are. fulfilled: = ...... (3) the

Essentiality Certificate regarding the desirability ahd


~216:-

* feasibility; of..:having the. proposed medical college at the
proposed location. has been obtained and that the adequate
clinical material is available as per Medical Council of India
requirements has been obtained by the applicant from the
respective State Government or the Union Territory
Administration; (4). that consent of affiliation for the
proposed medical college has been obtained by the applicant

from a recognised University.”

It would thus appear that obtainina of application
from a University is a condition precedent for applying for

permission to establish a medica] college, apart From an

“essentiality certificate” From the concerned State
Government. Te is equally relevant 10 note that even tor
applying for starting new cours or For increasing the
strength in a medical college, the permission of the

affiliating University for the Purpose is made ai condition

precedent under the said Regulations.

MF RROVISiONS..under the Oentists Act, 1948

A reference to the provisions of Section LO-A to 10-९०
of the Act shows that the power to permit the establishment of
a new dental college, new course of study or training
(including a post-graduate course of study or training) etc.
is vested in the Central Government. The provisions in

Section 10-A to 10-C and the Regulations made thereunder are



~gh7i~

in pari materia to the provisions. of tne 1992 amendment made
in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and = the Regulations

cited above.

2.6 Relevant. prov,

sentation...

(i) In fact under Section’ 3(3)(b) of the Gujarat Medical
Council Act, 1967, it is envisaged that the Medical Council
shall comprise of among others,
“by one member From each University established by
Jaw in the State which has a medical faculty, elected

by members of the medical faculty of the University

from amonast members thereof who are practitioners,:
and"
(ii) Similarly under ection 3(3) of the Maharashtra

Medical Council act, 1965, it is provided that the said

Medical Council shall comprise, inter-alia of =~

“(b) one member from each university established by
Law in the State which has a medical faculty, elected
by memebers of the medical faculty of the University

from amongst members thereof who are practitioners;”


Section 3 of this Act’ provides for the

constitution and composition of the Medical Council of
India. Section 3(1)(b) of the act. provides for

inclusion of:-

7 (७9) one member from each University, to be
elected from amongst the members of the
medical faculty of the University by members
of the Senate of the University or in case the
University has no senate, by members of the

Court:"

Civ) Position under the Dentists Act. 2948 m7

Section 3 of this Act deais with the Constitution ana
composition of the Dental Council of India. [t provides that
the Council shall comprise, inter alia, of the foliowing

members :-

“(d) one member from each university established by
law in the States which grants a recognised dental
qualification, to be elected by the members of the
Senate of the University, or in case the university
has no Senate, by the members of the Court, from

amongst the members of the Dental Faculty of the



—cl9:-

University or in case the University has no Dental

हे Sopra

Faculty, from. amongst the members of the Medical ,
Faculty thereof;

+ Gide SF

-"€e} one member to represent each State nominated by
the Government of each such State from among persons
registered either in a medical register or a dental

register of the State;"

8. cursory glance to the aforequoted provisions shows
that “there has been statutory recognition of the
representation of Universities in the respective Councils.
The role of each university is crucial in evolving
policies/decisions of the respective councils. Through their
presence the Universities can have their say in evolving
policies/decisions of the respective councils to achieve the
objectives of the enactments. It goes without saying that
each university has a say in making recommendations for
granting approval concerning the establishment of a new

institution or introduction of new courses.

OF, Section 10 of the

It has. become necessary to amend clause (k) of Section
10 of the-Act to expressly restore the important role of the
universities in the matter of grant of approval for starting
new technical institutions and for introduction of new courses
or programmes so that full Meaning can be given to the

aforesaid last words in clause (k} of Section 10 of the Act,


otherwise the observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court made
in the decision in Unni Krishnan, J.P... & Others v. State of
Andhra Pradesh & Ors. (suprai and in the Aadhiyaman

Educational...4... Research {[nsti

are being
understood as excluding any role to the University or the
Government in the matter of establishment of new technical
institutions concerned. It is also a matter for consideration
whether conferment of such exclusive power upon the AICTE is
advisable in the circumstances apart from the fact that such
conferment of absolute power is inconsistent with the express
provisions of the Act. The over-riding princiele in such
matters is that no power should be concentrated absolutely in

the hands

3
=

one person or one agency. Ik is alse necessary

to amphasise anc aulve Full meaning to the aforesaia last words

(Ki of Section Lo,

has become

the Supreme Court refs

Sary to restore the important rcia of the

Universities in the matter of establishment of such colleges

and courses. As pointe

out earlier, according to 19०८

Amendment fo che

B

{ndian Medical Council act, 1956 and the
Dentists Act, L24@ and the Regulations made tnareunder the
power to permit the establishment of a medical college/Dental

college

is vested in the Central Government. Before even

applying for permission for such

nment. an
essentiality certificate from the concerned State Government
and a letter of consent of affiliation from the concerned
university is made a condition Precedent. IMC is also one of
the bodies to be consulted and is not made the sole authority
in the matter. Besides it is also required to be considered

whether there is good reason for conferment of such exclusive



power upon the AICTE when in the case of similar statutory

professional Councils. only a recommendatory role is assigned

to them.

it may be pointed out that the role of the AICTE is
advisory in nature in many respects as is the role of Indian
Medical Council. Under seciton 10 C1) of the AICTE Act, 1987,

it may advise to the Cent

al Government in respect of grant of
charter to. any professional body or institution in the field

of kechnical education: under Section loChi, it may advise the

“GC for declaring any institution Liaparting technical
education as a deemed univresity. Tk may be pertinent to
refer to the decision in Ajay. Kumar Singh ४. State of Bihar,
JT 1994 (2) 50 467 (675). wherein the Supreme Court
interpreted the term “may also advise Iniversities in the
matter of securing uniform standards for post-graduate medical

education throughout  Inedia" used under se

tion 20 of the IMC

Act, as of advisory in nature. hus it may alse be relevant
to examine whether the role of 81७15 (Council) be also
organised in tune with the IMC, bental Council of India, एक

have consistency in the discharge of functions as between the

various statutory professional couneiles.

Be that as it may, it is nec

ry to emphasise and
give full meaning to the aforesaid last words in clause (k) of
Section 1O of the AICTE act.

a

2

In order to make the position clear, the Law
Commission proposes to suggest the amendment. of clause (k) of

Section 10 of the Act. 4 questionnaires in respect of the


proposed amendment 1 prepared below For your kind perusal:

(a) proposed amendment should be in the

Following manners: ~

na new technical

"CkY grant approval fer r
institutions and fer intraduction of new courses or

programmes ~

tid in consultation with the agencies

eon 4. and

mn

Cid) in the case of institutions proposed to

ady affiliated to a

be affiliat or air

Universit with othe coenmcurrence of that

Shion LOK} shoule be deleted

(b) Whe

and instead a new Stier Lo-a on the Lines of the ehion

Lora of the Indian tiedine Couneil Aek. Lease ited above,

functions?

apr y 01117

1०161 be incerporated ta

Cc) Whether there Ls making any other radical

changes in the Ack to achieve for improving the

chnical education in the country?

The Law Commission  invi /comments on

subject and requests vou to send vour valued opinions on the

issues raised in the questionnaire within six weeks.