LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST
REPORT

ON

CENTRAL VIGILANCE
COMMISSION

AND

ALLIED BODIES

1998


8. P. JEEVAN REDDY
Chairman, Law Commission of India

F.No.6(3)(49}/98-LC(LS)

SHASTRI BHAWAN

TEL. : 3384475

= Residence
सबत्यभेव जयते 1, JANP ATH

NEW CELHI 110011

TEL. 3019485

August 13, 1998
Dear Dr.M.Thambi Durai,

Iam forwarding herewith the One Hundred Sixty First
Report on “Central Vigilance Commission.”

2. The subject was taken up by the Commission jn
pursuance of the reference of the Government of India vide
their letter dated 12.86.98 received on 16.6.98 to take up the
study of the subject of ’Conferment of the Statutory Status

the Central Vigilance Commission" in pursuance of the Supreme

Court Judgment dated 18.12.97 in Vineet Narain and or
Union of India and aAnr. (W.P. (Criminal) Nos.340
and give its report along with a suitable draft legis

v
]

Dom

3. The background of the problems which led the
Supreme Court to issue directions in vin Narain
{reported in 1997(7) SCALE 656) quoted in para 1.2
report disclose the disturbing state of affairs an ac
Failure of the Government agencies like the CBI
revenue authorities to allegedly perferm their duties
legal obligations of properly investigating matt
out of the seizure of the so called "Jain Bair
nducted by the CBI. It was also brought out in
that financial support to certain terror 15. extended
through clandestine and illegal means, by use of tainted funds
obtained through ‘havala’ transactions, a nexus 2 twe
veral important politicians, bureaucrats and criminals whe
are all recipients of money from unlawful source given for
unlawful considerations; Tack of appropriate investigation,
inertia to prosecute influential persons. Such state of
affairs pose a serious threat to the integrity, security and
economy of the nation.

4, In order to combat the evil, the Supreme Court gave
directions in Vineet Narain’s case (supra) as quoted under
Para 3.2 of the report. In this report, the Commission
examined the ramifications of the various directions
Supreme Court in the said case and has recomn
inter-alia, to confer statutory status to th
Vigilance Commission, contemplating it to be t neMb>
body and has annexed a 8111 entitled Vigilance
Commission Bill", 1998 to the report, bringing out its
recommendations in the form of the Bill. a Further two

LAW COMMISSION OF IN:

NEW DELHI - 110 001


consequential amending Bills, namely, the Delhi Special Police
Establishment (Amendment) 8111, 1998 and the Foreign Exchange

Regulation (Amendment)
effect to the directions

Bill, 1998 are also annexed to give

of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in

Vineet Narain’s case, supra.

With regards,

Or.M.Thambi Durai,
Hon’ble Minister for Law,
and Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.

Yours smeerely,

1. +
Lor

( B.P.JEEVAN REDDY)

Justice i


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER IIT

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER VI

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS
IN PUBLIC LIFE AND THE ADVERSE
IMPACT OF LACK OF PROBITY

SCOPE OF DIRECTIONS OF SUPREME
COURT IN VINEET NARAYAN’S CASE
(SUPRA)

SET UP OF CENTRAL VIGILANCE
COMMISSION, CENTRAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIRECTORATE

CHANGING SCENARIO IN LAW
RELATING TO PUNITIVE MEASURES
AGAINST PERSONS HOLDING PUBLIC
OFFICE

RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

PAGES

1-13

14-21

22-42

43-58

59-63

64-110


CHAPTER-I

INTRODUCTION

1.4. Genesis of the report: In pursuance of the

directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Vineet
Narain vs. Union of India dated December 18, 1997 in
४.२. (0701) No.340-343 of 1993, also reported in 1997(7) SCALE
656, given to the Union of India and all concerned, the
Government of India has assigned to the Law Commission of
India the task “to examine the issue regarding conferment of
the statutory status on the Central Vigilance Commission
(0४0) and give its report along with draft legislation”, vide
their letter dated June 12, 1998 from the Ministry of Law,
Justice & Company Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs)
received by the Law Commission on 15/16.6.98. Accompany ing
the said reference the Government has also forwarded us the
report of the Committee (referred to in the judgement of the
Supreme Court as Independent Review Committee-‘IRC’) set up
to examine the structure and functioning of the Central
Bureau of Investigation and the Enforcement Directorate,
submitted in November, 1997 and the draft Bill entitled “the
Central Vigilance Commission 8111" prepared by the ०४०, for

the perusal of the Law Commission.


1.2 Background of the problem: In order to gather the
background facts which led the Hon’ble Supreme Court to issue
directions to the Union of India, it would be pertinent to
refer an extract from the order dated 30th January, 1996
(quoted under paragraphs 10 of the decision in Vineet Narain

case) (supra), as follows:-

“The gist of the allegations in the writ petition are
that Government agencies, like the CBI and the
revenue authorities have failed to perform their
duties and legal obligations inasmuch as they have
failed to properly investigate matters arising out of
the seizure of the so called “Jain Dairies” in
certain raids conducted by the CBI. It is alleged
that the apprehending of certain terrorists led to
the discovery of financial support to them by
clandestine and illegal means, by use of tainted
funds obtained through ’havala’ transactions; that
this also disclosed a nexus between several important
politicians, bureaucrats and criminals, who are all
recipients of money from unlawful sources given for
unlawful considerations; that the CBI and other
Government agencies have failed to fully investigate
into the matter and take it to the logical end point
of the trail and to prosecute all persons who have
committed any crime; that this is being done with a

view to protect the persons involved, who are very



influential and powerful in the present set up; that
the matter discloses a definite nexus between crime
and corruption in public life at high places in the
country which poses 8 serious threat to the
integrity, security and economy of the nation; that
Probity in public life, to prevent erosion of the
rule of law and the preservation of democracy in the
country, requires that the Government agencies be
compelled to duly perform their legal obligations and
to proceed in accordance with law against each and
every person involved, irrespective of the height at
which he is placed in the power set up. The facts
and circumstances of the present case do indicate
that it is of utmost public importance that this
matter is examined thoroughly by this Court to ensure
that all Government agencies, entrusted with the duty
to discharge their functions and obligations in
accordance with law, do so, bearing in mind
constantly the concept of equality enshrined in the
Constitution and the basic tenet of rule of law: "Be
you ever so high, the Jaw is above you".
Investigation into every accusation made against each
and every person on a reasonable basis, irrespective
of the position and status of that person, must be
conducted and completed expeditiously. This is
imperative to retain public confidence in the

impartial working of the Government agencies. In



this proceeding we are not concerned with the merits
of the accusations or the individuals alleged to be
involved, but only with the performance of the legal
duty by the Government agencies to fairly, properly
and fully investigate into every such accusation
against every person, and to take the logical final

action in accordance with law.”

1.2.4 The facts of the said case disclosed to the Supreme
Court a disturbing state of affairs. The court found that
inertia on the part of investigating agencies was the common
rule whenever the alleged offender was powerful person.
Indeed, the very constitution and working of the
investigating agencies, the court found, was at the root of
their inability to perform whenever powerful persons are

involved. In the words of the Supreme Court

"3. This experience revealed to us the need for
the insulation of these agencies from any extraneous
influence to ensure the continuance of the good work
they have commenced. It is this need which has
impelled us to examine the structure of these
agencies and to consider the necessary steps which
would provide permanent insulation to the agencies
against extraneous influence to enable them to
discharge their duties in the manner required for

proper implementation of the rule of law. Permanent



measures are necessary to avoid the need of every
matter being brought to the court for taking ad hoc
measures to achieve the desired results. This is the
eccasion for us to deal with the structure,
constitution and the permanent measures necessary for
having a fair and impartial agency. The faith and
commitment to the rule of tlaw exhibited by atl
concerned in these proceedings is the surest
guarantee of the survival of democracy of which rule
of law is the bedrock. The basic postulate of the
concept of equality: ’Be you ever so high, the law

is above you’, has governed all steps taken by us in

these proceedings.”

४15. Inertia was the common rule whenever the
alleged offender was a powerful person. Thus, it
became necessary to take measures to ensure
permanency in the remedial effect to prevent

reversion to inertia of the agencies in such matters.

16. Everyone against whom there is reasonable
suspicion of committing a crime has to be treated
equally and similarly under the Jaw and probity in
public life is of great significance. The
constitution and working of the investigating
agencies revealed the lacuna of its inability to

perform whenever powerful persons were involved. For



1.2.2

this reason, a close examination of the constitution
of these agencies and = their control assumes
significance. No doubt, the overall control of the
agencies and responsibility of their functfoning has
to be in the executive, but then a scheme giving the
needed insulation from extraneous influences even of
the controlling executive, is imperative. It is this
exercise which became nacessary in these proceedings
for the future. This is the surviving scope of these

writ petitions.”

Dismal picture presented by the Vohra Committee icture presented by the Vohra Committee:- The

Supreme Court referred to and relied upon the report of the

Committee known as Vohra Committee which was constituted by

the Government of India by their order dated July 9, 1993 as

follows :-

"47, AS a result of the debate in these
proceedings and the experience gained thereby the
Union of India came to realise that an in-depth study
of the selection of personnel of these agencies,
particularly the CBI and the Enforcement Directorate
of the Revenue Department, and their functioning is
necessary. The Government of India, sharing this
perception, by an Order No. $/7937/SS(ISP)/93 dated
9th July, 1993 constituted a Committee headed by the

then Home Secretary Shri N.N. Vohra to take stock of


all available information about the activities of
crime syndicates/mafia organizations which had
developed links with, and were being protected by
government functionaries and political personalities.
It was stated that on the basis of recommendations of
the Committee the Government shall determine the
need, if any, to establish a special
organisation/agency to regularly collect information
and pursue cases against such elements. The
Committee was headed by the then Home Secretary Shri
1.1१. Vohra and had as its Members-Secretary
(Revenue), Director, Intelligence Bureau, Director,
CBI, Joint Secretary (PP), Ministry of Home Affairs.
The Committee gave its recommendations dated
5.10.1993, It has made scathing comments and has
painted a dismal picture of the existing scene. It
has said that the network of the mafia is virtually
running a parallel government pushing the State
apparatus into irrelevance. The committee
recommended the creation of a nodal agency under the
Ministry of Home Affairs for the collation and
compilation of atl information received from
intelligence Bureau (1B), Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) and Research and Analysis Wing
(R&AW) and the various agencies under the Department
of Revenue. The report is significant for the dismal

picture of the existing scenario which discloses a


powerful nexus between the bureaucracy and
politicians with the mafia gangs, smugglers and the
underworld. The report of the Vohra Committee is the
opinion of some top bureaucrats and it confirmed our
worst suspicions focusing the need of improving the
procedure for constitution and monitoring the
functioning of intelligence agencies. There is,
thus, no doubt that this exercise cannot be delayed

further.”

1.2.3 Report of the Independent Review Committee (IRC)

relied upon:

The Supreme Court also referred to and strongly
relied upon the report of yet another committee called the
Independent Review Committee (IRC) constituted by the
government under its order dated September 8, 1997 comprising
Shri B.G.Deshmukh, former Cabinet Secretary, Shri N.N.Vohra
Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister and Shri S.V.Giri,

Central Vigilance Commissioner. The court observed:-

“27. The IRC is a body constituted by the Central
Government itself as a result of its perception that
the Constitution and functioning of the CBI, CVC and
Directorate of Enforcement require a close scrutiny
in the background of the recent unsatisfactory
functioning of these agencies with a view to improve

their functioning. The view taken by the IRC is a


reaffirmation of this belief shared by everyone. The
preface to the report indicates the reason for the
constitution of the IRC and says that " In the past
several years, there has been progressive increase in
allegations of corruption involving public servants.
Understandably, cases of this nature have attracted
heightened media and public attention. A general
impression appears to have gained ground that the
concerned Central Investigating agencies are subject
to extraneous pressures and have been indulging in
dilatory tactics in not brining the guilty to book.
The decisions of higher courts to directly monitor
investigations in certain cases have added to the
aforesaid belief." There can thus be no doubt that
there is need for the exercise we were called upon to
perform and which has occasioned consideration of
this crucial issued by this court in exercise of its
powers conferred by the Constitution of India. The
conclusions reached by the IRC and the
recommendations it has made for improving the
functioning and thereby the image of these agencies
is 8 further reaffirmation of this general belief.
There can also be no doubt that the conclusions
reached by the IRC and its recommendations are the
minimum which require immediate acceptance and
implementation in a bid to arrest any further decay

of the polity. It follows that the exercise to be


“:10 :-

performed now by this Court is really to consider
whether any modifications/additions are required to
be made to the recommendations of the IRC for
achieving the object for which the Central Government
itself constituted the IRC. We are informed by the
learned Attorney General that further action on the
report of the IRC could not be taken so far because
of certain practical difficulties faced by the
Central Government but there is no negative reaction

to the report given by the Central Government.”

1.3 Present situation of the outcome of ‘hawala’ cases
alarming:- As per the statement of the Minister given in

Parliament, reported in the Hindustan Times dated 25th July,
1998 that out of 34 hawala cases, 29 cases have been dropped
by the courts. Observations of the Supreme Court in this
context are appropriate:-
"53. There is another aspect of rule of law which
is of equal significance. Unless a proper
investigation is made and it is followed by an
equally proper prosecution, the effort made would not
bear fruition. The recent experience in the field of
prosecution is also discouraging. To emphasise this
point, some reference has to be made to a large
number of prosecutions launched as a result of
monitoring by the court in this matter which have

resulted in discharge of the accused at the



5: :८

threshold. It took several years for the CBI to
commence investigation and that too as a result of
the monitoring by this Court. It is not as if the
CBI, on conclusion of the investigation, formed the
opinion that no case was made out for prosecution so
that the earlier inaction may have been justified.
The cBI did file numerous chargesheets which
indicated that in its view a prima facie case for
prosecution had been made out. This alone is
sufficient to indicate that the earlier inaction was
unjustified. However, discharge of the accused on
filing of the chargesheet indicates, irrespective of
the ultimate outcome of the matters pending in the
higher courts, that the trial court at least was not
satisfied that a prima facie case was made out by the
investigation. These facts are sufficient to
indicate that either the investigation or the
Prosecution or both were lacking. A similar result
of discharge of the accused in such a large number of
cases where chargesheets had been filed by the CBI is
not consistent with any other inference. The need
for a strong and competent prosecution machinery and
not merely a fair and competent investigation by the
CBI can hardly be overemphasised. This is the
occasion for us to take the view that a suitable
machinery for prosecution of the cases filed in court

by the CBI is also essential to ensure discharge of


212 :-

its full responsibility by the 081. Unless a
competent prosecution follows a fair and competent
investigation, the exercise in the ultimate analysis
would be futile. Investigation and prosecution are
inter related and improvement of investigation
without improving the prosecution machinery is of no
practical significance. We would, therefore,
consider the aspect of prosecution also in the

formulation of the guidelines.”

This is a serious matter since even if stringent
measures are invoked to prosecute such sort of cases, and yet
the outcome is dismissal of the cases, it brings the
prosecution machinery to ridicule. It also provokes another
line of thought that unless accountability for lapses
appropriate to the wrong doing on the part of the prosecution
is fixed and expeditiously carried out, no amount of measures

can come to rescue.

1.4. Prevalence of various scams in the country: Various

decisions of Supreme Court have emphasised the dismal state
of affairs and the prevalence of various scams in the
country. For example in the case of housing entitled Shiv

Sagar Tiwari v. Union of India, (1997) 1 SCC 444, 471, it

was observed:-


-:13 :-

"88. It seems no scam can be avoided howsoever rigid
rules may be framed or guidelines laid down. Scams
are creatures of moribund mind and low moral
character. With various types of scams 811 around,

it ig too much to expect that we can provide any

formula by which scam can be prevented...." (emphasis

laid by underlining)

No further assertion is needed to emphasise the alarming

state of affairs resulting from the nexus between some of the

important politicians, bureaucrats and the criminals.


-:14 :-

CHAPTER IT

MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS IN PUBLIC LIFE AND THE

ADVERSE IMPACT OF LACK OF PROBITY

2.1 Maintenance of Standards in Public Life:- The

hallmark of maintenance of standards in public life has been
stressed even in other countries for survival of rule of law

and democracy.

The Supreme Court quoted in Vineet Narayan’s case
(supra) the general recommendations of the Committee headed

by Lord Nolan on “Standards in Public Life” as follows:-

“57. It is a similar perception in England which has
led to the constitution of a Committee headed by Lord
Nolan on ‘Standards in Public Life’. In Volume 1 of
Lord Nolan’s Report (1995), the general

recommendations made are:

General recommendations:
4, Some of our conclusions have general application

across the entire service:



—:15 :-

Principles of public 141७:

5. The general principles of conduct which underpin
public life need to be restated. We have done this.
The seven principles of selflessness, integrity,
objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and

leadership are set out in full On page 14.

Codes of conduct:

6. All public bodies should draw up codes of conduct

incorporating these principles.

Independent scrutiny:

7. Internal systems for maintaining standards should

be supported by independent scrutiny.

Education:

8. More needs to be done to promote and reinforce
standards of conduct in public bodies, in particular
through guidance and training, including induction
training."

58. The Seven Principles of Public Life are stated
in the report by Lord Nolan, thus:

The Seven Principles of Public Life

“Selflessness:
Holders of public office should take decisions solely

in terms of the public interest. They should not do


-:16 :-

so in order to gain financial or other material
benefits for themselves, their family, or their

friends.

Integrity:

Holders of public office should not place themselves
under any financial or other obligation to outside
individuals or organisations that might influence

them in the performance of their official duties.

Objectivity:

In carrying out public business, including making
public appointments, awarding contracts, or
recommending individuals for rewards and benefits,
holders of public office should make choices on

merit.

Accountability:

Holders of public office are accountable for their
decisions and actions to the public and must submit
themselves to whatever scrutiny is appropriate to

their office.

Openness:
Holders of public office should be as open as

possible about all the decisions and actions that


17 oi

they take. They should give reasons for their
‘decisions and restrict information only when the

wider public interest clearly demands.

Honesty:
Holders of public office have a duty to declare any
private interests relating to their public duties and

to take steps to resolve any conflicts arising in a

way that protects the public interest.

Leadership:
Holders of public office should promote and support

these principles by leadership and example.”

The Supreme Court has also relied upon these

principles of public life (evolved by the Nolan Committee) in

the aforesaid Vineet Narayan’s case:

"59. These principles of public life are of general
application in every democracy and one is expected to
bear them in mind while scrutinising the conduct of
every holder of a public office. It is trite that
the holders of public offices are entrusted with
certain powers to be exercised in public alone and,
therefore, the office is held by them in trust for
the people. Any deviation from the path of rectitude

by any of them amounts to a breach of trust and must



-:18 :-

be severely dealt with instead of being pushed under
the carpet. If the conduct amounts to an offence, it
must be promptly investigated and the offender
against whom a prima facie case is made out should be
prosecuted expeditiously so that the majesty of law
is upheld and the rule of law vindicated. It is the
duty of the judiciary to enforce the rule of law and,

therefore, to guard against erosion of the rule of

Taw."
2.2 Adverse impact of lack of probity in public life: It

is quite essential to maintain these standards in public life
failure of which breeds all-pervasive corruption undermining
rule of law, violation of right to equality, lack of faith in
courts and threats to democracy. Besides such failure poses
a serious threat to the integrity, security and economy of
the nation. (Vineet Narayan’s case (supra para 10). Adverse
impact of Jack of probity in public life as pointed out by

the Supreme Court in Vineet Narayan’s case (supra) reads:-

"60. The adverse impact of lack of probity in public
life leading to a high degree of corruption is
manifold. It also has adverse effect on foreign
investment and funding from the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank who have warned that
future aid to underdeveloped countries may be subject

to the requisite steps being taken to eradicate


5ै3:19 :-

corruption, which prevents international aid from
reaching those for whom it is meant. Increasing
corruption had led to investigative journalism which
is of value to a free society. The need to highlight
corruption in public life through the medium of
public interest litigation invoking judicial review
may be frequent in India but is not unknown in other
countries: रि ५ Secretary of State for Foreign and

Commonwealth Affairs, (1995) 1 WLR 386.

61. Of course, the necessity of desirable procedures
evolved by court rules to ensure that such a
litigation is properly conducted and confined only to
matters of public interest is obvious. This is the
effort made in these Proceedings for the enforcement
of fundamental rights guaranteed in the Constitution
in exercise of powers conferred on this Court for
doing complete justice in a cause. It cannot be
doubted that there is a serious human rights aspect
involved in such a proceeding because the prevailing
corruption in public life, if permitted to continue
unchecked, has ultimately the deleterious effect of

eroding the Indian polity.”

2.3. Lli_effects of corruption ffects f_corruption:- The i11l-effects of
corruption have been amply described in the Encyelopedia of

Democracy by Seymour Martin Lipset, Vol.I, p.310 in the


-:20 :-

Chapter ‘Corruption’ as quoted in Secretary, Jaipur
Development Authority vs. Daulat Mal Jain, (1997) 1 800 35,

para 15 as follows:-

“15. In the Encyclopedia of Democracy by Seymour
Martin Lipset, Vol.1, p.310, in the Chapter
‘Corruption’, it is stated that corruption is an
abuse of public resources for private gain. The
occasions for political corruption increase when
control on the activity of public administrators are
fragile and the division of Power between political
actors and the public bureaucrats, as well as between
the Government and the middleman, is unclear. It is
difficult to discover and punish cases of corruption.
Research has shown that political corruption tends to
be more widespread in authoritarian or totalitarian
regimes and when public opinion and the press are
unable to denounce corruption. Corruption develops
because of confusion about the borders between State
and society and between traditional and modern
values, It can be expected to grow during phases of
transition. Corruption should disappear in modern
stable democratic societies. Instead, it is growing.
Since State intervention in economic and social life
has increased the occasions for political corruption,
new technologies have increased the cost of electoral

campaigns and the professionalisation of political


careers has increased the number of those who have to
make a living from politics rather than living for
politics. Corruption has not disappeared.
Corruption has dangerous consequences for politics.
Although political corruption 18 more wideepread in
non-democratic regimes, it is particularly dangerous
for democracy because it undermines two of the major
principles on which democracies are based: the
equality of citizens’ rights and the transparency of
the political decision-making process. Bribes open
the way for access to the State for those who are
willing to pay and can afford the price. The
situation may leave non-corrupt citizens with the
belief that one ‘counts’ only if one has the right
personal contacts with those who hold power. Because
of its j1legal nature, corruption increases the range
of public decisions that are made in secrecy. It was
suggested that internal controls on public
bureaucracies through administrative controls and
accounting procedures as well as ombudsman systems
for public complaints, are remedies to control
potitical corruption. The rule of code of conduct
for political executives, public servants and private
entrepreneurs, emphasising merit and regulated system
of appointment in State bureaucracy and stimulating
price in public service, would generate remedies for

potitical corruption.”


7122 :-

CHAPTER- III

SCOPE OF DIRECTIONS OF SUPREME COURT IN VINEET NARAYAN’S CASE
(SUPRA)

3.1 Terms of reference of Independent Review Committee reference of lependent Revi committee
(IRC):

While appreciating the parameters of the directions
given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Vineet Narayan’s case
(supra) to combat with the evil studied in the preceding
chapter, it becomes necessary to quote the terms of
references of the IRC as set out in the Vineet Narayan’s case
(supra) as follows:-

"18, The same perception of the Government of

India led it to constitute another Committee by Order

No. 226/2/97-AVD-II dated 8th September, 1997
comprising of Shri 8.05. Deshmukh, former Cabinet
Secretary, Shri N.N. Vohra, Principal Secretary to
the Prime Minister and Shri 8.9. Giri, Central

Vigilance Commissioner, called the Independent Review

Committee (IRC). The order reads as under:


2123 :-

"WHEREAS the Government of India is of the opinion
that it is necessary to set up a Committee for going
into the matters mentioned hereinafter;

2. NOW, THEREFORE, a Committee of the following is
hereby set up:

(i) Shri 8.09. Deshmukh, former Cabinet Secretary
(ii) Shri NLN. Vohra, Principal Secretary to the
Prime Minister

(111) Shri S.V. Giri Cenral Vigilance Commissioner

Shri N.N. Vohra shall act as Convener.

3. The terms of reference of the Committee are
as under:

(i) To monitor the functioning of the nodal agency
established by the Ministry of Home Affairs in
pursuance of the recommendations of the Vohra

Committee Report.

(ii) To examine the present structure and working of
the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), the
Enforcement Directorate and related agencies to

suggest the changes, if any, needed to ensure:

(a) that offences alleged to have been committed by
any person, particularly those in positions of high
authority, are registered, investigated and

prosecuted fairly and expeditiously, ensuring


—:24 :-

against, inter alia, external pressure, arbitrary
withdrawals or transfers of personnel etc., and
ensuring adequate protection to the concerned
functionaries to effectively discharge their duties

and responsibilities;

(b) that there are sufficient checks and balances to
ensure that the powers of investigation and

Prosecution are not misused;

(c) that there are no arbitrary restrictions to the
initiation of investigations or launching of
prosecutions.

4, The Committee should give its report with regard
to the items mentioned in paragraph 3(ii) above

within a period of 3 months.”

3.2 Directions of the Supreme Court in Vineet Narayan’s of the Supreme Court in Vineet Narayan’s

case (supra): The directions of the Supreme Court in the
aforesaid Vineet Narayan’s case are contained under
paragraphs 62, 64 in four parts as set out below:-
"62. As a result of the aforesaid discussion, we
hereby direct as under:-
"I. CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI) AND
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (CVC).



—:265 :-

1. The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) shall be

given statutory status.

2. Selection for the post of Central Vigilance
Commissioner shall be made by a committee comprising
the Prime Minister, Home Minister and the Leader of
the Opposition from a panel of outstanding civil
servants and others with impeccable integrity, to be
furnished by the Cabinet Secretary. The appointment
shall be made by the President on the basis of the

recommendations made by the committee. This shall be

done immediately.

3. The CVC shall be responsible for the efficient
functioning of the CBI. While government shall
remain answerable for the CBI’s functioning, to
introduce visible objectivity in the mechanism to be
established for overviewing the CBI’s working, the
CVC shall be entrusted with the responsibility of
superintendence over the CBI’s functioning. The CBI
shall report to the CVC about cases taken up by it
for investigation; progress of investigations: cases
in which chargesheets are filed and their progress.
The CVC shall review the progress of all cases moved
by the CBI for sanction of prosecution of public
servants which are pending with the competent

authorities, specially those in which sanction has


7-126 :-

been delayed or refused.

4. The Central Government shall take all measures
necessary to ensure that the CBI functions
effectively and efficiently and is viewed as a
non-partisan agency.

5. The CVC shall have a separate section in its
annual report on the CBI’s functioning after the

supervisory function is transferred to it.

6. Recommendations for appointment of the Director,
CBI shall be made a Committee headed by the Central
Vigilance Commissioner with the Home Secretary and
Secretary (Personnel) as members. The views of the
incumbent Director shall be considered by the
Committee for making the best choice. The Committee
shall draw up a panel of IPS officers on the basis of
their seniority, integrity, experience in
investigation and anti-corruption work. The final
selection shall be made by the Appointments Committee
of the Cabinet (ACC) from the panel recommended by
the Selection Committee. If none among the panel is
found suitable, the reasons thereof shall be recorded

and the Committee asked to draw up a fresh panel.

7. The Director, CBI shall have a minimum tenure of
two years, regardless of the date of his

superannuation. This would ensure that an officer



~127 :-

suitable in 811 respects is not ignored merely

because he has less than two years to superannuate

from the date of his appointment.

8. The transfer of an incumbent Director, CBI in an
extraordinary situation, including the need for him
to take up a more important assignment, should have

the approval of the Selection Committee.

9. The Director, CBI shall have full freedom for
allocation of work within the agency as also for
constituting teams for investigations. Any change
made by the Director, CBI in the Head of an
investigative team should be for cogent reasons and

for improvement in investigation, the reasons being

recorded.

10. Selection/extension of tenure of officers upto
the level of Joint Director (JD) shall be decided by
a Board comprising the Central Vigilance
Commissioner, Home Secretary and Secretary
(Personnel) with the Director, CBI providing the
necessary inputs. The extension of tenure or
Premature repatriation of officers upto the level of
Joint Director shall be with the final approval of
this Board. Only cases pertaining to the appointment

or extension of tenure of officers of the rank of



-:28 :-

Joint Director or above shall be referred to the
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) for

decision.”

11. Proposals for improvement of infrastructure,
methods of investigation, etc. should be decided
urgently. In order to strengthen CBI’s in-house
expertise, professionals from the revenue, banking

and security sectors should be indicted into the CBI.

12. The CBI Manual based on statutory provisions of
the Cr. P.C. provides essential guidelines for the
CBI’s functioning. It is imperative that the CBI
adheres scrupulously to the provisions in the Manual
in relation to its investigative functions, like
raids, seizure and arrests. Any deviation from the
established procedure should be viewed seriously and

severe disciplinary action taken against the

concerned officials.

13. The Director, CBI shall be responsible for
ensuring the filing of chargesheets in courts within
the stipulated time limits, and the matter should be

kept under constant review by the Director, CBI.



129 :-

14, A document on the CBI’s functioning should be
published within three months to provide the general
public with a feedback on investigations and
information for redress of genuine grievances in a
manner which does not compromise with the operational

requirements of the CBI.

15. Time limit of three months for grant of sanction
for prosecution must be strictly adhered to.
However, additional time of one month may be allowed
where consultation is required with the Attorney

General (AG) or any other law officer in the AG’s

office.

16. The Director, CBI should conduct. regular
appraisal of personnel to Prevent corruption and/or

inefficiency in the agency.

II. ENFORCEMENT DIRECTORATE

“1. A Selection Committee headed by the Central
Vigilance Commissioner and including the Home
Secretary, Secretary (Personnel) and Revenue
Secretary, shall prepare a Panel for appointment of

the Director, Enforcement Directorate. The



- -:30 :-

appointment to the post of Director shall be made by
the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) from

the panel recommended by the Selection Committee.

2. The Director, Enforcement Directorate like the
Director, CBI shall have a minimum tenure of two
years. In his case also, premature transfer for any
extraordinary reason should be approved by the
aforesaid Selection Committee headed by the Central

Vigilance Commissioner.

3. In view of the importance of the post of
Director, Enforcement Directorate, it shall be
upgraded to that of an Additional Secretary/Special

Secretary to the Government.

4, Officers of the Enforcement Directorate handling
sensitive assignments shall be provided adequate

security to enable them to discharge their functions

fearlessly.

5. Extensions of tenure upto the level of Joint
Director in the Enforcement Directorate should be
decided by the said Committee headed by the Central

Vigilance Commissioner.



6. There shall be no premature media publicity by

the CBI/Enforcement Directorate.

7. Adjudication/commencement of prosecution shall be
made by the Enforcement Directorate within a period

of one year.

8. The Director, Enforcement Directorate shall
monitor and ensure speedy completion of
investigations/adjudications and Taunching ०

Prosecutions. Revenue Secretary must review their

progress regularly.

9. For speedy conduct of investigations abroad, the
procedure to approve filing of applications for
Letters Rogatory shall 56 streamlined and, if
necessary, Revenue Secretary authorised to grant the

approval,

10. A comprehensive circular shall be published by
the Directorate to inform the public about the
procedures/systems of its functioning for the sake of

transparency.

11. In-house legal advice mechanism shall be
strengthened by appointment of competent legal

advisers in the CBI/Directorate of Enforcement.


-:32 :-

12. The Annual Report of the Department of Revenue
shall contain a detailed account on the working of

the Enforcement Directorate.

III NODAL AGENCY

1. A Nodal Agency headed by he Home Secretary with
Member (Investigation), Central Board of Director
Taxes, Director General, Revenue Intelligence,
Director, Enforcement and Director, CBI as members,
shall be constituted for coordinated action in cases

having politico-bureaucrat-criminal nexus.

2. The Nodal Agency shall meet at least once every

month.

3. Working and efficacy of the Nodal Agency should
be watched for about one year so as to improve it

upon the basis of the experience gained within this

period.

IV. PROSECUTION AGENCY

1. A panel of competent lawyers of experience and
impeccable reputation shall be prepared with the
advice of the Attorney General. Their services shall

be utilised as Prosecuting Counsel in cases of



—:33 :-

significance. Even during the course of
investigation of an offence, the advice of a lawyer
chosen from the panel should be taken by the

CBI/Enforcement Directorate.

2. Every prosecution which results in the discharge
or acquittal of the accused must be reviewed by a
lawyer on he panel and, on the basis of the opinion
given, responsibility should be fixed for dereliction
of duty, if any, of the concerned officer. In such
cases, strict action should be taken against the

officer found guilty of dereliction of duty.

3. The preparation of the Panel of lawyers with the
approval of the Attorney General shall be completed

within three months.

4, Steps shall be taken immediately for the
constitution of an able and impartial agency
comprising persons of unimpeachable integrity to
perform functions akin to those of the Director of
Prosecutions in U.K. On the constitution of such a
body, the task of supervising prosecutions launched

by the CBI/Enforcement Directorate shall be entrusted

to it.



—:34 :-

5. Til? the constitution of the aforesaid body,
Spectal Counsel shall be appointed for the conduct of
important trials on the recommendation of the

Attorney General or any other taw officer designated
by him.

In order to attain independence in the functioning of

the investigating officers in States, the Supreme Court also

made the following observations:-

“64. In view of the problem in the States being even
mora acute, as elaborately discussed in the Report of
the National Police Commission (1979), there is
urgent need for the State Governments also to set up
credible mechanism for selection of the Police Chief
in the States. The Central Government must pursue
the matter with the State Governments and ensure that
a similar mechanism, as indicated above, is set up in
each State for the selection/appointment, tenure,
transfer and posting of not merely the Chief of the
State Police but also all police officers of the rank
of Superintendent of Police and above. It is
shocking to hear, a matter of common knowledge, that
in some States the tenure of a Superintendent of
Police is on an average only a few months and

transfers are made for whimsical reasons. Apart from


I. 0०५४०

demoralising the police force, it has also the
adverse effect of politicising the personnel. It is,
therefore, essential that prompt measures are taken
by the Central Government within the ambit of their
constitutional powers in the federation to impress
upon the State Governments that such a practice is
alien to the envisaged constitutional machinery. The
situation described in the National Police
Commission’s Report (19739) was alarming and it has
become much worse by now. The desperation of the
Union Home Minister in his letters to the State
Governments, placed before us at the hearing, reveal
a distressing situation which must be cured, if the
rule of law is to prevail. No action within. the
constitutional scheme found necessary to remedy the

situation is too stringent in these circumstances.”

Summary of IRC recommendations: recommendations:

1. CVC to be conferred statutory status; appointment
of Central Vigilance Commissioner to be made under

the hand and seal of the President (para 4.2).



“:36 :-

2. Constitution of a Committee for selection of ०४०

(para 4.3).

3. CVC to overview CBI’s functioning (para 5).

5. cvC to have 8 separate section in its Annual
Report on the CBI’s functioning after the supervisory

function is transferred to it (para 6).

6. Constitution of a Selection Committee (headed by
6५0) for identifying a panel of names for selection
of Director CBI; final selection to be made by Acc

from such panel (para 8.2).

9. Transfer of incumbent Director CBI would need

endorsement of the Selection Committee (para 8.5).

11.  Selection/extension of tenure of officers upto
the level of Joint Director (JD) to be decided by a
Board under Central Vigilance Commissioner; JD and

above would need the approval of ACC (para 8.7).

1. Selection Committee headed by Central Vigilance
Commissioner to recommend panel for appointment of

Director Enforcement by the ACC (para 2.2).



~137-:-

2. Director Enforcement to have minimum tenure of
two years. For his premature transfer, the Selection
Committee headed by Central Vigilance Commissioner to

make suitable recommendations to the ACC (para 2.3).

5. Extension of tenures upto the level of Joint
Directors in the Enforcement Directorate to be
decided by a Committee headed by Central Vigilance

Commissioner (para 2.6).

22. Committee headed by Central Vigilance
Commissioner to decide complaints of arbitrary action

by Directorate officials (para 5.3).”

It would equally be relevant to notice certain
portions of the report of the IRC in so far as they pertain
to the cvc.

“eae The Committee recommends that selection to
this important post (CVC) should be made from a panel
suggested by a committee to be set up for this purpose. If
government find it practical, there could be a common
committee for the selection of suitable persons to be
appointed to the Election Commission, UPSC, C&AG, the Central
Vigilance Commissioner. The selection may be done by a

committee comprising the Prime Minister, Home Minister and


—:38 :-

the Leader of the Opposition from a panel of outstanding
civil servants and others with impeccable integrity to be
furnished by the Cabinet Secretary. The appointments would
be made by the President on the basis of the recommendations

made by the committee headed by the Prime Minister.
Cvc’s role in regard to the CBI’s functioning:

As earlier observed it is necessary to ensure
accountability of CBI’s functioning specially considering the
obtaining misgivings about its functioning. While government
shall remain answerable for the CBI’s functioning, it appears
necessary to introduce a visible objectivity in the mechanism
to be established for over-viewing CBI’s working. In this
context, the committee recommends that the Central Vigilance
Commissioner should be entrusted with the responsibility of
superintendence over CBI's functioning. If this is accepted
by government, the CBI should report to the Central Vigilance
Commissioner (as per format and other details to be
formalised) about the cases taken up for investigation;
Progress of investigations; cases in which chargesheets were
filed and subsequently withdrawn from the court against the
recommendations of the Director CBI, etc. The Central
Vigilance Commissioner would also review the progress of all
cases moved by CBI for sanction of Prosecution of public
servants pending with the competent authorities, specially

those in which sanction was delayed or refused. Through such



—:39 :-

superintendence, the Central Vigilance Commissioner should be
made responsible for the efficient functioning of CBI. In
this context, it would be necessary to take an early view

regarding the conferment of statutory status on the CVC....

The committee recommend that CBI should regularly
bring out an annual report and, further, that the CVvC’s
annual report should contain a separate section on the CBI’s
functioning. Debate in the Parliament and elsewhere will,
the committee feels, generate suggestions for the continuing
fine-tuning of the guidelines for CBI’s functioning. Such a
measure in our opinion, would ensure transparency in the
08118 functioning and enable the Parliament and the general

public to know more about its activities....

The committee proposes that the recommendations for
the appointment of Director, CBI should come from a committee
headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner with Home
Secretary and Secretary (Personnel) as members. This
selection committee should also hear the views of the
incumbent Director for evolving the best choice. This
committee should draw up a panel of IPS officers on the basis
of their seniority, integrity, experience in investigation
and anti-corruption work in the State and the Centre. The
final selection should be made by the Appointments Committee
of the Cabinet (ACC) from the panel recommended by the

selection committee. If none among the panel 18 found


-:40 :-

suitable, the reasons thereof need to be suitably recorded
and the committee should be asked to draw up 8 fresh

panel....

We are of the view that selection of officers in the
CBI upto the level of Joint Director should be entrusted to a
similar Board comprising the Central Vigilance Commissioner,
Home Secretary and the Secretary (Personnel) with Director,
CBI providing the necessary inputs. Extension of tenure or
premature repatriation of officers upto the level of Joint
Director should also be left for final decision of this
committee. The recommendations of the Director CBI should be
given due weightage and the reasons for non-acceptance
thereof would need to be recorded by the committee.

Recommendations with respect to Enforcement Directorate:

An objective and transparent procedure should ४७७
adopted for the selection of Director, ED. The emphasis
should be on selecting the right person by prescribing
objective selection criteria. Selection of a suitable
candidate shall be made on the recommendations of a selection
committee headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner and
including the Home Secretary, Secretary (Personnel) and the
Revenue Secretary. The panel recommended by the selection
committee would be placed before the Appointments Committee

of the Cabinet (ACC) for the appointment of Director of


Enforcement.... A proposal for the Premature transfer of the
Director should be carefully considered by the selection
committee (headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner)

whose recommendations should be placed before the ACC....

Extension of tenure of officers upto the level of
Joint Directors should be decided by a committee comprising
the Central Vigilance Commissioner, the Revenue Secretary and
the Director of Enforcement giving due weightage to the
Director of Enforcement's recommendations in the matter..

The committee recommends .... that the Directorate
should take time bound steps to establish a grievances
redressal mechanism to Promptly deal with complaints received
from the public against actions of the Enforcement
Directorate. In so far as complaints of arbitrary actions by
senior officers of the Directorate are concerned, the
committee recommend that these should be looked into by a
committee headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner and
comprising Revenue Secretary, Director General (Revenue
Intelligence), Enforcement Director and a senior

representative of the Ministry of Law."

The committee (IRC) made several recommendations
under paragraph 25 of decision for strengthening the Chief

Vigilance Commissioner, Central Bureau of Investigation and



rq

ry

|

roy ory

ry

242 :-

the Enforcement Directorate which recommendations indeed

constitute the main basis for several directions given by the

Supreme Court.

In the light of these aforequoted directions of the
Supreme Court and the terms of the reference assigned to the
Commission, it becomes essential to study the existing set up
of the Central Vigilance Commission, Central Bureau of
Investigation and the Enforcement Directorate in the

succeeding Chapter in order to bring out with suitable

recommendations.



CHAPTER IV

SET UP OF CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION, CENTRAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT DIRECTORATE

4.1 History and functioning of the Central Vigilance d__functionin of hi Central Vigil
Commission:

At this juncture, it would be appropriate to briefly
notice the history and functioning of the Central Vigilance

Commission, as obtaining at present.

The Central Vigilance Commission was established in
1964 pursuant to the recommendations of the Santhanam
Committee to advise the government in respect of all matters
pertaining to maintenance of integrity in administration.
The CVC’s jurisdiction extends to all public servants and
employees of central public sector undertakings, nationalised
banks and autonomous organisations. It would be appropriate
at this stage to set out the Resolution dated February 11,
1964 of the Government of India (Ministry of Home Affairs)
No.24/7/64-AVD (as amended up-to-date) which sete out the
purpose for which the institution of 0४०. was created, its
functions, powers and other incidental matters. The Law

Commission had to and did keep in mind the provisions of this


“८ :44 :-

Resolution while drafting the legislation. This 18 for the
reason that the supervision over CBI and DE provided for in
the judgment of the Supreme Court is only an additional
function directed by court to be entrusted to Cvc. It does
not mean that the existing powers and functions of CVC were
to be taken away or were intended to be curtailed in any
manner. In fact the idea was to strengthen this institution
by giving it a statutory character and entrust some more
important functions to it. It is for the purpose of
rendering the CVC an effective, fair and competent organ that
the court had taken the trouble of giving the aforementioned
specific directions. One of the main objectives behind
giving a statutory basis to CVC is to free it from
administrative or other control of any ministry or any other
person or body. The Resolution dated February 11, 1964 reads
as follows:

No.24/7/64-AVD

Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs

New Delhi - 11
February 11, 1964

RESOLUTION

On a careful consideration of the recommendations
made by the Committee on Prevention of Corruption under the
chairmanship of 801 K. Santhanam, the government have
decided to set up a Central Vigilance Commission which will

be headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner.


“०:45 :-

2. The powers and functions of the Central Vigilance

Commission will be as follows:

The Central Vigilance commission will have
jurisdiction and Powers in respect of matters to which the

executive power of the Union extends -

1) to undertake an inquiry into any transaction
in which a public servant is suspected or
alleged to have acted for an improper purpose

or ina corrupt manner.

ii) to cause an inquiry or investigation to be
made into -
a) any complaint that a public servant

had exercised or refrained from
exercising his powers for improper or

corrupt purposes;

b) any complaint of corruption,
misconduct, lack of integrity or
other kinds of malpractices or
misdemeanor on the part of a public
servant including members of the All

India Services even if such members


iii)

iv)

~:46 :-

are for the time being serving in
connection with the affairs of a

State Government;

(The relevant rules under the All India
Services Act will be amended in consultation
with the State Governments in order to bring
the members of those services under the

purview of the Commission).

to call for reports, returns and statements
from all Ministries/Departments/Corporate
central undertakings so as to enable it to
exercise general check and supervision over
the vigilance and anti-corruption work in the

Ministries/Departments/undertakings:

to take over under its direct control euch
complaints, information or cases as it may
consider necessary for further action which

may be either;

a) to ask the Central Bureau of
Investigation to register a regular

case and investigate it, or


v)

vi)

-:47 :-

b) to entrust the complaint, information

or case for inquiry -

1) to the Central Bureau of

Investigation; or

2) to the Ministry/Department/

undertaking concerned;

in cases referred to in paragraph (iv){b)
above the report of the inquiry will be
forwarded to the Commission so that on a
consideration of the report and other
relevant records, it may advise the concerned

Ministry/ Department/undertaking as to

further action;

the Central Bureau of Investigation ७४111
forward to the Ministry of Home Affairs
through the Commission the final report in
all cases investigated by the Bureau in which
it considers that a Prosecution should be
launched, provided that sanction for such
Prosecution 18 required under any law to be
issued in the name of the President; and the

Bureau will simultaneously send a copy to the


“7:48 :-

Ministry/Department/undertaking concerned for

any comments which it may wish to forward to

the Commission;

vii) a)

b)

the Commission will advise the
Ministry of Home Affairs, after
examining the case and considering
any comments received from the
concerned Ministry/Department/
undertaking, whether or not
prosecution should be sanctioned.
(Orders will thereafter be issued by
the Ministry of Home Affairs in whom
the power to accord such a sanction

will be vested);

in cases where an authority other
than the President is competent to
sanction prosecution and the
authority does not propose to accord
the sanction sought for by the
Central Bureau of Investigation the
case will be reported to the
Commission and the authority will
take further action after considering

the Commission's advice:


viii)

ix)

x)

~:49 :-

the Commission will hava the power to require
that the oral inquiry in any departmental
Proceedings, except in petty cases, should be
entrusted to ona of the Commissioners for
Departmental Enquiries. (A suitable number
of Commissioners for Departmental Enquiries
will be attached to the Central Vigilance

Commission).

the Commission will examine the report of the
Commissioner for Departmental Enquiries,
which will in all cases be submitted by the
Commissioner for Oepartmental Enquiries to
the Central Vigilance Commission, and the
Commission will forward the record of the
case to the appropriate disciplinary
authority with its advice as to further

action;

in any case where it appears that
discretionary powers had been exercised for
an improper or corrupt purpose the Commission
will advise the Ministry/Department/
undertaking that suitable action may be taken
against the public servant concerned; and if
it appears that the procedure or practice is

such as affords scope or facilities for


x

xVit}

xiv)

corruption or misconduct the Commission may
advise that such procedure or practice be
appropriately changed, er changed in a

particular manner;

she Commission may initiate at such intervals

as it considers suitable review of procedures
and practices of administration in so far as
they relate to maintenance of integrity in

administration;

the Commission may collect such statistics

and other information as may be necessary;

the Commission may obtain information about

action taken on its recommendations;

the Commission wil] submit an annual report
to the Ministry of Home Affairs about its
activities drawing particular attention to
any recommendation made by it which had not
been accepted or acted upon; and a copy of
the report together with a memorandum
explaining the reasons for non-acceptance of
any recommendations of the Commission will be
laid by the Ministry of Home Affairs before

each House of Parliament.


if
L

~

L

Pryor 4

rq

|

हा. coe WO कया 1731 ॥&73 1 eee [_1 1 1717+

—

oo

The Central Vigilance Commissioner -

(x)

(b)

(०)

(कक)

(0)

the proposal for the appointment of the
Central Vigilance Commissioner shall be
initiated by the Cabinet Secretary and

approved by the Prime Minister: (*)

Vide DOPT’s Resolution No.247/2/95-AVD-II

dated 11.11.1995.

will not be removed or suspended from office
except in the manner provided for the removal
or suspension of the Chairman or a Member of

the Union Public Service Commission;

will hold office for a term of five years;

(ऋऋ)

Vide DOPT’s Resolution No.247/1/90-AVD-IT

dated 21.5.1990,.

on ceasing to hold the office of the Central
Vigilance Commissioner, shall not accept any
further employment under the Union or a State
Government or accept any political or public

office. Provided that the Central Government


5४:52 :-

may be exceptional circumstances, when the
public interest so requires, permit a person
who has held the office of the Central
Vigilance Commissioner to accept any such

employment or office. (**x)

(कक ) Vide Deptt. of Personnel Resolution

No.262/2/ 72-AVD-II dated 15.2.1972.

4, The Central Vigilance Commission will, for the
Present, be attached to the Ministry of Home Affairs, but in
the exercise of its powers and functions it will not be
subordinate to any Ministry/Department and will have the same
measure of independence and autonomy as the Union Public

Service Commission.

5. The Central Vigilance Commissioner will be
responsible for the Proper performance of the duties and
responsibilities assigned to the Commission and for general
coordinating the work of and advising the
Ministries/Departments/undertak ings in respect of all matters

pertaining to maintenance of integrity in administration.



-:63 :-

6. The Central Vigilance Officer in Ministries/
Departments will be appointed in consultation with the
Central Vigilance Commission and no person whose appointment
as the Chief Vigilance Officer is objected to by the Central

Vigilance Commission will be so appointed.

7. The Central Vigilance Commissioner will have the
Power to assess the work of the Chief Vigilance Officers and
Vigilance Officers and the assessment will be recorded in the

character rolls of tha officers.

8. The Central Vigilance Commission will take the
initiative in Prosecuting persons who are found to have made
false complaints of corruption or lack of integrity against

public servants.

ORDER

ORDERED that a copy of this Resolution be
communicated to all State Governments, 811 Ministries of the
Government of India, etc., and also the Resolution be

published in the Gazette of India.

L.P. SINGH

Special Secretary to the Govt. of India



-:64 :-

The vast jurisdiction vested in the Central Vigilance
Commission is evident from a plain reading of the above

Resolution.

4.2 History and functioning of the Central Bureau of and _functionin: th Central re of
Investigation:

We may now briefly mention the position of the

Central Bureau of Investigation. During World War II, the

Government of India issued an ordinance in 1943 constituting
a special police force for the investigation of certain
offences committed in connection with the affairs of the
Central Government. The said ordinance lapsed with the end
of the war. In the year 1946, the Parliament enacted the
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. The Act was intended
to create a special police establishment, a specialised
agency, for making enquiries and investigations into certain
specified offences. Section 5 of the Act provides that the
Central Government can, with the concurrence of the State
Governments, extend the jurisdiction of the SPE to all
States. SPE is envisaged as supplementary to the State
police forces, enjoying great powers of investigation in
cases notified under section 5 in respect of offences
notified under section 3 of the DSPE Act, 1946 which can of
course be exercised in a State only with the consent of the

Government of that State. The CBI in its present form came


-:55 in

into being in 1963 through a Resolution adopted by the
Government of India pursuant to the recommendations of the
Committee on Prevention of Corruption (Santhanam Committee).
The Resolution also specified the types of cases which would
be investigated by the CBI, which of course continues to
derive its legal powers for investigation from the aforesaid
Act. Over the years the character of the CBI has undergone a
significant change. Its role is 10 longer restricted to
anti-corruption activities. It is being increasingly called
upon to investigate the conventional crimes and banking and
other economic offences. Of course, the main thrust of its
functions continues to be on the detection and investigation
of offences of bribery and corruption committed by public
servants under the control of the Central Government and its
undertakings. According to the Report of the IRC, “under the
existing arrangements, the CBI is answerable to the courts in
regard to the cases investigated by it. It reports to the
Department of Personnel and Training in respect of its
administrative matters. During the Committee's discussions
with Secretary, Personnel and Director CBI, it was noted that
the Personnel Department provides CBI with the required
back-up support to enable it to carry out its functions but
does not play any role in over-viewing the investigations
carried out by the agency. The CBI furnishes to the
Government monthly reports indicating the number of cases
taken up for investigation; number in which chargesheets have

been filed in courts; number of casas where sanction for


-:56 :-

prosecution is awaited from competent authorities etc. The
Committee found that, based on the aforesaid reports,
Government has not been exercising the nature of control over
CBI’s functioning which has compelled the Supreme Court and
certain High Courts to take over monitoring of individual

cases."

The directions given by the Supreme Court 101. the
matter of supervision of the functioning and working of the
CBI must be understood in the above context. It is obvious
that for implementing the directions of the Supreme Court,
the relevant provisions of the Delhi Special Police

Establishment Act, 1946 have also got to be amended.

4.3 Constitution of the Enforcement Directorate:

Section 3 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1973 provides for appointment of Directors of Enforcement,
Additional Directors of Enforcement, Deputy Directors of
Enforcement and Assistant Directors of Enforcement. Section
4, inter alia, deals with appointment of the aforesaid
officers. According to section 4, the Central Government is
the appointing authority for the aforesaid four class of
officers, while other officers of Enforcement can be
appointed by any of the above four category of officers as

may be authorised by the Central Government. The Enforcement


Directorate implements FERA, which is an Act to consolidate
and amend the law relating to certain Payments and dealings
in foreign exchange and securities, transactions indirectly
affecting foreign exchange and the import and export of
currency for the conservation of foreign exchange resources
of the country and the proper utilisation thereof in the
interest of the economic development of the country.
According to the IRC Report, the total sanctioned strength of
ED is 798 and its budget is Rs.10.37 crores per annum. The
ED functions through seven zones at Delhi, Calcutta, Chennai,
Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Bangalore and Jalandhar and 12 field
units/subzonal offices. The IRC Report further states that
with the introduction of policy of economic liberalisation,
the functions of ED have undergone a qualitative change. It
is now concentrating on cases pertaining to large illegal
cash flows in the nature of money-laundering where the funds
have been generated either through evasion of income-tax,
sales tax, excise or gains from illicit narcotics apart from
organised financial crimes involving over-invoicing,
under-invoicing for routing such illegally generated money
either for laundering or retention abroad. Indeed the recent
events show that even some politicians and bureaucrats have
received monies, whether knowingly or unknowingly, which are
Proceeds of money laundering activities. It appears further
that the working of the ED may undergo significant change
with the proposed enactment of the Foreign Exchange

Management Act (FEMA) which 15 supposed to replace the



present FERA. The IRC was also informed that the Government
is contemplating a Money Laundering Law which would create a
new offence in relation to the gains of crime for certain
serious offences like trafficking in drugs and psychotropic
substances, narco-terrorism, heinous offences under Indian
Penal Code and certain offences under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, which also may be placed within the

jurisdiction of the ED.

It is equally obvious that for carrying out the
directions of the Supreme Court relating to &D, certain
amendments are called for in the present law i.e. FERA.
While drafting the FEMA which is supposed to replace FERA, it
is obvious that the aforesaid directions of the Supreme Court

have to be kept in mind and implemented.



-:69 :-

CHAPTER V

CHANGING SCENARIO IN LAW RELATING TO PUNITIVE MEASURES

AGAINST PERSONS HOLDING PUBLIC OFFICE

5.1 Of late, many cases relating to arbitrary/misuse of
power by public functionaries have drawn the kind attention

of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.

The court held in Common Cause (a registered society)

Vv. Union of India, (1996) 6 SCC 530, 555 that even in the
matter of grant of Jlargesses including award of jobs,
contracts, quotas and licences, the government must act in
fair and just manner and any arbitrary distribution of wealth
would violate the Taw of the land. It held that a Minister
in the Central Government is in a position of a trustee in
respect of the public property under his charge and
discretion. The petrol pumps/gas agencies are a kind of
wealth which the government must distribute in a bona fide

manner and in conformity with Jaw. The court observed as

follows:-

. It is high time that the public servants
should be held personally responsible for their
malafide acts in the discharge of their functions as

public servants. This Court in Lucknow Development



-:60 :-

Authority v. MLK, Gupta, approved "Misfeasance in
public offices” as a part of the Law of Tort. Public
servants may be liable in damages’ for malicious,
deliberate or injurious wrongdoing. According to

Wade:

There is, thus a tort which has been called
misfeasance in public office and which includes
malicious abuse of power, deliberate
maladministration, and perhaps also other unlawful

acts causing injury.

With the change in socio-economic outlook, the public
servants are being entrusted with more and more
discretionary powers even tn the field of
distribution of government wealth in various forms.
We take it to be prefectly clear, that if a public
servant abuses his office either by an act of
omission or commission, and the consequence of that
is injury to an individual or 1655 of public
Property, an action may be maintained such public
servant. No public servant can~ say “you may set
aside an order on the ground of malafide but you
cannot hold me personally liable.”. No public
servant can arrogate to himself the power to act ina

manner which is arbitary.”


5.2 Award of Exemplary damages: While referring to the

observations of Thermas Ringham M.R. in Broome v. Cassell &
Co.Ltd., 1972 AC 1027= (1972) 1 All ER 801, the Supreme Court

in another case entitled ‘Common Cause, a Read. society v.

Union of India, (1996) 6 SCC 593, 598 observed:-
“ In the said case Thomas Ringham M.R. further

elaborated the concept in the following words;

In the first category there had been what he
variously described as an ‘'‘arbitary and
outrageous use of executive power.’ and
‘oppressive, artitary or unconstitutional
action by the servants of the government’.
Minute textual analysis of these expréssions
is inappropriate. This was a judgment, not a
statute. But there can be no doubt what Lord
Devlin was speaking out. It was gross misuse
of power, involving tortious conduct, by
agents of government. According to the
traditional classification of the law of
tort, such misuse of power could give rise to
any one of a number of causes of action,
which Lord Devlin was not at pains to

identify.”



-:62 :-

The Court of Appeal also relied upon the judgment of

the House of Lords in Broome v. Cassell & Co. Ltd.

We are of the view that the legal position
that exemplary damages can be awarded in a case where
the action of a public servant is oppressive,

arbitary or unconstitutional is unexceptionable.”

The court directed the Minister to pay a sum of Rs.50 lakhs
as exemplary damages to the Government Exchequer holding
“since the property which Capt.Sharma was dealing was public
property, the government which is “by the people” has to be

compensated.”

5.3 Penal action also attracted for abuse of official

position: In the matter of a housing scam. the Supreme

Court in the case of Shiv Sagar Tiwari v. Union of India,

(1996) 6 SCC 599, referred to the relevant part of its order

dated 19.7.96, quoted below:-

“Mr. N.N. Singh, Superintendent of Police, CBI, New
Delhi has placed on record Interim Report No. 3
dated 17.6.1996 and Iterim Report No. 4 dated
16.7.1996. Interim Report No. 3 indicates that a

separate preliminary enquiry was registered against



7:63 :-

Smt. Shiela Kaul and others in the matters of
allotment of shops/stalls made by her on 7.6.1995 and
3.7.1995 in favour of her close relatives/friends of
her personal staff as well as those of the officials
of Directorate or Estates. According to the report,
the preliminary enquiry, prima facie, establishes
that Smt Shiela Kaul had abused her official
poisition as the Minister for Urban Devlopment and
she had entered into a criminal conspiracy with some
of the acquaintances and her personal staff, pursuant
to which she in abuse of her official position, made
these allotments and caused wrongful loss to the
Government by effecting allotments on economical
licence fees basis without inviting any tender or by
issuing public notice for inviting the response from
the general public from the point of view of earning
maximum revenue for the Government. A regular case
under Sections 120-B, 420, 468/471 IPC and SEction
13(2) read with SEction 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988, has been registered against
Shiela Kaul and her Additional Private Secretary

Rajan S. Lala and others.”

Thus it was held that when a public functionary had abused
her official position and caused wrongful loss to the
government, she was liable for prosecution under the relevant

provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and IPC.


-:64 :-

CHAPTER VI

RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

6.1 The Commission has perused the judgement of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Vineet Narayan’s case (supra) and
other relevant decision in the preceding chapters and has
also perused the draft Bill entitled “the Central Vigilance
Commission Bill" prepared by the Chief Vigilance Commission
stated in para 1.1, supra.

As noticed hereinbefore the directions given by the
Supreme Court are not confined to the 0४० but extend to CBI
and ED as well. Indeed the functions and duties of the 0४०
indicated by the court cannot be divorced and disassociated
from the functioning of the CBI and ED. The Commission
presumes that giving a statutory basis to CVC is the first
step in implementation of the said directions and that the
government will be taking up simultaneously the issue of
implementation of the directions of the Supreme Court with
respect to the CBI and ED. The Central Government may also
consider taking immediate steps to create the nodal agency
and the prosecution agency in accordance with the directions

contained in section III and IV of para 62 of the judgment.


-:65 :-

6.2 Accordingly, the Law Commission is submitting a draft
of the proposed Bill called the Central Vigilance Commission
Bill, 1998 and two consequential amending Bills, namely, the
Delhi Special Police Establishment (Amendment) Bill, 1998 and
the Foreign Exchange Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 1998, at

the end of this chapter.

The Commission makes the following recommendations as
regards certain basic features of the proposed Central

Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998:-

6.3 It may be mentioned that though the directions of the
Supreme Court contemplate a single-member Central Vigilance
Commission, the Law Commission is of the opinion that having
regard to the vast jurisdiction, extensive powers and
expansive supervisory jurisdiction now being vested in the
Central Vigilance Commission, it is better and appropriate
that the Central Vigilance Commission is made a multi-member
body. It is axiomatic that such extra-ordinary powers should
never be vested in one individual. Moreover, 8 multi-~member
body may have the advantage of mutual deliberation and debate
which would go to make the decisions of the Central Vigilance
Commission more considered and result of thorough analysis.
Accordingly, we are recommending for a five-member body
comprising a Chief Vigilance Commissioner and four Vigilance

Commissioners.


“:66 :-

In I.N.Seshan, Chief Election Commissioner of India

v. Union of India & Ors, (JT 1995 (5) S.C. 337), the

Supreme Court referred to the decision in §.S.Dhanoa v.

Union of India and Others, (1991) 3 SCC 567, paragraph 26 as

follows:
“There is no doubt that two heads are better than
one, and particularly when an institution like the
Election Commission is entrusted with vital
functions, and is armed with exclusive uncontrolled
powers to execute them, it is both necessary and
desirable that the powers are not exercised by one
individual, however, allwise he may be. It is true
that the independence of an institution depends upon
the persons who main it and not on their number. A
single individual may sometimes prove capable of
withstanding all the pulls and pressures, which many
may not. However, when vast powers are exercised by
an institution which is accountable to none, it is
politic to entrust its affairs to more hands than
one. It helps to assure judiciousness and want of
arbitrariness. The fact, however, remains that where
more individuals than one, man an institution, their
roles have to be clearly defined, if the functioning

of the institution is not to come to a naught.”



-:67 :-

The Constitution Bench approved the observations made

in T.N.Seshan’s case, supra holding under para 14 as

follows:-
“ .,..Notwithstanding this bitter experience, the
Division Bench made the observations in paragraph 26
extracted herein before, with which we are in
respectful agreement.”

6.4 The Supreme Court has indicated for taking measures

for improvement of infrastructure, methods of investigation
etc. It has emphasised that in order to strengthen CBI’s
in-house, machinery, professionals from the revenue, banking
and security sectors should be inducted into the CBI (see
pr.62 1 (11) of the decision). Similarly it has stressed
that in-house legal advice mechanism shall be strengthened by
appointment of competent legal advisors in the
CBI/Directorate of Enforcement (see pr.62 (II) (11) of the

decision).

As far as the directions concerning the improvement
of infrastructure and methods of investigation are concerned,
it is relevant to refer to the organisational set up for
investigation of offences by the Serious Fraud Office ("SFO")
in U.K. (Arlidge & Parry on Fraud, 2nd Edition Chapter 13).
In 1983 the Lord Chancellor and the Home Secretary appointed
Fraud Trials Committee under the Chairmanship of Lord Roskill

to address concerns which have been expressed as to the


—:68 :-

difficulties of investigating and prosecuting complex fraud.

The
the
the
the

SFO became fully operational in April, 1998. Thereafter
Graham and Davie reports also recommended for changes in
working practices of the SFO. It is pertinent to quote

relevant para concerning organisational set up of

investigating such serious offences of fraud there:

"13.012 If a case is accepted for investigation, a
case team is appointed by the Deputy Director. This
team is headed by a case controller, who will be = an
experienced lawyer. Other members of the team may
include an investigating lawyer, accountants, police
officers, information technology personnel and
administrative support staff. It is this
multi-disciplinary approach to investigations that is
the innovating hallmark of the $.F.0. The case team
may also work closely with other experts, e.g.
bankers, stockbrokers and computer specialists,
seconded to the S.F.0. as required by the needs of a
particular investigation. The case team meets
regularly at case conferences, at which the conduct
of the investigation is reviewed and its future

direction considered.”

Thus the multi-disciplinary approach to

investigations is the innovative hallmark of the S.F.O.

Besides the case team may also work closely with other



-:69 :-

experts for example bankers, stockbrokers and computer
specialists, seconded to the S.F.0. as required by the needs
of a particular investigation. The Commission feels that in
sensitive cases and also cases involving complex issues, it
is better and appropriate to have a multi-disciplinary
investigative team which may work closely with experts in
other fields according to the needs of a Particular

investigation.

6.5 Providing CBI/ED separate trained police force with CBI/ED separ. trained police force with

ultra modern weapons:-

In Vineet Narain’s case, supra the Supreme Court has
also directed that officers of the Enforcement Directorate
handling sensitive assignments shall be provided adequate
security to enable them to discharge their functions
fearlessly (see para 62(II)(5) of the decision cited in
SCALE).

It may be emphasised that not only the Enforcement
Directorate but the Central Bureau of Investigation is
empowered to carry out search and seizure during
investigation of cases and instances have been noticed in
recent past in which crores and crores of rupees are
recovered from the high level politicians during the searches
and seizures in States other than the capital of the country.

Such politicians are obviously having strong holds in the



-:70 :-

States to which they belong and obtaining local police
assistance by the officials of CBI and ED to conduct raids
for such searching and seizure of property becomes very
difficult. Without adequate police force, the officials of
CBI/ED, may not be able to carry on such searches and
seizures fearlessly. There may be chances of stiff
resistance by local supporters of such politicians. In order
to meet such unwarranted situations, in which the evidence of
the crime may disappear, the Law Commission is of the
considered opinion that in order to strengthen the CBI and ED
with separate central armed police force and to let their
officials work fearlessly, as well as to provide security to
the officers of the ED and cBI handling sensitive
assignments, the ED and the CBI may be provided with separate
adequate central armed police force equipped with modern
weapons. Such contingent of police force can be trained for
giving protection during searches and made mobile through
air/road and available to their officials at a short notice.
The search team should be equipped with latest technological
machines e.g. money counting machine, wireless etc. to

calculate the amount recovered during searches.

The officers of the CBI and the Enforcement
Directorate should also be entitled to call upon the officers
and agencies of Central and State Governments to assist them

in conducting their operations including searches and



seizures. The officers and agencies of Central and State
Governments shall render full and proper assistance when so

called upon by the CBI and the Enforcement Directorate.

6.6 Measures to complete trials involving high level

politicians/public men, with utmost expedition:-

The Supreme Court observed in Vinbeet Narain’s case
in its order dated 7.10.96 (reported in 1996(6) 3500 354)-and
also referred to in Vineet Narain’s case, 1997(7) SCALE 656

(667) that

“the concerned court dealing with the above matters
has to bear in mind that utmost expedition in the
trial and its early conclusion is necessary for the
ends of justice and credibility of the judicial
Process. Unless prevented by any dilatory tactics of
the accused, all trials of this kind involving public
men should be concluded most expeditiously,

preferably within three months of commencement of the

trial. This is also the requirement of speedy trial
read into Article 21."

(emphasis supplied)



5:72 :-

It 18 relevant to state that in "Gommon Cause" A
Registered Society Through its Director v. Union of India & Soci Through its Director v. ion of Indi &
Ors. 1996(4) SCALE 127, paras 3, 4 also it was emphasised to

try such offences on priority basis. Thus, it was held:-

"4. Directions (1) and (2) hereinabove shall not
apply to cases of offences involving of corruption,
misappropriation of public funds, whether under the
Indian Penal Code, Prevention of Corruption Act or
any other statute, (b) smuggling, foreign exchange
violation......... offences relating to public

servants.....

"5. The criminal courts shall try the offences

mentioned in para (4) above on_a priority basis. The

High Courts are requested to issue necessary Courts ar requested to issue essar

directions in this behalf to all the criminal courts in this behalf to all the criminal court.

under their control and supervision.”

Effective steps should be taken to give effect to the

above observations of the Supreme Court.

6.7 No premature media/publicity by the CBI/ED:-

In order to maintain the integrity of the
investigation and also to avoid any prejudice to the accused,

it is essential that no premature media/publicity by the



-:73 :-

CBI/ED should be allowed as desired by Hon’ble Supreme Court
in Vineet Narain’s case, supra (see pr.62 (11)(6) of the
decision). Such premature publicity may also tarnish the
image of public functionary/accused even if he is acquitted
ultimately. In order to implement it, it is essential to
provide a clause in the Bill of CVC/DSPE (Amendment) 8111 to

the following effect:-

“Secrecy of Information:-

Any information obtained by the Central Vigilance
Commission or any of the Vigilance Commission or
officers or employees 170. the course of or for the
purposes of any inquiry or proceeding or
investigation, and any evidence recorded or collected
in connection therewith shall be treated as
confidential during the course of enquiry , n=

proceeding or investigation.”

6.8 Adhering to the provisions of the Mannual in relation

to _ investigative functions like raids, seizures and

arrests:-

The Supreme Court has emphasised the necessity of CBI
adhering scrupulously to the provisions of the CBI Mannual in
relation to investigative functions like raids, seizures and

arrests. It has cautioned that any deviation from the



174 :-

established procedures should be viewed seriously and severe
disciplinary action taken against the concerned officials.
We are of the opinion that such checks should also be
enforced against ED as well in respect of their

investigative/enquiry functions.



-:75 :-

Bill No. of 1998

The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998
A

BILL

to confer upon the Central Vigilance Commission the
statutory status and to give statutory recognition to
the functions of the Central Vigilance Commission
with a view to make it a more effective and efficient
institution to undertake, guide and supervise
investigations and inquiries into allegations of
corruption against public servants and employees of
the public sector corporations and for matters

connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the

Republic of India as follows:-

CHAPTER - I

Preliminary

Short title, extent and commencement commencement



1.04)

(2)

(3)

-i76 :-

This Act may be called the Central Vigilance
Commission Act, 1998.

It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.

It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint provided that such date shall not be
later than three months from the date on which the
President of India grants assent.

Definitions

(a) “Commission” means and refers to the Central
Vigilance Commission constituted under
sub-section (1) of Section 3;

(b) “Chief Vigilance Commissioner” means the
Chief Vigilance Commissioner appointed under
sub-section (3) of section 3;

(०) “Central Bureau of Investsigation” (CBI)
means the organisation set up under the Delhi
Police Establishment Act, 1946 read with the
Resolution of the Government of India
No.4/31/61-T/MHA dated 1.4.1963;

(७) “Enforcement Directorate” means the
Directorate of Enforcement constituted under
and comprising Directors of Enforcement,
Additional Directors of Enforcement, Deputy

Directors of Enforcement and Assistant



(e)

(9)

Directors of Enforcement and such other
officers of Enforcement of the Tike rank
appointed under section 3 of the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973

“Corruption” includes-

(a) any act done or omitted to be done by a
public servant with an improper purpose or a
corrupt motive in contravention of any of the
provisions of-

(i) the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
or

(ii) Indian Penal Code; or

(iii) any other Jaw for the time being in
force which bears adversely on the integrity
of the public servant; or

(b) any act done or omitted to be done by a
public servant involving lack of integrity;
or

(c) any act done or omitted to be done by a
public servant indicating gross negligence on
his part; or

(d) any act of the nature indicated in the
preceding clauses (a) to (c) done in
violation of the relevant Conduct, Discipline
and Appeal Rules.

"Public servant” means a person defined as a

public servant under clause (c) of section 2



of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and
shall also include a person defined as public
servant in section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860;

(Ch) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made

under this Act.

(i) “Vigilance Commissioner” means the Vigilance

Commissioner appointed under sub-section (3)

of section 3;

CHAPTER - IT

Central Vigilance Commission

Constitution of Central Vigilance Commission: -

3.1) As from the date of commencement of this Act,
there shall be constituted a Commission called the Central
Vigilance Commission to exercise the powers conferred on, and

the functions assigned to it, under this Act.

(2) The Central Vigilance Commission shall consist of-



-:79 :-

(a) a Chief Vigilance Commissioner; and
(b) four Vigilance Commissioners.
(3) The Chief Vigilance Commissioner and the other

Vigilance Commissioners shall be appointed by the President
of India under his hand and seal.

Provided that every appointment made under this
sub-section shall be made after obtaining the recommendations
of a committee consisting of -

(a) The Prime Minister Chairman

(b) Minister in-charge of - Member

the Ministry of Home
Affairs in the Government
of India
(०) Leader of the Opposition - Member
in the House of People
Provided that in case there
is no member of the said
House designated as “the
Leader of the Opposition in
the House of the People", the
the leader of the largest
recognised political party or
group, as the case may be,
shall be the member of the
Committee.

The Committee shall select the Chief Vigilance

Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners out of a panel


-:80 :-

of outstanding and meritorious civil servants, with
impeccable integrity, serving or retired, who are holding or
have held the post of Secretary to Government of India or an
equivalent post in any statutory corporation and having
qualifications specified under section 4 of the Act, the
panel shall be prepared by the Cabinet Secretary to the
Government of India, and submitted along with relevant
record, to the Prime Minister for being placed before the

Committee.

Qualification for appointment of Chief Vigilance Commissioner for appointment of Chief Vigilance Commissioner

and Vigilance Commissioners: -

4.(1) The Chief Vigilance Commissioner shall be a _ person
having experience and expertise in administrative
matters and shall be a person known for his ability,
integrity, independence and efficiency.

(2) The four Vigilance Commissioners shall be persons
having wide experience and expertise in the fields of
administration, finance, investigation and law
respectively and shall be persons known for their

ability, integrity, independence and efficiency.

Chief Vigilance Commissioner 909 Vigilance Commissioners to Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners to

be ineligible to hold other offices.

5.(1) The Chief Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance
Commissioner shall not hold any office of trust or

profit (other than his office as Chief Vigilance


6.(1)

Commissioner or Vigilance Commissioner, as the case

may be, or in case of serving civil servant, his lien

in his parent organisation if allowed to be retained

as per rules applicable), or be connected with any

political party, or carry on any business, or

Practise any profession and, accordingly, before he

enters upon his office, a person appointed as the

Chief Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance

Commissioner shall, --

(a) if he holds any office of trust, or profit,
resign from such office: or

(b) if he is connected with any political party,
sever his connections with it: or

(०) if he is carrying on any business, sever his
connection (short of divesting himself of
ownership) with the conduct and management of
such business; or

(d) if he is Practising any profession, cease to

practise such profession.

Term of office, salary and allowances and other of office salar and allowances and other

conditions of service of Chief Vigilance Commissioner of service of Chief Vigilance Commissioner

and Vigilance Commissioners.-

The Chief Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance
Commissioner shall hold office as such for a term of

five years from the date on which he enters upon his



(2)

(3)

—:82 :-

office, or till he attains the age of 65 years,

whichever is earlier, but shall not be eligible for

reappointment.

00 ceasing to hold office, a Chief Vigilance
Commissioner or the Vigilance Commissioner shall be
ineligible to hold any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of a State or
accept any kind of employment under any organisation,

public, private or international organisation, as the

case may be.

Provided that a Vigilance Commissioner shall be
eligible to be appointed as the Chief Vigilance
Commissioner, but his term of office both as
Vigilance Commissioner and as Chief Vigilance
Commissioner put together, shall not exceed the

period of five years.

The salary, allowances and other conditions of
service of the Chief Vigilance Commissioner and the
Vigilance Commissioner shall be the same as those of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
Provided that the Chief Vigilance Commissioner shall
further be entitled to an additional allowance of

Rs.500/- per month.



(4)

7:83 :-

The status of the Chief Vigilance Commissioner and
Vigilance Commissioners shall be that of the

Comptroller and Auditor General of India:

Provided that the Chief Vigilance
Commissioner shall rank above the Vigilance

Commissioners:

Provided further that such salary shall be in
addition to any pension to which the Chief Vigilance
Commissioner or Vigilance Commissioner may be
entitled to in respect of any previous service under
the Government of India or under the Government of a
State and no deduction shall be made from such salary
on the ground of his having received any retirement
gratuity, or on the ground that he received the
commuted value of a portion of the pension, in

respect of his previous service.

The Chief Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance
Commissioner shall, before entering upon his office,
make and subscribe to an oath and of secrecy in such
form and in such manner and before such authority as

may be prescribed.



8.(1)

(2)

-184 :-

Resignation

The Chief Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance
Commissioner may resign his office, by writing under
his hand addressed to the President of India.
Provided such resignation shall take effect only on

its acceptance by the President of India.

Removal of Chief Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance

Commissioner .-

Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the
Chief Vigilance Commissioner or the Vigilance
Commissioner shall only be removed from his office by
order of the President on the ground of proved
misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on reference
being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry,
held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in
that behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the
Chief Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance

Commisioner, ought on any such ground to be removed.

The President may, in consultation with the Chief
Justice of India, suspend the Chief Vigilance
Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner of the
Central Vigilance Commission in respect of whom a
reference has been made to the Supreme Court under
sub-section (1) until the President has passed order

on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court.


(3)

(4)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), the President may by order remove from office
the Chief Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance
Commissioner, if the Chief Vigilance Commissioner or
such Vigilance Commissioner, as the case may be,-

(a) has been adjudged as insolvent; or

(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral
turpitude; or

(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of
acting as a Chief Vigilance Commissioner or a
Vigilance Commissioner; or

(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as
is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a
Chief Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance

Commissioner; or

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(3), no Chief Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance
Commissioner shall be removed from his office on the
ground specified in clause (d) of that sub-section
unless the Supreme Court, on a reference being made
to it in this behalf by the President, has, on an

enquiry, held by it in accordance with such procedure


9.(1)

(2)

as prescribed in this behalf by the Supreme Court,

reported that he ought, on such ground or grounds, to

be removed.

Officers of the Commission and other staff.-

(a) The Commission shall, for the purpose of
assisting it in the discharge of its functions under
this Act, appoint a Secretary and such other officers
and employees as the President may determine, from
time to time, in consultation with it.

(b) The Commission shall establish a department of
inquiries comprising adequate number of officers
designated as commissioners for departmental
inquiries to conduct oral inquiries against public
servants.

(c) The Commission may also establish a technical
wing consisting of engineering and financial experts
consisting of such number of engineering and
financial experts as may 986 required for due

discharge of its functions and powers.

Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section
(1), the Commission may secure-
(i) the services of any officer or employee or

investigating agency of the Central Government or. a



(3)

(4)

State Government with the concurrence of that

Government, or

(ii) the services of any other person or agency.

The terms and conditions of service of the officers
and employees referred to in sub-section (1) and of
the officers, employees, agencies and persons
referred to in sub-section (2) (including such
special conditions as may be considered necessary for
enabling them to act without fear in the discharge of
their functions) shall be such as the President may
determine, from time to time, in consultation with

the Commission.

In the discharge of their functions under this Act,
the Secretary, the officers and employees referred to
in sub-section (1) and the officers, employees,
agencies and persons referred to in sub-section (2)
shall be subject to the exclusive administrative

control and direction of the Commission.

Proceedings of the Central Vigilance Commission of the Central Vigilance Commission:-

10(1)

The Central Vigilance Commission shall meet at the
head office or any of its offices at such time and on
such dates as the Chief Vigilance Commissioner may

direct. It shall be open to the Chief Vigilance


(2)

(3)

Commissioner to constitute sub-committees comprising
the Chief Vigilance Commissioner and one or more
Vigilance Commissioners for convenient transaction of
the business of the Commission, which shall be

empowered to take decisions on behalf of the

Commission.

The Chief Vigilance Commissioner or, if he is unable
to attend a meeting of the Commission, any other
Vigilance Commissioner nominated by the Chief
Vigilance Commissioner in this behalf and, in the
absence of such nomination or where there is no Chief
Vigilance Commissioner, any Vigilance Commissioner
chosen by the Vigilance Commissioners present from

among themselves, shall preside at the meeting.

All questions which come up before any meeting of the
Central Vigilance Commission shall be decided by a
majority of votes of the Chief Vigilance
Commissioner/Vigilance Commissioners present and
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the
Chief Vigilance Commissioner or the person presiding

shall have the right to exercise a second or casting

vote.



-:89 :-

(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), Chief

Vigilance or every Vigilance Commissioner shall have

one vote.

(5) All orders and decisions of the Central Vigilance
Commission shall be authenticated by the Secretary or
any other officer of the Central Vigilance Commission
duly authorised by the Chief Vigilance Commissioner

in this behalf.

Vacancies not to invalidate proceedings of Central Vigilance

Commission

V1. No act or proceedings of the Central Vigilance
Commission shall be questioned or shall be
invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Central

Vigilance Commission.

Expenses of Central Vigilance Commission to be charged 0०0 charged on

Consolidated Fund of India:-

12. The expenses of the Central Vigilance Commission
including all. salaries, allowances and pensions

payable to, or in respect of, the Chief Vigilance


-:90 :-

Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners and the
staff of the Commission shall be charged upon the

Consolidated Fund of India.

Powers of the Central Vigilance Commission:-

13. The Central Vigilance Commission shall, for the
purposes of any inquiry or proceedings under this Act have
the powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of

Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters,

namely:-

(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
witness and examining him on oath;

(b) the discovery and production of any document or
other material object producible as evidence:

(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;

(d) the requisition of any public record;

(8) the issue of commission for examidnation of
witnesses;

(f) review its decision, directions and orders;

(9) any other matter which may be prescribed.

CHAPTER IIT

Jurisdiction and powers of the Central Vigilance Commission



Functions of the Central Vigilance Commission

14,

(1)

(2)

a)

b)

The jurisdiction and powers of the Central
Vigilance Commission shall extend to matters
to which the executive power of the Union of
India extends.

The Central Vigilance Commission shall have

the power:

to undertake an inquiry into any transaction
in which a public. servant is suspected or
alleged to have acted for an improper purpose
or in a corrupt manner or is alleged or

suspected to be guilty of corruption:

to cause an inquiry or investigation to be

made into:

i) any complaint that a public. servant
has exercised or refrained from
exercising his powers for improper or

corrupt purpose;

ii) any complaint of corruption,
misconduct lack of integrity or other

kind of malpractice or misdemeanour


c)

d)

on the part of a public servant
including members of the All India
Services even if such members are for
the time being serving in connection
with the affairs of a State

Government;

to call for reports/returns and statements
from all Ministries/Departments/corporate
central undertakings so as to enable it to
exercise a general check and supervision over
the vigilance and anti-corruption work in the

Ministries/Departments/undertakings;

to call for annual reports from the public
servants containing full and proper
disclosure of all the movable and immovable
assets held by the public servant, and the
members of his family including all and any
receipts of any movable or immovable assets
in any manner whatsoever and from any source
whatsoever during the preceding year; to call
for such other information from public
servants as may be required in the interest

of integrity of administration:


e)

-:93 :-

Explanation: For the purposes of this
clause, the expression “members of family” in

relation to a public servant includes -

(1) the wife or husband, as the case may be,
of the public servant, whether residing with
the public servant or not but does not
include a wife or husband, as the case may
be, separated from the public. servant by a
decree or order of a competent Court;

(ii) son or daughter or step-son or
ste-daughther of the public servant and
wholly dependent on him, but does not include
o* step-child who is no longer in any way
dependent on the public servant or of whose
custody the public servant has been deprived
by or under any law;

(111) any other person related, whether by
blood or marraige, to the public servant or
to the public servant’s wife or husband and

wholly dependent on the public servant;

to exercise general superintendence over the
functioning of the CBI and to review the
Progress of all cases moved by the CBI for

sanction of prosecution of public servants


1)

9)

“>:94 *:-

which are pending with the competent
authorities, specially those in which

sanction has been delayed or refused;

to call for reports from the CBI about the
cases taken up by it for investigation and
with respect to the progress of
investigations and the progress of cases in

courts;

to take over under its direct control such
complaints, information or cases, as it may

consider necessary for further action which

may be either:

(a) to ask the CBI to register a regular
case and investigate it: or

(b) to entrust the complaint, information
or case for enquiry-
(i) to the Central Bureau of
Investigation and for further
appropriate action; or
(ji) to refer the matter to the
Ministry/ Department/Undertaking
concerned for appropriate action, as

the case may be.


h)

i)

3)

-:95 :-

to advise the Ministry of Home Affairs or
other competent authority - after examining
the cases and considering any comments
received from the concerned Ministry/
Department/undertaking - whether or not
prosecution should be sanctioned or why the
sanction should not be refused, as the case

may be;

to advise the Ministries/Departments/
undertakings upon the appropriate action to
be taken against a public servant who appears
to the Commission to have exercised his
powers for an improper or corrupt purpose and
also to advise them upon the changes required
in prevalent procedures and practices which
afford scope for or facilitate corruption or

misconduct;

to initiate, at such intervals, as it
considers suitable, review of procedures and
practices of administration in so far as they
relate to maintenance of integrity in

administration;


k)

1)

m)

n)

to collect such statistics and other
information as may be necessary for
appropriate and effective discharge of its

functions;

to call for information from the appropriate
authorities about action taken on the

recommendations made by the Commission;

to direct the Commissioners for departmental
enquiries to conduct oral enquiries on behalf
of the departmental authorities and to
require that the oral inquiry in any
departmental proceedings (except in the case
of minor charges) should be entrusted to one
of the commissioners for departmental
enquiries, to examine the reports submitted
by the commissioners for departmental
enquiries and advise the competent
disciplinary authority on the further action
to be taken or penalty to be imposed, as the

case may be;

to submit an annual report to the Parliament
about the activities of the Commission during
the preceding year pointing out in particular

cases in which the recommendations of the


15.

16.

Central Vigilance Commission have not been
accepted or acted upon; such report. shall
contain a separate section setting out in
detail the functioning of the Central Bureau

of Investigation during the relevant year;

०) to perform such other functions and duties
and to exercise such other powers as may be

conferred upon the Commission by rules made

under the Act.

Evidence

For the purpose of any enquiry, the Central Vigilance
Commission may require any public servant or any
other person, who, in its opinion is able to furnish
information or produce documents relevant to such
inquiry, to furnish any such information or produce

any such document;

The Central Vigilance Commission shall be responsible
for generally coordinating the work of and advising
all organisations falling within its jurisdiction and
control in respect of 11 matters pertaining to
maintenance of integrity and probity in

administration.


-:98 :-

Departmental Inquiries

17. The Commissioners for Departmental Inquiries shall
conduct the oral inquiry in cases of Departmental
proceedings on behalf of the disciplinary authorities
and shall havae the powers under Section (5) of the
Departmental Inquiries (Enforcement of Attendance of

Witnesses and Production of Documents) Act, 1972.

CHAPTER IV

Miscellaneous

18. The Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) and Vigilance
Officer in Ministries/Departments of Government of
India/Public Undertakings of the Govenrment of India will be
appointed in consultation with the Commission and no person
whose appointment as the Chief Vigilance Officer or Vigilance
Officer is objected to by the Commission, will be so

appointed.

Saving of the acts of the existing Commission

19. (1) All acts done, proceedings taken, orders made
and directions given by the Central Vigilance

Commission established under the Government



-:99 :-

of India Resolution dated 11.2.1964 bearing
No.24/7/64-AVD (Ministry of Home Affairs)
shall be deemed to have been done, taken,
made or given, as the case may be, under this
Act in so far as they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as if this
Act was in force on the date the said acts,
proceedings, orders and directions were made

and shall be continued under the Act.

Consultation with the Commission in all Disciplinary

Enquiries

20. Notwithstanding anything contained in any special or
general rules governing the conduct of oral
inquiries, it shall be obligatory upon the concerned
authorities to obtain the opinion of the Central
Vigilance Commission, at the conclusion of atl
inquiries into charges attracting major penalties, on
the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer as well

as the penalty proposed to be imposed.

Protection of action taken in good faith

21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall
lie against the Commission or Chief Vigilance

Commissioner or any of the Vigilance Commissioners or



-:100:-

any officers or employees of the Commission, for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to
be done under this Act or the rules or regulations

made thereunder.
Over-riding Effect

22. The provisions of this Act shall have over-riding
effect over any other enactment in force and shall be
given effect to notwithstanding anything to the

contrary in any other Jaw for the time being in

force.

Secrecy of Information:-

23. Any information obtained by the Central Vigilance
Commission or Chief Vigilance Commissioner or any of
its Vigilance Commissioners or officers or employees
in the course of or for the purposes of any inquiry
or proceeding or investigation, and any evidence
recorded or collected in connection therewith shall
be treated as confidential during the course of

inquiry or proceeding or investigation.

Rules


—:101:-

24, (1) The Central Government, by notification in
the Official Gazette, may make rules to carry

out the purposes of the Act.

(2) The Rules made under the Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after they are made or
issued, before each House of Parliament which
is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or more successive sessions, and if
before the expiry of the said period, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the Rules, the Rules shall have effect
thereafter only in such modified form and if
both Houses agree to annul any Rule, it shall
cease to have effect therefrom, soa however
that anything previously done under the Rule
shall not be rendered invalid on that

account.

THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998

An Act to amend the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act in the light of the directions of the
Supreme Court of India made in Vineet Narain & Others v.
Union of India & Another (WP (Cr) Nos.340 - 343 of 1993) and

to provide for matters incidental thereto:


-:102:-

Title and Commencement

(1) This Act shalt be called the Delhi Special

Police Establishment (Amendment) Act, 1998.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint provided that
such date shall not be later than three
months from the date on which the President

of India grants assent.

Amendment of S.4 of Act 25 of 1946

For section 4 of the principal Act, the following

shall be substituted:-

“Superintendence and administration of Special Police

Establishment . ८

4(1) The superintendence and the responsibility for
the efficient functioning of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment shall vest in the Central Vigilance

Commission.


-:103:-

(2)(i) The Central Vigilance Commission shall review
the progress of all cases moved by the Central Bureau
of Investigation for sanction of prosecution of
public servants which are pending with the competent
authorities, specially those in which sanction has

been delayed or refused;

(ii) The Delhi Special Police Establishment (CBI)
shall submit reports, as and when called for by the
Central Vigilance Commission, with respect to the
cases taken up by it for investigation and with
respect to the progress of investigations and the
progress of cases in courts,

(iii) the Central Bureau of Investigation will
forward to the Ministry of Home Affairs through the
Central Vigilance Commission the final report in all
cases investigated by the Bureau in which it
considers that a prosecution should be launched,
provided that sanction for such prosecution is
required under any law to be issued in the name of
the President; and the Bureau will simultaneously
send a copy to the Ministry/Department/undertaking
concerned for any comments which it may wish to

forward to the Central Vigilance Commission;


-:104:-

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
section, the Central Government shall ultimately
remain answerable for the functioning of the Central
Bureau of Investigation (DSPE). In matters other
than those specified in sub-sections (1) and (2) of
this section, the power of superintendence over the
Delhi Special Police Establishment shall continue to

vest in the Central Government.

(4) The administration of the said police
establishment shall vest in an officer appointed as
Director of the Central Bureau of Investigation in
this behalf by the Central Government who shall
exercise in respect of that police establishment such
of the powers exercisable by an Inspector-General of
Police in respect of the police force ina State, as

the Central Government may specify in this behalf.

(5) Manner _of appointment of the Director of the Director of the

Central Bureau of Investigation.-

(a) The Committee consisting of the Chief
Vigilance Commissioner, Union Home Secretary
and Secretary, DOPT in the Government of
India, headed by the Chief Vigilance
Commissioner, shall draw up 8 panel of IPS

officers on the basis of their seniority,


-:105:-

integrity, experience in investigation and
anti-corruption work and recommend a panel of
three officers for appointment as Director
(b) Before making its recommendation, the
Committee shall take into consideration the
views of the incumbent Director in the
matter. If the Central Government does not
find any one in the panel fit for
appointment, it shall record its reasons
therefor and call for a fresh panel from = the

aforesaid Committee.

(6) The Director, Central Bureau of Investigation,
shall have a minimum term of two years regardless of
the date of his superannuation, and shall not be
transferred to or assigned any other job except with
the approval of the Selection Committee referred to

in sub-section (5).

(7) The Director, Central Bureau of Investigation
shall also:
(i) allocate the work within the
Bureau/establishment and constitute teams for
carrying out investigation into various
cases:
Provided that any change in the Head of an

investigating team for the purpose of


3.

-=:106:-

effective investigation can be effected by
him only by an order in writing, after
recording special reasons for such change;
and

ii) take such effective measures as may be
required to ensure expeditious completion of

investigation.

(8) The Joint Director of Central Bureau of
Investigation or any officer above him shall also be
appointed in accordance with the procedure prescribed

in sub-section (5).

(9) The selection or extension of the tenure of
officers (not including Joint Director and above)
shall be made by a Board comprising Chief Vigilance
Commissioner, Union Home Secretary and Secretary,
(DOPT), Government of India. The Chief Vigilance
Commissioner shall head the Board. The Board = shall
take into consideration the relevant information and
material as may be placed before it by the Director,

Central Bureau of Investigation.”

After section 7 of the principal Act, the following

sections shall be inserted, namely:-



-:107:-

“Over-riding Effect

8. The provisions of this Act. shall prevail
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
any other law for the time being in force.

9. Secrecy of Information:-

Any information obtained by the Director or other
offficers of the Delhi Special Police Establishment
(Central Bureau of Investigation) or any of its
employees in the course of or for the purposes of any
inquiry or proceeding or investigation, and any
evidence recorded or collected in connection
therewith shall be treated as confidential, during

the course of inquiry or proceeding or investigation.

THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998

An Act to amend the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act
1973, in the light of the directions made by the Supreme
Court of India in Vineet Narain and Others v. Union of India
and Another (WP (Cr) 340-343 of 1993) and to provide for

other incidental matters:

Title and Commencement



-:108:-

1. (1) This Act shall be called the Foreign Exchange

Regulation (Amendment) Act, 1998.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as_ the
Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint provided that
such date shall not be Tater than three
months from the date on which the President

of India grants assent.

Amendment of §.4(1)

2. Sub-section (1) of section 4 of the principal Act
shall be substituted with the following sub-sections (1) and
(2) and the existing sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be

renumbered as sub-sections (3) and (4) respectively:

“(1)(a) The Director of Enforcement, who shall be in
the rank of Additional Secretary/ Special Secretary
to the Government of India. shall be appointed by
the Central Government from out of a panel of three
names recommended by a Selection Committee, which
shall consist of the Chief Vigilance Commissioner,
Union Home Secretary, Secretary, Department of
Revenue and Secretary, DOPT of the Government of
India. The Selection Committee shall be headed by

the Chief Vigilance Commissioner.


-:109:-

(b) The Director of Enforcement shall be appointed
for a minimum tenure of two years regardless of the
date of his superannuation, and any transfer of the
Director to any other post, before the expiry of his
tenure, shall be effected only with the approval of

the Selection Committee mentioned in clause (a).

(c) The appointment of a Special Director shall also
be made in the manner prescribed in clause (a) of
this sub-section and his minimum tenure on the post
shall also be the same as in the case of the Director

of Enforcement.

(2)(a) It shal? be the duty of the Director of
Enforcement to monitor the progress of all
investigations and adjudications being handled by the
Directorate and to take steps for their speedy and
effective completion. He shalt also monitor and
guide 911 prosecutions launched by the Enforcement
Directorate, subject, of course, to the overall
supervision of the Secretary, Department of Revenue,

Ministry of Finance, Government of India.


“:110:-

(b) The annual report of the Enforcement Directorate
shall contain a full and clear account of the working

of the Directorate.

We recommend accordingly.

(MR. JUSTICE B.P.JEEVAN REDDY)(RETD.)

CHAIRMAN

(MS.JUSTICE LEILA ००७५० Oe, fee
MEMBER MEMBER MEMBER -

(ON LEAVE) SECRETARY

DATED: 13th August, 1998