LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT

ON

REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL;
CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND GOLD (CONTROL) APPELLATE TRIBUNAL AND
INCOME-TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL

1998


— D.O.No.6(3)(21)/93~LC(LS)

LAW COMMISSICN OF INDI.
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 601
TEL. : 2384475

~JSSTh
8. P. JEEVAN REDOY

~rarman Law Tommise. 2 sf roa

Fesicence

August 14, 1998
Dear Br.M.Thambi Durai,

Iam forwarding herewith the One Hundred Sixty
Second Report on “Review of functioning of Central
Administrative Tribunal: Customs, Excise and Gold
(Control) Appellate Tribunal and Income-tax Appellate
Teibunal”,

2. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case
of R.K Jain Vs Union of India, (1993)4 362 119 directed
the Law Commission to make a comprehensive study of the
functioning of the several tribunals in India and to
suggest measures for their improved functioning. It
was observed that the Commission may 8180 suggest
anges in the different statutes and evolve a model on
basis whereof tribunals may be constituted or
zh a view ta ensure greater
xtract of the relevant observations

Ar

8 set Sut under paragraphs 1.1 and 1.2 of the report
n reoard.

3 The previous Commissions, accordingly, took up
the matter for consideration, prepared a
*Questionnaire’ and a "Revised Additional
Questionnaire’ and circulated the same for opinion to
all concerned persons, departments and authorities. It
rec ed opinions, suggestions and comments from
various quarters which have teen duly considered by the

commission.

4, The Commission would have submitted its report
in the year 1996 itself but for the fact that it was
brought to its notice that the issue relating to the
functioning of Administrative Tribunals and the
ty of Articles 323-A and 323-8 of the
itution of India had been referred to a Jarger
Constitution Bench for consideration and that the same
was then sending.

5. The seven-Judge Constitution Banch of the
Supreme Court has since delivered its judgment in Le
Chandra mar Vs, Union of India, (1997)3 300

a:

2
which is extremely significant and relevant for t
Purpose of this study and has accordingly been kept in
Mind while preparing this report.

8. when the Commission had initiated the study
pursuant to the observations in R.K.Jain’s case
(supra), it devoted its attention to three types of
r

tribunals, namely, Ci} Administrative tribunal,
a
[rr
9200 eee lq


constituted under the Administrative Tribunals Act,
1985, (11) The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control)
Appellate Tribunal, and (iii} The Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal.

7. The Commission decided that it would be
appropriate and convenient to examine the functioning
of each of these types of tribunals separately.

a. The Commission is of the considered opinion that
the radical anges recommended in the report need to
be taken immediately to achieve the reforms in the
working of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Central
and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, and
né Tax Appellate Tribunal to attain a sound justice
very system which is sine qua non for the efficient
governance of a country wedded to the rule of Taw.

to express our appreciation for
d from Snri Sushi} Kumar,
» in drafting of this report and
nm right through.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

o>
फ्री ऊन |
Lose

(8.7. Jeevan Reddy)

Or.M.Thambi Durai,

Hon'ble Minister for Law,
Justice and Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhawan,

1७७ Dethi,


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER IIE

(PART I)

(PART II)

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER VII

ANNEXURE-I

ANNEXURE-IT

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

THE PURPOSE OF ADMINISTRATIVE
LAW

AOMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES IN
OTHER COUNTRIES AND IN INDIA

AOJUDICATION MACHINERY UNDER
THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962

CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS

CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND GOLD
(CONTROL) APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
(CEGAT )

INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
(ITAT)

CONCLUSION
LETTER DATED 29TH APRIL, 1994

LETTER DATED AUGUST, 1995

PAGES

1-10

14-12

13-58

59-75

76-130

134-139

140-144

145-163

164 (i-xix)

165 (i-xx7)


CHAPTER — I

Introduction
| The Supreme Court of India in the case of R.K.dain
ve “nion of India, (4983) 4 Sec 119 (A.M.Ahmadi, 3.

speaking for himself and M.M.Punchhi, J

were) directed the Law Conmissian to make a comprehensive

Study of the functioning of the several tribunals in

India to suggest measures for their imprayved
functioning, It was observed that the Law Commission of

India tiay also Suggest changes in the different statutes
and evolve a model on the basis whereof tribunals may be

constituted or resenstituted with a view to ensur

7

greater independence. It would be appropriate to set out

wb

observations made in the said decision:-

5. Lastly, the time is ripe for taking stock

of the working of the various tribunals 5

»
ot
=
3
oe

the country after the insertion of Articles 323-4

ivery system is a sine qua non. for the

country wedd

and impartial

litigating public

Faith and confidence alone can deliver the 2

on of these two



Articles, Acts have been enacted. whereunder
tribunals have been constituted for dispensation
of justice. Sufficient time has passed and
experience gained in these JTast few years for
taking stock of the situation with a viaw to
finding out if they have served the purpose and
objectives for which they were constituted,
Complaints have been heard in regard to the
functioning of other tribunals as well and it is
time that 4 body like the Law Commission of India
has a comprehensive  Jook-in with a view to

suggesting measures for _ their ss improved

functioning. That body can also suggest changes

in the different statutes and evolve a model on

the basis whereof tribunals may be constituted or

reconstituted with ai view to ensuring greater

independence. An intensive and extensive study

needs to be undertaken by the Law Commission in

regard to the constitution of tribunals under to the constitution. of tribunals under

various statutes with a view to ensuring their

independence so that the public confidence in such

tribunals may increase and the quality of their

performance may improve, We strongly recommend to

the Law Commission of India to undertake such an

exercise on priority basis. A copy of this

judgment may be forwarded by the Registrar of this
Court to the Member-Secretary of the Commission

for immediate action.”


1,2 To the same effect are the observations of
K.Ramaswamy, J. who delivered a separate concurring
judgment in the ‘said decision. The Jearned Judge
observed ~

“Before parting with the case it is necessary to
express our anguish over the ineffectivity of the
alternative mechanism devised for judicial
reviews. The judicial review and remedy are
‘fundamental rights of the citizens. rights f the citizens. The
dispensation of justice by the tribunals is much
to be desired. We are not doubting the ability of
the members or Vice-Chairman (non-Judges) who may
be experts in their requtar service. 8७४ judicial
adjudication is a special process and would
effecientty be administered by advocate Judges.
The remedy of appeal by special leave under
Articte 136 to this Court also proves to be costly
and prohibitive and far-flung distanca too is
working as constant constraint to litigant public
who could 111 afford to reach this Court. An
appeal to a Bench of two Judges of the respective

Hiah Courts over the orders of the tribunals

within. fts territorial jurisdiction on questions

of jaw would assuage a growing feeling of

injustice. of those who can 111 afford to approach

the Supreme Court. _ Equally the need for


recruitment of members of the Bar. to man the
tribunals as well as the working system of the
tribunats need fresh look and regular monitoring
is necessary. An expert 009५ Tike the Law
Commission of India would make an in-depth study
in this behalf inciuding the desirability to bring
SEGAT. under the control of Law and Justice
Department 10 line with Income Tax Appellate

Tribunal and ४० make appropriate urgent

recommendations to the Government of India who

should take remedial steps by an appropriate
legislation to overcome the handicaps and

difficulties and make the tribunals effective and

efficient instruments for making judicial review
efficacious, inexpensive and satisfactory."
1.3 The Law Commission of India accordingly took up

the matter for consideration, prepared a ’Questionnaire’
and a ‘Revised Additional Questionnaire’ (Annexures I &
Il__respestively) and circulated the same for opinion to
all concerned persons, departments and authorities. The
response has been “quite encouraging. It has received
opinions, suggestions and comments from various sources

which have been duly considered by the Commission.

1.4 The Commission would have submitted its report in
the year 1996 itself but for the fact that it was brought

to its notice that the issue relating to functioning of


the Administrative Tribunals and the validity-of Articles
$23-A and 323-B of the Constitution of India has been
referred to a larger Constitution Bench for consideration
and that the same was pending. In view of the said
information, the Commission withheld further action
awaiting the opinion of the Supreme Court in the matter.
The seven-Judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court
has since delivered its judgment in L.CHANDRA KUMAR ४.
U.O.T. (1997) 3 SCC 261. The unanimous opinion of the
Court has been delivered by A.M.Ahmadi, C.J. The
essential features of the judgment are in the succeeding

chapters.

1.5 The above decision is extremely significant and
relevant for the purpose of this study and has

accordingly been kept jin mind while preparing this

report.
1.6 When the Law Commission of India had initiated the
study pursuant to the observations in R.K.JAIN v. Union

of India, it devoted its attention to three types of

tribunals only viz.i-

(i) Administrative Tribunals constituted under
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
enacted pursuant to Articles 323-A of the

Constitution.


(11) The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control)
Appellate Tribuna; established under
Section 129 of the Customs Act, 1962 and
dealing with cases under both the Customs
Act and the Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944,

Citi) The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
constituted under Section 252 of the

Income Tax Act, 1951.

1.7 The Law Commission of India is of the opinion,
keeping in view al? the relevant circumstances, that it
would be appropriate and convenient to examine the
functioning of each of these types of tribunals
separately. Indeed these three tribunals are constituted
under three different enactments, Only the tribunals
mentioned in (1) above are governed by Art.323~A and not
the other two types of tribunals. They are also situated
differantly in the matter of their powers, status,
importance, method of recruitment and other conditions of

service,

Major issues of study regarding functioning of issues of stud regardi functionin: of
Administrative Tribunals in the country:-


The Commission has decided to confine its area of
study on the following major issues pertaining to the

functioning of Administrative Tribunals in the country:-

1. Appointment of members of the Tribunals, their
eligibility mode of appointment etc.

2. Composition of the Tribunal.

3. Need to standardise the powers and procedures of
administrative tribunals,

4. Guarantee parties appearing before the tribunals
basic Procedural rights and safeguards; and
ancillary issues Tike seeking Justice through
post.

5. Simplify administrative law, particularly with
regard to judicial review and appeal; and

6. Ensure the requisite degree of independence when a

tribunal is required to act in a judicial fashion.

The Reference to the Law Commission is to
specifically consider the functioning of those agencies
which could be classified as “administrative tribunals”.
These agencies are authorized by the Government through
law to make decisions which can affect people’s
fundamental rights of equality, property, economy,
political and liberty rights and economic and social
entitlements. Besides this there are many decision
making bodies which are not, strictly speaking,

“tribunals” which affect people and make decisions about


resources in a community. The Commission feels that the
role of such decision making bodies in the administrative

justice system also deserves careful consideration.

The Commission refers to the extracts of the
Malimath Committee report quoted in L.Chandra Kumar’s
case (1997) 3 500 261 27.88 citing a number of reasons
which show that several tribunals in the country have not

inspired confidence in the Public mind.

(i) The foremost is the lack of competence,

objectivity and judicial approach.

(ii) The next is their constitution, the power and
method of appointment of personnel thereto, the

inferior status and the casual. method of working.

(iti) Their actual composition; men of calibre are not
willing to be appointed as presiding officers in
view of the uncertainty of tenure, unsatisfactory
conditions of service, executive subordination in

matters of administration and ~ political

interference in judicial functioning.

The Supreme Court observed:


“89... That the various Tribunals have not
performed up to the expectations is a self-evident
and widely acknowledged truth.

However, drastic measures may have to be
resorted to in order to elevate their standards to
ensure that they stand ४० to constitutional
scrutiny in the discharge of the power of judicial

review conferred upon them.”
(Emphasis supplied)

Besides these reasons, we are of the view that the

following issues also need drawing attention:-

(a)

(b)

There is delay, lack of training and public
Perception of unfairness and a feeling that
impermissible considerations Play a part in many

cases.

Issues of efficiency and cost to individuals and
to the Government in the administrative system
providing justice are of fundamental concern. In
some cases, particularly involving individual’s
rights or entitlements, delay in’ the System can
result in injustice and undermine the credibility

of the system as a way to achieve justice,


7:10 :-

(०) The Government, in carrying out reform, should try

to avoid making decisions expensive.

(d) The question of appropriate procedures often seems
difficult for peopte to understand, particularly
when issues relating to appeals and judicial

review are involved.

(e) There appears to be an ad hoc approach to
procedures used by some tribunals on making
decisions. Some agencies create their own, some

are governed by regulations, and others have none.

Some objectives which should be achieved by an
administrative justice system and also be reflected in
decision making procedures include: Representativeness,
Accessibility/Openness, Expertise, Accountability,

Efficiency.

The attainment of these objectives by an
administrative system will create an environment in which
the principles of natural justice can operate and, in
fact, many of these objectives are integral to natural

justice or fairness.


5>:11 :-८

CHAPTER - IT

2.1 The Purpose of Administrative Law Purpose of Administrative Law

The State regulates the lives of its citizens in
manifold ways. The ordinary citizen has to encounter the
government at every turn, particularly so if he is
engaged in business or is the owner of the property or
employed in the Government or its agencies. It is,
therefore, a requisite of efficient public administration
that a fair balance must be struck between the interest
of the State on the one hand and those of the citizen on
the other hand because of the paramount concern of
administrative law which is to Protect the public and the
citizen from abuse of official power. This notion of
fair balance is a justification for the existence of
administrative law or its French equivalent, droit
administratif, as part of public law. The courts
interfere to protect the interest of the citizen only to
the extent necessary and within the framework of
principles and concepts Known to the science of
administrative law. “it is not for the courts, in the
exercise of revisional jurisdiction to determine in the
first instance, matters of administration, before the

Government has itself dealt with such matters on merit.

(Z.M.Nedjati and J.€.Trice, English and Continental

Systems of Administrative Law, Chapter I)


2.2 Advantages of Administrative Tribunals:-

Among the other advantages noted for such

tribunals, some important ones, need highlighting as

fotlows:-
(i) cheapness, where cheapness is an essential
ingredient of justice (e.g. in the Central

Administrative Tribunal (CAT) the application can
even be sent by post).

(ii) speed

(111) expert knowledge of the technical matters
involved.

Civ) capacity to give effect to the policies of social
improvement without undue restriction arising from

common Taw policies and the doctrine of precedent.

It is generally understood that for the creation
of new standards in such diverse matters such as housing,
social services, townplanning, capacity for work, control
of transport, professional and trade discipline, and the
like, greater technical experience, greater flexibility
and a greater emphasis on social welfare are required
than the ordinary judicial process and tradition allow.
(Principles of Australian Administrative Law by
Benjafield, D.G. and Whitmore, H., page 332, (fourth

edition).


CHAPTER - IIT

PART-1

Administrative remedies in other countries and in India remedies in other countries and in India

3.4 A study on the tribunals will be incomplete unless
the position of administrative remedies in other
countries is adverted to. At the same time, the attempts
to reform made in the past in India need to be referred
to for taking into consideration the broader perspective

of the situation.

3.2 Franks Committee Report and Committee on

Minister's power (U.K.):-
The Franks Committee -

In 1955, the United Kingdom Parliament,
established the Committee on Administrative Tribunals and
Enquiries, usually - known as the Franks Committee, to
examine the process of administrative adjudication. The
basis for the setting up of this Committee was the
anxiety of all political Parties, prompted largely by the
Crichel Down affair (Crichel Down Enquiry (Cmnd. 9176
(1954), as to the need to Protect the citizens in

relation to administrative action.


-:14 :-

The Committee’s general recommendations include an
appeal on fact, law and merits from an administrative
tribunal of first instance to an appellate tribunal
(other than a minister himself), except where the
tribunal of first instance is exceptionally strong and
well qualified. Further, an appeal on a point of law
should lie, with certain exceptions, to the ordinary
court’s machinery, for such appeals should be simple,
cheap and expeditious. The Committee also recommended
that no statute should contain words purporting to oust
the remedies by way of certiorari, prohibition and
mandamus. The most important recommendation was the
Proposal that there should be set up a Council on
Tribunals for England, (and a separate Council for
Scotland), the members of which should be appointed by
and responsible to the Lord Chancellor. The Council
would suggest how the Committee’s more detailed
recommendations as to the constitution, organisation and
Procedure of tribunals should be applied to existing
tribunals, and keep tribunals under continuous review and
advise on the constitution and procedure of any proposed
new type of Tribunal ( Principles of Australian
Administrative Law by 0.6. Banjafield and H.Whitmore,

fourth edn, pp.333;336).


It would be beneficial to extract the relevant
passage from 0.C.M.Yardley in his book on Principles of
Administrative Law, (1981) pp.198-201 regarding the

extent of implementation of these two reports:-

The two major legislative achievements of the
Franks Report were the creation of the Council on
Tribunals and the institution of appeals on law
from many tribunals direct to the Divisional
Court, But there were many other marked effects
upon the whole flavour of the system of
administrative tribunals and inquiries. The great
majority of the ninety-five detailed
recommendations of the Committee were promptly
accepted by the Government of the day, and a
number of others wera later accepted either in
whole or in part. Only a mere handful were in the
end rejected or simply not carried into effect.
But as many of the recommendations which were
accepted were on matters of detail, rather than
Principle, it was Possible to implement them
without resorting to tegistation. For example,
the recommendation that all chairmen of rent
tribunals should have legal qualifications has
been effected as a matter of Practice without
altering either the Primary or the secondary
legislation concerning the tribunals. Again, the

emphasis placed __.by the Committee upon the


~:16 :«>

requirements of openness, fairness and
impartiality has been reflected usually not in
subsequent tegislation, but by a change in general
attitude by those tribunals which had not
previously appreciated the full import of these
characteristics.... the statutory instrument
which governs the procedure of rent tribunals
dates from 1946, though it has since been amended
in some respects, and that instrument permits
tribunals to sit either in private or in public at
their own discretion. Before the Franks Committee
Report it was quite common for rent tribunals to
sit in private, and to exclude the press, but
since the Franks Report chairmen of rent tribunals
have realised the importance of sitting in public
unless there is some really compelling reason to
sit in camera. Accordingly,...it is now camnion
practice to sit in public unless persuaded ta do

otherwise by the principles already stated.

A host of other reforms have been achieved by
changes of administrative Practice. Many of these
are concerned with the detailed procedure of
individual tribunals or types of inquiry, and need
not be considered here, But amona the most

prominent we may perhaps list three:


(8) Appellate tribunals now customarily publish
selected decisions as guidance both for themselves
in later cases and for first instance tribunals.
Thus decisions of rent assessment committees are
circulated to all members of the relevant panel,
and to all rent officers within the panel area,
Also, and perhaps of greatest importance in this
context, the decisions of the Social Security
Commissioners aré published by Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office and circulated to all tocal
insurance officers, all chairmen of local
tribunals, and to selected libraries. These
decisions, though not of quite the same binding
precedent value upon other tribunals in the social
security field which would attach to a decision of
the High Court, are nevertheless considered by
jacal insurance officers and local tribunals as
generally binding upon them, so that a sonsistent
body of sacial security tribunal case law is built
up. Furthermore, a highly authoritative Digest of
Conmissioners' ‘Decisions? compited by a retired
National Insurance Commissioner, Me .Desmand
Neligan OBE, and also published by the Stationery
Office, is of the greatest assistance in helping
to establish this consistent body of precedent.
The Digest is kept up to date by ai regutar

laose-leaf service.


—:18 *-

(b) Legal representation is allowed before almost
all tribunals, but it is a matter for each party
whether he avails himself of such representation.
The Franks Committea had recommended that the
Jegal aid scheme should be extended to the more
formal or expensive tribunals, and to final
appellate tribunals. The right to legal
representation is generally re-cognised, and is
sometimes specifically stated in rules of
procedure. Also the lagal advice scheme has been
progressively extended in the years since the
Franks Report so that it is now available to cover

advice before hearings in any tribunals. But the

w

cheme has not yet been generally extended to
cover the cost of legal representation. This may
well be largely because of the cost to the public
purse which it would entail. But other reasons
probably include doubts about whether solicitors,
who would be the more likely practising lawyers to
appear at most inferior tribunal hearings, are
adequately equipped to cope with the specialist
law which is dealt with. Certainly in proceedings
before tribunals in the social security field the
experience of the present writer as chairman of 4
Joral tribunal suggests that trade union officers
usually make more effective advocates far

appellants than do lawyers. So parties are


M9
welcome to retain lawyers to represent them in

almost all tribunal proceedings, but normally only

at their own expense.

{c) Chairmen of tribunals must usually now have
1९59] training, and must hormally be selected by
the appropriate Minister froma panel of persons
appointed by the Lord Chancellor, or in Scotland
by the Lord Advocate. This helps to ensure that
the person who chairs any tribunal proceedings is
qualified to appreciate the importance of a full
disclosure of all material facts to all parties
before the hearing takes place and that an
adequate opportunity is given to all parties to
attend the hearing (and any inspection which may
be involved). Furthermore, the 18991
qualifications of the chairman should help to
ensure that a proper watch is kept from the chair
to see that the rules of natural justice are
Followed in the course of the hearing, and = that
any questions are put from the chair to parties to
elicit facts or argumentswhich are relevant, but
which may not have been sufficiently presented
without such Prompting. This latter function of a
chairman probably more than makes up for any

absence of actual legal representation of a ०

at the hearing.


~:20 :-

+++.the overall effect. of the publication of the
Report of the Donoughmore-Scott Committee on
Ministers’ Powers was to remove the great majority
of the previous fears and apprehensions about
delegated legislation: but it took many years for
this effect to be appreciated, and decades before
Parliament acted upon any of the Committee's
detailed recommendations. The effect of the
Franks Report was far more immediate. The first
Tribunals and Inquiries Act received the Royal
Assent only a year after the Report was published,
and indeed a number of the administrative changes
recommended by the Committee were already in train
by that time. The overall effect upon the climate
of opinion was also much quicker, and by the time
the Council on Tribunals embarked upon its work in
1959 there was already a general belief that any

defects were being ironed out.”

It is pertinent to quote from the relevant passage
of H.W.R.Wade in his book, The Administrative Law, 7th
Edition, pages 9315-920 regarding radical recommendations
made by the committee and the extent of reforms carried

out legislatively:-

THE REFORMS OF 1958


120 :-

The Tribunals and Inquiries Act, 1958 (U.K.) gave
effect to the policy of the Franks Committee’s
report, though with some variations in detail.
The Act was short and did not present the whole
picture, since important reforms were also made by
changes of administrative regulations and
Practice. It has now been replaced, first, by the
Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971, and now, by the
Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1992 both of which are

consolidating Acts which make no change of

substance.

The Act of 1958 provided first for the Council on
Tribunals. It has a maximum membership of
sixteen; but there is special provision for a
Scottish Committee of the Council, consisting
Partly of persons not members of the Council
itself. The Councit emerged as a purely advisory
body, without the function of appointing tribunal
members, but with general oversight over tribunals
and inquiries. The tribunals under its
superintendence were listed ina schedule, which
included the great majority of those considered by
the Committee. It was probably right that such a
body, which is intended to bea watch-dog and
independent of ministerial control, should not be
given executive functions; it was designed to bark

but not to bite. It is not, therefore, a court of


appeal, or a council of state on the French or
Italian Model. But it has to keep under review
the ‘constitution and working’ of the listed
tribunals, and report on any other tribunal
questions which the government may refer to it.
In Practice, it receives complaints from
individuals and invites testimony from witnesses.
It is also frequently consulted by government
departments in the ordinary course of their work,
Its annual report must be laid before Parliament.
It is specifically empowered to make general
recommendations as to the membership of the listed
tribunals, and it must be consulted before any new
Procedural rules for them are made. Some
Particulars of the Council's work will be found

below.

As the Franks Committee had recommended, the
Council on Tribunals consists partly of lawyers
and partly of lay members, the lay members being
in the majority. The purpose of the lay majority
is to make sure that the Council’s guiding
principle shall be the ordinary man’s sense of
justice and fair Play, freed so far as possible
from legal technicality. The membership comprises
wide experience in industrial, commercial and
trade union affairs, as well as administrative

experience “contributed by eminent retired civil


7:23 :-

servants. This structure has both advantages and
disadvantages. Although much of the Council’s
work, such as the vetting of Bilis in Parliament
and procedural regulations, requires the aid of
lawyers, its policy is to evolve and maintain the
standards which the public demands of tribunals,
rather than to copy the practices of the
established courts of law. But naturally the
elements of substantial justice are to a large

extent the same in both systems.

OTHER REFORMS MADE BY THE ACT OF 1958 FORMS DE BY THE ACT OF 19

The Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1958 also made the

following provisions.

1. Chairmen of rent tribunals and of tribunals
dealing with national insurance, industrial
injuries, national assistance, and national
service were to be selected by their ministries

from panels nominated by the Lord Chanceltor.

2. Membership of any of the listed tribunals, or of a
panel connected with it could be terminated only

with the Lord Chancetlor’s consent.


“2:24 :-

No procedural rules or regulations for the listed
tribunals might be made without consultation with

the Council on Tribunals.

' A right of appeal to the High Court on a point of

Taw was given in the case of a number of specified
tribunals, including rent tribunals, and tribunals
dealing with the children, employment, schools,
nurses and mines. In various other cases this

right already existed...

Other tribunals could be brought within the Act by
ministerial order. Since Parliament has continued
to create new tribunals as fast as ever, many
additions have been made to the schedule,
including mental health review tribunals, betting
levy appeal tribunals, industrial tribunals, rent
assessment committees, immigration tribunals, VAT
tribunals, school allocation appeal committees,
the data protection tribunal and the financial

services tribunal.

Judicial control by means of certain remedies
(certiorari and mandamus) was safeguarded. This

is discussed elsewhere.


7128 :-

The Act gave a Tegal right to a reasoned decision
from any of the listed tribunals, provided this
was requested on or before giving or notification

of the decision. This is discussed betow.

The ministers responsible under the Act, and to
whom the Counci? on Tribunals was to report, were
the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary of State for
Scotland (replaced for this purpose in 1973 by the

Lord Advocate).

The Act fell short of the Committee’s
recommendations in certain respects, for instance
in its arrangements as to the appointment of
Chairman and Members of tribunals. Perhaps the
most notable divergence was in the failure to
Provide for appeals on questions of fact and
merits. The Committee recommended ai right of
appeal on 'fact, law and merits’, but the Act
Provided only a right of appeal on 8 question of
Taw. Thus the Committee’s Proposal that there
should be a right of appeat from rent tribunals to
county courts remained unfulfilled, and no right
of appeal was given, except on a point of law,
from the rent assessment committees set up by the
Rent Act 1965. Jurisdictional facts are of-course

reviewable independently.


-126 :-

WORK OF THE COUNCIL ON TRIBUNALS OF THE COUNCIL ON TRIBUNALS

Although the Counci? has no legal right to be
consulted about Bills in Parliament constituting
or affecting tribunals, it is in practice
consulted as the Franks Committee intended. The
Council comments on 81115 in much the same way as
it does on procedurat rules, and in particular it
attempts to help departments drafting provisions
for new tribunals. In this way it has been able,
for example, to secure a statutory right to be
heard for a licence-holder threatened with

cancellation of his licence.

It has investigated various complaints made to it
by dissatisfied parties, and in some cases has
been able to obtain reform of tribunals’
Practices, It has secured improvements in
tribunals’ accommodation by following up
complaints, and also as a result of its members’
visits to tribunal hearings. It has, thus, acted
as a kind of ombudsman in the sphere of tribunals,
as also in that of inquires, though with a view to
the improvement of the system rather than the
remedying of individual cases. For some years now

the flow of complaints about tribunals has been


—:27 :-

much reduced. This may be in some degree a
measure of the success of the reforms of 1958 and
the improvements effected subsequently by
government departments, stimulated in some cases

by the Council.”

3.3 The Act of 1958 has been replaced by the Tribunals
and Inquiries Act, 1992 (U.K). Sections 1-4 thereof
concern the provisions of the Council on Tribunals and
their functions. Section 1 envisages the functions of
the Council and includes inter alia, to keep under review
the constitution and working of the tribunals specified
in Schedule I of the Act and, from time to time, to
report on their Constitution and working: to consider and
report on such particular matters as may be referred to
the Council with respect to Tribunals other than the
ordinary courts of law, whether specified or not in

Schedule I of the Act.

Section 2 provides for the composition of the
Council and section 4 prescribes the procedure of making

reports by the Council,

Section 5 envisages that the Council may make to
the appropriate Minister general recommendations as to
the making of appointments to membership of any tribunals

mentioned in Schedule I or of Panels consituted for the


5०:28 :-

Purpose of any such tribunals. However, section 6
envisages the procedure of the method of appointment of

the Chairman of certain tribunals.

The Council has to be consulted under section 8 of
the Act in order to make the Procedural rules for any

Tribunal specified in Schedule I of the Act.

Section 11 governs the appeals from certain
Tribunals. Under sub-section (1) if any party to
proceedings before any specified Tribunat is dissatisfied
in point of law with a decision of the Tribunal he may,
according as rules of court may Provide, either appeal
from the Tribunal to the High Court or require the
Tribunal to state and submit a case for the opinion of
the High Court. Under sub-section 3 thereof, rules of
court made with respect to all or any of the Tribunals
May also provide for authorising or requiring a Tribunal
in the course of Proceedings before it, to state in the
form of a special case for the dacision of the High
Court, any question of law arising in the proceedings and
the decision of the High Court shall be deemed to be the
judgment of the court. Under sub section (5) it is
specified that appeal to the court of appeal shall not be
brought by virtue of this section except with the leave

of the High Court or the court of appea?.


“ :29 :-

3.4 Report of the Committee of JUSTICE - &11 Souls
Review of Administrative Law in the United Kingdom has
adopted the six themes as under mentioned while preparing

its report. (paras 1.11 to 1.17 thereof). These are:

a. The need to prevent grievance;
b. The need to openness in decision making;
०. The ease of access to remedies;
9. The adequacy of remedies;
e. The need to keep the law upto-date: and
f. The need for public information.

a. The need to prevent grievance:

The Report emphasis that it is of paramount
importance to minimise the number of occasions when there
is any grievance to redress. In the planning field it
recommended that effective appeal procedures are
essential as the appellants and objectors must feel that

their case has been fairly considered,

0. The need for openness in decision making:
Decisions should be clear and intelligible.
Administrators should be required on demand to give
reasons for their decisions and to state the facts on
which such decisions are based. The Report points out
that a rule to this effect will serve the purpose under

(8) above, i.e. the prevention of grievance. This is


7:30 1-

because the discipline of having to give a properly
articulated decision curbs the chance of an arbitrary or

irrational or prejudiced decision.

o

Remedies should be freely available:

The Raport emphasises the need to do away with the
artificial powers which make it difficult for a person to
avail himself of a needed remedy. Based on this
underlying Pprincipte the Report was against the
Principles of order 53, i.e. leave of the court must be
obtained by the applicant for judicial review. Similarly
jt was against the rule which requires that the fiat of
the Attorney General must be obtained before an action to

declare or enforce a public right can be brought.

9. Adequacy of remedy:

The Report observes that it is not much to the
point to have a streamlined procedure for getting to
court if the remedies which thea Judge can award are
inadequate. In this regard the Report points out that in
the Ombudsman field, it is essential that the remedies

recommended by the local Ombudsman should be complied

with.

se. The need to keep the law upto-date:
It is pointed out in the Report that there is a
danger that rigidity and ossification will take over. It

recommends that a careful watch need te be kept over alt


the institutions to ensure that they fulfil their task
promptly and efficiently. It advocates that there is
need of a standing body, independent of Government, which
can comment on pending legislation, itself propose
reforms and draws attention to deficiency in judicial
review, in the substantive law and in the Ombudsman’s
jurisdication, It Proposed that such a body could be
Sreated by statute or be set up as a standing Royal
Commission and the Council on Tribunals would remain in
being and work alongside the new Commission. The
proposed body suggested in the Report is “Administrative

Review Commission”. (Page 75 of the said report).

f. The need for public information and access:

The Report advocates that public should be
informed adequately of the avenues of redress. The
grounds on which judicial review can be sought should be
codified in statute (though in a form which leaves room

for the growth of the Taw to continue).

3.5 Judicial Review in Australia

Statutory statements of the grounds on which a
court will set aside an administrative decision in
Australia are as follows:-

The Report of the Committee of the JUSTICE (page
18 thereof) sets out the grounds of review contained in

section 5(1) of the Australian Administrative Decisions


(Judicial Review) Act, 1977, as amended in 1978 and 1980,

in the following abbreviated forms :-

a. Breach of the rules of natural justice;

0. Breach of mandatory procedural requirements:
0७. Lack of jurisdiction:

d. Absence of statutory authority;

8. Improper exercise of statutory power:

1. Error of law;

9. Decisions induced by fraud:

|. Absence of evidence;

i. Decisions otherwise contrary to law;

Section 5(2) of the Act expands on ground (e)
above by stating that improper exerecise of a power 18 to

be construed as including a reference to the following: -

a, Taking an irrelevant consideration into account;
b. Failing to take relevant consideration into
account;

0. Exercising a power for non-statutory purpose;

d. Excercising a power in bad faith;

8. Acting at the direction of another person;

1. Applying a rule or policy without regard to

the merits of a particular case

9. unreasonable exercise of power;
h. Producing an uncertain result; and
i. Any other exercise of a power in a way that

constitutes abuse of the power.


3.6 A glance at the systems of administrative Taw on
the continent of Europe is made by Z.M.Nedjati and
J.E.Trice in the book entitled "English and Continental
Systems of Adminsitrative Law", 1978 Edn., Chapter 3 as

follows:-~
French Administrative Law

In France there is a two-tier hierarchy of
administrative courts headed by the ‘Consei? d’Etat.
This specialised tribunal, which comprises about 150
carefully selected specialists had its origins in the
ancient regime and is a markedly French institution. Its
function is twofold : first, to advise the government
and the executive upon the implications and validity of
administrative regulations and ordinary Jaws which may be
submitted; second, to judge through its litigation
department (section du contentieux) any disputes which
may arise between the State or public bodies and the
individual citizen. In the lower tier are grouped the 24
Tribunaux Administratifs uhich act as the administrative

courts of first instance for their particular region.

Litigation before Administrative Courts


-:34 :-

In France, litigation between a citizen and some
organ of the State in an administrative context comes
within the jurisdiction of the Conseil d’Etat statuant au

contentieux.
3.7 Federal Republic of Germany

In the Federal Republic of Germany there are
separate administrative courts and tribunals in each Land
or State (Verwaltungsgericht) at local 1९४७1, and an
appellate Oberverwaltungsger icht or
Verwaltungsgerichtshof (High Administrative Court) in
each Land. The highest court of administrative matters
is the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Federal Administrative
Court). There is also. a separate hierarchy of courts
dealing with special administrative matters such as

social security courts and fiscal courts.

3.8 Betgium

In the course of the nineteenth century the
Belgian ordinary courts worked out 8 system of
substantive droit administratif not far removed from the
French system. The Belgian Consei} d’Etat was
established by the Law of December 23rd, 1946. It
sonsists of two sections, one of which deals with
legislative matters and the other with administrative

affairs. The legislative section is responsible for


-:35 :-

improving the drafting and editing of legal texts. The
administrative section . has the task of ensuring
Protection of the citizens’ rights and interests in
relation to exercise of public powers, It has
jurisdiction to quash a decision of the administration
(contentieux d’annulation) on grounds (cas 8! ouvertures)

corresponding to the grounds of French administrative

Taw.

3.9 Italy

The new Constitution which replaced the old
constitutional statute of 1848, was promulgated on

December 27th, 1947 and came into force on January 1st,
1948,

An Act of 1889 remoulded the organisation of the
Italian Council of State (Consiglio di Stato)
establishing a new division besides the three old ones.
The fourth division (or section) was vested with power to
determine all complaints (ricorsi) against acts of
administrative agencies whenever these applications were
not within the province of the ordinary courts. In the
exercise of this jurisdiction the Consiglio di Stato
could decide on the legality of administrative acts. The
grounds which make an administrative act unlawful were
described in the statute in the stilt living formula:

incompetenza, eccesso di potere and violazioni di legge


incompetence, excess of power and violation (or reach)
of law, respectively. This jurisdiction of the Consiglio
di Stato, being an equivalent of what French doctrine
describes as the recours pour exces de pouvoir affords

the remedy of annulment of unlawful administrative

action.

3.10 Greece

Section 47 of Law No.3713/1928 is the material
section regulating thea substantive competence of the
Greek Council of State which has jurisdiction to annul
administrative action on grounds not far removed from the

cas d’ouvertures of French adniinistrative law.

3.11 Turkey

The basis of all judicial jurisdictions in Turkey

is the Constitution of 1961.

The principle of a separate and independent
administrative court system was first established in
Turkey in 1868 under the Ottoman Empire and was continued

by the Turkish Repubtic.

Article 140 of the 1961 Constitution declares that
the Council of State (Danstay) is an administrative court

of first instance in matters not referred by law to other


-:37 :-

administrative courts and an administrative court of last
instance in general. The law retating to the Turkish
Council of State is Law No.521 of 1964 which has been
subsequently amended. The counct} of State has
jurisdiction to annul administrative action on grounds of
defects of jurisdiction, form, cause, subject-matter and

motive.....

3.12 Human Rights under the European Convention-

Relevance to Administrative law

The European Convention on Human Rights was drawn
up by the Council of Europe in 1950 and came into force
in 1953. The Member States of the Council of Europe who
ratified the Convention have thereby become Contracting
Parties to it. Tha Convention sets out certain
fundamenta} rights and freedoms that are to be protected
in binding provisions which are interpreted and applied
by the European Commission and Court of Human Rights or,
in certain circumstances, by the Committee of Ministers

of the Council of Europe.
3.13 Position in United States of America

In USA, the importance in the exercise of power by
the administration and judicial control of administrative
action was realised. Consequently, the emphasis was laid

upon procedural safeguards to ensure the proper exercise


—:38 :-

of administrative authority, which fact was articulated
in the form of tJegislative enactment in the Federal
Administrative Procedure Act, 1946, a Taw which lays down
the basic procedures which must be followed by American

Administrative Agencies.

Every administrative Yaw case arises out of a
controversy between a private citizen and some ergan of
the administration of, as it is usually termed in the
United States, some administrative agency. According to
the definition in the Federal Administrative Procedure
Act of 1946 “agency” means each authority ...... of the
Government of the United States other than Congress, the
Courts, or the Governments of the possessions,

Territories,or the Districts of Colombia....”

Essentially, this definition equates the agency
with the executive branch of Government and under it

every governmental organ outside of the legislature and

the courts is an administrative agency.

The Administrative Procedure Act contains a number
of provisions regulating the conduct of the agency
hearings. A hearing examiner may not be assigned
inconsistent duties nor may he consult “any person or
Party on a fact in issue (Sec.5 of the Act). Examiners
are empowered to-administer oaths, to issue subpoenas, to

rule upon matters of proof and relevant evidence and


“>:39 :-

generally to regulate proceedings (Sec.7 of the Act). In
practice the procedure may range from an informal
conference type hearing to a hearing which resembles a
trial and extend over many days or weeks. Representation
before the examinee is of right (Section 6). The
examiners must keep 8 record and give a very detailed
discussion which becomes part of the record; the reasoned
discussion must contain findings and reasons upon all
issues of fact, Jaw or discretion presented on record
(Sec.8(b). The initial decision by the examiner is
deemed to be the final decision in the absence of an
appeal to the agency or a motion to review by the agency
(Sec.8(a)). «2... Judicial review of administrative
action is readily available. The Administrative
Procedure Act allows for review where there is error of
Taw or where the agency fails to base its decision on
substantial evidence on record (Sec.10) (Principles of
Australian Administrative Law by 0.G.Benjafied and

H.Whitmore. pp.344-45).

3.14 Attempts of reforms relevant to our study made in

the past in India:

On parity with the theme of the Report of JUSTICE
on the need to prevent grievance (quoted under para 3.4,
supra), the Law Commisston has also recommended for

framing litigation policy in this regard.


-:40 :-

126th report on Government and Public Sector

Undertaking Litigation Policies and strategies of

Law Commission recommends, inter-alia, as follows:

“4.13 Assuming that litigation as a whole is
unavoidable, an alternative method for resolution
of dispute has to be found. An alternative method
could be of a standing committee representing the
employers, employees and the organisation to which
every case can be taken wherever the dispute
arises and the result of it must be binding.
Today most of the countries are in search of
non-court forums for resolution of disputes. It
is therefore necessary for such an organisation,
which is devoting itself to expanding social
justice benefits to the employees working in
industries, to organise such a forum for
resolution of disputes and which must as well as
satisfy the amployers. The organisation is
triangular in character and all the affected
interests must have confidence in a forum for
resolution of disputes arising amongst them. The
Law Cammission would certainly devise such a forum

for their consideration,

“5.19 It would, therefore, be idle parade of
familiar knowledge to advance all those supporting

reasons for satting up various Tribunals.


However, Tet it not be forgotten that the approach
paper relevant to the present report invited
suggestions not for setting up different forum to
the exclusion of courts for resolution of disputes
invelving public sector undertakings/Government.
In fact, the search is for litigation policy and
strategy to be followed by public sector
undertakings and Government, with a view to, as
far as possible, avoiding litigation or resort to
courts and to devise a machinery to settle the
disputes amongst contending parties. That cannot
be ascertainad with certainty by recommending
tribunats involving litigation by or against

public sector undertakings as well as Government.”

"7.5 The Law Commission has come to note that
the Government has resolved to set up a
Directorate in the Cabinet Secretariat itself to
strengthen the machinery for redressal of public
grievances. Presumably, an official in the rank
of a Secretary to the Government of India would
head the Directorate. In the first instance, the
new Directorate would deal with grievances
relating to railways, posts and
tete-communications and banking if the concerned
Department has turned deaf ear to the complainant.
The details are yet to be worked out but the

format appears to be of a three-tier set up : one


-:42 :-

in the Department itself, a monitoring cell anda
Directorate at the 18५61 of Cabinet Secretary.
The experiment may be evaluated when it is made
fully operational. For the present, the Law
Commission can only take note of the wholesome
attempt in this behalf. What would be required
would be a total and radical change in the
attitude towards those coming forward with
grievances. Experience shows that generally one
who can set right the grievance turns deaf ear to
the complainant and he is not subject to any
social audit. In the absence of social audit, the
doctrine of accountability suffers and wide
yawning chasm develops between the maker of the
grievance and the one who has power to redress the
same. While suggesting effective measures, this

aspect will have to be kept in central focus.”

"8.6 Therefore, the first thing that is
required to be done is that the Government of
India must issue a compulsory directive binding on
public sector undertakings that in the event of a
dispute between any one or more public sector
undertakings or between two or more public sector
undertakings on one hand and Government on the
other, the parties shall refer the dispute to
arbitration. It shall be presumed by a _ legal

device, if the parties to a dispute are two or


more public sector undertakings or public sector
undertakings on one hand and Government on the
other, excluding the tax authorities, that a valid

arbitration agreament subsists,

"B.7 In order to provide teeth and
effectiveness to this suggestion, the Government
of India should set up an arbitration panel
composed of retired Supreme Court Judges and High
Court Judges from which the parties can agree to
the selection of one or more arbitrators and
failing agreement, the appointment will be made by
the Minister of Law from the panel. There must be
a fairly good number of panelists so that the work
can be distributed amongst them. The fees to be
paid to the panelists shall be fixed by executive
order in advance and those who agree to accept the
fees so prescribed may be ampanelled. There is no
dearth of retired Supreme Court and High Court
Judges willing to put to constructive use their

experience and expertise for the national good."

“BB If necessary, an amendmant to the
Arbitration Act, 1940 should be made which would
ampower the court before which any public sector

undertaking has initiated litigation without


->:44 :-

resorting to arbitration to compe? the undertaking
to go to arbitration and not merely stay the suit

but dismiss the same,

"8.9 The award of the arbitrator shall be final
and unless the Minsiter of Law permits the
challenge of the award on a valid and rational
ground, the same shal? not be challtengable before

any court.

"B.10 In the matter of tax disputes between
public sector undertaking on one hand and taxing
authorities on the other, ordinarily the dispute
would arise before an Income Tax Officer or
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner or a
Commissioner of Income Tax or the lowest grade tax
officer functioning under statutes levying
indirect taxes. So far, the Taw should be allowed
to take its own course. Once the Commissioner
decides the dispute, the aggrieved undertaking may
approach the nodal Ministry under which it is
functioning seeking permission whether the matter
should be litigated further at all. If need be,
an opinion from one of the panelists in the
arbitration panel may be obtained and that should
become binding. If, however, the recommendation

of the Law Commission for setting up Tax Courts is

a


7:48 te

accepted and implemented, the matter. may be
litigated up to the Central Tax Court and must end

there.

“8.41 Dealing with the disputes between the
public sector undertaking and its employees, avery
public sector undertaking must set up a Grievance
Cell composed of management and workmen’s
representatives not exceeding three on either side
and presided over by a retired Judge who has
functioned as a Judge of the Supreme Court or High
Court or Chairman of the Industrial
Court/Tribunal. Every dispute involving
individual employee must be brought, if need be by
amending the standing orders or service rules,
before the Grievance Cell, The decision of the
Grievance Celt shall be binding. If the dispute
involves more than one employee but not all the
employees of the undertaking, same procedure has
to be followed. Even the disputes as to
seniority, promotion and allied issues must be
brought before this Cell. Promotion has long
since ceased to -be a management function.
Therefore, the Grievance Cell would be competent
to deal with the same. In the first instance, the
promotion may be decided by the management but the
dispute arising out of promotions granted or

refused may be brought before the Grievance Call.
a


148 :-

The decisions of the Grievance Cell will be
binding and if any one, despite this arrangement
and effective implementaton, takes the matter to
the court, the court must decline to entertain the

dispute,”

"8.20 Turning to the complaints by the employees
of the Government of India vis-a-vis the
departmental bosses, the procedure indicated in
para 8.11 must be effectively followed. Effective
Grievance Cell should be set up which must remain
active and must be in a position to dispose of the
problems ratsed by the staff. Where a point of
Tegal formation without a precedent is involved
and if the Grievance Call is unable to deal with
that point effectively, the concerned Department
and the employees involved in the dispute must
agree to abide by the opinion of a member of the
panel of arbitrators to whom ai reference on a
point of Taw be made and his opinion invited. The
disputes must he disposed of in consonance with

his opinion.

"B.21 It is equally necessary in the arger
national interest of reducing litigation and
curbing litigative culture that a central body
should be devised for having a continuous overview

of the different bodies recommended herein. The


w1a7 :-८

role of this central body would be of a
co-ordinating nature, of devising ways and means
of reducing inter se litigations between Union and
States, between States and States, between public
sector undertakings inter se, between public
sactor undertakings and taxing authorities, and
lastly between Government and public sector
undertakings on one hand and citizens on the
other. This needs Planning, strategy and
effective implementation of policy decisions. It
must be a body which can effectively curb the
tendency to rush to the court or to rush to higher
courts by preferring appeals. In fact, this body
can effectively Tay down ground rules which, when
effectively fotlowed, would make a direct dent on
litigious tendencies, Such a body can be
appropriately described a Federal Legal Cell
composed of retired yudges, retired law officers,
both Central and State, and senior executives who
have worked in public sector undertakings. The
function and duties of the Federal Legal Cel? can
be extensively drawn up centering round policy and
Strategy planning with a view to reducing frequent
resort to litigation, It can also work asa
courjer between the Executive and the Judiciary.

The Vink till today is missing and is responsible


“8.22

148 :5

for many 1138 which are otherwise curable. The
Government of India should set up such Federal

Legal Cells with apnropriate terme of reference.

»....Therefore, tike the Public Accounts Commitee,
there should be a Parliamentary Committees on
Litigation with power to inquire into every
Yitigation taken by or on behalf of the Government
to question tne correctness of the decision with a
view to pointing out that care should be taken in
future not to resort to such litigation.
Parliamentary Committee can every year seek
detailed information on expenses incurred on
litigation by Government, public sector
undertakings, and Departments and
instrumentatities of the Government, and take upon
itself the inquisition of any particular
litigation which was avoidable and yet resorted
to. It can inquire whether appeals are merely
being pereferred for extraneous and irrelevant
considerations. This will introduce sufficient
accountability of the officers in whom the
decision-making power for initiating and
continuing litigation vests. The composition of
the Committee must be a matter of concern of the

Parliament ftself.”


+15

7149 :-

inthe _131st Report on the Role of Leaal i3ist Report on the Role of al

Profession in Adminsitration of Justice, the Law in Adminsitration of Justic the Law

Commission recommended inter-alia as follows:- recommended inter-alia as follows:-

"3.15 Another tendency which has become very
recently visible, especially where pleadings are
drawn up for Mofussil Courts, is to raise all and

sundry, frivolous and untenable points of facts

and Taw...."

"3.16 For a positive check, while deciding the
cost quantum to be awarded ona way or the other,
the presiding judge must also certify whether
untenable and frivolous defences were raised,
necessitating framing of the issues on which
Parties were at variance and the time spent in
recording decisions on them. If the presiding
Judge is satisfied that such frivolous and totally
untenable defences with regard to facts and law
were raised, the same must enter the verdict and

quantify the costs to be awarded.”

The Law Commission in its 79th report on Delay and Law Commission in its 79th report on Delay and

Arrears in High Courts and other Appellate Courts in High Courts and other Appellate ourts

recommended, inter-alia as follows:- as _ follows:-



5:80 i-

“16.17 Grouping of writ petitions:- While deating
with civil appeals we have pointed out the
hecessity of grouping of appeals involving the
same question of Taw. This is alt the more
important and necessary in the case of writ
petitions. Very often, a number of writ petitions
are filed Ww respect of the orders of
administrative tribunals, involving not only the
same point of law, but also the same or similar
facts. The grouping of all such petitions by the
Registry wil? very much help in the quick and

satisfactory disposal of these cases,”

"17.12. Conflicting views unavoidable:- It is, no
doubt, true that the disposal of references by the
various High Courts sometimes results in different
and conflicting views. This is in the very nature
of things and cannot be helped. It, however,
needs to be mentioned that as stated elsewhere,
the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to make a
reference direct to the Supreme court of a
question of Jaw, if the Tribunal is of the opinion
that, on account of a conflict in the decisions of
High Courts in respect of any particular question
of law, it is expedient that a reference should be

made direct to the Supreme Court,”


“47099 Substitution of Appeal for Reference of Appeal for Reference:- A

view has also been expressed that the present
Procedure of the Appellate Tribunal making a
reference to the High Court should be done away
with, and, instead of that, an appeal should Tie
to the High Court against the order of the
Tribunal on a question of law or a substantial
question of law. The position, as already noted
is that an appeal lies from the Income Tax
Authority concerned to the Appellate Tribunal on a
question of fact as well as well as law. The
finding of the Appellate Tribunal on a question of
fact is final. In case, however, the assessee or
the department feels aggrieved with regard to the
finding of the Appellate Tribunal on a question of
law, it can file an application to the Appellate
Tribunal under section 256(1) of the Income Tax
Act, 1961, within the prescribed time, for a
reference to the High Court on the question of Jaw
arising out of the order of the Tribunal. If the
Appellate Tribunal finds, after issuing notice to
the opposite party, that a question of law arises
out of its order, it draws up a statement of case
and refers to the High Court the formulated

question of law.


~:82 :-

If the Appellate Tribunal declines to make a
reference to the High Court, it is open to the
aggrieved person to apply to the High Court under
sub-section (2) of section 256 of the Income Tax
Act for an order directing the Appellate Tribunal
to make a reference to the High Court regarding
the question of law about which the Tribunal had
declined to accede to the Prayer of the applicant.
The High Court in such application can, after
hearing both the Parties, make an order if the
circumstances of the case so warrant, directing
the Appellate Tribunal to refer the question of
Taw to the High Court. In pursuance of the order
of the High Court the Appellate Tribunal draws up
a statement of case and refers the formulated

question to the High Court.”

"4744 Advantage of appeal:- The advantage of
doing away with the reference, and substituting in
its place a right of appeal, is that the time
spent before the Appellate Tribunal in proceedings
for referring the question of law to the High
Court would be saved. It would also obviate the
hecessity of filing applications under sub-section
(2) of section 256 of the Income Tax Act in those
cases in which the Appellate Tribunal has declined
to make a reference about a question of law to the

High Court."


>:53 :-

"17.18 Direct Direct reference to Supreme Court by the to Supreme Court by the
Appellate Tribunal:- 1६ may also be mentioned that

if on an application made under section 256, the

Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion that on
account of a conflict in the decisons of the High
Courts in respect of any particular question of
law, it is expedient that a reference should be
made direct to the Supreme Court, the Appellate
Tribunal may draw Up a statement of the case and

refer it through its President direct to the

Supreme Court.

“47.49 No further comments :- Since the matter

about the substitution of appeal in place of
reference against the order of the Tribunal has
already been dealt with by the High Courts Arrears
Committee and the Law Commission in its 58th

Report, sent in 1974, We do not propose to say do _not ropose to sa

anything further _in the matter, further in the matter,”

The Fifteenth Law Commission doas not wish to
Pursue the idea of providing for appeal in the place of

reference, at this juncture.


17

154 :-

in order to attain uniformity in decisions of

higher courts, the Law Commission in its 136

report on Conflicts in High Court Decisions on

Central Laws - How to foreclose and how to

Resolye, recommended, inter-alia, as follows:-

“Second Recommendation

The need for evolving a mechanism for nipping in
the bud the conflicting interpretation at the High

Court level and the suggested sotution.

"8.3.1 The question that raquires to be addressed
to is as regards the need for evotving suitable
machinery $0 88 to maintain, strengthen and
restore uniformity on questions of Jaw. For, the
present constitutional and statutory provisions
that are designed to maintain such uniformity
operate only when the matter reaches the highest
judiciary by way of appeal by the aggrieved party
er the Legistature finds time to attend to the
conflict of decisions. If one keeps aside certain
special provisions, such aS the advisory
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, one finds that
a point on which there is want of uniformity can
come up for decision only when a litigant invokes
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. In other
words, if a litigant who has failed in the High

Court on a question of law cannot afford to go to


the Supreme court, or does not, for any reason,
propose to approach the Supreme Court, then the
ruling of the High court stands. The conflict of
decisions on a particular point of law will then

remain as it is. This is nota satisfactory

position,

"5.3.2 To allow a conflict of views between High
Courts to arise and languish in comfort for many
years, even decades, before resolving it ‘if’ the
conflict is carried to the Supreme Court and
ironed out in due course ‘when’ the matter happens
to came up for hearing there, is less than an
exemplary solution, A much better, much speedier,
and much more satisfactory solution which will
systematically address this problem deserves to be
evolved. And such is the present endeavour of the

Commission,

"6,3,3 The contours of the suggested selution contours of the suggested solution

When High Court “A” is faced with a problem
pertaining to an all-India law {excluding the
Constitution of India) on which High Court “B” has
already made a pronouncement, if High Court "A"
holds a view different or inconsistent fram the
view already pronounced by High Court "8", High

court JAN, instead of making its own


(2)

(3)

pronouncement, shall make a reference to the
Supreme Court, The order of reference shall be
accompanied by a reasoned apinion propounding its
own view with particular specification of reasons
for differing from the view pronounced by High

Court "8".

(a} The party supporting the reference may arrange
for appearance in the Supreme Court but ४111 not
be obliged to do so,

(b) The said party will have the option of
submitting written submissions supplementing the
reasoning embodied in the order of reference.

(c) The party opposing the reference shall also
have a similar option for engaging an advocate in
the Supreme = Court and submitting written
submissions, inter alia to counter the written

submissions, if any, submitted by the other side.

The Supreme Court may require the Government of
the State in which the High Courts "A" and "8" are
situated to appoint at the State's cost any
advocate from the State panel of lawyers of the
concerned States to support by oral arguments the

view points of the respective High Courts.


(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

ATl such references may be assigned to a Special
Bench which may endeavour to dispose of all such
references within six months of the receipt of the
references in the Supreme Court in view of the

inherent urgency to ensure uniformity.

If any SLP or appeal is already pending on the
same point from judgment of High Court "8" or any
other High Court, the said matter may be clubbed
alongwith the reference. Any interested party may

be permitted to appear as interveners,.

The Supreme Court may return the reference if it

appears that the parties are acting in collusion.

The Attorney General may be served with a copy of
the reference and he shall be entitled to urge the
point of view of the Central Government in regard
to the relevant provision of the concerned Cantral

Statute, if so desired,

The referring High Court shall finally dispose of
the appeal on all points in the light of the
decision of the Supreme Court in regard to the

referred point,


(9)

The decison of the Supreme Court in the reference
Will have no impact or effect on the decison of
High Court "8" in the event of the Supreme Court
upholding the reference in case it has become
final between the Parties by reason of the matter
not having been carried to the Supreme Court and
the said decision shall remain undisturbed as

between the parties in High Court “B".”

"5.3.4 In order to give effect to the aforesaid
recommendation, a suitable legislation may have to
be enacted. A draft of the suggested legislation
has been appended for the sake of facilitating the
task.”


7~:69 :-

PART~II

3.18 ADJUDICATORY MACHINERY UNDER THE CUSTOMS ACT, U ATORY MACHINERY

1962:

Under Section 122 of the Customs Act, in every
case under Chapter XIV of the Custome Act in which
anything is liable to confiscation or any person is

liable to a penalty, such penalty or confiscation may be

adjudged:-

{a) without limit, by a Collector of custome

or a Deputy Collector of Customs;

(b) where the value of the goods liable to
confiscation does not exceed R8.50,000/-

by an Assistant Collector of Customs;

{c) where the value of the goods table to
confiscation does not exceed Rs.2500/- by
a gazetted officer of custome lower in

rank than an Assistant Collector of

Customs.

An order of confiscation for penalty under this
Act is not a mere administrative or executive act, but is

really a quasi-judicial act.


-:60 :-

The Act also provides for valuation and

classification of goods imported and exported as the case

may be.

APPEALS TO COLLECTOR (APPEALS)

Under section 128, any person aqggrieved by any
decision or order passed under this Act by an officer of
customs lower in rank than a Collector of Customs, may
appeal to the Collector (Appeals) within 3 months from
the date of communication to him by such decision or
order. This right extends to important matters like
classification and valuation hesides several other

matters provided by the Act.

Under Section 128 A, the Collector (Appeals) after
making such inquiry as may be necessary, may pass such
order as he thinks fit confirming, modifying or annulling
the decision or order appealed against, or may refer the
case back to the adjudicating authority with such
directions as he may think fit for a fresh adjudication
or decision, as the case may be, after taking additional
evidence, if necessary. On disposal of the appeal, the
Collector (Appeals) communicates the order passed by him

to the appeltant, the adjudicating authority and the

Collector of Customs.


-:61 iH

APPELLATE TRIBUNAL

nder section 129 of the Act the Central
Government has constituted an appellate tribunal called
the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate

Tribunal, consisting of judicial and technical members.

Any person aggrieved by any of the following
orders may appeal to the appellate tribunal against such

order -

(a) A decision or order passed by the
Collector of Customs as an adjudicating

authority;

(b) An order passed by the Collector (Appeals)

under section 128-A.

(6) An order passed by the Board or the
Appellate Collector of Customs under
section 128 as it stood immediately before

the appointed date;


(4)

Provided

discration,

order referred

(d), where -

(4)

(77)

(111)

“:62 :-

An order passed by the Board or the
Collector of Customs, either before or
after the appointed date under section
130, as it stood immediately before that

day;

that the Appellate Tribunal may in its

refuse to admit an appeal in respect of an

to in clause (b), clause (८) or clause

the value of the goods confiscated without
option having been given te the owner of
the goods to pay a fine in lieu of

confiscation under section 125; or

in any disputed case other than a case
where the determination of any question
having a relation to the rate of duty of
customs or to the value of goods for
purposes of assessment is in issue or is
one of the points in issue, the difference

in duty involved or the duty involved; or

the amount of fine or penalty determined
by such order, does not exceed Rs.

50, 000/-.


—:63 :-

Under sub-section (2}, the Collector of Customs
may, if he is of the opinion that an order passed by the
Appellate Collector of Customs under section 128, as it
stood immediately before the appointed date or the
Collector (Appeals) under section 128-A, is not legal or
proper, direct the proper officer to appeal on his behalf

to the Appellate Tribunal against such order.

Under Section 129-B the Appellate Tribunal may,
after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of
being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit,
confirming, modifying or annulting the decison or order
appealed against or may refer the case back to the
authority which passed such decision or order ‘with such
directions as the Appellate Tribunal may think fit for a
fresh adjudication or decision, as the case may be, after

taking additional evidence, if necessary.

POWERS OF BOARD OR COLLECTOR OF CUSTOMS TO PASS CERTAIN

ORDERS

Under Section 129-0, the Board may of its own
motion, call for and examine the record of any
proceedings in which a Collector of Customs as an
adjudicating authority has passed any decision or order
tinder this Act for the purpose of satisfying itself as to
legatity or propriety of any such decision or order and

may, by order, direct such Collector to apoly to the


—:64 :-

Appellate Tribunal for the determination of such points
arising out of the decision or order as may be specified
by the Board in its order. Similarly, the Collector of
Customs may of his own motion, cal? for and examine the
record of any proceedings in which an adjudicating
authority sub-ordinate to him has passed any decision or
order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying
himself as to the legality and propriety of any such
decision or order and may, by order, direct such
authority to apply, ta the Collector (Appeals) for the
determination of such points arising out of the decision
or order as may be specified by the Collector of Customs
in his order. Then such applications made to the
appellate tribunal or the Collector (Appeals) as the case
may be are to be treated as if such applications were an
appeal against the decision or order of the adjudicating
authority and the provisions regarding appeals applies to

such applications.

Where the decision or order appealed against
relates to any duty demanded in respect of goods which
are not under control of the customs authorities or any
penalty levied under this Act, the person desirous of
appealing against such decision or order has to deposit
with the proper officer the duty demanded or penalty
levied during the pendency of the appeal except in cases

which would cause undue hardships to such persons.


—:65 :-

STATEMENT OF CASE TO THE HIGH COURTS OF CASE TO THE HIGH COURTS:

Under Section 130, the Collector of Customs or the
other party may against an order under section 129-8 (not
being an order relating, among other things, to the
determination of any question having a relation to the
rate of duty of customs or to the value of goods for
Purposes of assessment) require the Appellate Tribunal to
refer to the High Court any question of law arising out
of such order and the Appellate Tribunal is required to
draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the High
Court, after giving due opportunity to the opposite
party. If the Appellate Tribunal refuses to state the
case on the ground that no guestion of law arise the
Collector of customs or the other party may apply to the
High Court and the High Court may, if it is not satisifed
with the correctness of the decision of the Appel late
Tribunal require the Apellate Tribunal to state the case
and to refer it and on receipt of any such requisition
the Appellate Tribunal has to state the case and refer it

accordingly.

If the Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion that
on account of conflict in the decisions of the High Court
in respect of any particular question of law, it is
expedient that a reference should be made direct to the

Supreme court, ‘the Appellate Tribunal may draw up a


-:66 :-

statement of the case and refer it through the President

direct to the Supreme Court under section 130-A of the

Act.

If the High court or the Supreme Court is not
satisfied that the statements in a case referred to it
are sufficient to enable it to determine the questions
raised thereby, the court may refer the case back to the
Appellate Tribunal for the purpose of making such
additions thereto or alterations therein as it may direct

in that behalf.

Under section 130-D the High Court or the Supreme
Court decides the questions of law in the case referred
to them and delivers its judgment thereon containing the
grounds on which such decision is founded and a copy of
the judgment ig sent to the Appellate Tribunal. The
Appellate Tribunal then passes such orders as are
necessary to dispose of the case in conformity with - such

Judgment.

Appeal to the Supreme Court of India:

Under Section 130-E, an appeal lies to the Supreme

court From ८


(a)

(b)

7:67 :-

Any judgment of the High Court delivered
on a reference made under section 130 in
any case which, on its own motion or on an
oral application made by or on behalf of
the party aggrieved, immediately after
passing of the judgment, the High Court
certifies to be a fit one for appeal? to

the Supreme Court:

Any order passed by the appellate tribunal
relating, among other things, to the
determination of any question having a
relation to the rate of duty of customs or

to the value of goods for purposes of

assessment.

In the transitory provision every appeal which was

pending immediately before the appointed date before the

Board under Section 128 and any matter arising out of or

connected with such appeal and which was so pending, was

taken to be transferred to the appellate tribunal.

Under

this Act, the adjudication of confiscation

of goods and imposition of penalties is processed as

under :-


7:68 :-

Under section 33, where by the rules made under
this Act anything is liable to confiscation or any person

is liable to penalty, such confiscation or penalty may be

adjudged -
fa) without limit by a Collector of Central
Excise;
{b) up to confiscation of goods not exceeding

500 rupees in value and imposition of
penalty not exceeding 250 rupees, by an

Assistant Collector of Central Excise.

The Central Board of Excise and Customs may vary

the limits of powers indicated above.

This Act and the Rules made thereunder provide for
valuation and classification of excusable goods and

various other incidental matters.

Under section 35 of the Act any person aggrieved
by any decision oar order passed under this Act by a
Central Excise Officer lower in rank than a Collector of
Central Excise in matters of importance like
classification and valuation apart from the matters
provided under the Act may appeal to the Collector of
Central Excise (Appeals) (hereinafter referred to as the

Collector (Appeals). The Collector (Appeats) may, after
oi


5:69 :-

making such further inquiry pass such order as he thinks
fit confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or
order appealed against, or May refer the case back to the
adjudicating authority with such directions as he may
think fit for ai fresh adjudication or decison, as the
case may be, after taking additional evidence, if
necessary. On the disposal of the appeal, the Collector
(Appeals) shall communicate the order passed by him to
the appellant, the adjudicating authority and the

Collector of Central Excise.
Appeals to the Appellate Tribunal Js_to the A 1 Tribunal}

Under section 358 any person aggrieved by any of

the following orders may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal

against such order -

(a) a decision or order passed by the
Collector af central Excise as an
adjudicating authority.

Cb) an order passed by the Collector (Appeals)
under section 35A.

(८) ar order passed by the Central Board of
Excise and Customs constituted under the
Centrat Board of Revenues Act, 1963
(hereafter referred to as the Board} or
“the Appellate Collector of Central Excise

under section 35, as it stood immediately


(4)

—:70 :-

before the appointed day;

an order passed by the Board or the
collector of Central Excise, either before
or after the appointed day, under section

35A as it stood immediately before that

day;

Provided that the Appellate
Tribunal may, in its discretion, refuse to
admit an appeal in respect of an order
referred to in clause (b) or clause (०) or

clause (d) where-

(i) in any disputed case, other than a
case where the determination of any
question having a relation to the rate of
duty of excise or to the value of goods
for purposes of assessment is in issue or
is one of the points in issue, the
difference in duty involved or the duty

involved; or

(ii) the amount of fine or penalty
determined by such order, does not exceed

fifty thousand rupees.


The Collector of Central Excise may, if he jis of
opinion that an order passed by the Appellate Collector
of Central Excise under section 35, as it stood
immediately before the appointed day, or the Collector
{Appeals} under section 35A, is not legal or proper,
direct any Central Excise Officer authorised by him in
this behalf to appeal on his behalf to the Appellate

Tribunal against such order.

The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard,
pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming,
modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed
against or may refer the case back to the authority which
passed such decision or order with such directions as the
Appellate Tribunal may think fit, for a fresh
adjudication or decision, as the case may be, after

taking additional evidence, if necessary.

The decision of the Appellate Tribunal is thus
final, as regard the questions of facts are concerned
except in matters (under sec.35L(b)). The Appellate
Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under
this section to the Collector of Central Excise and the

other party to the appeal.


“172 :-

Under section 356 the Board of its own motion ean
call for and examine the record of any proceeding in
which a Collector of Central Excise as an adjudicating
authority has passed any decison or order under this Act
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality
or propriety of any such decision or order and may, by
arder, direct such Collector to apply to the Appellate

Tribunal for the determination of such points arising out

of the decision or order as may be specified by the Board

in its order.

At the same time, the Collector of Central Excise
is also empowered under sub-section (2) of section 3565
that he may of his own motion, call for and examine the
record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating
authority subordinate to him has passed any decision or
order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying
himself as to the legality or propriety of any such
decison or order and may, by order, direct such authority
to apply to the Collector (Appeals) for the determination
of such points arising out of the decision or order as
may be specified by the Collector of Central Excise in
his order. Such applications are then treated to be as
if appeals made against the decision or order of the

adjudicating authority.

Statement of case to High Court



-:73 :-

Under section 356, the Collector of Central Excise
er the other party may, within sixty days of the date
upon which “he is served with notice of an order under
section 350 (not being an order relating, among other
things, to the determination of any question having a
relation to the rate of duty of excise or to the value of
goods for purpose of assessment) by application in the
prescribed form, require the Appeltate Tribunal to refer
to the Htgh Court any question of law arising out of such
order and the Appellate Tribunal shall if it agrees to it
draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the High
Court. In this process the other party is also given an
opportunity to file his cross-objections. If the
Appellate Tribunal refuses to state the case on the
ground that no question of Taw arises, the Collector of
Central Excise or the other party may apply to the High
Court and the High Court may if it is not satisifed with
the correctness af the decision of the Appellate
Tribunal, require the Appellate Tribunal to state the
case and to refer it and on receipt of any such
requisiton, the Appellate Tribunal shall draw up the case

and refer it to the High Court.

Under section 35H if on an application made under
the above section the Appellate Tribunal is of opinion
that, on account of canflict in the decisions of High
Courts in respect of any particular question of law, it

is expedient that a reference should be made direct to


the Supreme Court, the Appellate Tribunal may draw up a
statement of the case and refer it through the President
direct to the Supreme Court. If the High Court or the
Supreme Court is not satisfied to enable it to determine
the questions raised thereby, the Court may refer the
case back to the Appellate Tribunal for the purpose of
making such additions thereto or alternations therein as

it may direct in this behalf.

Under section 35K the High Court or the Suoreme
Court hearing any such case shall decide the Guestions of
law raised therein and shall deliver its judgment thereen
containing the grounds on which such decision is founded
and a copy of the judgment shall be sent to the Registrar
of the Tribunal. The Appellate Tribunal has then to pass
such orders as are necessary to dispose of the case in

conformity with such judgment.

Appeals to Supreme Court

Under section 35L, an appeal shall tie to the

Supreme Court From

fa) any judgment of the High Court delivered
on 8 reference made under section 354 in
any case which, on its own motion or on an
oral application made by or an behalf of

the party aggrieved, immediately after the


-:78 :८

passing of the judgment, the High Court
certifies to be a fit ons for appeal to

the Supreme Court; or

(b) any order passed by the Appellate Tribunal
relating, among other things, to the
determination of any question having a
relation to the rate of duty of exciea or
to the value of goods for purposes of

assessment.

3.20 Adjudication process under the Gold (Control) Act.

The adjudication machinery 11 the Gold Contro?
Act, 1968 is almost on the same pattern as discussed
above in matters relating to the Customs Act and the
Central Exctse Act, 1944. These are not being reproduced

here for the sake of brevity.

A perusal of systems of administrative law on the
continent of Europe reveals that the administration of
justice through tribunals has taken firm roots in the
foreign jurisdictions atso and societies have been
content with the system. Therefore, there is no question
of abolition of the tribunals’ system in the country but
we have to look for reformative measures in the direction
to further tron out the problema in achieving justice

through the tribunals system.


-:76 :-

CHAPTER - IV

Central Administrative Tribunal

4,4 We shal? first take up and deal with the
Administrative Tribunals constituted under the

Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985:

4.2 Constitution of the Central Administrative

Tribunat:-

In 1976, by the Constitution 42nd Amendment Act,
Part XIVA containing Articles 323A and 323B was included
in the Constitution of India by which the Parliament and
the State Legislatures were authorised to constitute
administrative tribunals for service matters and
Tribunals for certain other matters. In 1985, the
Parliament passed the Administrative Tribunals Act. Some
of its relevant provisions are being discussed below.
Chapter II of the Act deals with the establishment of
tribunals and benches thereof. Section 4 provides for
establishment while section 5 deals with composition of
the tribunal and benches thereof. Section 6 Yays down
the qualifications of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
Members. So far as the Chairman is concerned,

sub-section (1) requires that he should be or have been-


-iT? ois

(a) a judge of a High Court; or
(b) has, for at least two years, held the office
of Vice-Chairman:

(6) (omitted by Act 51 of 1987)

Sub-saction (2) prescribing the qualification for

Vice-Chairnan provides that he should be or have been -

(a) a judge of a High Court; or qualified to he a
Judge of a High Court (inserted by Section 3(b) of
Act 51 of 1987); or

(b) has, for at least two years, held the post of
a Secretary to the Government of India or any
other post under the Central or a State Government
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than
that of a Secretary to the Government of India: or
(bb) has, for at least five years, held the post
of an Additional Secretary to the Government of
India or any other past under the Central or a
State Government carrying a scale of Pay which is
not less than that of an Additional Secretary to
the Government of India; or

(०) has, for a period of not Jess than three
years, hald office as [a Judicial Member or an

Administrative Member].

Sub-section (3) prescribes the qualification of a

Judicial Member and requires that:


“178 :-

(a) he should be or should have been or qualified
to be a judge of a High Court; or

(6) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service
and has held a post in Grade I of that service for

atleast three years.

Sub-section (3-A) provides the qualification for
appointment as Administrative Member and lays down that
such person (a) should have, for atleast two years, held
the post of an Additional Secretary to the Government of
India or any other post under the Central or a State
Government carrying a scale of pay not less than that of
an Additional Secretary to the Government of India; or
(0) has, for atleast three years, held the post of a
Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any other
post under the Central or a State Government carrying a
scale of pay which is not tess than that of a Joint
Secretary to the Government of India, and shall in sither

case have adequate administrative experience.

Section 8 of the Act prescribes the term of office
and provides that the term for Chairman, Vice-Chairman or
Members shall be of Five years from the date on which he
enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for
re-appointment for another term of five years. The
proviso to section 8 provides that no Chairman,

Vice-Chairman or other Member shal} hold the office after


-:79 :-

he has attained, in the case of Chairman or
Vice-Chairman, the age of 65 years, and in the case of

any other Member, the age of 62 years.

Chapter III of the Act deals with jurisdiction,
Powers and authority of tribunats. While section 14
deals with jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Section 15 is concerned
with State Administrative Tribunals and Section 16 deals

with Joint Administrative Tribunal.

It is pertinent to quote the provisions laid down

under Section 14 betow:~

"14, surisdiction, powers and authority of the Central
Administrative Tribunal. - (1) Save as otherwise
expressly provided dn this Act, the Central

Administrative Tribunal shal? exercise, on and from the
appointed day, atl the jurisdiction, powers and authority
exercisable immediately before that day by all courts

(axcapt the Supreme Court) in relation to-

{a} recruitment and matters cencerning recruitment, to
any All-India Service or to any civil service of
the Union or a civil post under the Union or ta a
post connected with defence or in the defence
services, being, in either case, a post filled by

a civilian;


(b)

(०)

7:80 :-

all service matters concerning -

(1) a member of any All-India Service; or

(ii) a person {not beig a member of an
All-India Service or a person referred to
in clause (c)] appointed to any civil
service of the Union or any civil post
under the Union: or .

Citi) a civilian [not being a member of an
All-India Service or a person referred to
in clause (c)] appointed to any defence
service or a post connected with defence;
and pertaining to the service of such
member, person or civilian, in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of any
State or of any local or other authority
within the territory of India or under the
control of the Government of India or of
any corporation [or society] owned or

controlled by the Government;

all service matters pertaining to service in
connection with the affiars of the Union
concerning a person appointed to any service or
post referred to in sub-clause (11) of sub-clause
(iii) of clause (०), being a person whose services

have been placed by a State Government or any


local or other authority or any corporation [or
society] or other body, at the disposal of the

Central Government for such appointment,

[Explanation. - For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby declared that reference to "Union" in this
sub-section shall be construed as including references

also to a Union territory,]

(2) The Central Government may, by notification, apply
with effect from such date as may be specified in the
notification the provisions of sub-section (3) to local
or other authorities within the territory of India or
under the control of the Government of India and to
corporations for societies] owned or controlled by
Government, not being a local or other authority or
corporation [or society} controlled or owned by a State

Government :

Provided that if the Central Government considers
it expedient so to do for tha purpose of facilitating
transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act,
different dates may be so specified under this
sub-section ‘in respect of different classes of, or
different categories under any class of, local or other

authorities or corporations [or societies].


(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this
Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall also
exercise, on and from the date with effect from which the
provisions of this sub-section apply to any local or
other authority or corporation § [or society], all the
Jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable
immediately before that date by all courts (except the

Supreme Court) in relation to-

(a) cruitment, and matters concerning recruitment,
to any service or pest in connection with the
affiars of such local or other authority or
corporation [or socfety]:; and

(b) all service matters concerning a person [other

than a person referred to in clause (a) or clause
(b) of sub-section (1)] appointed to any service
or post in cannection with the affairs of such
local or other authority or corporation [or
society] and pertaining to the service of such

person in connection with such affairs."

Section 17 empowers the Tribunal ४० punish for

contempt.

Chapter IV deals with the procedure to be followed
by the Tribunal. The provisions contained under section

19 are extracted below-


~:83 :-

"49, Application to Tribunals. - (1) Subject to the
other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by any
order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of
a Tribunal may make an apptication to the Tribunal for

the redressal of his grievance.

Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section,

“order” means an order made-

(a) by the Government or a local or other authority
within the territory of India or under the contro}
of the Government of India or by any corporation

for society] owned or controlled by the

Government; or

(b) by an officer, committee or other body or agency
of the Government or a tocal or other authority or
corporation for society] referred to in clause

(a).

(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be
in such form and be accompanied by such documents or
other evidence and by such fee (if any, not exceeding one
hundred rupees) [ in respect of the filing of such
apptication and by such other fees for service or
execution of processes, as may be prescribed by the

Central Government].


7:84 :-

[(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section
(1), the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after such inquiry
as it may deem necessary, that the application is 8 fit
case for adjudication or trial by it, admit such
application; but where the Tribunal is not so satisfied,

it may summarily reject the application after recording

its reasons. ]

(4) Where an application has been admitted by a
Tribunal under sub-section (3), every Proceeding under
the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances
in relation to the subject-matter of such application
pending immediately before such admission shal? abate and
save as otherwise directed by the Tribunal, no appeal or
representation in relation to such matter shall

thereafter be entertained under such rules,

Under Section 20, it is provided that applications
by the tribunal shall not ordinarily be admitted unless
other remedies are exhausted. Section 21 prescribes the
limitation period within which the application can be
entertained by the tribunal. Section 22 provides that a
tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by
the Code of Civil Procedure, but shall be guided by the
principles of natural justice and subject to other
Provisions of the Act and the rules made by the Central

Government. The tribtinal shall have power to regulate


its own procedure including the fixing of places and
times of its enquiry and deciding whether to sit in
Public or in private. Sub-section (2) thereof provides
that every application made to the tribunal shall be
decided expeditiously as possible and ordinarily every
application shall be decided on a perusal of documents
and written representations and after hearing such oral
arguments as may be advanced. The powers vested in a
tribunal are set out under sub-section (3) of Section 22

of the Act,

Section 24 lays down conditions as to making of

interim orders.

Section 27 deals with execution of orders of a
tribunal and section 28 excludes the jurisdiction of
courts except the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the
Constitution, Howaver, the finality of the tribunals
decisions is now open to challenge under the writ
jurisdiction before the concerned High Court in view of

L.Chandra Kumar's decision (infra).

4.3, Observations of the Constitution Bench of the

Supreme Court in L.Chandra Kumar v. Union of India:-



5:86 :-

The seven-Judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme

Court has since delivered its judgment in L.Chandra Kumar

v.

U.O.1. (1997) 3 SCC 261. The unanimous opinion of

the Court has been delivered by A.M.Ahmadi, C.J. The

essential features of the judgment are the following:-

(a)

Clause 2(d) of Article 323-A and clause 3(d) of
Article 323-B of the Constitution of India to the

extent they provide for excluding the jurisdiction

cs)

F the High Courts and the Supreme Court under
Articles 226 and 227 and Article 136 respectively
are un-constitutional on the ground that they
violate the basic structure of the Constitution.
Judicial review conferred upon the High Courts and
the Supreme Court by the aforesaid Articles, it
has been held, is a basic feature of the
Constitution and is not amenable to amendment, and
since the 42nd Amendment Act of the Constitution
which introduced the aforesaid Articles is a
post-Bharati enactment, it is invalid and
unenforceable in so far as it violates the said
basic feature of the Constitution. Section 28 of
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and other
clauses in any other enactment providing for
excluding the power of judicial review of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court, it has been held, is

equally void and ineffective.


(b)

{c)

-:87 :-

While the ‘power of judicial review’ of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court cannot be taken away,
it is open to the legislature to create courts and
tribunals and entrust them with judicial powers
but such powers can only be supplementary to the
powers conferred upon the High Courts and the
Supreme Court by Articles 226 and 227 and Article
32 of the Constitution. The tribunals created
under the aforesaid Articles, of course, are
competent to pronounce upon the constitutional
validity of statutory provisions and rules, with
this exception that they cannot examine or
pronounce upon the validity of the provisions of

the enactment under which they are created.

The decisions of the Administrative Tribunals
created under Article 323-A and the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985 shall be subject to scrutiny
by a Divison Bench of the High Court within whose
jurisdiction the relevant tribunal is located.
The tribunals will continue to act as courts of
first instance and it shail not be open to the
Parties to approach the High Court directly in the
matters relating to their conditions of service
except where the constitutionality of any of the
provisions of the very enactment under which the

particular tribunal is constituted, is questioned.


(d)

(f)

(9)

-“-:88 :-

The concept of judicial and quasi-judicial
tribunals has a sound basis, though it may be that
the tribunals constituted under various enactments
have not come up to the expectations. The remedy
is not in abolishing them but in improving them so
that they become effective instruments of the

justice delivery system.

The provision for appointment of administrative
members in the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
cannot be said to be wrong in principle. Qn the
contrary, the administrative members do provide a
certain input and expertise which contributes to,

and is conducive of, an effective, just and

balanced decison by the tribunal.

No appeal shal? lie to the Supreme Court against
the decisions of the Administrative Tribunals
directly. The parties must approach the Division
Bench of the High Court cancerned. From the
decision of the High Court, of course, a party can
approach the Supreme Court under Article 136 of

the Constitution, if he is so advised.

It 18 necessary that an independent agency for the
administration of all the tribunals constituted
under Article 323-A and 323-B be set up. ATT such

tribunals should be placed under a single nodal


Ch)

7:89 :-

agency which wilt be in a position to supervise
the working of these tribunals. Until creation of
such 8 central independent agency, the Ministry of
Law should supervise the working of these
tribunats. The Ministry of Law may, however,
appoint an independent supervisory body to oversee

the working of these tribunals.

So far as the inter-play of sub-section (2) and
(6) of Section 5 is concerned, the position is
that a single-member of an administrative tribunal
shall not be entitled to decide a question
invelving the interpretation of a statutory
provision or rule in relation to the Constitution.
All matters involving such questions shall be
Placed before a Bench of at least two-members, one

of them shall be a judicial member.

4.4 Other relevant observations made in L.Chandra Kumar v
Union of India, (1997) 3 SCC 261 are as follows:

(i)

The power of judicial review over legislative
action vested in the High Courts under Article 226
and in the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the
Constitution is an integral and essential feature
of the Constitution constituting « part of ite

basic structure. Ordinarily the power of High


“7:90 :-

courts and Supreme Court to test the
constitutional validity of legislations can never

be ousted or excluded.

The power vested in the High Courts to exercise
judicial superintendence over the decisions of all
courts and tribunals within their respective
jurisdiction is also part of the basic structure
of the Constitution. This is because a situation
where the High Courts are divested of all other
judicial functions apart from that of
constitutional interpretation is equally to be

avoided.

Clause 2(d) of Article 323-A and clause 3(d) of
Article 323-B to the extent they exctude the
jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme
Court and the Supreme Court under Articles 226/227

and 32 of the Constitution are unconstitutional.

Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act,
1985 and the ’exclusion of jurisdiction’ clauses
in all other legislations enacted under the aegis
of Articles 323-A and 323-B are, to the same

extent, unconstitutional.


(ii)

>:91 ie

There are pressing reasons why the conferment of
such a power of judicial review of administrative
actions be preserved. When the framers of our
Constitution bestowed the powers of judicial
review of legislative action upon the High Courts
and the Supreme Court they ensured that other
constitutional safeguards were created to assist
them in effectively discharging this onerous
burden. The expectation was that this power would
be required to be used only occasionally.
However, in the five decades that have ensued
since Independence, the quantity of litigation
before the High Courts has exploded in an
unprecedented manner, The decision in Sampath
Kumar’s case was rendered against such a backdrop.
We are conscious of the fact that when a
Constitution Bench of this Court in Sampath
Kumar's case adopted the theory of alternative
institutional mechanisms, it was attempting to
remedy an alarming practical situation and the
approach selected by it appeared to be most

appropriate to meet the exigencies of the time.

The various Tribunals have not performed up to the
expectations is a self-evident and widely
acknowledged truth. However to draw an inference
that their unsatisfactory performance points to

their being founded on a fundamentally unsound


-:92 :-

principle would not be correct. The reasons for
which the Tribunals were constituted stilt
persist; indead, those reasons have become even
more pronounced in our times. We have already
indicated that our consitutional scheme permits
the setting up of such Tribunals. However,
drastic measures may have ta be resorted to in
arder to elevate their standards to ensure that
they stand up to constitutional serutiny in the
discharge of the power of judicial review

conferred upon them.

“Pr....78....The constitutional safeguards which
ensure the Independence of the Judges of the
superior judiciary, are not available to the
Judges of the subordinate judiciary or to those

who man tribunals created by ordinary

legislations.”

Though the subordinate judiciary or tribunals
created under ordinary legislations cannot
exercise the power of judicial review of
legislative action to the exclusion of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court there is no
constitutional prohibition against their
performing a supplemental as opposed to a

substitutional role in this respect.


7:93 :-

The Tribunals are competent to hear matters where
the vires of statutory provisions are questioned,
they cannot act as substitutes for the High Courts
and the Supreme Court. Their function in this
respect is only supplementary and all such
decisions of the Tribunals will be subject to
scrutiny before a Division Bench of the respective

High Courts.

This power of the Tribunals will be subject to one
important exception that the Tribunals shall not
entertain any question regarding the vires of
their parent statutes. The High Court concerned
may be approached directly. All other deicisions
of these Tribunals, rendered in cases that they
are specifically empowered to adjudicate upon by
virtue of their parent statutes witl also be
subject to scrutity before a Division Bench of
their respective High Courts. The Tribunals will
continue to act as the only courts of first
instance in respect of the areas of law for which
they have been constituted. The litigants have to
directly approach firstly the Tribunals even in
cases where the vires of statutory ltegilsations
(except where the legislation which creates the

particular Tribunals) is challenged.


7:94 :८

All other decisions of these Tribunals, rendered
in cases that they are specifically empowered to
adjudicate upon by virtue of their parent
statutes, will also be subject to scrutiny before

a Division Bench of their respective High Courts.

The decision in L. Chandra Kumar will come into

effect prospectively.

No appeal from the decision of a Tribunal wilt
directly lie before the Supreme Court under
Article 136 of the Constitution; but instead, the
aggrieved party will be entitled to more the High
Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution
and from the decision of the Division Bench of the
High Court the aggrieved party can move the
Supreme Court under Art. 136 of the Constitution.
Regarding the need for appointment of

Administrative members, the Supreme Court held:

"95.... It has been urged that only those who have
had judicial experience should be appointed to
such Tribunals. In the case of Administrative
Tribunals, it has been pointed out that the
Administrative Members who have been appointed
have Tittle or no experience in adjudicating such
disputes;. the Malimath Committee has noted that at

times IPS Officers have been appointed to these


195 :-८

Tribunats. It is stated that in the short tenures
that these Administrative Members are on the
Tribunal, they are unable to attain enough
expertence in adjudication and in cases where they
do acquire the ability, it is invariably on the
eve of the expiry of their tenures. For these
reasons, it has been urged that the appointment of
Administrative members to Administrative Tribunals
be stopped. We find it difficult to accept such a
contention. It must be remembered that the
setting up of these Tribunals is founded on the
premise that specialist bodies comprising both
trained administrators and those with judicial
experience would, by virtue of their specialised
knowledge, be better equipped to dispense speedy
and efficient justice, It was expected that a
judicious mix of Judicial Members and those with
grassroot experience would best serve this
Purpose. To hold that the Tribunal should consist
only of Judicial Members would attack the primary
basis of the theory pursuant to which they have
been constituted. Since the Selection Committee
is now headed by a Judge of the Supreme Court,
nominated by the Chief Justice of India, we have
reason to believe that the Committee would take
care to ensure that Administrative members are
chosen from amongst those who have some background

to deal with such cases.”


-:96 :-

(111) The Supreme court emphasised the need for changes
in reapect of appointment to Tribunals and supervision of
their functioning by an independent body or authority.
It held:
"96.... The situation at present is that different
Tribunals constituted under different enactments
are administered by different administrative
departments of the Central and the State
Governments. The problem is compounded by the
fact that some Tribunals have been created
pursuant to Central Legislations and some others
have been created by State Legislations. However,
even in the case of Tribunals created by
parliamentary legislations, there is no uniformity
in administration. We are of the view that, until
a wholly independent agency for the administration
of atl such Tribunals can be set up it is
desirable that all such Tribunals should be as far
as possible under a single nodal ministry which
will be in a position to oversee the working of
these Tribunats. For a number of reasons that
Ministry should appropriately be the Ministry of
Law. It would be open for the Ministry, in its
turn, to appoint an independent supervisory body
to oversee the working of the Tribunals. This
will ensure that if the President or Chairperson

of the Tribunal is for some reason unable to take


~:97 is

sufficient interest in the working of the
Tribunals, the entire system will not languish and
the ultimate consumer of justice will not suffer.

The creation of a single umbrella organisation

will, in our view, remove many of the 1115 of the

present system. If the need arises there can be

separate umbretla organisations at the Central and

the State Jevels, Such a supervisory authority
must try to ensure that the independence of the
members of all such Tribunals is maintained. To

that extent, the procedure for the selection of

the members of the Tribunals, the manner in which

funds are allocated for the functioning of the

Tribunals and_all other consequential details will

have to be clearly spelt out."

{Emphasis supplied)

The Supreme Court felt that these suggestions shauld be

considered in detail by those entrusted with the duty of

formulating the policy in this respect. It couched:
“OT, The suggestions that we have made in
respect of appointments to Tribunals and the
supervision of their administrative function need
to be considered in detail by those entrusted with
the duty of formulating the policy in this
respect. That body witli also have to take into
consideration the comments of expert bodies like

the LOI and the Malimath Committee in this regard.


We, therefore, recommend that the Union of India
initiate action in this behalf and after
consulting all concerned, place all these
Tribunals under one single nodal department unal under Je on J ta rtme:

Preferably the Legal Department.“

(Emphasis supp?ted)

Civ) The Supreme Court upheld the provision under
Sec.5(6) of the Administrative Tribunals Act as valid,
since where a question involving the interpretation of a
statutory provision or rule in relation to the
Constitution arises for the consideration of a single
Members Bench of the Administrative Tribunal, the proviso
to Sec.5(c) will automatically apply and the Chairman or
the Member concerned shall refer the matter to a Bench
consisting of at least two Members, one of whom must be a
Judicial Member. This will ensure that questions
involving the vires of a statutory provision or rute will
hever arise for adjudication before a single Member Bench

or Bench which does not consist of a Judicial Member .

4.5 ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS CONSTITUTED UNDER THE NISTRATIV TRIBUNALS CONSTITUTE: Ni Ti
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985 (ART, 323-A OF THE TRIBUNALS ACT 85 RT A OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA)



The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 exatuded
the jurisdiction of the High Court in the matters within
the seisin of the Tribunals created thereunder, as
contemplated under clause 2(d) of Article 323-A of the
Constitution. Untit the decision in Chandra Kumar’s
case, the decision of the Administrative Tribunals could
net be questioned before the High Court. Parties
aggrieved with the decisions of the Administrative
Tribunals had to approach and were approaching the
Supreme Court directly under article 136 of the
Constitution, irrespective of the fact whether the
decision of the tribunal was rendered by a single member
or a Bench. This was the position affirmed by the

Supreme Court earlier in §.P.Sampat Kumar v. Union of

India (1987) 1 SCC 124. But the later decision in
L.Chandra Kumar, rendered by a larger Constitution Bench
has made a substantial and qualitative difference to the
above position, as has been detailed hereinabove. With
this later decision, the status of these tribunals has
also undergone a radical change. They have now become
tribunals subordinate to the High Court which is
evidenced from the fact that the decisions of these
tribunals are now amenable to writ jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. It is
ho longer an alternative mechanism to the High Court, but
a tribunal whose decisions are subject to scrutiny by the
High Court, albeit by a Division Bench. (As a matter of

fact, Shri Justice Shiva Shankar Bhat, a retired Judge of


-:100:-

the Karnataka High Court, who was appointed as chairman
of the Karnataka State Administrative Tribunal, tendered
his resignation soon after the decision in L.Chandra
Kumar was rendered, complaining that inasmuch as the
position and status of the Tribunal has been downgraded
by the said decision, he cannot continue as the Chairman
of the State Administrative Tribunal}. While striking
down certain clauses of Articles 323-A and 323-B of the
Constitution of the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985,
the Supreme Court has at the same time affirmed the
soundness of the principle on which these administrative
tribunals are created. It did not agree with the
contention that these tribunals should be abolished
inasmuch as they have not proved effective in discharge
of their duties and have failed to achieve the object
with which they were created. The Supreme Court has also
held that though these tribunals are subject to the writ
jurisdiction of the High Courts, they are yet competent
to decide questions relating to the constitutinal
validity of the statutory provisions and rules except,
of-course, the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals
Act 1985 under which they have been constituted. The
Supreme Court has also rejected that there ought to be no
technical/administrative members in these tribunals.
They said that these non-judicial members provide an

input which may not be available with the judicial

members.


5>:101:-

In the light of the above dicta of the Supreme
Court, not much room is left for the Law Commission of
India to suggest any substantial measures or
recommendations with respect to the functioning of these
tribunals. Even so, there are certain areas which can be

and are dealt with hereunder:-

(a) With a view to improve the efficiency of the
administrative tirbunals, the present practice of
appointing retired or about to retire District
Judges as judicial members is not entirely
satisfactory. These Oistrict Judges do not deal
with service matters during their judicial service
and since they are appointed towards the end of
their career, there is not much time and in some
cases incliniation to learn this branch of law
viz., service jurisprudence. They get hardly two
to three years on the job. (It may be remembered
that in the light of the judgment of the Supreme

Court in Alt India Judicial Officers Association

case, the age of retirement of subordinate
judiciary is now 60, in effect. It is obvious
that those who are not allowed to continue beyond
58 years in view of their unsatisfactory record,
would not be considered or appointed as members of
the Administrative Tribunal}. In this view of the
matter, an attempt should be made to recruit

members of the Bar between the ages of 45 and 50


(b)

“:102:-

who will have a longer period available to them to
prove their mettle, At the same time, it is
necessary, with a view to provide an incentive to
these judicial members that they should be
considered by the High Court (of the State from
which they hail) for appointment as judges of the
High Court in the quota normally reserved for
members of the subordinate judiciary and if for
any reason this course is not found feasible or
practicable, they may be considered under
sub-clause (b) of 61.(2) of Art.217 read with
Explanation (aa) and/or (b) appended to the said
clause. If this assurance is held out, many
members of the Bar may be attracted to this
office. It would also mean that persons of
competence, who have (acquired) expertise in
service matters would be available to the High
court. Section 8 of the A,T.Act, 1985 may
accordingly be amended, In the case of members,
the initial term should be made ten years,
renewable for a further period of five years.

The practice of appointing retired or about to
retire High Court Judges as Chairman of State
Administrative Tribunals and as Vice-Chairman of
Central Administrative Tribunals has also not
proved happy. Since the age of retirement for
these posts is 65, the persons so appointed hardly

get a three-year or sometimes, even less term in

the offica, It would be more appropriate if the

sitting Judges of the High Courts who have got at


—2103:-

jeast net less than one year to go before
retirement from the High Court, should be
considered for appointment to these posts. In
this manner, they will have at least a four-year
term which would give them sufficient time to
settle down in the office and do some productive
work. Ordinarily, an Administrative Member should
not be appointed as the Vice-Chairman of CAT or as

the Chairman of SAT,

An appeal should be provided to the High Court, to
be necessarily heard by a Division Bench against
the orders of the Administrative Tribunal. The
appeal shall lie to that High Court within whose
territorial jurisdiction the Tribunal rendering
the judgment to be appealed against is located.
This measure removes one of the serious and
principal criticisms against the judgment of the
Supreme Court in L.Chandra Kumar viz., that there
cannot be a judicial review of an order passed by
an authority in exercise of its power of Judicial
Review. The Tribunat's order, according to the
said decision, is in exercise of a power of
judicial review; if so, this order cannot be the
subject-matter of a judicial review once again.
Judicial review, by its very nature, content and
concept, is only against administrative or

quasi-judicial? action of administrative and other


—:104:-

authorities say the critics. The remedy of appeal
should be provided not only against the final

orders but also against the interlocutory orders

of the Tribunal.

The Commission is of the opinion that if the
aforesaid three measures are implemented along with
several other measures and directions issued by the
Supreme court in L.Chandra Kumar, these Tribunals should
become more effective instruments of Taw and would give
satisfaction to the parties coming before them. It may
go a long way in making these Tribunals more effective

instruments in the system of dispensation of justice.

4,6 Necessity for training of personnel manning the

tribunals:-

The need for imparting training to personnel
(judicial and administrative members/technical members)
who man the tribunals cannot be ignored. The Frank’s
Committee (supra) also recommended the imparting of
training to the members of the tribunal. The Law
Commission has already stressed the need for imparting

such training.

(a) Law Commission of India in its 116th Report on

formation of Al? India Judicial Services recommended,

inter alia, as follows:


-:105:-

“B.13....While recommending the constitution of an
Indian Judicial Service, a bold step is taken to make a
total departure from the earlier view that a minimum
Practice at the Bar is a pre-requisite to become a
judicial officer. To the extent that a fresh law
graduate, after qualifying at the competitive examination
would enter judicial service, the importance of
pre-service training both as to pattern, subject and

duration, has been considerably increased ”

"6.14...,.It does not require a Jong argument to
affirmatively assert that State Public Service
Commissions generally have lost their credibility. Way

back in 1958, the Law Commission observed that “the
evidence given by members of the Public Service
Commissions in some of the States does create the feeling
that they do not deserve to be in the responsible posts
they occupy. In some of the southern States, ‘the
impartiality of the Commissions in making selections to

the Judicial service was seriously questioned.....

“..,.Now that a judicial service at an att~-India
level is being proposed and recommended, it is necessary
to set up a National Judicial Service Commission. Its
raison d’etre, composition, powers, functions and duties
will be set out in detail in a separate report dealing

with this aspect. Broadly, it must be composed of a


-:106:-

recently retired Chief Justice of the Supreme court of
India, one or two retired Justices of the Supreme Court,
three to five retired Chief Justices of the High Courts,
one to two retired Judges of the High Court, two
outstanding members of the Bar, President of the Bar
Council of India and two to three outstanding legal
academics. The body shall be csonstituted by the

President of India.”

(0) The Law Commission in its 117th Report on Training

of Judicial Officers recommended, inter alia, as follows:

“Rendering justice is an art in itself and
acquiring rudiments of the art needs training. The
minimum equipment to render justice requires a keen
intellect to sift grain from the chaff, toa perceive
falsehood, to appraise relative claims, to evaluate
evidence, a fair and balanced approach, needs of the
society, the constitutional goals and able all times a
keen desire to do justice. None of these aspects are
dealt with in the syllabus prescribed at law colleges.
If training is imparted to an impressionable mind, not
contaminated by some of the prevailing undesirable
practices in vogue in the present day Bar, amongst others
by judges who have mastered the art of rendering justice,
the same can be acquired. In order therefore, to equip a
fresh law graduate to be a good judge a pre-service

training is indispensable. Similarly, those who enter


5>:107:-

state judicial service at grass roots level will equally
need training in the art of rendering justice. While the
basic tenets of training in respect of both may be the
same, the duration may vary depending upon the minimum
qualification prescribed for becoming eligible for
entering service. The Law Commission must cater to the
needs for pre-service training at both the levels,

institutional as well as practical training.”

4.7 Measures to check deterioration in moral values.

Corruption, and nepotism are on the increase in the

selection process FOC8eSSi~

There has been a decline in moral vatues,and a

prevalence of corruption and nepotism in the past.

In the case of Ajay Hasia & Ors ४8 Khalid Mujib

Sehravardi, 1981(1)SCC 722,745, (Constitution Bench)

observed as follows:

“Now, there can be no doubt that, having regard to the
drawbacks and deficiencies in the oral interview test and
the conditions prevailing in the country, particularly
when there is deterioration in moral values and
corruption and nepotism are very much on the increase,

allocation of a high percentage of marks for the oral


-:108:-

interview as compared to the marks allocated for the
written test, cannot be accepted by the court as free

from the vice of arbitrariness.”

With the intensity of corrosion of morat values,
corruption has increased gigantically in our country even
after two decades of these observations of the Supreme
Court. It can be evidenced through a spurt of various
scams in the country. In Shiv Sagar Tiwari v. Union of
India (1997) 1 SCC 444, the prevalence of scams in the
country has been judicially recognised. It speaks of the
prevalent corruption in the country being at it peak,
corroding the democratic structure of the country. The
experience of selection of judicial personnel through
some State Public Service Commissions has been very
discouraging inasmuch as these Commissions have lost
their credibility (please refer to the observations of
the Law Commission of India in its 116th report quoted in

this chapter).

Even if the said Commissions are excluded from the
jurisdiction of the selection of personnel manning these
tribunals (which are relegated to the status of District
Judges/Additional District Judges), yet the manner of
selection of these persons through personal interview
only is not “impervious to political interference,
corruption, nepotism especially when no evidence of

tape-recording of interview is maintained, and public


—:109:-

does not have access to such confidential matters to
enable them to impugn the selection process. Candidates
coming from far off places do not have contacts or the
time to spare to delve out the illegalities in the
selection process and thus the illegalities remain hidden

10 the files of the selection process.

It cannot be denied that those candidates who
could manage to secure appointments through corrupt
means, can not keep the adjudicating atmosphere free from
corrosion as they seek the return of expenditure incurred
by them in finding their way into the tribunal. This
Forms a cycle of corruption and lowering of the judicial

values. This cyclic process becomes unending because

greed is never curtailed.

As observed in L. Chandra Kumar’s case paragraph
89 (supra), certain drastic measures have to be resorted
to in order to elevate the standards of tribunals to
ensure that they stand up to constitutional scrutiny in
the discharge of the power of judicial review conferred
upon them. The Supreme Court has also recommended under
Paragraph 96 and 97 of the judgment that until a wholly
independent agency for the administration of 911
tribunals can be set up, it is desirable that all such
tribunals should be as far as possible under a single
nodal ministry which will, inter alia, Jay down the

Procedure for the selection of the members of the


-“:110:-

Tribunals. That body wil? also have to take into
consideration the comments of expert bodies like the Law

Commission of India and the Malimath Committee in this

regard.

In the backdrop of these developments, it is
evident that the said nodal agency will have before it
the data of manpower of the tribunal members, and details

of their retirement, and vacancy position etc

Under the French Administrative Courts System,
appointments are made through a national competitive
examination (see article by V.S. Chauhan on ‘Justice by
Administrative Tribunals’ AIR 1986 Journal 56, 58). In
search of a solution to the problem under consideration,
the Law Commission is of the considered view that
judicial members (other than the Chairman and
Vice-Chairman) to man the tribunal ought to be selected

through the process of a high standard written

examination followed by personal interview. It is only

if he qualifies in the written examination that he should
be considered for personal interview. The percentage of
marks allocated for written examination and personal
interview can be 85% and 15% respectively. Further more,
the evidentiary record of personal interview and written

test should be maintained at least for a period of two

years.


“:111:-

According to section 6(3)(b) of the Act, a
Judicial Member has to be selected from two categories
vis. (8) a person who has been or qualified to be a
judge of the High Court and (0) a person who has been a
member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in
Grade-I of that service for at least three years, In
view of the fact that the Commission is recommending the
selection of Judicial Members through a process of a high
standard written examination followed by personal
interview, it is necessary that there should be a wider
choice for selecting meritorious persons as Judicial
Members. Accordingly, all law officers (irrespective of
their designation) holding, for at least three years, a
post equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or any other post under the Central
or State Government or in the public undertakings owned
or controlled by the Central/State Government carrying a
scale of pay which is not less than that of ai Joint
Secretary to the Government of India, should be made
eligible for competing in the examination and selection
for the post of a Judicial Member, Accordingly, it is
recommended that Section 6(3)(b) of the Act should be

substituted by the following words:-

“Law officers (irrespective of their designation)
holding for at least three years, a post
equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the

Government of India; or holding for at least three


—:412:-

years any other post under the Central or State
Government or in the public undertakings owned or
controlted by the Central/State Government,
earrying a scale of pay which is not less than

that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of

India."
4.8 Constitution of National Appellate Administrative
Tribunal : An _alternatiye recommendation

The Supreme Court has laid down in lL. Chandra
Kumar’s case (supra) that an aggrieved party can have
recourse to the jurisdiction of the respective High Court
under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India,
against the decision of the Central Administrative
Tribunal. The repercussions of this development of law
have already been felt. The Karnataka Government has
sought to abolish the Karnataka State Administrative
Tribunal. In the news items in the recent past, it has
appeared that even the Central Government is proposing to
abolish CAT, The remedy of judicial review by the High
Court provided against the decision of the Administrative
Tribunal and a possible further appeal to the Supreme
Court under Article 136 is not only time-consuming but
also expensive. Besides this, the various High Courts
may interpret differently any statutory provision

concerning the service conditions governing the


-:413:-

employees. Thus the tack of uniformity in the High Court
decisions and consequently in CAT benches will create
confusion in the mind of the Titigant. It will further
make the public loose faith in seeking justice through

the judiciary, and thus undermine the democratic norms.

The Commission ig of the considered view that a
National Appellate Administrative Tribunal be constituted
on the lines of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission under section 20 of the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986. It shall be manned by a retired Chief Justice
of a High Court or a retired Judge of the Supreme Court
of India. An appeal, on substantial questions of Jaw and
fact may lie to the proposed Appellate forum, against the

decision of the Central Administrative Tribunal.

The proposed forum may have branches 811 over the

0
o

ountry

al
ie)
|
a
©
¢
s
®
9°
0
५
cr
oO
5
~
a
a
a
>
a
छः
3
¢
0
प्‌
>
o
oe
cre)
2
3
+

The decision of the proposed Appellate court will
be binding on all benches of CAT. The proposed forum
will be of status higher than a High Court but below the

Supreme Court.

An appeal may lie against the decision of the
proposed appellate forum to the Supreme Court. Under
section 130-E of the Customs Act, 4962, an appeal lies

from the decision of the CEGAT to the Supreme court.


“:114:-

Similarly, under section 23 of the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986, an appeal lies against the National
Commission’s decision to the Supreme Court. It will not
be advisable to convert the Supreme Court to a first
appellate court, because flooding of appeals against the
Tribunals’ orders may dilute the importance of the
Supreme Court and consequently our democratic polity will
suffer (€1994(2) Journal Section SCALE J1 by Justice A.M.
Ahmadi). In this manner, an aggrieved party will not
have a right of recourse to the writ jurisdiction under
Article 226/227 of the High Court against the decision of
CAT inasmuch as it is settled law that where adequate
remedy of appeal is there, one cannot have recourse to
the writ jurisdiction (see AIR 1996 SC 1209; AIR 1997 SC
2189). Though it is undisputed that where the vires of
the statute under which the Tribunal is constituted, is
challenged, one ean have recourse to the writ
jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of
India but such cases will be insignificant in number.
Similarly when a right to appeal is contemplated to the
Supreme Court against the decision of the proposed
Appellate Administrative Tribunal, one cannot have
recourse to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court under

Article 226/227 of the Constitution.

This procedure will take care of the ensuing
problems cropping up after the decision in L.Chandra

Kumar’s case (supra).


5:115:-

The proposed President of the Appellate forum wilt

continue to draw the same salaries and perks as are

admissible to a sitting Judge.

All pending writ petitions against the decision of
CAT/SAT in pursuance of L. Chandra Kumar’s case (except
those in which the vires under which the Tribunal is
constituted, is challenged), may be transferred to the

proposed Appellate Forum.

This proposal can be effective and beneficial,
only if Benches of the Appellate Forum are established at
911 important centres, at least in the capital of every

State, on the pattern of the High Court.

4.9 Grouping Appeals before CAT/SAT and the proposed

National Appellate Administrative Tribunal

It ts the need of the hour that for expeditious
disposa? of cases, all cases which raise one or more
common questions of Taw and on the basis of which, the
cases can be disposed off by a common judgment, should be
grouped together and heard together. Thus in the 79th
Report of the Law Commission of India on delay and
arrears in High Courts and other appellate courts, this

recommendation has been echoed as quoted in Chapter 171

(supra).


7:116:-

4.10 Similarly, the Law Commission of India has
recommended in its 125th report on “The Supreme Court A

fresh look” in paragraph 4.20--

“Cases covered by earlier Judgments of the Court

must be grouped together by a computer.”

Besides the decisions of the apex court, if there
are judgments of the Proposed Appellate Forum, then the
cases covered by it, and pending before CAT/SAT and even
before the proposed forum, should be grouped tagether and

disposed off together.

In order to implement the recommendations
contained under this Paragraph and the preceding
Paragraph, in a true spirit, CAT/SAT and the Proposed
Appellate Forum should appoint research officers, to
assist the respective Tribunals in this regard, in
finding out the commen cases, and the judgments already
promounced by courts which are binding on the cases
pending. They will be definitely assisting the Tribunal
in increasing the expertise and efficiency of the
Tribunal and thus realise these objectives. CAT/SAT and
the proposed forum may from time to time invite
applications from the litigants/opposite parties. The
Research Officer may then scrutinise the claim of the
applicant and put up the research note to the Bench for
Passing the appropriate orders. The Forum may issue

hotice to the parties before disposing of the cases as


5:117:-

per the judgment already pronounced by the higher court
and binding upon it. Similarly, an exercise may be done
by the Research Officer for grouping of the pending cases

which can be heard together.

4.11 Disposal of cases on the basis of arguments filed of cases on the basis of arguments filed

by the parties even through the post:

Towards achieving the objectives of easy
acoessibility/openness, under Section 19 of the Central
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, an application can be
Filed by a party even through the post (Rule 4 of the
Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure) Rules, 1987).
It follows that if notice is issued by CAT/SAT or the
proposed forum the opposite party may be allowed to send
his reply even through post and it can also be laid down
that the applicant can file his rejoinder to the reply in

the same manner.

Stmilarly, the applicant should be permitted to
file his written arguments/briefs with precedents on the
analogy of the recommendation of the Law Commission of
India in its 125th report on “The Supreme Court - A fresh

look", pr. 4.18 as follows:-

"4.18 ,... Therefore, it is now inevitable that
this reverential approach to oral arguments must

yield to the necessities of time. There are a


“:118:-

number of cases which can be identified by the
Chief Justice of India in which oral arguments can
be totally dispensed with. Petitions for special
leave which can be admitted without oral arguments
need not be listed in court but must be admitted
by circulation.... The Courts must be empowered

to dispense with oral arguments and insist upon

written briefs.”

The proposed research officers may assist the
Tribunal in disposing of the case on the basis of the

written briefs received.

This practice of making written submissions will
at least take care of holding favourable attitude against

a particular lawyer and save tribunal’s time.

Above-all, it may be necessary to circulate for
information of all the members of the Tribunals, the
effect of not following the judgment of the Higher Court,
especially when attention was drawn by the party in the
written brief. The effect is it leads to contempt of
Court as held in Shri Baradakanta Mishra Vs. Shri

Bhimgen Dixit, AIR 1972 SC 2466:-

"15-16 .... any deliberate and mala-fide conduct
of not following the law laid down in the previous

decision undermines the constitutional authority


“-:119:-

and respect of the High Court. .... It is ....
also likely to subvert the Rule of Jaw = and
engender harassing uncertainty and confusion in

the administration of law.”

This recommendation will be a

w

tep in the
direction of making the Tribunal member accountable for

his action if he violates the Rute of Law.

It has been observed that litigants and their
advocates many a time raise disputes before the superior
courts that though a particular decision of the higher
court was cited before the Tower court, yet it failed to
discuss the same in its judgment. In order to advance
the cause of the administration of justice so that the
rule of Taw can be further strengthened, it is felt that
it may be provided in the procedure followed by the
tribunal that before the beginning of the arguments, both
the parties be required to file their written arguments
and counter arguments, if they desire to do so, and at
the csconelusion of the arguments both the parties be
required to file a list of the cases cited by them before
the tribunal during the course of the hearing. Such a
course wil) avoid the raising of any dispute on those
issues as well as compel the presiding officer to adhere
to the rule of law laid down by the superior court and
avoid harassment to the litigants and confusion in the

administration of law.


-:420:-

4.12 Constitution of Benches of retired members of

Tribunals

As observed by the Law Commission of India in its
124th Report, on ’The High Court Arrears - A fresh look’.
paragraphs 3.15 to 3.26, there are numerous cases which
are more than five years old in the High Courts. It
recommended that Benches of retired Judges may be
constituted to do civil, criminal and miscellaneous work
in the morning from 8.30 a.m. to 12 of 12.30 noon. The
High Court Judges will then assemble from 12 or 12.30
noon and work up to 5.30 claiming a half hour Tunch
break. Thus the rich experience of judges and expertise
in the justicina process can be used. Similarly, the
services of retired tribunal members can be utilised for
disposal of old matters pending before Tribunals, without

involving any additional costs on buildings, libraries,

etc.

4.13 Laying down of the policy and machinery to curb

litigation between employees and the Government:-~

Unless a proper litigation poticy is evolved by
the Government or the public sector undertakings, it
would be an idle parade of familiar knowledge to advance
advocating the setting up of various tribunals. The Law

Commission of India has already recommended the setting


-“>:121:-“

up of an Effective Grievance Cell to dispose of the
Problems raised by the staff in its 126th report as cited
in chapter III, supra.

We reiterate those recommendations without
repeating them with the observation that untess an
appropriate litigation policy and machinery is evolved to
curb the problems, industrial relations will suffer and

Productivity will go down,

4.14 Need to quantify the costs for raising frivolous to uantify the costs for raising frivolou

defences:-

There is @ general proclivity to raise all the
sundry, frivolous and untenable points of facts and law.
The Law Commission of India has recommended in its 131st
report on the “Role of Legal Profession in the
Administration of Justice”, (cited in chapter IIl,
supra), that the presiding judge must also certify at the
time of passing the judgment whether untenable and
frivolous defences were raised how much time was spent in
recording the decisions on them, and if so, quantify the
costs to be awarded. This will curb the tendency of
filing frivolous cases. We reiterate those

recommendations for implementation in the Tribunals also.


—:t22:-

Need to evolve a mechanism for nipping in the bud

the conflicting interpretation at the CAT/High

Court:-

Untess uniformity of the decisions at higher level
is maintained, it is likely to raise confusion in the
minds of litigants. The Commission has exhaustively
dealt with the problem and recommended measures to tackle
the problem, in its 136th report on “Conflicts in High
Court Decisions on Central Laws - How to resolve”,

(chapter III, gupra).

We reiterate those measures quoted under chapter
III and recommended that the tribunals should also be
empowered to refer the conflicting decisions to the
Supreme Court. This will also give a chance to the

aggrieved party to present his point of view.

4.16 Locus standi of aggrieved party to review the

order and the need to provide explicitly the extent of

the powers of review of CAT and the need to publish it in

the news papers and to circulate it by the concerned

department so that persons can intervene in the

proceedings by which they will be adversely affected:-



-:423:-

Section 22(3)(f) of the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 enunciates the powers oF the tribunal

concerning reviewing its decision and provides as

follows:-

"(2) A Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of
discharging its functions under this Act, the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while
trying a suit, in respect of the following

matters, namely,-

(1) reviewing its decisions”

Rule 17 of the Central Administrative Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules, 1987 prescribes the procedure for
making an application for review. Under sub-rute (1) of
rule 17, it is provided that no application for review
shall be entertained unless it is filed within 30 days
from the date of receipt of a copy of the order sought to

be reviewed.

In the case of K.Ajit Babu v. Union of India, AIR
1997 SC 3277 the question arose as to whether a review
application can be filed by a person not a party to a
case but who would be adversely affected by an earlier
judgment of the tribunal. The Supreme Court held as

follows:-


—:124:-

“4. .eerre..Often in service matters the judgments
rendered either by the tribunal or by the court
also affect other persons, who are not parties to
the cases. It may help one class of employees and
at the same time adversely affect another claes of
employees. In such circumstances the judgments of
the Courts or the Tribunals may not be strictly
judgments in personam affecting only ६० the

parties to the cases, they would be judgments in

rem. In os

a

uch a situation, the question arises;
what remedy is available to such affected persons
who are not parties to a case, yet the decision in
such a case adversely affects their rights in the
matter of their seniority. In the present case,
the view taken by the Tribunal that the only
remedy available to the affected persons is to
File 8 review of the judgment which affects them
and not to file a fresh application under $.19 of
the Act. Section 22(3) (1) of the Act empowers
the Tribunal to review its decisions. Rule 17 of
the Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure and
Rules) (hereinafter referred to as “the Rules")
provides that no application for review shall be
entertained unless it is filed within 30 days from
the date. of receipt of the copy of the order
sought to be reviewed. Ordinarily, right of

review is available only to those who are party to


~:125:-

a case. However, even if we give wider meaning to
the expression “a person feeling aggrieved”
occurring in 5.22 of the Act whether such person
aggrieved can seek review by opening the whole
case decided by the Tribunal. The right of review
is not a right of appeal where 9011 questions
decided are open to challenge. The right of
review is possible only on limited grounds,
mentioned in Order 47 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. Although strictly speaking the 0.47 of
the Code of Civil Procedure may not be applicable
ta the Tribunals but the principles contained
therein surely have to be extended, Otherwise
there being no limitation on the power of review
it would be an appeal and there would be no
certainty of finality of a decision. Besides
that, the right of review is available if such an
applicationn is filed within the period of
limitation, The decision given by the Tribunal,
unless reviewed or appeated against, attains
finality. If such a power to review is permitted,
no decision is final, as the decision would be
subject to review at any time at the instance of
party feeling adversely affected by the said
decision. A party in whose favour a decision has
been given cannot monitor the case for all times
to come. Public policy demands that there should

be end to Taw suits and if the view of the


—:126:-

Tribunal is accepted the proceedings in a case
will never come to an end. We, therefore, find
that a right of review is available to the
aggrieved pesons on restricted ground mentioned in
0.47 of the Code of Civil Procedure and if filed

within the period of limitation.”

In a recent decision in the case of Sri 9०708
Bandhu Biswal v. Krishna Chanda Mohanty, 1998 (3) SCALE
226, the decision in K.Ajit Babu (supra) was also
referred to and it was observed as regards third parties

are concerned as follows:-

"10, ,..,. We will assume for the time being that

the applicants are persons aggrieved. Even so,
the question is whether they can have a judgment
which has attained finality by virtue of an order
of this Court, set aside in review. There is no
doubt that as between the parties to the main
judgment, the judgment is final and binding. The
respondents, State of Orissa and Union of India,
are therefore, bound to give effect to the
judgment of the Tribunal in T.A. No. + of 1989
jn the case of Gopa-Bandhu Biswal. If this is so,
can a third party by filing a review petition get
that same judgment reviewed and obtain an order
that Gopa-Bandhu Biswal is not entitled to the

benefits of the directions contained in the main


-:427:-

judgment since that judgment is now set aside? In
our view this 18 wholly impermissible. It will
lead to reopening a matter which has attained
finality by virtue of an order of this court. The
applicants, even if they are persons aggrieved, do
hot have, in the present case, a right of review
under any part of Order 47 Rule 1. Even under
Order 47 Rute 1 (2), the party not appealing from
a decree or oarder can apply for review only on
grounds other than the grounds of appeal which
were before the appellate court, and during the
pendency of the appeal. In the present case all
the grounds which were urged in review were, in
fact urged before the Tribunal at the time when
the tribunal decided the main application and they
were also urged by the petitioner in the Special
Leave Petition which was filed before this court.
The Special Leave Petition has been dismissed.
The same grounds cannot be again urged by way of a
review patition by another party who was not a

party in the main petition.

“44. According to the applicants certain
documents though produced before the Tribunal were
not noticed by the Tribunal in deciding the main
matter. Even so ance a judgment of a tribunal has
attained finality, it cannot be reopened after the

Special Leave Petition against that judgment has


—2128:-

been dismissed. The only remedy for a person who
wants to challenge that judgment is to file a
separate application before the Tribunal in his
own case and pursuade the tribunal either to refer
the question to a larger Bench or, if the tribunal
prefers to follow its earlier decision, to file an
appeal before the Tribunal’s judgment and have the
Tribunal’s judgment set aside in appeal. Review

is not an available remedy.

“42, Undoubtedly when the tribunal interprets
Service Rules and Regulations, the interpretation
so given may affect other members of that service
past, present or future. One can understand a
wider meaning in this context being given ta the
phrase “person aggrieved", thus enlarging the
right of persens to intervene at the hearing
before the Tribunal, or in appeal, or for filing a
review petition. Nevertheless, this right must be

exercised at the appropriate time and in

accordance with Taw. A review petition must be
within the scope of section 22 (3)(f) of the
Administrative Tribunals Act read with Order 47
Rule and must comply with the rules framed under
the Adminsitrative Tribunals Act. The present
review applications are not within the principles
laid down in Order 47 Rule t. They also do not

comply with the relevant rules. Rule 17 of the


it

is

-:129:-

Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure) Rules,
1987 prescribes, inter-alia that no application
for review shall be entertained unless it is filed
within 30 days from the date of the receipt of the

copy of the Order sought to be reviewed....”

"46.... If the tribunal decides to follow its
earlier judament the respondents in these
applications can file petitions for leave to
appeal if they so desire; and any other person
aggrieved may also, with the leave of the court,
apply for special leave to file an appeal. In the
event of the Tribunal coming to a conclusion that
its earlier judgment requires re-consideration,
the tribunal can refer the question to a larger
Bench. In either case the persons aggrieved can
apply and intervene to put forward their point of

view.'

From the aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court,

evident that:-

(a) ordinarily a right of review is available only
ta those who are party to a case,

(b) in circumstances where the judgments may also
affect other persons, who are not parties to the

cases, such judgments being strictly not judgments

in personam affecting only the parties to the


-:130:-

cases, a right of review should be available to
the aggrieved persons with the leave of the
Tribunal on the restricted grounds mentioned in
Order 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure and above
all if an application is filed within the period
of limitation,

(८०) the right of review of the decisions of the
tribunal oor court should be available only on
Vimited grounds mentioned in Order 47 ९०९ and the
principles contained therein have to be extended

to the tribunal.

In view of the above, the Commission is of the
considered opinion that section 22 (3)(f) of the Act
should be amended to explicitly incorporate the right
of review to an aggrieved persan (who is not a party ta
the proceedings) with the leave of the Tribunal but
restricted to the ground mentioned in Order 47 67९. छठ
far as the parties are concerned, the right of review is

already secured by the said provision.

4.17 There should be a reform of the administrative
justice system in order to ensure better standards of
independence, accessibility/openness, expertise,

representativeness, efficiency and accoutability.


-:13t:-

CHAPTER -५

CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND GOLD (CONTROL) APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
{CEGAT).

5.1 The CEGAT is constituted under Section 129 of the
Customs Act, 1962 and by virtue of the definition of the
“Appellate Tribunal" in clause (AA) of Section 2 of the
Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 read with Sections 35B,
35C and 35D of the said Act, the said Tribunal is also
the Appellate Tribunal for the purpose of the Central
Excise and Salt Act, 1944, This Tribunal , it is
necessary to point out, is net constituted under Article
3238, but under the special enactments aforementioned
which are in no way connected with Article 323B. Section
35L(b) of the Central Excise Act and Section 130&(b) of
the Customs Act, 1962 provide for a direct appeal to the
Supreme Court against the orders of the Tribunal in
matters relating to determination of any question having
a relation to the rate of duty payable or to the value of
the goods for the purpose of assessment, hereinafter
referred to for the sake of convenience, as
elassification and valuation respectively. In other
matters, a reference is provided to the concerned High
Court under Section 35G of the Central Excise Act and
Section 130 of the Customs Act. As a matter of fact, not
Jess than half of the matters which come before the CEGAT

under both the enactments pertain either to the rate of


~1132:-

duty payable or to the value of the goods for the purpose
of assessment. In this manner, a direct statutory appeal
to the Supreme Court is provided against half the number
of erders passed by the Tribunal under both the
enactments and these matters appear to be more
significant having regard to the stakes involved therein
both for the Revenue as well as the assessees. In other
matters decided by the Tribunal, recourse to High Court
by way of reference has to be adopted. Even here,
against any judgment delivered by the High Court 00 such
reference, an appeal is provided to Supreme Court under
Section 350६ (6) of the Central Excise Act and Section
130E(a) of the Customs Act. Though these two enactments
do not directly and specifically provide for an exclusion
of judicial review by the High Court and the Supreme
Court, they do so by necessary implication. By providing

a direct appeal to Supreme Court in a good number of

cases decided by the Tribunal, which remedy is a far

Tz

atter and a wider remedy than the remedy of judicial
review available under Article 226 or 227 or under
Article 32 of the Constitution of India and by providing
for the reference to the High Court in other cases, the
intention to exclude the right to judicial review by the
High Court and the Supreme Court is abundantly
manifested. The remedy of a reference to the High Court,
a procedure prescribed by the Income-Tax Act, 1961 (as
well as the repealed Indian Income-Tax Act, 1922), is a

well-established procedure and no one has suggested that


7-2133:-

the right to judicial review is available against the
arders of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal in addition
to the remedy of reference to the High Court and the

appeal to Supreme Court from the orders of the High

Court.

The Law Commission is of the opinion that the
function performed by the CEGAT is of crucial importance
both From the point of view of the Revenue as well the
assessee. The matters coming before the Tribunal involve
huge stakes, sometimes running into tens and hundreds of
crores. The Tribunal has also got the power to grant
stay pending the appeal, vide the proviso to Section 35F
of the Central Excise Act and the proviso to Section 1296
of the Customs Act. If a stay is granted and the appeal
is not decided by the Tribunal within a reasonably short
time, it will result in prejudice both to the Revenue as
well as to the Assessees. This is more so after the
Judgment of the larger Constitution Bench of the Supreme

court in Mafatlal Industries ttd. v. Union of India

1997 (5) 800 536, affirming and upholding the doctrine of
unjust enrichment and the validity of (Amending) Act 40
of 1991 giving statutory recognition to the aforesaid
doctrine. It is in the interest of the assessees in
particular that the disputes relating to classification
and valuation are disposed of as quickly as possible.
The Law Commission has a feeling that the highly

significant nature of the function performed by this


“:134:-

Tribunal has not been duly and sufficiently appreciated
by those concerned and it is Probably for this reason
that adquate number of Benches have not been created by
the government which is absolutely essential for the
Prompt disposal of the large number of appeals filed
before the Tribunal. (As a matter of fact, the facts and
figures made available by the Tribunal show that the
filing is increasing with every passing year which is
only adding to the problem of the huge backlog which has
already accumulated.) In view of the fact that in a bulk
of matters decided by this Tribunal, appeal lies to the
Supreme Court directly under the two statutes
aforementioned, it would not be unreasonable to infer
that this Tribunal has been treated by the Parliament
almost on par with the High Court. The status and
dignity of this Tribunal deserves to be enhanced

accordingly.

With a view to make this Tribunal a more effective
instrument of law for achieving the abjectives for which
it has been constituted and for achieving the objectives
underlying the Central Excise Act and the Customs Act,
the following recommendations are made which the
Commission hopes, will be given effect to, without any
delay, by the Government of India. The recommendations

arei-


(A)

(B)

“>:135:-

No person shall be appointed as the President of
the Tribunal unless he is or has been the Chief
Justice of a High Court. He must be ai person
reputed for his efficiency, integrity and hard
work. Immediately upon his appointment he must be
provided a residence in New Delhi consistent with
his status besides other perquisites and amenities
to which he was entitled as the Chief Justice of
the High Court. The selection of the President
should be made by a committee consisting of the
Hon'ble Chief Justice of India and the two sanior
most Judges of the Supreme Court. As a matter of
convention, it must be ensured that there is no
time lag between the retirement of a President and
the appointment of his successor. Only where a
suitable sitting or retired Chief Justice is not
available, should a senior sitting or retired High
Court Judge with the requisite qualities be
gongidered. An effective and efficient President
would go a long way in improving the work-culture
of the Tribunal - a fact borne out by experience.

Section 129 of the Customs Act calls for an
amendment. The appointment of the President of
the Tribunal should be a direct appointment in the
manner stated above, whereas section 129, as it
stands now, contemplates appointing one of the

Members of the Tribunal as the President thereof.


—:136:-

While the appointment of the Vice-President can be
done from among the Members, the President of the
Tribunal should be chosen directly from among the
sitting or retired Chief Justices or retiring or

retired sentor Judges of the High Court.

In the matter of appaintment of Judicial Members
of the Tribunal, an attempt shauld be made, as far
as possible, ta recruit Members of the Bar between
the age of 45 and 50. They must be provided with
an official residence as soon as possible upon
their appointment/posting to a particular sity and
they should also be entitted to all the
perquisites and amenities admissible to their
office. Not making a suitable residence available
almost immediately upon their posting to a place
and driving them to seek private accommodation at
exhorbitant cost acts as a disincentive to those
considering joining this service. It is equally
necessary to provide that these Judicial Members
should te considered for appointment as Judges of
the High Courts (of the State from which they
hail) in the quota normally reserved for members
of the subordinate judiciary and if for any reason
this course is not found feasible or practicable,
they may be considered under sub-clause (b) of
clause 2 of Article 217 read with extension (aa)

and/or (9) appended to the said clause. If this


“:137:-

assurance is held out, many members of the Bar may
be attracted to this office, which may
incidentally have the added advantage of making
available persons of competence, who have acquired
expertise in Central Excise and Customs matters to

the High Courts.

The prompt recruitment and posting of Judicial and
Administrative Members is again a necessity, which though
an obvious requirement, has not really been honoured in
practice. In this connection, the practice of taking
District Judges on deputation to work as Judicial Members
of the Tribunal should be encouraged. They should retain
a lien in their parent service so that their chances of

promotion or of appointment to the High Court are not

jeopardised,

(D) In matters where a reference lies to the High
Court under section 35G of the Gentral Excise Act
and Section 150 of the Customs Act, the
requirement of applying to the Tribunal for making
a reference as provided by sub-section (1) of
section 350 and sub-section (1) of section 130
respectively of the said enactments may be
dispensed with. Section 35G and section 130 may
be suitably amended providing that any person
aggrieved with the decision of the Tribunal may

8001५ ta the High Court for directing the Tribunal


(E)

(F)

-:138:~-

to refer the questions of taw arising from the
decision of the Tribunal. The time limitation for
making such an application can be retained at six
months as is now provided by sub-section (3) of
the aforesaid sections. It must however be
provided that a persan so applying to the High
Court should clearly state the questions of Taw
which he seeks to raise and should also specify
the paragraphs in the dacision/judgment of the
Tribunal relevant to the questions sought to be
raised, Such a provision is necessary in view of
the fact that the judgment of the Tribunal may

deal with several other questions of law and fact.

In every High Court there should at teast be one
Bench regularly hearing matters arising under the
Income-Tax Act, Central Excise and Salt Act and
the Customs Act. The matters arising under the
Jatter two enactments should, as far as possible,

be given precedence in the matter of hearing.

Every Bench of the Tribunal should be headed by a
Vice-President. For this purpose, there mist be
as many Vice-Presidents ag there are Benches of
the Tribunal. At any rate, the important centres
like Mumbai , Ahmedabad, Chennai and Calcutta

should necessarily have a Vice-President each.


(H)

(1)

—:139:-

The number of Benches should be commensurate with
the work in the Tribunal. Since avery
Member/Bench of the Tribunal is expected to
dispose of a particular number of cases every
year, the number of Benches should be determined
on the above basis and provided for. On the
Present pendency, there ought to be at least 20 to
22 Benches, in all. As stated hereinabove, the
filing in the Tribunal is going up with every

Passsing year - and not decreasing.

Special care should be taken while appointing the
Senior Departmental Representatives (507२8). and
Junior Departmental Representatives (JORS). Their
role is no less important. Persons of competence

and integrity alone should be designated as such.

The recommendations made regarding Central
Administrative Tribunal under paragraphs 4.9;

4.10; 4.11 and 4.43, Supra, shall also be extended
to CEGAT also.


-:140:-

CHAPTER - VI

INCOME~TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT)

6.1 So far as ITAT is concerned, the Commission is of
the opinion that no change is called for in the working
of this Tribunal since it has been working satisfactorily
for the last several decades. There is however one
measure of improvement which we wish to propose, namely,
the dispensing with of the requirement of applying to the
Tribunal ip the first instance for making a reference to
the High Court as provided by sub-section (1) of section
256 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961. The procedure can be
simplified and a lot of time can be saved by providing
that a person aggrieved with the decision/judgment of the
Tribunal may apply to the High Court straightway
requesting the High Court toe direct the Tribunal to state
the questions of law which according to him (the
applicant) arise from the decision of the Tribunal. The
present practice of clearly stating the questions of law
which a parson wants to raise must be continued. The
applicant must be further directed to specify the
paragraphs in the decision of the Tribunal which are
relevant to each of the questions of Jaw raised by him,
separately. It should aiso be provided that such
applications should be listed before the appropriate
Bench in the High Court as soon as they are ready for

hearing. This is being emphasised for the reason that in


-“-:141:-

certain High Courts, applications under section 256(2)

are kept pending for years together before they come up

for hearing.

6.2 It has been observed that the same question of Taw
is involved in the case of many assessees every year
repeatedly in the taxation matters, till the question of
law is finally decided by the higher courts. This
results im a geometric increase in the number of cases on
similar questions and also leads to uncertainty in
respect of the payment of taxes, In the event of a
decision holding against the assessee on those recurring
questions of law, the cumulative interest on taxes
payable, under various heads as determined by the court
to be payable by the assessee, sometimes reach very high
figures, which may give a jolt te the industry and even
lead to the closure of the industry in some cases.
Therefore, justice demands that the recurring disputes on
Account of common questions of law should be finally

settled at the earliest.

The sotution to this probtem may lie onty if
adequate attention of ITAT is drawn to such common
issues. Therefore, the ITAT may, through the assistance
of research officers specified under paras 4.9 and 4.10,
supra, invite applications regarding such common
jissues/recurring issues from the assessee/appellants or

from the Repondent/Revenue department by advertising from


~1142:-

time to time in newspapers and on notice boards. The
research officers may also delve into court files to find
out such common questions of Jaw and put them up hefore
the ITAT. The Tribunal should decide such issues ona
Priority basis. In their judgment, the Tribunal may
refer to the fact of taking up the common issue on an
expeditious basis, so that the High Court may also take
it up on a priority basis. Similarly, the High Court may
mention in their Judgment about taking up the matter on a
priority basis, so that in case the matter goes to the
Supreme Court, it may also decide the case expeditiously

to settle the matter.

6.3 The recomendations made regarding Central
Administrative Tribunal under paragraphs 4.9; 4.10; 4.11

and 4.13, supra, shal? also be extended to ITAT also.


—1143:-

CERTAIN GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

It may be mentioned that both in the first
questionnaire and the revised questionnaire as well as in
the suggestions received pursuant to these
questionnaires, one of the major issues debated was the
establishment of a National Tax Court (for direct taxes)

and a National Court of Indirect Taxes (for the purposes

of Central Excise and Salt Act and Customs Act) while
excluding the jurisdiction of the High Court altogether
in these matters, This idea is no longer relevant first
for the reason that both under the Central Excise Act and
the Customs Act, a direct appeal to the Supreme Court is
provided for in important matters viz., classification
and valuation and secondly because of the decision of the

Supreme Court in L.Chandra Kumar. According to this

decision, whose essential features have already been
detailed hereinabove, while such Tribunals can be
created, the judicial review of the High Courts under
Articles 226 and 227 and of the Supreme Court under
Article 32 cannot be excluded, which means that the
orders of such National Courts would still be subject to
judicial review by various High Courts in the country,
untless a direct appeal is provided to the Supreme Court
against the orders of such National Tax Court/National
Court of Indirect Taxes, which course would militate
against the very raison d’etre of the idea. And if no

such appeat is provided,

omeone may legitimately say


-1144s-

that the remedy of judicial review even against such
National Tribunals cannot be excluded. For the above
reasons, the said idea has not been pursued in this

Repert so far as these tribunals are concerned.


~2145:-

CHAPTER-Vit

Conclusions:

7.1 On the basis of the discussions contained in the
preceding Chapters, the Commission is of the considered
opinion that the following radical changes need to ba
taken immediately to achieve the reforms in the working
of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Central Excise
and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal and Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal to attain a sound justice delivery
system which is a sine qua non for the efficient

governance of a country wedded to the rule of law.

Thus the substance of the recommendations made in

the preceding Chapters is culled out below:-

7.2 The Law Commission makes the following
recommendations insofar as the administrative tribunals
constituted under the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985
enacted with reference to Article 323 of the Constitution

of India:

(a) With a view to improve the efficiency of the
administrative tribunals, the present practice of
appointing retired or about to retire District
Judges as- judicial members is not entirely

satisfactory. These District Judges do not deal


—:146:-

with service matters during their judicial service
and since they are appointed towards the end of
their career, there is not much time - and in some
of them, inclination - to learn this branch of the
law viz., service jurisprudence, they get hardly
two to three years oan the job. (It may be
remembered that in the Tight of the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Atl India Judicial Officers
Association case, the age of retirement of the
subordinate judiciary is now 60, in effect. It is
obvious that those who are not allowed to continue
beyond 58 years in view of their unsatisfactory
record, would not be considered or appointed as
members of the Administrative Tribunal). In this
view of the matter, an attempt should be made to
recruit members of the Bar between the ages of 45
and 50 who will have a longer period available to
them to prove their mettle. At the same time, it
is necessary, with a view to provide an incentive
to these judicial members that they should be
considered by the High Court (of the State from
which they hail) for appointment as judges of the
High Court in the quota normally reserved for
members of the subordinate judiciary and if for
any reason this course is not found feasible or
practicable, they may be considered under
sub-clause -(b) of clause (2) of Article 217 read

with Explanation (aa) and/or (9) appended to the


said clause. If this assurance is held out, many
members of the Bar may be attracted to this

office. It would also mean that persons of

competence, who have (acquired) expertise in

service matters would be available to the High
Court, Section 8 of the A.T.Act, 1985 may
accordingly be amended. In the case of members,

the initial term should be mace ten yea

renewable for a further period of five years.

(Cb) The actice of appointing retired or about te

retire High Court Judges as Chairman of State
Administrative Tribunals has alse not proved happy.

Since the age of retirement for these sts is 65, the

persons so appointed hardly gat ai three-year term or
sometimes even Tess - in office, Tt would be more
appropriate if the sitting Judges of the High Courts, who

have got at least not less than one year to go befor

ry
Dg

retirement from the High Court, should be considered for

In this manner, they will

a four-year term which would give them

sufficient to settle down jin the office and do some
oroductive wark, Ordinarily, an Administrative Member
should not be appointed as the Vice-Chairman af CAT or as
the Chairman af SAT.

(paragraph 4.5(6), supra)

(८३ An appeal should be provided to the High Court, to

be necessarily heard by a Division Bench against the

ra

he Administrative Tribunal. The appeal shat}

be to that High Court within whose territorial


~1148:-

jurisdiction the Tribunal rendering the judgment to be
appealed against, is located. This measure removes one
of the serious and principal criticisms against the
judgment of the Supreme Court in L.Chandra Kumar viz.,
that there cannot be a judicial review of an order passed
by an authority in exercise of its power of judicial
review. The Tribunal’s order, according to the said
decision, is in exercise of a power of judicial review;
if so, this order cannot be the subject matter of a
judicial review once again. Judiciat review, by its very
nature, content and concept, is only against
administrative or quasi-judicial action of administrative
and other authorities - say the critics. The remedy of
appeal should be provided not only against the final
orders but alse against the interlocutory orders of the

Tribunal.

(paragraph 4.5(¢), supra)

(d) As an alternative to the recommendation contained
in (०) above, it is recommended that the Government may
sonstitute a National Appellate Administrative Tribunal
to entertain appeals against the orders passed by the
Adminsitrative Tribunals. Such a National Apellate
Tribunal shal? have Benches in all important centres in
the country, if not in the capital of every State,
generally consistent with the pattern of the High Court,

Such an appellate forum should be headed by a former


-“:149:-

Chief Justice of a High Court or a former Judge of the
Supreme Court and whose other members shall be either
retired Judges of the Supreme Court or retired Chief
Justices of the High Courts as the case may be. An
appeal should be provided directly to the Supreme Court
and to the Supreme Court alone against the orders of such
an Appellate Tribunal. Such a court on the lines of the
National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission created by
the Consumers Protection Act, 1986 would ensure that the
Power under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution is
hot invoked against the orders of the appeltate forum.
Once an appeal is provided by the statute to the Supreme
Court against the orders of the appellate forum, it can
be stated with certainty that the High Courts would not
interfere with the orders of the appellate forum. Such a
course would also be consistent with the provisions of

the Customs Act and the Central Excise Act which provided

a

irect appeal to the Supreme Court against the orders of

QoQ

EGAT in matters retating to classification and
vatuation. If such an Appellate Tribunal is constituted,
the writ petitions pending in the several High Courts
against the orders of the Administrative Tribunals shall.
stand transferred to the appropriate Bench of the
Appallate Tribunal and be dealt with in accordance with
Taw. It is obvious that subject to the appeal to the
Supreme Court the orders of the National Appellate

Tribunal shall be final.


-:150:-

(paragraph 4.8, supra)

(8) The need for imparting training to personnel
manning the tribunal is essential as discussed in Chapter
1५.

(paragraph 4.6, supra)

(1) In order to combat and check deterioration in
moral values, corruption and nepotism which are on the
increase in. the selection process, the Commission is of
the considered view that Judicial Members (other than the
Chairman and Vice-Chairman) to man the tribunal should be
selected through undergoing the process of दक्ष high
standard written examination followed by personal
interview, It is only if he qualifies the written
examination that he should be considered for personal
interview. The percentage of marks allocated for written
examination and personal interview can be 85% and 15%
respectively. Further more, the evidentiary record of
personal interview and written test should be maintained

at least for a period of two years.

According to section 6(3)(b) of the Act, a
Judicial Member has to be selected from two categories
vis. (a) a person who has been or is qualified to be a
judge of the High Court and (b) a person who has been a
member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in

Grade-I of that service for at least three years. In


“>:151:-“

view of the fact that the Commission is recommending the
selection of Judicial Members through a process of a high
standard written examination followed by personal
interview, it is necessary that there should be a wider
choice for selecting meritorious persons as Judicial
Members, Accordingly, allt law officers (irrespective of
their designation) holding, for at least three years, a
post equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or any other post under the Central
or State Government or in the public undertakings owned
or controlled by the Central/State Government or carrying

a scale of pay which is not less than that of 8 Joint

Se

retary to the Government of India, should be made
eligible for competing in the examination and selection
for the past of a Judicial Member. Accordingly, it is
recommended that Section 6(3)(b) of the Act should be
substituted by the following words:-

“Law officers (irrespective of their designation)
holding for at least three years, a post
equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India; or holding for at least three
years any other post under the Central or State
Government or in the public undertakings owned or
controlled by the Central/State Government,

carrying a scale of pay which is not less than


~2152:-

that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of

India.”

(para 4.7, supra)

(8) It is essential that for the expeditious disposal
of cases, all cases which raise one or more common
questions of law and on the basis of which the cases can
be disposed of by a common judgment, should be grouped
together and heard together. In this spirit, the Central
Administrative Tribunal/State Administrative Tribunal and
the proposed appellate forum should appoint research
officers to assist the respective tribunals in this
regard, in finding out the common cases and the judgments

already pronounced by the courts which are binding on the

oO

cases pending. These officers will definitely assist the
tribunal in increasing the expertise and efficiency of
the tribunal and thus realise these objectives. CAT/SAT
and the proposed forum may from time to time invite
applications from the litigants/opposite parties through
advertisement on the notice boards/papers. The Research
Officer may then scrutinise the claim of the applicant
and put up the research note to the Bench for passing the
appropriate orders. The Forum may then issue notice to
the parties before disposing of the cases as per the
judgment already pronounced by the higher court and

binding upon it. Similarly, an exercise may be done by


-:153:-

the research officer for grouping the pending cases which

can be heard together.

(paragraphs 4.9 and 4.10, supra)

(h) Disposal of cases can be done by the tribunal on
the basis of arguments filed by the parties even through

post in the manner discussed earlier.

It has been observed that litigants and their
advocates many a time raise disputes before the superior
courts that though a decision of the higher court was
cited before the tower court, yet it failed to discuss
the same in its judgment. In order to advance the cause
of the administration of justice so that the rule of law
can be further strengthened, it is felt that it may be
provided in the procedure followed by the tribunal that
before the beginning of the arguments, both the parties
may be required to file their written arguments and
counter arguments, if they desire to do so, and at the
conelusion of the arguments both the parties be required
to file a list of the cases cited by them before the
tribunal during the course of the hearing. Such a course
will avoid the raising of any dispute on those issues as
well as compel the presiding officer to adhere to the

rule of law laid down by the superior caurt and avoid


“>:154:-

harassment to the litigants and confusion in the

administration of Taw.

(paragraph 4.11, supra)

(1) Canstitution of Benches of retired members of the
tribunals can be utilised for disposal of old matters
pending before the tribunals without involving any
additional sost on building, libraries etc. in the

manner discussed earlier.

(paragraph 4.12, supra)

(3) A proper litigation policy and machinery should be
evolved by the Government or Public Sector Undertakings

to curb Vitigation.

(paragraph 4.7123, supra)

(k) Cost for raising frivolous defences should be
quantified by the tribunal and awarded to the opposite
party as this will curb the tendency of filing frivolous
cases.
{paragraph 4.14, supra)

1) There is an essential need to evolve a mechanism
for nipping in the bud the conflicting interpretations by
the CAT/High Court in the manner discussed above.

(paragraph 4.15, supra)


-:185:-

Cm) The Commission has made recommendations regarding
the locus standi of an aggrieved party to apply for
review of the order with the leave of the Tribunal and
the grounds on which review can be sought by a person not
a party to the decision but affected by it.

(paragraph 4.16, supra)

(n) There should be a reform of the administrative
justice system in order to ensure better standards of
independence, accessibility/openness, expertise,
representativeness, efficiency and accoutability.

(paragraph 4.17, supra)

7.3 The recommendations of the Commission in so far as

the Central Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal

are as folltows:-

(a) No person shal] be appointed as the President of
the Tribunal unless he is or has been the Chief Justice
of a High Court. He must be a person reputed for his
efficiency, integrity and hard work. Immediately upon
his appointment he must be provided a residence in New
Dethi consistent with his status besides other
perquisites and amenities to which he was entitled as the
Chief Justice of the High Court. The selection of the
President should be made by a committee consisting of the
Hon’ble Chief Justice of India and the two senior most

Judges of the Supreme Court. As a matter of convention,


—:186:-

it must be ensured that there is no time lag between the
retirement of a President and the appointment of his
successor. Onty where 8 suitable sitting or retired
Chief Justice is not available, should a senior sitting
or retired High Court Judge with the requisite qualities
be considered. An effective and efficient President
would go a long way in improving the work-culture of the

Tribunal - a fact borne out by experience.

(paragraph 5.1.A, supra)

(७9) Section 129 of the Customs Act calls for an
amendment. The appointment of the President of
the Tribunal should be a direct appointment in the
manner stated above, whereas section 129, as it
stands now, contemplates appointing one of the
Members of the Tribunal as the President thereof.
While the appointment of the Vice-President can be
done from among the Members, the President of the
Tribunal should be chosen directly from among the
retired Chief Justices or retiring or retired
senior Judges of the High Court.

(paragraph 5.1.8, supra)

(०) In the matter of appointment of Judicial Members
of the Tribunal, an attempt should be made, as far
as possible, to recruit Members of the Bar between
the age of 45 and 50. They must be provided with

official residence as soon as possible upon their


-“>:157:-

appointment/pasting to a particular city and they
should also be entitled te 811 the perquisites and
amenities admissible to their office. Not making
a Suitable residence available upon their posting
to a particular place and driving them to seek
private accommodation at exhorbitant cost acts as
a disincentive to those considering joining this
service. It is equally necessary to provide that
these Judicial Members should be considered for
appointment as Judges of the High Courts (of the
State from which they hail) in the quota normally
reserved for members of the subordinate judiciary
and if for any reason this course is not found
feasible or practicable, they may be considred
under siib-clause (0) of clause 2 of Article 217
read with extension (aa) and/or (b) appended to
the said clause, If this assurance is held out,
many members of the Bar may be attracted to this
office which may incidentally have the added
advantage of making available persons of
competence, who have acquired expertise in Central

Excise and Customs matters to High Courts,

The prompt recruitment and posting of Judicial and
Administrative Members is again a hecessity, which though
an obvious requirement, has not really been honoured in
practice. In this connection, the practice of taking

District Judges on deputation to work as Judicial Members


—:158:-

of the Tribunal should be encouraged. They should retain
a lien-in their parent service so that their chances of
promotion or of appointment to the High Court are not

jeopardised.

(paragraph 5.1.C, supra)

(७) In matters where a reference lies to the High
Court under section 358 of the Central Excise Act
and Section 130 of the Customs Act, the
requirement of applying to the Tribunal for making
a reference as provided by sub-section (1) of
section 35G and sub-section (1) of section 130
respectively of the said enactments may be
dispensed with. Section 35G and section 130 may
be suitably amended providing that any person
aggrieved with the decision of the Tribunal may
apply to the High Court for directing the Tribunal
to refer the questions of law arising from the
decision of the Tribunal. The time limitation for
making such an application can be retained at six
months as is now provided by sub-section (3) of
the aforesaid sections. It must however be
provided that a person so applying to the High
Court should clearly state the questions of law
which he seeks to raise and should also specify
the paragraphs in the decision/judgment of the
Tribunal” relevant to the questions sought to be

raised as such a provision is necessary in view of


(7)

(9)

“:159:-

the fact that the judgment of the Tribunal may
deal with several other questions of law and fact.

(paragraph §.1.0, supra)

In every High Court there should at least be one
Bench regularly hearing matters arising under the
Income-Tax Act, Central ६०138 and Salt Act and
the Customs Act. The matters arising under the
latter two enactments should, as far as possible,
be given precedence in the matter of hearing.

(paragraph 5.1.E, supra)

Every Bench of the Tribunal should be headed by a
Vice-President. For this Durpose, there must be
as many Vice-Presidents as there are Benches of
the Tribunal. At any rate, the important centres
like Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Chennai and Calcutta

should necessarily have a Vice-President each.

(paragraph §.1.F, supra)

The number of Benches should be commensurate with
the work in the Tribunal. Since every
Member /Bench of the Tribunal is expected to
dispose of a particular number of cases every
year, the number of Benches should be determined
on the above basis and provided for. On the
present pendency, there ought to be at least 20 to

22 Benches, in all. As stated hereinabove, the


-:160:-

filing in the Tribunal is going up with every
passsing year - and not decreasing.

(paragraph 5.1.G, supra)

(h) Special care be taken while appointing the Senior
Departmental Representatives (SDRs) and Junior
Departmental Representatives (JDBRs). Their role
is no tess important. Persons of competence and
integrity atone should be designated as such.

(paragraph 5.1.H, supra)

६1) The recomendations made regarding Central
Administrative Tribunal under paragraphs 4.9;
4.10; 4.11 and 4.13, supra, shall also be extended

to CEGAT also,

(paragraph 5.1.1, supra)

Tea So far as ITAT is concerned, the Cammission is of
the opinion that no change is called for in the working
of this Tribunal sinee it has been working satisfactorily
for the last several decades. There is however one
measure of improvement which we wish to propose, namely,
the dispensing with of the requirement of applying to the
Tribunal in the first instance for making a reference to
the High Court as provided by sub-section (1) of section
256 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961. The procedure can be
simplified and a lot of time can be saved by providing

that a person aggrieved with the decision/judgment of the


5“:161:-«

Tribunal may apply to the High Court straightway

requesting t

he High Court to direct the Tribunal to state
the questions of Jaw which according to him {the

applicant) arise from the decision of the Tribunal. The

Present practice of clearly stating the question

w

of Jaw
which a person wants to raise must be continued. The
applicant must be further directed to specify the

paragraphs in

decision of the Tribunal which are

relevant te each of the questions of law raised by him,

n

epar

By

tely, Tt should also be provided that such
applications should be listed before the appropriate
Bench in the High Court as soon as they are ready for
hearing. This is being emphasised for the reason that in
certain High Courts, applications under section 256(2)

are kept pending for years together before they come up

for hearing,

7.4.1 It has been observed that the same question of law

is invelved in the case of many assessees avery year

in the taxation matters, ti11 the question of

Jaw is finally decided by the higher courts. This


-:162:-

results in a geometric increase in the number of cases on
similar questions and also leads to unecertainity in
respect of the payment of taxes. In the event of a
decision holding against him on those recurring questions
of law, the cumulative interest on taxes payable under
various heads as determined by the court to be payable by

the assessee, sometimes reach very high figures, which

a jolt to the industry and even lead to the

the industry in some cases, Therefore,
justice demands that the recurring disputes on account of

common questions of law should be finally settled at the

earliest.

The soatution toa this problem may lie only if

adequate attention of ITAT is drawn to such common

iss

. Therefore, the ITAT may, through the assistance
of research officers specified under paragraphs 4.9 and
0, supra, invite applications regarding such common

issues/recurring issues from the assessee/appellants or

from the Repondent/Revenue department by advertising from


time to time in newspapers and on notice boards. The
research officers may also delve into court files to find
out such common questions of Taw and put them up before
the ITAT. It may decide such issues on a priority basis.
In their judgment, the Tribunal may refer to the fact of
taking up of the common issues on an expeditious basis,
so that the High Court may also take it up on a priority
basis. Similarly, the High Court may mention in its

Judgment about the taking up of the matter on a prior

basis, so that in case the matter goes to Supreme Court,
it may
matter
(para 6.2, supra}
7.4.2 inade regarding Central

Admin

a
co
o

ribunal under paragraphs 4.9; 4.16; 4.73

and 4.73, supra, shalt a4

|)

्
(नह. JUSTICE 8.9. JEEVAN REDDY) (8६703)
WG

Ree 7; Ltt “EM,
aa (Ae

(MS. JUSTICE LEILA SETH){RETDO) (OR.NIM.GHATATE) (R.L.MEENA)

neve जता —. MEMBER MEMBER -
a SECRETARY

DATED: 29th July, 1998


er a ieee ANNEXURE - 1
CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 001
Tel, 01. 38 44 75
Ros. 3019465

K. N. SINGH
OMMEN CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA)

D.O.No.6(3) (21) /93-LC(LS) April 29, 1994
Dear Chief Justice,

1 have addressed you a fetter alongwith
questionnaires for eliciting your valued opinion regarding the
functioning of Central Administrative Tribunal and Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal and Customs, Excise and Gold (01101
(Appellate) Tribunal, The details are given in the fetter and

the questiomaires.

J would be grateful if you could kindly circulate
the letter and the questionnaires to the Hon'ble Judges ol
your Court to enable them to express their views in the
matter. 1 am aware this wiJl cause, you some inconvenience
but the Commission will not be able to complete the ine

depth study of the matter without your valued co-operation.
With regards,
Yours

4 (K.LSINGH)
e.

sly,

To

Chief Justices of All High Courts


0.0. No. 6(3)(21)/93-LC(LS) Apeil 29, 1094

Dear

By the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 the Constitution was amuuted ant
Articfe 323-A and 3B -B were inserted to provide by Jaw ompewertng the
Parliament” and the State Legislature to enact laws [6r the comstimtion of
Administrative Tribunals for the adjudication and cotitrol of disputes and
complaints relating to the service matters of public servants belonging to the
Union or’ the States. The Parliament enacted the Administrative Tribunal Act,
1985 for constituting the Central Administrative Tribunal. Some of the States
have also constituted State Administrative Tribunals for the adjudication and
trial of the service matters. These tribunals exercise the jurisdiction and
power which were earlier. exercised by the courts including the ‘igh Court
and their orders are not amenable to judicial review by the High Courts and
the only remedy available to the aggrieved party against the order of the
Tribunal is under Article 136 of the Constitution. The Chairman of these
tribunals ig a retired Judge or Chief Justice” of a High Court and the View
Chairman is: Secretary to the Government or equivalent post hotder with a
requisite experience. The selection of the Chairman, Vice-Chairnian and the
Members is made by a committee headed by the Chief Justice or his nominee
Judge from the Bench. Ordinarily the Tribunal consists of a Judicial’ Officer
and an Administrative Member aud its administrative control 8 ander thy
executive, Orders of these Tribunals are [inal subject to a Special Leave
Petition under Article 136 of the Constitution.

As regards the Income-tax Appellate T-ibunal, its orders are subject
to the judicial review of th2 High Court and under Section 256 of the tncome
Tax Act references are made to the High Court on questions of law. Since a
number of references in tax matters were kept pending for long years
the High Court, the Revenue faced great difficulty in collecting the dues from
the assessees. The Law Commission by its [15th Report made recommundation
for the constitution of a Central Tax Court with 311 India jurisidetion to
introduce an all India perception in the matter of implementing of tax Jaw ane
eliminating conflicting decisions and delay at the High Court level ie reference
causes. The Tax Refarms Committee set up by the Government of fretia his
also recommended for the setting up of a Central Tax Court. The orders of
the proposed Central Tax Court will not be subject to judicial review by the
High Court.

Under Section 129 of the Customs Act, Customs, Excise and Gold
(Control) Appellate Tribunal (CEGAT) has been constituted. Its orders are
final subject to an order made on reference by the High Court under Section
130. The appointment of the President of CEGAT and its Iunctioning came up
for consideration before the Supreme Court in R.K. ve oT Union of
India, AIR 1993 50 1769. While considering the question of ~appoiniment,
selection aud functioning of the CEGAT, the Court ceferred to the appointment
and functioning of other tribunals also includ the CAT and dncome Vax
Appellate Tribunal. The Suoreme Court observed:

"The dispensation of justice by the Tribunals is much to be desired,
But judicial adjudication is a special process and would elficiently
be administered by advocate Judges. The remedy of appeal by

before *


special feave under Art.$36 to the Supreme Court also preved 10 be
costly and prohibitive and far-flung distance loo is) working as
constant constraint to litigant public who could 111 afford te reach
the Supreme Court. An appeal to a Bench of two Judges of the
respective High Courts over the orders of the Tribunals within ts
territorial jurisidction on questions of flaw would assuage a growing
feeling of injustice of those who can iJ afford to apnreach the
Supreme Court. Equally the need for recruitment of members of the
Bar to man the Tribunals as well as the workihgs system by the
Tribunals need fresh 100९ and regular monitoring is nec
Except body tike the Law Commission of India would make an
indepth study in this behalf including the desirability fo bring
CEGAT under the control of Jaw and justice department in tine with
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and to make appropriate urgent
recommendations to the Govt. of India who should take remedial
steps by an appropriate legislation to overcome the handicaps and
difficulties and make the tribunals effective and efficient instruments
for making Judicial review efficacious, inexpensive and satisfactory."

ESSAY.

Proceeding ,further the Supreme Court observed that these tribunals are 101
wholly independent bodies Like courts in view of their constitution,
members aud the administrative control over them by the exccutive.
Supreme Court directed the’ Law Commission of India to undertake an iiteusey
and extensive study in regard to the constitution of the tribunals under the
various statutes with a view to ensuring their independence so that the pubfic
confidence in such tribunals may increase and tne quality of their performance
may improve.

Pursuant to the directions of the Supreme Court the haw Commission
of India has undertaken indepth study of the tribunals with a view 10 submit
its suggestions to the Government to make the Sunctioning of the tribunals
effective and efficient and provide speedy and inexpensive justice to the
litigant public. Even though a humber of tribunals are functioning, the Law
Commission has for the present confined its exercise with regard ७
administrative tribunals dealing with service matters and the tncome Tax
Appellate Tribunal and the CEGAT. In this context the Connission has
prepared two sets of questionnaires, one relating to the functioning of the
service tribunals and the other relating to ITAT and CEGAT, to elicit views
of the Hoa’ble Judges, lawyers, jurists, academicians and officers ol the
department, as their response would provide valuable a: tances te he
Commission in formulating its recommendations, We are enclosing a copy of
the two questiomaires to you for your kind perusaj and study.

I would, therefore, request you to kindly
precious time in giving your valued opinion to the is
questionnaire at your earliest couvenience, preferably within one month.

७. ४ण्वाः
0. 11९९

Looking forward to your cooneration.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,


QUESTIONNAIRE ON SERVICE TRIBUNALS

1 Ave you osatiofted wlth the, fanethontop oof tte

Central and State Adminlstrathve Tribunals? It

not, kindly state your reasons’ for. the same.
1
Ha). Do you think that the present system of
constitution of the Tribunals having Judicial and
Administrative Members is satisfactory and
working efficiently? If not, please pive your

reasons and suggestions.

2(b). (00 you agree with the suggestion that these
tribunals should be manned only by the Judpes
and judicial officers to the exclusion of the
administrative members? If se, state your

reasone.

3. Do you think that the service tribunals as they
are constituted presently are satisfactorily
catering to the .needs of the ftitigants? Is it
correct to say that the tribynals as constituted

at present, are good substitutes for the High

Gourts? If not, kindly state your reasons,

aa). At present there is no appeal against the ordet
of the teibunat but appeals छाए straightaway

being filed ‘before the Supreme Court under

~We


॥(७)

S{a).

Article 136 of the Constitution whieh | is
increasing the workload "7 on the apex
constitutional court. Should this system be
continued? If not, what modification you would

suggest. in this regard.

Any party filing appeal before Supreme Court
under. Article 136 of the Constitution against the
order of the tribunal has (0 incur exerbitant

cost and even for triviat service matters

arising out of disputes relating (0 increment,
é .

sentority, promotion, interpretation of service

rules. etc., a litigant has to travet to Delhi

from: far off places by incurring considerable
, :

cost. ‘Does this requlte a change in the system

by devising any other appellate forum? 11 so,

in what manner?

Do you agree with the suggestion that Chere
should be’ one appeat on ‘facts as well as on
questions of law against orders of the teibunal?
If so, before which authority, the High Court,
the Supreme Court) or at separate Appellate

Tribunal.


5(b).

06 you agree that appeals against the order of
.

tribunals ‘should be ‘maintainable, before the High
Court on questions of fact and jaw and in order
to ensure’ speedy disposal the igh Courts
should be required to constttute permanent
service benches for the Central Government and
the State Government servants to deal with the

service matters exclusively?

If you do ‘not agree with the appeal being filed
before the Wigh Court, ‘do yqu agree with the
suggestion for the constitution of appellate
tribunals with Benches on regional basis (0
entertain and hear appeal against the orders af

the tribunals?

Do you agree with the view that the
multiplicity of the tribunals is destructive of
the uniformity of ‘law in India? lf so; please

staté yout reasons. |

De. ‘you agree with the suggestion that the

selection a. Chairman/Vice{Chairman and
alrarte हे

Members of the tribunal, be madé by the Chief

Justice of India in case of CAT and in the case

of SAT by the Chief Justice of respective fligh

Court or a Committee ‘appointed by — the

respective Chlef Justice. If ot, please state

your reasons - aye


Do you agree with the suggestion that the
Administrative Ministry» for the CAT and SAL

should be Ministry of Law?

Do you suggest any change in the definition of

“service matters"?

Have you any other suggestions to make?
i


Va)

I(b)

ADDITIONAL QUESTIONNAIRE ON SERVICE TRIBUNALS

)

Whether the existing provisions under Section G read
with Section 8 of the Administrative “Tribunals Act. 1985,
prescribing soualification lor appointment ef a’ Judicial
Member that “a person is, ,-or’ has been, or ts aualified

to be a Judge of a High Court sean

“and he shall net hold the office alter be bas attained

(9) in the case of Member, the age of sixty two
years." f
provide any incentive to a working Wieh Court Judpe to
join the CAT?

Whether the words “or is aualified te be a Judge of the
High Court" in the aforeoucted, section 6, have advanced

the abjective of making the oresent forum ef CAT. really

a substitute of tligh Court? |.

Whether the provisions under i 6 of the Act mak iny

persons other than the High “Court Judres ctigible for

appointment have maintained the standard of the fova of

CAT reparding its elficiency. effectiveness, cllicacy as
that of a High Court not only in form and dejure but in

content and de facto?

Wi.


inisteative Members be onty

Should the existing ads

assessors or continue to be members of the CAT?

Do you agree with the. suggestion that existing justice
* :

delivery system’ through CAT and SAT has indpived faith

'
and confidence in fitigants? Tfonet. please elaborate
causes.

Whether in your opinion, the members ot Tribunal

enjoy the” repute of independence from | executive
pressures oor influence, fearlossacss eb other power
centres, economic or “political, Land freddom from
prejudices acauired and nourished by the clas& to which
they belong? ,

Whether there should be a statutory lotin te keep under
review the constitution and werking ef the tribunals:
also to consider ahd report on such particular matters

and may be referred. to such fora? 11 so. what should

be’ the nature of the composition of the said tovumn?

Vi ase


26

Do you agree with the suggestion that existing jj
delivery system through CEGAT/IPAT has Inspived faite and
confidence in litigating public that these are compe 100:
and expert mechanism with judicial approach and objec tivity?

If not, please elaborate causes/reasons.

Whether in your opinion, the members ef the Tribunal enugey
the repute of independence from executive pressures ov
influence, fearlessness of other power centres, cconomic or
political, and freedom from prejudices acquired and neurished

’

by the class to which they belong?

Composition:

(8) Do you think that the present composition of rhe
wedbunols whereunder one Member is a Judicial Bomber and
the other is a non-judicial one, 4s sound in principle and
satisfactory to secure the ends of justice? lease five
reasons for your view qnd sugges tions, Lf any.

(9) Would. you agree to the suggestion that the Teibunels

in question should consist of exclusively persous with
Yudicial experience?

Qc) Whether the existing technical members/accountant
members under the CEGAT or IfAT respective ly be con by
assessors or continue to be Members of the एफ कप

(a) In regard to judicial members, what, in yous epinion,
should be the minimum qualifications or expericnce requisite
for appointment to the Tribunals?

(०) Rule 10 of the CEGAT Members (Recruitment ond Cond ithen:.

of Service) Rules,?19@7 prescribes qualificaticus for”

न्++ 5०2००

Veet =


-2Qe

appointment as Member and President, it states:
“serving judge of a [igh Court,..eshall held of tice

as Presidenty....till he attains the age of 62.

”

yearSeceee”

\ The Rule does not provide any incentive to a serving High
cof Judge to join the CEGAT in view of constitutional provi-
si under Article 217 that he holds office until he attatns
lane of 62 years. This runs counter to common 1110 lination
why a gitting judge would opt to serve CEGAT as its President,
if hd is to retire at the same age without any benefit. In
your ppinion, what suitable changes should be made to make the
=| and conditions of service more attractive $0 that slicing
High dourt Judges may opt for appointment as the President of

se its

the CEGAT and even for post of Member of the CEGAT to rails

standard. |

" (e)(4)" Would you suggest, ih the light of the above, thal,
as in the case of the Central Administrative Tribunal (Cat),
‘the retiring age of the President and Vice-President should
be raised to 65 years while in the ‘case of other members
it may continue at 62 years?
(11) As a corollary to the above, would you suggest that ths
post of President and/or 'Vice~Fresident of these tribunals
should be restricted only to a sitting/or retired Judge of
a High Court or would you make it available for promotion
to judicial and/or technical or accountant Kembers of the
Tribunals as well? Would you restrict the eligibility of
Hembers only to the posts. of Vice-President and tha Lotoa .

only to a proportion of such pods?

~ Oe te ०55 dens


-3-

(५) whether the existing section 129(2) of the Customs

Act, 1962 providing for qualifications of a judicial moms

that -
“A judicial member shall be a person who las fer at
least ten years held a judicial office in the territery
of India or who has been a member of the Centeal Logal
Service end has held a post in Grade I of that service
or any equivalent or higher post for at least three
years, or who has been an advocate for abo deash ten

, YCAarSocese"

and similarly section 252(2) of the Income-Tax Act, 1261.

need amendment in the context of the qualificetions ef

the President of the CEUAT quoted above.

Do. you agree thet merely rising the s tetus of the
President of the Tribunals is not sufficient but the status
of the members of the Tribunals as well should botaiced
aorrespondingly?

Considering that two of the three qualifications
referred to earlier are also qualifications which make a
person eligible to be considered for appointment as a

High Court Judge, in what way do you consider it possible

to raise the status of the members consis tenk wilh the
status to be prescribed for the President and/or Vice
President."

ae Whether a litigent is able to get his case decided expedi--
tiously? If not, how mich period is normally consuned
\ for final disposal ‘before the Tribunals?

wee enlbane


7

ohn

co

Administrative | Authority:

Do you agree that there should be an authority to have

administrative control with power to issue adminis tration

instructions in the functioning of the ‘fribunals.

If so, which authority, you would prefer: The Spee me

Court of India/Ministry of Law/Ministry of Finance of

Government of India.

Please indicate reasons for your preference,

Which authority should hold selection of Chairman, Vlec-~

Chairman and Members of the Tribunals in question?

(a) The Chief Justice of India, or

(bo) a Committee appointed ‘by the Chief distice of

India, or

(c) the Central Government.

io bo you agree that whichever autaority for select lon

1s constituted, it should be in charge of selection of ahi.

‘tribunals?

(6B) Should such Selection Board be

Yromotion Committee to decide, from time to ti

_members = both judictlal and technical members ~ of the

80 constituted as

Sy, OD

the promotion of members of the Tribunal as Vice-lresident/

Fresident, .if ‘eligible under the rules?

(6C) vould you suggest any other powers to the Selection

Board in matters of administration of the Tribunal?

Appeals: General

Should there be a provision for second appeal agninat the

order of Tribunal?

(i) I£ so, should -thé second appeal be on f

as on law or-only on questions of 1

your reasons.

-XI-

gsovie LL

Please indicate

»०००००००००


(ii) If you suggest an appeal against the order af cbhe
‘tribunal should lie, what in your opinion, shord bo
the forum for appeals against the gudgments of the
fribunals in question? Would you favour pon appeal
to’ the ~
{a) Supreme Court,

(b) High Court,
(०) any other National Tax Court/Appeltvte Trt bure!
to be newly constituted?

Do you agree with the view that procedure Lor reference by ¢

the Tribunal to the High Court (gnder Section 256, Mieome

Tax Act, 19613 Section 150 of the Customs Act, 1908) shew td

be abrogated, instead appeal. should lie te the 11101 Court

on substantial qiestions of law against the order of the

Tribunal. .

BA. Another suggestion /that a partial abrogation of the

reference procedure - by. eliminating the need to apply

to the ‘tribunal for reference to the High Court in the first

{instance and, on failure, to apply to the High Court for x

mandains + and substituting it by a simple procedure of

seeking a direction from the High Court for a reference
only on substantiel qiestions of law arising ‘owt at the
४ Tribunals order would - \ ‘
(i) eliminate a step in the present law which only
causes delay and is perhaps unnecessary; 2nd
(44) make’ the system almost as good and effective as a

Airect appeal: to the High Court Crom the Triburedts

order.

What are your views on these sugrestions?

re ears

> xh


9...

10.

~6-

In case you favour appeal to the Iigh Court 41 place of
reference, do you agree with the suggestion ‘that ter igh
Courts should be required to constitute permanant fenehes
for hearing, appeals from the Tribunals in que sian?

In case you favour the continuance of the present rystem
or reference, do you consider it udeful to constitite
permanent Benches for disposing of such reference?

(1) Do you agree ‘that the jurisdiction of the 1181 Court bea

abrogated under Articles 226/227 of the Consti imbion

of India against the decisions ‘of ‘the authorities
in
under the Income-tax Act, 1961, or under the CRGAT by

constituting an equally efficacious, eftective fovum

like Natlonal Tax Court or Appellate Tribimals? If so,

what should be its composition?
(ia) W411 not the provisicn of such a Court or trdbunal be
really the ve petition of a provision for bax osnecseur
-of a third tier of appeal while litigants In other
branches of law have, in general, only two tiers of

appeal available to them?

(i1) In case you favour the creation of a separate Appellate

Tribunal like National Tax Court or Tribunal az,sinst

judgments of the Tribunals in questtor, shoul the

‘tribunal hold its sibtings through Benches funetioning

amd Wee bY?

in, say, four regions (North, South, Bi:

(iid) Now far do you think such regional Renches will be abte

(a) to cope up with the workload invelvad whieh at
Present is distributed among several Minh Cencte
and +

a i
(७) to 11.14) the objective of Sarry ing justice nearer

vesentoese

~ Xie


41.

-7-

to the doorstep of the assessees?

(lv)Do you agree that the proposed National. Court, ov

* (०)

Appellate Tribunal should also be vested with purisdice

tion to deal with constitutionality,of tax legislation.
Could there be any objection Lo bliin eonene Pe the
Trivunal proposed either consists - only of judteial
members or, if it is provided that only Benches ot the
tribunal consisting of such members will deal with such
questions? d |

Where ig a view that unless the ortgdnat | 111 (110 ॥ 1 1१५
of determihing the constituticnality of tax Jeuistation
is conferred upon the proposed forum of National Cax
Court or other Appellate fribunal litigants wilh be able
to resort to High Courts under Articles 226 of 110
Constitution of India and frustrate the objective of
expeditious disposal of imatlers? How to meek 11७४ sities

tion, indicate. your reasons.

Should the National Tax Court or Appellate Tribunal be

constituted exclusively by judges, under the administrative

control of Supreme Court?

Under the present system, provision for appeals with special

{leave to the Supreme Court under Art:

Ye 156 et Une Coansatie

tution against the judgnentgof the Tribunals in qostion,

is

dnereasing the workload of the Supreme Court and fs

causing hardship to litigants who have to travel to Pelhi

from far off places. Would you fevour any mmencineout in

this regard, and if so, in-what direction?

a

eeeee rena

न xIVe


va

16.

17%

-8-

Nave you any changes to suggest regarding the jurisdiction
of the. Tribunals in question? If so, kindly give your
suggestions in detail with reasons,

Do you agree with the view that the fiultiplicity ny
Tribunals to deal with various matlors is deatene tive

of the uniformity of law in Indda? Ir so, Meas mike

any concrete suggestions that you may Like to he sonside red
in this regard,

there lo a proposal to nbolish the 11 anc the CRA ars

constituted at present and to substitute theses thin;

a Notional a dbunal having a nuinber of Benches lu the

country to deal with the appeals arising out of bho Incam=

Yex Act and the Customs Act. Do you arree Lo this proposal?

(a) Do you agree that the constitution of a शव! 10 Natio
Jax Court or National Tr#bunal (in place of bin oxine
ting tribunals) will effectively solve the veed pro
biem of a conflict of judicial opinion and prosnote

certainty in the law or would you sus thet the

existence of conflicts is necessary end healthy to
promote a full discussion of all points of vlew open
on any question?
The proposed National Tribunal is to be constituted under
Article 323B of the Constitution excluding the guvisdic-
tion of ‘the! Migh Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution as well as abrogating the reference procedure
bo you agree to this proposal?

Uf the Nigh Court jurasdiction is taken avay, Will ib not

increase the workload in the Supreme Court onder Article

~ ४ ४-


18.

19 6

of the Constitution as the aggrieved party willl appreanch
the Supreme Court under that provision against the onler

of the proposed tribunal.
. >

‘ne proposed National Tribunal, in the absence of a

Constitutional amendment, cannot have any jurisdiction

‘

to determine the question of constitutionality.of laws
and the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226
would be likely to ve invoked to challenge the consti-~
tutional validity of the Income-Tax Act and the Customs Act
and the rules jtramed thereunder. (tt. thls not frustrate
the object and purpose of the constitution of the National

Tribunal and cause delay?

Have you any other suggestions to make in -this matter,

aoe

~ Xv


1«

2«

{

é
SUPPLEMENTARY QUESTIONNAIRE ON INCOME TAX AND CEGAT वा

After Question 3(e), we add:

"(eli) Woul@ you suggest, in the light of the above, that,
as in the case of the Central Administrative Tribunal CCA)
the retiring age of the President and Vice~Prentdent should

be raised to 65 years while in the case of other members

,it may continue at 62 years?

(e Yas) As a corollary to the above, would you sugaesh thal
the post of President and/or Vice President of these
tribunals should be restricted only to a sittinr/or ’
retired Judge of a High Court or would you make {tb
available for promotion to judicial and/or technical

or accountant Members of the “fribunals agive11? would you
restrict. the eligibility of Members only te the posts of

Vice-President and that too only to a proportion of

guch posts?

at the end of the’ second part of Question 3(f), we adds

ations referred

"Considering that two of the three qualili
to earlier are alse qualifications which make 2 person
eligible to be considered for appointment as a High Court
Judge, in. what way do you censider it possible to raise
the status of the members consistenthith the status to

be prescribed for the President and/or Vice President,"
after Question No» 6, insert the following:

"GA) Do you agree that whichever authority for seleetion
is constituted, 41 shovld be in charge of selection of all
members = both judictal and technical members - of the

Tribunal?

xvi


Be

&.

Te

(6 B) Should such Selection Board be also constiluted
as Promotion Cowmittee to decide, from time to time,
on the promotion of members of the Tribunal as Vice-President/

President, if eltgible under the rules?

(6 C) Would you suggest any other powers to the Selection

Board in matters of adwinistration of the Tribunal?"

After Question 8, we insert the folvowing questian:

“BA, Another suggestion is that a partial abrogation of

the reference procedure - by eliminating the need to

apply to the Tribunal for reference to the High Court in
the first instance and, on failure, to apply to the

High Court for e mandamus = and substituting Lt by a
simple procedure of seeking a dirention from the High
Court for a reference only on substantial questious of
es arising out of the Tribunal's order would ~

: eliminate alstep in the present law which only cnuses है
delay and is perheps unnecessary ; and

(4M) ‘make the system almost as good-and effective es a direct
apbeal to the High Court from the Tribunal's order. शीत ५
are| your views on these suggestions”.

me Question 10(i), insert the following:

"(ial) Will not the provision of such a court or tribunal

be really the repetition of a-provision for tex assessees
of a third tier of appeal while litigants in other branches
of law have, in general, only two tiers of appeal avatiable
to them?" हि

In Guestion 10, add after (41)

(444) How far da you think such regional Benches will be

=X


7.

"Bo

able (a) to copy up with the workload involved which

at present is distributed among several Nigh Courts and

(७) to fulfil the objective of carrying Justice nearer

to the doorstep of theassessees? ”

In Question 10(i1i) adds ;

“Could there bg any objection tof this course if the Tribunal
proposed either consists ~ only of judicial members or,

if it is provided that only Benches of the Tribunal

consisting of such members will deal with such questions?”

After Question 15 we addt

"({a) Do you agree that the constitution of a single

National Tax Court or National Tribunal (in place of the

existing tribunals) will effectively solve the vexed
problen of a conflict of judicial opinion and promote
certainty in the law or would you suggest that the
existence of conflicts is necessary and healthy to
promote a full discussion of all points ef view oper

on any question?"

— XIX


ANNEXURE - IT
9. 0. NO, 6(3)(21)/93-LC(LS). |

Dr, S. C, Srivastava
Joint Secretary & Law Officer

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ©
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE
& COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS:
LAW COMMISSION
SHASTRI BIIAWAN, NEW DELI - 1100904
> Tel. : 385682

August,

Dated |...

Dear Sir,

The Law Commission had cirecnlated a Questionnaire on
Service Tribunals vide its letter of even number dated
September 4, 1994, soliciting views from Hon'ble Judges,

Chairman/Vicé-Chairman of various tribunals, lawyers,
jurists, academicians and State Governments etc. The Law
Commission has been benefited immensely through various
responses projected by many eminent persons. After
perusing those views, it is felt to enlarge the scope of
के the Questionnaire on Service Tribunals so that the working

of the teibunals may be dealt with in a broader perspective
keeping in view the responses and observations of the
Supreme Court, particularly with regard to the concept of

judicial review, a basic feature of the Constitution. A
detailed Questionnaire on Service Tribunals has _ been
prepared, which is enclosed herewith. This Commission

solicits your valuable views on the Questionnaire enclosed
to enable the Commission to prepare a comprehensive report
on the subject. It is likely that some of the questions.
might have found place in the previous Questionnaire on
Service Tribunals, and you might have already sent your
valuable views on those issues. In such a situation, you
may not repeat it. ;

Some of the excerpts from the judgment of the Supreme
Court in R.K. Jain V. Union of India ia, (1993)4 scc 119,
which impeiied the Commission ertake the exercise,

are enclosed for your reference.

In view of the above, we request you to kindly spare
gome of your precious time in giving your valuable opinion
on the issues raised in’ the Questionnaire enclosed, at the
earliest, preferably by 15th September, 1995.


D. 0. NO.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE
& COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL ABEAIRS
LAW COMMISSION
SHASTRI BHAWAN, NEW 1)1:1.111 - 110001
Velo: ASIns?

Dr. S. C. Srivastava
Joint Sceretary & Law Officer

-~-2- Dated |

Since the Commission is intending to hold a Workshop
on Administrative Tribunals and their working in October,
1995, your valuable views will be of great assistance to
this Commission for further deliberations in the said
Workshop.

Looking forward to your co-operation.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Encl: As above

( S.C. Srivastava )


Extracts taken from the Judgment of R.K. JAIN
४. UNION OF INDIA (1993) 4 scc 120

8. Lastly, the time is ripe for taking stock of the
working of the various tribunals set up, in the country
after the insertion of Articles 323-A and 323-B in the
Constitution. A sound justice delivery system is a sine
qua non for the efficient governance of a country wedded
to the rule of law. An independent and impartial justice
delivery system in which the litigating public has (faith
and confidence alone can deliver the goods. After the
incorporation of these two Articles, acts have been

11.01 (५१७ (bor

enagted whereunder tribunals have been con

sed and

dispensation of jpstice. Sufficient time has pas
experience gained in these last few years for taking stack
of the situation with a view to finding out if they have
served the purpose and objectives for which they were
constituted. Complaints have been heard in regard to the
functioning of other tribunals as well and it is tiwe that
a body like the Law Commission of tndia has a
comprehensive look-in with a view to suggesting measures
for theic improved functioning. That body can also
suggest changes in the different statutes and eveleo a
model on the basis whereof tribunals may be constituted or
reconstituted. with a view to ensuring greater
independence. An intensive and extensive study needs to
be undertaken by the Law Commission in regard to the
constitution of tribunals under various statutes with a
view to ensuring their independence so that the public
confidence in such tribunals may increase and the quality
of their perfocmance may improve. We strongly cocommond
to the Law Commission of India to undertake such an
exercise on priority basis. A copy of this judament may
be forwarded by the Registrar of this Court to the Nowber-

Secretary of the Commission for immediate action.

he


66. In S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India this Court
held that the primary duty of the, judiciary is to
interpret the Constitution and the laws and this would
predominantly be a matter fit to be decided by the
judiciary, as judiciary alone would be possessed of
expertise in this field and secondly the constitutional
and legal protection afforded to the citizen would become
illusory, if it were left to the executive to determine
the legality of its own action. The Constitution has,
therefore, created an independent machinery i.e. judiciary
to resolve disputes, which is vested with the power of
judicial review to determine the legality of the
legislative and executive actions and to ensure compliance
with the requirements of law on-the part of the executive
and other authorities. This function is discharged by the
judiciary by exercising the power of judicial review which
is a most potent weapon in the hands of the judiciary for
maintenance of the rule of law. The power of judicial
review is an integral part of our constitutional system
and without it, there will be no government of laws and
the rule of law would become a teasing illusion and a

promise of unreality. The judicial review, therefore, is

a basic and essential feature of the Constitution and it

cannot be abrograted without affecting the basic structure abrograted without affecting the basic structure

of the Constitution. The basic and essential feature ot
judicial review cannot be dispensed with but it would be
within the “competence of Parliament to * amend the
Constitution and it provide alternative institutional
mechanism or arrangement for judicial review, provided it
is no less efficacious than the High Court. It must ,
therefore, be read as implicit in the constitutional
scheme that the law excluding the jurisdiction of the High
Court under Articles 226 and 227 permissible under it,


must not leave a void but it must set up another effective
institutional mechanism or authority and vest the power of
judicial review in it which must be equally effective and review in it which must be egually effective and
efficacious in exercising the power of judicial reviow.
The tribunal set up under the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 was required to interpret and apply Articles 14,

15, 16 and 311 in quite a large number of | cases.
Therefore, the personnel manning the administrative
tribunal in their determinations not only require judicial
approach but also knowledge and expertise in that
particular branch of constitutional and administrative
law. The ef£icacy of the administrative tribunal and the
legal input would undeniably be more important ard
Sacrificing the Legal input and not giving it sufficient
weightage would definitely impair the efficacy and
effectiveness of the Administrative Tribunal. Therefare,
it was held that an appropriate rule should be made to
recruit the members; and to consult the Chief Justice of
India in recommending appointment of the Chairman, Vice~
Chairman and Members of the Tribunal and to constitute a
committee presided over by the Judge of the Supreme Caurt
to recruit the members for appointment. In M.8. Najundac
v. Union of India when the mebers of CAT claimed parity of
pay and superannuation as is available to the Judges of
the High Court, this Court held that they are not on a par

with the judges but a separate mechanism created for theic

appointment pursuant to Article 323-A of the Constitution.
Therefore, what was meant by this Court in Sampath Kumar
case ratio is that the tribunals when exercise the power
and functions, the Act created institutional alternative
mechanism or authority to adjudicate the service
disputations, It must be effective and efficacious to
exercise the power of judicial review. This Court did not

appear to have meant that the tribunals are substitutes of

the igh Court under articlés 226 and 227 of the
Constitution. J.B. Chopra Chopra v. Union of India merely

follewed the ratio of Sampath Kumar.

—y-


-4.

76. Before parting with the case it is “necessary to
express our anguish’ over the ineffectivity of the
alternative mechanism @evised fot! judicial reviews. The
judicial review and remedy are fundamental rights of the
citizens. The dispensation of justice by the tribunals is
much to be desired. We are not doubting the ability of
the members or Vice-Chairman (non-Judges) | who may be
experts in their regular service. रा But judicial
-adjudication is a special process and would efficiently be
‘administered by advocate Judges. The remedy of appeal by
special leave under Articlé 136 of this Court also proves
to be costly and prohibitive and far-flung distance too is
working as constant’ constraint to Litigant public who
could ill afford to reach’ this Court. An appeal to a
Bench of two Judges of the respective High Courts over the
orders of ‘the tribunals within its territorial
jurisdiction on questions of law would assuage a growing
feeling of injustice of those who can ill afford: to
approach the Supreme Court. ‘ Equally -the need for
recruitment of members of the Bar to man the tribunals as
well as the. working system of the tribunals need fresh
look and regular monitoring is necessary. An expert body
like the' Law Commission.of India would make an in-depth
study in this behalf including the desirability to bring
CEGAT under the control of Law: and Justice, Department’ in
Line with Income Tax Appellate. Tribunal and to make
appropriate urgent recommendations to the Government of
‘India who should take~remedial steps by an appropriate
legislation to, overcome the handicaps and difficulties and
make the tribunals effective and efficient instruments for
making judicial review efficacious, inexpensive and

satisfactory. © ae हि


. LAW COMMISSION OF INDEA

REVISED ADDITIONAL QUESTIONNAIRE ON AOMINISTRATIVE TRERBUHALS

CON TEN TS

PART - I CENTRAL/STATE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL

SECTION I ~ Working of Administrative Pespurals
Proposed changes in str हि
measures to be taken for
an efficacious Torun.

SECTION II- “Proposals to make the Cenfralysts

Administrative Tribunat a re
substitute to the High Court far hie
purposes of sat yong bees

requirements of वर coy ise.
basic feature of the Conshoetutdian,

CTION 111- Proposed Changes try Structure 7071
Functioning.

PARE - (f THE CREATION OF THE APPELLATE FORUM
SECTION [ - Appeal to the Special # 1. 0३
High Gourk.
SECTION II - Appeal to the proposed Habior
Administrative Tribunal.

SECTION 111- Creation of an Appellate ferum rst
: the requirements of judictal revises


n

REVISED ADDITIONAL QUESTIONNAIRE ON AOMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS

PART-I: Central/State Administrative Tribunal

SECTION I WORKING OF ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS: PROPOSED
CHANGES IN STRUCTURE ANO MEASURES TO BE TAKE:
FOR PROVIDING AN ‘EFFICACIOUS FORUM
3
Do you think that the existing arrangements ot 0४ १ १९५१
Administrative and Judicial Members under Phas
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 are satisfactory ane

working effectively?

Should the Administrative Member always sit in a Sener

alongwith. the Judicial Member?

Whether Administrative Member’s help ts

dealing with the ;complex administrative mathers तक १

effectively by using his expertise on the subje

Do you think that the provisions of Section @ (1६9७! -*

the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, namety. a person

shall not be qualified for ‘appointment as oa Judicial
Member unless “he has been a Member of the Tadtan beat
Service and has hetd a post in Grade 1 of that Service

for oat least three years” bas really hedped se कवि" ses

~Vviir~


effectiveness, efficacy, standard and status as that of

High Court? If not, what are your suggestions on it?

would “you suggest for, enlarging the ambit of source o
personnel for “eligibility as “Judicial: Members b
including personnel from 811 departments of Ministry of
Law of Government of India and of Law Departments 67
State Governments, who are hotding the rank equal to tl:
rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of — Inedi-
dealing with Taw?
,

Should the Tribunal constituted under the Administrative
Tribunal Act, 1985 be placed under the administrative
control of the Ministry of ‘Law and Justice?

Should the -necessary rutes be framed governing the
matters which will. be heard by a Single Member Bench of

the ‘Central: Administrative Tribunal or Stake

Administrative Tribunal respectively?

What suggestions would you make in respect of allocation
. ‘

of cases for, disposal: by. ६ | Bench comprising a_ 51191 6

Member - and by a Division Bench in regard to the matters
falling within the jurisdiction of the Central/State
Administrative Tribunal jin order to bring uniformity and

facilitate proper exercise of jurisdiction?


10.

11.

12.

13.

Bo you agree that in cases where the Benches of the
Central Administrative Tribunal or the State
Administrative Tribunal are required to comprise only one

member, he should necessarily be a judicial member?

Should the Administrative Member while sitting in a Bench
along with a Judicial Member act only in the capacity of
an assessor? " Should his role be confined onty to

assessment of facts?

Do you think that if the Bench is to consist of two
?
members thet! it should be presided over only by Judicial)

Member?

should an-appeal lie against the decision of the Bench of
Tribunal comprising a single member, to a larger Bench of
the Central Administrative Tribunal or State
Administrative Tribunal respectively?

Whether .the . concerned larger Bench of the Central/State
Administrative Tpibunat can post the appeal for adimissicn
after due notice and dispose of the same at the admission

stage if the appeal is not maintainable?


14.

SECTION II PROPOSALS TO MAKE THE | CENTRAL/STATE
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL A REAL SUBSTITUTE TO
THE HIGH COURT FOR THE PURPOSES OF SATISFYING
THE REQUIREMENTS OF JUOECTAL REVIEW, A ASIC

FEATURE OF THE CONSTITUTION

Do you think that if the status of the pr

Cantrat/State Administrative Tribunal is raised Lo that
of a High Court in 811 respects, including compogsis ron,
service conditions eligibitity criteria and disposal of

cases hereinafter suggested and by also providing ८:

i) that these Tribunals are manned onty by judiciai
members who are equally competent as that of a High Court
Judge;

(11) the role of Administrative Member is limited te tty
of an assessor;

(iii) the power of making decision would rest only wrth
the Judicial Member, whether sitting in a Single Member
Bench or in a Division Bench as per the atlocation of the

cases?

If so, whether the proposed constitution of such a
Central or State Administrative Tribunal does become a
real substitute to the High Court satisfying the
requirements of basic feature of Lhe Constitutren, as


16.

17.

laid down in Keshvananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, AIR

1973 SC 1461 and Minerva Mill Ltd. v. Union of India,

(1980) 3 5.0.6. 625.

If the answer of the above questions is in affirmative,
whether the exctusion of jurisdiction of the High Court

under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India

‘is valid and justifiable and ‘the requirements of judicial

review, a basic feature of- the Constitution remain

unaffected? ,

SECTION Iti - PORPOSED CHANGES IN STRUCTURE AND

FUNCTIONING

(a) Should such proposed Central Administrative Tribunal
at Delhi consist of:-

(a) Chairman; ~

(०) Judicial Members; and

(c) Administrative Members (to act as assessors

only. )

(b) Should such proposed. Bench of the Ventral
Administrative Tribunal at various places consist of:- i

(8) Vice-Chairman; -


(0) Judicial Members; and
(८). Administrative Members (to act as assessors

only.)

18. Should every such proposed State Administrative Tribunal
consist of:-
(8) Chairman;
(b) Vice-Chairman;
(c) Judicial Members; -and
(d) Administrative Members (to act as assessors).

19. Should a person be eligible to! be appointed as Chairman
of the Central/State Administrative Tribunal, if he -
(8) is, or has been the Chief Justice of a High
Court, or
(b) has, for at least 2 years, held the office of

Vice-Chairman appointed "88 suggested in question No.20.

20. Should a person be eligible to be appointed as a
Vice-Chairman of the Ccentral/State Administrative
Tribunat if he -

{a) is, or has been, a judge of a High Court, or

(b) has, for at least two years, been a Judicial

Member appointed as suggested in question No.2t.

21. Shoutd a person be'eligible to be appointed as a Judicial
Member of the central/State Administrative Tribunal if he i

is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or has been a |


22.

23.

24.

District Judge and held judicial office for a period of
not less than 10 years or is qualified to be a judge of

the High Court?

Should the appointments of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
Members of the. Central Administrative Tribunal be made bys
a permanent High Powered Selection Committee headed ७५४
the Chief Justice of India. or a sitting Judge of the
supreme Court nominated by him and in the case the State
Administrative Tribuna? by the Chief Justice of the State

High Court or any other sitting Judge nominated by the

Chief.Justice of the- State High Court concerned, ag

suggested in §.P.Sampath Kuma Kumar v. Union of India, (1987)

1 806 124,

Should there bea time-Timit within which proposals for
appointment of members of tribunals ought to be
Processed, and periodic review of optimum strength of
members in each tribunal be undertaken so that delay in
disposal of cases may be avoided because of lack of
appointment of a Member? .

Should a person be eligible to be appointed as an
Administrative Member of the Central/State Administrative
Tribunal to act as assessor in the aforesaid manner if he

has held the post _-of a Secretary to the Government of


25.

26.

27.

India or any other post under the State Government
carrying the scale of pay which is not less than that of
a Secretary to the Government of India?

Do you agree that if aforesaid changes in the structure
and functioning of Central/State Administrative Tribunal

are made, would they not become a real substitute to the

-High Court in all respects satisfying the requirement of

judicial review, a basic feature of the constitution,

PART II - THE CREATION OF AN APPELLATE FORUM

Do you agree with the suggestion that a regular appeal
should . lie” against the orders of the Central/State
Administrative Tribunal? If yes, what should be the

nature and structure of the appellate forum?

SECTION I APPEAL TO THE SPECIAL BENCH OF THE

HIGH COURT

Do you agree that appeals against the order of the
tribunals should be maintainable before the High Court on
questions of fact and law, and in order to ensure speedy
disposal, the High Courts | should be required to
constitute permanent * Servide Benches for the Centrai
Government and the State Government servants to deal with

the service matters exclusively?


28.

29.

30.

31.

. Would you ' suggest that the proposed N

SECTION II APPEAL TO THE PROPOSED NATIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE

APPELLATE TRIBUNAL

Would you suggest that an appeat should lie from tie

decision of the Central Administrative Tribunal and es.

- State Administrative Tribunal to the proposed Hations

Administrative Appellate Tribunal?

हू ३1७1१
Administrative Appellate Tribunal should be . located ११
Delhi, having four or more benches in various parts ४!

the country?

Should the National Administrative Appellate  Tretenyy

‘have overatl contro! in administative, Pitan rad vied

other matters over alt the Benches of the Tribunal?

Should the National Administrative Appellate Tribunal a:
Delhi consist of -

(a) Chairman; and

(b) One or two judicial Membe


32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Should every other Bench of the proposed National
Administrative Appeltate ४ Tribunal consist of a
Vice-Chairman and one or two Members, or two or more

Members?

Should the appointment of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and

Members of the'proposed National Administrative Appellate

Tribunal be made by a permarent high-powered selection

committee headed by the Chief Justice of India or a

sitting judge of the Supreme Court hominated by him, ag’
a

suggested in S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India,

case.

Should a person be eligible to be appointed as a Chairman
of the proposed National Administrative Appeltate
Tribunal if he has been the Chief Justice of the Supreme

Court of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court of India?

Should 8 persen be made eligible to be appointed as

Vice-Chairman of the proposed National Administrative
Appellate Tribunal if he has been either a Judge of the

Supreme Court or a,Chief Justice .of a High court?

Should a person be made eligible to be appointed as a
Judictal Member of the proposed National Administrative

Appellate Tribunal, if he is or has been a Judge of a

High Court? ©

mV -


37.

38.

39.

40.

Should the term of appointment of the Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Member | of the proposed National
Administrative Appellate Tribunal be three years with a

1
further provision that they may be re-appointed for a

. : i
period upto three years as the situation requires?

Do you agree’ with the view that the orders of the
proposed National Administrative Appellate Tribunal or
Benches thereof shall be final and no appeal shall lig

against its order in any court?

Do you agree with the suggestion that the appeal to the
proposed National Administrative Appellate Tribunal
should lie oenty on the following grounds:-

(a) Violation of Fundamental Rights;

(0) Want or excess of jurisdiction;

(०) Substantial question of Jaw of general

importance;

(d) Error of law; or error apparent on the face

of record; and

(e) Perverse findings.

Do you agree that an appeal may be filed in the
respective Bench of the Central Administrative and the
State Administrative Tribunal as the case may be against
whose order the appeal has been preferred? If so, the
Registry of the Tribunal shall forward the same to the

1
concerned Bench of the proposed National Administrative


4t.-

42.

43.

Appellate Tribunal. ! The Sench of the proposed National
Administrative Appellate Tribunal shall fix the tentatile
date for admission before it and accordingly inform the
parties concerned. The appeal may than be heard by the
concerned Bench of the National Administrative Appellate
Tribunal? However, (in urgent matters involving stay of
proceedings of other matters, the aggrieved party may
directly file the appeal before the concerned Bench of

the proposed National Administrative AppeYiate Tribunal

Should: the concerned Bench of the National Administrative
Appellate Tribunal beempowered to dispose of the appeat

at the! admission stage, if it 1 $ not maintainable?

Whether there should: ‘be a time limit for the disposal of
t
an appeal? If 80, what shoulid be the. time limit?

Do you agree that no appeal! shall! tie before the Nationa!
Administrative Appellate’ Tribuhal against the decision of
a Single: * Member Bencn or the central ‘Administrative
Appellate Tribunal or. the State Administrative Tribunal
in view of the proposed provisions: for appeal against the
decision of the Single. Member Bench toa Targer Bench of

the Central/State Administrative Tribunal respectively?


44,

45.

46.

Whether there should be a time limit for disposal of such

an appeal? If so, what should be the time<limit?

SECTION III CREATION OF AN APPELLATE FORUM AND THE

REQUIREMENTS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW

Whether the provision, either by constituting permanent
Service Benches: in the High Courts or by constituting
Proposed National Administrative Appellate Tribunat,:
would satisfy the requirement of judicial review which is

' i

the basic feature of the Constitution as held in the

Keshvananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 1461

and Minerva Mill Ltd. ४. Union of India, (1980) 3

5.0.0. 625.

If the answer to the above question is in affirmative,
whether the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article
226 and 227 of the Coneti tution of India can be excluded
with regard to the decisions of the Central/State
Administrative Tribunal because of the availability of an
equally efficacious and speedy remedy by way of appeal
and would satisy the requirements of the judicial review,

the basic feature of the Constitution.


47.

48.

Should the present structure subject to modification

suggested in question Nos. 4,5,9 and 11 can continue in
i

view of the proposed: Appellate Forum being provided

against the decision of the Central/State Administrative

Tribunal satisfying the requirements of judicial review?

Any other suggestions which you propose to offer.