LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT

ON

THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997

NOVEMBER, 1

o

9

3


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 001
TEL. : 3384475

USTICE
3. P. JEEVAN REDDY
PRrauman, Law Cormmussion of India

Residence :
1, JANFATH
NEW DEUTE 110 011
TEL. : 3019465

0.0.N0.6(3)(39)/97-LC(LS) 18.11.1998

Oear Or.M.Thambi Ourai,

I_am forwarding herewith 163rd report on “The Code
of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Bill, 1997",

2. The Law Commission was requested by the Government
of India (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs) to
undertake comprehensive revision of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. In January, 1998, the Commission took up
the subject and decided to do the exercise in two phases,
In the first phase, the Commission Proposed to express its

। viewS on the various amendments suggested by the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) 8111, 1997 which was introduced
as an official Bill in the Rajya Sabha. In the second
phase of the work, the Commission intends to take up the
revision of the Code in its entirety since a comprehensive
revision of the entire Code would take comparatively longer
time. .

3. The Commission issued a comprehensive questionnaire
on the subject to elicit informed opinion on several
provisions and proposals contained in the Amendment Bill,
The Commission also held three conferences at Delhi,
Allahabad and Hyderabad through the assistance of concerned
Chief Justices of the High Courts. There was an excellent
response in the conferences from the members of the Bar,
subordinate judiciary and Judges of the High Courts. The
responses received on the various questions have also been
considered by the Commission ,

4, The Commission is of the opinion that certain
changes recommended in the report need to be incorporated
in the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997 to

attain the objectiva of speedy and effactiva justice.

With regards,

Or.M.Thambi Durai, :

Hon’ble Minister for Law, Justice
and Company Affairs,

Shastri Bhawan,

New Dethi.


CHAPTER-IT

»

ANNHEXURE-A

INTRODUCTION

RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
REGARDING THE CODE 5

CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENOMENT )
BILL, 1997

CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

QUESTIONNAIRE

PAGES

1-10

11-67

1- 38

1- 43


CHAPTER-1

INTRODUCTION

1.1. Scope of the Report:- The Law Commission of India was

requested by the Government of India (Ministry of Law, Justice
& Company Affairs) to undertake comprehensive revision of _the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The Commission took up the
matter in January, 1988. It decided to do the exercise in two
phases. In the first phase, the Commission Proposed to
express its views on the various amendments suggested by the
Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997 (Annexure-A)
(hereinafter to be called the Amendment 8111) which was
introduced as an official bill in the Rajya Sabha. In the
second phase of the work, the Commission proposes to take up
revision of the Code in its entirety since a comprehensive
revision of the entire Code would take comparatively longer
time,

1.2. Issuing of Questionnaire and holding conferences of Questionnaire and holdin: nferences: With

a view to elicit informed opinion on several Provisions and
Proposals contained in the Amendment Bill, the Commission
prepared a questionnaire (Annexure-B8) containing as many as 43
questions. Under each question, the Commission mentioned
briefly the meaning of the Proposed amendment- and also
indicated the possible responses and interpretations of the
proposed amendment. Wherever necessary, relevant case law was

also indicated to facilitate clear and informed responses. It


however, made clear that the views, if any, expressed in

stionnaire by the Commission did not represent its

Final views but were only tentative opinions put forward with

a view to eliciting effective and informed résponses from

the Bar, Bench and other persons concerned with the

3. Besides communicating the questionnaire to aly

mmission also held three conferences at

concer

Delhi, Allahabad and Hyderabad. The respective Chief Justices

were requested to arrange the

nferences which | they
gracefully did. The conference at Delhi was moderated by Ms.

Justice Leila Seth, Member, Law Commission while the

conferences at Allahabad and Hyderabad were moderated by the

Chairman. There was an excellent response at all the three

from the members of the Bar, subordinate judiciary

and Judges of the High Court. In many cases, they expressed

their views in writing. The Commission prepared a record oF

the e2edings of alt the three conferences, briefty
recording the various views expressed by the participants. .
1.4, The Commission is grateful to all those who have

their views in response to the questionnaire

during the conferences organised

The replies on the various questions have

Our Hest CA


1.5. importance of the subject:- The Commission has been

veicing concern in its various reports about the

the justice delivery system in the country. Thus,
in its 127th report on ‘Resource Allocation for
Infra-Structural Services in Judicial Administration - (A

continuum of the repert on Manpower Planning in Judiciary: A

Blueprint)’, the Commission observed as follows:

“1.4 Ever since men have begun to reflect upon the
relations with each other and upon vicissitudes of the

human Jot, they have been pre-occupied with the

nearing Of justice and a popular belief has been that
onty be obtained threugh court. That

credence, credibility and respectability

tem, But Tike any other institution,

the system has to constantly justify its existence by
rendering the service expected of it. The moment it
ails or falters, the credibility and respectability

devalues, For a funetioning democracy, court system,

2 is obtained even against the State, is a
bre-requisite. Therefore, the court system, whenever
it is under an unbearable load, requires thorough

re-examination and its restructuring with a view to

ing it effici

o

nt, people and = result-orientead,

(Allen, quoted in the Report of the Labour Laws Review

4 (Government of Gujarat, 1974))."


“41.2 The Universal claration on Human
Rights provides that:

“Everyone has the right to an

ib

ffactive remedy by the competent
national tribunals for acts violating

the Fundamental rights granted by the

stitution or by Taw". {Art.18,
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
approved by the General Assembly of

the United Nations}.

Expounding the fundamental principles of justice

widerlying the Sectaration, in ano report, the Law

Commission had observed as under:

Equality is the basis of all modern systems
of Jurisprudence and administration of
justice... In se far as a person is unable to
obtain access to a court of Jaw for having his
wrongs redressed or for defending himself
against a criminal charge, Justice becomes
unequal and laws which are meant for his

pratection have no meaning and to that extent

fail in the

ir purpose, (LOI idth Report on

"Reform of Judicial Administration’, p.587)."


1.5.4. Failure on the front of providing adequate and easily
accessible courts of justice is one of the principal
causes of popular dissatisfaction with the
administration of justice. This was voiced way back
in 1906 by Dean Roscoe Pound in his famous speech as

follows:

“The dissatisfaction stems from unmanageable
backlog of cases, mounting arrears and
inordinate delay in disposal of cases in
courts at all. levels Yowest to the highest
coupled with exhorbitant expenses. This has
attracted the attention not only of the
members of the Bar, sonsumers of justice
(litigants), social activists, legal
academics, Parliament, but also the managers
of the court.” (Quoted in H.T. Rubin, The

Courts, Fulcrum of the Justice System, 208).

1.5.2. The Commission in its 127th report also pointed out
that the expression “access to justice” had different
connotations. The road blocks in the access to justice could
be high cost, geographical distance, adverse cost-benefit
ratio and the inordinate delay in search of illusory justice.
The State was responsible for removing all road blocks in the
access to justice. Accordingly, the State should ensure that
the system is equally accessible to all and should lead to the

results that were individually and socially just.


1.5.3 The concept of access to justice has undergone
significant transformation. Earlier, the right to judicial
Protection meant the aggrieved individual’s formal right to
litigate or defend a claim. It did not require active State
action for this purpose. Their preservation only required
that the State did not allow them to be injured by others.
Relieving 'legal poverty’, that is, incapacity of many to ‘make
full use of the law and institutions was not the concern of
the State. (M.Capelletti, Access to Justice, 6-7 (Book 1)
(vide paragraphs 2.2 and 2.3 of the 127th report of the Law

Commission, cited supra).

1.5.4 The procedure is the handmaid to the substantive
rights of the parties. [Sukhbir Singh v. Brij Pal Singh,
(1997) 2 SCC 200]. Substantive laws determined the rights and
obligations of citizens but the procedural laws, which are

equally if not less important, prescribe the procedure for the

ement of such rights and obligations. The efficacy of
substantive laws, to a large extent, depends upon the quality
of the procedural 19५9. Untess the procedure is simple,
expeditious and inexpensive, the substantive laws, however

good are bound to fail in their purpose and object.

1.5.5 Besides, as the Commission observed in its 114th

report on Gram Nayayalaya, Chapter V, para 5.3 that -


“5.3 It would be unwise to look at the problem from
the point of view of court management only. In other
words, it would be very imprecise to examine the
matter from the aspect of ever-growing court dockets.
Such an endeavour has to be guided by the aspirations
proclaimed in the Constitution of India. Article 39A
of the Constitution of India directs the State to
seoure that the operation of the legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall,
in particular, provide free 1७991 aid, by suitable
legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ‘ensure
that opportunities for securing justice are not denied
to any citizen by reason of economic or other
disabilities. This is the constitutional imperative.
Cenial of justice on the ground of economic and other
disabilities is in nutshell referred to what has been
known as problematic access to law. The Constitution
how commands us to remove impediments to access to
justice in a systematic manner. All agencies of the
Government are now under a fundamental obligation’ to
enhances access to justice...."

1.5.6. Article 39A casts a positive duty on the State to so
structure the legal justice system as to ensure that its
operation promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity.
‘To attain this object, the State has to pass suitable
legislation or frame schemes to ensure that opportunities for

securing justices are not denied to any citizen by reason of


economic or other disabilities. Among other disabilities,
courts situated at a long distance from the habitat of the
eitizens in search of justice itself would have a dampening
effect on one’s search of justice (see para 2.4 of Law

Commission of India, 127th report, supra).

Therefore, while bringing about reforms in the Code,
it is quintessential to keep in view the above constitutional
objedtives.

1.5.7. Detay in disposal of cases threatens justice. The
lapse of time blurs truth, weakens memory of witnesses and
makes presentation of evidence difficult. This leads to loss
of public confidence in the judicial process which in itself
is a threat to rule of law and consequently to the democracy.
The rising cost of litigation can also be said to be
attributable to delay which in turn causes the litigants to
either abandon meritorious claims or compromise for a lesser
unjust settlement out-of-court. Besides, expression of
society’s moral outrage is essential in an ordered society
that asks its members to rely on legal processs rather than
self-help to vindicate the wrongs. To avoid anarchy, fairness
has to be actually felt by the aggrieved persons and it is the
courts which provide the systematic outlet. Obedience to law
has been described as the strongst of all the forces making

for a nation’s peaceful continuity and progress. (S.Shetreet,


॥
|

“The Limits of Expeditious Justice”, Expeditious Justice, 1 at

page 15) (vide paras 2.15 and 2.12 of the 127th report of Law

Commission of India, supra).

1.6.

Attempts made in the past

The Commission has made a number of recommendations in its

aarlier

reports for speedy disposal of cases and with a view

to tackling the mounting arrears pending in various courts in

the country. The relevant reports are as under:

(i)

(11)

(iii)

Civ)

(५)

(५1)

(vii)

(viii)

(12)

(x)

14th report on “Reform of Judicial Administration”
27th report on “Code of Civil Procedure, 1908"

54th report on “Code of Civil Procedure, 1908"

55th report on “Rate of interest after decree and
interest on costs under Sections 34 and 35 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908”

56th report on “Notice of Suit required under certain
Statutory Provisions"

58th report on “Structure and Jurisdiction of the
Higher Judiciary”

77th. report on “Delay and arrears in trial Courts”
79th report on “Delay and arrears in High Court and
Qther Appellate Courts”

99th report on “Oral and Written arguments in the
Higher Courts"

114th report on “Gram Nyayalaya”


(iis)

(xiv)

Cav)

42401 report on “The High Court Arrears - A Fresh

725th report on “The Supreme Court - A Fresh Look"

12Aath report on “Cost of Litigation”
129th report on “Urban Litigation - Mediation as
Alternative to Adjudication”

436th report on “Conflicts in High Court Decisions on

ort on “Urgent Need to Amend Order XXI, Rule

92(2), Code of Civil Procedure to Remove an anomaly
which nullifies the Benevelent Intention of the
Legislature and occasions injustice to
Judgment-Oebters sought to be benefited.”

140th report on “Need to amend Order ४, rule 19A of

of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to service
of slimmons of registered post with a view to
foreclosing likely injustice”

444th report on "Conflicting Judicial Decisions
pertaining to the Code of. Civil Procedure, 1908”

155th report on “Suggesting some amendments to the

Code of Civil Procedure (Act No.V of 1908)"


CHAPTER-IIT

Recommendations and Conclusions Regarding The Code of Civil
dure (Amendment) Bill, 1997

2.1 The law relating to the procedure in suits and civil
proceedings in India (except in the case of State of Jammu and
Kashmir, Nagaland and Tribal areas of Assam and certain other
areas) is contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
{hereinafter referred to as the "“Code”). The Code has been
amended from time to time by various Acts of Central and State
Legislatures, The Code is mainty divided into two parts,
hamely, sections and orders. While the main principles are
contained in the sections, the detailed procedures with regard
to the matters dealt with by the sections are specified in the
orders. linder section 122 of the Code, the High Courts have
powers to amend, by rules, the procedure JTaid down in the
orders, In exercise of these powers, various amendments have

teen made in the orders by different High Courts,

2.2 With a view to implementing the recommendations “of
Justice Malimath Committee, 129th Report of the Law Commission
of India and the recommendations of the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation (11th Lok Sabha), and the resolution
adopted in the Law Ministers’ Conference held in New Delhi on
Bath June and ist July, 1997 the Government introduced a 8111
calles the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) 8111, 1997 for

amending the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The Bill



(4nnexure-A) inter-alia, aims at expediting the disposal of

edings so that justice may not be delayed

(see para 2 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons annexed

with the Amendment छ11). The Bill -also seeks to amend

certain fisions of the Limitation Act, 1983 and the Court

2.3 The seeks to make

me of the following

of Civil Pracedure, 1908 (as

d

Objects and Reasons annexed with

thes 8111):-

to be filed shall be in duplicate
nied by ati the documents on which
upon in support of his claim. It
to be supported by an affigavit stating the
oF the claim af the plaintiff and of the
which he relies up

weitten statement in duplicate shal] be
the deguments and shall be Filed
thiety days from the data of

Weitten statement is alsa to be
idavit

obviate delay in service of
ssed that plaintiff shall take the
eeourt and fd it to the parties,
ipt th = post, fax,

Z yr By such other

AS may tee directed by the
with a view to implement the 129th Report of
i of India and making conciliation
it is proposed to ma it obligat
refer the disput after the issues
med, for settlement = by arbitration,
ation, mediation, dud Settlement
Lok Adal qed 7
r any one of the
that the sui
in which it was

te resotutio
Further in



(e) As maximum time is consumed by the courts in
recording oral evidence which causes delay in disposal
of cases, it is Proposed to reduce such delay by
making provisions for filing of examination-in-chief
of every witness in the form of an affidavit. for the
cross-examination and re-examination of witnesses, it
is proposed that it shall be recorded by a
commissioner to ७७ appointed by the court and the
evidence recorded by a Commissioner shall become part
of ord of the suit;

(1) With a view to implement the recommendations.
oF the Committee on Subordinate Legislation (11th Lok
relating to steps to reduce unnecessary
urnments, it is proposed to make it obligatory for
a judge to record reasons for adjournment of a case as
well 98 award of actual or higher cost and not merely
notional cost against the parties seeking adjournment
in favour of the opposite party. Further, it is
Propesed to Vimit the number of adjournments to three
Ooniy during the hearing of a case:

3) As the party in whese favour an injunction has
been granted usually causes delay on flimsy and
unreasonable grounds, it is proposed that the party
who applies for injunction shall also furnish security
so that that party may not adopt delaying tactics
during the trial of the case;

(h) In matters relating to Property disputes,
particularly in matter of unauthorised construction on
the land of others, it has been found that, under the
existing provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, no
application for injunction can be moved unless the
suit is filed first in the court having competent
Jurisdiction. With a view to obviate this hardship,
it is proposed that a person may make an application
to the court of competent Jurisdiction for appoinment
of a commission to ascertain the factual status of the
Groperty so that at the time of Filing of regular
suit, the report is available to the Commissioner
relating to the factual status of the Property in
dispute: .

With a view to implementing recommendations of
४.9. Malimath Committees, it is proposed that

against the judgment of a single
fi In a petition under article 226
Sonstitution: and

with a view to reduce delay, it is proposed
the court shall, on the date of pronouncement of
t, simultaneously provide authenticated copies
Judgment to the parties. Appeal shall be filed



in the court which passes the decree and no notice
shall be served on the advocates of the parties in the
, court of first instance.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”

2.4. A perusal of the Amendment 8111 shows that there are
36 clauses which contain various amendments, substitutions,
omissions and insertions. The Amendment 8111 also contains
notes on clauses of the Bill which furnish the necessary
background for amending the existing provision or for
insertion of new provision in the Code. A memorandum
regarding delegated legislation points out the provisions
under which the Government or the High Courts can frame rules.
For facility of comparison with the existing provisions of the
Code which are sought to be modified by the Amendment 8111, an
extract of such provisions is also appended to the Amendment.

8111 at internal pages 23 to 38 thereof.

2.5. The Commission intends to specifically deal with and
make recommendations on the following clauses in the Amendment
Bill, namely, clauses 2, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 11,
18, 19, 20, 23,, 24, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31 and 32, which appear
to bring about radical changes in the Code. In respect of
other ‘clauses of the Bill, the Commission is in agreement with

the amendments suggested.

2.6 Glause 2 of the Amendment Bill proposing to insert 2 of the Amendment 8111 roposin: o.__insert

sub-section (2) in sectién 26 making it obligatory upon the 2) in sectién 26 making it obligatory u tt

Qlaintiff to file an affidavit in support of the facts stated to file an affidavit in suppor £ ef s

in the plaint:- A similar provision has been proposed in Order


wv: 45 iH

VI. The proposal is to insert sub-rule (4) in Rule 15 of
Order VI providing that "The person verifying the pleading
shall also furnish an affidavit in support of his pleadings’.

Obviously, this would cover the written statement also.

2.6.1. The response of members of the Bench as well as the
Bar has been uniformly against the above Proposals. The
general view expressed by them is that such a provision would
only add ta the delays in disposal of suits. It was submitted
that there are enough provisions in the existing law to deal
with false and malicious averments in the pleadings and that
this additional requirement would not make any differance, By
way of example, the participants in several conferences
referred to a similar requirement in support of facts stated
in the writ petitions and counters and other affidavits filed
in the writ proceedings which had in no Manner operated as a
check upon the tendency to make false statements, It was atso
observed that the Pleadings acquired the character of evidence

with the filing of affidavit in support of the pleadings. In

fa

such an event, ai party could even call the other party to

ore

qh
ys
%

xamine him with respect to the facts stated in his

pleadings,

2.6.2. The Law Commission is, however, of the opinion that

do amendments are salutary and may, at Teast to some

extent, check the tendency to make false averments in the
Pleadings. In this connection, the Conmission recalls the

following observation of George Bernard Shaw..." the theory of


legal procedure is, if you set two liars to expose one

another, truth will emerge”. Probably it was meant as a
satire, made in his typical style, on the type of pleadings in
courts and to emphasise the tendency to make false averments
in the pleadings. This tendency has certainly to be checked.
Eves if the parties in two to five per cent cases could be
dealt with appropriately for making false statements in - the
pleadings, it would greatly help in arresting this tendency.
In any event, the measures Proposed may be tried out on an
experimental basis and if it is found to cause further delays,
as apprehended by many participants in the conferences, the
same could be reviewed. It should, however, be clarified that
the party swears to the correctness of only the facts stated
in the pleadings and not to the quéstions or propositions of
Taw, if any, stated therein. It should also be open to the
party to say in his affidavit which of the facts are true to
his knowledge and which of the facts he believes to be true on
the basis of information received by him. It may not be
inappropriate to refer to observations of the Supreme Court in

the following cases:

In Ohananjay Sharma v. State of Haryana, (1995) 3 scc
757, p.38, it was held:

“...The swearing of false affidavits in judicial
procedings not only has the tendency of causing

obstruction in the due course of judicial proceedings

—_

but has also the .tendency to impede, obstruct and


हज: 17 t=

interfere with the administration of justice... The
due process of Jaw cannot be permitted to be slighted
nor the majesty of law be made a mockery by such acts
or conduct on the Part of the parties to the
litigation or even while. appearing as witnesses.
Anyone who makes an attempt to impede or undermine or
obstruct the free flow of the unsoiled stream of
Justice by resorting to the filing of false evidence
commits criminal contempt of the Court and renders
himself liable to be dealt with in accordance with the
Act. Filing of false affidavits or making fatse
Statement on oath in Courts aims at striking a blow at
the Rule of Law and no Court can ignore such conduct
which has the tendency to shake public confidence in
the judicial institutions because the very structure
of an ordered life is put at stake. It would be a
great public disaster if the fountaion of justice is
allowed to be poisoned by anyone resorting to filing
of false affidavits or giving of false statements and
Fabricating false evidence in a court of law. The
stream of justice has to be kept clean and pure and
anyone soiling its purity must be dealt with sternly
so that the message percolates loud and clear that no
one can be permitted to undermine the dignity of the
court and interfere with the due course of judicial

proceedings or the administration of justice...


In Mohan Singh ७. , Late Amar Singh through the LRs Amar Singh through the Rs,
1998(5) SCALE 115, the Supreme Court stressed the consequences

of filing false affidavits in courts, by holding as under:-

“36...Tampering with the record of judicial
proceedings and filing of false affidavitsin a court
oF law has the tendency of causing obstruction in the
due course of justice. It undermines and obstructs
free flow of unsoiled stream of justice and aims at
striking a blow at the rule of law. The stream of
justice has to be kept clear and pure and no ene can
be permitted to take liberties with it by soiling its
purity. Since, we are prima facie satisfied that the
tenant has filed false affidavits and tampered with

judicial record, with a view to eradicate the evil of

herjury, we consider it appropriate to direct the
1 Registrar of this Court to file a complaint before the
appropriate court and set the criminal law in

motion...”

In view of these rulings, the Law Commission considers

that the suggested amendment is appropriate,

2.7 Clause 7 of the Amendment 8111 proposing to_ingert of th Amendment 87111 proposing to insert

Section $3. enabling and/or obliging the Court to explore the the Court to explore the

possibility of alternative methods of dispute resolution viz., methods of dispute resolution viz.

‘conciliation, mediation, arbitration, judicial settlement or mediation arbitration, judicial settlement or

settlement through Lok_Adalat:- Coming to the propesal, it may



53: 19 :«

be mentioned that there was good amount of debate on the same.
Almost a uniform opinion was expressed by both the members of
the Bench and the Bar that the Court should not be asked to
undertake the exercise contemplated by proposed Section 89.
Doing so would invite comments and suspicion upon the
neutrality of the court as an impartial arbiter, it was
submitted. While formulating the terms of settlement or whila
reformulating the terms of a possible settlement after
receiving the observations of the parties, it may happen that
the court may 6e obliged to express some opinion ona
Particular aspect of the dispute which may not be liked by one
of the parties. Some procedural difficulties (e.g. absence
of provision for a reference to arbitration in a pending suit
in the present Arbitration Act) were also pointed out.
Accordingly, several aiternatives were suggested by the
Participants. One of the alternatives suggested was that
instead of inserting proposed section 89, the existing Order
XXXII-A may be suitably amended to cover al} suits. Another
suggestion which appeared to have gathered large amount of
support was that after the issues were settled, every suit
should be necessarily sent to a committee or board of
conciliators comprised of senior lawyers and retired judicial
officers enjoying high reputation for integrity and
cametence. Such a committee or board will decide, after
hearing the. parties, whether the suit should be referred to
any of the alternative modes of dispute resolution mentioned
in sub-section (1) -df section 89. It was explained that

generally speaking, there was good amount of interval between


the framing of the issues and the commencement of the trial
and as such a mandatory reference to the committee or the
board would not, really result in detaying the trial or the
disposal of the suit. Some others, however, expressed an
apprehension that while this Suggestion may be possible to
implement in cities and big towns where a number of senior
lawyers and = retired Judicial officers were available, there
may be difficulties in implementing the same in smaller towns
where there was only one court and there were not enough

senior lawyers or retired judicial officers of high integrity.

2.7.1. The Law Commission is of the opinion that proposed
section 89 may be suitably modified to provide as under:

(a) After the settlement of issues in every suit (when both
the parties would have also filed their basic documents as
required by the proposed provisions relating to filing of
documents along with the Pleadings), the suit shall be
referred to a board of conciliators to explore whether there
existed elements of settlement which were acceptable to the
parties and if it appeared to the board that such elements of
settlement did exist, they shall refer the suit for
arbitration, judicial settlement or settlement through Lok
Adatat. Method of conciliation could be tried by the Board
itself if found feasible. Such reference could be made either
after reformulating the terms of possible settlement if the
board found the same feasible and advisable or without such

reformulation, as the case may be.



(9) The presiding Officer of the principal civil court
in every city and town shall constitute, in consultation with
his senior colleagues, a Board of conciliators consisting of
retired judicial officers and senior lawyers of known

integrity and competence.

(०) A time limit should be prescribed within which the
board of conciliators shall complete its work i.e., either
refer the suit to arbitration/judicial settlement or
settlement through Lok Adatat- or bring about a settlement
through conciliation -if it finds that such a course was
advisable or report to the court that it could not find’ any
elements of settlement which might be acceptable to the
parties and that, therefore, any reference of the suit to
arbitration/conciliation/judicial settlement or settlement
through Lok Adalat was not warranted or advisable. This
period could range between 4 months to one year, as may be

specified by each court,

(d) To delete the alternative mode of “mediation”
mentioned under clause (2) of sub-section (1) of the proposed
section 89, Mediation by a court could be resorted to at any
stage of the proceedings and it should hot be stipulated as a

matter of law either at the Stage of the issues or at any

n

ubsequent stage. Such a course is always open to the court
and there is no reason to define or codify it. Accordingly,

clause (4) in sub-section (2) of Section 89 might be deleted.



Section 89 may be redrafted in the light of the

aforesaid recommendations.

2.8 Clause _10 of the Amendment _Bi11 proposing to 10 of the  Amendmen Bill roposi t

Substitute existing section 100A existin section 100A:- By virtue of this

amendment, the Letters Patent Appeal against the Judgement and
decree of 8 single Judge made in an appeal preferred under
section 96 of the Code as well as the Letters Patent Appeal
preferred against the Judgment and order of a single judge in
an application made under article 226 or article 227 of the

Constitution is sought to be done away with altogether.

2.8.1. So far as the proposal to abolish the Letters Patent
Appeal against the judgment and order of a learned single
Judge made on an application under article 226 is concerned,
there was a strong and uniform opposition against the proposal
from both the members of the Bench and the Bar. Such a move
would only result in adding enormously to the burden of the
Supreme Court because the only remedy then available would be
to approach the Supreme court under article 136 of the

Constitution.

2.8.2. So far as article 227 is concerned the position is the
same, However, the procedures followed by differant High
Courts in this behalf is not uniform. For example, in the
High Court of Andhra Pradesh- and Probably in some other
southern High Courts too, an application under article 227 of

the Constitution is treated and registered as a civil revision



Petition. In such a situation, there is no question of any
Latters Patent Appeal against the order made on such an
application/petition. In some other High Courts,however, an
application under article 227 is generally treated on par with
an application under article 226. Yet another distinctive
Practice peculiar to Allahabad High Court appears to be. that
by virtue of Uttar Pradesh High Court (Abolition of Letters
Patent Appeal) Act, 1962. Letters Patent Appeal’ stands
abolished against the orders of singte Judge made on a writ
petition (a petition under article 226 of the Constitution)
Preferred against the judgment and orders of tribunals and

other quasi-judicial authorities.

2.8.3. The Law Commission is of the opinion that so far as
the proposal to abolish Letters Patent Appeal against the
judgment and order, whether interim or final of a single Judge
made oon an application under article 226 or article 227 is
concerned, it is neither advisable nor desirable. Quite a few
of the writ petitions disposed of by single Judges in various
High Courts invelve substantial stakes and have serious
consequences both for the State as well as the citizens.” Very
often, the writ petition is an original proceeding. At any
rate, it is an original proceeding in a civil court i.e., High
Court. There ought to be at least one appeal against the
order made by a single Judge on applications preferred under
article 226. The proposed move is certainly not in public
interest because in many cases the public interest may suffer

VF such a proposal +8 given effect to. The Law Commission,


therefore, strongly recommends against the move to abotish the
Letters Patent Appeal against the Judgment and orders made by
a single Judge on an application made under article 226 or
article 227, wherever it is available at present. The
existing practice Prevailing in various High Courts ought to
be continued. In fact, by virtue of the aforementioned UP Act
of 1962, a large number of appeals are being preferred in the
Supreme Court against the Judgment and orders of singla judges

made in writ petitions filed in the Allahabad High Court.

2.8.4. Now coming ० the Proposal to abolish the Letters
Patent Appeal against the judgment and decree of a “single

Judge made in an appeal against the original decree (i.e.,
under section 96 of the Code), two strands of opinions can be
said to have emerged in the various conferences and in the
responses received from the various governments, organisations
and individuals. While one view is to continue the existing
practice without any change, the other view is to limit this
right only to substantial questions of law arising from the
Judgment of a single judge on the lines of section 100 of the
Code. A few participants supported the Proposal in’ its
entirety. The opinion ultimately expressed by a majority of
the: participants/respondents is that the provision of Letters
Patent Appeal against the interim/interlocutory orders made by
a single Judge in such first appeals should be done away with
though the letters patent appeal against the final
Jjudgment/decree should be retained in a restricted fashion.

It was suggested by some~oF the Hon’ble Judges of the High



Court that not many Letters Patent Appeals were filed against
the judgment and decrees of single Judges in first appeals and

that even among those filed, a majority were dismissed at the

stage of admission itself.

2.8.5. The law Commission is of the opinion that so far as
the final judgment and decrees made in first appeals (appeals
Preferred against the Judgment and decree in an original suit)
are concerned, it is both advisable as well as desirable that
the Letters Patent Appeal should not be abolished altogether
against such judgment and decree. The suggestion to restrict
the Letters Patent Appeal in such matters to substantial
questions of law only on the lines of section 100 of the Code
is laudable and deserves to be accepted. This suggestion is
made in view of the fact that according to the law laid down
by the Supreme Court and certain High Courts, in such Letters
Patent Appeals even questions of fact are open to review,
though as amatter of practice, the Letters Patent court
ordinarily respects the concurrent findings of fact. Be that
as it may, the restriction of the Letters Patent Appeal to
substantial questions of law alone would not only restrict and
reduce the number of such Letters Patent Appeals but would
drastically cut down the admission rate of such appeals. No
such appeal should be permitted against inter im/interlocutory

orders.


2.9 Clause 11 of the Amendment _ 8111 proposing _ ४६० 11 ० the Amendment Bill roposin to
A
substitute the existing section 102 the existing sectio 02:- By this amendment, not

only the value of subject-matter of the suit is sought to be
raised from Rs.3000/- to Rs.25,000/-, even the existing
restriction as to the nature and character of the suit is also
sought to be done away with. In other words, according to the
proposed/substituted section 102, there shall be no second
appeal at all where the amount or value of the subject-matter

of the original suit does not exceed Rs. 25,000/-.

2.9.1. While some Participants/respondents supported this
proposal, quite a few of them opposed the removal of
restriction as to the nature and character of the suit while
welcoming proposed enhancement of value of the subject-matter
from Rs. 3000/- to Rs. 26000/-. It was pointed out by
several participants that having regard to the Provisions
contained in section 11 of the Code incorporating the rule of
res judicata, many decrees made by the courts in suits the
value of the subject-matter whereof is less than Rs.,
25,000/- may operate as res judicata even in matters of far

higher value.

2.9.2. The Law Commission is of the opinion that while the
amount or value of the subject-matter of the original suit in
Proposed section 102 be raised from Rs.25,000/ to Rs.50,000/-,
the proposed removal of restriction as to the nature and

character of the suit may be dropped. (At present, the

provi

॥ is limited to suits of the nature cognizable by



courts of Small Causes.) It may be remembered that a second
appeal is not available on all points but is restricted only
to substantial questions of law. In such a situation,
abolition of second appeal altogether in all matters the value
of subject-matter whereof does not exceed Rs.25,000/~ may not
be an appropriate step. The reason for the Law Commission
‘recommending the raising of monetary Timit From Rs. 25, 000/to
Rs.50,000/- 15 that generally speaking, money suits are
comparatively simple suits which fact is recognised and
affirmed by the fact that the Legislature has thought it fit
to enact Order XXXVII-providing for summary procedure in many
money suits irrespective of the monetary value thereof,
Situation may be differant in the case of other types of
suits. In this connection, it may be recalled that suits for
Mere permanent injunction are valued at a Tow figure unrelated
to the value of the subject-matter of the suit. This is
indeed permitted by the various court-fees Acts. Therefore, a
provision of the nature proposed may result in grave injustice

in such cases.

2.10 Clause _12__of the Amendment 8111 proposina t to. delete
She existing clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of roviso ta sub-section 1 of

115 and d_the further addition of sub-Section (3) in further addition of sub-Section (3) in

Section 115.:-There was almost uniform opposition to the

to delete clause (b) of proviso to sub-section (1) of

It was submitted that such a power should be

available to the High Court to correct instances of failure of



5“: 28 :-

justice or of orders causing irreparable injury. It was
submitted that deletion of the said clause would only result
in more remands by the appellate courts. Only a few members
of the subordinate judiciary in the State of Uttar Pradesh
supported this provision. So far as the insertion of
sub-section (3) is concerned, it was generally welcomed by

all.

2.40.4. The Law Commission, while welcoming the insertian of
sub-section (3) in section 115, is of the opinion that the
Proposal to delete clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section
(1) is not advisable nor would it serve the purpose of speady
disposal of suits. May be, it is true, that in some States
interference under section 115 is being made very liberally
and without due regard to the restrictive language of the
section, That is certainly a feature to be deprecated and
discouraged. The High Courts and the other authorities

sing powers of revision (in the State of Uttar Pradesh,

the power of revision has been conferred upon the District
Judges) should always bear in mind the significance, the
object and the purpose underlying Section 99 of the Cade,
Section 99 is premised on the supposition that each and every
infraction of 8 procedural Provision in the Code does not
warrant interference by the appellate court and that
interference with a © judgment and decree is warranted only

where such jiafraction has resulted in substantial prejudice to

the party. This is the spirit behind stion 99 which says,

No decree shall be-“Feversed or substantially varied, nor



-: 29 :- 7,

shall any case be remanded, in appeal on account of any
misjoinder or non-joinder of Parties or cause of action or any
error, defect or irregularity in any proceedings in the suit,
hot affecting tha merits of the case or the jurisdiction of
the Court." But the proposal to delete clause (9) of proviso
to section 115 (1) on the ground of frequent interference by
the courts exercising powers of revision may not be warranted.

The remedy ties elsewhere, namely, exercising restraint and

क्ष

eif-discipl ine while exercising power of revision. It may be
noted bhat this clause was inserted on the recommendations of
Law Commission of India, 27th report, pr.57 thereof at 7.25.
In this regard the reason underlying these provisions is

quoted under pr.56 of the said report, are quoted below:-

it

56, AS regards the second question, the Law

Commission after carefully considering the views

oa

xpressed before it, came to the conclusion that the
right of revision against an interlocutory order is a
valuable right which should not be abolished. The
case for retaining the right of revision against an
interlocutory order was fairly put by an experienced
Chief Justice who made the following statement before

the Law Commission:-

“It is nat unoften that a very wrong order is
made. If it be made impossible to challenge
the order immediately and have it set aside

and if the error is left to be corrected in

&
if


the appeal from the final order if, and = when
such an appeal is taken, the intermediate
Proceedings will necessarily all be on an
erroneous basis and it can hardly be just to
compel the parties to submit to the order

without any chance of instant redress,”

The Law Commission in the Fourteenth Report
accordingly recommended that the expression “casa
decided” in section 115 should be so defined as to
inelude an interlocutory order. Necessary amendment

is proposed in section 115."

The Commission feels that the reasons assigned for
introducing this clause in Section 115 as quoted under pr.56
oF 27th report of Law Commission are germane and lead to the
conelusion that the said provision should be retained. The
Law Commission, therefore, recommends that the propesal to
delete clause (b) of proviso to sub-section (1) of section 115
be given up. The addition of sub-section (3) is, however,

Perfectly in order.

2.11. Clause 13 of the Amendment 8111 seeking to substitute 13 Of the Amendment Bill seeking to substitu

the words "not exceeding 30 days in total “in the place of the words “not exceeding 30 days in total “in the place of the

xisting words “such period” words “such period”":- Section 148 provides for

enlargement or extension of time fixed or granted under the

erders of the court. -The proposal to limit the discretion of



the court in this behalf to a total period of 30 days has been
uniformly opposed by al? the participants as unduly fettering

the discretion of the courts.

2.11.1. The Law Commission is also of the opinion that no such
restriction should be placed in section 148. Situations may
arise where the interests of justice may call for exercise of
power under section 148 even beyond the period proposed to be
stipulated. Any such restriction of time may in some cases
even lead to failure of justice. The Proposal may, therefore,

be dropped.

Amendment of Orders

sub-rule (3 32 in rule 41 of Order Iv. rule of Order V.:- The amendment to

sub-rule (1) is formal in nature and is het opposed. But, so
far as the proposal to insert sub-rule (3) is concerned, it
was apprehended by many of the Participants in the various
conferences that such a rule may lead to innumerable
complications. Sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of Order IV provides
that every suit shall be instituted by presenting plaint to
the court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf while
sub-rule (2) says that every plaint shall comply with the
rules contained in Orders VI and VII, so far as they are
applicable. The proposed sub-rule (3) says that 9 plaint

shall vet be deemed to have been duty instituted unless it


complies with the requirements specified in sub-rutes (1). and
(2). The proposed rule would give room for objection by the
defendant that the plaint does hot conform to one or the other
requirements of Order VI or Order VII, which may contribute to
delaying the suits further. Moreover, from the stand point of
limitation also, the proposed sub-rule (3) may give rise to
considerable difficulty. The existing Tegal position is that
the date of presentation of Plaint is treated as date of
filing of suit. This rule may become inapplicable, if the
proposed sub-rule (3) is inserted, A time-limit could be
indicated within which all defects in and objections to
Presentation of plaint are to be rectified. The Law
Commission, therefore, recommends that the Proposed sub-rule
(3) may be dropped and instead a time-limit may be prescribed
within which atl defects in and objections to the presentation
of plaint have to be rectified. An outer time-limit of 30

days would appear appropriate.

Clause 15 of stauise 15 of the Amendment 8i11 seeking to amend Amendment 8111 seeking to amend

Several Rules in Order v:- We may deat with each of the rutes

proposed to be amended separately.

(i) Amendments proposed to Rule 1(1):

The existing sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of Order ४

#s that “when a suit has been duly instituted, a summons

May be issued to the defendant to appear and answer the claim
aan

on a day to be therein specified: Provided that no such



summons shall be issued when the defendant has appeared at the
Presentation of the plaint and admitted the plaintiff’s claim:
Provided further that where a summons has bean issued, the
Court may direct the defendant to file the written statement
of his defence, if any, on the date of his appearance and
cause an entry to be made to that effect in the summons”,
According to the proposed/substituted sub-rule (1) the
defendant is required to file his written Statement “00 such
day within thirty days from the day of institution of the suit
as may be specified therein" in the summons. Though the first
proviso is not proposed to be amended, the second proviso as
amended, provides that where the defendant fails to file a
written statement on the date prescribed in the main body of
Subtrule (1), the defendant shall be allowed to file the same
“on such other day which shalt not be beyond thirty days from
the date of service of summons on the defendant, as the Court
May think fit". It is true that the proposed amendment is
inspired by a concern for expeditious progress of the suit but

at the same time, it is ne take into account the

७
है|
na
wo
»
<
ce
5

gractical problems and the realities of the situation while
fixing such mandatory time limits. All the suits are ‘not
simple in nature. Some of them are complicated, calling for a
good amount of preparation by the defendant before he can file
.awritten statement. It may happen that in some cases the

defendant may be required to gather

amount oF material
before he can file his written statement. Some clarifications

cessary to be asked for by the defendant with

ments inthe plaint. All this cannot happen


within the peried prescribed in the Proposed sub-rute (1).
While some participants, Particularly the members of the Bar,
suggested that there should be no such time limits and that
the yule should merely direct the court to call upon the
defendant to file his written statement at the earliest,
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, some
other members, particularly members of the Bench, strongly
supported mandatory time Vimits for filing the written
Statement. However, even the latter class of Participants
agreed that the time limits proposed in sub-rule(1) were
unrealistic and might result in failure of justice in some
cases. There was consensus that the words “within thirty days
from the day of institution of the suit” in the main body of
the proposed sub-rule(1) should be substituted by the words
“within sixty days from the day of institution of the suit"
and similarly, in the second proviso, the words “thirty days
from the date of service of summons on the defendant” should
be substituted by the words “ninety days from the date on

which the period of sixty days aforesaid expires".

2.13.4. The Law Commission agrees with the view that the time
Vimits proposed in sub-rule(1) in the Amendment Bill are harsh
and might result in failure of justice in some cases. This
May be particularly true in suits where the Government happens
to be the defendant. Experience shows that in cases where
Gavernment is the defendant, it is not as prompt as a private
party in filing the written Statement. Because of the very

nature of the working of the government departments and the



requirement of coordination and internat correspondence
between one department and the other, it generally requires a
longer time for filing the written Statement. It is true that
in the interest of speedy disposal of the suits, the period
for filing the written statement should be curtailed but it
should not be done in such a manner as to prove
counter-productivs. The Law Commission is, therefore, of the
opinion that the words “thirty days” in the main body of

sub-rule(t) should be made “sixty days" and the period of
“thirty days" prescribed in the second proviso to sub-rule(1t)
should be made ninety days and this period of ninety days
should be calculated from the date of expiry of sixty days

Prescribed in the main body of sub-rule(1).

(11) Proposed substitution of Rule 9:
2.13.2. The proposed substitution of rule 9 provides for
sending the summons to thea defendant by other supplementary
means presently not specified in sub-rule (1) of Rute 9. The
existing sub-rule also places the duty of serving the summons
upon the plaintiff. Sub-rule (1) says that "The Court shall
issue summons and deliver the same to the Plaintiff or his
agent for service........ ." While there was a general welcome
to the proposed sub-rule(1t), which seeks to take advantage of
the new and modern methods of communication like speed post,
courier service, fax and E.mail, there was uniform opposition,
both from the members of the Bar and Bench, to the proposal to
deliver the summons to plaintiff for being served upon the

defendant. It was submitted that the summons should be sent


in any of the modes specified in sub-rule (1) to rute 9 by the
court itself, though at the expense of the plaintiff. AN
apprehension was expressed by many Participants that delivery
of summons to the plaintiff for service upon defendant may
provide room for mischief and fraud. The Law Commission
agrees with the same and accordingly recommends that while
sub-rute (1) of Rule 3, as proposed, may be adopted the words
in the said sub-rule which provide for delivering the summons
to the plaintiff or his agent for service upon the defendant
should be deleted and the service of summons in any of the
Modes specified by the Code shoutd be by the court itself, no

doubt at the expense of the plaintiff.

2.13.3, So far as sub-rule (2) of new Rule 9 is concerned, it
also requires to be amended in the same terms. In other
words, sending of summons through court in the traditional
mode shall be by the Court itself and not through plaintiff.
It Was suggested that the sub-rule may stipulate that the
office/Registry of the Court shall send the summons within
Seven days of the filing of the summons with requisite charges

by the plaintiff

2.13.4, It was also suggested by some of the
respondents/participants that sub-rute(3) must provide further
that where endorsement was made by a postal employee or any
authorised person that the defendant or his agent had refuscd
to take delivery of the postal article containing the summons

or refused to accept the summons by any other modes specified


10 sub-rule(1), the court shall, before declaring that the
summons had been duty served upon the defendant or his agent,
make i: appropriate enquiry and make such declaration only on
being satisfied that the endorsement was true. For this
Purpose, the court should be empowered to summon the postal
employee or other authorised person and to record his
statement on oath wherever called for. The Commission in its
140th Report pr.6.1 observed that we cannot overlook’ the
fairly large number of reported cases in which injustice might
have. resulted by reason of a fraud practised with the help of
a dishonest postman or lapse in tendering the article to a
wrong person. In view of this, the Law Commission agrees with

this suggestion.
Proposed new Rule 9-8:

2.13.5. It was suggested by the participants and it is also
the opinion of the Law Commission that the opening words in

sub-rute(t) of the proposed Rule 9-& should read as follows:

“The Court shall, in addition to and simultaneous ty
with the issuance of summons in the manner provided in

Rule 9....".

In other words, the normal mode of delivery of summons
through Court should be mandatory and obligatory and shall be
in addition to any modes of service specified 10 sub-rule(t)

of Rule 9. Other amendments Proposed in Order V are in order.


2.44 Clause 16 of Clase 16 of the Amendment Bill proposing to amend Amendment Bill roposin to _amen

gertain rules in Order VI:- (i) Sub-clause (i) of clause 16 of

the Amendment 8117 proposes to omit Rule 5 of Order VI. The
said rule enables the court to direct the parties to furnish
better statement of the nature of the claim or defence,or
further and better particulars of any matter stated ine any
Pleading. This rule is perhaps sought to be omitted on the
ground that it is unnecessary in view of the Provisions for
serving the interregatories and the Provisions relating to
discovery and inspection. (Note on this clause indicates that
the omission is being effected consistent with other changes
Proposed in the Code). Though there was some opposition to
this deletion from among some of the Participants, the Law
Commission is of the opinion that existing Rule 5 can be

safely omitted.

(ii) The proposed insertion of sub-rule(4) after sub-rule
(3) in Rule 15 providing that the person verifying the
Pleading shall also furnish an affidavit in support of his
pleadings has already been discussed by the “Law Commission
under paragraph 2.6., supra.

(iit) The proposal to delete Rule 17 (and the consequential
provision in Rule 18) of Order VI has been opposed uniformly
by all the participants, whether members of the Bar or of the
Bench, All the participants pleaded for retaining Rule 17 but

there ow

हज

re two different strands of opinion in this regard.

According to one view, the present rule should be left



m2 39 :-

untouched. It was pointed out that in appropriate cases, the
Supreme Court had granted the amendment of pleadings at the
stage of appeal to the Supreme Court. It was also observed
that any number of situations may arise including the
subsequent changes in law and the subsequent discovery of new
and relevant facts, which may call for amendment of the
Pleadings. In such a situation, it was Suggested, the power
of the court to grant amendment on appropriate terms should
not be interfered with in any manner. According to the other
strand of opinion, this Power of amendment should be
restricted, Members of the Bench, in particular, suggested
that no application for amendment should be entertained once
the trial of the suit had begun. In other words, 811 the
amendments should be effected before the trial opened. Once
the trial had commenced, no amendment should be granted except
where such an amendment was called for by a subsequent change
in Taw or the happening of a subsequent event necessitating
such amendment, According to this view, the provision for
amendment of pleadings was being misused by parties with a
view to delay the trial and to harass the other side. It was
submitted that very often application for amendment was filed
en othe date when the suit was posted for trial only with a
view ite stopping commencement of the trial because the party
was ‘not ready or it was not convenient for it te go on with
the trial on that occasion. It was suggested that such
attempts and tactics should be discouraged and it was for this
reason that the suggestion had been made that no amendment

should be allowed to be applied for once the trial opened and


that no such application should be entertained on the date on

which the trial was to commence. The Law Commission is of the

opinion that this power of amendment of pleadings should not

be taken away. At the same time, however, it is necessary to

ensure that this provision is not abused and is not used as a

means of delaying the commencement or progress of the trial.

The Law Commission, accordingly, agrees with the second strand

of thought aforementioned. In other words, the Rule should

state that no amendment of pleadings shall be granted and no

such application far amendment should be entertained, on the

date the trial ig to commence except where the Court feels

that the amendment is necessitated by a change in law effected

subsequent to the framing of the issues or on account of any

fait coming to the knowledge of the applicant after framing of

the issues which he could not have discovered, with due

diligence before the framing of the issues. Once the triat

commences, No amendments should be allowed except where it is

found necessary on account of the subsequent events whether

Tegal or factual as mentioned above. Rule 18 being

consequential in nature, does not call for any separate
comment.

2.15 Clauss 17 ०0 the Amendment Bill:- (i) Clause 17 of

the Amendment Bill proposes changes in Rule 9 Order VIT
dealing with the procedure on admitting plaints. The proposal

is ta substitute Rute 9 in Order VII. This may be effected.


subject to the caveat that the service of summons should not
be by the plaintiff but through the court as discussed

hereinabove while dealing with Order v.

(ii) The additional grounds on which the plaint can be

rejected as proposed in sub-clause (ii) of clause 17 of the
i

Amendment Bill could also be included subject to the rider

that it should be clearly indicated that the failure referred

to in each of the proposed sub-clauses (e), (1) and (g) in

rule 11 of Order VII, should be a repeated failure,

(iii) The proposed substitution of Rule 14 is a step in the
right direction but the only thing suggested by the
participants - with which the Law Commission agrees - is that
the plaintiff should not ७७ compelled to file the original
document where he apprehends that it may be tampered with -
while in the custody of the registry of the Court. It should
be open to the plaintiff to file the xerox copies of those
documents which he apprehends may be tampered with while in
the custody of the registry of the court. But, he shall be
under an obligation to produce the same at the trial or as ‘and

when called upon by the court.

2.15.1. A number of participants suggested that sub-rule(3) of

Rule 14 should be so worded that for special reasons to be

d, the court should be empowered to allow the plaintiff
to produce a document or copy thereof which he has not filed

with the plaint. According to the Commission, this is a good


suggestion. Sub-rule 3 of Rule 14 may ascordingly be re-cast
$0 as to enable the court to permit the Plaintiff to produce a
document or a copy thereof which he has not filed atong with

the plaint.

Civ) The proposal to delete existing Rule 15 of Order VII
is in order in view of Rule 14 (2) of Order VII as proposed in

the Amendment Bill.

(v) Sub-clause (५) in clause 17 of the Amendment Bi11
proposes to omit the words “without the leave of the Court” in
sub-rule (1) of Rule 18, This proposal is consistent with the

formulation in proposed Rule 14.

2.16 Clause 18 of the Amendment Bi11:(4) 1॥७

Proposed/substituted rule 1 in Order VIII provides that the
defendant shall at or before the first hearing or within such
time as the Court may permit, which shall not: be beyond 30
days (rom the date of service of summons on the defendant,
present a written statement of his defence. This aspect has
been discussed and dealt with when gealing with Order ५,
hereinabove. For the reasons mentioned earlier, the periods
Prescribed for filing the written statement should be as
suggested by the Law Commission while discussing the proposed

amendments in Order ४,


(iid Rule 16 sought to be inserted in Order VIII is on

the

samz lines as the proposed/substituted Rule 14 of Order VII.

Therefore, whatever we have said with respect to Proposed Rule

VII applies in all respects to this

proposal

(111) The proposed deletion of Rule BA is consistent

the extent that the power of the court to

ho prod

written statement, should be retained with the rider

Power coiled be  excerci

yy

recorded,

mit the

से document, which he did net produce with

as

with
Rule 1A and is, therefore, unobjectionable except ta

defendant

the

that such

edo ०01५ for special reasons to be

Civ} The proposed deletion of Rule 9 appears to be rather
tnadvisable. It is one thing to say that no Pleading

subsequent to the written statement of a defendant shall be

Allowed to be presented and it is a differant thing to delete
Rule 9 . By deleting Rule 9, the opportunity to
111७ 5७ Pleading by way of de to a set of fF oor

counter-claim would also be taken away which is a very serious

taken away. Neither the objects

Such an opportunity available to the defendant

and reasons

deletion of Rule 9.

In

300 Shanti Rani Das Dewanjes v. Dinesh Chandra Day (Dead) By Chandra Day (Dead) 8

260, if was held white

referring

te


"“2.... %It has been held by this court that right to
file a counter-claim under Order VIII Rule 6A of the
Code of Civil Procedure is referable to the date of
accrual of the cause of action. If the cause of
action had arisen before or after the filing of the
suit, and such cause of action continued upto the date
of filing written statement, or extended date of
Filing written statement, such counter-claim can be

Filed even after Filing the written statement...”

In Shri Jag Mohan Chawla v. Dera Radha Swami Satsang,
1986(4) SCALE 585, 587, it was observed regarding the

limitations under Rule 6A:-

7 “Bie. The only limitation is that the cause of action
snould arise before the time Fixed for filing the
written statement expires. The defendant may set up a
cause of action which has accrued to him even after

the institution of the suit...”

The Law Commission is, therefore, of the opinion that
either the proposal to delete Rule 9 may be dropped or it

should

qd

ड्फ wo

लए that a pleading subsequent to the written

Statement of a defendant shall be permitted only by way of

defence to a set off or by way of a counter-claim.


(५) The proposal to delete Rule 10 of Order VIII means
that the court is now free to make such order as it thinks fit
on the failure of the defendant to file a written statement.
Probably, the idea behind the deletion is that Rule 10 is
superfluous since it states the obvious. May be, Rule 10 is
mone in the nature of guidance to the court. On the failure
of. the defendant to file the written statement, it is open to
the court either to pronounce judgment against the defendant
or to make such appropriate order as it thinks fit in the
facts and circumstances of the case, Indeed, Rule 10 does not
contribute in any manner to the delay in disposal of suits.
May be, it would be more appropriate to retain the rule than

to delete it.

2.47 Clause 19 of the Amendment Bill proposing to

substitute Rule 2 and to amend Rule 5 in Order IX:

:- (i) The
proposed Rule 2 as substituted in Order IX says that “where on
the day so Fixed it is found that the summons has not been
sent within the stipulated period of two days, to the
defendant by the plaintiff or his agent or [sic] in
consequence of their failure to pay the court-fee or any
charges, if any chargeable for such service, the court shall

make an order that the suit be dismissed.” (It is not

to refer to the proviso.) Inasmuch as the Law
Commission is recommending that the summons be sent through
court (and not by the plaintiff), no doubt at the expense of

the plaintiff, this Rule requires to be reworded accordingly.


>>: 46 :~

The penalty should be for not paying the requisite charges,
court fee and/or for not taking steps hecessary to enable the

Court fo send the summons.
(11) The amendment to Rule 5 is designed only to cut down
the period for applying for fresh summons from one menth to

seven days. The amendment is unobjectionable.

2.18 Clause 20 of the Amendment Bill proposing to amend 20 of the Amendmen Bill sroposin to amen

Order  X:- Clause 20 of the Amendment 8111 Proposes to insert
rules 18, 1B and 10 after Rule 1 and also proposes to amend
Rule 4 of Order X. So far as proposal to insert Rules 1A, 18
and 16 in Order X is concerned, it may be observed that they
are oon the same pattern as in proposed section 89 except for
the distinction in the language employed in Rule 18 of this
Order and the proposed Section 89 which is sought to be
inserted by clause 7 of the Bill. Rule 1A reads as if the

court is under a mandate to ask the parties to opt for either

settlement outside the court as specified in the
proposed section a9(1) and that this should te done after
recording the admissions and denials. On the other hand, the
bropesed section 89 is couched in an enabling language. It

enable

wm

the court to take these specific steps if it appears
to it that there exist elements of settlement which may be
acceptable to the parties. Be that as it may, the epinion
expressed by the Commission with respect to section 88 should

as well be relevant in respect of Rules 18, 1B and iC as

‘
i



proposed in Order X. Indeed, Rules 1B and 10 merely state the
obvious while Rute 1A, as stated above, is really intended to

effectuate the provision in the proposed section 89.

(111) Amendment to Rule 4(1) is only by way of cutting

down the time limit and is a step in the right direction.

2.19 Clause 23 of the Amendment Bill: By this clause,

Rules 1 and 2 of Order XIII are sought to be substituted. The
amendments are in accord with the provisions contained in
proposed Order VII Rule 14 and proposed Order VIII Rule 1A.
Indeed, proposed Rule 1 of Order XIII expressly contemplates
situations where the original documents are not filed but only
copies thereof are filed with the 91811 or written statement,
a matter referred to by Commission white dealing with
amendments in the said Orders. The obligation created by the
clause under consideration is to produce the original before
the settlement of the issues. It would be more appropriate if
the stage at which originals are to be produced is left to the
disdretion of the court. It can be done even at the time of
trial. The matter should be left to the discretion of the
court. It would be for the court to direct the parties to
produce the original documents at the appropriate stage. With
this clarification, the amendments proposed in Order XIII can

be said to be in order.


—: 48 :-

2.20 Clause 24 of the Amendment Bill:- (1) The amendment in
Rule 4 of Order XIV is in order. It merely seeks to cut down

the time limit.

(11) The proposal to delete Rule 5 of Order XIV,
however, is questionable. It was pointed out by the
participants/respondents that the power of amending the issues
or framing of additional issues should always be available to
the court and that the said power should be available to be
exercised at any stage of the suit. The existing Rule 5 also
empowers the court to strike out issues which in its opinion
are wrongly framed or unnecessary. The Commission is of the

opinion that there is no sound reason to detete Rule 5.

2.21 Clause 26 of the Amandment Bill :- This clause of the
Amendment Bill seeks to substitute sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of

Order XVII anc also to amend sub-rule (2).

(1) Sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 as sought to be substituted
requires the court to record reasons in writing for every
adjournment of the hearing of ai suit. Furthermore, the
Proviso places a ceiling upon the number of adjournments which
can be granted to a party during the hearing of the suit.
Evidently, the adjournment contemplated by this sub-rule is an
adjournment granted at the request of a party and not an
adjournment occasioned on account of the court not teing able
toe take up the case or any other reason for which the court is

net able to take up the case. Even so, the members of the Bar


1
y
|]
+

strongly opposed the proposed amendment while the members of
the Bench supported the amendment. One of the suggestions put
forward by the participants was that no adjournment shall be
granted at the oral request of a party and that every request
for adjournment should be made by way of an application. The
application should either be verified by the advocate
concerned or it should be supported by an affidavit oF the
party. Another suggestion put forward was that instead of
placing a ceiling upon the number of adjournments which can be
‘granted to a party at its request, awarding of costs should be
made obligatory for each such adjournment and that the costs
showld ascend steeply with every succeeding adjournment. In
ether words, if the amount of cost awarded for the first
adjournment is Rs.100/- the costs to be awarded for the second
adjournment should be three hundred and so on. Yet another
suggestion put forward was that where an adjournment was
granted with costs, the costs awarded to the other side should
be the full costs which are incurred and not an arbitrarily
determined Figure. By way of example, if in a given case the
barty brings his witnesses for examination tut the other side
asks for an adjournment, the full and actual costs incurred by

the party for bringing the witnesses and for making all

ry arrangements in that behalf for proceeding with the
suit should be reimbursed by the party asking for adjournment.
In this connection it was submitted that clause (e) of the
Proviso to rule 1 of Order XVII should be amended by
substituting the words pay, if it thinks fit” occuring

therein with the word “shall”; another view expressed in this


behalf was that the words to be substituted ought to be
“shall, unless the court records special reasons therefor”.
The members of the Bench submitted that unless a ceiling is
Placed upon the number of adjournments which could be granted
to a party, prompt disposal of the suits could not be ensured,
It was submitted that the members of the Bar bring pressure in
several ways upon the courts to grant adjournment. Very
often, the opposing counse? does not oppose the request.
Sometimes, -a request is made by both the parties, even where
the suit is posted for triat- and the court feels helpless.
Some of the learned trial judges suggested that once the suit
was posted for trial and the court was in a position to take
it up on that day, no adjournment whatsoever should be granted
either at the request of one party or at the joint request of
both the parties, unless of course it was a case of a death of
A party or ‘some ether supervening reason which made the

adjournment inevitable.

2.24.1. In this connection, we must mention an interesting
discussion which took place at the conference held at
Allahabad. In the Allahabad High Court, there is a pecutiar
practice prevalent over a long number of years according to
which a Counsel seeking adjournment on the ground of his
iliness need. not send an application nor is it necessary that
the request ' 15 made by him or some other counsel on his
behalf, in the court. What is being done is that a stip
called ‘illness stip’ is_sent to the Court Master/Bench Clerk.

On receiving the illness slip the Court Master/Bench Clerk


automatically adjourne the case without even bringing it to
the notice of the presiding Judge or the Judges constituting
‘the Bench. The counsel on the other side too is not informed.
‘Admittedly, there have been several instances where an
advocate sends such an itiness stip in one court of the High
Court while he is found arguing or present in another court on
the same day. The Judges of the Allahabad High Court strongly
pleaded for putting a stop to this unholesome practice which
is very often resulting in abuse of. process of the court. The
members of the Allahabad High Court Bar who were present and
Participated in the conference tried to justify the said
system though they did admit that it was being abused by some
advocates. The Law Commission is of the opinion that this
insidious Practice must be put an end to. The practice may
have originated in some distant past. It is not clear in what
circumstances and for what reasons such a practice began. The
fact, however, remains that not only is it a practice not
sanctioned by the Code, it appears to run counter to the very
discipline, dignity and decorum of the court. It is high
time, it is put an end to. It does not also appear to be

prevalent in any other High Court.

2.21.2. In the light of the above discussion, it is obvious
‘that the proposed sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 isa highly desirable
and salutory step. The sub-rule must, however, be clarified
to indicate that the adjournment contemplated by it meant an
adjournment granted or to _ be granted at the request of a party

and not an adjournment caused by other reasons. It should


further be made obligatory that even for the first, second or
third adjournment which may be granted to the party at his
request, the other side should be compensated in full for the
actual costs incurred by it for that date of hearing. Indeed,
this aspect can be said to be implicit in the amendment
proposed in sub-rule (2) of Rule 1. There must be a further
proviso added to sub-rule (1) to the effect that no
adjournment shall be granted on an oral request of a party or
in terms of a stip or a letter given by the counsel and that
an adjournment shall be granted only on the basis of a written
application filed by a party which should either be verified
by the counsel for the party or should be supported by an
affidavit of the party. This should be so even where the
other side does not object. In a case where Joint request is
made by both the sides for adjournment, the court should
impose costs upon both parties, which can be remitted to the
legal aid body of that district or State, as the case may be.
In sum, two more provisos should be added to sub-rule (1).
The second proviso as proposed by the Law Commission, should
say that no adjournment shall be granted except on the basis
of a written application which is verified and’ signed by the
counsel for the party or which is supported by an affidavit of
the party, the copy whereof is served before hand on the
counsel for the opposing parties. The third proviso should
say that an adjournment contemplated by sub-rule is an
adjournment granted at the request of the party and not an

adjournment granted for other reasons. It is, however,
=


obvious that even where the suit is adjourned for other
reasons, the court has to record the reasons for such

adjournment as required by proposed sub-rule {1}.

(ii) In the light of the above discussion it must be
said that the proposed amendment in sub-rule (2) is a welcome

‘step and the Law Commission agrees with the same.

"2.22, Clause 27 of the Amendment Bill:- (i) The proposal to
delete sub-rule (4) of Rule 2 of Order XVIII does not appear
to be an appropriate one. This was proposed, the Commission
believes, in the light of the fundamental change in the manner
of recording of evidence proposed by the new Rule 4. Be that
as it may, and even if new Rule 4 is given effect to there is
no reason why sub-rule (4) of Rule 2 (which enables the court,
for reasons to be recorded, to direct or permit any party to
‘examine any witness at any stage) should be deleted. This
sub-rule was specifically put in by the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 for sound reasons and there is

no reason to undo it now.

(ii) The existing rule 4 is sought to be substituted
altogether by a new rute. The said rujte states that, “The
evidence of the witnesses in attendance shall be taken orally
in open court in the presence and under the personal direction
and superintendence of the Judge”, whereas the proposed rule
Provides that (a) the examination-in-chief of a witness shall

!
be given by way of an affidavit, copies whereof shal? be


supplied to the opposite party by the party who calls him for
evidence; (b) the cross-examination and re-examination shall
be done before the commissioner to be appointed by the court;
(७) power is, however, retained in the court to examine a
witness in the court in the presence of and under the personal
direction and superintendence of the Judge, for reasons to be
recorded in writing; (d) the expenses incurred for examination
on commission shall be paid by the court or by the party
summoning the witnesses as may be prescribed by the High
Court; and (e) where any question put to a witness is objected
to by the other side, the commissioner shall allow the same to
be put but shall take down the question together with his

decision.

2.22.1. With respect to this new method of examination of
witnesses, there was a good amount of controversy in all the
conferences. While members of the Bar uniformly opposed this
method, some members of the Bench welcomed it. The members of
the ‘Bench who welcomed the new proposal were of the opinion
that this mathod would greatly help the court in disposing “of
the suits expeditiously. In fact, it was brought to our
notice that in several courts, a peculiar method was being
adopted whereunder while the Judge was hearing the arguments
jin one suit, the examination of witnesses in another suit was
simultaneousty going on in a corner of the court. Indeed, we
were told that sometimes the witnesses in two different suits
were being examined inm~two different corners of the court

while the Judge was hearing arguments in a third matter.



Whenever any objection was raised or controversy arose in any
one of those suits, the Judge stopped hearing the arguments,
we were told, heard the objections and after disposing of the
same, resumed hearing the arguments in the third suit. This
method was being adopted, we are told, with a view to enabling
the Judges to fulfil the quota of disposals prescribed by the
High Courts. Be that as it may, we shall deal with: the
objections put forward to the new method suggested by the

propesed Rule 4.
2.22.2. So far as the examination-in-chief of a witness by way
of an affidavit is concerned, the objection was that the
evidence given in such a fashion would not only be not an
evidence given in the court - not even the evidence given
before the commissioner appointed by the court - but would be
evidence given before an advocate. It was pointed out that
very often words were put in the mouth of the witness which he
had not. uttered, In effect, it was submitted that it would be
evidence of an advocate of the party and not of the witness.
Yet another objection put forward in this behalf was that’ if
the examination-in-chief was allowed to be tendered by
affidavit, the command of the Evidence Act that no leading
questions could be put in examination-in-chief, could not be
observed and implemented. It was also submitted that very
often many documents were marked in the course of
examination-in-chief of a witness and if no objection was
raised on that occasion +tSelf and the document is marked, the

opposite party would be precluded from raising the objection


i ~

I
at a later stage. The exampte of marking of insufficiently or
unstamped documents was given and the bar in Section 36 of the

Stamp Act was relied upon.

2.22.3. So far as the cross-examination and re-examination on
commission is concerned, the objections were manifold. It was
submitted that the solemnity and sanctity of the court woutd
not be there if evidence was recorded in the office of a
commissioner or at any other premises.- It was submitted that
sub-rule (7) of Rule 4, as proposed, only provided for the
commissioner taking down the question together with his
decision where an objection was raised by a party and the
commissioner allowed the said question to be put. The Rute
did not provide, it was pointed out, as to what should happen
in case the commissioner upheld the objection and did not
allow the question to be put. Yet another objection put
forward related to the practical aspect of the matter. It was
submitted that whenever a witness was examined on commission,
the record had to be ‘taken by a clerk of the court to the
advocate’s office or to such other premises, as the case may
be, where the evidence of the witness was being recorded. It
was pointed out that the record could not be made over to the
sommissioner and that it was necessarily to be in the custody
of a court officer. It was further pointed out that if the
recording of evidence on commission became the general
practice, a number of suits may be simultaneously opened where
the evidence was being _ recorded and there would not be

sufficient number of clerks available to take the files and



attend the recording of evidence by different commissioners.
Some of the participants pointed out that the commissioners
generally did not conclude their work expeditiously and that
they go on leisurely and very often demanded facilities at
high cost hotels involving lunch and other miscellaneous
_ expenses. It was pointed out that many of the parties might
not be able to afford the said expenses. Some others objected
that only where the witnesses were examined in the court,
would the court be able not only, to notice the demeanour of
the witness but also form an impression about the veracity of
his evidence and about his credibility. All these elements
would be missing in cases of evidence recorded on commission,

they submitted.

2.22.4. On tha other hand, it was pointed out by certain
members of the judiciary that the aspect of demeanour or for
that matter the assessment of the credibility and veracity of
a witness by the court was no longer of any real significance
because of the 18798 number of suits and the large number of
witnesses who were examined by the courts every week/every
month. It was pointed that unless the demeanour was recorded
by the court even during the course of examination of the
witness, it could’not be relied upon by the court while
disposing of the suit. It was also pointed out that in
countries like the United States of America, the entire
evidence was recorded not even before the commissioner but in
ithe office of the attorney of the party whose witness was

being examined. The said system was functioning successfully,


it was pointed ०५६. It was also suggested that because of the
heavy load of work, the Presiding officer was obliged to spend
most of the early hours of the day in disposing of
miscellaneous matters and that if evidence was to be recorded
by the Judges themselves, not much time would be left for
hearing arguments, for study, for reflection and for
preparation of judgments. From this stand point, it was
submitted that the proposed Rule 4 was an extremely welcome
step. It was submitted that the examination-in-chief should
also be required to be recorded before the commissioner

instead of being tenderad by way of an affidavit.

2.22.5. After considering 311 the view points carefully, the
Law Commission has come to the conetusion that Rule 4 might be

redrafted as follows:-

(a) In all suits, the subject-matter whereof is valued
at more than Rs.5,00,000/-, the examination-in-chief,
cross-examination and re-examination may be done
before the commissioner to be appointed by the court
except in cases where the court, for’ reasons to be
recorded in writing, considers that the witnesses or
some of them as may be specified by the court, shall

be examined in court;

(b) Presiding Judge of every principal civil court in
a city or town shall Prepare a list of commissioners

somprising retired judicial officers and other senior


advocates who are prepared to undertake the job. It
would be’ appropriate if the court also specifies the
scale of remuneration of such commissioners. The

remuneration may be fixed on an hourly basis.

(c) The expenses of commission shall be incurred by
the party whose witness is being examined. Ordinarily
the evidence shall be recorded at the office ‘of the
commissioner (if he is an advocate) or such other
Place as may be agreed upon by the parties and the
commissioner. It may 8150 be considered whether it
would not be convenient if the evidence is recorded at,
some place in the court premises, wherever available.
It would also be appropriate if the Commissioner
undertakes this work after the court hours or during

holidays.

(qd) Even in suits the value whereof is less than
Rs.5,00,000/~, the examination of witnesses can be
done on commission, if the parties agree
thereto-subject, of course, to the orders of the

court.

(8) The proposat to adduce evidence of a witness in
his examination-in-chief by way of an affidavit be

dropped.


(f) Where a question put to a witness ts objected to
by a party or his pleader and the commissioner
disallows the same, the commissisoner shall record the
question, the objection and his decision thereon.
Where he allows the question to be put notwithstanding
the objection, even in’ such a case, the commissioner
shall record the question, the objection and his
decision thereon along with the answer given by the

witness in that behalf.

(iii) The proposal to delete Rule 17A, which was
indeed inserted by the 1976 Amendment Act has been strongly
opposed by practically 11 the participants/respondents. The
Law Commission is also of the opinion that there is no good
reason why this rule which was incorporated by the 1976
Amendment Act after due deliberation should be taken away.
The proposal. to delete the sub-rule may, therefore, be
dropped.

i
2.23. Clause 28 of the Amendment Bill:- Several amendments
suggested in Order XX appear to be actuated by a concern for
transparancy and promptness. We shal? deal with each of the
proposed amendments separately.

(i) The words “but a scopy of the whole judgment shall
be made available for the perusal of the parties or the
Pleaders immediately after the judgment is pronounced" in

sub-rule (2) of Rule 1 of Order XX are evidently proposed to


be deleted in the light of proposed Rule 6B. Rule 68 says
that where the judgment is pronounced (which obviously means
where a prepared judgment is Pronounced), copies of the
Judgments shall be made available to the parties immediately
after the pronouncement of the judgment for preferring — an
appeat on payment of appropriate charges. In this sense the
deletion of the aforesaid words from sub-rule (2) of Rule 1 is
unobjectionabte. But what was suggested by some of the
members of the judiciary was that the requirement of supplying
copies of the judgement immediately after the pronouncement of
the judgment was difficult because of several practical
difficulties and that the requirement should be to supply
copies of the judgment within three days. In other words, the
words “immediately after” occurring in Rule 68 ought to be
substituted by the words "within three days of". It was
submitted that in many cities and towns, the facilities by way
of zerox and photocopying were not immediately available or
even if available there would be practical difficulties in
‘photocopying and supplying copies of the judgments on the day
of their pronouncement. The proposal appears to be based upon
experience of the judicial officers and in our opinion ought
to be respected and given effect to. The matter can be
reviewed at a later stage, if necessary. On many occasions,
orders/judgments are dictated in court. In such cases, it is
not possible to comply with the requirements of Rule 6B. A
clarification with regard to proposed Rule 68 may, therefore,
be necessary to indicate,that the requirement of this rule

would be attracted only after the order/judgment is



5 7: 62 :-

transcribed, corrected and signed, in cases _ where the
order/judgment is dictated in the court.

(ii) The provisions contained in the proposed Rule 6A
are unexceptionable. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 6A May, however, be
clarified by adding a proviso to the effect that where an
appeal is preferred on the basis of the judgment on the ground
that the decree had not been drafted or made available, the
appeal so preferred shall not be treated as defective provided
that the copy of the decree is filed within a reasonable

period after the preparation of the decree.

2.24 Clause 30 of the Amendment  Bill:- There was
considerable controversy about the proposed addition of
sub-rule (2) in Rule 1 of Order XXXIX. Particularly the
members of the Bar felt that the requirement of security as
pre-condition for the grant of temporary injunction may
adversely affect the interest of indigent and poor. plaintiffs
Vike a widow claiming maintenance and asking for temporary
injunction against alienation of properties by her husband,
Plaintiffs suing in forma pauperis but having a‘ good cause,
Plaintiffs in suits relating to public nuisance and public
charities and so on, On the other hand, quite ai few
participants supported the proposed sub-rule on the ground
that it would help discourage plaintiffs asking for temporary

injunctions in a flippant or casual manner.


n

.24.1. The objectors to the said sub-rule have not apparently
given sufficient attention to the wording of the proposed
sub-rule (2). The rule requires that the court shall, white
granting a temporary injunction of the nature mentioned in the
sub-rule, “direct the plaintiff to give security or otherwise
as the court thinks fit". In our opinion the sub-rute
cortains a very salutory principle. However, to make the
Matter clear it would be appropriate if the words “or
otherwise” are substituted by the words “or make such other
directions”. A proviso may also be added that the said
requirement of giving security or making of other appropriate
directions as a condition for granting temporary injunction —
(of the nature specified in the sub-rule) may be dispensed
with in appropriate cases for special reasons to be recorded

by the court.

2.25. Clause 31 of the Amendment Bill 31 of the Amendment 111:- Rules 1 and 2 of the
proposed order XXXIX-A do not bring out or give effect to the

intention behind the said provisions. Paragraph 3(h) of the
statement of objects and reasons is as under:

“Tn matters relating to property disputes,
particularly in matter of unauthorised construction on
the land of others, it has been found that, under the
existing provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, no
application for injunction can be moved unless the
suit is fited first in the court having competent

jurisdiction. With a view to obviate this hardship,


|

it is proposed that a person may make an application
to the court of competent jurisdiction for appointment
of a commission to ascertain the factual status of the
Property so that at the time of filing of the regular
suit the report is available to the commissioner
relating to the factual status of the property in

dispute.”

, However, the language of Rules 1 and 2 does not bring
out the said intention and for that reason the rules have been
criticised as lacking in direction and as ambiguous. It would
be appropriate if these rules are redrafted to reflect the
intention clearly so as to be in consonance with the statement

of objects and reasons.

2.26 Clause 32 of the Amendment Bill:- The amendments
proposed in Order XLI have evoked uniform opposition from both
the members of the Bar and the Bench. The main idea behind
the amendments proposed in this order is to provide that an
appeal can be preferred in the court which has passed the
decree to be apealed against and that court is required to
remit the same to the appellate court. It was pointed out
that very often the parties also asked for interim orders by
way of stay or injunction or other appropriate directions on
an interlocutory application filed along with the appeat and
that if an appeal was to be preferred before the court which
passed the decree appealed against, jt may not be inclined to

make any such orders against its own decree. It was also


pointed out that ordinarily, the parties consulted a lawyer of
the appellate court who may very often be located in a
different city or town and took his opinion on the
advisability of the preferring of the appeal. It was observed
that while the lawyer who had lost his client’s case in the
court generally advised strongly for preferring the appeal,
the appellate court lawyer might take a different view. हि For
‘this and other practical reasons (viz., maintaining separate
appeals register in each court apart from the appeals register
in the appellate court), it was suggested that the proposal

may be dropped.

2.26.1. After considering the views expressed by the
participants/respondents, the Law Commission is of the opinion
that the measure now suggested is a half-hearted one. Either
the old system should continue or if the idea is to facilitate
the filing of an appeal in the trial court (or in the court
which passed the decree to be appealed against as the case may
be), it should be further provided that while filing the
appeal, the appellant shall serve copies of the appeal and the
accompanying interlocutory applications, if any, upon the
counsel for the other side in that court and that such service
shall be deemed to be sufficient service upon the other side.
Such a practice is in vogue in the High Courts in the matter
of preferring Letters Patent Appeals whether in civil matters
or in writ petitions. For this purpose, the form of the
Vakalatnama prescribed by the appropriate rules has to be
modi fied making it obligatory upon the advocates to receive

के


the copies of the appeal and other accompanying applications,
if served upon them by the other side even after passing of
the decree. The court whose decree is being appealed against
should also be expressly empowered to pass appropriate interim
orders for a limited period within which the appeal papers can
be transmitted to the appropriate appellate court and the
appellate court can deal with the same. This suggestion has
the merit of obviating the necessity of sending summons once
again in appeal which normally takes a very long time. The
. experience shows that serving the respondents in appeals takes
years in many cases which also contributes to the delay in
disposal of the appeals. All this can be avoided “if the’
service upon the advocate of the respondents (in the appeal)
is treated as sufficient service upon the party. The trial
court can then fix a day on which both the parties shal}
appear before the appellate court and from which stage the
appellate court takes over the matter. But the provision now
Proposed merely provides for filing of appeal in the trial
court .or in the court whose decree is sought to be appealed
against, as the case may be, without anything more. In the
opinion of the Law Commission, the proposed measure is likely
to prove ineffective. The amendments may need to be

reconsidered in the light of the above observations.


2.27 Law Commission has NO objection to the other

amendaments suggested in the Code of Civil Procedure

(Amendment) 8111, 1997.

a)
(MR.JUSTICE 8.9 कि — REDDY ) (RETD)

CRATRMAN

gD COR. SUBHASH C.JAIN)
MEMBER MEMBER

MEMBER-SECRETARY

DATED: 13, NOVEMBER, 1998


ANNEXURE - A

AS INTRODUCED IN Rava SABHA

TA ANG ४1४

Dill No. 1. ०७ 1997
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997

A
BILL

Further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the Limitation
Act, 1963 and the Court Fees Act, 1870, .

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-cighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

5.11. (4) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Ainendment) Act, 1997, Short title
and com-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by menceient.
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act and for different States or for different parts thereof.


Amendment
_ existing section 26 shall be re-numbered es sub-section (1), and after sub-section (1)

of section
26.

Amendment
of section
271

Amendment
of section
32.

Amendment
of section
58.

Amendment
of section
60.

fnxertion of
new scction
89.

Settlement

of disputes
outside the
Court.

CHAPTER I
AMENDMENT OF SECTIONS
2. in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
(2) In every plaint, facts shall be proved by affidavit.”,

3. In section 27 of the principal Act, the following words shall be inserted at the end,
namely:— ‘ a

“on such day not beyond thirty days from datc. of the institution of the suit”.
4. In section 32 of the principal Act, in clause (c), for the words "not exceeding five
hundred rupees”, the words "not exceeding five thousand rupees” shall be substituted,
5, in section 58 of the principal Act,—
Gi) in sub-section (/),—

(a) in clouse (a), for the words "one thousand rupees”, the words “five
thousand rupecs” shall be substituted;

(6) for clause (6), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(b) where the dectee is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding two
thousand rupecs, but not exceeding five thousand rupees, for a period not
exceeding six weeks:";

(ii) in sub-section (4A), for the words “five hundred rupees”, the words “two
thousand 100०5" shall be substituted.

6. In section 60 of the principal Act, in the first proviso to sub-section (/), in clause
(i), for the words “four hundred rupees", the words “one thousand rupees” shall be
substituted. है

“a In the principal Act, after section 88, the following section shall be inserted,

namely: —

“89. (1) Where it appears to the court that there exist elements of a लिन की
which may be acceptable to the parties, the court shall formulate the terms of
settlement and give them (0 the parties for their observations and afer receiving the
observations of the pattics, the court may reformulate the terms of a possible
settiement and refer the same for—

(७) arbitration;
(b) conciliation;

(©) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalal; or

5 of 1908.
5

,

10

15

20


26 of 1996.
5

39 of 19897.

10

39 of 1987.

20

25

30

35

(d) mediation,
(2) Where a dispute has been referred —

(a) for arbitration or conciliation, the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply as if the proceedings for’ arbitration or
conciliation were referrea for settlement under the provisions of that Act;

(9) to Lok Adalat, the court shall refer the sainc to the Lok Adalat in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (7) of section 20 of the Legal
Services Authority Act, (987 and all other provisions of that Act shall apply in
respect of the dispute so referred 10 the Lok Adalat;

(०) for judicial senJement, the court shall refer the same to a suitable
institution of person and such institution ot person shall be decined 10 be a Lok
Adalat and all the provisions of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 shall

apply as if the dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat under the provisions of that -

Act;

(व) for mediation, the court shall effect a compromise between the parties and
shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.”. 7)

है, In section 95 of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), for the words "not exceeding
one thousand rupees”, the words “not exceeding fifty thousand rupecs” shall be
substituted.

9. In section 96 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words “three thousand
mupces”, the words “twenty-five thousand rupees” shall be substituted.

10, For section 1008 of the principal Act, the following section shalt be substituted,
namely: —

"LUOA. Notwithstanding asything contained in any Letters Patent for any High
Court or in any other instrument having the force of faw or in any other law for the
time being in force,—

(a) where any appeal from an original of appellate decece or order is heard
and decided,

(0) where any writ, direction ot order is issucd or made on an application
under stticle 226 of article 227 of the Constitution,

by 2 single Judge of a High Court, no further appeal shall lic from the judgment,
decision of order of such Single Judge.”

11. For section 102 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“102. No second appeal shail lic from any decree, when the amount or vatuc of
the subject-maticr of the original suit docs not exceed twenty-five thousand rupecs.”.

Amendment
of section
95.

Amendment
of section
96.

Substitution
of new
section for
section tO0A,

No further
appeal in
cortain
cases,

Substitution
of new
section for
section 102.

No second
appeal in

certain


iio Fo

Amendment 12, In govtlon 115 of the pelwolpat ‘Act, In aub-sevtton OW.
of section :
115. ( for the proviso, the following. proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

*Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary OF reverse any
order made, or any order deciding an issue, in the course of a sult of
procecding. except where the order, if it bad been made in favour of the party
applying for revision, would have finally disposed of the suit or “other
progecdings"

(४) after wub-wwetlon (a), but batons the Haplanation, tho tatlowing 300 another
shall be Inserted, namely!-~ a

(3) A revision shall not operate 85 3 slay of suit oF other proceeding before
the Court except where such sult or otber proceeding Is stayed by the High
Court.”. . :
Amendment. 13. In section 148 of the principal Act, after the words “such period", the words
of section = “mot exceeding thirty days in total,” shall be inserted.

148,

HEAP ETUC ॥॥
कजि॥॥७॥४॥॥ OF 1101 8४

Ameonulnettt 14. In the Pleat Sohedule to the palrolpat Ant (hetolnaliet reload bo an Vw ht
of Order Schedule), in Order IV, in rule 1—

WN.
q@ in sub-rule (1), for the words “plaint to the Court”, the words “plaint in

* duplicate to the Court” shall be substituted;

(ii) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:

10

ws

20

(39) ‘The platnt shall bet be doomed to be duly jnaittated wnless Ht somptien | 1

wy 0 हीत aeequttosnnentn peek ster he 2 enton GF) wel C2)"

Annealed 1&, 10 आए ETAT Hedpatule, to 10००4 ४५

caf (हल
ve un ta tule te tea pune gael 411, te bathe atest for कपल (९०४६ 4३७१७ HE

>(/) When ४ sult has been duly instituted, 8 smenmone may be tasted 0 the
defendant to appear ‘and answer the claiin ‘and to file the written statcrnent of his
- defence, if any, on. such day within thirty days from the day of institution of the
\le we a. . \ suit as may be specified therein: है “4
ie <
» aan Provided that no such summons shall be issued when 2 defendant bas
os appeared at the presentation of the plaint and admitted the plaintiff's claim:

(हट)

. Provided further that where the dofendant falls to Mite the wrliten atatentent Ob
7 4 the said day, he shall be allowed to file the saine on such other day whleb shall
है not be beyond thirty days from, the date of service of summons CD the defendant,

_+ | ७४ the court may think Tit.";

an

30

35


10

20

25

30

35

40

Gi) for rute 2, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

"2. Every suinmon shall be accompanied by a copy of the plaint.*;

(ii) in rule 6, for the words “for the appearance of the defendant”, the words

“under sub-rule (7) of rule 1” shall be substituted;

(i¥) in rule 7, for the words “all documents”, the words and figures “all

documents or copies thereof specified in rule 1A of Order VIII" shall be substituted;

(० for rule 9, the following rules shall be substituted, namely:—

“9, (1) The court shall issue summons and deliver the same to the plaintiff or
his agent, for service, and direct the summons to be served by registered post
acknowledgment duc or by speed post or by such courier service as may be
approved by the High Court or by fax message or by Electronic Mail Service or
by such other means as the High Court may prescribe by rules, addressed to the
defendant to accept the service at the place where the defendant or his agent
actually and voluntarily resides or catties on business or personally works for
gain.

(2) The plaintiff or his agent shall send the summons by any means as
directed by the court under sub-rule (/) within two days feom the delivery of
summons (o the plaintiff by the court under that sub-rule,

(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by
the defendant or his agent received by the court or postal article containing the
summons is received back by the court with an endorsement purporting to have
been made by a postal employee or by any authorised person to the effect that
the defendant or his agent had refused to take delivery of the postal article
containing the summons or refused to accept the summons by any other means
specified in sub-rule (/), when tendered or transmitted to him the court issuing
the summon shall declare that the summons had been duly served on th
defendant: पर

Provided that summons was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by
registered post acknowledgment duc, the declaration referred to in this sub-rule
shall be made notwithstanding the fact that the acknowledgment having been lost
or misled or for any other reasons has not been received by the court as the date
fixed by it.

9A. (1) The court may, in addition to, and simultancously with the delivery of
summons for service to the plaintiff as provided in the manner provided in rule
9, may also direct that summons to be served on the defendant or his agent
empowered to accept the service at the place where the defendant or his agent
actually and voluntarily resides or carties on business or personally works for
gain.

(2) The summons shall, unless the court otherwise direct, be delivered or sent
to the proper officer in such manner as may be prescribed by the High Court to
be served by him or one of his subordinates. हु

Copy of
plaint
annexed to

Delivery

of summons.
40 the
plaintiff

or his
agent.

Simulta-
neous issue
of summons
for service ©
by the

controlled
process.


किक... EES सारा,

(3) The proper officer may be an officer of Ute court other than that in which
the suit is instituted, and where he is such an officer, the summon may be sent
to him in such manner as the court may dircet.

(4, The proper officer may serve the summons by registered post
acknowledgment due, by speed post, by such courier service as may be approved
by the High Court, by fax message, by Electronic Mail service or by such other
means as may be provided by the rules made by the High Court.";

(vi) rule 19A shall be omitted;

(vii) in rule 21, for the words “or by post”, the words “or by post or by such

courier service as may be approved by the High Court, by fax message or by
Electronic Mail service or by any other means as may be provided by the mules‘ made
by the High Court” shall be substituted;

(viii) in cule 24, for the words “by post or otherwise”, the words “or by post or

by such courier service as may be approved by the High Court, by fax message or
by Electronic Mail service or by any other mcans as may be provided by the mules
made by the High Court” shall be substituted;

(ix) in rule 25, for the words “by post”, the words “or by post or by such courier

service as may be approved by the High Court, by fax message or by Electronic Mail
service ot by any other means as may be provided by the rules made by the High
Court” shall be substituted.

Amendment Us. In the First Schedule, in Order V1,—

‘of Order
VL

(0 tule 5 shall be omitted;
(ii) in rule 15, after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be inserted,

namely:—

Jn

Amendment
of Order
Vil.

Procedure
on admitting
plaint.

"(4) The person verifying the pleading shall also furnish an affidavit in support
of his pleadings.”;

(iii) rules 17 aud 18 shalt be omitted.

. In the First Schedule, in Order ५॥,--

(i) for rule 9, the following tule shall be substituted, nainely:—

"9. (0) Where the plaint is admiticd, the court shall give to the pipintiff
summons in the name of all the defendants to be served upon ot get sepved in
the manner provided under Ordet V.

(2) Within two days of the receipt of summons.under sub-rule (1), the plaintiff
shall send or cause to send the summons to the defendants alongwith the copy of
the plaint in the manner provided under Order V.

(3) Where the court orders that the summons be served on the defendants. in
the manner provided in rule 9A of Order V, it will direct the plaintiff to present
as many copies of the plaint on plain paper as there are defendants within two
days from the datc of such order alongwith requisite fee for service of summons
on the defendants.”.

10

15

20

30

35

40


7

Gi) in rule 11, after sub-clause (4), the following sub-clauscs shal] be inserted,
namely: —

*(e) where it is not filed in duplicate;
@ where the plaintiff fails to comply sub-rule (2) of rule 9;
$ () where the plaintiff fails to comply sub-rule (3), of rule 9A.”.
(iii) for rule 14, the following rule shall be substituted, namely: — हे
“14. (4) Where a plaintiff sues upon a document or relics upon document in Production’ हु

his possession or power in support of his claim, he shail enter such documents of document +
in a list, and shall produce it in court when the plaint is presented by him and on which

10 shall, at the same time deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with plaintiff
the plaint. sues or
relies.

(2) Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the -
plaintiff, he shall, wherever possible, state in whose possession or power it is.

(3) Where a document or a copy thereof is not filed with the plaint under
15 this rule, it shall not be allowed to be received in evidence on behalf of the
plaintiff at the hearing of the suit.

(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply to document produced for the cross
examination of the plaintiff's witnesses, or, handed over to a witness merely to
refresh his memory.”;

20 (iv) rule 15 shall be omitted.
(») in rule 18, in sub-rule (7), the words “without the leave of the court” shall be
omitted. oan
y) 18. In the First Schedule, in Order ViII,— Amendment
of Order
(@ for rule 1, the following rule shall be substituted, namely: — Vul.
25 >|. The defendant shall at or before the first hearing or within such time as Written

the court may permit, which shall not be beyond thirty days from the date of statement.
service of summons on the defendant, present a written statement of his
defence.";

(ii) after rule 1 so inserted, the following rule shall be inserted, naincly:—

30 “LA. (1) Where the defendant bases his defence upon a document or relics दी C
upon any document in his possession or power, in support of his defence or deft
claim for set off or counter claim, he shall enter such document in a list, and 10 produce
shall produce it in court when the wrilten statement is presented by him and documents
shall, at the same time, deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with upon which
35 the written statement, relief is
claimed or
(2) Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the relied upon
defendant, he shall, wherever possible, state in whose possession ot power itis. by him.

(3) Where a document or a copy thereof is not filed with the written statement
under this rule, it shall not be allowed to be received in, evidence on behalf of
40 the defendant at the hearing of the suit.


Amendment
of
Order LX,

Dismissal of
suit where
summons
not served
by the
plaintiff

or his agent
‘ot in con-
sequences
failure to
cost,

Amendment
of Order
xX.

Direction of
the court to
opt for any
one mode
of
alternative
dispute
resolution.

Appearance
before the
conciliatory
forum or
authority.

Appearance
before the
court
consequent
to the
failure of
efforts of
conciliation.

(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply to documents—
(a) produced for the cross examination of the plaintiff's witnesses, or

(8) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory;

(iii) rules 8A, 9 and 10 shall be omitted.

. As. In the First Schedule, in Order 1X,—

(0) for rule 2, the following rule shall be substituted, namely: —

“2, Where on the day so fixed it is found that the summons has not beca sent
within stipulated period of two days, to the defendant by the plaintiff or his agent
or consequence of their failure to pay the court-fee or any charges, if any
chargeable for such service, the court shall make an order that the suit be
dismissed: '

Provided that no such order shall be made if, notwithstanding such failure, the
defendant attends in person or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent
on the day fixed for him to appear and answer.”;

(ii) in cule 5, for the words “one month”, the words “seven days” shall be

substituted.

20, In the First Schedule, in Order X,—

(i) after rutc 1, the following rutcs shall be inserted, namely: —

"1A. After recording the admissions and denials, the court shall direct the
partics to the suit to opt cither mode of the settlement outside the court as
specified in sub-section (1) of section 89. On the option of the parties, the court
shall fix the date of appearance before such forum or authorily as may be opted
by the parties.

IB. Where a suit is referred under rule 1A, the parties shall appear before
such forum or authority for conciliation of the suit.

9

¢

1C. Where a suit is referred under rule 1A and the presiding officer of
conciliation forum or authority is satisfied that it would not be proper in tbe
interest of justice to proceed with the matter further, then, it shall refer the matter
again to the court and direct the parties to appear before the court on the date
fixed by it.”;

Gi) in rule 4, in sub-rule (J), for the words “may postpone the hearing of the suit

to a future day”, the words “inay postpone the hearing of the suit to a day not later
than seven days from the date of first bearing” shall be substituted.

10

15

30


10

20

25

30

9
21. In the First Schedule, in Order XI,—

(i) in rule 2, after the words “submitted to the court”, the words “and that court
shall decide within seven days from the day of filing of the said application,” shail
be inscricd;

(ii) in rule 15, for the words “at any time”, the words “at or before the settlement
of issues” shall be substituted.

22. ॥ the First Schedule, in Order XI,—

(४) in male 2, for the word “fifteen”, the word “seven” shail be substituted;

(ii) in cule 4, second proviso shall be omitted.

23. In the First Schedule, in Order जय, for rules 1 and 2, the following rule shall
be substituted, namely:—

‘
“I. (1) The parties or their pleader shall Produce on or before the settlement of
issucs, all the documentary evidence in original where the copics thereof have beco
filed along with plaint of writich statement.
(2) The court shall recive the documents 30 produced:

Provided that they are accompanied by an accurate list thercof Ptepared in such
form as the High Court directs,

(3) Nothing in sub-rule (2) shall apply to documsnts—
(4) produced for the cross-examination of the witnesses of the other Darty; or

(8) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.”,

24. In the First Schedule, in Order XIV,—

(0) in rule 4, for the words “may adjourn the framing of the issues to a future
day”, the words “may adjoum the framing of issucs to a day not fater than seven
days” shall be substituted. .

(ii) rule 5 shall be omiticd.

25. in the First Schedule, in Order XVI,—

© in rule 1, in sub-rule (4), for the words “court in this behalf", occurring at the
end, the words, brackets and figure “court in this behalf within five days of
Presenting the list of witnesses under sub-rule (2)” shall be substituted;

(ii) in rule 2, in sub-cule (1), after the words “within a period to be fixed”, the
words, brackets and figures “which shall not be later than seven days from the date
of making application under sub-rule (4) of rule 17 shall be inserted,

of Order

of Order

Origioat
documents
to be
produced at
or before
the

settlement
of issuca,

Amendinent
of Order
XIV.

Amendment
of Order
XVL


Amendment
of Order
XVIL

Amendment
of Order
XVIB.

Recording
of evidence
by com-
missioner.

10

26. In the First Schedule, In Order XVI, in rule 1,—
(® for sub-rule (J), the following shall be substituted, namely: —

“(2) The court may, if sufficient cause is shown, al any stage of the suit grant
time to the parties or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the
hearing of the suit for reasons to be recorded in writing:

Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to
a party during hearing of the suit.”;

(ii) in sub-rule (2), for the words “may make such order as it thinks fit with
respect to the costs occassioned by the adjournment”, the words “shall make such
orders as to costs occassioned by the adjournment or such higher costs asthe court
deems fit" shall be substituted.

27. In the First Schedule, in Order XVH1,— पु
(i) sub-rule (4) of rule 2 shalt be omitted;
(ii) for rule 4, the following rule shall be substituted, namely: —

"4. (1) In every case, ihe evidence of a witness of his examination-in-chicf
shali be given by affidavit and copics thercof shall be supplicd to the opposite
party by the party who calls him for evidence.

(2) The evidence (cross-cxamination and re-examination) of the witness in
altendance, whose evidence (examination-in-chief) by affidavit has been furnished
to the court shall be taken orally by a commissioner to be appointed by the court
from amongst the panel of commissioners prepared for this purpose on the same
day:

Provided that, in the interest of justice and for the reasons to be recorded in
writing, the court may direct that the evidence of any witness shall be recorded
by the court in the presence amd under the personal direction and
superintendence of the judge.

(3) The commissioner shall be paid such sum for recording of evidence as
may be prescribed by the High Court.

(4 The amount payable to the commissioner under sub-rule (3) shall be paid
by the Court or by the partics summoning the witness as may be prescribed by
the High Court, 4

a

(5) The District Judge shall prepare a panel of commissioners to record the

evidence under this rule. .

(6) The commissioner shall record evidence cither in writing or mechanically
in his presence and shall make a mcmorandum which shall be signed by him and
the witnesses and submit the sane to the court appointing such commissioner.

(7) Where any question put to a witness is objected by a party ot his pleader
and the commissioner allows the same to be put, the commissioner shall take
down the question together with his decision.”; -

10

1s

20

25

30

33


(ii) rule 17A shall be omitted;
(iv) after rule 18, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—
“19. Notwithstanding anything contained in these tules, the court may, instead

of examining witnesses in open court, ditect their statements to be recorded on
5 commission under rule 4A of Order XXVL.",

28. In the First Schedule, in Order xX

(@ in rule 1, in sub-rule (2), the words “but a copy of the whole judgment shall
be made available for the perusal of the partics ot the pleaders immediately after the
judgment is pronounced” shall be omi

to (ii) for rules 6A and 6B, the following rules shall be substituted, namely: —

"6A. dy Every endeavour shall be made to cnsure that the decree is drawn
sup as expeditiously as possible and, in any case, within fiftcen days from the date
on which the judgment is pronounced,

(2) An appeal may be preferred against the decree without filing a copy of
15 the decree and in such a case the copy made available to the party by the court
, Shall for the purposes of rule 1 of Order XLI be treated as the decree. But as
1. 5001 as the decree is drawn, the judgment shall ccasc 10 have the effect of a
decree for the purposes of execution of for any other purpose.

6B. Where the judgment is pronounced, copies of the judgment shall be made
20 available to the partics immediately after the Pronouncement of the judgment for
preferring an appea? on payment of such charges as may be specified in the rule

made by the High Court.”,

29.In the First Schedule, in Order XXVI, after rule 4, the following rule shall be
inserted, namely: — .

25 “4A, Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, any court may, in the
interest of justice or for the expeditious disposal of the case or for any other reason,
issue commission in any suit for the examination, on intertogatorics or otherwise, of
any person resident within the local limits of its jurisdiction, and the evidence so
recorded shall be read in evidence,

30 30. In the First Schedule, in Order XXXIX, rule 1 shall be renumbered as sub-rule
(1) of that rule and after sub-rule (/) as so tenumbered, the following sub-rule shall be
inserted, namely: —

“(2) The court shall, while granting a temporary injunction to restrain such act
or to tnake such other order for the purposes of staying and preventing the wasting,

Power to
get
statements
recorded on
com-
mission.

Amendment
of Order
XX,

Preparation
of decree.

Copies of
judgments
when to be
made
available.

Amendineat
of Order
XXVL

Commission
for
examination
of any
person
resident
within the
court focal
limits.

Amendment
of Order
XXXIX.


Insertion of
new Order
XXXIKA.

Filing of
application
for inspoc-
tion by

legal rep-
resentative.

Filing of
the suit,

Amendment
of Order
१4 मे

Registry of
“memotan-
dum of
appeal.

12

damaging, alicnation, sale, removal or disposition of property or dispossession of the
plaintiff, ot otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any property under
disposition in the suit ander sub-rule (2), direct the plaintiff to give eccurity or
otherwise es the court thinks fit”.

31, in the First Schedule, after Order 20000 the following Order shall be insert,
namely:—

“ORDER XXXIXA
INSPECTION BEFORE INSTITUTION OF SUIT

1. In & case where @ person competent to file ॥ suit for grant of relief is not
available to file such a suit for injunction, the fegal representative of that person may
inake an application to the competent court of jurisdiction for the appointment of a
commission make focal investigation of the property for the purpose of elucidating
any matict in dispute and such commission shall be deemed to be eppointed under
Order XXVI.

2. Within seven days from the daic of the filing of the application under rule 1,
the person compctent to file suit, sball file the suit.”.

32. In the First Schedule, in Order XLI,—

(0 in sub-rule (4) of rule 1, for the words and brackets “decree appealed from
aud (unless the Appellate Court dispenses therewith) of the judgment on which it is
founded", the word “judgment” shall be substituted;

(ii) for rule 9, the following rule shall be substituted, samely:—

“9, (7) The Court from whose decree an appeal lies shall entertain the
memorandura of appeal and shall endorse thercon the datc of prescatation and
shall register the appeal in a book of appeal kept for that purpose.

(2) Such book shail be called the register of appeal.”;

(ii) in role 11, for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be substituted,
namely:—

“(1)) The Appellate Court after fixing 8 day for hearing the appellant ot his
pleader and hearing him accordingly if he appears on that day may dismiss the
appeal.”;

¢

{ivy in tule 12, for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shalt be substituted,
namely: — हि

"(2) Such day shall be fixed with reference to the current business of the
court.”;

(9) mules 13, 15 and 18 shail be omitted;
(vi) in rule 19, the words ausd figures "or rule 18* shalt be omitied;

(vit) in rule 22, sub-rule (3) shall be omitted.

10

15

20

30

35


13

CHAPTER V
REPEAL AND SAVINGS

33. (2) Any amendment made, or any provision inserted in ७० principal Act by a Repeal
State Legislature or High Court before the commencement of this Act shall, except in and
5 so far as such amendment or provisions is consistent with the provisions of the principal savings.
Act as amended by this Act, stand repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding that the provisions of this Act have come into force or repeal
under sub-section (३) has taken effect, and without prejudice to the generality of the
10 of 1897. provisions of section 6 of the Gencral Clauses Act, 1897,—

10 (व) the provisions of section 26 of the principal Act and of Order IV of the First
Schedule, as amended by sections 2 and 14 of this Act, shall not apply to or affect
any suit pending immediately before the commencement of sections 2 and 14; and
every such suit shall be tried as if sections 2 and 14 had not come into force;

(0) the provisions of scetion 27 of the principal Act, as amended by section 3 of
15 this Act, shall not spply to ot affect any suit pending iinmediatcly before the
commencement of section 3 and every such suit shall be tried 2s if section 3 bad not

come into forge;

(०) the provisions of section 58 of the principal Act, as amended by section 5 of
this Act, shall not apply to or affect any person detained in the civil prison in
20 execution of a deerce before the commencement of scction 5;

(4) the provisions of section 60 of the principal Act, as amended by section 6 of
this Act, shall not cxempt salary from attachment to Uic extent mentioned in clause
(i) of the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 60 before the commencement of
section 6;

25 (e) section 89 and rules 1A, $B and IC of Order X of the First Schedule, as
inserted in the principal Act by sections 7 and 20 of this Act, shall uot affect any
suit in which issues have been settled before the cominencement of section 7; and
every such suit shall be dealt with as if sections 7 and 20 had not come into force;

(0 the provisions of section 96 of the principal Act, as amended by section 9 of
30 this Act, shall not apply to or affect any appeal from original decree which had been
admitted before the commencement of section 9; and every admitted appeal shall be

dealt with as if section 9 had not come into force;

(g) the provisions of section 1004 of the principal Act, as substituted by section
10 of this Act, shall not apply to or affect any appeal against the decision of a g
igh Court under article 226 or article 227 of Use Constitution
which had been admitted before the commencement of section 10; and every such
cd appeal shall be disposed of as if section 10 had not come into force;

os

35

(0) the provisions of section 102 of the principal Act, as substituted by section 11

of this Act, shall not apply to or affect any appeal which had been admitted before

40 the commencement of section 11; and every such appeal shail be disposed of as if
section 11 had not come into force;

' (i) the provisions of scetion 115 of the principal Act, as amended by section 12
of this Act, shall not apply to of affect any procceding for revision which had been
finally disposed of;


14

(7) the provisions of rules 1, 2, 6, 7, 9, 9A, I9A, 21, 24 and 25 of Order V of
the First Schedule as amended or, as the case may be, inserted or omilted by section
55 of this Act shall not apply to any summons issucd immediately before the
commencement of section 15;

(6) the provisions of rules 9, 11, 14, 15 and 18 of Order VIE of the First
Schedule, as amended or, as the case may be, substituted or amended by section 17
of this Act, shail not apply to in respect of any proceedings pending before the
commencement of section 17; ~

(0 the provisions of rules 1 and 1A of Order VIII of the First Schedule, as
substituted or inserted by section 18 of this Act, shall not apply to a written
statement filed and presented before the court immediatcly before the commencement
of section 18;

(७४) the provisions of rules 2 and 5 of Order LX of the First Schedule, as
amended by section 19 of this Act, shall not apply in respect of summons before the
commencement of section 19;

(a) the provisions of rules 2 and 15 of Order Xi of the First Schedule, as
amended by scction 21 of this Act, shall not apply to or affect any order passed by
the court or any application submitted for inspection to the court before the
commencement of section 21 of this Act;

(०) the provisions of rules 2 and 4 of Order XII of the First Schedule, as
amended and omified, as the case may be, by section 22 of this Act, shall not affect
any notice given by the party or any order made by the court before the
commencement of scction 22 of this Act;

(p) the provisions of rules | and 2 of Order XHL of the First Schedule, as
substituted by section 23 of this Act, shall not affect the documents produced by the
partics or ordered by the court to be produced before the commencement of scetion
23 of this Act;

(व) the provisions of rule 4 and 5 of Order XIV of the First Schedule, as
amended and omitted by section 24 of this Act, shall not affect any order made by
the court adjourning the framing of the issucs and to amend and steike out issucs
before the commencement of on 24 of this Act;

(70) the provisions of rules | and 2 of Order XVI of the First Schedule, as
amended by section 25 of this Act, shall not affect any application made for
summoning of witnesscs and time granted to a party to deposit amount for
summoning witness

(s) the provisions of rule 1 of Order XVI of the First Schedule, as amended by
on 25 of this Act, shal? not affect any adjournment granted by the court and any
cost occasioned by the adjournment granted by the court before the commencement
of section 25 and the number of adjournments granted carlier shall not be counted for
such purpose;

ns of rules 1, 6A and 6B of Order XX of the First Schedule, as
atended and substituted by section 28 of this Act, shail not affect any application for
obtaining copy of decree for fil of appeal made by a party and any appeal filed
before the commencement of section 28 of this Act; and every application made and
every appeal (iled before the commencement of section 28 shall be dealt with as if
section 28 had pot come into force;

(0 the prov

“10

15

20

25

30

ide by the court before the commencement of section 25; ल्‍ह 35

40

45


के
10

36 of 1963.

T of 187015

5 of 1908.

20

25

5 of 1908.

15

(00) is sub-rule (2) of rule 1 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule, as inserted
by section 30 of this Act, shall not affect any temporary injunction granted before the
sommencement of section 30 of this Act.

(४) the provisions of rules 1, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19 and 22 of Order XLI of the
First Schedule, as amended, substituted and omitted, as the case may be, by clause 32
of the Bill shall not affect any appeal filed before the commenccment of section 32; and
every appeal pending before the commencement of scction 32 shall be disposed of as
if scetion 32 of this Bill had not come into force.

CHAPTER Vi
AMENDMENT OF THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
34. In the Limitation Acl, #963, in section 12, in sub-section (3), the words “on
which the deerce or order is founded” al the end shall be omitted,
CHAPTER VII
AMENDMENT OF THE CourT FEES’ ACT, 1870
35. In the Court Fees’ Act, 1870 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Court

Fecs’ Act), after section 15, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

“16. Where the court refers the partics to the suit to any one of the mode of
settlement of dispute referred to in section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the
plaintiff shall be catitled 10 a certificate from the court authorising him to receive
back from the collector, the full amount of the fee paid in respect of such plaint.”.

36. In the Court Pees’ Act, in the Second Schedite after serial number 1A and
entries relating thereto, the following sctial number and chirics thereof shall be inserted,
nainely:—

“tB. Application to any Civil Court for When presenied 10 Rs.50/-
local inspeetion under Order XXXIXA Civil Court
of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.”.

Amendment
‘of scction
12.

Insertion of

. new section

16.

Refund of
Fee.

Amendment
of the
Second
Schedule.

ony


STA

EMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘Whe Jaw relating to the procedure in suits and civil proceedings in India (except those in the State of
Jamu and Kashmir and Nagaland and Tribal Areas of Assam and certain other arcos) is contained in the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, The Code has been amended from time t time by various Acts of Central and State
‘The Code is mainly divided into two parts, namely, Sections aud Orders. While the main principles
re contained in the Sections, the detailed procedure ॥ regards to the matters dealt with by the Sections are
SI ces. Under section 122, the High Courts lave powers to amend, by rules, the procedure laid
down: in the Onde In exercise of these powers, vatious amendincnts have bees made in the Orders by the
different High Coutts.

2. tn terms of the Common Minin Progran: of the United Front Governnecot, it was envisaged
that क BAIL on judicial reforms and disposal of pending cases within a period of three years may be introduced
in the Patliament. With a view to keep the commitment given to the people of India so that a speedy disposal
of ea: may take place wit the fixed time frame and with a view to implement the report of Justice
V.S.Malimath, it was thought necessary to obtain the views of dre State Governinents on the subject, also. In the
Law Minister's Confetenee held in New Delhi on 30th June and Ist July, 1997, the working paper on the
proposed amending to the Code of Civil Procedu 1908 was discussed, On the basis of resolution adopted
in the said Conte and with a view to implement the rccommentations of Justice Malinath Committee, 129th
Report of the Law Commission of india and the recommendations of the Coumittcs on Subordinate Legislations
(ith bok Sabha. it proposed to intraduce a Bill for the ndipents of Cod vil Procedure, 1908
keeping in view, among others, that evety effort should be © 10 expedite the disposal of civil suits and
proceedings so that justice may ot he delayed,

3 Some of the more impottoat changes proposed to be made are es follow:

to any pleint to be filed Tbe in duptic accompanied by all the docutnents
es whieh the plaintiff relies upon in support ot his. cl: also 1७ be suppotted by an atfidavit
SiGag the genuineness of the chin of the phintit€ and of the documents on which fe relies apou;

(hy the written: statement: ina ate shafl be
fited within a period of thinty days from the date of
Le supported by an aflids

companiod by all the documents and shall be
vice of summons, — Weitten statement is also to

of simmmons, it is proposed that plaintiit shall take the
sof the receipt hero, by post, fax,

ws as 188) be dineted by the court;

te) की etder to obviate delay in servic
stanmons ton the court and sead it to the patti
है हा, sy

+. Law Conn जा. of And and to make

(0). with ॥ vie Report oft

1

ory for the court fo refer the dispute after

cote
the $:
or through Lok Adalat. Wis only
कब dispute iesohution methods

meciliation, mediation, judicial settlement
ie disputes settled through any 000 of the
ed छाल in the court in which ॥ was: filed:

recording oral evidence by the courts which causes
y by making provisions for filing of
vit, Bor the ९१९४४: ation amt re
# [तल 4 vided by 1 comtissioner to he appointed by
jones shall become past of the record of the suit;

(ey as the maximune |
in dispe
ten कि। chiel of ९
x 11100 of Withesnes it
the comet and the chee recorded by x communi

dyoow
Clik Tok Sabha) 4
obtigatery for a judg
vost apd not merely notion:
Farther. क ts prope

७ 4३ inaplom
fing 10 steps to
to record ted

ans of the Committee on Subordinate Legistations

ry adjovrmments, it is proposed to make it
for adjowmment of a case as well as award of actual or higher
ing adjonmment in favour of the epposite party.
only during the heating of a cas

16



: 17

(g) as the parly in whose favour an injunction has been granted usually causes delay on flimsy
and unreasonable grounds, it, is Proposed that the party who applics for injunction shall also furnish
security so that thal parly may not adopt delaying tactics during the tial of the case; :

(hy in matters relating to property disputes, particularly in matter of unauthorised construction on
the land of others, it has been found that, under the existing provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
no application for injunction can be moved unless the suil is filed first in the court having competent
jurisdiction. With a view to obviate this hardsni it is proposed that a person may make an application
fo the court of competent | ict ment of a comunission to ascertain the factual status of
the property so that al the t of the filing of the regular suit the report is available to the commissioner
relating to the factual status of the property in dispute;

(@ with a view to implement the recommendations of Justice V.S. Malimath Committee, it is
Proposed that no further appeal against the judgment of a single judge shalt lic even in a petition under
article 226 or 227 of the Constitution; and

(0) with a view to reduce delay, it is proposed that the court shall on the date of pronouncement
of judgment simultaneously provide authenticated copies of the judgment to the partics, Appeal shall be
filed in the court which passes the decree and no notice shall be scrved on the advocates of the parties
in the court of first instance. .

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects

New DELHL;

[fhe 1206 Auguss, 1997. RAMAKANT D. KHALAP.


Notes on clanses

Clause + In section 26 of the Code, a suit is instituted by presentation of a plaint or such othet
Manner as may be prescribed by rules made dy High Court. Since these rules are different with different Hi
Courts, the requitements for institution of suit are not uniform, ‘the tules made by seme High Courts require
plin( 10 be supported by an affidavit stating the genuincness of the claim of the plaintiff and of the documents
on which he refivs upon while no such affidavit is required under the rules made by some High Courts. With
8 view to bring uniformity and lay down simple procedure to complete the plendings, chuse 2 amends section
26 of the Code and provides that facts must be proved by afticdavil in every pluint.

Clanse 3 amends seetion 27 ¢
1७ defendants. It
defendants,

the Code with a view 10 lay down a fixed time frame to send summons
eks to provide 30 days from the instinvion of suit within which sunmmons should be sent to

Clase In cb (ce) of section 3

of the Code, the court is empowered to impose a fine not
excveding five hundred rupees for Ue purpose of compelling the attendance of any person in the court, Claire
4 substitutes “five thousand rupees” in place of “fi in the said section. for the reason of
decrease in the money value since the time prey

Clase 5. -- Seeti 58 of the Code provide

ve the detention and release of 9 person from civil Prison
Wala dectee, Since the t of scetion 58 were made. the value of moncy has decreased

In this view, clause 5 seeks to amend ion 58 and it substitutes for the words “one thousand:
ive hundred mpees” the words “five thousand tv and “two thousand rupees” respectively, |

Clause 1 कक the 10 provides: for altichinent खाते sale of properties in execution of १
Clause 0 seeks to amemt section OO by  substindi one thersand enpees” 1७ place of “four hundeed
r teason af decrease in the money value sinee (he sim provisions were made,

he the court. ‘The plovisions of clause 7 ate based |
on the recotumendations wade hy Law Con af India and Malimath Comittee, it was Suggested by Law .
Coomibeion of India tha the Court make require attendance of any patty to the stil oe prace dings to appear!
in person wilh a view to aniving at an ainicable settlement of dispute between te partios and make an attempt!
10 setde the dispute benveen the parties atieably. Molimath Committee recommended to make it wbligatory for
the court to refer the dispnte, after issues are Jemed, lor settlement either by way of arbigation, concitiation,
शहर "पकाने, judicial settlement or through Lok Adalat. {is only when the partics fail to their disputes settled
thronph: any of the alternate dispute resolution method that the suit could Proceed torther. In view of the above,
ks 40 insert a new scetion 89 in the Code in ordet to provide for alternate dispite resolution,

Clause 7. provirle

+ for the sctdement of

clause 7 se

Chew In se ॥ 95 of the Code, the court nay award campensation got execediag one thousand
pees: in it appears to the court that an arrest, tor injunction
attachment of injunction was applied for 101

insufficient ground or that there was no ॥ ble ground for
the suit, Sub clause (2) of the said section Gars a suit fore Mupensation in respect of such arrest, attachment or |
injeeetion Han onter bas been passed by the cout on an application for compensation under subaeetion (1). tn

this citeunistance, chu Sto substitutes “Hilty thotsand mpees” in place of “ove thousand rupees”.

Ppcal trom: original decree. Since the time provisions
sed and the pecuniary limits of “three thousand rupees”
fe “twenty five thousand capces” in place of “three

Clause ०... Section °6 of the Cade provides: tor
werd nade the vahie of moneys has considerably ds
tequive 10 he revised. Cla
thonsand rupees” in seetic

Clause 10.
Singly Indge exercising ev
to scelion 100/ of the Code with a
also recommended for suitable cnectine
decision and order deted by a Singh
the Constitution C © [0 secks to
in the above cases.

ined the issue of पाताल appeal against the judgment of
fe jurisdiction. “The Comuuittee recommended for suitable amendments
w to provide dhat ferther appeal in this regard shall oot lie. the Committee |
for abolition of appeal to a Division Bénelt against the |
Judge ef the Hizb Court in a proceeding under articles 226 of 227 of
pstitule a new section 1008 with a view to provide for no further appeal

18


19

Chase Et Section 102 of the Code bars record appeal when the atnownt or value of the subject matter
tedees not exceed ene thousand rupees, Justice Malimath Comittee recommended the amcndments by
१ 102 in order to substiaie मे Timit of twenty-five thousand rupees in place of one thousand mupees for the
[ teaseps of deetease in the value of money since the ime provisions wer: made. Clause 11 secks to bring in a
Flint of twenty-five thou

nd rupees 1७ bar record appeal.

Chanse 12. Sec

शा 115 01 the Cade provides Cor wvision by the High Contt of an order or decision
of any eo wbordinate to sech Tigh Court, the Malimath Committee noticed that often the records of the lower
a me sent te the High Cont in the tevisional proceedings. ॥ is imperstive that records of proceedings
tending in the subordinate court should not be sent unless High Court so desires and revision should not operate
stay Of procerdings belore the (rial court, The Committce while agrecing in principle that scope of interletence
L: Ost interlocutory orders should be restrieted, felt (hat the object eae be achieved more effectively without
५ desnding the High Court of the power of revision. Clause 12 secks to achieve the above object by suitable
amendinents to section 115.

q

[ Chase 14, - section (48 of the Code provides for enlargement of time by the court, Where any peried
is fixed of prusted by the court for of any act prescribed or allowed by the Code, court Ins disctetion to cnlarge

such petiod, Clause 13 secks to pul a limit on enlargement af such period by inserling the words “not exceed:
हा te days in total” in section 148 with a view to minimise the procedual delay at the instance of either party

tawse $4. (सतत IV of the code provides for the institution of suits. Sub-rofe (1) of tute 1 of Order
es that every suit shall be instituted by presenting a plaint to the court. Since a copy of plaint is sent
[! refore comil बात a duplic:

€ copy of plaint in needed for records, suitable amendments are made in this regacd
wee 11 which requires institution of a suit by presenting plaint in duplicate to the: court. Sub-rule (2) of tule
the said order tequires: compliance of certain formalities by the tegisry of court. With a view to dispel: th
foabts when a soit is regarded to have फिट stituted, clause 14 inserts a new sub-nule (3) to provide that the
पका! shall not be deemed to be duty instituted unless il complies with the requirements. speci sub-miles
1. ¢tt amd (23

joked into the problem of atrears of cases in the courts and recommended amendinents to the Code with a view
ey down ॥ fixed! tine drome within which pleadings
ate 11) ef mile dat Order Voto provide for iB writlen si
[: ihe suitaexeept की few siluations, Clause 15 amends cule
HL Pee ats on whieh plrintilt reties upon are defivered with
tule 9 te provide for delivery of summons by speed. po:
to as the High Court may presetibe by rates, 10 neikes
line,

L Chae 14 Onder ¥ of the Cate provides for issue and service of summons. ‘The Malimath Committee
‘

Ht to be completed. Clause 15 seeks to substitute sub
kuements within thitly days (rom the day of institution
6 sed 7 lo ensure that copy of plaint alongwith
utomtions te the defendant. “This clause substitutes
. cotticr service, fax message or by elcetronic mail,
the Code upto date with the changing needs of the

Chie 16.0. Order Vio of the code provides: for pleadings generally, Cliuse 16 seeks to. provide that
[ vw vetilying tle pleating shall furnish au affidavit in support of his: pleadings. This is rules 5, 17

cla

re UR af Order ४1 (७ hring i consisteney with new clomges iy the: Code. 18०

Pi
Clause 17 कि Oulor VU of the Code, mle it provides: for production of documents on which plaintiff
£. Clouse 17 serks to substitwe mile 14 10 provide where a plaintiff sues upon a document in his possession, -
४ हज enter such documents in a dist and shall produce it in court when plaint is presented by him and shall

deliver document and a copy thereof to be filed with the plaint. "The new rule father provides in ease a document
i: copy thereat is not Het with the plaing it shatl not be allowed to be rceeived in evidence on behalf of
A

Hint at the आदत ड़ af the suit.

Chet Order VAL af the Code provides for written stateinent and) set otf, Ch 18 seeks to
४ (dilate कल bak Onder 0॥॥। ty provide a lised time tiaine with b pleadings ate to be completed. ‘he
oN py fers terpaited tte detondant 1 preseat a written statement within thitty days from the date of service
of sunmons on the defenlant, Clause 18 inserts eule 1A to provide ita duly of defendant to produce docuents ||
ear which relief is clitued or iclicd upore by him. Rule LA reqnites the defendant to produce documents in his
eseoton in the count and deliver the document and a copy thercof when the जाला statement is presented by
int, Rute GA farther requites के case a document or copy thetcof is not filed with the weilten statement, it shall
wot be allowed (0 be averived in evidence on behalf of defendant at the bea
“>

"

au


20

Clause 19.— Rule 2 of Order IX is being substituted so as to provide that where there is default on the
past of plaintiff to deliver summons to the defendant, the suit shall be dismissed by the court. This is in addition
to non-payment of cost by the plaintiff as a ground of dismissal of suit.

It is proposed by amending rule 5 of Order 1X so as to reduce the period from one month to seven days
within which the plaintiff is required to apply for fresh summons where summons carlier issued remein un-
served.

Clause 20.— Order X is proposed to amend by inserting rules 1A, 1B and 1C in the said order. This
amendinent is consequential to the insertion of new section 9 vide clause 7 of the Bill.

Clause 21.~ Rules 2 and 15 of Order Xf ate proposed to be amended by fixing time limit to decide an
application for leave to deliver intcrrogatorics and to provide that an application for inspection of documents by
the partics can be made only before the setticment of issues.

Clause 22.— Rule 2 of Order XI is proposed to be amended for reducing the time from filtcen days to
seven days within which notice 10 admit a document may be given by any party to the suit.

Further the sccond proviso to tule 4 of the said order is being omitied so as to curtail the discretion of
the court in the matter of allowing any parly to amend or withdraw admission made by bim.

Clause 23.— Rules 1 and 2 of Order XIII are proposed to be substituted so as to provide that the original
of documents of which copies have been filed with the plaint and writtca statement shall be submitted before the
scitlement of issues is made by the court.

Clause 24.— Rute 4 of Order XIV is proposed to be amended so as to restrict the discretion of ovurt
by fixing time-limit beyond which no adjournment for the cxamination of witnesses or of the document shall be
granted by the court before framing of issues by the court.

It is also proposed (o omit rule 5 56 that issues are framed within time and ४० application for amendimneats
and striking out the issue is cntertained by the court.

Clause 25.— Order XVI is proposed to be amended so as to fix a time limit within which an application
may be made for summoning of witness. Further it is proposed to provide that e party applying for summons
shall pay foc towards calling the summons within a period not later than seven days from the dole of making
application.

Clause 26.— Order XVII lays down the procedure for granting adjournments. The Commitice on
Subordinate Legislation (Eleventh Lok Sabha) recommended that it should be made obligatory in the judgment
to record reasons for adjournment of cases as well as award of actual and not merely notional cost against the
patty secking adjournment in 48५०० of the opposite party. ॥ is proposed to make it obligatory by amendment
of proposed Order. ॥ is proposed to make it obligatory for the judges to record the seasons in writing where the
court grants adjournment and (o award the actual cost to the opposite party. Further limit up to three adjournments
has also been fixed in a case. a

Clause 27.— Order XVIMN provides for manner of recording the evidence. It is proposed to confer the
power of recording of evidence by the commissioncr to be appointed by the court.

Clause 28.— Order XX makes it compulsory for a party filing appeal to annex the certified copy of the
decree to the Memorandum of Appeal. Justice Malimath Committee has pointed out thal it takes a long time for
obtaining certified copy of the decree and thus filing of appeal takes a long time. It is proposed to dispense with
annexing certified copy of the decree alongwith Memorandum of Appeal and it is also proposed that the whole
judgment shalt be made available to the parlics immediately after the judgment pronounced.

Clause 29.— Order XXV{ cnables the court to issue commission only in cases where witness resides
outside the focal limits of the jurisdiction of the court. It is proposed to amend Order XXVI by inserting a ocw
rule 4A so as to enable the court to issue commission in any case where the interest of justice so demands.


at

Clause 30,— 10 has been observed that after obtaining temporary injunction the party in whose favour

 gginiunction has been granted causes delay in disposal of cases on flimsy and unreasonable gtounds. To curb this

practice it is proposed to amend Order XXXIX so as to provide that the party who applics for obtaining
injunction shat! also furnish seeurity so that il may not adopt delaying tactics during the trial of the casc.

Provedure, 908 no application for interim injunction can be moved unless te suit is filed first in the court

having competent jurisdiction. In matters relating to property disputes particularly it may help a person if such
| person can make an application to the court of competent jurisdiction for appointment of a Commission to
[corns the factual status of the property so that at the time of filing of the regular suit the report of the

: [ Clause 31.—  secks to tL a mew Order XXXIXA, Under the ८: provisions of the Code of Civil

Commissioner is available relating to the factual status of the property.

Clause 32.— proposes to amend Order XLI of the First Schedule so as to provide for filing of appeal

on the basis of the copy of the judgment, to avoid delay as obtaining copy of dectce takes considerable time.

ioe 12 avoid delay it is proposed that an appeal may be filed in the same court which passed the judgment
‘and that court shall direct the parties to appear before appellate court.

[. Clause 33.— By this clause, ail amendments to the Code made by -the State Legislatures and the High
jourts before the commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1997, are, except to the
extent they arc consistent with the provisions of this Act, being repealed. The provisions relating 10 savings are
broadly intended to ensure that the amendments made by the sections are broadly intended (o ensure that the
mendments made by the sections mentioned in sub-section (2) are nol taken advantage of in respect of
coceedings which are pending al the commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1997,

[ Clause 34. (Amendment to the Limitation Act, 1963)

Sub-scetion (3) of section 12 of the Limitation Act, 1963 excludes for limitation purposes the time required

for obtaining a copy of judgment on which the dectec ot order is founded. As it is proposed in clauses 28 and

2 of the Bill that copy of judgment is to be delivered at the time of pronouncement of judgment and that is

ern for filing of appeal, therefore, amendment of consequential nature are being made under the aforesaid
ub-seetion by omitting the words “on which the dectec or order is founded”.

[ Clause 35.— (Amendment to the Court Fees Act, 1870)
‘The proposcd amendment is consequential to the new section 89 in the Code of Civil Procedure, +708,
roposed to be inserted vide clause 7 of the Bill so as to cnable the Party to claim refund of court-fee in case
f matter in dispute is settled outside the court.
Clause 36.— (Amendment to the Schedule to the Court-Fees Act, 1870)
[ The proposed amendment is consequential to the insertion of mew order XXXIXA in the First Schedule

roposed to be inserted vide clause 31 of the Bill. The proposed amendment prescribes fee in these cases where
9 person applics for inspection before institution of the suit.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 89,. as sought to be inserted by clause 7 of the Bill, empowers
the Government and the High Courts to make rules to be followed in mediation proceedings to effect the
compromise between the parties.

Rules 9 and 9A of Order V as sought to be substituted by clause 15 of the Bill, empowers the High
Courts 10 approve the couricr service for the purpose of service of summons and also empowers to make rules
with regard to other means of service of summons.

Rule 4 of Order XVIII as sought to be substituted by clause 27 of the Bill empowers the High Courts
10 provide, by rules the sums to be paid to the Commissioner for recording of evidence and the amount payable
to the Commissioner by the court or by the partics.

Rule 6B of Order XX as sought to be substituted by clause 28 of the Bill empowers the High Courts to
make rules with regard to the charges to be paid by the partics for supply of copy of the judgment.

The matters, in respect of which such orders ot rules may be made are matters of detail and may hardly
be provided for in the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character,

22


Institution
of suits.

Sutumons to
defendants.

Penalty
for
default.

Detention
and
release.

1५ oes

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
(5 oF 1908)
* * ® * *
INSTITUTION OF SurTs

26. Every suit shall be instituted by the presentation of a plaint or in such other
manner as may be prescribed.

SUMMONS AND DISCOVERY

27. Where a suit has been duly instituted, a summons tay be issued to the
defendant to appear and answer the claim and may be served in manner prescribed.

* ® * * *

32. The Court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons has
been issued under section 30 and for that purpose may—

(०) impose a fine upon him not exceeding five hundred rupees;

* * * ® .

58. (1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a decree shall be
50 detained,—

(a) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of moncy exceeding one
thousand rupees, for a period not exceeding three months, and

(6) where dhe decree is for the payinent of a sum of money exceeding five
hundred rupces, but not excecding one thousand rupees, for a period not exceeding
six weeks:

Provided that he shall be released from such detention before the expiration of the

said period of detention—

() on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention being paid to the
officer in charge of the civil prison, or

(ii) on the decree against him being otherwise fully satisfied, ot

Git) on the request of the person on whose application he has been so detained,
or

(0) on the omission by the person, on whose application he has been so
detained, to pay subsistence-allowance:

Provided, also that he shall not be released from such detention under clause (it) or
clause (iti), without the order of the Court.

(1A) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no order for detention of
the judgment-debtor in civil prison in execution of a deeree for the payment of money
be made, where the total amount of the deeree docs not exceed five hundred
rupees,

23


24

ATTACHMENT:

60. (7) The following property is liable to attachment and sale in execution of a
decree, namely, lands, houses or other buildings, goods, moncy, bank-notes, cheques,
bills of exchange, hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other
sceurities for money, debts, shares in a corporation and, save as hercinalter mentioned,
all other saleable property, molvable or immivable, belonging 10 the judment-debtor, ot
over which, of the profits of which, he has a disposing power which he may exercise
for his own benefit, whether the same be held in the name of the judginentOdehtor or
by another person in trust for him or on his: behalf:

Provided tha the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale,
namely:

*” * * * *

(i) salary to the extent of the first four bundeed rupees and two-thirds of the
remainder in execution of any decree other than a decree for maintenance:

Provided that where any part of such plottion of the salary as is liable to attachment
has been under attachment, whether continuously or istermittently, for a 1०७1 period of
twenty-four months, such portion shall be exempt from attachment until the expiry of
a further period of tweleve months, and where such attachment has been made in
execution of one and the same deere, shall, after the attachment has continued for a
total period of twenty-four months, be finally exempt from attachment in exceution of
that decree.

95. (1) Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attachemnt bas been effected of a
temporry injunction granted under the last preceding section, —

(4) it appears to the Court that such arrest, atachemnt or injunction was applied
for on in sufficient grounds, or

(5) that suit of the plaintiff fails and ॥ appears to the Court tht there was no.
reasonable or probable grohund for instituting the same,

apply to the Court, and the Court may, upon such application award
against the pla by its ender such, ame one thousand rupees, as.
it deems a reasonable defendannt: for the expense or injury
Cineluding injury to कुछ

the defendant ॥

Provided that the Court
Ikimits of its pecuniary jurisdiction.

rction, an amount execeding the

PART शा

APPEALS
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES

96. (7) * * * * *

Property
liable to
attach-ment
aud

sale in
execution of
decrec,

Compen-
sation for
obtaining
arrest,
attach-
jnent or
injunction
on sufficient
grounds.

Appeal

from
Original
decree.


No further
appeal in
certain

No second
appeal in
certain

Revision.

245

(4) No appe: all lic, except on a question of taw, from a deerce in any suit of the
nature cognisable byh Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value of the
subject-matter of the original suit docs not exeved three thousand rupees.

* * * * *

(O0A, Notwithstanding anything contained ny Letters Patent for any High Court
in any other instrument having the force of law or any other Inw for the time being
in force, ‘where any appeal from an appellate deerce or order is heard and decided by
a single Judge of a High Court, no further appeal shall fic from the judgement, decision
or order of such single Judge in such appeal or from any decree passed in such appeal.]

* * * * *

second appeal shalt lie in any suit of the nature cognizable by Courts of
When the amount or value of the subject-matter of the original suit docs
hot execed three thousand rupees.

* * * ® ®

115. (4) The High Court may call for the record of any case which has been decided
by any Couet subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and
if such subordinate Court appears—

(a) (७ have exervised a jurisdiction not vested in it by Jaw, or

(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or

(०) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material
irregularity,

the High Court may make such order in the ease as it thinks fit:
Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary of reverse any order

made, or any order deciding an 0. in the course of a suit or other proceeding,
except where—

(a) the order, if it had been made in favour of the party applying for revision,
would have finally disposed of the‘suit or other proceeding, of

(9) the order, if allowed to stand, would occasion a failure of justice or cause
irreparable injury to the party against whom it was made.

all not, under this section, vary or reverse any dectee or order

(2) The High Court
either to the High Court or to any Court subordinate

against which an appeal |
thereto.

ion, the expression “any case which has been decided”
» or any order deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or

Explanation.—in this
includes any order mad
other proceeding.

® * * रू *


a6

148. Where any period is fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act
prescribed or allowed by this Code, the Court may, in its discretion, from time to time,
enlarge such period, even though the period originally fixed or granted may have
expired.
* रू * * x
ORDER IV
INSTITUTION OF SUITS

1. (1) Every suit shall be instituted by presenting a plaint to the Court or such officer
as ॥ appoints in this behalf.

* * * * ®
ORDER V
Issuc and Service of Summons

Issue of Summons

1. GZ) When a suit has been duly
defendant to appear and answer the cl

tuted a summons may be issued to the
ona day to be therein specified:

Provided that no such summons shall be issued when the defendant has appeared at
the presentation of the plaint and admitted the plaintiff's claim:

Provided further that where a summons has been issued, the Court may direct the
defendant to file the written statement of his defence, if any, on the date of his
appearance and cause an entry to be made to that effect in the summons.

2. Every summons shall be accompanied by a copy of the plaint of, if so permitted,
by a concise statement,

* * * * *

oa
¢

6. The day for the appearance of the defendant shall be fixed with reference to the
current business of the Court, the place of residence of the defendant and the time
necessary for the service of the summons; and the day shall be so fixed as to allow the
defendant sufficient time to enable him to appear and answer on such day.

7. The summons to appear and answer shall onder the defendant to produce all
ion or power upon which he intends to rely in support of his

Enlarge-
ment of

time,

Suit to
be com-
menced
by plaint.

Summons.

Fixing day
for appear-
ance of =,
defendant.

Summons to |
order
defendant to
produce
documents
relied on by
him.


Delivery
or trans-

summons,
for service.

Simuh-

aneous issue
of summons
for servi
by post in
addition to

Service of
summons
where
defendant
tesides
within
jurisdiction
of another
Court,

Service on
defendant in
prison.

a7

Service of Summons

9. (1) Where the defendant resides within the jurisdiction of the Court in which the
suit is instituted, of has an ageut resident within that jurisdiction who is empowered to
cevice of the summons, the summons shall, unless the Court otherwise
¢ delivered or sent to the proper officer to be served by him or one of his
subordinates.

(2) The proper officer may be an officer of a Court other than that in which the suit
instituted, and, where be is such an officer, the summons may be sent to him by post

or in such other manner as the Court may direct.

* * * * *

198. (1) The Court shall, in addition to, and simultancously with, the issue of
summons for service in the manner provided in niles 9 to 19 (both inclusive), also
direct the suinmons to be served by registered post, acknowledgment duc, addressed to
the defendant, or his agent, empowered to accept the service, at the place where the
defendant, or his agent actually and voluntarily resides or cartics on business or
personally works for gain:

-nule shall require the Court to issue summons for
1 the mstances of the case, the Court considers

Provided that nothing in this su
service by registered post, where,
it unnecessary.

(2) When an acknowledgment purporting to be signed by the defendant ot his agent
is received by the Court of the postal article containing the summons is reccived back
by the Court with an endorsement purporting to have been made by @ postal employce
to the effect that the defendant or his agent had refused to take dclivery of the postal
article containing thé summons, when tendered 40 bim, the Court issuing the summons
shail declare that the summons had been duly served on the defendant:

Provided that where the stinmons was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by
registered post, acknowledgment duc, the declaration referred to in sub-rule shalt be
made notwithstanding the fact tut the acknowledgement having been lost or mislaid,
or for any other tcason, has not been received by the Court within thirty days from the
date of the issue ‘of the summons.

® * * * *

21. A summons may be sent by the Court by which it is issued, whether within or
without the State, cither by one of its officers of post to any Court (not being the High
Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the defendant resides.

* * * * *

24. Where the defendant is confined in a prison, the summons shall be delivered or
sent by post or otherwise to the officer in charge of the prison for service on the
defendant.



28

25. Where the defendant tesides out of India and has no agent in India empowered
lo accept service, the summons shall be addressed to the defendant at the place where
he is residing and sent to him by post, if there is postal communication between such
place and the place where the Court is situate:

Provided that where any such defendant resides in Bangladesh or Pakistan, the
summons, together with a copy thereof, may be sent for service on the defendant, to
any Court in that country (not being the Sigh Court) having jurisdiction in the place
where the defendant resides:

Provided further that where any such defendant is a public officer in Bangfad
Pakistan (not belonging to the Bangladesh or, as the case may be, Pakistan military,
naval or air forces) or is @ servant of a railway company or local authority in that
country, the summons, together with a copy thereof, may be sent for service on the
defendant, to such officer or authority in that country as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, speeify in this behalf.

® * * * «
ORDER VE

PLEADINGS GENERALLY

* * * ® *

5. A further and better statement of the nature of the claim or defence, or further
and better particulars of any matter stated in any pleading, may in all cases be ordered,
upon such terms, as to costs and otherwise, as may be just. 5

* * * * *

17. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow cither party to alter or
amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms as may be just, and all such
amendments shall be made as may be necessary for the purpose of determining the real
questions in controversy between the parties,

18. If ॥ party who has obtained an order for feave to amend does not amend
accordingly within the time limited for that purpose by the order, ot it no time is
thereby limited then within fourteen days from the date of the order, he shall not be
permitted to amend after the expiration of such limited time as aforesaid of of such
fourteen days, as the case may be, unless the tin extended by the Court.

ORDER Vil

PLAINT

« * * ” *

9. (1) The plaintiff shall endorse on the plaint, or annex thereto, a list of the
documents (if any) which he has produced along with it and, if the plaint is adinitted,
shall present, within such time as may be fixed by the Court or extended by it from
time to time, as many copies on plain paper of the plaint as there are defendants, unless
the Court by reason of the length of the plaint or the number of the defendants, or for
any other sufficient reason, permits him to present a like number of concise statements
of the nature of the claim made, or of the relief claimed in the suit, in which case he
shall present such statements.

Service
where
defendant
tesides out
of India and
has no
agent.

Further aod
bettcr state-
ment, or
particulars.

Amendment
० f
picadings.

Failure to
amend after
order.

Procedure
on adinit-
ting plaint.

Concise
statements.


Production
of doctiment
on which
plaintitt
sues,

List of
other
docu

aus.

Statement
in
documents
hot in
plaints
possession
or power.

Inadmisi-
bility of
document
hot pro-
duced when
plaint

filed.

Written
statement.

cof

29

(A) The pk
sub-rule (2), p

ime fixed by the Court or extended by it under
te fee for the service of summons on the defendants.

(2) Where the pi
rept live
defendant sues or is

of the defendants is sued, in a
ty, such statements shall show in what capacity the plaintiff or
ued.

(3) The pl ay, by leave of the Court, amend such statements so as to make

them correspond with the pl:

(4) The cl

ements if, on ex:

fcrial officer of the Court shall sign such list and copies or
pation, he finds them to be correct.

* *, * * *

Documents relied on in pliant

IT sues.
produce it in Court when the plain
document of a copy thereof to be

pon a document in his possession or power, he shall
presented, and shall at the same time defiver the
with the plai

(2) Where he relies on any other docum
hot) as evidence in support of his claim, he
added of annexed to the plaint.

४5 (whether in his possession or power or
hall enter such documents in a fist to be

15. Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the plaintiff, he
shall, if possible, state in whose possession or power it is.

18. (1) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the plaintiff when the
plaint is presented, or to be entered in the list to be added ot annexed to the plaint,
and which is not produced of entered accordingly, stall not, without the leave of the
Court, be received in evidence on bis behalf at the hearing of the suit.

* * * * *

ORDER VII

WRITTEN STATEMENT, SET-OFF AND COUNTER-CLAIM

1. (2) The defendant shall, at or before the first hearing or within such time as the
Court may perinit, present a wri of his defence.

(2) Save as otherwise prov
document Qvhether or not in his possession er power) in support of his defence or
claim for set-off or counter-claim, he shall enter such documents in a fist, and shall,—

(a) if a written statement is: pre:



50

Provided that where the defendant, in his weitten statement, claims a set-off or makes
a counter-clain based on a document in his possession or power, he shall produce it in
Court al the time of presentation of the written statement and shaft at the same time
deliver the document or copy thereof to be filed with the written statement;

(0) if a written statement is not presented, present the list to the Court at the first
hearing of tie st

(3) Where any such document is not in the possession ot power of the defendant,
he shall, wherever possible, state in whose possession or power it is.

(4) If no such list is so annexed of presented, the defendant shall be allowed such
farther period for the purpose as the Court may think fit.

(5) A document which ought to be entered in the list referred to in sub-rule (2), and
which is nol so entered, shall not, without the Icave of the Court, be received in
evidence on behail of the defendant at the hearing of the suit.

(6) Nothing in sub-rite (5) shall apply to docements produced for the eross-
examination of plainti((s witnesses of in answer 10 apy case sel up by the plaintiff
subsequent to dhe filing of the plaint, or handed over to a witness mercly te cefresh his
memory.

(7) Where a Court grants leave under sub-rule (5), it shall record its reasons for so
doing, and no such leave shall be geanted unless good cause is shown to the satisfaction
of the Court for the non-entey of the document in the list referred to in sub-rule (2).

8A. (1) Where a defendant bases his defence upon 9 document in his possession or
power, he shall produce it in Court when the written statement is presented by him and
shall, at the same time, deliver the document or a copy thercof, to be filed with the
writlcn slatement.

(2) A document which ought to be produced it Court by the defendant under this

1 gule, but is घण so produced, shall not, without the leave of the Court, be reecived in

evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit,
(3) Nothing in this rule shall spply to documents produced, —
(०) for the cross-examination of the plainti(f's witnesses, of

(%) in answer to any case sct up by the plaintiff subsequent to the Filing of the
plaint, or

(८) handed over (0 a witness merely to refresh his memory.

9. No pleading subsequent 10 the written statement of a defendant other than by way
of defence 10 a set-off of countet-claim shall be presented except by the leave of the
Court and upon such terms as the Court thinks fit, but the Court may at any time
tequire a written staicment or additional written slatenient from any of the parties and
fix a time for presenting the same.

10... Where any party from wham a written statement is required under rile 1 or rule
9 fails (6 present the same wilhin the time permitted or fixed by the Court, as the case
may be, the Court shal! pronounce judgment against him, or make such ordcr in relation
to the suit as it thinks fit, and on the pronouncement of such judgment, a decree shall

be drawn up.

Duty of
defendant to
produce
documents
upon which
relief 15
claimed by
him.

“

Subsequent
pleadings.

Procedure
when partly
fails to
present
writen
statement
called for

by Court.



Dismissal of
suit where
summons
not served
in conse-
quences of
plaintiff's
failure to
pay costs,

Di sal of
suit where
plaintiff,
after
SIMMONS.
referred
unserved,
fails for one
anonth to
apply for
fresh
summnons.

Conse-
quence of
tefusal or
inability of
pleader to
answer.

3)

ORDER 1X

APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCE OF NON-APPEARANCE

* * * * ®

2. Where on the day so fixed it is found that the summons has not been served upon
the defendant ins consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court-fee or postal
charges (if any) chargeable. for such service, or to present copies of the plaint or
concist iments, as required by 4७० 9 of Order VII, the Court may make an order

that the suit be dismissed:

Provided that no such order shall be made, if, notwithstanding such failure, the
defendant attends in person (or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent) on the
day fixed for bin to appear and answer.

* * * * *

5. (2) Where, afice a summons has been issued to the defendant, or to one of several
defendants, and returmmed unserved, the plaintiff fails, for a period of one month from
the date of the return made to the Coust by the officer ordinarily certifying to the Court
returns made by the serving officers, to apply for the issue of a fresh summons the
Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed as against such defendant, unless
the plaintiff has within the said period satisfied the Court that—

(a) he has failed.after using his best endeavours to discover the residence of the
defendant who has not been served, or

(b) such detendant is avoiding service of process, or
(८) there is any other sufficient cause for extending the time,

in which case the Court may extend the time for making such application for such
period as it thinks fit.

(2) In such case the plaintiff may (Subject to the law of limitation) bring # fresh suit,

* * * * *

ORDER X 1

Examination of Partics By the Court

® * * * *

4. (1) Where the pleader of any party who appears by a pleader or any such person
accompanying 3 pleader as is referred to in rule 2, refuses of is unable fo answer any
material question relating to the suit which the Court is of opinion that the party whom
he represents ought to answer, and is likely to be able to answer if interrogated in
person, the Court may postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day and direct that
such party shall appear in person on such day. .

® * * * ®


Br

ORDER XI
+ Discovery and Inspection

* रू * * *

ion for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatorics Particular
Proposed to be delivered shall be submnitted to the Court, In deciding upon such interro-
application, the Court shall (ake into account any offer, which may be inade by the gatories to
Party sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make admissions, ot to be

produce documents relating to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall submitted.
be given as to such only of the infertogatorics submited as the 0001 shall consider पु
necessary cither for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs,

2. On an appli

0. (0 any other Laspection

15, Every party to a itked at any time to give noti
whose pleadings or affidavits reference is made to any document, or who has of
entered any document in any list annexed to his pleadings, to produce such document documents’
for the i जी of the party giving such notice, or of his pleader, and to permit him — referred to
or them 10 take copies thereof; and any party not complying with such notice shall not in pleadings

afterwards be at liberty to put any such document in evidence on his behalf in such suit. or
unless he shall satisfy the Court that such document relates only to his own title, he affidavits,
being a defendant to the st हु

other cause or excuse which the
Court shail deem sufficient for not complying with such notice, in which case the Court
may allow the same to be put in evidence on such terms as to costs and otherwise as
the Court shall think fit.

* * * * *
ORDER XII
Admissions

* * ® * *

2. Either party may call upon the other party to admit, within (ifteen days from the Notice to
date of service of the notice any document, saving all just exceptions; and in case of ® admit
(10 admit, after such notice, the costs of proving any such document documents.
hall be il by the party so neg! ng, Whatever the results of the suit
tay be, unless the Court otherwise ditvets; and no costs of proving any document shall
be allowed unless such notice is given, except whefe the omission to give the notice is, a
in the opinion of the Court, 4 ig Of expense.

refusal or ne

* * * * *

not जल than nine days before Notice to
ly to admit, for the purposes of the — admit facts,
joned in such notice. And in case of refusal

me within six days after service of such notice, or within such

may be allowed by the Cou of proving such fact or facts

shall be paid by the party so ne; ing or refusing, whatever the ॥ of the suit may .
be, unless the Court otherwise Provided thal any admission made in pursuance

of such not to be deemed to be made only for the purposes of the particular suit,

and not as an admission (0 be uscd against the party en any other occasion ot in favour

of any person other than the party giving the notice:

4. Any party may, by notice in wei
the day fixed for the hearing, call on
suit only, any: s;
or negleel to
fiwther time



Document-
ary
evidence to
be produced
91, 66 before
the
setHement
of issues,

cl of
hon-pro-
duction of
documents.

Court may

or
docuements
before
framing
sues,

Power to
amend,
and stricke
oul, issues,

33

Provided also that the Court apay at any
any admission so made on such terms 98 0

ne allow any party to amend of withdraw
yb

® * रू * *

ORDER XIII
Production, Impounding and Return of Documents

1. (1) The parties or their pleaders shall produce, at ७५ before the settlement of
issues, alt the documentary evidence of every description in their possession or power,
on which they intend to rely, and which bas not already been filed in Court, and. all
documents which the Court has ordered to be produced.

(2) The Court shall receive the documents so produced: Provided that they are
accompanied by an fate list thereof prepared in such form as dhe High Court
direct

ary evidence in the possession or power of any” party which
has not been produced prdance with the requirements of
॥ be received at any subscque: Stage of the proceedings unless good cause
is shown to the sai on of the Court for the non-production thereof; and the Court
receiving any such evidence shall record the reasons for so doing.

(2) Nothing in sub-rale (1) shall apply (6 documents, —

(a) produced for the cross-examination of the witnesse of the otier party, or

(b) handed over to a witness merely to refresh bis memory.

* ® * * *

ORDER XIV

Settlement of Issues and Determination of Suit on Issues of Law or on Issues agreed upon

* * * * *
3

cannot be correctly framed without

ore the Court or without the inspection of some

|, 1 may adjourn the framing of the issues to a future

w for the time being in force) compel the attendance uff
production of any document by the person in whose Possession or

mons or other process.

4. Where the Court is of opinion
the examination of som
document not produced
day, and may (sul
any pers
power it

5. (1) The Court may at any
additional issues on sue!
issucs as may be ॥

before passing a decree amend the issues or frame
Ss and all such‘ amendments or additional
ig the matters in controversy between the

a ing a decree, strike out any issucs
that appear to it 10 be wrongly framed or introduced.

” ® * रू *


34
ORDER XVI
Summoning and Attendance of Witnesses

1. (४) * * * *

ions of sub-rule (2), summonses referred to in this rule may
be obtained by the parties on an application to the Court or to such officer as may be
appointed by the Court in this behalf.

* * * * *

2. (4) The party applying for a summons shall, before the summons is granted and
within a period to be fixed, pay into Court such a sum of money as appears to the
Court to be sufficient to defray the travelling and other expenses of the person
summoned in passing to and from the Court in which.he is required to attend, and for
one day's attendance.

* * * * *

ORDER XVII
Adjournmenis

1. (1) The Court may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage of the suit grant
time ५० the parties or to any of them, and may from time to time, adjourn the hearing
of the suit,

(2) In every such case the Court shall fix a day for the further hearing of the suit,
and may make such order as it thinks fit with respect to the costs occasioned by the
adjournment:

Provided that,—

(a) when the hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be continued from day-
to-day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unfess .the Court
finds that, for the exceptional reasons to be recorded by it, the adjournment of the
hearing beyond the following day is necessary,

(b) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the
circumstances ate beyond the control.of that party,

(०) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not
be a ground for adjournment,

(d) where the illness of a pleader or his ility to conduct the case for any
reason, other than his being engaged in another Court, is put forward as a ground for
adjournment, the Court shall not grant the adjournment unless it is satisfied that the
party applying for adjournment could not have engaged another pleader in time,

(०) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present
or the party or his pleader, though present in Court, is not ready to; examine or cross-
examine the witness, the Court may, if it thinks fil, record the statement of the
witness and pass such ordets as il thinks fil dispensing with the examination-in-chief
or cross-cxamination of the wilness,.as the case may be, by the party or his pleader
nol present of not ready as aforesaid.

* * * * *

List of
witnesses
and 7
summons
to wit-
nesses.

Expenses
of witness
lo be paid
into Court
on applying
for
summons.

Court ‘may
grant time
and adjourn
hearing.
Cost of
adjourn-
ment.


Statement
and
production
of evidence.

Witnesses
10 be
examined in
open Court,

Production
of evidence
hot
previously
known or
which could
not be
produced
despite duc
diligence.

Judment
when
pronounced,

Last
paragraph
of judgment
to indicate
in precise
terms’ the
telicf
granted:

Ss
ORDER XVI
Hearing of the Suit and Examination of Witnesses
2.(1)* * * x *

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this tule, the Court may, for reasons to be
recorded, direct or permit any party to examine any witness af any stage.

* * * * *

4. The evidence of the witnesses in attendance shall be taken orally in open Court
in the presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of the Judge.

* * * ® *

17A, Where a party satisfies the Court that, aficr the exercise of due diligence, any
evidence was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the. time

when that party was leading his evidence, the Court may permit that party to produce
that evidence at a later stage on such terms as may appear to 11 to be just.

* * * * *

ORDER XX
Judgment and Decree
ay * * * * *

(2) Where a written judgment is to be pronounced, it shall be sufficient if the
findings of the Court on cach issue and the final order passed in the case are read out
and it shalt not be necessary for the Court to read out the whole judgmeat, but a copy
of the whole judgement shall be made available for the perusal of the parties or the
pleaders immediately after the judgment is pronounced.

* * * * *

6A, (1) The lost paragraph of the judgment shall state in precise terms the relicf
which has been granted hy such judgment. .

(2) Every endeavour shall be made to ensure that the decree is drawn up as

expeditiously as possible, and, in any case, within fifteen days from the date on which.
the judgment is pronounced; but where the decree is not drawn up within the time
aforesaid, the Court shall if requested so 10 do by ७ party desirous of appealing against
the decree, certify that the decree has not becn drawn up and indicate in the cettificate
the. reasons for the delay, and thereupon—

(a) an appeal may be preferred against the decree without filing a copy of the
decree and in such a case the tast paragraph of the judgment shall, for the purposes
of tule 1 of Order XLI, be treated as the decree; and

(b) so long as the decree is not drawn up, the last Paragraph of the judgment
shall be deemed to be the decree for the purpose of execution and the party
interested shalt be entitled to apply for a copy of that Paragraph only without being

e


36
required to apply for a copy of the whole of the judgment; but as soon as a decree
is drawn ap, the fast paragraph of the judgment shall ecase to have the cflect of a
deeree for the purpose of exceution or for any other parpose:

where un applicntion is made for obtuining a copy of enty the last
judgment, such copy shall indicate the nome and address of all the

608. Where the judgment is type-weitten, copies ef the type-wrilten judgment shall,

where it is practicable so to do, be made available to the padics immediately after the
pronouncement of the judgment on payment, by the party applying for such copy of
stich charges as inay be spceilied in the niles made by the High Court,

* * » * *

ORDER XXXIX

EMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS
‘Temporary injunctions

1, Where in any suit it is proved by affidavit or utherwise—

(a) that any property ia di
or nbenated by any party to the suil, or wrongfully sc

sof being wasted, damaged
til in execution of a decree, or

(0) that the defendant threatens, of intends, to temove or dispose of his property
with a view 10 deftanding bis creditors,

(०) that the defendant threatens (0 dispossess the plaintiff or otherwise cause
injury to the plaintiff in celation to any property in dispute in the suit,

the Court may by order grant a tetnporary injunction to restrain such act, or make such
other order for the purpose of slaying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alicnation,
sole, removal or disposition ef the properly or dispossession of the plaintiff, or
otherwise causing injury to the plaintif€ in cvlation to any property in dispute in the
suit as the Court thinks fit, until the disposal of the suitor until further orders.

® * * * «

ORDER XLI

APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREKS जे

1. (2) Every appeal shall be preferted in the form ef a memorandum signed by the
appellant oe his pleader and presented (othe Conrt of to such officer as it appoints in
is beball. ‘The memorandun shaft be aceotmpanicd by a copy of the decree appealed
the Appellate Court dispenses therewith) of the judgment en which it

Provided that where Bvo or more suits have been tried together and a common
judgment has been delivered therefor and two or more appeals are Ciled against any
decree covered by that judged, whether by the same appellant or by different
appellants, the appellate Court may dispense with the Filing of more than one copy of
Ue judgment,

Copies of
1 hoe
typewsittcn
judgment

- when to be

made
available.

Cascs in
which
temporary
injuction
tay be
granted,

Form of
appeal.



37

Procedure on admission of appeal

9. (1) Where a memorandum of appeal is adinitted, the-Appellate Court or the Proper
officer of that Court shall endome thereon the date of presentation, and shall register
the appeal in a book to be kept for the Purpose.

(2) Such book shall be called the Register of Appeals.

* * * x *

11. (7) The Appellate Court, after sending for the record if it thinks fit 3० to do, and
after fixing a day for hearing the appellant or his Pleader and hearing him accordingly
if he appears on that day, may dismiss the appeal without scading notice to the Court
from whose decree the appeal is preferred and without serving notice on the respondent
ot his pleader.

* * * * *

12. (7) * * * *

(2) Such day shalt be fixed with reference to the current business of the court, the
place of residence of the respondent, and the time necessary for the service of the
notice of appeal, so as to allow the respondent sufficient time to appear and answer the
appeal on such day.

13. (1) Where the appeal is not dismissed under rule 11, the Appellate Court shalt
send notice of the appeal to the Court from whose dectee the' appeal is preferred.

(2) Where the appeal is from the decree of a Court, the records of which are not
deposited in the Appellate court, the court receiving such notice shall send with all
practicable despatch all material papers in the suit, or such Papers as may be specially
calied for by the Appellate Court.

(3) Either party may apply in writing to the Court from whuse decree the appeal is
preferred, specifying any of the papers in such Court of which he requires copies to be
made; and copies of such papers shall be made at the expense of, and given to, the
applicant,

* * * * *

15, ‘The notice to the respondent shall declare that, if he docs not appear in the
appellate Court on the day so fixed, the appeal will be heard ex parte.

Procedure on hearing

* ® * * *

18. Where on the day fixed, or on any other day to which the hearing way be
adjourned, it is found that the notice to the tespondent has not been served in
consequence of the failure of the appellant to deposit, within the period fixed, the sun
required to defray the cost of serving the notice or, if the notice is returned unserved,
and it is found that the notice (० the respondent has not been issued in consequence of
the failure of the appellant to deposit, within any subscquent period fixed, the sum
requited to defray the cost of any further attempt to serve the notice, the court may
make an order that the appeal be dismissed:

Provided that no such order shall be made although the notice has not been served


38

upon the respondent, if on any such day the respondent appears when the appeal is
called on for hearing.

19, Where an appeal is dismissed under rule 11, sub-rule (2), ot rule 17 of rule 18,
the appellant may apply to the appellate Court for the re-admission of the appeal; and,
where it is proved that he was prevented by any sufficicnt cause from appearing when
the appeal was called on for hearing or from depositing the sum so required, the Court
shal! re-admit the appeal on such tcrms as to costs ot otherwise as it thinks fit

* * * * *

22. (7) ® * * *

(3) Unless the respondent files with the objection a written acknowledgment from the
party who may be affected by such objection or his pleader of having received a copy
thereof, the appellate Court shall cause a copy to bd served, as soon as may be after the
filing of the objection, on such party or his plcader at the expense of the respondent.

* * « * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
Act No. 36 OF 1963

* * * ® *

PART Ill
COMPUTATION OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION

12. (1) * * * *

(3) Where a decree or order is appealed from or sought to be revised or reviewed,
or where an application is made for leave to appeal from dectce or order, the time
requisite for obtaining a copy of the judgment on which the decree or order is founded

shall also be excluded. कक

® * * * *


RASYA SABHA

A

BILL,
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedute, 1908, the Limitation Act, 1963
and the Court Fees Act, 1870.

(Shri Ramakant D. Khutlap, Minister of State for law and Justice)



ANNEXURE - B

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

QUESTIONNAIRE ON THE

CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908


Fage No.1
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

DRAFT QUESTIONNAIRE
ON THE

CODE OF CIVIL PROCENURE, 1708

Introductory Remarks

i. The Law Commission of India has been
requested by the Government of India in the
Ministry of Law to make recommendations for

revision of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1708.

2. The Commission proposes to undertake
the exercise in two phases. In the first
phase, the Commission proposes to express its
views on the various amendments suggested by
the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Bill,
1997, which has been introduced as an
official Bill in the Rajya Sabha. In the
second phase of the work, © the Commission
will, if necessary, consider the provisions

of the Code which have not been dealt with in


Page No.2

the Bill (that is, provision on which the
Bill does not propose any amendment) but
which may appear to be in need of revision,
in the interests of simplicity, certainty and
uniformity in the law of Civil Procedure and
with a view to achieving rationalisation and

modernisation of the law.

Division of the project into two phases
(as above) has been decided upon by the
Commission, in the light of the fact that
proposals for a comprehensive revision of the
Code at this juncture may involve
considerable length of time, while the
proposals contained in the Bill seem to

require a comparatively urgent attention.

3. In order to elicit informed opinion
on the various proposals contained in the
Rill, the Commission has prepared a
Questionnaire on the subject. In the various
questions as formulated by it, the Commission
has attempted to mention, very briefly, some

of the courses and alternatives that can be


Page No.3

possibly adopted with reference to the points
to which the various amendments (as proposed
in the Bill) relate. The Commission would
like to make it clear that these courses and
alternatives do not necessarily represent the
final views of the Commission. They have been
put forth, mainly in order to elicit informed
opinion on the subject, and in order to
facilitate a detailed consideration of the
various points by the persons and bodies who
may like to express their opinions on the

proposals contained in the Bill.

4. The Commission will appreciate if
interested persons and bodies will kindly
forward their comments by the 30th of April,

1998, to the Commission.

(For facility of reading, each amendment
proposed on the Bill is set out, along with

the text of the existing provision].


Page No.4

QUESTIONNAIRE

INSTITUTION OF SULTS

-L os Section 26 (Plaint) » Clause 2 of the

Section 26 of the Code provides that a suit
shall be instituted by the presentation of a
Plaint or in other prescribed manner. The Bill
proposes the addition of the following ¢

“In every plaint, facts shall be proved

by affidavit".

[See also 8-11 below ~ Order 6, rule 151.
The main object is to reduce the possibility
of false statements made in a plaint — believed to

be a common phenomenon.

(a) Do you consider that above amendment

on

will serve a useful purpose 7

(b) If so, would you favour a re-framing

of the amendment “ say, as under 3:


Page No.S

“The allegations of fact made in a
plaint shall be supported by an
affidavit, setting out separately facts
which the plaintiff states on his awn
knowledge and the facts which he states
en information received by him and

believed by him to be true 7"

a2: Section 58 (Detention in prison = maximum
period) : Clause 2 of the Bill

Existing section 58 of the Code makes certain
provisions, placing limits on the period of
detention of the judgment debtor in execution of a
decree. The limits are based on the amount of the
money decree. In view of fall in the value of the
rupee, the Bill seeks to increase the relevant

amounts as under १

Existing Amount Proposed Amount Maximum period

(a)
exceeding 1,000 exceeding 3,000 3 months
rupees rupees



(b)

exceeding 500
rupees but not
exceeding 1,000
rupees

exceeding 2,000
rupees but not
exceeding $,000
rupees

(c)

amount does not
exceed 500
rupees

amount does not
exceed 2,000
rupees

Page No.&

6 weeks

no detention
can be
ordered

Would

amendment ?

you agree with the need for

A.D.R
QoS kt Section 897 (to be inserted) settlement of.

disputes outside the court) : Clause 7 of the Bill

The Bill proposes to insert a new section (as

section 897),

seeking to provide that

“Where it

appears to the court that there exist elements of

settlement,

parties,

settlement and give them to the parties for

observations". After observations of the

which

may be

the court (it is proposed) may

acceptable to the

terms of
their

parties,

re-formulate the


Page No.7

terms of a possible settlement and refer the same
for arbitration, conciliation “judicial
settlement” including settlement through Lok

Adalat) or mediation.

Where the reference of the dispute is for
arbitration or conciliation, the Bill proposes
that the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
shall apply, “as if the proceeding for arbitration
or conciliation were referred for settlement under

the provisions of the Act".

Where the reference is to Lok Adalat or
“judicial settlement", the Legal Services

Authority Act, 1989 is to apply.

Where the dispute is referred for mediation,

the proposal is that “the court shall effect a

compromise between the parties and shall follow

such procedure as may be prescribed".

It should also be mentioned that while clause
7 of the Bill requires such attempts at

"settlement", “only where there exist elements of

ment", clause 20(i) of the Bill proposes to


Page No.8
‘

introduce Order 10, rule 1A, whereunder, after the
admissions and denials of the parties are recorded

by the court, “the court shall direct the parties

to the suit to opt either mode of settlement
outside the court as specified in sub-section (1)

of section 89" . [886९ 0७-22, infra].

(Thus, one or ather mode must be opted far, by

the parties, under proposed Order 10, rule 1A).

The object of the proposal in the Bill is
obviously to promote alternative methods of
dispute resolution. However, on the proposals as
formulated in the Bill, certain points of
substance as well as points of form, arise for
consideration. Opinion is therefore invited on the

following points ६:

(७9). Would the proposal in clause = make
for quicker resolution or would it lead to
the insertion of one more step in the

chronology of the suit ?

(५). Should the reference by the court to

the alternative method be discretionary


Page No.9?

(with the court) or should ait be

mandatory?

(c) Should the stage for reference be

set aut in proposed section 89 itself 7

(9) Where the reference is to
arbitration or conciliation, would the
formula in proposed section a7(2)(a) “as
if the proceedings were referred for
settlement under the provisions of that
Act (i.e. the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, £996)" be appropriate and in

conformity with the language of that Act ?

(e) Should the court itself be required
to frame the agreement or, would it be
better to permit the parties to enter into
an agreement ? (This needs deep thinking,
because the Act of 1996 is basically
structured upon the concept of an

arbitration agreement).

(1) In case of arbitration, several

points of detail may arise, 8०५७६ 7 who


Page No.10

will be the arbitrator, what will be his
jurisdiction, what will be the venue, what
will be the arbitrator's fees, etc.. How

will these issues be dealt with 7

(g) Where mediation is decided upon,
then, under section 89 as (proposed), “the
court shall effect a compromise between .
the parties”. What will be the situation,
if the parties do no agree on a

compromise?

{Some further points may also arise in the
context of clause 20, seeking to insert

Order 10, rule 1A ~ See Q-22 below].

APPEAL AND REVISION

Q@-4 : Section 100A (Appeals from decisions of
single Judge of High Court) म Clause 10 of the

Bill.

At present, section 100A of the Code bars an
appeal (Letters Patent appeal) from the appellate

decision of a single Judge. The Bill proposes to


Page No.ti

enlarge the scope of this bar (by amending section
100A), so as to bar an appeal even from an
original decision of a single judge, as also from
the writ, direction or order issued by a single
judge "on an application made under article 226 or

article 227 of the Constitution”.

Do you consider that this amendment will be in

the interests of justice ?

Would you favour, as an alternative, an
amendment which would restrict such appeal to
cases where the decision of the single judge
involves a substantial question of law or is
likely ta result ina serious miscarriage of

justice ?

छ-5 : Section 102 : No second appeal in certain

cases : clause 11 of the Ball.

Section 102 of the Code bars second appeal in
certain (what may be cabled “petty") cases. The
bar operates, if two conditions are satisfied,

namely:


Page No.12

ti} The suit is of a nature cognizable

by a court of small causes;

(ii) The amount or value of the subject
matter of the suit does not exceed three

thousand rupees.

Thus, a double test is to be satisfied at

present, depending on ८
(i) the pature of the controversy; and
(4i) valuation of the subject matter.

The Bill seeks to eliminate the requirement at
(i) above. 4s regards the second requirement, the
Bill seeks to replace "three thousand rupees" by
twenty five thousand rupees (in view of the fall

in the value of the rupee).

Do you agree with the above approach 7?

Would you agree with the desirability of

retaining the criterion that the suit must be of a
\

‘nature cognizable by the court of small causes



Page No.is

(while increasing the amount of pecuniary
valuation) 7 It may be necessary to keep in mind
in particular, suits for declaration, injunction,
etc. The present section (as mentioned above)

primarily the suit and only secondarily

concerns itself with the value of the subject

matter.

{At present, section 102 does not apply to
declaratory suits: -Rameshchdandra Aver Vs.

Sahib, (1907) ILR 30 Mad 101 or to suit

for title ~ see sections 15, 16, 27, Provincial
Small Cause Courts Act, 1887. Nor does it apply to
suits for accounts.

[Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, Second

Schedule, article 31).

The nature of the suit determines
appealability.

Digambar Parshwanath Jain Mandir Vs. Valubai,

AIR 1761 Bom. 221.

Rovma ~
Mohini Vs. Sankar das,
AIR 1924 Cal. 497.

E.F.Gautam Vs. Rk. Agarwal,


Page No.14

AIR £977 011. LOR.
। CYour comments on Clause 14 of the Bill are
invited in the light of the above legal
position.].

G6 : Section 115 (Revision) Clause 12 of the

(4) Section 115 (1), Proviso, of the
Code (as inserted in 19776), provides that
the High Court shall, not in revision,
vary or reverse an order made tn the
course of a suit or an order deciding an
issue in the course of a suit (briefly,
interlocutory orders), unless one of the

following conditions is satisfied :

(a) the order, if it had been made
in favour of the revision petitioner,
would have finally disposed of the case

or

(b) the order, if it is allowed to
stand, would occasion ai failure of

justice or cause irreparable injury to



Page No.15

the petitioner.

In either of the two cases mentioned

above, the High Court can interfere.

Of course, the requirements given in the
Main paragraph of the section, -clause
(ay, (b), or (८) ~ are still to be
satisfied. See Mulla, CFC (1995), Vol. i,

bages 776 and 824.

The Bill proposes to amend the proviso,
so as to delete clause (b). The effect
would be to bar interference in revision
against interlocutory orders, even where

there is failure of justice or irreparable

injury. The proposal is intended to cut
the number of revisions on petitions.
However, it is to be noted that the effect
would be to bar interference even in cases
of serious injustice resulting from an

interlocutory order.

For example, an order of the trial court

refusing an amendment of Pleadings, even


Page No.16

where the amendment is sought because of
intervening events or to rectify a bona
fide mistake or to remedy unintentional
omission to implead a party or
unintentional omission to take a plea in
defence which is left out, would cease to

be revisable under the Bill.

(11) An order rejecting a document as
inadmissible would cease to be revisable,
even though the document may be very

material.

{Such orders can possibly be made a
ground of attack in appeal against the
ultimate decree, but the lapse of time

would itself cause serious injustice).

(iii) The revisional court would be
deprived of the opportunity of taking into
account subsequent events - a power which
it possesses at present.

State of Madras Vs. Asher Textiles Ltd.,

AIR 1960 Mad. 180.


Page No.17

(iv) If the trial court wrongly frames an
issue on a fact which is admitted by the
defendant, the High Court can (under the

existing section), interfere.

435 Cf.

Sivaprasad Ys. Tricomdas,

(1915) ILR 42 Cal. 9726, 931.

[The proposal will take away this power .]
Keeping the above aspects in mind, would you

favour the proposed amendment of section 115 7

PLAINT AND SUMMONS:

@7 : Order 4, rule L (Commencement of suit by
Blaint) : Clause 14 of the 8111.

Order 4, rule 1(1) of the Code provides that
every suit shall be instituted by presenting a
Plaint, etc.. Order 4, rule 1(2) further provides
that every plaint shall comply with the provisions
of Order 6 and Order 7, so far as they are

applicable. The Bill proposes two amendments in


Page No.19

this regard :

(1) It is proposed that the plaint must
be in duplicate. This will become Order 4,
rule £(2)3 (For consequential proposals,

see Q-14, below].

(ii) It is further proposed to add Order

4, rule £(3), as under 4

3) The plaint shalk not be deemed
to be duly instituted unless it complies |

with the requirements specified in sub

rules (1) and (2)."

It would appear that while the first amendment
is a comparatively minor one, the second one may
require serious consideration. The effect would be
obvious, particularly on reading proposed rule
ACT) with rules 4(1) and 4(2), under which any
omission to comply with Order 6 or Order 7 would

have serious consequences.

In this context, it 15 to be remembered that

Order 6 (pleadings generally) and Order 7 (plaint)


Page No.19

contain a vast variety of provisions, dealing with

numerous mat

je
i>

detail. If it is to be
brovided that a deficiency in respect of any of
the detailed matters is to mean that there is no
Plaint in law, then great anomalies and hardships
are bound to ensue. For example, the Code lays

down, inter alia, (Order 6, rule 2] that Pleadings

shall state the material facts on which the
Plaintiff relies ~ and this must be done
reoncipely”. 1 the registry of the court regards
the pleadings ass“concise" and, consequently, the
suit is not regarded as not propperly instituted,
the result will be that the plaintiff will have to
redraft the plaint. But, even if he is prepared
to do 80, he will not be certain, if the re-
drafted plaint itself is “concise” enough (in
style) or whether (in point of substance), it
contains all material facts. No doubt, the level
of drafting should be improved. But it is
apprehended, that that object can be more
appropriately achieved by educating junior members

of the bar, rather than by visiting the litigants

with adverse consequences for deficiencies in


Page No.20
drafting.

To take another instance, similar problems
could arise, if the provision relating to Order 7s
rule 14 (documents to be produced, ete.) is
alleged to have been infringed. Under the proposed
amendment, the plaintiff and the court registry
may be compelled to enter into long-ranging
controversies, as to what are basic documents,

what are evidentiary documents, etc..

A still more fertile source of trouble would
emerge from the requirement in Order 7, rule 1(०)
that the plaint must contain the facts which show
the cause of action. It is not always easy at the
initial stage for the plaintiff to decide what are
the “essential facts" in this regard. Even a good
lawyer may not always find the matter easy, as the
question is a mixed one of fact and laws: and
complex issues of substantive law may be
inextricably Linked with the factual matrix. A
difference of opinion between the plaintiff’s

lawyer and the registry may create problems.


Page No.21

The Commission would like the respondents to
this Questionnaire, to offer their considered
views in the matter in the light of the above

position.

छ-8 : Order 5. rule 1 (Summons to appear and
answer) ३ Clause 15(1) of the Bill.

Order S, rule 1 of the Code empowers the court
(after the institution of the suit), to issue to
the defendant summons to appear and answer the

claim, on a day to be therein specified.

The Bill proposes an amendment of this rule,
whereunder the day 5०0 fixed has to be within
thirty days from the day of institution of the

suit.

Secondly, while the present rule leaves it to
the court’s discretion ta require that the
defendant should file his written statement also
an that date, the amendment proposes that the day

fixed for appearance shall also be the day fixed

for filing the written statement.


Fage No.22

Vhirdly, the proposed amendinent envisages that
if the defendant fails to tile his written
statement on the date so specified, he shall be
allowed to file the written statement on a
Specified day, but that (later) day "shall not be
beyond thirty days from the date of service of

summons on the defendant."

Thus, the date fixed for appearance (under the
proposed amendments) shall never be beyond thirty

days from th of the plaint. And the date

for written statement can never be beyond 30 days

from the date of service of summons.

The amendments so proposed are obviously well-
intentioned, aiming at as Speedy a completion of
the preliminary of trial of the case, as possible.
At the same time, certain counter -balancing

factors do arise for consideration, as under :

(a) Is it proper to fix a rigid time
limits for the acts in question - rigid,
in the sense that the court will have no
discretion to relax or madify the same,

even when the special facts of a case so


Fage No.23

demand ?

(b) The date of appearance and date for
filing written statement are fixed after
taking into account several factors,

including the following ~

(4). Volume of work before the court

in questions

(id) Distance of the defendant's
place of residence from the

headquarters of the courts

(iii) Available facilities for

sending the summons;

(iv) Magnitude of the claim (A big
claim may require good deal of
documentation, for properly defending

it).

(v) Complexity of the controversy
(sometimes, the claim which is to be met
by the defendant may need good deal of

time for dealing with it. For example,


Page No.24

he may have to take competent legal
advice, not only as to what facts he
should admit ar deny, but as to how the

denial should be framed.).

(vi) Consulting his (defendant's)
lawyers for ascertaining whether legal
defences, such as Jurisdiction,
limitation, want of cause of action,

plea of dudicata, etc. are

available.

The point to make is, that most of these
factors are flexible and variable and they cannot

be governed by one uniform criterion as to the

requisite time,

Comments on the proposed amendment, in the

light of the above aspects, are welcome.

(Clause 15(441) and clause LS(iv) of the Bill
propose certain amendment, which are consequential

on other proposals).


Page No.25

QF +: Order 8, rules 9. 94. 1२8, 21, 24 and 23
(Modes of service of summons) ॥ Clause iS(v) to
Clause (ix).

The Code (in Order 5, rules 9, 1904 21, 24,
29, etc.) at present contemplates service of

summons —

(1) through proper officer of the court,

and

(2) also by registered post (unless

the court dispenses with it).

Instead of this scheme, the amendment proposes
that the service shall be under a different

scheme, whose main features are as under i]

(a) The court shall hand over the
summons to the plaintiff or his agent, who
shall arrange to serve it within two days
in the manner provided in (b) below:

EFor the consequences of default, see Q-

20, below, see also G-1%, below).


Page No.26

(b) The plaintiff (or his agent) will serve the
summons on the defendant by -

(i) registered post; or

(ii) speed post: or

(111) approved courier service: or

(iv) fax message; or

{v) Electronic mail service; or

(vi) other means prescribed by the High
Court by rules.

(The actual mode to be adopted, out of (i)
to (vi) above, will be specified by the court).
(८) In addition, the court may also direct
service through the proper officer of the

court.

Would you prefer the above scheme which seeks
not only to take advantage of modern technological
innovations but also provide for modes of service which

are more abuse-proof?

Would you agree that both the modes of service

(b) and (c) above should be mandatory?


Page No.27

PLEADINGS AND PARTICULARS

@-10 =: Order @, rule 5 (Further and better
statement oF particulars) : Clause 4(4) of the

Bill.

Order 6, rule 5 of the Code provides that the

following may be ordered (by the court) :

(a) A further and better statement of

the particulars;

(b) further and better particulars of

any matter stated in any pleading;

(८) The order may be upon such terms as

may be just.

The Bill proposes deletion of this rute. The
proposal seems to be based on the assumption that
the present rule is unnecessary and may cause
delay. However, the assumption so made may require
further consideration. “Further and better
particulars” are undeniably intended to enlighten
the court and the opposite party, as to the nature
of the case. The expression “further” denotes the


Page No.28

Quantitative aspect, while the expression "better"
denotes the qualitative aspect. In principle, the
Jaw should encourage such clarification of the
controversy. Ordering of Particulars may not
necessarily cause delay. Rather, the more clear
the controversy becomes, the less time will be
taken, in future in disposing of the issues. The
object of particulars is to enable the parties to

understand the case better. Spedding Ys.
adeylotsy/ :
Fitzd@rald, (1898) 38 Ch. D 413.

Your views on the subject will be weicome.

Q-11 2 Order 4, rule is. {Verification) & Clause
16(21) of the Bill.

Order 6, rule 45 of the Code deals with
verification of the Pleadings. The Bill Proposes
to add sub-rule (4), to the effect that the person
verifying shall also make an affidavit, in support
of the pleadings. This is cunnected with the
amendment proposed in section 26, to the effect
that facts in the Plaint shall be “proved by

affidavit". [Clause 2 of the Bill] - See (७-4,


Page No.29

above.

What are your comments in this regard 7

Q@-12 s Order 6 rules 47-18 {Amendment of
pleadings) : Clause 16 (iii) of the Bill.

The Bill proposes deletion of Order 6, rules
17-18 of the Code, which empower the court to
grant leave to amend the pleadings. The proposal
appears to be based on the assumption (i) that
this power is unnecessary and (ii) that recourse

to it causes delay.

The above proposal may, however. require very
careful consideration. Amendment of the pleadings
is not always necessitated by carelessness. It
may become necessary for a variety of causes. It
may (for example) be necessitated by subsequent
events or by reason of facts, which would not have
been in the plaintiff’s knowledge in spite of his
due diligence. (In fact, in such cases, the law
allows even a review of the judgment - see Order

47, rule 4 of the Code). (See “Illustrative cases,


Fage No.30

below].

Occasionally, a document which is material to
the case was not originally known to the party now
applying for amendment. The document may affect
the nature of the pleading. In such cases, the
considerations of justice obviously demand that
the real issue should come before the court. A
court of justice is expected to deal with the real
controversy that troubles the parties and not with
a debate which reflects the contest in a very

imperfect manner.

Delay in the disposal of the litigation in
such cases may be unavoidable. But the parties
will have at least the satisfaction, that the real
dispute between them has been “adjudicated" -
which, indeed, is the heart of the judicial

function. Otherwise, the judgment will leave

Lilustrative cases as to amendment

In order to illustrate the points made above

more concretely, a few instances, culled out from


Fage 14०0-54

reported decisions, are noted below t

(i) Plaintiff sued for partition and
accounts. Defendant objected, that the
suit should have been for dissolution of
Partnership and accounts. Amendment of the
Plaint to that effect was allowed (even at
the appellate stage), as it was based on
the pleadings and evidence of the
defendant himself.

K-Krishna Rao Vs. K.Babiee Rao,

AIR 1991 AP 232 (DB).

(ii) Amendment of the plaint may be more
readily granted, if the * necessary
materials are already on record.

Ishwardas Ys. State of MF,

AIR 1979 SC 5951.

(441) Plaint did not give the valuation
for court fees. Amendment was allowed, to
permit the Plaintitt to add such
valuation.

Sathappa Chettiar Vs. Ramanathan



Page No.32

Civ) Plaintiff sued in a court fer an
amount beyond the pecuniary jurisdiction
of the court. He wished to relinguish a
Part of his Claim, in order to bring the
suit within the Jurisdiction of the court.
Tt was allowed.

AIR 1990 Raj. 57,

Compare Shobha Venkatgt Rao Vs.

K-RsMahale, AIR 1969 Bom. 370.

Crt may be mentioned that Order 2, rule
2(2) and Order 23, rule 1 of the Code
permit the plaintiff to abandon or

relinquish a part of the claim}.

(५) In considering the Prayer for
amendment, subsequent events can be taken
into account.

t
Vingd Kumar Vs. Mangal Sain,

AIR 1989 SC 871 = (1984) 3 50८ 352}

Brijlal Vs. Hotel Neelam,

AIR 19983 Bom. 452.


Fage No.33

(vi) Amendment of the plaint may be
necessitated by intervening events, where
the changed circumstances give rise to a
new cause of action : (Of course, after
such amendment, the defendant has to be
allowed opportunity to meet the amended
plaint).

R.Durgaraju ४७५ Venkataraiu,

AIR 1979 AF 143
AIR 1979 Raj. 443

Gatish Chandra Vs. State of WB,

OIR 1960 Cal. 278.

(vii) Plaintiff ina suit for specific
performance failed to make an avertment of
his own readiness and willingness to
perform the contract as required by
section 16(c), Specific Relief Act, 1963.
Amendment was allowed to add this
averment. (1६ did not introduce any new

cause of action).

6.

an Jaikishan Joshi Vs. Prabhakar

fohanlal Kalwar, (1990) 4 SCE 166.


Page No.34

(viii) In a petition for divorce under
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1985, a prayer for
seeking Judicial separation (as an
alternative) was allowed to be added, by
way of amendment.

Satyamma Ys. Gopal Reddy,

AIR 1961 AP f~92.

(dis) है suit was filed to annul a
marriage, but the date of the marriage was
left out, by slip. Amendment to add the
date of marriage was allowed, being bona
fide mistake and essentially required to

bring the facts on record.

nd Ys. Chandrasen,

AIR 1906 Bom. 172.

Cx} Amendment of the plaint may be
allowed to permit withdrawal of an
admission made by the plaintiff in the
Plaint (€under a miscanception).

E

(110 hed

Narain Vs. Jyoti Sahay,

(1704) Suppl. sce 594,


Page No.35

As to withdrawal of admission made in
the written statement compare —

Mahendra Radio & Telivision Vs. State

ja, AIR 1788 All. 257.

(xi) An amendment of the plaint to add
the relief of possession should be
allowed, if no grave prejudice is caused
to the defendant.

Haridas Ys. Godrej Rustom

AIR 1983 SC 319.

Views are invited on the proposal in question, in

the light of the above legal position.

19-15 2 Order 7, rule 9 : Procedure on admission of
_plaint : Clause 17(i) of the Bill.

Under Order 7, rule 9, the plaintiff is to
endorse on the plaint, etc. a list of documents
and (on the plaint being admitted), he shall
furnish the necessary number of copies of the
plaint or (if so permitted) concise statement of
the plaint. The Hill seeks to revise this rule, on

the following points :


Page No.36

qi) On admission of the piaint, the
court shall give to the plaintiff the
summons, to be served as per Order 5 (as

proposed to be amended). [See under 9-१,

(1i) The plaintiff shall forward the

summons to the defendant within two days.

(iii) Where (under Order 5, rule 9A as
proposed), the summons is to be given to
the court (i.@. its proper officer), the
court will direct the plaintiff to file
the necessary number of copies (and

service fees) within 2 days.

Have you any comments in this regard 7

७-44. : Order 7, rule 11 (Rejection pf plaint) 4
Clause 17(ii) of the Bill.

Order 7, rule 11 of the Code requires the
court ta reject the plaint in four situations. The

Bill seeks to add, to this enumeration the


Page No.37

following additional situations =

"“(e) where it (i.e. the plaint) is not

filed in duplicate;

(1). where the plaintiff fails to comply
with sub-rule (2) of rule 6 (The reference
seems to be to Order 5, rule 9%, as

proposed to be revised — See @-13 above).

(g) where the plaintiff 1७३३७ to comply
with sub-rule (3) of rule 9A [This seems
to refer to Order 3, rule 9A (2), relating

to court-controlled service of process].

In order to help the respondents in
answering this Questionnaire, it may be
convenient to elaborate the impact of the
proposed amendments in some detail, as

under $

Proposed clause (e) ~ The Bill, by clause
14(i), proposes that the plaint shall be
filed in duplicate. (See @Q-7, above].
Presumably, as a connected amendment,

clause 17(4i4), by inserting Order 7; rule


Page No.38

1ife), seeks to provide that for failure
to file a duplicate, the plaint shall be
rejected” (The proposal does not envisage
any time to be given to the plaintiff for

the purpose of rectification].

It seems to be preferable that some time
should be given to the plaintiff to

rectify the omission.

Proposed Clause ६1) - Order 7, rule 5 as
proposed to be amended [See Q-9, above],
requires the plaintiff to send the summons
to the defendant (alongwith a copy of the
Plaint) for carrying out the mode of
service through the plaintiff (as now
contemplated). This must be done within 2
days. Order 7, rule 11(1) proposes that if
this is not dome, the plaint shall be

rejected.

Now, it is to be noted that the above
stage will really arrives only after the

plaint is admitted under (proposed), Order


Page No.39

7, rule 9(1). Post-admission “rejection”
may not be quite appropriate. Apart from
that linguistic point, there is a matter
of substance to be considered. Should not
the plaintiff be allowed some time to

rectify the failure to send the copies ?

Ordinarily, the plaintiff will not
deliberately delay the service; but the
Pressures of work or other circumstances

may come in the way in special situations.

Proposed clause (६) ~ Clause (9g), as
proposed to be inserted in Order 7, rule
11, in effect means that if, as
contemplated by proposed Urder 5, rule
9A(2), the plaintiff does not deliver to
the court office the copies and fees etc.
for court-controlled service, then the
plaint shall be rejected. Here again, no
oppor tunity is to be given to the
Plaintiff to rectify the failure. It 4७ to
be considered whether a straightway

rejection of the plaint (compulsorily) is


Page No.40

1 called for, in such cases. It is true that
the rejection (i) ig appealable and (41)
does not bar a fresh suit (there being no
decision on the merits). But, in the long
run, an appeal or a fresh suit will mean
fresh burden on the court (apart from the
trouble and expense which have to be
incurred by the plaintiff).

Comments on Clause 17(14) of the Bill are
invited in the light of the above points.

{See also Q-7, 5s al].

Q@-15 8 Order 7, rule 14, 15, 18 (Production pf
documents on which Plaintiff sues) : Clause

A7(idi) Civ) (४) of the Bild

Existing Order 7, rules 14, 15, and 18 of the
Code deal with the production or listing of
documents, alongwith the plaint. For this purpose,

the present scheme makes a distinction between 8

(a) documents which farm the foundation
or basis of the suit (one can call them

the "basic documents") and


Page No.41

(b) dacuments which merely constitute
evidence of the claim (“evidentiary

documents" )

Documents under category (a) above have to be

physically produced (if in the plaintiff's

possession etc.), while documents under category

(b) above are merely to be listed.

Further, non-production or non-listing of
documents does not necessarily mean exclusion (of
the documents) from evidence, In every case, the
Court can, under existing Order 7, rule 18, grant

leave to admit them in proper cases.

This existing scheme is sought to be replaced
(under the Bill) by a more drastic scheme, whose

chief features are as under :

(a) All documents must be physically

produced along with the plaints;

(b) Non-compliance with the above cannot
be cured, as the court’s power to grant

leave is sought to be taken away, by


Page No.42

amending Order 7, rule 18.

Now, with reference to the above
amendments, at least two major points
require consideration. First, whether it
is really necessary to insist on physical
production and delivery (at the
commencement suit) of even evidentiary
documents 7 This would mean burdening the
court with many decuments which may
ultimately never be formally tendered in
evidence (say, because the defendant's
admission of certain facts may render them
superfluous). The present scheme, which
makes a distinction between “basic” and
“evidentiary documents", has worked well.
Evidentiary documents are to be produced
when the issues are (or are about to be
settled). Gee Order 13, rule 1-2 (whose
scheme is examined in detail in AIR 1990
GBauhati 7). If the defendant has, by that
stage, already admitted certain facts, the

related documents will have no role to


Page No.43

perform.

Secondly, to completely deprive the court
of the power to permit Production ete. of
a document at oaiolater stage (for
sufficient cause) appears to be a course
uncalled for. It is not in every case that
hon~proaduction will cause prejudice to the
defendant. if, for example, there is no
possibility of fraud, etc. and there is no
doubt about the existence of a document at
the date of suit, the court should admit
the document,

D@vidas Ys. Pirjada Begum,

(1984) ILR 8 Flom. 377.3
+ Arjun Vs, Gankariah,
AIR 1997 ar 784:

AIR 1959 Cal. 302.

This is particularly the case where
certified copies of public decuments are
sought to be produced at a late stage.

Ti

ar Singh Ys. Bha¢
(1908) 42 CWN 342,


Page No.44

The utility of the discretion conferred
at present on the court to relax the
rigour of the rules relating ta production
of documents has been recognised at the
highest level.

(4) Kanda Vs. Waghu,

AIR 1930 PC ७8.

(ii)  Imambandi Ys. Mutsaddi,

ILR 49 Cal. 878 (PC).

One small point (not arising out of the
Proposals) can be conveniently mentioned, at this

stage. Present Order 7, rule 15 reads as under 1

“45. Where any such document is not in
the possession or power of the Plaintiff,
he shall, if possible, state in whose

possession or power it is".

It can be considered whether, at the end
of Order 7s rule 15, the following words
should be a added "and take steps for
getting it produced before the court by

i applying to the court for issuing process


Page No.48

H for such production". [See also Q-20,

below).

G@-16 3: Order 8, rule 1 (Written statement by
defendant) : Clause 19(4) of the Bill.

Order 8, rule 1 of the Code (as it standa at
present) reqtires the defendant to present his
written statement at the first hearing or “within
such time as the court may permit". The #8ill
proposes to provide that the time permitted by the
court shall not be beyond thirty days from the
date of service of summons on the defendant. The
question is, whether an inflexible limit of 30
days should be categorically provided by the law.
It is ta be kept. in mind that when a summons is
received by the defendant, who is now to prepare
his defence, such defence usually involves the

following steps-

(i) getting ready the necessary

documents3

(ii) engaging a lawyer and giving him

instructionss


Page No.46

(ii1) allowing the lawyer some time, to go

through the materials

(iv) drafting (and getting typed) the

written statements and
(v) physically filing it in court.

Steps at (iti) and (iv) above are not within
the control of the defendant personally. Further,
if the case is a complex one, the lawyer will take
some time to study the legal defences (if any),

that may be available,

Having regard to these considerations, a
Proposal depriving the court of its Present
discretion in regard to the time limit for filing
the written statement may not be a very desirable
step. Sometimes, in order to keep to the
(proposed) time limit, the defendant's lawyer may
be induced to include in the written statement all
conceivable defences ~ sound and unsound .- thus

leading to delay in disposal and to the framing of

unnecessary issues.


Page No.47

@-17 2: Order 8. rule 1A (proposed) Defendant's
.
documents : Clause 18(it) of the Bill.

Order 8, rule 1(2) at present, requires the
defendant to file a list of documents on which he
ipraposes to rely. A&A document not so listed cannot
‘be later received in evidence for the defendant,
without the court’s leave, for which reasons have
to be recorded. This is the gist of existing Order
8, rules 1(2), 4(5) and 1(7)- If the defendant
relies on a dacument as the basis of his set off
or counter-claim, then that document must be
physically delivered to the court with the written

statement.

Where no set off is claimed, but the defendant
bases his defence on a document which is in his
possession or power, the same also must be
physicalty delivered to the court, along with the
written statement, as provided by Order 6, rule
SA(1). If it is not so produced, it cannot be
received in evidence for the defendant, without

the leave of the court, under existing Order 9,


Page No.4e
rule GBA(2).

The Bill proposes to change this scheme, both
in substance and in structure, by replacing
existing Order 6, rule 1(2) to 1(7) and rule BA,
by Order 8, rule 14, whose main features are as

under»

(a) Defendant must list, produce and
deliver, along with the written statement

every document on which he relies -

(1) whether it ts a document which
forms the basis of his defence (without

set off etc.) or

(4.4 ) whether it is a document on
which he bases his set off or counter-

claim or

(244) whether dit is a document on
which he merely "relies" (i.e. which is
merely an evidentiary document and not a

basic or foundational document).

(b) A document which is not so listed,


Fage No.49

Produced and delivered, cannot be tendered
in evidence on behalf of the defendant at
the hearing of the suit. This bar is
mandatory (under the Bill) and admits of
no relaxation by the court, even Lf good
cause is shown for its non~filing etc.
(Contrast Proposed Order 8, rule 1A(2),
with existing Order 8, rule 1(9) and Order

8, rule 88(2)1-

It is a matter for serious consideration

whether such a provision, admitting of no

relaxation, would preserve the essentials of fair

trial. It would even render nugatory Order 47,
rule 1, under which the court can entertain a
review application for evidence subsequently
discovered. Other inconveniences may also result

from the proposal. [See alsa Q-28, below).

Existing Order 8, rule 9 of the Code . Provides

as under :


Page No.30

“No pleading subsequent to the written
statement of a defendant, other than by
way of defence to a set off or counter-
claim, shall be presented except by the
leave of the court and upon such terms as
the court thinks fit; but the court may at
any time require a written statement or
additional written statement from any of
the parties and fix a time for presenting

the same."

The 8111 proposes to delete this rule.
The consequences of the proposed deletion
of Order 8, rule 9 need to be analysed in

some detail.

(a) The existing rule begins with a
prohibition. Couched in negative
language, it lays down that no pieading
(subsequent to the first pleading) shall
be allowed, without the leave _of the ~
court. Thus, tliterally, its deleting

would mean removal of the prohibition


Page ४०-51
against subsequent Pleadings.

(0). Hawever, that does not seem to
be the intention underlying the Bill,
whose general approach is towards
eliminating (what are regarded as)
procedural refinements. The object seem
to be to take away the power of the
court to permit subsequent pleadings. If
so, the proposal seems to be extremely
unrealistic and may cause serious
injustice. Filing of such supplementary
pleadings may become necessary in
various situations. Following list of

such situations is illustrative only 3

Lllustrative cases {Supplementary
Pleadings

(4) If the defendant introduces a
new case, it is fair to allow the
plaintiff to file his subsequent
Pleading.

Shakoor Ys. Jaiour Development
Authority. AIR 1987 Raj./9.



Page No.92

(iid If the plaintiff amends (with
leave) his plaint, defendant should be
given leave to file a subsequent
pleading.

Sala Charan Vs. Sukanti,

AIR 1979 Orissa 78.

Conversely, if the defendant amends
his written statement,. then leave should
be granted to permit the plaintiff to
file his additional Pleading, to react

to it.

(441. ) Leave toa file an additional
Pleading may be granted to take into
account subsequent events, occurring
after the filing of the suit and to

avoid multiplicity of suits.
Ramaswami Naidu Vs. Pe@thy Pillai,

AIR 1965 Mad. १.

(iv) When a minor attains majority
during the pendency of litigation and is

not satisfied with the pleading filed by


Page 1४०. 55

the guardian ad litem, the minor should
be given leave under this rule.

Shiva Kumar Sineh Vs. Kard Singh,

AIR 1962 Fat. 159,

Your views on the point under
consideration are invited in the light (

of above aspects.

Q-19 + Order 9. rule 10 (Defendant's failure to
file written statement) 43. Clause 18(14i) of the
Bill.

Fresent Order 8, rele 10 deals with the
situation where the defendant fails toa file a
written statement, The rule (as amended in 1976)

leaves to the court two alternatives ४

(a) the court May proceed to pronounce

Judgment, or

(७०) the court may make such order as at
thinks fit.

Ganpat Chand Vs. Seth Mal,
AIR 1983 Raj. 146.


Page No.54

The Bill proposes to delete this rule. It
would appear that this would remove from
the Code a power which is badly needed.
Its deletion would create a void in the
procedural apparatus and create
uncertainty.

Would you favour the proposal ?

SUMMONS NOT SERVED

9-20 : Order 9, rule 2 (Dismissal of suit phere

summons not served for fejture, Ray process fees,

etc.) 3. Clause 19(1) of the Bill.

Order 9, rule 2 of the Code, at present,
empowers (but does not require) the court to
dismiss the suit, if the summons has not been
served upon the defendant because of the
plaintiff's failure to pay the process fees or to
present necessary copies of the plaint, etc.. The
Bill makes the provision more stringent, by
‘reauirina the court to dismiss the suit, if the
‘summons has not been served because of plaintiff's

failure to send the summons to the defendant


Page 1५० - 55

within two days (that being the scheme in the Bill
in the amendments proposed in Order 5, rule 9) ~

See ७-१, above.

(Further, the Bill does mot mention non-
service because of failure to file copies of the
Plaint - presumably because of the amendment,

proposed in Order 4, rule 1).
The amendment to Order 9, rule 2 is thus

consequential and does not need separate comments.

9-21 : Order 9, rule 5 (Failure to apply for fresh
summons) s Clause 19(ii) of the Bill.

Under existing Order 9, rule S(i), if the
plaintiff fails to apply, within one month, to
apply for fresh summons (after the first one has
been returned unserved), the court shall dismiss
the suit, unless the plaintiff satisfies the court

about certain specified circumstances excusing the

failure.

The Bill proposes to substitute seven days, in

place of thirty days.


Page No.56

Would you favour the proposal 7

PROCEDURE FOR A.D.R.

9-22 : Order 10, rule 14 iNew) Alternative dispute
resolution ३ Clause 20(i) of the Bill.

Order 10 of the Code deals with examination of
the parties by the court at the Pre-trial stage.
In this Order, the Bill proposes the addition of
new rule 1.0, to the effect that after recording
the parties’ admissions and denials, the court
‘shall direct the parties to opt (for) either mode
of the settlement outside the court as specified

in sib-section (1) of section 89" .

This new rule is, in substance Consequential
on the proposed amendment, of section 89 (as per
clause 7 of the Bill. However, it is necessary to
Point out that sector a9 (as proposed by Clause 7

of the Bill) begins as under $ न

"89(4) Where it appears to the court that

there exist elements of a settlement which



Page No.57

may be acceptable to the parties the court

shall formulate the terms of

settlement....".

(See under G-3, above].

Thus, under section 89 as proposed, the
court is to take into account the
possibility of settlement in the
particular case, while proposed Order 10,
rule 1A contains no such requirement. On
the general principle that rules should
not go beyond the sections, it would be a
point worth considering if Order 10 rule,
18 (proposed) would not require some

change.

(This point of drafting is, of course, in
addition to the major question whether -ADR
through court, with “limited" compulsion

under section 99, can reduce delay.)



Page No.58‘
REFUSAL TO ANSWER

Q@-23 3: Order 10, rule 4, Refusal {to answer
material guestions : Clause Z2O0(ii) of the Bill.

Where the party’s pleader, appearing at the
pre-trial hearing, is unable to answer material
questions, and the court is ef the opinion that
the party himself can answer those questions, it
can, under Order 10, rule 4, “postpone the hearing
of the suit to a future day" and direct that such
party shall appear in person on the day so
specified. The Bili proposes that such "future
day“ shall not be later than seven days from the

date of first hearing.

The object, obviously, is to cut short the
interval. But a few important aspects may have to

be kept in mind, while evaluating this proposal.

(4) The volume of business before the
court may be such, that in the next week,

it has no free time left.

(iid The defendant (assuming that he is

well-connected with his counsel) may not


Page No.3?

necessarily be able to arrange for his

travel in five or six days.

INTERROGATORIES AND INSPECTION

G24 : Order 11, rule 2 2 Interrogatories.

Order 11, rule 2 of the Code provides for
delivery of interrogatories by a party to the
court, but lays down no time limit, as such,
within which the court must decide about their
admissibility. The Bill seeks to add these words
“and that court shall decide within seven days

from the day of filing of the said application".

Since decision on the interrogatories within 7
days (though good as a working rule) may not
always be feasible (where the court calendar is a
heavy one), this proposal may need modification.

It can, for example, be provided that the court

shall ordinarily decide the application within two

weeks".


Page No.60

Q@-25 : Order 11, rule 15 Notice for inspection of
documents ३ Clause 21 (41) of the Bill.

Under Order 11, rule 15 of the Code, “every
party to a suit shall be entitled at any time", to
give to any other party notice to produce’ for
inspection documents referred to in the pleadings,.
affidavit, list of documents etc. filed by that
party. The Bill proposes an amendment, whereunder
the notice must be given “at or before the

settlement of issues",

The proposal appears to be acceptable. Of
course, this is the usual practice, though parties
do not resort often to the notice procedure in

India.

ADMISSIONS

9-26 2 Order 12, rule 2 (Notice to admit
documents) : Clause 22(i) of the Bill.

Order 42, rule 2 deals with the notice given
by a party to the opposite party to admit, within


Fage No.61

fifteen days from the date of service of the
notice certain documents. The proposed amendment

seeks to reduce this period to seven days.

The proposal is prima facie, acceptable.

@-27 ४ Order 12, rule 4 (Notice to admit facts.

Under Order 12, rule 4 of the Code, a party
may give to the other party notice to admit
certain tacts. Even where an admission is made in
pursuance of such notice under the secand proviso,
the court may, at any time, allow any party to
amend or withdraw any admission so made", on such
terms as may be just". The proposal now is to
delete the second proviso altogether. The effect,
of course, would be that an admission can neither
be withdrawn, nor can it be amended - and this
would be so, even if the admission was made under
a mistake, coercion, fraud or undue influence.
Frima facie, the proposal seems to go too far.
Moreover, even the present rule does not give a

right to withdraw. The matter is in the discretion

of the court. There de arise occasions when an


Page No.42

admission ~ even in the Pleadings —- may have been
made under mistake, etc.. Facility of withdrawal

should therefore be preserved.

cf. Hollis Vs. Burton, (1892) 3 Ch. 226.
DOCUMENTS.
-@-28 : Order 13, cules 1 and 2 {Production of

documents) : Clause 23 of the Bill.

Order 15, rules 1-2 of the Code Provide that
where a decument is not already filed in court by
a party, the party must Produce it (if in the
party's possession or Power) at or before the
settlement of issues Otherwise it cannot be

tendered in evidence, without leave of the court.

In the Bill (see the amendments Proposed in
Order 7, rule 14 and Order 8, rule 14), the scheme
adopted is different. All documents ~ basic or
evidentiary ~ must be produced - in original or in
copy -with the pleading. Where a copy has been so
filed, the original must be delivered when the
issues are settled. [See under Q@-15 and Q-17,


Page No.63

above].

To a very large extent, the amendment of Order
13, rules 1-2 is consequential on the more stringent
approach already adopted in the Bill under Order 7,
rule 14 and Order 8, rule 1A, and the fate of the two
proposals hangs together. However, one point of detail
needs examination. A party may be having only a copy
of a document and may be able to file it under Order 7,
rule 14, etc... But he may not be able to comply with
proposed Order 13, rule 1 (requiring the filing of the
original on settlement of the issue in every case where
he has filed the copy earlier). In such a situation,
the rule must provide that the party ought to apply to
the court to send for the document from the custody of

the person in possession of it.

ISSUES

Q-29 =: Order 14, rule 4 : Adjournment for framing
issues : Clause 24(i) of the bill.

Under Order 14, rule 4 of the Code, when a
court cannot frame the issues’ immediately (because it
desires to examine some witness or to inspect some

document), it may adjourn the case to a


Page No.64

future day. The proposal in the Bill is that the

future day should not be later than seven days.

The object of course, is to reduce the
‘intervals. But one has to remember that the later
‘date will be for production of some witness or
document. Circumstances may arise where the
witness or dacument may not be available so soon.
The proposed rigid time limit will then prove to

be unworkable.

The proposal tas to be examined in the light

of the above practical aspects.

Q@-30 s Order 14, rule Sk Amendment. etc. af
issues : Clause 24(ii) of the Bill.

Existing Order 14, rule 8 of the Code empowers
the court to add to or amend, the issues, even
after they are framed. The Bill seeks to delete
this rule. It seems to have been assumed that
since the power to grant leave to amend the
pleadings (Order 6, rule 17) is to be removed,
[Q-12, supra}. [see Clause 16 (434) of the Bill),

therefore, there is no need to retain the


Page 0०-65

provision relating to addition etc. of issues.

However, it needs to be pointed out that this
is not a totally complete or accurate picture of
the position. Addition to, or amendment of, the
issues may become necessary or desirable, not only
by reason of amendment of the pleadings, but also
because, even on the pleadings as filed
originally, some issues may have been incorrectly
framed. Obviously, the court should have power to

rectify the mistake.

Moreover, even leaving aside these situations
(i.e, amendment of the issues, consequential on
amendment of pleadings or necessitated by mistake
of the court), there may exist other special
circumstances, justifying a re-framing of the

issues. The following is an illustrative list.

Illustrative list - Amending the issues

(i) Evidence may show that ai certain
document (not illegal) is void. The court

may lite to examine the implications. and


Page No.66

to amet the issues.

c.f Shaymil Fatter V. Abdule Kadir (1912)
ILR 3S Mad. 607 (F.C)

(ii) Evidence may show that an agreement
is iltegal (and not merely’ void). Court

has itself to frame an issue on the point.

(iti) Defendant may admit a certain fact
(in his evidence) or under Order 42 (in
response to a notice). The related issue

may then require deletion or modification.

(iv) Court may discover that the issue
Framed by it cannot possibly arise having
regard to the nature of the suit.

Chikkaveer@® Gowda Vs. Deveqowda,

AIR 1975 Karn. 445.

In fact, the power to amend, ete. issues,
instead of causing delay, can well he
exercised to avoid multiplicity of

litigation.

AIR 1930 Cal.


Page No.67

It is presumably because of the valuable

object which can be achieved through

amendment of the issues, that the

Privy

Council in one case held that an issue can

be raised, even after the close

arguments.

Shamu Batter Vs. Abdul Kadir,

ILR 35 Mad. 607 (PC).

| PROCESS

of

G@-3i: Order 16, rule 1(4) (Summons to be obtained

by parties : Clause 25(i) of the Bill

Under Order 16, rule 1(4) of the Code,
parties may obtain summons to witnesses
applying to the court. The Bill proposes that
should be done within 5 days of presenting

list of witnesses.

Do you agree 7

the
by
this

the


Fage No.68

Q-32 =: Order 16, rule 2(1) : Deposit of expenses

Olauses 25(4i) of the Bill

Order 16, rule 2(1) requires a party applying
for witness summons to deposit the expenses of
witnesses. The Billi proposes that the deposit
should be made within 7 days of the application
under Order 16, rule 1(4).

Do you agree 7

ADJOURNMENT

Q-33 : Order 17, rule 4 Adjournment and costs

thereof : Clause 35 of the Bill.

At present, the Court has power ta adjourn the
hearing under Order 17, rule 1, and "may make an

order" as to costs. The Bill proposes that —

(4) not more than three adjournments
shall be granted to a party during the

hearing of the suit; and

(ii) the court shall make an order as to

costs (including such higher costs as the


Page No.69

court deems fit), when adjounment is
granted.

It is felt that the fettering of the court’s
discretion as to the grant of adjournment and the
award of costs (as proposed) may not be a very
expedient course, as there May arise, in practice,
exceptional cases justifying a special approach.
For example, if party “A" dies and is succeeded by
"EB", who also dies and is succeeded by "C",
adjournment may be necessary at the instance of
the Plaintiff, on both the occasions. Thereafter,
plaintiff's lawyer has fallen ill an one occasion,
necessitating an adjounment. Later, the plaintiff
is injured in an accident. These episodes would
make up four adjournments. Rigidity would not be

desirable. [See ir Abmend Ys. Mehmood Hussain,

AIR 1999 SC 18571.

WITNESSES AND EVIDENCE

9-54 : Order 548, rule 214). Order of examination
of parties : Clause 27(i) of the Bill.

Order 18, rule 2 of the Code provides tor the

order in which witnesses shall be examined. The


Fage No.70

general rule may be departed from, under Order 18,

rule 2(4),. which reads as under :— .

“(4), Notwithstanding anything contained
in this rule, the court may, for reasons
to be recorded, direct or permit any party

कं to examine any witness at any stage."
The Bill proposes that this sub-rule shall be

deleted.

For understanding the implications of this
proposal, it is desirable to look at the scope and
utility of the present sub-rule. 10 confers two

different kinds of power on the court ८

(i) power to direct the examination of

witnesses at any stages and

(ii) power to permit the examination of

witnesses at any stage.

At the outset, it should be pointed out that
sub-rule(4) (naw proposed to be deleted came to be
inserted in 1976, and incorporates the gist of

High Court Amendments (made by the High Courts of


Page No.71

Assam and Nagaland, Kerala, Madhya Frasdesh,
etc..) One of the reasons why the law was regarded
as needing such clarification was the fact that
some High Courts had taken the view, that after
the cage is adjourned for arguments, the Court is
not bound to examine a witness (even if he is
present).

cf. Mobanial Ye. Indarman,

AIR 1954 Raj. 228. dissenting from the opinion
of the Chief Justice in Monilal Bandopadhyawa Vs.

da 73581, (1894) ILR 20 Cal. 740.

The sub-rule was added in 1976 to remove the
controversy. If it is deleted, the earlier

controversy will be revived.

That apart, on the merits alse, the provision
in sub-rule (4) seems ta be needed. Following are

some illustrative situations ३

Illustrative cases — Order of examination
(i) After the plaintiff had closed his
CASE, the defendant tendered certain
documents through his witnesses. Plaintiff

had no opportunity of rebutting them. The


Page No.72

court permitted him to produce additional

evidence for the purpose,

AIR 1977 Orissa 87

cf. Alekh Eradhan Ys. Batpndar Pal,

AIF 1978 Orissa 58.

(ii) Plaintiff was in hospital, when his
witnesses were being examined. Court
allowed the plaintiff himself to be
examined at the end.

Shiv Sahay

AIR 1989 MF 40, 42.

cf. Brahwidee Prasad Sah Ys. Ram Sakal

Sah, AIR 1985 Fat. SP.

(iii) Case was set छ parte for the
defendant absence. The defendant was later
permitted to participate in the trial
(though ex parte order was not set aside
as such). It was held that the court could

permit a party to examine its own

witnesses.

Subala Charan Rout Vs. Erolilla Kumar 1.



Fage

Dadi, AIR 1991 Orissa 157.

Q@-35 : Order 18, rule 4 (Examination by the Judae

in gpen court) ¢ Clause 27(ii) of the Bill.

1
९ In the present scheme of the Code, witnesses

are to be examined in open courtby the Judge.

Order 18, rute 4 provides as under ३

"A. The evidence of the witnesses in
attendance shall be taken orally in open
court in the presence and under the
personal direction and supretendence of

the judge."

This applies, inter alia, to expert witnesses
also.

Lakshma Vs. Suryanarayana,

AIR 1958 AF 254.

The Bill proposes to substitute a radically

different scheme, by revising Order 16, rule 4.

The revised rule, (which is lengthy enough)

need not be quoted at this place. But its

No.73


Page No.74

principal features are as under ३०

(a) Examination in chief of ai witness

shall be in the form of affidavit.

(hy) Thereafter, his cross~examination

ken orally by a Commissioner.

(©) The Commissioner shall be selected

by the trial court from a panel

tuted by the District Judge. He will
be suitably renumerated (High Court will

make rujes on the subject).

(d) Commissioner shall record the evidence
and make a report and submit the same to

the court.

(e) When a question is objected to by a
party, but ais still allowed by the
Commissioner, “the Commissioner shall take
down the question together with his
decision” ~ this is laid down in proposed
Order 18, rule 4(7). CIncidentally, the
proposed sub-rule is silent about taking

dawn the gist of the objection and the


Page No.75

answer given by the witness].

(1) For reasons to be recorded, the court may

examine a witness in open court. [See proposed

Order 18, rule 4(2), provisol.

The language of proposed Order 18, rule 4(2)
main para, would seem to suggest that (subject to the
proviso), the ordinary mode will be examination
through commissioner. But proposed Order 18, rule 19
(new) and Order 26, rule 4A (new) [see clause 27 of the
Bill] suggest that the matter is in the court's
discretion. [See under 9-37 and 9-39, below].

The Commission is of the opinion that this is a
very salutory and long overdue provision. The age-old
rule that final decision by the judge who has heard the
evidence is conducive to a fair judgment has lost much
of its validity in the present day situation. very
often we find that the judge who decides the case
finally is not the judge who has recorded the evidence.
In many places, retired judicial officers are
available, who can be assigned this job which will also
save the frequent trips and the incidental expenses
involved in bringing the witnesses on every adjourned
date of hearing. This would also mean a great saving
of time of trial courts, which can be gainfully
employed in final hearing of suits and/or’ the
interlocutory matters. In most of the States, the
courts are groaning under the weight of workload and
the proposed process would mean a god - send to them.

This does not mean that the court cannot itself take up


Page No.76

the recording of deposition of witness(s). Where it
thinks that such a course is just and proper or where
the court has ample time at its disposal, it can
certainly choose to do so.

So far as demeanour of witness is concerned,
the ordinary rule is that it should be recorded at the
time of recording of his deposition (See Order 18 Rule
12). If it is not so recorded, but is refered to in
the judgment, proper reasons must be given for such
opinion (see AIR 1972 SC 1618) referred with reference
to Section 363 Cr.P.c. (1898) which broadly corresponds
to order 18 rule 12, ९४०.

Such a procedure is in vogue in USA and has
been working successfully.

A few points of detail should also be adverted
to, at this stage :

{a) In Order 18, rule 4 is to be amended as

proposed, some consequential changes


Page No.77

may be needed in other rules also (for
example, in Order 18, rule 5, Order 18,

rules 8, and 14, Order 18, rule 15, etc.).

(b) Where a question is objected to, by
the opposite party, but is allowed by the
Commissioner, it may be better to provide
that the Commissioner shall take down :

(i) the question
(ii) the nature of the objection
(iii) the name of the objector

(iv) the decision of the

Commissioner, and

(v) the answer given by the
witness.
(cf. Order 18, rule ji, as to the

evidence recorded by the Judge himself].

(८) It should also be considered as to
what is the status of the order Passed by

the Commissioner. At present, a


Page No.78
Commissioner appointed to take the evidence of
witnesses has no power to disallow questions
which he considers irrelevant.
Ram Krishna Dalmia vs. Firoze Chand,
AIR 1960 Punje 430.
Such a power may have to be conferred upon the
Commissioner, by the Rule.
At present, Order 26, rule 16A (inserted in

1976), deals with the matter in some detail.


Page No.79

छ:56 : Order 18, rule A7A (Evidence not previously

known, etc.).

At present, Order 18, rule 178 of the Code
empowers the court to permit a Party to produce
(at a later stage) evidence which he could not
produce earlier, either because it was not within
his knowledge or because it could not be produced
when he was leading his evidence. In either case,

due diligence must be proved.
The Bill proposes to delete this rule.

10 is submitted that in coming to a conclusion
on this proposal, several points need to be

considered.

(i) The rule was inserted as late as

1976 and its deletion today, within two

decades, shoutd prima facie be considered

anc an ounusual course, for which very

strong reasons would be required.

(1.1. ) On the merits also, the rule appears

to be a rational one. If certain evidence


Page ४०-8०

(not earlier available) becomes available
before the judgment is Pronounced, it
stands to reason that the court should
have power to permit it. It would be
pointless to compel the Party to wait
until the judgment is pronounced and then
expect the party to file an application
for review under Order 47, rule 1, on the
ground that such evidence had become
available. Order 18, rute 170, far from
delaying the trial or making the procedure
complex, has really the effect of
lessening the time spent in litigation and
making the procedure less complex, because

it avoids the laborious chronolagy of ¢

(1). judgment and decrees

(2) application for review (because

of fresh evidence):

(3) hearing and disposal of the
,
review applications

(4) (if review is granted), fresh


Page ५०-84

hearing of the main case, though limited

to the new evidence and

/evidence and
(5) fresh/judgment in the trial so

re-opened.

Cef. &

ind Ram,

AIR 1980 P&H 160.7.

Q@-37 3s Order 18, rule 19 iNew) (Power to get

statements recorded on Commission) : Clause 27iv)

|

the Bill

The Pill proposes t

insertion of a new rule

~ Order 18, rule 19, under which the court may,
instead of examining witnesses in Open court,
direct. their statements to be recorded on
Commission under Proposed order 26, rule 4A. By
Clause 29 of the Bill, it is Proposed to insert
Order 26, rule 4A, to the effect that the court
i

may in the interests of justice or for the
expeditions disposal of the case or for any other
Feason, issue a commission for the examination of
any person resident within its jurieciction" and

Lhe evidence so recorded shall be read as


Fage ४०. 82

evidence" (Compare Rajasthan amendment Order 26,

rule 1A).

Thus, Order 18, rule 19 (proposed) and Order

26, rule 4A (proposed), go together.

Order 26, rule 4A, at the first sight, appears
innocuous. Rut the real problem arises fram the
vogueness oof the language. What is the basis on

which the discretion is to be exercised ?

Is the Commission procedure to be resorted to

as a routine 7

Apart from that, there is the question of
disharmony between —

(i) firder 18, rule 4(i) (as proposed}

under which (subject to the proviso) cross

examination, etc. must be done on

Commission, Csee G-35, suprs].

(ii) Order 18, rule 7 and Order 26, rule
4 (as proposed), whereunder it is
,
discritionary?

(Ser a

: infral.


Fage No.83

JUDGMENT AND DEGREE

छ-58 +: Order 20, rule 4& (Pronouncing of the

judament and giving copy, etc.) : Clause 28 of the

Bill, read with Clause 32(i).

The Bill, in clauses 28, and 32(i), proposes

certain material changes ~

(ai) in the course to be adopted by a
trial court, when it pronounces Judgment,
regarding giving the parties a copy of the
Judgment, and preparation of the decree,

etc. (Clause 28 of the Bill}, and

(ii) in the requirements of the law
relating to the copy of the decree, etc.
that mist accompany the filing of the

first appeal [clause 22(1) of the Bilt}.

The proposals are fairly elaborate and relate
ta Urder 20, rule 1(2), Order 20, rute 6A and rule
6B and Order 41, rule 1 of the code. It will be
convenient, aif the present law and the proposed

amendments are analysed as under +:


Page ४०.84

(a) Under existing Order 20, rule 1(2),
a copy of the whole judgment shall be
wade available “for the perusal of the
parties, ete." immediately after the
Judgment is pronounced. Under the proposal
regarding Order 20, rule 4B, copies shall
be made available to the parties,
immediately “for preferring an appeal", on

payment of charges specified by rules made

Ny the High Court.

(bo) Under present Order 2o rule, GA(L)
and (2), and rule 6A0(2), the scheme is as

under:

(i) The last paragraph of the
Judqment shall state precisely the

relief granted.

(ii) The court shall endeavour to
draw up the decree expeditiously and
within 156 days, but, if the decree is
not ready within 15 days, the party

desirous of appeal can obtain from the


Fage ०.85

court a certificate and thereupon the
appeal can be preferred without filing a
copy af the decree. The last Paragraph
of the judgment will constitute the
decree, far Purposes of appeal and

execution.

In contrast, under the Proposed
scheme, the position will be as under :

(1) The decree must be drawn up
within 15 days (Order 20, rule 6A(1),

as proposed).

(2) Provision that last Paragraph
of the judgment should contain the
precise relief, is omitted {COrder 20,

rule 6A(1), as proposed].

(3) Copies of the Judgment must be
avallable for preferring an appeal.

Corder 20, rule 6B, as proposed).

(4) Appeal can be filed without
filing a copy of the decree. Copy of

the judqment [made available under


Page No.86

point 3) above] is to be treated as
the decree. But once the decree is
prepared, the judgment ceases to have
the effect of a decree. [Order 20,
rule 6A and Order 441, rule 1, as

proposed].

[Order 41, rule i as proposed by

clause 32(i) of the Billi).

In a rough and ready manner, it can be stated

that the Bill wishes to place strict emphasis upon

a timely preparation of the decree and
(consequentially) deletes the facility of filing
an appeal with copy of the last paragraph of the
judgment. (pending preparation of the decree)
However, the judgment can be treated as the

decree, till decree is prepared.

The main question to be considered is, whether
this altered scheme is an improvement on the
present law, which is based on the extensive
examination of the subject by the Law Commission

in its 54th report and connected recommendation.


Page No.B7

Present law does not seem to have given rise to
any serious complaint, It takes note of the
realities - i.e. delay in the preparation of the

decree and makes other connected provisions.

Incidentally, the present provision in
Order 20, rule 6A(L). [Judgment to state the
precise relief] is not anly helpful for appeal,
but also serves to improve the quality of Judgment
writing It compels the Judge to focus and
concentrate his mind on the relief, thus promoting
the cause of clarity and precision. The proposed
amendment seems to have missed this aspect very
important aspect alse.

'
[See also Q-42, infral.


Fage No.88

9-57 : Order 26, rule 40. (New) Commission for

witnesses : Clause 29 of the bill. [See also Q-35,

supraly.

Clause 29 of the Rill broposes to insert Order
26, rule 4A (new), under which, the court "may in
the interest of justice, etc. issue Commission,
for examining a witness within its Jurisdiction."
it may be noted that clause 27(ii) of the Bill
proposes toa amend Order 18, rule 4 to make such
commissions mandatory (except in certain cases}.

(See Q-35, supral.

INTRERLOCUTORY RELIEF

@-40 : Order 39, rule 31 {Temporary) Injunction मे

Clause 30 of the bill.

t Fresent Order 39, rule 1 of the Code empowers
the court to issue temporary injunctions ~ mostly
relating to disputed property or on apprehension
that the defendant will dispose of his property to

defraud his creditors, The Bill seeks to add sub-

rule (2), under which "the court shall" (when


Fage No.6?

granting such injunction) "direct the plaintiff to

give security or make such other directions as

‘the court thinks fit."

It is not certain if such a mandatory
provision is really required; and this point of
substance will definitely need attention. In
addition, the drafting may also need ai second

ook.

Q-41. 3 Order 39१0 (proposed) (Inspection before
institution of suit) ४ Clause 31 of the Bill

The Bill proposes to insert Order 39A, in the
Code. The object (though not precisely stated in
the draft rules) is that even while a suit is not
yet filed , some one representing the plaintiff
may apply to the court to appoint a Commissioner
for local investigation "for the purpose of
elucidating any matter in dispute". The
Commissioner so appointed will be deemed to be
appointed under Order 26. Order 579, rule 2
further proposes that within seven days of filing

of such application, “the person competent to file

PMB? /PMBOZL2


Page No.90
suit, shall file the auvit.

The draft given in the Bill is silent about the
consequences to follow -

(i) af the suit is 50 filed; or

(ii) if the suit is not so filed.

The intention presumably is that if the suit is
filed, then the appointment will continue. If not,
then it will lapse.

Probably the order as drafted does not bring
about the real object behind this provision, which
appears from clause (h) of para 3 of the Statement of

objects and reasons which reads as follows:-

"(h) in matters relating to property disputes,
particularly in matter of unauthorised
construction on the land of others, it has been
found that, under the existing provisions of
the Code of Civil Procedure, no application for
injunction can be moved unless the suit is
filed first in the court having competent
jurisdiction. With a view to obviate this
hardship, it is proposed that a person may make
an application to the court of competent
jurisdiction for appointment of a commission to
ascertain the factual status of the property so
that at the time of the filing of the regular
suit the report is available to the
commissioner- relating to the factual status of

the property in dispute."


Page No.90A

The rule in this order may be redrafted to
accord with the said objective or to bring about
clearly the intendment and scheme the draftman has in
mind in this regard.

The proposal is unexceptionable in substance.
In fact, it could be expanded to cover certain other
types of commission ~ e.g., to record the statements of
witnesses who are likely to leave the country or are
very ill. Of course, in the absence of cross-
examination, their statements (cannot constitute
"evidence". But the statements so recorded can (if
statutorily recorded) serve certain other purposes
(e.g. see sections 32, 145, 157 and 159, Evidence Act}.

However, the drafting will need changes in many

respects, and it will also be necessary (as


Page No.91

stiggested above) to add a provision as to
the consequences of filing / non-filing of suit

after the pre-suit application is made..

The class of suits for which the provision isa
intended, may also have to be indicated with some

precision.

You may like to offer your comments in the

light of the above.

APPELLATE PROCEDURE

Q-42. : Order 41, rule (1) (Form of appeal) 8

Clause 32(i) of the Bill.

In view of the amendment proposed by the Bill
in Order 20, rule 6A, 6B, ete. the Bill (as a
consequential change) proposes to amend Order 41,

rule 1(1). (See Q-28, supra).


Fage No.92

9-45 2 Order 41, rule 7 Presentation and

registration of memo of appeal : Clause 32(if) of
the Bill.

Under existing Order 41, rule 1, 9, etc. the
menarandum of appeal is to be presented to the
appellate court. Thereafter (subject to technical
scrutiny), the memo of appeal is admitted by the
court (or its officer), who shall endorse thereon
the date of presentation and enter it ३॥ the

register of appeals.

In place of the above procedure, the Bill
envisages a different scheme. The memorandum of
appeal will be filed in the very court which

pronounced the judgment. This is the gist of the
amendment proposed in Order 41, rule 79 - though
Order 41, rule 1 is not being amended in 50 many
words, for this purpose. It is proposed that the
trial court will forward the memo to the appellate
court (though the suggested amendments do not make

this specific provision explicitly).

Haw far do you favour this scheme ?


Page 0. 95

(The amendments proposed by the Bill in Order
41, rules 11, £2, 45, 18, 18, 49 and 32 by clause
S2(vii) are consequential, on those referred to in

Questions 41, 42 above.].