५९८८

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT

ON

THE INDIAN. DIVORCE ACT (IV OF 1869)

NOVEMBER, 1998


JUSTICE
8. P_JEEVAN REDDY
Cha .an, Law Commussion of India

£

SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 001
TEL. : 3384475

Residence :
1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI 110011
TEL. : 3019465

00.No.6(3)(50)/98-LC(LS) 18.11.1998

Dear Or.M.Thambi Durai,

7 am_ sending herewith 164th report on “The Indian
Divorce Act (IV of 1869)".

2. The subject was taken up by the Commission sug motu
in view of the discriminatory Provisions based on sex as
applicable to the Christians in India, so as to make

recommendations for removing anomalies and ambiguities in
the law.
3. It may be mentioned that the Law Commission had

suggested comprehensive amendments to the Act in the 8111
titled “The Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Bill,
1960" submitted alongwith its 15th report. The Commission
had also dealt with this matter in its 22nd and 90th
reports. The Commission is of the considered opinion that
the recommendations made by it on the subject be
implemented expeditiously in the interest of social justice
to the Christian community in India.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

m NY

| oe eee
(8.7. JEEVAN REDDY)

Or.M.Thambi Durai,

Hon’ble Minister for Law, Justice
and Company Affairs,

Shastri Bhawan,

New DeThi.

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

तहत


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER IIT

INDEX

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTORY

OBSERVATIONS OF VARIOUS
HIGH COURTS

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE LAW
COMMISSION

FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES

PAGES

10-25

26-27

28-30


GHAPTER TI

INTRODUCTORY
1.1 Significance of the Act and the need for

revision: The Indian Divorce Act, 1869 was taken up by
the Law Commission in pursuance of its terms of
reference, which, inter alia, empower the Commission to
make recommendations for the removal of anomalies,
ambiguities and inequalities in the law. The Act of 1869
is a central Act of considerable importance to the
Christian community. In view of the inequalities pointed
out in various judicial decisions as discussed in the
succeeding chapters, a review of the Act appears to be

badly needed.

1.2 Scheme of the Act in brief:- The Indian Divorce

Act was enacted in the year 1869 “to amend the law
relating to divorce and matrimonial causes". Its
application is confined to persons professing the
Christian religion. Of course, it is enough even if one
of the parties to the marriage professes Christian faith
(see section 2). Section 10 sats out the grounds on
which a decree for dissolution of marriage can be made.
According to section 14, such a decree for dissolution
can be granted by the “court”, which expression “Gs
defined by clause 4 of section 3 to mean the High Court
or the District Court, as the case may be. Section 17,

however, provides: “Every decree



for a dissolution of marriage made by a District Judge
shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court.
Cases for confirmation of a decree for dissolution of
marriage shall be heard (where the number of the judges
of the High Court 15 three or upwards) by a Court
composed of three such dudges, and in case of difference
the opinion of the majority shall prevail, or (where the
number of the judges of the High Court is two) by a Court
composed of such two dudges, and in case of difference
the opinion of the Senior Judge shall prevail.” Section
16 provides that where a decree for a dissolution of
marriage is made by the High Court (not being a
confirmation of a decree of a District Court), it shall

in the first instance, be a decree nisi, not to be made
absolute till after the expiration of not less than six
months from the date of such decree. Section 20 provides
that every decree of nullity made by a District Judge

shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court in the

manner provided by section 17,

1.3 Some discriminatory, anachronistic provisions of anachronistic provisions of

the Act:- Section 10, which specifies the grounds for

dissolution of marriage reads as follows:

"410, When husband may petition for dissolution.
- Any husband may present a Petition to the

District Court or to the High Court, praying that


his marriage may be dissolved on the ground that
his wife has,. since the solemnization thereof,

been guilty of adultery.

When wife may petition for dissolution. - Any
wife may present a petition to the District Court
or to the High Court, praying that her marriage
may be dissolved on the ground that since the
solemnization thereof, her husband has exchanged
his profession of Christainity for the profession
of some other religion, and gone through 8 form
of marriage with another woman;

or has been guilty of incestuous adultery,

or of bigamy with adultery,

or of marriage with another woman with adultery,
or of rape, sodomy or bestiality,

or of adultery coupled with such cruelty as
without adultery would have entitled her to a
divorce a mensa et toro,

or of adultery coupled with desertion, without

reasonable excuse, for two years or upwards.”

1.4 It may be emphasised even at this stage that
section 10 makes a clear and invidious discrimination
against the woman. While a man seeking dissolution need
prove only adultery on the part of his wife, a wife is
required to prove some other marital offence in addition

to adultery to be able to obtain dissolution.



roan)

1.4.1 In section 55 of the Indian Divorce Act, an
appeal has been provided against a decree made by the
High Court as if it were a decree made in exercise of its
original civil jurisdiction which means that an appeal
lies to a division bench against an order of the judge of

a High Court granting a decree for dissolution of

marriage under section 16.

1.4.2 The Act was made more than 128 years ago. In
view of its antiquated and discriminatory Provisions, it
has become an anachronism today. The Law Commission was
seized of this problem in the Past and has been making
repeated recommendations for a thorough review of the law

and for enacting a new Act in its Place.

1.5 Previous Reports of the Commission and later Reports of the Commission and later

deévelopments:- The Law Commission had suggested
comprehensive amendments to the Act in the Bill titled
“The Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Bill,
1960" submitted along with its 15th Report! whereby both
husband and wife were given the right to seek dissolution
of marriage on almost all grounds mentioned in the
Special ‘Marriage Act, 1954, including the ground of
adultery simpliciter, cruelty and desertion as per clause
30 of the Bill. In clause 31, the Law Commission also
recommended that a provision be made for the grant of

divorce if after a decree for judicial separation,


cohabitation had not been resumed. On receipt of the
1500 Report, the Government finalised a Bill on the lines
suggested by the Law Commission and again referred the
matter to the Law Commission for its views after inviting
opinion from the public. Accordingly, the Law Commission
after ascertaining Public opinion submitted the 22nd
Report? reiterating its earlier stand. Though on receipt
of the 22nd Report, the Christian Marriage and
Matrimonial Causes Bill, 1961 was introduced in the
Parliament, the same lapsed on the dissolution of the Lok
Sabha. It further appears from the counter-affidavit

filed by the Union of India in Mary Sonia v. Union of

India? that after consulting the leaders of the Christian
community, the Central Government had prepared another
Bill called Christian Marriage Bill, 1994 but it is not
clear why this has not been enacted by Parliament so far.
The following extracts from the counter-affidavit are

relevant:

“In view of the fact that owing to the strong
opposition from certain segments of the Christian
community, the earlier action of the Government
of India for bringing in a comprehensive
legislation relating to Marriage and matrimonial
causes of the Christian community could not be
got enacted. Now we have, through the efforts of

the Joint Women’s Programme, a voluntary women’s

organisation, received comprehensive proposals in



the form of draft Bills for changes in the
personal laws of the Christian community from the
Christian churches. These Bills include the
draft Christian Marriage Bill, 1994 which seeks
to consolidate, amend and codify the law relating
to marriage and matrimonial causes of persons
professing the christian religion and to rapeal
the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 and Indian Christian
Marriage Act, 1872 among other things. The
grounds for divorce proposed in the aforesaid
Bill are more liberal in nature in tune with the
changed social-economic conditions of the
community and the prevailing Jaw relating to
marriage and divorce available under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954. The grounds for divorce
include desertion of the petitioner by the other
spouse for a continuous period of not less than
two years immediately preceding the presentation
of the petition. It has been stated that the
Bill has the support of the Catholic Bishops’
Conference of India (CBCI) and 27 Member Churches
of the National Council of Churches in India
(NCCI) and some other independent churches.

Since the christian churches have now come
forward with the necessary legislative proposal,

the Government are actively considering the same


with a view to bringing in necessary legislation
as early as possible. The proposals are being

studied and examined.”

1.5.1 Evidence of Christian community considered by the

Commission in its previous reports for making

recommendations for amendment of Section 10 of the Act for amendment _of Section 10 of the Act:-

It is also relevant to note that the 15th and 22nd
Reports (supra) were prepared after collecting evidence
from leaders of the Christian Church, representatives of
the Christian Associations, members of the Christian
community, Bar Associations and Judicial Officers in the
country. The reports would reveal that there was a
demand from the Christian community itself for inclusion
of progressive grounds for divorce like cruelty and

desertion which are available in almost 811. modern

ciel

islations on the subject. Since the law continued as
such, in 1983, the Law Commission of India headed by none
other than late Hon’ble Justice K.K. Mathew suo motu
took note of the urgent need to amend the provisions
contained in section 10 of the Act and submitted its 90th
Report dated 17.5.1983 recommending urgent amendment of
that section. It is appropriate to quote the reasons

given in the report:

"The reason why we attach the highest importance
to amending section 10 as above may be stated.

We regard such an amendment as a constitutional



imperative.

In our view, if the section is to stand the test
of the constitutional mandate of equality before
the law and equal protection of the 18७8, in’ the
context of avoiding discrimination between the
sexes, then the amendment is necessary. If
Parliament does not remove the discrimination,
the courts, in exercise of their jurisdiction to
remedy violations of fundamental rights, are

bound, some day, to declare the section as

void....

1.5.2 Though more than fifteen years have elapsed after
the said Report, no effective action seems to have been
taken by the Parliament on the basis of the same to amend
section 10 of the Act. The Commission reiterates the
urgent necessity of amending section 10 of the Act to
remove discrimination between the sexes and recommends
that the offending words which have already been struck
down “by the Kerala and Andhra Pradesh High Courts, be

deleted.

1.6 Observations of Courts regarding review of Act of Courts regarding review of Act:-

The courts in India have noted the antiquated and

anomalous nature of the Act and stressed the need for

amendment of the law in various judgements. In $.0.
Selvaraj v. Chandirah Mary4, Alagiriswami, J. (as he

then was) had stressed the need for an immediate



amendment of the Act on the 11088 of the provisions
contained in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1985, the Parsi
Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936, and the Special Marriage
Act, 1954. In T.M._Bashiam ४. M. Victor$, a special
Bench of the same court after referring to the
observations of Alagiriswami, J. in Selvaraj’s case has
made the following observations:
“It is only under this Act (4 of 1869) that the
law remains where it Was, when this enactment was
born, so that parties governed by this Jaw are
under the grave disadvantage that, even if a
husband deserts his wife for a cansiderable
period, that will be no ground for divorce; in
our view, it is a genuine hardship and there is

urgent need for re-examination of the provisions need for re-examination of the rovisions

of Act 4 of 1369, as the Act governs a large body

ons in this country to see that its
provisions are rendered humane and up-to-date,”
(emphasis supplied)
1.7 It is, therefore, recommended that Parliament
enact a comprehensive law governing the marriage, divorce
and other allied aspects of the Christians in India. The
draft Bi11 enclosed with the 22nd report of the Law
Commission, a draft Christian Marriage and Matrimonial
Causes Bill, 1961 and the draft Christian Marriage Bill,

1994, referred to hereinabove, should serve a basis

for such a law. We do not think that there is any ground

for procrastinating the matter any longer.



CHAPTER IL
OBSERVATIONS OF VARIOUS HIGH COURTS _ RVATION F VARI. HIGH COURTS
PART _I
2.1 Constitutionally invalid provisions invalid provisions:- Though as
obiter, A.M. Bhattacharjee, J. speaking for the Full
Bench in Swapna Ghosh ५. Sadananda__Ghosh' had the

following observations to make in regard to the

constitutionality of the provisions under consideration:

“,.. If the husband is entitled to dissolution
on the ground of adultery simpliciter on the part
of the wife, but the wife is not 50 entitled
unless some other matrimonial fault is also found
to be superadded, then it is difficult to
understand as to why this provision shall not be
held to be discriminatory on the ground of sex
alone and thus to be ultra vires. Art.15 of the
Constitution countermanding any discrimination on
such ground ...."

2.2 Discriminatory provision under section 10:- Then

again, under the Divorce Act, Christian spouses are not

entitled to dissolution of marriage on the ground of



cruelty or desertion, but are only entitled to judicial
separation under section 22 which shall have the effect
of a divorce a mensa et toro, that is separation only
from “bed and board” whereunder matrimonial bond remains
undissolved. But spouses married under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954, Hindu, Bhuddhist, Sikh and Jain
spouses governed by the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,
Zoroastrian spouses governed by the Parsi Marriage and’
Divorce Act, 1936, Muslim wives under the Dissolution of
the Muslim Marriages Act, 1939, are entitled. to
dissolution of marriage, and not merely judicial
separation, on those grounds. Are we then discriminating
against Christian spouses and that too, on the ground of
their being Christian by religion and thus violating the
mandate of Art.15 interdicting discrimination on the

ground of Religion only?

2.2.1 K.T. Thomas, J. has also made the following
observations and diractions while passing an interim

order? [in 0.P. No.5805 of 1988]:

After independence, the Indian Parliament
brought about radical changes in the marriage law
applicable to Hindus, Parsis and aven to
foreigners Jliving in India by incorporating
progressive and realistic grounds for divorce in

such enactments. But either for no reason or for



Cc.

reasons which are not easy to comprehend, the law
of marriage applicable to Christians remains

unrealistic and antiquated.”

After observing so, the learned Judge has directad the
Union of India to take a final decision regarding the
recommendations of the Law Commission in its 90th Report
already referred to within a period of six months” from
the date of receipt of a copy of the said order. In
spite of such a positive direction, no final decision to
amend the law, has been taken though the direction was

given on.13.12.1989.

2.3 In Mary Sonia v. Union of India?, a Full Bench
of the Kerala High Court has struck down the
discriminatory words in section 10. The declaration

granted by the High Court is in the follawing words:

“For all the above reasons, we would hold that
the offending portions of the provisions as
already indicated are severable and they ara
liable to be quashed as ultra vires. We would
further hold that the remaining portions of the
provisions can remain as valid provisions
allowing dissolution of marriage on grounds of
adultery simpliciter and desertion and/or cruelty
independent of adultery. Adoption of such a

course, in our view, would help to avoid striking



down of the entire provisions in section 10 of
the Act and to grant necessary reliefs to the
petitioners and similarly situated Christian
wives seeking dissolution of their marriage which
has for all intents and purposes céased to exist

in reality.

We would accordingly sever and quash the words
“incestuous” and “adultery coupled with” from the
provisions in section 10 of the Act and would
declare that section 10 will remain hereafter

operative without the above words.”

2.3.14 Having granted the aforesaid declaration, the
Full Bench proceeded to make the following pertinent

observations‘:

“Before parting with this case, we would like to
observe that in spite of a positive direction by
Thomas, J. in these two Original Petitions which
were filed in the year 1988, directing the
Central Government to take a final decision on
the recommendations of the Law Commission in its
90070 Report for making amendments to 5.10 of the
Act, no final decision has been taken in the
Matter till today. The direction issued was to
take a decision within six months from the date

of receipt of a copy of the order dated



13.12.1990. In spite of such 8 peremptory
direction, the Central Government has not” even
cared to inform this Court about the decision if
any taken in the matter till the fag end of the
arguments in this case when the Central
Government Pleader has produced the communication
to which we have already referred to. It is
after taking note of, if we may say so, the
totally intransigent attitude adopted by the
Central Government in the matter of taking a
final decision regarding the amendment of the law
on the point which was recommended by successive
Law Commissions of India at least from 1961
onwards and the various courts in India through
their observations and directions including the
positive direction in this case, that we have
decided to consider the matter on merits and to
grant the reliefs prayed for, assuming the role
of the reformer to the extent legally permissible
as an attempt to bridge the gap between the

personal laws."

2.4 In Youth Welfare Federation (represented by its

Chairman, K.J. Prasad) v. Union of India’, a Full Bench

of the Andhra Pradesh High Court held that section 10 of

the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, is inconsistent with



Article 14 of the Constitution, being discriminatory
against wife “who is subjected to more anerous grounds to

obtain divorce than the husband....”

2.5 A Special Bench of the same Court in N.  Sarada

Mani v. G. Alexander and another®, again reiterated the

view of the Full Bench as under:
"\..we are of the opinion that the grounds which
are available to the wife (sic - “husband") under

section 10 should also be made available to the

husband (sic - “wife") in a petition filed by him
(sic - “her") seeking divorce and the Parliament
should immediately take note of the

discrimination writ large between the grounds
available to the wife and the husband ina
petition for divorce. It is for the Parliament
to take note of this anamoly and Fill-in the void
by suitable legislation. A pre-constitution
discrimination by the provision in section 10 of
the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, it is rightly held
by the Full Bench in Youth Welfare Federation
case (supra), cannot survive the test of equality
between men and women as envisaged under Articles

14 and 15 of the Constitution of India.”

(In Anil Kumar Mahsi v. U.O.T.7, the Supreme
Court of India, in another context, held that whereas

husband could get dissolution of marriage on the ground



of adultery simpliciter, wife had to prove that husband
was guilty of not only adultery simpliciter but that
adultery was (i) incestuous, (i7) coupled with bigamy,
(iii). coupled with marriage to another woman, (iv)
coupled with cruelty which without adultery would have
entitled her to divorce amensa et toro. To that extent,
it was the wife who was discriminated against and at a

disadvantage. 1

2.6 Inasmuch as the aforesaid decisions of the High
Courts have no binding effect in States other than where
they are located, and also because, the whole Act needs
to be replaced by a new and modern legislation, it is
absolutely essential to enact a new Jaw on the lines of
the draft Bill prepared by the Law Commission § and
reiterated by it again under the Chairmanship of Mr.
Justice K.K, Mathew, former Judge, Supreme Court of
India, which is enclosed to the Reports of the Law

Commission referred to herainabove.



PART _IL
URGENT NECESSITY TO AMEND SECTIONS 17 AND 20 NEC Y_TO_AMEN CTIONS 17 AND 20
OF THE ACT
2.7 If for any reason, there is going to be some

delay in enacting a new comprehensive law as suggested in
Part 4 and paragraph 1.5.2, supra of this report, the
provisions in sections 17 and 20 may at least be amended
forthwith in the circumstances and for the reasons

mentioned hereinafter.

2.8 The general practice appears to be that parties
seeking dissolution of marriage under this Act generally
approach the District Court but that court can grant only

the decree nisi which has to be confirmed by a Bench of

not less than three judges of the High Court. Of course,
if the High Court has only two judges then the two judges
shall form a Bench and can hear such reference. (As a
Matter of fact, today there is no High Court with only
two Judges, except perhaps Sikkim.) On account of the
“heavy load of work in all the High Courts in the country,
constitution of a three-judge Bench to hear the
confirmation matters under this Act takes a long time,
indeed several years. Parties who have obtained a decree

nisi of dissolution from the District Court have to wait

interminably ti11 a special bench of three judges is



constituted. The personal laws governing the Hindus and
Muslims do not contain any provision for confirmation by
a special Bench of three judges. Under the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955, a decree for divorce or dissolution
can be made by a District Judge finally and it is upto a
losing party to file an appeal to the High Court which of
course is to be heard by a Bench of two judges. Similar

is the case in the case of Muslims.

2.8.1 Existing provision for confirmation by a special for confirmation by a special

Bench of three judges of the High Court, criticised judges of the High Court, criticised:- The

aforesaid provision for confirmation by a special Bench
of three judges of the High Court has been uniformly
criticised by almost all the High Courts in the country.
They have suggested that the relevant provisions be
amended to bring them on Par with the corresponding
provisions in other Personal laws. A brief reference to

the said decisions would be in order,

2.3.2 In Mrs Neena v. John Pormer’ » A special bench of

the three judges of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh

observed as under:

the procedure prescribed by section 17 of

the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, requiring
confirmation by the High Court of a decree for
dissolution of a Marriage made by District Judge

prolongs the agony of the affected parties aven



i)

though none of the parties is desirous of
preferring an appeal. We see no valid
justification for continuation of this procedure
especially when no such procedure is prescribed
by other Acts dealing with dissolution of
marriages, namely, the Special Marriage Act, 1954
and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955... In our
opinion, therefore, there is an urgent need for
making suitable amendments in the Indian Divorce
Act, 1869 as made in Uttar Pradesh by Act No.30

of 1957."

2.8.3 Similarly, a special Bench of three judges of the
Calcutta High Court observed as follows in Swapna Ghosh

v. Sadananda Ghosh and another® :

"I have, however, my own doubts as to whether the
provisions of section 17 of the Indian Divorce
Act requiring confirmation of the decree of the
trial court by the High Court should any longer
be retained. A decree for dissolution of
marriage among the Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and
Jains under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 among
the Parsis under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce
Act 1936, among the Muslims under the Dissolution
of Muslim Marriage Act, 1939 are made by the
District Courts and under the last mentioned Act,

even by courts of lower rank and all such decrees



operate with the fullest efficacy without any
confirmation from the High Court. It is,
therefore, difficult to appreciate the retention
of the provisions of section 17 of the Divorce
Act providing that the Christian couples, even
after obtaining a decrea for dissolution from the
District Court, may be after a long-drawn and
streneous litigation, must still wait for
confirmation thereof from the High Court before
those decrees can be complete and binding. These
provisions of section 17 even assuming that they
had their days when enacted in the mid-ninteenth
century, have probably outlived their purposes
particularly in the context of the later
enactments relating to matrimonial laws governing
the other communities and referred to hereinabove
and only result in protracting and prolonging the
litigation, even where none of the parties is in
a mood to have a Further review or
reconsideration of their case by any higher
court. All these considerations led the
Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh to do
away with these provisions in section 17 of the
Divorce Act by a State Amendment Act being Act
No.30 of 1957. We are inclined to think that our
Parliament, or the State Legislatures (marriage
and divorce being matters in the Concurrent List)

should very seriously consider the question of


introducing similar amendments in the Divorce Act
of 1869 to bring it in harmonious conformity with
other analogous enactments on the subject
governing the other communities in India and we
are glad to note that a special bench of the
Madhya Pradesh High Court while disposing of a
confirmation proceeding under section 17 of the
Act in Neena v. John Parmer AIR 1985 Madhya
Pradesh 85 at 7.87 (58) has also made
recommendation to that effect in emphatic
terms... Have not the Christian spouses been
denied procedural reasonableness and due process
by these provisions of section 17 providing for
compulsory confirmation hearing, in the context
of the spouses belonging to other communities
whose matrimonial proceedings are not subjected

to any such further hearing?”

2.8.4 The same views have been reiterated in another
decision of the Calcutta High Court in Ramish Francis

Toppo v. Violet Francis Toppo'®,

2.9 To the same effect are observations of special
Bench of three judges of the Bombay High Court in Mrs.

Pragati Varghese and etc. v. Cyril George Varghese and

etc.11:



“Section 17, we further find, provides that in
case a High Court comprises of only two judges
and decree passed by a District Court comes up
for confirmation before the said two judges and
in case of a difference of opinion, the provisian
contemplates that the decision of the senior
judge would prevail. In our judgement, the
aforesaid procedure contemplated by sections

8,

18.

17 and 20 are anh ee are unreasonable and are arbitrary in and are arbitrary in

nature. The same achieves no useful object or
purpose, The Procedure provided tends to
perpetuate the agonies of the affected parties
for no useful purpose. If such a procedure is
absent in other similar enactments, we do not
find any propriety why this procedure should be
applied to Christian spouses, The said
Procedure, in the circumstances, is liable to be
struck down by suitable amendments, which we
suggest should be brought about by suitable
amendments in the Act.

We further find the provisions of sections
16, 17 and 20 of the Act are also arbitrary and
unreasonable. We suggest that the legislature
should intervene and carry out suitable
amandments to ‘the Act’ at the earliest. we
direct that a copy of this order may be forwarded
forthwith to the Ministry of Law and Justice for
such action as they May deem fit to taka."

(emphasis supplied)


w

2.10 The latest decision reiterating the above
observations is that of the Kerala High Court. A special
Bench of three judges observed thus in their order dated
10th August 199812, The relevant observations are to the

following effect:

“Before this Court, even though notice is served
on the respondent, he is neither present nor
represented by counsel. We feel that it is high
time that the provision regarding confirmation
under sections 17 and 20 of the Indian Divorce
Act 1869 are deleted from the statute. Section
17 provides that every decree for dissolution of
marriage made by a district judge shall be
subject to confirmation by the High Court. It is
further provided that cases for confirmation of a
decree for dissolution of marriage shall be heard
(where the number of the judges of the High Court
is three or upwards) by a court composed of three
such judges or (where the number of the judges of

the High Court is two) by a court composed of

such two judges. Section 20 provides that every
decree of nullity of marriage made by a district
judge shall be subject to confirmation by the
High Court. That too by a bench of three judges

in courts where the number of judges is three or

upwards and where the number of judges of the



71 24 :-

High Court is two, by a bench composed of two
judges. A petition under section 10 for grant of
divorce and section 18 for declaring the marriage
null and void can be filed both before the
district court as well as the High Court. When
such petitions are filed in the High Court, it is
being heard by a single judge and appeal
therefrom by a bench constituting two judges.
Above being the provision, we are of the view
that confirmation of a judgment of the district
court by a bench of three judges is absolutely
unwarranted. We are also of the view that the
provision for confirmation can be deleted and in
its place a provision could be made for filing an
appeal before the High Court by whichever party
aggrieved by the order passed either under
section 10 or under section 18. Such an appeal
can be heard by a bench consisting of two judges
as in the case of all other matrimonial appeals.”

(amphasis supplied)

2.11 The Madras High Court has also expressed similar
views in Solomon Devasahayam Selvaraj Devasahayam Selvaraj v. Chandirah
Mary?3, है
2.12 (1.72, Amendment Act U.P, Amendment Act No.30 of 1957:

It may also be mentioned that as far back as
1957, the U.P. Legislature has amended the Indian

Divorce Act, 1869 by U.P. Amendment Act No.30 of 1957


deleting clauses 1 to 5 of section 17 of the Act which
Provide that a District Court alone can make a decree
nisi and that such decree nisi has to be confirmed by a
special Bench of three judges of the High Court and other
allied provisions. Section 20 which provides that every
decree of nullity of marriage made by a District Judge
shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court was
also omitted by the said u.P. Amendment Act. No
objection has been taken by any section of the Christian
community to the above Amendment Act nor has anyone
criticised the aforementioned observations of the High

Courts.


CHAPTER IIT

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE LAW COMM] OF THE LAW COMMISSION

3.1 The Law Commission is in full agreement with the
views expressed by Law Commission in its earlier reports 1
mentioned hereinabove and the views expressed unanimously

by saveral High Courts in the country.

(i) It is, therefore, recommended that Parliament
enact a comprehensive law governing the marriage,

divorce and = other allied aspect

a

of the

Christians in India. The draft Bill enclosed
with the 15th report of the Law Commission, the
draft Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes
Bill, 1961 as modified by the 22nd report of the
Law Commission and the draft Christian Marriage
Bill, 1994, referred to hereinabove, should serve
as a basis for such a law. We do not think that
there is ता» ground for procrastinating the
Matter any longer.

(11) The Law Commission further recommends that
in any event paragraphs 1 to 5 of section 17 and
section 20 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, be

deleted forthwith, The last remaining paragraph

is)

fo section 17 would thus become section 17,

Further, section 10 should also be amended in th

bh

i

manner indicated in para 1.5.2 of this report.



had

3.2 The Law Commission wishes to emphasise the fact
that the provisions contained in sections 17 and 20 are
only procedural in nature and there is absolutely no
possibility of any member of the Christian community
objecting to amendments suggested herein. Section 10 of
the Act also needs to be amanded suitably so that the
female spouses are not discriminated vis-a-vis male
spouses in obtaining divorce, as indicated by us in
Paragraph 1.5.2 above. Indeed, the offending portions
have been already struck down by Kerala and Andhra
Pradesh High Courts and tnere is not a murmur against the

the
Said decisions by any member of Christian Community. The

Law Commission recommends that at least these amendments

be made without any delay.

_
व जता: --+
(MR. JUSTICE B.P.JEEVAN २६०0५) (RETD)
CHAIRMAN
, Ch
. - wd
=< Ss Mele

(MS, JUSTICE LEILA SETH)(RETD) (DR.NUM.GHATATE) (DR.SUBHASH ©, JAIN}

MEMBER MEMBER MEMBER-SECRETARY

DATED: 18TH NOVEMBER, 1998



1
Nn
@

i]

Footnotes and References

CHAPTER 1

15th Report of the Law Commission of India on “Law
Relating to Marriage and Divorce Amongst Christians
in India“ with “Christian Marriage and Matrimonial

Causes Bill, 1960" appended.

22nd Report of the Law Commission of India an
“Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Bill,

1961".

Mary Sonia v. Union of India, 1995 (1) KerLT 644,

89.0. Seivaraj v. Chandirah Mary, (1968) 1 M.L.g.
289.

T.M,  Bashiam v. M. Victor, AIR 1970 Madras 12.



है

५

Footnotes and References
CHAPTER IT

Swapna Ghosh v. Sadananda Ghosh, AIR 1989 Cal. 1.

0.7. No.5805 of 1988 referred to in Mary Sonia v!

Union of India, 1995 (1) KerLT 644,

Mary Sonia v. Union of India, 1985 (1) KerLT 644 at

672.

Id. p. 673.

Youth Welfare Federation (represented by _its

Chairman, K.J. Prasad) v. Union of India, (1996) 4

Andh L.J. 1138.

N. Sarada Mani v. G. Alexander, AIR 1998 Andhra

Pradesh 157 at 161-162.

Anil Kumar Mahsi ४. Union of India, (1994) 5 5

Mrs. Neena v. John Pormer, AIR 1985 Madhya Pradesh

85 at 87.

Swapna Ghosh v. Sadananda Ghosh and another, AIR

1989 Cal. 1 at 2.


10.

11.

12.

Ramish Francis Toppo v. Violet Francis Toppo, AIR
1989 Cal. 128.

Mrs. Pragati Varghese and etc. v. Cyril George
Varghese and etc., AIR 1997 Bom 349 (FB) at 373. 1

C.M. Reference No.48/98 (Bincy Mathew v. Sabu

Abraham), decided on 10.8,98 by the High Court of

Kerala.

Solomon Devasahayam Selvaraj v. Chandirah Mary,
(1968) 1 M.L.J. 289.