LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTH REPORT

ON

FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION FOR CHTLOREN

NOVEMBER, 1998


JUSTICE

8. P, JEEVAN REDDY

Chairman, Law Commission of India

NEW DELHI

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 001
TEL. : 3384475

Residence :
1, JANPATH

110011

TEL. 3019465

F.NO.6(3)(48)/98-LC(LS) Dated 52. 19/11/1998

Dear Or. M. Thambi Durai,

Iam sending 165th report on "Free and Compulsory
Education for Children".

2. The Law Commission had taken up the = afor id
subject 8110 motu having regard to the Directive
i iple of the Constitution of India as well as

decision of the Supreme Court of India. Edueation is
essential for all. This is fundamental to our all-round
development material as well as spiritual. Education is

quint-essential for economic, social and human
development. It also leads to hetter health care,
smaller family norms, greater community and palit
participation, less income inequality and a or
reduction of absolute poverty.

3. The Commission had prepared a detailed nate on fr
and compulsory education for children together with a
draft Bill for a central legislation on which it alsa
ebtained views of the Ministry of Human and Resources
Development, Department of Education, Government of
India. The Commission has carefully dered various
i tes in the light of the comments rr
rtment of Education as well as

conferences in the field of
Commission has made recommendations on act under
ter VI of the report emphasising the need far
iate central legislation to give effect te the
to  -aducation without waiting Cor tho
anistitutional amendment to go through itn Pardiamant. A
8111 is also appended to this report for this purpose,

With regards.

Yours

(8.7, जला Rochty }

Or. M Thambi Durai, °
i roof Law, Justice &
ny Affairs,

Govt, of Tnelia,

ah rio Rhawan,

New Dedhi,



CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER VI

ANNEXURE A

ANNEXURE B

INDEX

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

CAUSES OF DENIAL OF EDUCATION TO
CHILDREN IN OUR COUNTRY

RIGHT TO EDUCATION IN INDIAN
CONSTITUTION AND INTERNATIONAL

COVENANTS

ATTEMPTS MADE FOR IMPARTING PRIMARY

EDUCATION TO CHILDREN IN SOUTH ASIA

NATIONAL POLICIES AND PROGRESS MADE
REALISING THE OBJECTIVE

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RIGHT
EDUCATION: RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMISSION

FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION
CHILDREN BILL, 1998

LIST OF ACTS PERTAINING TO SUBJECT

IN

Ta
LAW

FOR

65-85

86-98

99-101


INTRODUCTION

1.1 Ganesis of the report:- The issue concerning provision

of free and compulsory education to all children upto the age
of 14 years, a cherished goal set in the Constitution of
India, was taken up by the Law Commission of India for

consideration suo motu.

1.2 Importance of the _subject:- In our national

perception, education is essential for all. This is
fundamental to our all-round development, material as well as

spiritual.

Education has an acculturating role. It refines
sensitivities and perceptions that contribute ta national
cohesion, scientific temper and independence of mind and
spirit -- thus furthering various goals set out in our

Constitution.

In sum,* education is a unique investment in the

ent and the future. This cardinal principle is the key to

pr

the National Policy on Education’:

1.2.4 The Human Development Centre in its repart? also

highlights the impor tance—of education by observing:-



(Education is critical for economic and
development. It is crucial for building human
and for opening opportunities. It is the true essence of
human development. Without education, development can be
heither broad-based nor sustained. The importance of
education was fully recognised by classical economists such as
Adam Smith, John Stuart Mills, Karl Marx and Alfred Marshall
and has been reconfirmed by recent writers such as Schultz,
Becker, and Amartya Sen. Alfred Marshall in the Principles of

Economics (1890) observed as follows:

“The wisdom of expending public and private funds on
education is not to be measured by its direct fruits
alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment, to
give the masses of the people much greater
opportunities, than they ean generally avail
themselves of. For by this means many, who would have

ed for

died unknown, are able to get the start ne
bringing out their latent abilities. ‘The most

4 in human

valuable of all capital is that inve

beings. ! ४

Frederick Engels in Speeches in Elberfeld (1845

“the first [measure] would be the general education of

ra

all children without exception at the expense of th

tate-an education which is equal for all and

on

COCOA ७ 11011 Ghee िक विवश) ७ हलक ri जवाल। के trae



as an independent member of society. Every man has
the right to the full development of his abilities and
society wrongs individuals twice over when it makes
ignorance a necessary consequence of poverty. It is
obvious that society gains more fram educated than

from ignorant, uncultured members.”

“The education is not merely a means better income and
employment opportunities for individuals or for higher
economic growth potential for their nations. The social
benefits of education spread in many directions. Education
leads to better health care, smaller family norms, greater
community and political participation, less income inequality,
and a greater reduction of absolute poverty. The role of
education in removing poverty 15 decisive. No aducated
society can remain politically, socially or economically
repressed for long. Education is a basic component of social

cohesion and national identity."3)

1.2.2 The importance of education may be set out below while

quoting the relevant passages from Unnikri

hnan, J.P ve

va

State of Andhra Pradesh,‘

“The immortal Poet Valluvar whose Tirukkural will
surpass all ages and transcend all religions said of
education:

“Learning is excellence of wealth that none destroy;
To man nought else-affords reality of joy.”



Therefore, the importance of aducation does hot

require any emphasis.

The fundamental purpose of Education is the same at
all times and in all places. It is to transfigure the
human personality into a pattern of perfection through
a synthetic process of the development of the body,
the enrichment of the mind, the sublimation of the
emotions and the dTumination oF the spirit.
Education is a preparation for a living and for life,

here and hereafter.

An old Sanskrit adage states: “That is Education
which leads to liberation” - liberation from ignorance
which shrouds the mind; liberation from superstition
which paralyses effort, Jiberation from prejudices

which blind the Vision of the Truth.

of Government

In the context of a democratic
which depends for its sustenance upon the
enlightenment of the populace; education is at once a
social and political necessity. Even several decades
ago, our leaders harped upon universal primary
education as a dasideratum for national progress. It
is rather sad that in this great land of ours where
knowledge first lit its torch and where the human mind
soared to the highest pinnacle of wisdom, the
percentage of illiteracy should be appalling. Today,

the frontiers of knowledge are enlarging with


incredible swiftness. The foremost need to be
satisfied by our education is, therefore, the
eradication of illiteracy which persists in a
depressing measure. Any effort taken in this

direction cannot be deemed to be too much.

Victories are gained, peace is preserved, progress is
achieved, civilization is built up and history is made
not on the battlefields where ghastly murders are
committed in the name of patriotism, not in the
Council Chambers where insipid speeches are spun out
in the name of debate, not even in Factories where are
manufactured novel instruments to strangle life, but
in educational institutions which are the seed-beds of
culture, where children in whose hands quiver the
destinies of the future, are trained. From their
ranks will come out when they grow up, statesmen and
soldiers, patriots and philosophers, who will

determine the progress of the land....

",..The importance of education was emphasised in the
‘Neethishatakam’ by Bhartruhari (First Century 8.0.)

in the fotlowing words:

“Translation:
Education is the special manifestation of man;

Education is the treasure which can be preserved
without the fear of loss;

Education secures-- material pleasure, happiness and
fame;



Education is the teacher of Lhe ३. bets
Education is God incarnate;

Education secures honour at the hands of the State,
hot money.

anjimat."

A man without education is equal

“The fact that right to education occurs in as many as

पडा

and 4

three Articles in Part-IV viz., Articles 41, 4
shows the importance attached to it by the founding

in Part-IIT viz.

fathers, Even some of the Artic

Articles 29 and 30 speak of educat

In Brown v. Board of Education (1953) 95 Law Ed 873

Ear] Warren, C.J., speaking for
Court emphasised tha right to ertueation 11 the

following words:

“Today, education is perhaps

function of State and local gove
school attendance laws and the
education both demonstrate ‘our
importance of education to our
i eequired in the perform
esponsibilities, even service
It is the very foundation of

it is the principal instrument
te cultural values, im preparing him fer

ratic ci
of Dur Nic
the armed
itizenship.

in awakening the

professional training, and in betping bim oto s
hoarmally to his environment. Tn these « : i
doubtful any child may reasonably be  sepected to
Sue’ do in life if he is denied the opportunity of ac
education,”

Th Wisconsin 30 Law 15, the

urt recognised that:



“Providing public schools ranks at the very apex of
the function of a State."

The said fact has also been affirmed by eminent
educationists of modern India like Or. Radhakrishnan,

J.P.Naik, Dr.Kothari and others."

1.2.3 Imparting education has the benefits of various kines

to the society. It leads to broad economic and
benefits for individuals and for society for it helps in
achieving higher productivity, Tower infant and ehild
mortality rates, and better health. * These benefits are
greatest ence primary education broadly covers the

population.§

1.2.4 Primary education leads to better family health, Tower

fertility and thus slower population growth,

1.2.5 The World Bank® Report coneludes from the survey oof

the economics and social outcomes of in the

following words:-

“First, the economic and social nefits of ert
are greatest when ai critical minimum level of

een achieved across the

educational attainment has |

Population. Mass expansion of primary education

raises India’s current] Tow educational attainment
y

5S)

(averaging about 1.9 years for workers in 1981) te 4
threshold of about four bo five years of completed

primary education per worker ceuwld have high



realize these

in efonomic and social banefits.
benefits in the medium term, all states will need ४०
develop a solid foundation of education, And second,
the benefits of education extend beyond individuals

whe receive schooling diractly. Other members of

wy .
society also gain, through . The

resulting improvements in economic efficiency provide

continuing justification for public sector invalvenent

in education, Primary schooling offers the greatest

economic and social returns, followed by secondary
schooling.

On economic outcomes, the survey Teads te five
conclusions. First, the average educational

attainmant of the population has a strong positive

effect on economic growth. An exploratery production

function analysis suggests that fer 1971-81

ing of the

Og

rage

one-year increase in the av
Jabour force was associated with an inerease in output

of 13 recent. Second, in agriculture, primary

schooling affects productivit speeds the ackopt fon of

1. revolution technologie and rates growth

॥

where there are new technological

Third, schooling also produces  externalit

helping to diffuse knowledge about new agricultural

t ina

041 1

hnologies to unschooled farmers. F

where schooling across the farm population has re
acertain threshold, the. potential effects of an

advance in agricultural technelogy are mere fully



1.3
current

words:-

realised. Fifth, private and social market returns
are highest for primary and middle schooling, and
returns to primary schooling are highest for

lower-caste graduates.”

Present scenario of Education as source of development

The observations of the World Bank point out the

position as regards primary education in the following

“India’s primary education glass is two-thirds full,
one-third empty. Having steadily raised primary
enrollment rates over the past four decades, India now
has 67 million children ages G-10 whe are attending
primary school, but 28 million ta 32 million
primary-school-age children wha are not?"
“....At) Independance in 1947, fewer than 15% of the
adult population was literate. Literacy grew slowly

over the next four decades and in 1994 the literacy
.

fa
a

rate for adults (persons overage 7 (sic 17)) wa

t Asian Economies when

wi

which is well below rates in Ea
they began accelerated integration with world market,
For example, in 1961, the Republic of Korea's literacy

was 71% and Thailand’s was 68x? ,

"

rat

b

जा
The World Bank Report points cut?:

“that India’s education system is the cand largest

in the world. According to provisional statiat des



From the Sixth All India Education Survey, 98 million
children were enrolled 11 875,000 Tower primary
schools in 1993, another 34 million in 161,900 Upper
primary schools, and 22 million in 90,000 secondary
schools (NCERT 1995). Roughly & million students were
enrolled in nearly 8,000 institutions at the tertiary
level (India, Ministry of Human Resource Development,

19940), In all, 18 percent of India’s population was

enrolled in school, up from 7 percent in 1951."

1.3.1 It is revealed in the said reportt? that enrolment

डा

has grown at all levels since the 19505. Thus in 1950-51
students enrolled in grades 1-5 and grades 0-8 were 20 million
and less than 5 million respectively and it has grown in
1990-91 to 100 million and little above 20 million in the said
grades respectively (as per the graph shown in the World Bank
Report under chapter 1 thereof). The said report projects

that nevertheless, at least 32 million poor rural

primary-school-age children do not attend school even in

States with high participation rates. Official, primary se

dropout rates were 39% for girls and 35% for boys. The world

Bank report observes that though India has made much progress
towards universal primary education and could achieve nearly
universal - 958 - primary net enrollment rates by 2005, it

will be atleast two decades later than in such countries as

Indonesia and Malaysia and three decades later than in the

Republic of Korea. ae


1.4 As per thea National Human Rights Commissiontt, a
gloomy picture of the state of health and education emerges

of the Commissioan

which may best be axpressed in the words

itself:-

"2.14... Based on data contained in 1991 Census
Report, 328.9 million Indians were illiterate,
Indeed, a report issued by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development in January 1997 estimates that 65
million children in the age group of 6-14 years are at

wT. As fer health, 185

Present not attending set

s to primary

million people had yet to gain a
health care, while 226 million were witheut safe
drinking water and 640 million were without basic
sanitation facilities; 88% of all pregnant women aged

between 15 and 49 suffered. from anaemia. As regards

food and nutrition, there were 62
children under the age of 5. years. [tm respect of
children, nearly -one-third of those under the age of
16 were engaged in child labour - many. in hazardous
industries. In terms of poverty and income, mearly
one-third “or the world’s poor Tive in Tortial sl.

Increasingly it bacemas evident that thee ००४ tas

ople Fs to jinyvest

improve the quality of life of fp

wisely and substantially in education aad beatth, ota

India, such investment is के 14 pu per anqum:

in the Republic of-Korea it is $ 160..."



1.4.1 The National Human Rights Ceommissient?  athecrees

regarding child Tabour that the Central Goverment fees baben

up a majer op

egrammea to emd chit Tatour it respeat ae >

millien children working in hazare

015 cup Pans bry this yenae

2900, for which it is p

posed to allocate some RSs.RIO craves

by that year. Und Paragraph 5.10, it. the cpusstion as

to how the country will be pr

with the mech

em of child labour in ether ocrunations as well
the estimate of those so warking varying frem SO million te a

number much higher.



$

m

NOTES AND REFERENC

CHAPTER I

National Policy on Education, 1986

Excerpts quoted from Mahbub U1 Haq and Khadija Haq

Human Development in South Asia, 1998, Chapter

Ibid.

AIR 1993 SC 2178.

World Bank Report on Primary Education in

Edn.1997, Chapter 2, page 30.
Id., at p.50-53.

Id., page 1.

Id., Chapter 1.

IZd at paga 16.

Ibid.

National Human Rights Commission, Annual
1996-97, paragraph 2.14.
National Human Rights Commission, Annual

1995-96, paragraph 5.9.

2.

India,

Report,

Report,


CHAPTER-IT

9 OF DENTAL OF EDUCATION TO CHILDREN _IN OUR COUNTRY _

2.1 Various causes of illiteracy among children and adults
have been identified by many scholars. It will be fruitful to

notice some of the principal onas as set out below:

2.1.1. Prevalence of child Jabour:- Child labour is a

socio-economic phenomenon. Illiteracy, ignorance, low wages
unemployment, poor standard of living, poverty, deep sacial
prejudices and apalling backwardness of the countryside are
all cumulatively the root causes of child labour. The direct
consequence of child in labour is that a child is denied the

opportunity to seek education in a school.

chool and

D

2.1.2. The notion that children should be sent to
not be a part of the labour force is a comparatively recent
idea. A few hundred years ago children in most countries
worked with their parents looking after the craps and cattle,
collecting fire-wood and fetching water and food. It was only
the children’ of the privileged classes who were educated and

thus able to retain their position of power.

2.1.3, But in those days child labour was very different to

d as a result of industrialisation., Th was based

what happene
on the belief that a child should contribute to the
maintenance of the familys which was A social unit. However

after industrialisation children started working in mines and


factories and with machinery and chemicals. They worked for
low wages and for long hours and were exploited, with great
risk to their health and well being. They also worked in
cottage industries. It was only in 1284 that a Venetian
statute forbade glass makers from employing shildren in
certain dangerous branches of the glass making trade and only
in 1396 that a Venetian ducal edict prohibited children under

13 from working in certain trades!.

2.1.4. As Myron Weiner has observed? , it was only in the
subsequent centuries that childhood was discovered and

children were

“transformed from valuable wage-earners to
economically useless but emotionally priceless
objects. The transformation did not occur without
considerable public debate and while the upper and
middle classes held this view of their own children
they did not readily apply it to the children of the

poor.”

2.1.5. Surprisingly, it was Voltaire who wrote} that
“it is absolutely necessary that a great proportion of
mankind is destined to drudgery in the meanest
occupations, that nothing but early habit can render

it tolerable, and that to give the meanest of people

an education beyond the station in which Pravidence

has assigned them is doing a real injury”.


(Tt ore

English conservatives argued that schooling Was
inappropriate for the working class, whose children could

better acquire skills as apprentices.

2.1.6. It was in the 19th century that governments started to
regulate conditions of employment for children and toak on the
role as protector of children against employers and parents.
This attitude was closely linked to the idea of education of
children. As a result even poor parents were not allowed ta

1.

use their children’s labour instead of sending them to sct
At the end of the 190 century Japan became the first.
hon-Western. country to make elementary school education
compulsory. This was succassfully followed by South Korea and

Taiwan.

2.1.7. It was only when children were viewed as “priceless”

rather than as an investment that attituces started changing

and fertility rates declined. In order to ensure universal

education it was. necessary to remove children from the Tabour

10109 and make them attend = school. ' This was politically
contentious. > The opposition to State intervention is based oan
the concept of the rights and obligations of the State versus
the rights and obligations of parents and the character of the

economic order.

and

iD

2.2. India is going through thes
the socio-political forces.-are very much at play. The main

argument against compulsory education is that child labour ie


ज1 व :«८

necessary for the well being of the poor as the State is
unable to provide relief. The second argument 15. that
education would make the poor unsuited for tha kind of manual
work that is required to be done. The third argument 18. that
certain industries would be forced to close down if they did
not have the facility of the low wage child labour. The last
argument against banning child labour and enforcing compulsory
education is that the State should not be allowed to interfere
in the parents’ rights who know what is best for their

children and families.

2.2.1. Some people in India feel that society cannot afford
to do without the labour of children while the real question
is whether we can afford to have child labour, illiterate

clear

wn

children and still talk of tomorrow’s citizens#? It i
that compulsory elementary education cannot wait till poverty
is totally eliminated. It is the child’s constitutional right
and the duty of the State to provide it. State intervention
to remove children from the labour force and require that they
attend school has always been politically contentiaus. The
debate is endless. The family’s need for money, the mother’s
need for help, the. difficulties of the inrlistry dependent oon
child labour, the view that education would make the poor
unsuitable for the kind of manual work that is required, the
“State’s resources, the children’s nead for education and the
society’s claim that the children should be “trained to

intelligent citizenship".



“1१118 :-८

2.2.2. The figures of child Vabour in India vary from 17
milion to 44 million to 100 million. A large percentage of
these children work in cultivation and agriculture including
live-stock, fishing, plantations etc. and the unorganised
sector, In the urban areas a Jarge percentage works as

domestic servants, rag-pickers, building and construction

fa)

labourers, in garages, dhabas and stone quarries ete.
2.2.3. The constitutional mandate provides in Article 24 that
no child below the age of 14 years shall be employed to wark
in any factory or mine or engaged in any hazardous employment.
This article cannot be understood as permitting employment of
children in employments other than these mentioned in the

rstood and interpreted in

article, This article must be unde

the light of the relevant Directive Principles Policy
contained in Part IV of the Constitution, as held by the

Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan J.P.5. The Directive Principles

provids in Articles 39 (e) and (1) that the ter

children be not abused and citizens be not fo

necessity to enter  avocations ited to,

strength and further that children be given opp

facilities to develop in an healthy manner and in conditions

of freedom and- dignity and that childhood and youth _ be

Joitation and against moral ane niaterial

probe |_against_exp

- abandor



2.2.4. Article 41, one of the Directive Principles, pravides
for the right to education within the limits of the State’s
economic capacity and development and Article 47 requires the
State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of

living and to improve public health.

2.2.5. Article 45 which is of utmost importance, provides for
free and compulsory education for all children till they
complete the age of fourteen years. The State has been
enjoined to endeavour to provide this within a period of ten
years from the commencement of this Constitution. Though this
is also a Directive Principle it has now been raised by the
Supreme Court to a fundamental right as per its judgment in
Unnikrishnan’s case decided en ath February, 1995,
Consequently the abolition of child labeur and the providing
of free and compulsory education to children, which are two
sides of a coin, and are interlinked is a matter of great
public concern and one of the most important functions of the

Indian State.

2.2.6. India has also made an international commitment to do
so on 11th December, 1992 while ratifying the 1989 UN
Convention on “the rights of the child. The Government of

India has, subject to resources, undertaken to take measures

iy

2 of th

D

to progressively implement the provisions of Article
Convention. This specially recognises the right of the child

to be protected from economic exploitatian and from performing



-:20 :-

any work that is likely to be hazardous or te interfere with

the child’s education or to be harmful to the child’s health

or vitiate his mental, spiritual, moral छा secial development,
2.3 Tha International Labour 01160, has see 1 tly
framed the causes and forms of child labour. They state that
the extent and nature of their work are influenced mainly — by
the structure of the economy and the Jevel and pace of

development.

2.3.1. In agrarian societies work by children is an integral

part of the socialisation process and a means of transmitting
traditionally acquired skills from parent to child. To some

Found in artisanal

extent, comparable patterns are

their

workshops and small scale services. Children

and gradually

n

in ancillary tasks, acquire skill

Fablishments एक

fully fledged workers in family
trades, However, the ILO did not हक कि Gt child 1 छा
In the view of the ILO, child Vabour as work or empToyment

of 15 are engaged on

situation is where children under the
A more or less regular basis to earn ao livelihood for

themselves or their familias’.

aid te be

2.3.2. Causes attributable to child Tabeur can

poverty, Tow earning capacity of adults in familie
unemployment; large families coupled with | Tow nor chit
Jabour as a cheap commodity; non-existence of wision For

parents

mpulsory education; illiteracy

s of education.

© advant

aban



FOOT-NOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER~-IT

Myron Weiner, The Child and the State in India, Second

Edn., Chapter 6, page 110.

Id., at page 115.

Referred in ibid

Leila Seth, The First Rosalind Wilson Memorial

Lecture, India International Centre Quarterly, Winter

1993 page 79,85.

Unnikrishnan J,P., v. State of A.P., AIR 1993 50
2178.

International Labour Office, Geneva, Child Labour: A

briefing. manual, Pages 1-2.

Id, at page, 11.



-122 :-

CHAPTER-III

RIGHT 10 EDUCATION IN INDIAN CONSTITUTION AND INTERNATIONAL

3.1 Constitutional provisions. — concerning. right ६७

ducation: It is necessary to refer to various provisions of

the Constitution of India.

The Preamble promises to secure to all citizens of
India “justice, social, economic and political” and “liberty
of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship”. It
further provides “equality of status and of opportunity” and
assures dignity of the individual. Articles 21, 38, 39 (a)
and (1), 41 and 45 of the Constitution are reproduced

hereunder:

"24. Protection of Jlife and personal liberty. - No
person shall be deprived of his life or personal
liberty except according to procedure established by

law.

38. State to secure a social order for the pramotion
of welfare of the people. - (1) The State shall strive
to promote the welfare of the people by securing and
protecting as effectively as it may a social order in
which justice, social, economic and political, shall

inform all the institutions of the national life.


(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise
the inequalities in income, and endeavour to eliminate
inequalities in status, facilities and oppertunities,
not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups
of people residing in different areas er engaged in

different vocations.
39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by
the State. - The State shall, in particular, direct

its policy towards securing -

(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have

the right to an adequate means of liveliha:

(f) that children are given opportunities and
facilities to davelap in a healthy manner and
in conditions of freedom and dignity and that
childhood and youth are protected against
exploitation and against inoral and material

abandonment.

41. ' Right to work, to educahion and to public
assistance in certain cases. - The State shall,

within the limits of its econemic capacity and

development, make effective provision for securing the
right to work, to education and to public assistance
in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and

disablement, and in-other cases of undeserved want.


3.2

Supreme

45. Provision for free and compulsory education for
children - The State shall endeavour to provide,
within a period of ten years from the commencement of
this Constitution, for free and compulsory education
for -all children until they complete the age of

fourteen years.”

In Mohini Jain (Miss) v. State of Karnatakat, the

court expounded upon the import of ‘right to

education’ by holding:

"7,  It-is no doubt correct that ‘right ta sducatian’
as such has not been guaranteed as a fundamental right
under Part III of the Constitution but reading the

seeeeee provisions cumulatively it becomes clear that

the framers of the Constitution mace it obligatory for

the State to provide education for its citizens.”

"12. “Right to life" is the compendious expressian
for all those rights which the courts must anferce
because they are basic to the dignified enjoyment of
life. It extends to the full range of conduet which
the individual is free to pursue, The right to
education flows directly from right to 111७... The
right to life under Article 21 and the dignity of an
individual cannot be assured unless it is accompanied
by the right to education. The State Gavernment is
under an obligation to make endeavour to pravide

educational facilities at all levels to its citizens,


“13. The fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III
of tha Constitution of India ineluding the right te
freedom of speech and expression and other rights
under Article 19 cannot bea appreciated and fully
enjoyed unless a citizen is educated and is conscious

of his individualistic dignity.

“17. We hold that every citizen has a ‘right to
education’ under the Constitution. The State is under
an obligation to establish educational institutions to
enable the citizens to enjoy ‘the said right. The
State may discharge its obligation through State-owned
or State-recognised educational institutions. When
the State Government grants recognition to the private
educational institutions it creates an agency to

fulfil its obligation under the Constitution.”

_Unnikrishnar

Extent of ‘right to education’ _

wo
w

case: =
The- Constitution Bench in) Unnikrishnan’s case?

curtailed the parameters of the right of education by holding:

“180... (1) The citizens of this cauntry have a
fundamental right to education. The said right flows
from Article 21. This right is however, not an
absolute right. Its content and parametars have to be

determined in the light of Articles 45 and af, In



~126 :-

other words every child/citizen of this country h

right to free education until he completes the age
fourteen years. Thereafter his right to education is
subject to the limits of econemic capacity and

development of the State.

Again in the case of University of Delhi__and_ Another

3.4
vs. Shri Anand Vardhan  Chandal3, the Constitution Reach
rejterated the decision in the Unnikrishnan G.P. | ane Others

A.P and others by helding -

vs. State

2 there is, therefore, nod he right
to education is a fundamental right to the extent it
has been spelt out by the Constitution Bench in
Unnikrishnan’s case."

25 In) RBandhua_ Mukti Morechat, the Supreme Court feat fede

oD

hake in

that the Right to Life guaranteed by Artic

it observed

“educational facilities”. In Unnikrishnan, J.P

that having regard to the fundanental signifiecan of
education to the life of an individual and the nation, and

adopting the “reasoning and logic of the earlier dec ions of
the court, it agreed with the statement in Bandhua__Mukti
Morcha, “that the right to education is implicit in and मऊ

from the right to 11168 guaranteed by Article 214 further 1७

right te education has been treater as one of trance nnidentad

been

tance in the life of an individual amd this ha

gnised nat only in this country since thousands of years,

but all over the world.



-127 :-

3.6 International covenants relevant to the sub. Since
the days of the League of Nations, commitments for the
protection of children have been projected in various
international treaties and declarations. The Geneva

Declaration containing five principles was adopted on 26th
September, 1924, It stated that necessary means must be given
for the physical and spiritual development of the child, and
specifically provided that a child must be educated and

protected against exploitation. Thereafter, the landmark 1948

Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed that children
as a category are entitled to special care and assistance. In
Article 26, the right to compulsory free education, at least

in the elementary and fundamental stages is recognised’.

3.6.1. On 20th November, 1959, the Declaration on the Rights
of the Child was proclaimed by the General Assembly of the
United Nations. It contained 10 principles which enriched and
developed the 1924 Geneva Declaration. Exactly 30 years
later, on 20th November, 1989 the General Assembly unanimously
adopted the Convention on the rights of the child. It entered
into force on 2nd September, 1990, having been ratified by the
required 20 States. This Convention has been recognised as
the most complete statement of children’s rights with the
force of international law. The earlier 1959, UN Declaration
on the Rights of the Child, though an international
instrument, carried no binding legal obligation, whereas the
Convention demands an active decision on the part of the

individual States ratifying it. Further, ao omechanism for


monetary compliance is an integral funetion of the Convention

sort te a Committee

and the signatory States are obliged to r
on the Rights of the Child’.
3.6.2 The Convention recognises the special vulnerability of

children and deals not only with civil and political rights

but alsa economic, social, cultural ane humanitarian rights

which are mutually inter-dependent. It has a holistic

approach and acknowledges that although ai ochild may be

velop Tully is not

adequately nourished, its right ta ¢

properly pretected unless it ig also eclucated and shielded
from such things as arbitrary detention and exploitation at
work. The main underlying principle of the Convention is that

the best interast of the child shall always be the major
consideration and that the child's ewn opinion shall be given

on 11101 ७1 00101. owith

due regard. Tha child is recognised

which evolve with age and maturity. Consequently, the

ne

child has en given the right to participate in the decisions

affecting its present and future when balancing the child

others who are

ha
mn

right with the rights and duties of

nsible for its survival, development and protection? ,

3.6.3. The Preamble of the Convention recalls the c
principles of the United Nations anc specific pravisions of

clamations; it

affirms the fact that children, leer aise oof 1७11

ecial & and protest ian Pooplares

villnerability, need s o

Spee dad emphasis en the primary cc ing ad peer bee tp yee

responsibility of the family, the nee for legal and other


-:29 :-

protection of the child before and after birth, the importance
of respect for the cultural values of the child’s community
and the vital role of international cooperation in achieving

the realisation of children’s rights®.

3.6.4. It advocates concerned public action by all
individuals and agencies - government as well as
non-governmantal, 10681, national, regional and = international
to promote the rights of the child. The Convention, is ina
sense, a means of empowering children and creating an
environment in which all children are able to live securely

and realize their full potential in life.
3.6.5. Four sets of basic rights

The Convention draws attention to four sets of civil,
political, social, economic and cultural rights of every

child. These are:

The right to survival:

which: includes the right to life, the highest
attainable standard of health, nutrition, and adequate
standards of living. It also includes the right a a

name and a nationality.

The right to protection:



-:30 :-

which includes freedom from all farms of exploitation,
abuse, inhuman or degrading treatment, and negligence
including the right to special protection in

situations of emergency and armed conflicts.

The Right to development:

which includes the right to education, support for
early childhood development and care, social security,
and the right to leisure, recreation and cultural

activities.

The Right to participation:

which includes respect for the views of the child,
freedom of expression, access to appropriate
information, and freedom of thought, conscience and

religion.

3.6.6. The Convention provides the legal basis for initiating
action to ensure the rights of children in society.

3.6.7. The Convention indeed reiterates and elaborates what
is already contained in the Constitution of India. Article 39
‘of the Directive Principles of State Policy quoted above is in

parimateria with the said Convention.

wo

3.7.8. Article 28 of the Convention state



“State Parties recognize the right of the child to

education, and with a view to achieving this right

ressively and on the basis of eyual opportunity,

they shall, in particular, make primary education

compulsory and free to all.”

3.7.9. Recognising the need to make available free and
universal primary education is set out in Article 45 of the

Constitution of India.

3.7.10. Article 32 of the said UN Canvention provides as

fallows:

“State Parties recognise the right of the child ta be
protected from economic exploitation and From
performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or
to interfere with the child’s education, or to be
harmful to the child’s health or physical, mental,

spiritual, moral or social development.

2. State Parties shall take
administrative, social and educational measures te
ansure the-implementation of this article, To this
end, and” having regard to the relevant pravisions of
ether international instruments, State Parties shall
in particular:

(a) provide for a minimum aye or minimum ages feu
admissions to employment;

(b) provide for L@appropriate regulation of the hours

and conditions of employment; ane



(c) provide for appropriate penalties or other
sanctions. to ensure the effective enforcement of this

article.”

The important words in Article 32 are that the child
is to be protected from performing any work that will

“interfere with the child’s education”.

3.7.11. Article 46 of the Constitution of India deals with the
Promotion of education and economic interest of scheduled
castes, scheduled tribes and other weaker sections: and
Article 41 with the right to work and education, etc. Article
24 as originally proposed by Or.K.M.Munshi prohibited child
Tabour “in all form" but it was recast and reformulated, and
reads “no child below the age of 14 years shall be employed to
work in any factory or mine of engaged in any hazardous

employment”.

3.8. The National Policy for Children in 1974 affirmed the
Constitutional provisions and declared that “it shall be the
policy of the State to provide adequate services to children,
both before and after birth and through the period of growth,
to ensure their -full physical, mental and social development.
The State shall progressively increase the scape of such
“services so that, within a reasonable time, allo children in

the country enjoy optimum conditions for their growth.”
.


-:33 :-

3.8.1. Government of India by ratifying the Convention an the
Rights of the Child on December 11, 1992, once again
re-affirmed its commitment to children. This obligates the

Government to:

- review national and state legislation and
bring it in Vine with the provisions of the
Convention;

- develop appropriate monitoring procedures ६७
assess progress in implementing the
Convention;

- involve all relevant government Ministries and
departments, international agencies,
non-governmental organizations, and the legal
profession in the implementation and reporting
process;

- publicize the Convention and. seek public
inputs for reporting and,

- ensure that reporting is frank and transparent

3.8.2. By endorsing the 27 survival and development goals for
the year 2000~ laid down by the World Summit for Children,
Government of India has firmly reaffirmed its commitment to

advance the cause of children in Indiat°
Article 6 of the Convention states:-

“State Parties shall_-ensure to the maximum extent

possible the survival and development of the child.”



3.8.3. 191 countries have signed the Convention or become

essian ot succession,

State Parties to it by ratification, a
the largest number for any International Convention; the only

exceptions being United States of America and Somalia.

3.8.4. A UNICEF Background Paper’! states that there are two
types of development emergencies that need equal attention (1)
“loud” emergencies which include natural disasters and armed
conflicts that kill and disable children and (2) “silent”

ead

emergencies resulting from endemic poverty and wid
deprivations which lead to many more deaths than famine, flood
or war. Widespread illiteracy, malnutrition, hunger and
morbidity, poor health and neglect of women’s concerns are
examples of such silent deprivations. Professor John Kennith
Galbraith in a lecture delivered in New Delhi in November,
1992 remarked:

see Once it was understood : का education is the
first requirement for economic progress, That
essential fact was forgotten: impressive steel mills,

great hydroelectric dams, glistening airports, were

too often sited. amid ignorant people, I have
previously made the point:in this world there is no
literate population that is poor, ne illiterate

population that is other than poor.”

By
fi
+
a
o
n
n

A pro-children development strategy

both these types of emergencies.



ed with

8.5. It is therefore clear that we must pr

५

urgency to make these rights of the ता a reality,

Consequently one would venture to ask, is not all snp Toy rent

and the depriving of education “hazardous” te the child, We

respectfully submit it is. Asking a child to work is by

“of their tender and also amounts te

itself an “abuse"

fo

cing them by economic necessity to enter avenations
unsuited to their age and strength within the meaning oof

39 of the Constitution, which

clauses (9) and (1) of Artie

icle, we submit, must now provide and constitute +

a

ar

content of Article 24, Fifty years a

titution, if is

more than forty eight years after the

these two clauses of Article 39 that must increasing]

enlighten the content of Articles 21 and 24 -alen

these clauses are consistent with the international
conventions and, above all, are in the interest of our nation

and a humane view of life,

Without education a child is left without any rea

choices. It would, therefore appear that it i

gy

is introduced to ensure that good schools are

established at reasonable distan: quality  ecuea

ived of

all children and they are ont

is available

ment which

this opportunity of devel



10.

11.

FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER-IIE

Miss Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka, AIR 1992 SC
1858.

Unnikrishnan, J.P, v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR

1993 SC 2178 (Constitution Bench).

University of Delhi v. Shri Anand Vardhan Chandal,

1998 (5) SCALE 23.

Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, AIR 1984 50

802.
Supra at 2.

Leila Seth, The First Rosalind Wilson Memorial

Quarterly, Winter

Lecture, India International Cen
1993 page 79.

Id., at page 80

Ibid.

Ibid.

UNICEF India Background Paper, The Right to be a
Child, March, 1994.

Ibid. *


CHAPTER-IV

ATTEMPTS MADE FOR IMPARTING PRIMARY EDUCATION 10 CHILDREN IN

SOUTH ASIA

4.1 South Asia has emerged by now as the most illiterate
region in the world, with 395 million illiterate adults
(nearly one-half of the world total)-and 50 million out of
school children (over two-fifths of the world total). Human
Development in South Asia 19981, is documented by the Human
Development Centre and it reveals that what is missing is not
financial resources, but political commitment, for tackling
the educational tasks that lie ahead. The said report
observes that income poverty is no barrier to the spread of
basic education. Thus it points out that Kerala with a per
capita income of $ 1017, has a literacy rate of 90%, compared
to 58% in Punjab which has more than double the per capita
income of Kerala. International comparisons also corroborate
the same. For example, Vietnam, with a per capita income of $
1208 (in 1994 PPP dollars) has attained an adult literacy rate
of 94%, while India (real per capita income of $ 1348) has 52%
literacy; Pakistan. (per capital income of $ 2154) is aven
further behind with 38% literacy. Thus while income is

important, it is not decisive?.

4.2 Key Education challenges examined:- The HDC repert3,

loudly projects three key challenges which require davising
concrete strategies to address the three hey shartcomings in

South Asia’s education system. First, the lack of access to


ond the 10४. level

schooling for large number of children,
of primary school, completion due to drop out and repetition;
and the third the low learning achievement. of many students
who enrol and complete school. Amongst other nations,
countries like India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Bhutan, Nepal,
Srilanka and Maldives are afflicted because of these key

problems.

4.3 Based on the studies undertaken in South Asian

countries, the said report concludes! :-

(a) The quickest way to expand capacity is to upgrade
existing school facilities, viz., provision of schools at the
nearer distance, electricity in the schools, latrines, potable

water, playgrounds and construction of buildings.

(b) Setting up a formal school costs 80 times more than a

non-formal school in Pakistan.

(c) Flexible timings has been a key strategy for improving

schooling of girls and rural children.

The report also observes that one of the mechanisms
for increasing the demand for education is to ensure active

community and parent participation. When parents are active

in the educational process, their children are more likely to

attend school.



1
oP)
iro)

1

(०) The production and distribution af छा, books are best

by the private sector.

(e) al__monitering is the for
s_remain open.

(f) Achieving universal primary co js as ortant

as universal primary enrolment.

(g) Decentralisation is the key to improving education

administration in South Asia.

(h) Decisions regarding primary hoolinag must bes taken on

educational grounds rather than on political ground

(i) Better education data are required for efficient

educational planning in South Asia.

4.4 How Zimbabwe achieved universal primary enredment in

fg

rsi- The aforesaid report of HDC has brought out® the

three yea

key reforms made by Zimbabwe for enrolling students and the

pro and cons cof the reforms. . These are summar nd beaten:

A. Key reforms for enrolling students

1. Compulsary primary schooling

2. Primary school tuition fees abolished

3 jon abolished

4, Primary school gradua Given option of four years oF



5.

fe)

Ci)

sacondary schooling
Rapid increase in public spending an education

Substantial community Cinaneing tatrodueead

Key reforms for increasing buildings

‘Hot seating’ introduced - double shifts but with two
different sets of teachers

Automatic promotion for primary school and first four
years of secondary school

Key reforms for increasing teachers

Teacher supply was rapidly increased by employing

untrained teachers at the primary level.

Teacher supply was increased by introducing a new,
low-cost teacher-training scheme, Zimbabwe Integrated

National Teacher Education Course (ZINTEC): only two

terms in the four-year course were spent in college,

the remainder being spent teaching in schools.

Other -raforms to lower unit costs

Unit costs reduced by standardizing classes, thus
increasing class size in many of the more privilege
schools.

School resource allocation strictly on the basis of

children enrolle

Number of topic in curriculum reduced,



Examinations localized.
Science-kits for class-based science teaching, even
without labs of electricity.

Vocational subjects introduced.

Key strategies for financing universal primary

education

Focused on devolution of rasponsibility for planning,
financing, and implementation to local communities and

households

Financing strategy for government primary schools.
Government paid for staff salaries, maintenance, all
other materials and running expenses; the community
financed building materials and school building, paid
a small variable fee, and provided voluntary

additional community support.

Financing strategy for non-gevernment primary schools
(90 per cent of all primary schools): the government
provided salaries of teaching staff and gave a per

capita grant of $Z 17.55 per child (12% = US $

0.4-US$1.6 over the period); ‘responsible authorities

financed school maintenance,  non-teacher

furniture, equipment, textbooks, and running
of schools; the community Cinanced school building,

ला



~142 :-८

paid general purpose and sports fees, contributed to a
building fund, and = provided voluntary Additional

community support.

It would be worth pointing out that amongst other
reforns to lower unit cost, vocational subjects were
introduced. This could reduce unit cost by producing
marketable goods in schools. However, it failed elsewhere in
Africa. The report observes on the aspect of Financing for
education that several South Asian countries heavily
subsidised higher level of education. A rise in funding fer
university education would have been understandable if the
goal of universal basic education had already been met. The
efficiency of education spending in South Asia is very low,
The report further projects® a five point strategy ta ensure

universal basic education.

1. The first step is to prepare a concrete five year plan
(1999-2003) to extend universal basic education.

2. Compulsory education laws must be passed and enforced.
3. In order to make the Financial targets more feasible,
a cost effective strategy should be adapted for implementing
the target of universal primary education,

4, In order to formulate a realistic Financial strategy,

the main focus should be on the reallocation of existing

budgets.



-:143 :-

A number of innovative methods can also be used to

a

provide adequate funding for the goal of universal primary
education. Certain countries have resorted to special Tavias

earmarked for education spending.

It goes without saying that some of the radical
features/strategies which helped in achieving universal

primary education elsewhere, must be adopted.



2.

4.
5.

6.

FOOTNOTES 6110 REFERENCES
CHAPTER-IV

Mahbub Haq and Khadija Haq, Human Development in South
Asia, 1998, Human Development Centre, page 2.

Id, at page 3.

Ibid, Chapter 5

id., at pages 71-75

Id, at pages 140-141.

Id., at pages 142-143.


GHAPTER-V.

NATIONAL POLICIES AND PROGRESS MADE IN REALISING THE OBJECTIVE

5.1 Educational plans qn the initial years after
independence were formulated in the context of new enthusiasm
and high expectations. Jawahar Lal Nehru in the Conference of
State Education Ministers argued that “the entire base of
education must be revolutionised”. In 1948, an All India
Education Conference was convened by the then Union Minister
of Education which endorsed the recommendations of earlier
committees on free and compulsory. education. The national

leaders visualised the extension of democracy from political

to economic spheres.

5.2 Data projected by World Bank in its Publication:- The

World Bank chronologically brings out! the details of the
National Policy, Central schemes, State projects and the
decentralised education development and District primary

education programme approved in 1992. It states:

“Working groups of the Planning Commission established
ambitious. target dates for achieving universal
elementary education, targets that were revised
throughout the 1960s and 1970s. In 1966, the Kothari
Commission proposed achieving the goal no later than
1986. This target, too was superseded when the 1986

National Policy o

~ Education articulated a goal of


-:46 :-

ensuring that by 1990 all children 11 years of age
would have completed five years of formal or

non-formal aducation....

The 1986 National Policy on Education sets the stage
for the Central Government toa pla; an increasingly

cation. The policy

important role 10. primary e
explicitly recognised the need to make ai concerted
effort to expand and improve basic education, meaning
formal? and non-formal primary and adult literacy
adueation. At the primary schools level, the policy
gave priority to reducing the disparities in enrolment
for girls and for students from Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes. To carry out the policy, the
Oepartmant of Education created ai set of centrally
sponsored grant schemes to assist States in developing

basic education."

ch schemes inter-alia, Operat ian
Blackboard: 1986; District Institutes of Education and
Training (DIETs): 1988; Total Literacy Campaign: 1988

Minimum Levels of Learning: 1989.

5.2.1. The publication adds? that assisted by donors varia

Stat

cd

projects were also initiated such as Andhra Pras

Education Project, which began in early 1980s with the supmoart

of United Kingdom’s Overseas Development Administrat Cop
Bihar (United Nations Children Fund, UNICEF), Rajasthan

(Swedish International Development Authority) and Wht ar
y


Pradesh (International Development Association, IDA) started
projects between 1990 and 1993. In each State, registered
societies have been created to receive and disburse funds and
to provide an umbrella organisation, closely linked to state

education derartments for project implementation.

District Primary Education Programme

52.2, In 1992, Parliament approved an updated National

a

Policy on Education. The new policy opted for giving a
priority for girl’s education and improved quality in primary
education. It also called for an integrated and decentralised
approach to developing primary education systems, with a focus
on building the capacity of districts to plan and manage
primary education. Thus in 1992 constitutional (73rd and
74th) amendments were carried out which visualised the
increase in the responsibility and the authority of local
governments. These amendments gave the control of primary,
secondary, adult, non-formal, technical | and vocational
education to Panchayati Raj Bodies. The Central Advisory
Board of Education issued a special report as to how to
decentralise ‘the .management of education, » detailing the
structure, role, functions and powers of local bodies, with
the objective of improving the efficiency and effectiveness of

“schools and to reducing demoralisation at the local level

(Ministry of HRD, 1993). It is understood that almast al}
States have passed enabling legislation for implementing the
said constitutional amendments. Administrative guidelines for

decentralisation are also being issued?.



-:48 :-

5.3 Achievements on elementary education as indicated in
1998, a reference annual of th the Ministry of

Information and Broadcasting, ¢ Government of India:-

EDUCATION

Before 1976, education was exclusively the
responsibility of states, the Central Government was only
concerned with certain areas like coordination and
determination of standards in technical and higher education,
etc. In 1976, through a Constitutional amendment, education
became a joint responsibility. Decisions regarding the
organisation and structure of education are largely the
concern of the states. However, the Union Government has a
clear responsibility regarding the quality and character of
education. In addition to policy formulation, the Ministry of
Human Resource Development, Department of Education shares

with the states the responsibility for educational planning.

5.3.1. The Central Advisory Board of: Education (CABE), set up
during the pre-Independence period in 1935, continues to play
a lead role in the evolution and monitoring of educational
policies and programmes, thea most notable of which are the
‘National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986, Programme of Action

(POA), 1986 and a revised NPE and POA (1992).

5.3.2. EXPENDITURE: we



National Policy on Education, 1986 and the Programme
of Action (POA) 1992 envisages that free and compulsory
education of satisfactory quality should be provided to all
children upto the age of 14 years before the commencement of
the 2180 century. As per the commitment of the Government
under the Common Minimum Programme, about six per cent of the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) would be earmarked for the

Education Sector by the year 2000 AD ane 50 per cent of the

outlay will be spent on Primary Education.

5.3.3, With the increasing commitment of the resources to
education, resource allocation for education has, aver the
years, increased significantly. Plan outlay on education
increased from Rs.153 crore in the First Five Year Plan to
Rs.19,600 crore in the Eighth Five Year Plan (1992-97). The

expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP also rose from

0.7 per cent in 1951-52 to 3.3 per cent in 1995-96 (RE).

5,

(>)

.4. The Eighth Plan outlay (Centre and , States) at
Rs.19,600 crore is higher than the Seventh Plan expenditure of
Rs.7,633.13 crore by 2.6 times. In keeping with this set up,
the Central Plan outlay for education has been substantially

5-96 to RS.3,383 crore in

from Rs.1,825 crore in 19

ore jn 1997-98,.,

1996-97 and further to Rs.4,095 ¢



5.3.5. There has been inter-se shift in the allocation of
resources within the education sector from higher education to
elementary education. The outlay on elementary education is
62.1 per cent of the total Central Sector Plan outlay in
1997-98. Further the outlay consists of Rs.354.94 crore for
Secondary Education, Rs.403 crore for University and Higher
education, Rs.127 crore for Adult Education and Rs.390 crore

for Technical Education.
5.3.6. ELEMENTARY EDUCATION:

The revised Programme of Action 1992 of the NPE, 1986
resolves to ensure free and compulsory education of
satisfactory quality to all children upto 14 years before we
enter the 21st century. In order to operationalise the
revised policy of the Government, the following three
sub-schemes were proposed under Operation Blackboard during
the Eighth Plan : (i) continuation of the ongoing scheme to
cover all the remaining schools identified as on 30 September
1986; (ii) expanding the scope of the scheme to provide three
rooms and three teachers’ in primary schools with enrolment
exceeding 100 with provision for about 50 per cent women
teachers in primary schools as mandatory for all states/UTs;
and (iii) extending the scope of the scheme to upper primary
“schools. The expanded schemes have been started since

1993-94.



—:51 :-८

5.3.7. To achieve the goal of Universalisation of Elementary
Education, the Non-Formal Education Programme had been. put
into operation in 1979-80 to provide education of a quality
comparable to formal system to children who do not/cannot
attend school, school dropouts, girls who cannot attend whole
day schools and working children. The scheme was reorganised
and expanded in 1987-88 and again in 1993. Under the Scheme,
assistance is given to the states/union territories in the
ratio of 60:40 and 90:10 for running general co-educational
and girls centres respectively. Cent per cent assistance is
given to voluntary agencies for running non-formal education
centres and undertaking experimental and innovative projects.
Presently 2.86 lakh centres have bean sanctioned far imparting
education to about 71 lakh children. About 1.18 lakh centres
are exclusively for girls. Under another Centrally-sponsored
scheme of Restructuring and Reorganisation of Teachers
Education, launched in 1987-88, 433 DIETs, 110 CTES/IASEs have
been established throughout the country to impart good quality
of pre-service and in-service training to teachers and 19

SCERTs have been strengthened.

-3.8. In elementary education the focus has been shifted

a

from enrolment per se to retention and achievement. The
Minimum Levels to Learning programme answers the third
dimension of Universalisation of Elementary Education, namely,
universal achievement. Laying down competency to be mastered
by all children in the country at a particular grade, the

programne envisages a package of quality improvement. It

incorporates curricular revision, teacher orientation and


improved pedagogy to handle multi-grade situations. A
Committee has also 088७1 constituted to Tay dawn Minimum Levels

of Learning for subjects taught at upper primary stage.

2

§.3.9. In the first phase, 18 projects were taken up and

¢
(>)

after working in 4,000 primary schools, the programme is being
upstaged through the institutional mechanism of DIETs and

e
SCERTs in about 12 states. After this period of initiation

nd

the programme would be extended and expanded to cover th
entire school system by 2000 An. Currently, about 200 DIETs
have been oriented in the comprehensive strategy.

$.3.10. DISTRICT PRIMARY EDUCATION PROGRAMME:

The District Primary Education Programme (DPEP) is a special

7

thrust and a new initiative to achieve Universalisation of

ame takes a holistic

Elementary Education (UEE)> The prog
view of primary education development and Seeks to

gh district specific

operationalise the strategy of WEE thro

Management,

planning with emphasis or

participatory processes, empowerment and capacity building at

all levels. The programme is implemented through the State

level registered societies.

ry

5.3.41. The programme aims at improvising access te primary

education for all children, reducing primary dre

Jess than 10 per cent, increasing Teareing achievement or

primary school students: by 25 Per Gent ned cedue dag thee gender

and social gap to Tess than ४७ लक cent.



6.3.12. The programme is structured to provide additional
inputs over and above the Central/state sector schemes for
elementary education. The programme fills in the existing
gaps in the development of primary aducation and seeks to
revitalise the existing system. DPEP is contextual and has a
marked gender focus. The programme components include
construction of classrooms and new schools, opening of
non-formal/alternative schooling centres, appointment of new
teachers, setting up early childhood education centre,
strengthening of State Councils of Educational Research and
Training (SCERTs)/District Institute of Education Training
(DIETS), setting up of block resource centres/cluster resource
centres, teacher training, development of teaching learning
material, research based interventions, special interventions
for education of girls, education of SC/ST ete. A new
initiative of providing integrated education to disabled
children and distance education for teacher training has also

bean incorporated in the DPEP Scheme.

5.3.13. The district is the unit of programme implementation
and selected on the basic of twin criteria, viz., (a)
educationally backward districts with female literacy below

the national average and (b) districts where total literacy

campaigns (TLCs) have been suc » leading to enhanced

demand for elementary education.



5.3.14, DPEP is a centrally-sponsored scheme. Eighty-five per
cent of the project cost is provided by the Government of
India which is resourced by external funding, which is already

tied up te the extent of Rs.3,450 crore, The balance 15 per

cant is shared by the participating states. The World Bank is
providing assistance to the tune of US$ 260.3 million (Rs. 806
crore) for the District Primary Education Programme (075६7)
phase-I and an amount of US$ 425,0 million (Rs1,480 crore) for
OPEP phase -II for which a grant from Government of Netherland
amounting to US $25.8 million (Rs.90 crore) is also tied up.
The European Community has made available a grant of ECU's 150

million (approximately Rs 585 crore), for implementation of

DPEP in 19 districts of Madhya Pradesh.

-3.15. Assistance from ODA of UK amounting to Rs.42.5 million

a

(Rs 255 crore) and Rs.37.71 million (Rs.226.22 crore) is

available for DPEP in Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal

respectively. The World Bank has alan offered

e districts) in

coverage of 17 educational districts (27 revenu

Bihar under DPEP phase-III.

5.3.16. The programms, which was initially Jaunched in ac
districts of seven states in 1994, is now covering a tetal of
122 districts in 13 states. The programme implementation has
Shown promising results as per reports of various supervision
missions and evaluatory studies. The programme is encouraging
application of numerous innevative and practical interventions

for improving access, retentton and quality of education.


5.3.17. BIHAR EDUCATION PROJECT:

The Bihar Education Project (BEP) is a basic education project
aimed at Universalisation of Primary Education by bringing
about a qualitative improvement in. the - existing education
system. The project was initiated in 1991 covering seven
districts in Bihar. .The financing pattern was 3:2:1 among
UNICEF, Government of India and Government of Bihar. The
phase-I concluded in March 1996 and the programme has been
extended for a period of two years from 1996-97 to 1397-98
under phase - II, with an outlay of Rs 61.5 erore,

Significant outcomes of the Project include intensification of

community participation process and motivational training
teachers in participatory mode leading to renewal of teaching
learning processes, During 1997-98, it is proposed to cover
17 educational districts, (27 revenue districts)  ineluding
these seven districts of Bihar under DPEP-TIT with assistance

from the World Bank.

5.3.18 LOK JUMBISH:-

An innovative project callad “Lok Jumbish” (People's movement

for Education for All) with assistance from Swedish
International Development Authority (STDA) has been undertaken
in Rajasthan. The basic objective of the project is te
achieve “Education for ALL” through people's mobilisatian an

their participation.



5.3.19. The Project has so far covered 58 blacks-where it has
undertaken environment building activities in 2,491 villages
and has completed school mapping exercises in 1,800 villages
where community mobilisation and partnership with voluntary
groups has been noteworthy. Three hundred and forty four new
schools have been opened while 275 primary schools ‘have been

upgraded. An innovative and successful NFE programme launched

by LJP has spread to 1,502 centres. The Lok Jumbish Proj
has made a positive contribution ta quality improvement
through the development of improved MLL based textbooks fram

Classes I-IV, which has been mainstreamed in all schools of

Government of Rajasthan.

5.3.20. NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT TO PRIMARY

EDUCATION:

A National Programme of Nutritional Support to Primary
Education commonly called the Midday Meal Scheme was launched
on 15 August, 1995 with the intention of improving enrolment,
attendance and retention while simultaneously impacting an the
nutrition status of students in’ primary classes. The

programme envisages provision of cooked meals/processed food

for children studying in classes 1-५ in all government, JTacal

ist
na

body and government aided primary sct Central assistance

‘under the programme is available for the reimbursement of cost
of foodgrains and for transportation charyes for movement oof
foodgrains from FCI godowns to schools/villages. Salaries of

cooks/helpers ete., expenditures on construction of

ar

kitchen sheds needed for conversion of foodurains inte



—~:57 :-

meals are eligible for coverage under the poverty alleviation
schemes i.e. JRY/NRY. Other costs of conversion of
foodgrains into cooked meal/processed food are to be met by

implementing agencies/states.

5.3.21. Apart from this, the implementation of these “schemes
is today, indifferent and full of "leakages". In spite of the
achievements “set out in the said report, the fact remains
that in India, out of 5,47,672 villages, 48,566 do not have
any school and 1,67,382 rural schools have just one teacher

for each school5.

5.4 Recommendations of the Committees of State Education

Ministers on implications of the proposal to make elementary

education a fundamental right:- The Chief Ministers’

Conference held on 4th to 5th July, 1996 adopted a resolution

to universalise primary education by 2000 A.D. A Committee
chaired by Mr. Muhi Ram Saikia, Union Minister of State for
HRD (Education) was constituted on 29th August, 1996 with the
Education Ministers of 13 States and senior officials of the
Central Government as its members to’ consider the legal,
academic, administrative and financial implications. The
Committee submitted its report on 15th January, 1997. The
report says that the number of primary schools have gone up to
5,90,421 and the number of upper primary schools to 1,71,216
in 1995-96 as against 2,10,000 and 13,000 in 1950-51
respactivaly. Gross enrolment ratio at primary level has
increased from 42.6 in 1950-51 to 104.5 in 1995-96 with a

large proportion of increase being in rural and semi-urban


areas. According to the 5th All India Educational Survey,
94.6% of the rural habitations have a primary school within
one Kilometre and 85.4% have an upper primary school with a
distance of three kilometres. The committee observes that tha
task of universalisation of elementary education (UEE) is far
from being complete because there are severe gender, regional,
sectional and caste disparities in UEE. Only two-thirds of
the children compjete primary schooling and only half complete
upper primary schooling. A significant proportion of thease
who join school drop out before completing their studies due
to socio-economic and cultural factors as also due to lack of
adequate infrastructure, shortage oF teachers,
non-availability of teaching, learning materials and text
books, a curriculum which is not fully related to local needs

and low levals of learning.

5.4.1. After considering various pros and cons, the said
committee made the recommendations which are summarised as

follows:

i) The Constitution of India should be amended to make
the right to.free elementary education upto 14 years
of age a Fundamental Right. Simultaneously, an
explicit provision should be made in the Constitution
to make it a Fundamental Duty of every citizen who is
a parent to provide opportunities for alementary
education to all children upto 14 years of age.
Consequential amendments to the Directive Principles

of State Policy as enunciated in Article 45 of the



ii)

iii)

Constitution should also be made.

In 9 diverse federal polity such as ours and with the
States being the main providers: of elamentary
education, there is no need toa enact a Central
Legislation making elementary education compulsory
States should either amend their existing legislation
or enact fresh legislation to give effect to the
proposed Constitutional amendments on the Vines of the
action taken in regard to implementation of 73rd and
74th Constitutional amendments. The Central
Government should issue guidelines providing a broad
framework for enactment of fresh legislation on
compulsory elementary education. The guidelines
should be finalised in consultation with State/uT
Governments.

State legislation should provide for the follewing:-
(a) provision of permissive compulsion to enable

State Governments and local bodies to enforce the Taw

(b) grounds for exemption from -compulsory school
attendance;

(०) 1. imposition of punishment on defaudting parents

- quantum of minimum and maximum punishment out be

specified;

Ss within 4A

(d) establishment of primary sc
distance of 1-1.5 kilometers from rural habitations
provided that there is a population of 250 in the

catchment areas; 7

(e) establishment of upper primary hools within



iv)

v)

-:60 :-

a distance of 3 kilometres from rural habitations
provided that there is a population of 500 in the
catchment areas; |
State Governments should be entitled to relax the
norms in (d) and (e@) above in the case of hill,
desert, tribal and inaccessible areas so as to ensure
that the proposed schools are viable.

(f) responsibilities which may be delegated to
Gram Panchayats and Village Education Committee (VECs)
for achieving Universalisation of Elementary Education
(UEE) in their jurisdiction; |

(g) provision for engaging honorary attendance
officers; and

(h) vesting of powers to impose penalties and
grant exemptions in the Panchayat Raj
Institutions/Village Education Committees (PRIs/
VECs); and

A State-wise approach in regard to free education
should be adopted in keeping with the local situation.
However, in order to ensure unffermity, free
elementary education may) include exemption from
tuition fee; provision of essential stationery to all
children in primary classes. In addition, the Mid-day
Meals Programme may be continued. State Governments

may provide ‘other incentives such as free schaol

uniforms, cash incentives, scholarships, ete. in
accordance with their economic capacity and
priorities. ae

The administrative machinery for supervision,


vi)

vii)

viii)

-:61 :-

inspection, monitoring and evaluation of elementary
education should be augmented and strengthened at the
Secretariat, Directorate, District and Block levels.
The academic implications of the proposal which
include provision of recurrent teacher training and
quality textbooks besides introduction — of Minimum
Levels of Learning (MLL) should be given due
attention.

Minimum infrastructure and teachers as envisaged under
Operation Blackboard should be provided in all primary
and upper primary schools preferably during the 9th
Five Year Plan. However, such provision of facilities
may not be made a_i statutory obligation for the
present. The norms prescribed under OB would not be
applicable to alternative schooling and non-formal
education programme.

As in the past, the primary responsibility to promote
elementary education should remain with the State
Governments, who should consider measures which will
enable local bodies in urban and rural areas to raise
revenues for improvement: of facilities in schools.
They should consider the proposal to levy an
“educational cess” in this regard. The Central
Government should meet additional requirements heeping
in view the past trend of resource transfers and the
need to augment resources to implement the proposal
The Central and State Governments should allocate 50%
of budgetary allocations for education to elementary

education and ensure that the funds so allocated are


ix)

x)

xi)

xii)

not re-appropriated or diverted ta any other sector.
They should also streamline the existing system of
flow of funds to Elementary Education Programmes.

The Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should
evolve an appropriate formula in consultation with the
State Governments concerned to share additional
finances required to implement the proposal. The
formula 60 evolved should provide for transfer of more
resources to educationally backward
States/Districts/Blocks. Estimates of additional
funds required to implement the proposal should be
carefully examined in consultation with experts who
may also identify the possible sources of Financing
the additional requirements. The additional
expenditure to implement the proposal should be phased
out, preferably over a period of 5 years, coinciding
with the Ninth Five Year Plan.

States should provide adequate space and opportunity
to deserving private schools to spread elementary
education in remote and inaccessible rural areas.
They should also consider suitabla regulatory
provisions to ensure that the tendency OF
commercialisation of education is effectively curbed.
In regard to medium of instruction at primary 1७५७१,

isting policy of

States should continue the
providing primary education in the regional language
and where regional language is other than the mother
tongue, in the mother tongue.

In order to give meaning and effect to the proposal,


special efforts should be made to build public opinion
in favour of Universalisation of Elementary Education
(७६६) by social mobilisation and involvement of local
communities on a much larger scale. To achieve this,
a National Elementary Education Mission (NEEM) should
be effectively operationalised in IXth Plan; Non
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) should be provided
larger assistance and support in their efforts to
promote Universalisation of Elementary Education
(UEE); and Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) should be
given greater responsibility in planning, management
and implementation of programmes of elementary

education.

5.5.1. The Saikia Committee observes that the requirement of
additional funds in five years coinciding with the 9th Plan to
achieve the national goal of UEE, would be approximately
Rs.40,000 crores. As per the Annexure-IV of the proposed 9th
Plan, under the Head Education, for realising
primary/elementary education including mid-day meal scheme,
the proposed outlay for the 9th Plan is Rs.31,594 crore
(comprising of Centre’s share of Rs.12,G44 crore and State and
UTs share of Rs.18,950 crore). However, the required outlay
is of Rs.48,950 crore (comprising of Centre’s share of
Rs.30,000 crore and State and UT's share of Rs.18,950 crore).
Thus a gap of Rs.17,356 crore is still being projected in the

9th Plan.


-:64 :-

FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES
CHAPTER-V.

The World Bank Publication, Primary Education in
India, Edn., March, 1997, Chapter 1.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government
of India, India 1998 A Reference Annual.

Or.J.C.Kulshreshtha, Indian Child Labour, Edn.1994,

page 39.



-:65 :-

CHAPTER-VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RIGHT TO EDUCATION: RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THE COMMISSION :

6.1 The need for compulsory education for children children:- The

Law Commission had prepared a detailed note on free = and
compulsory education for children together with a draft 8111
for a central legislation. In drafting the Bill, the
Commission had taken into consideration certain suggestions
and comments received by it including those made at the
National Conference on Education as a Fundamental Right
organised by Pratham on 24th and 25th April, 1998 at New
Delhi; and the National Consultation on Right to Education; a
strategy to eliminate Child Labour, organised by the Centre
for Child and the Law, the National law School of India
University with the support of UNICEF heid on 16th and 17th
May, 1998 at Bangalore. A cany of the same was forwarded to
the Ministry of ‘Human Resource Development, Department of
Education, Government of India requesting for views of the
Departnent.
6.1.1. The Law Commission has carefully considered various
issues in the light of comments of the Department of Education
“as well as other available materials. Accordingly, it has

come to the following conclusions:



-:66 :-

6.1.2. If a Central Legislation is enacted as is being
proposed by the Commission, it would not require ratification
by the State Legislatures, being a subject falling under Entry
25 of Concurrent List of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
of India. Article 254(1) provides that the Jaw made by
Parliament with reference to ai concurrent subject shall
prevail over a law made by the State Legislature on the same
subject irrespective of the fact whether the law made by the
Parliament is earlier or subsequent to the State enactment.
(This provision is of course subject to clause (2) of article

254.)

6.1.3. A view has been expressed that it may not be feasible
to bring the private unaided institutions within the purview
of the proposed Bill. In this connection, reference has been
made to article 21A(3) as proposed to be inserted by the
Constitution (Eighty-Third Amendment) Bill, 1997 which

provides that States shall not make any Jaw for free and

a

compulsory education under clause (2) in relation to th
institution not maintained by States or not receiving aid out
of State funds.

6.1.4. The Department of Education may perhaps be right in
saying that as of today the private educational institutions
which are not in receipt of any grant or aid from the State,
cannot be placed under an obligation to impart free education

to all the students admitted into their institutions.

jo of Unnikrishnan case, it is

However, applying the r

perfectly legitimate for the State or the affiliating Board,



as the case may be, to require the institution toa admit and
impart free education to fifty per cant of the students as a
condition for affiliation or for permitting their students to
appear for the Government/Board examination. To start with
the percentage can be prescribed 65 twanty. Accordingly,
twenty per cent students could be selected by the concerned
institution in consultation with the local authorities and the
parent-teacher association (see the appended Bill at
Annexure-A). This proposal would enable the unaided
institutions to join the national endeavour to provide
education to the childiren of India and to that extent will

also help reduce the financial burden upon the State.

6.1.5. Further, imparting education, including
primary/elementary education, is as much the obligation of the
Central Government as that of the States after the 42nd
amendment of the Constitution which has put “education” in the
Concurrent List. It is the Commission’s view that the Union
of India has the primary responsibility for carrying out the
mandate of article 45 read with articles 41, 46 and 21 of the
Constitution. One cannot lose sight of the fact that
substantial additional finances are required for this purpose
and in the present state of things, the additional finances
can only come from the Centre. It hardly needs mention that

“most of the high-yielding revenue resources are with the

Centre.



-:68 :-

6.1.6. Article 45 speaks of "free and compulsory education
for all children until they complete the age of 14 years".

The expression “compulsory” in the said article necessarily

implies an element of compulsion, 0०७ it compulsion on the

State to provide free education or a compulsion on the parents
to send their children to the school or a compulsion on the
society to ensure that all its children go to school atleast
until they complete the age of 14 years or for that matter
upon any other institution, organisation or individual, as the
case may be. It may not, therefore, be correct to say that

the method of compulsion is inadvisable.

6.1.7. A statute imposing compulsory education is no
encroachment on any fundamental right, for no one has any

right to remain ignorant or illiterate’.

6.1.8. The Law Commission is of the view that Universal
Elementary Education (७६६) cannot be achieved except by the
use of a certain amount of compulsion. In this context, it is
relevant to notice that the method of persuasion has not
yielded the desired results. It needs to be emphasised that
the constitutional obligation is to provide “free and
compulsory education” and all permissible means and measures
ought to be employed to achieve the said goal. It may
necessitate dispensing with the tuition fee, providing free
text books or free uniforms, free lunch, ete.wherever

necessary.



-:69 :-

6.1.9. The Commission is aware that the basic reason for the
children from the poor families being not able to attend the
schools is poverty. The Commission recognises that no parent
who can afford to send his child to school, would not do so
and would prefer to send him to work. Undoubtedly, it would
be the wish and desire of every parent to see that his child
is educated and that he is not called upon to work whether as
a domestic servant or in a factory or anywhere else. At the
same time, it is recognised by all educationists that a little
amount of compulsion may be necessary in certain cases apart
from persuasion and incentives, to achieve the goal of an
Universal Elementary Education which is basic to any

democratic society.

6.2. The Commission has noted with some satisfaction that
so far 19 States/Union territories have enacted legislation
making primary/elementary education compulsory. (A list 1s
attached as Annexure-B). _ These are Assam, Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bangal,
Delhi and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. These enactments are in

three parts:

(i) Power vested in the State Government to notify
the area in which the Act can be implemented.
(ii) Penalties for not sending children to school.

(iii) Power in a_vested authority to grant exemption

from the legislation.


-:70 :-

.6.2.1. The Department of Education has pointed out that most

of thease Acts have, however, remained unenforced due to

wo

various socio-economic and cultural facters as well a
administrative and financial constraints. According to that
Department, the compulsion contemplated in article 45 of the
Constitution is a compulsion on the State rather than on
parents. As such a consensual approach to motivate parents
and children is said to be more appropriate. The key elements
of this approach are stated to be: (i) community involvement;
(ii) decentralisation of planning and management of school
education to Panchayati Raj Institutions; (iii) motivation of
children to attend schools regularly; (iv) improvement of

f

infrastructure and facilities in schools; (५) development ७
locally relevant curricula; (vi) improvement in quality of
textbooks; (vii) teacher training; (viii) child centered

learning; and (ix) adoption of minimum levels of Tearning.

6.2.2. However, since the consensual approach alone has
failed to yield results, it is the view of the Law Commission
that it may be necessary to introduce some compulsion ta
supplement if not supplant the consensual approach and methods

of persuasion:

6.3 It was brought to the Commission’s notice that a
“committee of State Education Ministers (Saikia Committee) had
in August, 1996 inter-alia, examined the need for ai central
legislation for elementary education and cane to the
conclusion that it was _bot strictly necessary to have a

_

central legislation in view the fact that elementary education



oe :८

was mainly the responsibility of the States and in a diverse
federal polity such as ours with wide disparities, it was
debatable whether a central legislation on compulsory
education would serve much purpose. It was felt that since
these State Governments are the main providers of elementary
education, they should enact such legislation , and be
responsible for their proper implementation. Noting that
existing legislation was outdated and required to be in tune
with later developments and the current social ethos, the
Committee was of the view that States should either amend
their prevailing legislations or enact fresh legislations for
free and compulsory primary education. The Central Government
should support and strengthen the efforts made by the States
in this regard and issue guidelines providing a_ broad
framework for enactment of fresh legislation on the subject.
The guidelines should be finalised in consultation with

State/Union territory Governments.

6.3.1. The Law Commission finds it difficult to agree with
the approach of the Saikia Committee for the reasons already
stated. The spirit of cooperative federalism does not come in
the way of central legistation, nor does the central
legislation prevent the States from offering appropriate
amendments (as may be called for in their local conditions) to
‘such central legislation. Only when an inconsistent law or
inconsistent provision (inconsistent with the central

legislation) is sought to be enacted by the State Legislature

that the requirement of President’s assent is necessary to

make it effective and valid as per article 254(2).


-:72 :-

In fact, the report of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development has stated in
paragraph 15.6 that the Central Government should consider
working out the necessary legislation to provide for the
universalisation of free elementary education. “this law
should be simple “with some skeletal framework which may also
indicate the Central share in the financial burden. The
details can be formulated by the respective States according

to their requirements".

No such law 15 presently being worked out by the
Central Government, which is awaiting the Passing of the
Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) 8111, 1997 before taking

action.

As above noticed there does not appear to be any sense
of urgency with regard to the Constitution (Eighty-third
Amendment) Bill. — Presently it lies in a state of suspended
animation and one does not know if and when and in what form
it will eventually be passed. We are fast moving towards the
end of the century and Indian children cannot wait and remain
ignorant. Their’ needs have to be dealt with Today. The
Supreme Court has given them the right to elementary education
as part of their right to a dignified life, a life where they
can make choices. This is the Taw of the Tand and must be

implemented immediately.



6.4 On the issue of ramifications of compe Tling
Parents/guardians of every child to send their children to
attend the school, the Committee of State Education Ministers
appears to have examined the matter keeping in view the
socio-economic conditions prevailing in” the country, It
pointed out that one of the major barriers in the effective
enforcement of compulsory education laws had been the spectre
oF large scale Punishment by imposition of fines o

who

imprisonment of defaulting parents, particularly
ostensibly could not afford to send their children to school,
Another apprehension was that the defaulting parents would be
subject to considerable harassment by the bureaucracy,
resulting in widespread resentment, among the general
population against the implementation of compulsory education

laws.

The Law Commission agrees that the request of
conpulsion on the parent/guardian should not be allowed to
become an instrument of harassment and penalties should be
enforced only as a 1880 resort; and that too in a humane and
compassionate manner without losing sight of the objective of
the exercise, that is, pressurising and persuading
recalcitrant parents to send their children to school, The
punishment may vary from State to State and could possibly

include community service (Shram Daan, Kar Seva ete.) and

suitable disincentives as determined by Panchayati Raj

Institutions.



In this connection, it may be noticed that in the
United Kingdom, the defaulting parents who fail to send their
children to the schools, are forced to do so through the State
agencies. Under sections 37(5) and 40(1) of the Education
Act, 1944 in that country, any person who fails to comply with
a school attendance order served upon him is gui tty ef an
offence unless he proves that he is causing the child to
receive efficient full-time education suitable to his age,
ability and aptitude otherwise than at school. On a summary
conviction for the offence, a person is liable in the case of
a first offence to a fine not exceeding pounds 10, on a second
conviction of the same offence to a fine not exceeding pounds
20 and on a third or a subsequent conviction of the same
offence to a fine not exceeding pounds 20 or imprisonment not
exceeding one month or both (Education Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1948 section 9(1) (UK): Criminal Justice Act,

1967, section 92(1), Schedule 3, Part-I (UK).

The court by which a person is convicted of failing to
comply with a school attendance order or before which a person
is charged with failing to cause a child of compulsory school
age to attend regularly at the school at which he is a
registered pupil,-may direct’ thea local education authority
which instituted the proceedings to bring the child in
question before a juvenile court (section 40(3) of the
Education Act, 1944 (UK) and Children and Young Persons Act,

1969, section 72(3), Schedule 5, para 13 (UK).


-:75 :८

6.4.1. Many existing State Legislations in our country on the
subject also provide for imposition of punishment on the
parents who fail to send their children to school. In the
Commission’s view, it would not be conducive to realising the
objective of compulsory education to provide a punishment

which may vary from State to State.

6.5 The Department of Education has rightly emphasised the
need for social mobilisation and involvement of the community
to build up public opinion in favour of UEE which 145 crucial
to implementation of the proposal. The Saikia committee
recommended, inter-alia, that NGOs should be provided larger
assistance and support in their efforts to promote UEE; and
Panchayati Raj Institutions should be given greater
responsibility in planning, management and implementation of
programmes of elementary education. The committee also
recommended that a National Elementary Education Mission
(NEEM) should be operationalised in the Ninth Five year Plan
to monitor and supervise programmes of elementary education,
assist State Governments in area specific programmes for
equality and equity in UEE and to launch a national media and
advocacy campaign for UEE. :

6.5.1. The Law Commission is in agreement with the view that
social mobilisation and involvement of the community to build
up public opinion in favour of UEE jis crucial for the
implementation of the proposal. Besides, the increasing role
of village education committees and parent-teacher

associations also needs to. be acknowledged. However, these



—:76 :-

provisions can hardly be operationalised through incorporation
in the proposed legislation. This will need to be dealt with
and enforced at the executive levels through the machinery of
Centre and the States. However, a specific provision enabling
parent-teacher associations to monitor the functioning of the
schools and the quality of education imparted therein would be
in order.

6.5.2. In addition to the Non Governmental Organisations, the
Panchayats and Municipalities should also be involved in this
effort. Articles 243G and 243W in Chapter IX and IXA of the
Constitution of India introduced by the Constitution
(Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992 w.e.f. 1.6.1993 pravide
the necessary basis for this purpose, Article 2436
contemplates the State Legislatures enacting laws conferring
upon Panchayats, such powers and authority as may be necessary
to enable them to function as institutions of self-government.
It is further provided that such law may contain provisions
for the devolution of powers and responsibilities on
Panchayats at the appropriate level subject to such conditions
as may be specified therein with respect to (a) the
preparation of Plans for economic development and social
justice and (b) the implementation of schemes for economic
development and social justice as may be antrusted to them
including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Eleventh Schedule. Items 17 and 18 of the Eleventh Schedule
read: “17: Education, including primary and secondary

schools; 18: Technical training and vocational education” To

the same effect is article 243W which places upon. the

Municipalities a similar obligation read with items 3 and 13

of the Twalfth Schedule. It is appropriate that State



-:77 in

Legislatures should enact legislation as contemplated by the
aforesaid provisions of the Constitution, if they have not

already done so.

6.5.3. It is essential that legislation should also contain a
provision to ensure that good schools are established at
reasonable distances so that quality education is available

for all children.

6.6. Constitution (Eighty-Third Amendment) Bill, 1997

Proposing insertion and amendment of certain provisions in the insertion and amendment of certain provisions in the

Constitution of  India:- A Constitution amendment Bill being
the Constitution (Eighty-Third Amendment) 8111, 1997, dated
9th July, 1997 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28th July,
1997. The Bill provides for the insertion of a new article
21A the omission of article 45 and amendments to articles 35

and 51A. The proposed article 21A reads as under:

“21A.(1) हि The State shall provide free and
compulsory education to all citizens of the age of six
to fourteen years.

(2) The right to free and compulsory education
referred to in clause (1) shall be enforced in such
manner as the State may, by law, determine.

(3) The State shall not make any law, for free and
compulsory education under clause (2), in relation toa
the educational institutions not maintained by the

aid out of State funds.”

State or not receivi



6.6.1. In the Law Commission's view, the words "right to” in
clause (2) of proposed article 21A should be substituted by

the words “obligation to provide". This is for the reason

that there cannot be 68 fundamental “right to free and
compulsory education". The fundamental right of citizens,

until they attain the age of 14 years, is to “free education”,
whereas the State’s corresponding obligation is to provide
“free and compulsory education". The chapter on fundamental
rights contains several articles which are worded so as to

create an obligation upon the State and yet those provisions

क्र

have been understood and interpreted as creating
corresponding fundamental right for citizens. The foremost
example of this type of legislative practice is article 14
which says “The State shall not deny to any persen equality
before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the

territory of India."

So far’ as clause (3) is concerned, the Law Commission
suggests that it should be totally re-cast in the light of the
basic premise of the decision in Unnikrishnan, which has been
referred to hereinabove. It would neither be advisable nor
desirable that the unaided educational institutions are kept
outside the proposed article altogether. While the primary
obligation to provide education is upon the State, the private
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided, supplement

this effort.



6.6.2. The u ided “institutions should be made aware that

recognition,. a: iliation or permission to send their children
. an

५10० appear | ror the Government/Board examination al casts a
“eorresponding ‘social obligation upon them towards the society.
aThe recognition/affiliation/permission aforesaid is meant to
enable’ them ‘'to:supplement the effort of the State and not to
enable them to make money. Since they exist and function
effectively because of such recognition/affiliation/permission
granted by’. public authorities, they must and are bound to
serve the public interest. For this reason, the unaided
educational institutions must be made to impart free education
“to 50% of the students admitted to their institutions. This
principle has’ already been applied to medical, engineering and
other colleges ‘imparting professional education and there is
“no reason why the’ schools imparting primary/elementary
‘education should not be -placed under the same obligation.
Clause (3) of proposed article 21A may accordingly be recast
to give effect to the above concept and obligation.

6.6. “The aforesaid bill also provides that article 35 of

1]

the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) of that

_article and, ५ se (1) as so renumbered and before the

4 1.२०

Fo yee oy

Explanation, the: following. clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(2) The competent Jegislature shall make
the law for the enforcement of right to free and
compulsory education referred to 10 clause (1) of
Article 21A within one year from the commencement of
the Constitutian (Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 1997

Provided that a provision of any law relating


-:80 :-

to free and compulsory education in force in a State
immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Eighty-third Amendmant) Act, 1997 which
is inconsistent with the provisions of article 21A,
shall continue to be in force until amended or
repealed by a competent legislature or other competent
authority or until the expiration of one year from

such commencement, whichever is earlier.”

6.7. Article 45 of ‘the Constitution is proposed to te
omitted by the same bill. Further,in article 518 of the
Constitution, after clause (j), the following clause is
proposed to be added, namely:-
"(k) to provide opportunities for education
to a child between the age of six and fourteen
years of whom such citizen is a parent or

guardian.”

6.7.1. .The reason given for this constitutional amendment is
that it “would demonstrate the necessary political will and
administrative resolve of the © country to achieve
universalisation ‘of ealementary education and to eradicate
illiteracy". It was suggested that this historical amendment
of the Constitution in the 50th yaar of Independence would
‘inspire the nation to meet the daunting challenge of achieving

the goal of education for all by 2000 A.D.



~:81 :-

6.7.2. As is apparent from what is set out above, the States
and Union territories would be required to enact laws for the
enforcement of the right to free and compulsory education
within one year from the commencement of the Constitution

(Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 1997.

6.8. The aforesaid bill was referred by the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha to the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development. A press communique
inviting suggestions/views was issued on 18th August, 1997.
The Committee considered the Bill in four sittings and heard
oral evidence. It adopted the draft report at its meeting
held on 4th November, 1997. The report was then presented to
the Rajya Sabha on 24th November, 1997 and laid on the table
of the Lok Sabha on the = same day. Unfortunately, the Lok

Sabha was dissolved soon thereafter and elections were called.

6.8.1. The Budget Session after the new Lok Sabha was
constituted is over. There is, however, no indication whether

the Government is inclined to pursue the pending bill.

at all

D

6.9. The squestion is debatable whether it i
necessary to amend the Constitution when there is an explicit

recognition of the right to education till the age of fourteen

-years by the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan’s case. As the

said judgment can be overruled by a larger Bench in another
case, thus making this right to education vulnerable, it would

appear advisable to give this right constitutional sanctity.

ao


6.10. In the view of the Law Commission, the obligation to

enforce the right to education should net be shifted te the

ib

State Governments. A uniform Cantral legislation underlining
certain minimum parameters for implementing this right would
be clearly desirable. In that view of the matter, amendments
to article 35 as proposed in the Constitution (Eighty-Third
Amendment Bill) 1997 would be unnecessary for the reason that

even if the law is made by Parliament, the State Legislatures

o

are .-competent to effect local amendments thereto inasmuch a
the subject of “education” is in the Concurrent List. Indeed,
according to the Constitution, a State Legislature can also
substitute a provision in the Parliamentary legislation or
enact an inconsistent provision wherever mecessary - of course
subject to the requirement of obtaining the assent of the
President. Similarly the Commission does not favour the
proposed amendment under clause (3) of article 218 seeking to
bar enactment of any Taw against educational institutions not
maintained by the State or not receiving aid out of State
funds for the ‘reasons indicated by us in paragraph 6.6.2.
above. The Commission does not see any harm if the other
amendments are retained.

6.11 The Commission is not unaware of the fact as also
stated in the Financial Memorandum te the Constitution
-(Eighty-Third Amendment Bill), 1997, that huge expenditure is
involved in providing compulsory education ta all citizens
the age of six to fourteen years. The annual expenditure

thousand

estimated in this regard igs said to be forty

nine hundred fifty crore rupees. However, it is not in the


domain of this Commission to dwell on resources to 9७७ found
for providing free education to the children. This aspect has
been the subject-matter of discussion in the report of the
Committee For Review of National Policy on Education (1986).
The suggestions in this regard include levying of “education
cess". It would be for the Centre and the States/Union
territories to raise necessary resources to achieve the goal
of providing free education. We may incidentally point out
that ‘mopping up of resources through levying of “education

cess" has been upheld by the Supreme Court of India in

Goodricke Group Ltd, case?.

6.12 Vocationalisation of the education as a means of
meeting the demand of skilled manpower and as an alternative
to higher education is another area on which the Government
may have to pay attention. However, this cannot be a

substitute for free primary/elementary education.

It is important that the people at large should know
how much money has been allocated for ensuring frea
primary/elementary education. The State Governments concerned
may be required to publish necessary details ‘in this respect
in local newspapers which are widely circulated in the area.
The District education authorities concerned should be also
under an obligation to publish quarterly details as to how the
funds were utilised. There should be an apprepriate mechanism
for dealing with complaints of misuse of funds. In case of

any lapse or negligence in executing the project, the NGOS or

the PTAs or local residents (of a group of 100 persons) may


“>:84 :-८

approach the appropriate authorities which shall be bound to
take immediate action thereon and inform the complainant of

its decision.

6.13 Finally, the Law Commission would like to emphasize
the need for immediate Central legislation to give “effect to
the right to education without waiting for the constitutional
amendment to go through in Parliament. Accordingly, a draft
bill has been prepared and annexed to this report
{Annexure-A). While drafting the bill, the Commission has
taken into consideration laws enacted in certain States in
India as also recommendations or suggestions made by other
bodies, committees or conferences in the field of education.
The Commission commends the draft bill for its adoption by the

Government of India.

ple

(MR. JUSTICE B.P.JEEVAN REDDY )(RETD)

Fue LE

(MS.JUSTICE LEILA SETH) (RETD) gb

CHAIRMAN

MEMBER MEMBER MEMBER-SECRETARY

DATED: 19TH NOVEMBER, 1998

1

शा SS ee —a

»M.GHATATE) (DR.SUBHASH C.JAIN)


2.

FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER-VI

Cf.Colley, Constitutional Law, 4th Edition, 1931,
P.295 (as also referred to in Basu’s Commentary on
Constitution of India, Sixth Edition, volume 5६,

p.121).

Goodricke Group Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, 1995

. Supp (1) SCC 707

\


ay

Short title,
extent and
commencement

Definition

—:86 :-

ANNEXURE-A

Free and Compulsory Education for ¢ an m0) 151 Education for Children Bill, 1998

An Act to provide for free and compulsory education
for for all children upto 14 years of age and matters

incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty First Year of

Independence of the Republic of India as follows:

1.01) This Act may be called Free and Compulsory Education
for Children Act, 1998.

(ii) It extends to the whole of India.

(iii) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government. may by notification in the Official Gazette

appoint.

Provided however that the date of such notification
shall not be later than one year from the date on which the

assent of the President is obtained.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(a) “approved school" means any school in any
specified area within the jurisdiction of a local
authority imparting elementary education which --

(i) is under the management of the Central
Government, State Government or the Jecal authority

or



(ii) being under any other management, is
recognised by the local authority for the purposes of
this Act and receives aid from Government funds for
running the school, or

(iii)being under any = other management, is
recognised by the local authority for the purposes of
this Act and has received substantial aid from
Government funds in setting up or expanding the
school.

(b) “appropriate government” means the State
Government in the case of States mentioned in Part I
of the First Schedule to the Constitution and in the
case of Union Territories mentioned in Part II of the
First Schedule to the Constitution, the ‘Government of
India’.

(०) “attendance authority” means the Panchayat or
Jocal authority concerned or any other authority as
may be prescribed;

(d) “attendance at an approved school” means
presence for instruction at a school imparting
elementary education for such number of days, and on
such days in a year, and at such time or times on each
day of attendance, as may be prescribed;

(e) “child” means a boy or girl within such age
group not being less than six or more than fourteen.
(f) “competent authority” means the Director of
Education of the Government or such other authority as
may be specified by the Government;

(9) “compulsory education” means and implies an


obligation on Government to take all steps to ensure
that every child is enrolled and retained till the
prescribed level of education in a school imparting
the prescribed courses of study and the steps taken in
that behalf;
(h) “free education" means exemption from the
obligation to pay tuition fee or other charges which
schools usually collect flrom pupils in a school, It
extends to provision of free supply of text-books,
note-books and other study materials and may alsa
include health care and nutrition where the
appropriate Government so declares by rules under the
Act;
(1) “guardian” means any person to whem the care,
nurture or custody of any child falls by Jaw or by
natural rights or by recognised usage, or who has
accepted or assumed the care, nurture or custody of
any child or to whom the care, nurture or custody of
any child has been entrusted by any lawful authority;
(3) “parent” means the father or mother of a child
and includes an adoptive ‘father or mother;

> (kK). "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made

under this Act;

(1) “recognised school” means a school recognised

by the competent authority or recognised by or

affiliated to the Central Board of Secondary Education
or other like public education authority.

(m) “school” means a centre for imparting

ia

education to children of six to fourteen years where



Compulsory
Education

Responsibility
of parent to
cause his
child to
attend school

the strength of the teaching staff is not less than

two;
(1) #७७॥७०७०॥ #७७" ॥॥ oretatten toa eh tba anes

being not lese than six years or not more than
fourteen;

(०) “special school" means any institution which
imparts such education as in the opinion of the
Government 18 suitable for children suffering from any
phyaical or mental defect; and

(p) “year” means the academic year as specified by

the government.

3. (i) Subject to the provisions of this Act
education shall be compulsory for avery child of school age.
(11) For giving effect to the provisions OF
subsection (1) the Government of India and the State
Governments shall ensure that atleast one sehool is
established within 1-1/2 kilometres distance of all centres or
human habttation witht tle tort 11.७1 ५ .
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the parent or guardian of
every child to cause the child to attend an approved school
unless there.be.a reasonable excuse for his/her non-attendance

within the meaning of, section 5.

(2) It shall be the duty of the attendance authority
to ensure compliance with sub-section (1). This duty shall

axtend to children without a parent or guardian.



Reasonable
excuse for
non=

attendance

Certain
duties of
Teachers

Parent-
teacher
Association

“7:90 :-

5. For the purposes of this Act any of the following
circumstances shall be deemed to ba a reasonable aecues fro
the non-attendance of a child:

(i) that there is no approved school within the
prescribed distance from his residence;

(ii) that the child is receiving education ina
recognised school;

(iii)that the child suffers from a physical or mental
defect which prevents him from attendance;

Civ) that such child is exempt from attendance on

any other ground as may be prescrib

6. It shall be duty of the teachers in association with
the parents/guardians to ensure continued attendance of
children enrolled in the schools. Every teacher has) an
obligation not only to impart education but to also support
all round development of the children entrusted to his/her
care. The teachers will report to the attendance authority if
they are unsuccessful in their efforts to get a defaulting
child back to school. Failure to report will be deemed to be
a professional misconduct and the teacher will be proceeded
against accordingly.

7. A parent-teacher association shall be constituted in
each school in the manner as prescribed. It shall be the duty
of such an association to ensure that quality education is

imparted and proper standards are maintained in the school



Special
Schools

Attendance
Order

The concerned local authority or panchayat shall also be under
a similar obligation in respect of the schools within its

area.

8. If there is in existence a special school within the
prescribed distance from the residence of a child who is
suffering from a physical or mental defect, the competent
authority may, if it is satisfied that the child is not
receiving any education in some other manner considered by it
to be satisfactory, by order require the child to attend the
special school; and it shall be the duty of the parent or
guardian of such child to cause the child to attend the
special school unless there be a reasonable excuse for the
non-attendance of the child within the meaning of clause (iv)

of section (5).

9. (1) Whenever the attendance authority has reason
to believe that the parent or guardian of a child has failed
to cause the child to attend an approved school and that there
is no reasonable excuse for the non-attendance of the child
within the meaning of section 5; it shall hold an enquiry in
the prescribed manner.

(2) If as a result of the enquiry the attendance
authority is satisfied that the child is liable to attend an
approved school under this Act and that there is no reasonable
excuse for his non-attendance within the meaning of section 5,
it shall pass an attendance order in the prescribed form

directing the parent, or guardian to cause the child to attend

the approved school with effect from the date specified in the



“०:92 :-

order.

(3) An attendance order passed against a parent or
guardian in respect of his child under this section shall,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), remain in force
for so long as this Act continues to apply to the child.

(4) If any parent or guardian against whom an
attendance order has been passed in respect of his child under
sub-section (2) transfers the custody of the child to another
‘person during the period for which the attendance order is in
force, such parent or guardian shall be bound to immediately
inform the attendance authority in writing of such transfer
with the necessary particulars.

(5) Where an attendance order has been passed
against a parent or guardian in respect of his child under
this section, such order shall have effect in relation to
every other person to whom the custody of the child may be
transferred during the period for which the attendance order
is in force as it has effect tn relation to the person against
whom it is passed.

(6) A parent or guardian may at any time apply to
the attendance authority for cancellation of an attendance
erder on the .ground -- |

(i) that he is no Tonger the parent or guardian in
respect of the child; or

(ii) that circumstances have arisen which provide a
reasonable excuse for non-attendance;
and thereupon the attendance authority may, after holding an
inquiry in the prescribed manner, cancel or modify the

attendance order.



Employment or
engagement of

a child
preventing from
attending
school not
permissible

No fee to
be levied

1

oO

oO
'

10. No person shall employ or engage a child in 8 manner
which shall prevent the child from attending an approved
school.

11. (1) No fee shall be levied in respect of any child
for attending an approved school which is under the management
of the Central Government, State Government or 8 local
authority or under private management but receiving aid from
government funds.

(2) Where, in respect of any child an attendance
order has been passed under section 9 and the only school
which he can attend is an approved school under private
management falling within sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of
section 2, the school shall admit such student in consultation
with the parent-teacher association and the local authority
subject to the limit of forty per cent as mentioned in
sub-section (3).

(3) (i) The approved schools falling within sub-clause
(iii) of clause (a) of section 2 shall impart free education
to forty per cent of the students acmitted to any class upto
and inclusive of eighth standard. The schildren. under this
category shall be chosen by the local authority “Goncerned in
consultation with the parent-teacher, association from the
poorer strata of society of the village or locality who are
not able to afford the fee and other charges levied by the

school.

(ii) In case of any dispute, the competent authority

shall decide whether-.-the school has received “substantial aid”



Obligation of
recognised
schools

How to compute
the age of
a child

Penalty for
violation of
attendance
order

12. Every recognised school shall impart free education to
twenty per cent of the students admitted to any class upto and
inclusive of eighth standard. The students in this category
shall be admitted by the school in consultation with the
Parent-teacher association and the concerned local authority
from among the children of the poorer strata of society of the
village or locality, who are not able to afford the fee and

other charges levied by the school.

13. The age of a child for the purposes of this Act shall
be computed in terms of years completed by the child on or
before the first day of the academic year:

Provided that where the birthday of a child falls ona
day not later than sixty days from the first day of the
academic year, the birthday shall be deemed to fall on the
first day of the academic year for the purpose of computing
the age of the child.

Ordinarily the birth certificate and in its absence
the declaration of a parent or guardian will be prima facie
proof of age unless the admitting authority has reasons to
disbelieve it.

In case it is disbelieved, the authority concerned
should record the reasons therefor and make such enquiry as is

deemed appropriate for determining the age.

14. Every parent or guardian who fails to discharge his
duty or comply with the attendance order shall be liable to

fine not exceeding Rs.5/- for each day in violation as May be


Penalty for
contravention
of Section 10
and cognizance
of offence

Courts
competent to
try offences
under the
Act

Certain
persons to be
public servants

imposed by the competent authority.

15. (1) If any person contravenes the provisions of
section 10 he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend
to Rs.500/- and in the case of continuing contravention, with
an additional fine not exceeding Rs.50/- for each day during
which such contravention continues after conviction for the
first of such contraventions.

(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence
under this Act except on the complaint of the competent
authority/attendance authority or any other person authorised
in this behalf by the local authority by general or special

order.

16. (1) The Courts competent to try offences under
Section 15 of this Act shall be the following,-
(a) the Panchayat Adalat - by whatever name
called, in respect of offences within their

jurisdiction;

(b) Where there are no Panchayat Adalats - by
whatever name called - and where the offence takes
place outside the jurisdiction of such

> Panchayat-Adalats, the court of a magistrate having
jurisdiction over the area.
(2) Any offence triable by the Panchayat Adalat
shall be tried in the manner provided for the trial of
“criminal cases by the concerned Panchayat Raj Act, and
any offence triable by a magistrate shall be tried in
a summary way.

17. Every person referred in clauses (c) and (f) of



~rotection

of action
aken in good
Jaith

-delegation
of powers

Power to
ike rules

—-:96 :-

section 2 and other persons authorised to lodge complaints
under section 15 shall be deemed to be public servants within

the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against the Government or any authority or person in
respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to

be done under this Act.

19. (1) The appropriate Government, may by
notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification,
authorise any officer or authority subordinate to it to
exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the appropriate
Government by or under this Act.

(2) A local authority may, by general or special
order and with the previous approval of the appropriate
Government, authorise any officer or authority subordinate to
it to exercise all or any of the powers conferred on a local

authority by or under this Act.

20. (1) ». The appropriate Government may, by
notification’ in the Official Gazette and subject to the
condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act. }

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for
all or any of the following matters, namely:-

(a) the quality and = standard of education which


-:97 :-

shall be considered essential for education and the measures
to be taken for imparting such education;

Ob) the particulars to be contained in any scheme
including particulars relating to the provision made or to be
made in any area for the establishment of special schools or
of schools imparting education or for the supply of books,
writing materials, uniforms or other necessary amenities, to
children while attending school or for health care and
nutrition.

(०) the manner in which lists of children may be
Prepared and the intervals at which the lists shall be kept
revised and persons with whose assistance such lists shall be
prepared;

(d) the functions to be performed, and the manner
in which such functions may be performed, by competent
authorities;

(e) the distance beyond which a child may not be
compelled to attend an approved school;

(1). 18 circumstances which may be regarded as
reasonable excuses for the non-attendance of a child within
the meaning of section 5;

(g) »the manner in which any inquiry under this Act
may be held including the determining of age;

(h) the form in which an attendance order under
this Act may be passed;

(i) the composition of parent-teacher associations
to assist schools to ensure a relevant and value based
education; _

ao

(j) the registers, statements and other


—:98 :-

information to be maintained or furnished by approved schools
for the purposes of this Act;
(k) any other matter which has to be, or may be

prescribed under this Act.


STATES/UTs

“:99 :-

ANNEXURE-B

NAME OF ACT

- OT

1. ANDHRA

PRADESH
2. ASSAM
3. BIHAR
4. DELHI
5. GOA

Andhra Pradesh Education Act 1982 (Act

No.1 of 1982)

The Assam Elementary Education
(Provincialisation) Act, 1974 (Assam

Act No.6 of 1975)

i

Bihar Primary Education (Amendment )
Act 1959 (Bihar and Orissa Education
Act (1 of 1919) as amended by Bihar
Act XVI of 1939 and Bihar Act XVII of
1946 and Bihar Act IV of 1959).

The Delhi Primary Education Act 1960

Act No.39 of 1960

The Goa Compulsory Elementary Education Act,

1995 (Goa Act NO.4 of 1996)



10.

11.

12.

13.

GUJARAT

HARYANA

HIMACHAL

PRADESH

JAMMU &
1984

KARNATAKA

KERALA

MADHYA

PRADESH ~

MAHARASHTRA

-:100:-

Gujarat Compulsory Primary Education

Act, 1961 (Gujarat Act No.XLI of 1961)
Punjab Primary Education Act 1960

The Himachal Pradesh Compulsory Primary

Education Act 1953 (Act NO.7 of 1954)

The Jammu and Kashmir Education Act

(Act No.XI of 1984)

The Karnataka Education Act 1983 (Karnataka
Act No.1 of 1995) (First published in the
Karnataka Gazette Extraordinary on the

Twentieth day of January, 1995)

The Kerala Education Act 1958 (Act
NO.6 of 1959)(As amended by Acts 35 of

1960, 31 of 1969 and 9 of 1985)

The Madhya Pradesh Primary Education
Act 1961 (Madhya Pradesh Act No.33 of

1961)

The Bombay Primary Education Act 1947
(Bombay Act No. LXI of 1947)(As

\modified upto 30th April, 1986)


-:104:-

14. ORISSA Orissa Basic Education’ Act 1951 No.18
Orissa Primary Education Act 1969 as
amended by the provisions of the
Orissa Education (Amendment) Act, 1974

& 1975

15. PUNJAB Punjab Primary Education Act 1960,

No.39.

16. RAJASTHAN The Rajasthan Primary Education Act 1964 (Act
Hy No.31 of 1964)
17. TAMIL NADU The Tamil Nadu Compulsory Elementary Education

Act 1994 (Act No.33 of 1995)

18. UTTAR © United Provinces Primary Education Act
PRADESH 1919 (UP Act No.7 of 1919)/United Provinces

. (Dist. Boards) Primary Education Act
1926°

(UP Act No.1 of 1926)

Adapted and modified by the Adaptation

han . of Laws Order 1950

19. WEST BENGAL Primary Education Act 1973 (West

Bengal No.43 of 1973) -

NOTE: *(88 per information available till November, 1996)
——