LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

\oy

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT

ON

THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT ) BILL, 1996

FEBRUARY, 1999



LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

JUSTICE SHASTRI BHAWAN
8. P. JEEVAN REDDY NEW DELHIF110 001
Chairman, Law Commission of India TEL. : 3384475
Residence :
असल 1, JANPATH

NEW DELHI-110 011
TEL. : 3019465

No. 6(3) (54)/99-LC(LS) February 26, 1999

Dear Dr. M. Thambi Durai,

I am sending herewith 167th Report on "The
Patents (Amendment) Bill, 1998".

2. The Law Commission had taken ७० the
aforesaid subject suo motu in view of the
fundamental importance of the provisions contained
in the aforesaid Bill and notwithstanding the fact
that it has already been passed by the Rajya
Sabha. This unusual step has been taken in view
of certain significant omissions in the Bill,
which impinge seriously upon our national
interest. .

3. The recommendations contained in the Report
may be considered by the Government and Parliament
while debating the said Amendment Bill in _ the
Budget Session.

With regards,

* Yours sincerely,
Qa NN
47202 नि f .
ip

(B.P. Jeevan Reddy)

Dr. M. Thambi Durai,
Minister of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs,

Government of India,

Shastri Bhawan,

NEW DELHI.



CHAPTER I

CHAPTER IT

CONTENTS

INDEX PAGE

INTRODUCTION 1-15

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 16-27


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1d Gen

sis of the report:- The Law Commission of India
has taken up the study of the Patents (Amendment) Bill 1998
Cintreduced in Rajya Sabha On 16th December, 1998 and passed
by the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December 1998) suo motu in-view of
the fundamental importance of the provisions contained in it

hotwithstanding the fact that it has already been passed

sy the Rajya Sabha. This unusual step is being taken in view
फ certain omissions in the Bill. For example, though Art.27
reement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual

Property Rights (TRIPs) entitles the member-States to provide

for certain exemptions, they have not been incorporated in the
Bill. The said omissions impinge seriously upon our national
interest, There are others as this Report will disclose,
Having considered the provisions of the Amendment Bill in
Jepth, and after consulting several experts on the subject,
the Law Commission is submitting this report. The

recommendations contained in the Report may be considered by

the

ernment and the Lok Sabha while debating the said

Amendment 811 in the Budget Session.

Patents Act, 1970 was enacted by

consolidate the law concerning

the Parliament ta amend and

patents, Tt was based upon the comprehensive report prepared


by Shri Justice N.  Rajagopala Ayyangar (a former Judg® of the
Suprens Court) as modified by the Report of the Joint

of Parliament dated November 1, 1966.

Comms t

1.2 India has signed the agreement for the establishment

220d
of Werld Trade Organisation (WTO) including the Agreement on
Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs)

The WTO agreement has coma into foree on fst January, 1995,

With त view to meeting India’s obligations under the TRIPs
Agreement, it has become necessary to amend the Patents Act,
1970, An extract from the Statement of Objects and Reasons

appended to The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 1998 (Bill Ne .xVvIV

of 1998 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 16.12.1998) give

n

७) 1७४5१ -

हक रू ‘uy का events happened after 1.1.1995, as
"2, The TRIPs Agreement, inter, alia, prescribes
the minimum standards to be adopted by the member
spect of 8 years of intellectual

countries inor

ng

Though, India has a transition period of 5

1-1-1995) under Article 65 to apply the

provisions of the Agreement and an additional period

ef 5 years for extending product patent proter ho
areas of technology nok protected soa far, certain

obligations were required be fulfilled ४,७०७.

Jin the succeeding paragraphs,”

ty

Notwithstanding the transition

mentioned above, jn t of Articles 70.8 and 76.3 of

प्‌

rin

n
ye

the TRIPS Agreement, member countries which da not


1
ey
t

provide for product patents in “the areas of
pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals, were
required to provide with effect from the coming into
force of the WTO Agreement, i.e., from ist January,
1995, a means to recsive product patent applications
for pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals, and on
fulfillment of certain conditions, grant exclusive

marketing rights for a period of five years rout

the patent is granted or rejected whichever is

“a, As the Patents Act, 1970 does not provide for
grant of product patents, inter alia, in the fields of
agricultural cshemicals and pharmaceuticals and also

for grant of Exclusive Marketing Rights (EMRs}, th

ia

provisions of Articles 70.8 and 70.9 were applicable

to India.”

"S, These obligations were initially fulfilled by
issuing an Ordinance on 31st December, 1994, namely,

the Patents (Amendment) Ordinance, 1994,"

“OC. Subsequently, the Patents (Amendment) 8111,

1995 was intr in the Lok Sabha in) March, 1995,

The Bill was by the Lok Sabha

ink

doin the Rajya Sabha wher

D
+
=
a
he

Teck Committee of the House. As

mi bbe did’ net submit its report

lution of the 10th Lok Sabha, the 8111 Tansed."

o



wide

"TF, While taking steps to amend the Patents Act,
1970 to fulfil our obligations under the Agreement,
measures have been incorporated in the amendments ta
ensure that Government’s ability to intervene in the
Public interest is preserved. Further restriction an
inventions made in India are also proposed ta be
removed, Cartain safeguards are proposed te be

provided in the farm of public non-commerctat us

मत

,
price fixation and compulsory licensing. The Bill

also contain some measures in the interest of National

urity. It is also proposed to provide validation

to applications Tiled after 26 March, 1995,"

1.3 Since the Patents (Amendment) Bill, 1998 could not be

by House of tha People in Parliament, the President of

india promule ‘The Patents (Amendment) Ordinances, 1999’ to

the

Act, 1970, for giving effect te the

provisions of the World Trade Organisation (WTG)/TRIPS

iia Knowledge Materials gained from times immemorial

- Mr. K.t.Mehra,

eannob be ig rmer Director oof the

National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resaure ICAR, New Delhi,

‘Indigenous Bi

im his artic ity Rights’ published in
7, 1995 fF succintly points out that plant

in natural ७ stem and in

ssyshems, People have identified,

and improved economic plant



the world. It is undeniable that knowledge and

Wifferent communities were freely available.

informal  innovater (individual or group of individuals)

shared his (their) innovation (s) with others. Thus, there

was never felt necessity to keep records of who innovat

whab, Such manner of sharing knowledge and planting material

economic prosperity of peoples, communities and

tlald Our old scriptures lay down the characteristics,

and applications of herbs and medicinal plants for curing
mankind. Have these ever been claimed or

patent rights?

1a .2 In today’s era, in a market economy, profit earning is

traditional

the sole aim and even by dint of piracy

ef informal innevaters, many formal inneavatars

Werade their intellectual prop

ty rights in them by

0118 or advances. Mr.K.L.Mehra (supra)

waking minor modificati

cunts that botanists seek information free of from

which have accumulated through several

and) adeption. When

publish such data, indigenous knowledge falls in

work is

hain’, and

brome t “Gnfermation

Industry

informal

wi tint mak ing any
inovabors /communi bies . More than 7000 natural

roo wedicines and chemical

हु. वात 2३.1३

Vemployed by indigenous healers and other pe



centuries, Other companets have often investigated useful

of substances known to ai tribal community, and

attr ibuk

after isolating the active principle(s) thereof, they have

the product(s) or sometimes used it as a lead for the

design of a new synthetic compound, which may be generally
more stable or 1885 toxic than the original substance He
cites the examples of such kinds of inventions viz., neem

Ie derivatives like bio-pesticides, Ethiopian ended,

sa_dodecantra, providing Jow-cost molluscicide: and

Thumatin, a natural sweetner. The annual market value of
Pharmaceutical and chemical products derived from medicinal
Plants discovered by indigenous peoples exceeded US $ 43

billion. The said author emphasises that there is a need ta

recognise Indigenous Rights and to develop appropriate and

effective legal mechanisms to provide Intellectual Property
Rights (IPRs) and economic benefits to informal innevators

Cindividuals and communities).

1.4.3 In an articles on “Global Trade and Biodiversity in

Conflict" on internet, it is pointed out that the industry has

the world outraged with its biopiracy. Farmers have

marching in the streets of Delhi to denounce a US Fatent on

or
+

Basmati rice; devaloping countries are taking TNC

theft of indigenous medicinal knowledge: green

aw
it
ra
s<
1
Dg

scientists are !up in arms about seed

revo lut

responsible for keeping pub Wiis being privatised by Australian

companies. Corperate hunger for Fully-flee
लि के of Tite - from human genes to entire crops species - is

how ato othe centre of the world trading system. Th



jects that several Latin American nations have been

Furth

erp
successfully lobbied to join the Union, although Brazil is
thinking twice before it crosses the thrashold. As the
Workers Party has pointed out, if Brazil joins uPaV, ‘We
should net be surprised if in a near future our small farmers

endo up in jail for using protected rice varieties.’ It is

clear that Brazil’s op ition party’s analysis of UPOV sees
the Convention as heralding a transfer of power from farmers
and stakes to corporations. Another writer Nicola, 0.
Ostertag while analysing the impact of TRIPs on the neem tree,
views, on internet, that the neem tree is a natural and

cultural resource for India. Esonomic,,. Tegal and

nelegical developments with regard to neem indicate that

Plant material and indigenous knowledge continue to be.

.

priated without compensation. Indian research and
industry could be stifled by foreign contries. Traditional
agricultural practices may be abandoned. The biological

diversity with regard to neem could decline and overall TRIFs
may hinder the best management of neem for the Indian people.
He concludes that this outcome is not due to intellectual

rights alone, but is a consequence of a capitalist

nemic system of which intellectual property protection is a

Declarations concerning be

fel
- om KL Mehra (supra) sculls out the

international declarations beneficial to india


communities ane these recognise sovereign rights of
nation-states over their respective territories, including

their natural resources and cultural property. These are:-

The United Nations General Assembly resolution

(Resolution 1803 of 1962) that

“Due care should taken to ansure that there
is no impairment, for any reason, «of -the
State’s soversignity over its natural wealth

and resources.”

1

2
4
nN

The UN Conference on the Human Environment in

Principle 21

“States have the sovereign right to exploit their own

pursuant to their Own environmental

polici

The UN Foo

and Agricultural Organisation's
International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources
(Gonference resolubien 3/91) and FAQ's International

c

2 of Conduct for Plant Germplasm Collecting and

have

Lerriteries,


The Declaration (A.B. Cunningham, Ethics,
Ethnobiological Research and Biodiversity,
WWF-International, Gland, Switzerland, 1993) of Belem
of the International Society of Ethno-biology strongly

urged that

“Procedures be developed to compensate native peoples
for the utilisation of their Knowledge and their
biological resources and mechanism be established by

which indigenous specialists are recognised as p

authorities and are consulted in all programmes
affecting them, their resources and their

environments."

The International Year (1993) for the wWorld’s

Indigenous Peoples provided an unpre nted

portunity for the international community to examine

existing injustices in various fields and to

demonstrate its commitment to helping indigenous

people, realise their rights. Article 29 of United

Nations’ Oraft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous

Peoples (1993) states:

“Indigencus peoples are entitled to the recoanition of

the full ownership ontrol and protection of their
cultural ane intel4actual property. They have the

right te jal measures to control, develeap and

prot

their sciences, technologies and cultural

manifestations, ineluding human and ether, genetic



“:10:-

seeds, ° medicines, knowledge of the

of fauna and = fiera, oral tr

literatures, designs, and visual and performing arts,

Every nation has the Power and jurisdiction to

now its natural resources and assets,

tangible and intangible, are controlled, used, and, if

it wishes, made subj

to sharing the economic

benefits with people/communities that held. the

traditional rights. The International Labour
Organisation’s Convention | No.163, Article 15,

concerning indigenous

ba consult with indigenous Peoples when

(prog exploitation of natural re

indigenous lands, to respect indigenous

rights “te Participate in the Use, management and

ryation of these resources” and to ensure that

indigenous Peoples share the benefits of axploitation

“where possible". The Convention an
Diversity (UNEP, Convention an Biological Diversity,

Nairobi, Kenya, 1992) also reaffirmed this principle

3, 8, 15), stating that

“each Contacting Party shall as far as possible and as

appropriate, subject “to national

preserves and main#éin know bed 1 innovations and

oF indi genous ane local Coline ies

pe

embodying traditional lifestyle

rvation and sustainable



उ:11:5“

diversity and promote their wider application with the
approval and involvement of the holders of such
knowledge, innovations and practices, and
the equitable sharing of the benefits arising From the
utilisation oF such knowldge, innovations and

practices,

stitutional directives and Jurisprudence of health

health
for all:- Justice V.R.Krishna वहा in his article “Part-I To
Paris With Tears : The National Pharmaceutical Policy And The

Jurisprudence Of Health For 611" appeared in the book

By Patent: On Patent Law And Policy” published by

National Working Group on Patent Laws, holds that social

ustice is the sweeping promise made in the Preamble to the

Indian Constitution. The term “Social Justice”, whatever its

ih

semantic variables, its human essence does take in the right

a

to life for everyones including the basic satisfactions and
prouressive slimination of inequality in standards ofr life.
Life is nothing without health. Slyinoza said that the first

of a gentleman is to be healthy animal. Ane

e existence, lifelessly alive, is inanimate. Justice

Iyer views that the State shall democratice the right to

jcaid” as within the reach of the b

re

the indigent and the lowliest,, the lost and the last of Indian

csription of

humanity. This is the preamb
t

ernity and justice. For what is Craternity if some die

ता. 18

disease जा (1०

t medicine while others have no fellow - feeling

t

and selidarity enough to salvage him with money or mecdicin

५ in its dimensions of dohealth, if the poor

ty


suffer fatal illness without remedy while the rich win the

title having the wherewithal. What is “health equality”

among curable patients, the unfortunate sick sink becaus= the

s nob deliver medicines at easy cost and within quick

while the fortunate few purchase relief through castly

they can afford and are within reach. The inevitable

ny is that the States tryst extends to ensuring access
to essential drugs by practical supply and service systems at

realistic prices and places whereby no person shall pertsh or

famish if stricken by curable disease;

by Jaw", the p
humanism oof this provision has been examined for dynamic

gudicial illumination in various cases, For example, in Olga

Tetlis case - AIR 1986 SC 180, it was observed:-
“Tt would be pedantry to exclude the right te
Tivelihe from the content of the right to life.”
1.0.2 Justice Iyer ob if “livelihood is part of life”

tiorari integral to life. The

» health thus falls squarely within the larger right te

n, critically i717 but capable

x

Phe cure given ते life-saving drug in time, has only a pe

tight te life if therapeubics for him is a teasing tllusion,

iT [व करतर eu iC als are beyond his pur BSimidarty,


—:13:-

Oirective Principles of the State policy enshrined in article
39 ordain that the health and strength of workers, men and
women, be secured and under Article 47, that the level of

nutrition of the people and public health shall be raised,

These show great concern for the physical well being of the
weaker 5 jons of the saciety. In Vinseent ४५. Union of

India, AIR 1987 SC 990, it was held that the raising of the

level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people

be ement of public health is the primary duty

the impre

of the State and is of high priority perhaps one at the top.

os)

It is settled in CERC v. Union of India, 1995 (1) SCALE 54,
para दब that the expression “life has a much wider meaning
which includes right to livelihood and better standards of
Vite, Article 21 derives its Vife and breath from the

Directive Principles of State Policy.

1.6.3 Justice Iyer propounds that law and policy must be
geared to the goal of making life saving and essential

to the indigent and illiterate

unfortunates. Disease deprives a person of his right to life,
even liberty. Only medicines cure illnesses. So the State

Blays with Vife if by oblique policy it fails to make
medicines available or permits marking up of market prices so

buy. . The

As to put it

with power supplies of drug,

in favour of th

prota hungry giant corporations by leuislative

t

als liberalism or

pho Further, th

procedure oof price fixation of



“_:14:-“

witleout | enable, fair or just consideration of th

oa

of the little Indian being priced out by the

Vikelih
corporate, especially the transnational, manufacturer

deliberately manipulating the market, is an unconstitutional

ssercise
VG ia In his subsequent article entitled “Part II The Paris
Convention : A Gonstitutional - Dialectical Critique”,

rishna Iyer in the aforesaid published book

Justice Ayyangar report on the Revision of Patents Law

has established the case for JVimiting patents to specific

ducts. Ingenious ways

pre Sses bub not generally एक 1

devices by creative genious to reach the same product are thus

hep alive for publie g Justice Iyer views that fords ane

me licines are nat patentable inventions. The apprehensions

ched by him are that MNCs dump banned drugs, phoney

tonics anc brands rackets. And through glamorous high voltage

propaganda 1० the people through psychic blandishments.

Surender J.Patel in his article “Indian Patent

Another aub
Act (1970) and The Revision of the World Patent System and
Paris Canvention” in the aforesaid published book also

that the monopolistic privileges granted to the

impose heavy cost burdens on the patent - granting

countries. Similarly, NN. Mehrotra in his ar

“Techneloygical Innovat jong, Self-Reliance anedt Patent

Peoter tion Tnedian Contexts and Paris vention” published in

tie said book also projects its apprehensions in the Colluwing


“:15:-“

“Gf there is a change in the Indian Patent 521. ...

the public will havea to pay enormous sums
imports and have to wait for prolonged period for any
other manufacturer to produce the product and break

poly. It will also no longer be mandatory for

the patentee to work the patent within any stipulated

Lime and there obtaining of the product patent,

OFF potential competitors,

man एल. ५ do oto ble

without indulging in production of a drug which may be
very much needed by the people, but its production may

ated with the highest of (1७ 5.

i

het be ass:

say it will be drugs required for national

Needless bo

health programmes and essential drugs that will be the

ones most neglected.”

1.6.5 And the said apprehension is evidently becoming true,

When one purchases from the chemist an antibiotic of standard

brand, he has to spare a hefty amount for the antibiotic

bablebs to complete the course, There has been sudehen spurt

of such antibiotics.

In view of the above background, we

sulbseqquent chapter to analyse and conc lude our

' omen bak Pons.



—:16:-

CHAPTER II

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

2.1 Recommendation No.T:- Amendment of Section 5 of the

Principal Act.

wv

Section 5 provides inter alia that in cas oF

stances intended for the use, or capable of being used, as

food or as medicine or drug” while no patent shall be granted
in respect of “the claims for the substances themselves” the
“claims for the methods or processes of manufacture shall be
patentable”. In other words, the Act did not recognize the

duct patent but recognized the process patant only. Now,

by virtue of the Patents (Amendment) 8111, 1993 (being Bill
No, G4 of 1998 introduced in the Rajya Sabha in December
1998), the existing section is. proposed to be numbered as

sub-section (1) and a new sub-section, numbered as sub-section

ot

sught to be introduced providing for product pater

in respect of medicines and drugs. Any such application is to

dealt with in the manner provided in Chapter IV-A. A new

Chapter Chapter IV-A "Exclusive Marketing Rights’ is

wD
n

accordingly sought to be introduced. The 9111 also provid
for deleting Section 39 and insertion of a new section -
sub-section 187-A. bys
ae

2.4.4 In the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to

tive Bill, 10 is stated that Articles 70.8 and 70.9 of th

ra

TRIPS Ayresmeant require that notwithstanding the transition



en ied

periods allowed thereunder, meinber countries which do not
provide for product patents in the areas of pharmaceuticals
and agricultural chemicals, should provide, with effect from
the date of coming into force of the W.T.9. Agreement (i.e.
from 1st January 1995), a means to receive product patent
applications for pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals,
and on fulfilment of certain conditions, grant exclusive
marketing rights for a period of five years or until the

is granted or rejected whichever 18 shorter. Is ‘is

that the said Bill was being introduced to carry out

said obligations. Indeed, similar provisions are
contained in an Ordinance issued on December 31, 1994, called

The Patents (Amendment) Ordinance, 1994 but it lapsed jin terms

a

of articles 123 of the Constitution. Subsequently - it 7

wv

eelai in the Statements of Objects and Reasons - th
Patents (Amendment) 8111 1995 was introduced in the Lok Sabha

ed by the Lok Sabha but before

it could be passed by the Rajya Sabha, the 1Oth Lok Sabha was

The Statement of Objects and Reasons also refers

६७. the recommendation of the Appellate Body of the WTO on the

dispute raised by the USA whereunder India is obliged to make

such provisieans by April 19, 1999.
2.1.2 In view of the commitments made in the W.T.O,

Vike the one in proposed sub-sedtiion (2) may be necessary but

ato the same thare appears no reasen why India should net take

age of and incorporate the exemptions permitted in the

TRIPS Agreement. To be precise, Arbicle 27(2) permits, the

“,


“:18:-

members bo exclude from patentability inventions, the
commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect
public order or morality including protection of human, animal
or plant life or health or to avoid serious Prejudice to the
environment. Similarly, clause (a) of sub-Article (3) of
Articl® 27 enables the members to excluda from Patentability
diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment
of humans or animals. Clause (b) of the ‘said sub-Article
again enables the members to exclude from patentability plants
and animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially
biolegical processes for the production of plants and animals
ether than  non-biological and micro-biological processes, It

would the entire Article 27 far

“Article 27

Patentable Subject Matter

(1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3,

patents shall be available for any inventions, whet

ducts or processes, in all fields ef technology,

that they are new, involve an inventive step

are capable of industrial application. Subject to

paragraph 4 of Article, 65, paragraph 8 of Article 70
andl paragraph 3 of githis Article, patents shall be
available and patent rights enjoyable without

Wd

b

riminabion as to the place of invention, the fi

wh technology and whether products are imported ar

Jeeally produced,



“5:19:

(2) Members may exclude from patentability inventions,
the pravention within their territory of the
commercial exploitation of which is necessary to
protect ordre public or morality, including to protect
human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid
serious prejudice to the environment, provided that

such exclusion is not made merely because the

exploitation is prohibited by their law.
(3) Members may also exclude from patentability:

(a) diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods far

the treatment of humans or animals:

(७) plants and animals other than micro-organisms, and
essentially biological processes for the production of

nts or animals other than non-bielogical and

microbiological However, Members shall

provide for the protection of plant varieties
by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by
any combination thereof. The provisions of this

sub-paragraph shall be reviewed four years after the



-120:-

2.41.3 There ig no. reason why the proposed Bill should not
Lain provisions in terms of the aforesaid provisions of the

said Article. Accordingly, the Law Commission recommends that

znd of sub-section (2) a proviso and an explanation be

ab th

to the following effect:

“Provided that no patent shall be granted under this
sub-section (a) in respect of diagnostic, therapeutic
and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or

animals; and (9) to inventions, the prevention of

commercial exploitation of which is necessary to

tion

protect public order morality including p
of human, animal or plant life or health or to avaid
serious prejudice to the environment.

The expression ‘substance

sub-section shall not inelude plants or animals or any

part thereof other than micro-organisms.”

2.4.4 The Law Commission is of the opinion that the atave

s are necessary since the existing

seckhion 3 of the Principal Act (Patent Act,

the definition of “medicine er drug” in clause

2 dey

het provide for axceptions to patentability in terms of

and कक permitted by the aforesaid provisions of Article 27 of

the TRIPS Agreement.

2.2 Recoumendation No.IT: - Amendment of section 244 in
bhe IVA.



—124:-

The Patents (Amendment )

Ordinance No.3 of 1999, issued on January 8, 1999 contained an

explanation to the following effect:

“Explanation: It is hereby clarified that for the
purpose of this section, the exclusive right to $211
er distribute any article or substance under this
section shall not includa an article

based on the system of Indian medicine as

clause (8) of sub-section (1) of section

Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1879 and

or substance is already in the public domain”.

2.2.1 Though the said Explanation did not find a pl in
the 8111 introduced im the Rajya Sa
has the Rajya Sabha. The Law Ce

however, of the opinion that the definition of the

“Indian Hedicine” contained in clause (७) of §

indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 does in
indiy medicine or practices. It is to

safeguard our traditional knowledge and practice

the rural and tribal communities, from being

EWRs., Agcordingly, it is

Rep lateatiewt be on 240 (10; may be amended as below:
fi

clarified that far

purpese of this xolusive right

or odistribute any article or substance



—122:-

ction shal not include (a) an article or

on the system of Indian medicine as defined in

clause (8) of sub-section (1) of saction 2 of the

Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 and such

iain

ov substance is already in the public 4

Any article, substance or method indigenously used

|

हर]
ct
na

ed for treatment.” (sugg

Jitional words are those underlined.

in Sections 40, 64 and 118 as pro

7 of the Amendment Bill 7 Firstly,

9.9 of the TRIPS Agreement do not require

eur country to oda so. The said provision does not also stand

in the way of effecting compliance with the transitianal
ents provided by the said Articles. “Secondly, it
cannot alse tu said that the purpose for which Section 39 was
७. |. in the Ack has sed obo be wholly irrelevant.

lent shall nat make or

Section 39 pravides that an Indian

Cause to be made any apni India for the grant

of A patent for an invention exc A
ered then oernit granted by or on b ntrolber (such
written permission can be granted by the Controller anly with

the oprier consent oof the Central Government) unless (1) an



“:23:-

Application far a patent for the same invention has been made

jn कंस less than 6 weeks before the application outside

India and either no directions have been given under Section

35¢4) in relation to the application in India or all such

n revoked. Section 35(1) provid

in respect of an application made before or after the

ment of this Act for a patent, it appears to the

hin by the , Government as relevant
10031 1४ » oor, where otherwise the invention appears to him

se relevant, he may give directions for prohibiting or

stricting the publication of information with |

inventions ar the commnieation of such infermation te Any

fee sen oot

doin the direction; or (2)

plication

whey or prokection in relation

first been Filed ina

ites

intry

persen resident outside India.

2.3.1 Th would thus appear that while section 39 is
hes and promote the national interest of our
ih is couched in 1118० arily harsh terms. It would be

repr 1: and just to provide that if within six wee

हज दूत hoes को intimate in writing that he has

Hires tions under an for pahenk

the applicant shall be

eathsidd Tindj a. Ag SUS re

be amended omithing the words fcegk under the

weitten  pearinit gran half of the con

by or oon

1.01 (1), Further ab be end की in



—124:-

subesection (1), far the words “or all such directic

have

been revehed", the words “within the said period of six weeks

subst j tute:

Sub-section (2) of section 39 has necessarily
to be omitted in view of the omission of the aforesaid words

in tha main Vimb of sub-section (1).

- Amendment

It is also necessary ४०0. anend jon Gd which

ect
for revecation of patents on certain cified

in

cessary to provide an additional ground of

to protect our State interest. Accordingly it is

in sub-sectio

be inserted:

“(p) That the patent granted is prejudicial toa the

security ofr the State or has been granted in

wn

contravention of the provisions of thi

revocation i 1

ते
a
wn

sto 11 the applicant to

compliance with

Taw, This would ensure not indudlas



—:268:-

- Amendment of Section

ation Neo

Principal Ac

ction 134 occurs in Chapter XXII of the Act which

als with ‘International Arrangements’. Section 134 is
cou hed in simsle and plain language. It reads:

134. Notification as to countries not providing for

reciprocity. - Where any country specified by the

Central Government in this behalf by notification in

the Official Gazette

2s not accord to citizens of
India the same rights in respect of the grant of

and the protection of patent rights as it

to its own nationals, no national of

country shall

be entitled, either solely or jointly with any other

person, -

(a) to apply for the grant of a or be
regis rietor of a patent;

(७) to the assignee of the

proprietor of a patent; or

or held any licence

under this Act.

The Object as stated

8111,

bement,



~:26:-

to its own nationals, India too would deny te

which it

the citizens of that country the right to apply for pa

a
id

des for such negative

istent with our national

ynity ane honeur, But recently, there have been

n

d countries

certain advanced/develop

the access to technology on the specious ground of

potential. The number of such denials have

hetantially inereased since May 1998, Our protests of
discrimit 31918 have had no effect, Such denia are
affecting our security and technological

» It is significant to note that such denials are

डक not warranted under the

India to counter

that in s

chion 134, after the words

own nationals” and before the words “na

वा, thea words "or prevents. or withhold

patented invention, whether product or pre

hne logy by means of unilateral expert

prohibition, whe

grounds of security or

Tae Thar Ped, This suyyested ack ition is perfectly consistent

with = jibes! 10 Pur the underlying Section 134

O register our protest against such

Tel is eesent iad nek only

rimnina but also

ted Pater



>:27:-

to the principle of reciprocity in full. Accordingly a new
Section, Section 8 be introduced in the Amendment 8111

inserting the aforesaid words in Section 134.

We recommend accordingly.

Pons,”

iw, 22009
(२. 305110६ B. P. JEEVAN REDDY) (RETD.)

CHAIRMAN

x jit GL

Nye Zz iy ,

Pe te IR

६ \ आया ¥ re

(MS.JUSTICE LEILA SETH)(RETD) (DR.N.M.GHATATE) (DR.SUBHASH C.JAIN)

MEMBER MEMBER MEMBER-SECRETARY

DATED: 25TH FEBRUARY, 1999