LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT

ON

THE HERE-PURCHASE ACT, 1972

MARCH, 7

oO
५०६
ire}


LAW COMMISSION.OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 001
TEL. : 3384475

Residence :
4, JANPATH
NEW DELHI. 110 011
TEL. : 3019465

JUSTICE
8. P, JEEVAN REDDY

Chairman, Law Commisston of India

D.0.No.6(3)(39)/96-LC(LS)
हि 18.3,1999

Dear Dr.M.Thambi Ourai,

व्‌ am forwarding herewith the 168th report on “The
Hire-Purchase Act, 1972”.

2. The subject was taken up by the Commission in
pursuance of the reference of the Government of India
dated 30th September, 1996. Earlier, the Commission had

made an indepth study of the subject and forwarded its
20th report on “The Law of Hire-Purchase” in May, 1961.
Parliament enacted the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 following
the recommendations of the Commission. A number of
companies carrying on hire-purchase business pointed out
certain deficiencies in the Act and therefore the said Act
could not be enforced . The Government of India
introduced the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989 in
pursuance of the observations made by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee. Therefore, the Government of India
referred the whole issue of hire-purchase law to the Law
Commission for an indepth examination.

3. The need for a separate Hire-Purchase law to
regulate hire-purchase transactions, is undeniable. such
a law is essential with a view to affording protection to
the buyer of the goods on hire-purchase, against certain

abuses in the practice of hire-purchase trading. Some
safeguards may also be required for the owner of the
goods,

4, The Commission circulated a questionnaire on "Law
of Hire-Purchase” to the concerned interest groups to
solicit their views on the subject. After considering
their views, the Commission has recommended various

amendments in the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) 8111, 1989 and
the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972. For the sake of convenience,
Commission has alsa annexed The Hire-Purchase
dment) Bill, 1999 (Annexure-A to the report) which
Porates the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989 and
our modifications therein as well as in the Principal Act.
Again, for the sake of convenience and ready reference, we
have set out in Annexure-B to the report, the

oo0e2


Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 as amended by the Hire-Purchase
(Amendment) Bill, 1999. In other words, if all the
amendments suggested by the Law Commission are accepted by
the Parliament, the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 would read as
set out in Annexure-B8 to the report.

With regards,

Yours sinceraly,

हट

(B.P. Jeevan Reddy)

Or.M.Thambi Ourai

Hon’ble Minister for

Law, Justice & Co.Affairs
Shastri Bhavan

New Delhi.


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER 11

(PART 1)

(PART IT)

ANNE XURE-A

ANNEXURE-B

ANNEXURE-C

ANNE XURE-D

CONTENTS PAGE No.

INTRODUCTORY t- 31

ANALYSIS OF VIEWS ON

QUESTIONNAIRE 32 - 56

CONCLUSIONS AND

RECOMMENDATIONS 57 ~ 100

THE HIRE-PURCHASE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999 101 ~ 123

THE HIRE-PURCHASE ACT,
1972 (Incorporating the
amendwents of the Hire-
Purchase (Amendment )

Bill, 1999) 124 = 168

THE HIRE-PURCHASE

(AMENDMENT ) BILL, 1989 169 (1-17)

QUESTIONNAIRE ON LAW

OF HIRE~PURCHASE 170 (1-51)


INTRODUCTORY

+.1 The subject:- The Law Commission had, in its eighth

report on the Sale of Goods Act’ observed as follows:-

“There is no provision in the Act regulating a
Liansaction of fhire-purchase, which is alse a
method of selling goods. It is a transaction of

hire at the inception with an option to purchase.

“In the English Sale of Goods Act of 1893, there
was no provision for such a transaction. Hence
provision was made by a separate Act, namely, the
Hire-Purchase Act of 1938 (1 and 2 Geo. 6, ०.53),
with a view to affording protection to the buyer of
the goods on hire-purchase, or on similar terms,
against certain abuses which had become apparent in
the practice of hire-purchase trading. This Act
has been supplemented by the Hire-Purchase Act,
1954 (2 and 3 Eliz. 2, ०.51). *

"In our opinion, it is desirable that 8 separate
Act on the lines of the English Hire-Purchase Acts

arb ather similar laws should be enacted in India



1.5 regulate hire-purchase transactions. Tha
commission will maka its recommendations in this
connection in a separate report.”

1.2 Theo of the repert:- During the past few

decades there has been a mushroom growth of hire~purchase

transactions in India. The growth of hire-purchase

transactions and the complexities surrounding such
transactions perhaps prompted the Law Commission to
uvdertake a study of the subject. The Commission made an
in-depth study of the subject and submitted its 20th
Report on “The Law of Hire-Purchase” in May, 1961. The
Commission also appended a Bill to its report on the
Hire-Purchase, Tha Indian Parliament enacted the Hire

Purchase Act, 1972 following the recommendations of the

Law Commission,

1.2.1 The Government of India by G.S.R. 228 (६) dated
$3,.4,1972 notified that tha Act will come into force with
effect fram 1.6.1973. A number of companies which were
carrying en hire-purchase business or financing of
lite-purchase transactions made representations ta the
Government pointing out certain deficiencies in the Act
and requested for postponement of decision of the

enforcement of the Hire Purchase Act. This resulted in

ance of notification GSR No.288(E) dated 31.5.1973
rescinding the earlier notification and appointing

1.9,1973 as the date on which the Act would come inte


force, Meanwhile Shri R.T.Parthasarathy, M.P. who was
the Chairman of the Joint Committee which examined and
repurterb upen the Hire Purchase Bill wrote a letter dated
19.8.1973 to the Minister in the Ministry of Law and
Justice pointing out certain anomalies in the Act. As a
result GSR No.402(£) dated 30.8.1973 was issued rescinding
the operation of tha Act from 1.9.1973 as notified

earlier, The matter rested there.

1.2.2 The Report dated April 24, 1987 of the Committee on
Petitions, Rajya Sabha relating to the question of
bringing into force the Hire Purchase Act, 1972 noted the
sad state of affairs resulting from the non-enforcement of
the Act and racommended that immediate steps be taken to
notify and implement the Hire Purchase Act, 1972 without

any further delay.

1,2.3 In due course, the Ministry of Law & Justice

prepared a comprehensive Amendment Bil? for the amendment

ef the Hire Purchase Act which was introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the Sth May, 1989. A copy of the 8111 18 annexed

hereto as ANNEXUYRE-G for ready reference. In‘pursuance of

the rules relating to the Department related Parliamentary

Standing Committees, the Chairman of Rajya Sabha referred

et
ia

h Bill to the Committee on Home Affairs for examination
and report, The Committee considered the Bill and heard
the representative of Ministry of Law, Justice & Company

हक कद, anil made the following


Peceiinndat ions /observat longs?

"(j) The Hire Purchase Act since its passage in
1972 has remained im -operative till now. In
between great many socio-economic changes,
particularly during the last couple of years, have
taken place, As the legistation intends to govern
the rights and duties of both tha business and
cansumer communities, it becomes imperative to have
these changes reflacted in the legislation,
otherwise the entire exercise in this regard may
prove to be futile.

(41) The Bill which seeks to amend comprehensively
nearly half of the provisions of the Hire Purchase
Act, 1972, in some cases substituting the entire
provisions of the Act, has been brought forward
pending enforcement of the Principal Act. It,
therefora, necessitates the desirability of
enacting a frash lagislation of the subject instead
of doing complicated patech-work here and there in
the Act.

(iii) Some of the provisions of the Bild are too
technical and intricate to be comprehended by a
common man, who is concerned with the subajot
matter of the Bill. Those provisions, therefore,

to be simplified.



Th view the above, the Conmittes is of the
considered viaw that the praesent Bill may not
suffice in achiaving the desired objectives. The
Committee, therefora, recommends that Government
nay consider referring the whole issue of
hire-purchase to the Law Commission for an in-depth
examination, keeping in view the above observations
and thereafter bring in a Fresh comprehensive

legislation oan the subject before Parliament, as

expeditiously as possible.”

1.2.4 Reference made by the Government:- The Committee

recommended that Government iway consider referring the

sue of hire-purchase to the Law Commission for an

th examination, keeping in view the observations of
the Committee and thereafter bring in a frash

chonsive legislation on the subject bafore

Parliament, as expeditiously as possible. Accordingly,

of hire-purchase was referred by the

ean ge

cP eS [. te the Law Commission for an in pth

amination,

a circulated by the Commission:- The

Questionnal

Commi ss bon cireulated a questionnaire on Law oof

Hire-Purchase (ANNEXURE-D) to Bar Associations, State

Advocates, aminent Juriats and others

ree छ ,

colemtunt to solicit their views on the subject.



Before embarking upon analysis of Views received,
it is pertinent to tread through the historical concept of
the term thife-purchase’ and growth of the subject. in eur

courts.

1.3.1 Growth of ss sHire-Purchasa transactions:

Industrialisation in Europe started long back and it has
passed through centuries as to today. England occupied a

leading position in the race of industriatisation in

Europ Colonisation of Asia, Africa and certain parts of
Awerica by the European powers started with the objectives
of securing supply of raw materials to their industries
and later on markets for their products. The colonial
markets, however, were originally not attractive in view
of their poverty, backwardness and ignorance. The
colonial masters, therefore, had to find alternate markets
for their products. One of the novel mathods of achieving
this object was perhaps hire purchase and credit sale,

1.3.2 In England, the practice of selling goods on
credit, the price being payable by instalments, is of very
early origin; but the appearance of hirPe-purchase as a
commercial , institution dates substantially to the secand
half of the nineteenth century. In the industrial sphere,
at ahout the same time, the North Central -and British
Wagon Companies began to finances the purchase by
eotlieries of the railway wagons needed for the carriage

of caal and security for the advances made was provided by


hire-purchase transactions. The subsequent advent of the
motear-car immensely extended the ambit of hire-purchase,
and hire purchase terms are now available over a large

range of consumer durables.

4.3.3 It cannot be denied that whenever a society which
is primarily an agricultural society transforms into an
industrialised society, commercial or business law is
required to be enacted to protect certain rights and
interests of parties. The Jaw of hire-purchase differs
considerably from the law of sale owing to differences in
conmercial practice. Thus the existence of codifying Act
for sale of goods will not serve the purpose with regard

to hire purchase transactions.

Despite rapid davelopments of industries in India
and despite a general acclaim that India ranks in the top
imlustrialized countries of the world, it stil} remains
hasically an agricultural society and a large chunk of its
population stil? lives in villages which are far away from
the aura of influence of industrialization. © Howaver in
metropotitan cities, there is vast increase in commercial
transactions through the system of ‘hire-purchase’. Such

transactions inctude purchasing of motor vehicles,

domestic appliances, and even purchasing of houses/flats.
Fyen the public undertakings are building houses and

selling these on hbire-purchase basis.


neept of Hirs-Purchase:- The words

“hite-~urchase® are frequently used in general discussion
to denote all forms of instalment trading. Two classes of
instalment contract are in common use; the hire-purchase
agreement and the credit sale agreement (sometimes called
a clefearred paymant sale contract). A hire-purchase
Agreement connotes that the vendor of the goods will lat
theo and the customer will bire them for ai fixed period
and will pay an agreed rental by a series of instalments
throughout the hiring period; and that when the customer
has paid all the instalments he shall become the owner of
the yoods. It is also customary that the customer shal)
have the right to return the goods in good order at any
time during the hiring period and to discontinue the
hiring, provided that he pays an agreed proportion of the
total hiring cost and any overdue’ instalments. Such
transaction is thus a contract of hire with an option to
purchase; and until that option is exercised, the vendor
remains the owner of the goods. A credit sate agreement,
om the other hand, is a contract of sale which provides
that the owner will sell and the purchaser wit] buy the

and will pay an agreed price by a series of

9
instalments. Ownership of tha goods passes immediatety
the agreemant is signed and the purchaser becomas an
ordinary debtor for thea several instalments of the

purchase price,


4.4.1 ‘Hire-purchase agreement’, means‘ an agreement
under which goods are et on hire and under which the
hirer has an option to purchase them in accordance with
the term of the agreement and includes an agreement under
which -

(i) possession of the goods is delivered by the

owner thereof to a person on condition that
such person pays the agreed amount in
periodical instalments, and

Ciid the property in the goods is to pase to
such person on the payment of the last of
such instalments, and

(iit) such person has a right to terminate the
agreement at any time before the property

so passes. (Hire-Purchase Act, 1972,

1.4.2 system is a transaction or system

whereby a person agrees to take on hire - an article with
aA stipulation that if he pays certain number of

instalments by way of hire, he shall become the owner of

that artiole, on payment of a further sum by way of option

of purchase, at his choices.

ording to Halsbury’s Laws of England®:



- 10 -

“Hire purchase agreement” means an agreement, other
than a conditional sale agreement, under which (1)
goods are bailed in return for pertedical payments
by the person to whom they ara bailed: and (2) the
property in the goods will pass to that person if
the terms of tha agreement are complied with and
either (a) the bailee exercises an option to
Purchase the goods; (b) any party to the agreemant

does a specified act; or (०) any other specified

a

t occurs. For the avoidance of doubt it is

o

1

od

Vv
expressly stated that the parson by whom goods are
bailed to an individual under ai hire purchase
agreement is taken te provide that individual with
Fixed-sum credit to finance the transaction of an
amount equal to the total price of the goods less
the aggregate of any deposit and the total charge

for credit.

“Conditional sale agreement” means an agreement for
the sale of goods or Tand under which the purchasa
peice or part of it is payable by instalments, and
the property in tha goods or land is to remain in
the seller notwithstanding that the buyer ig to be
in possession of the goads or land untid such

ditions as to the payment of instalments or

otherwise as may be specified in the agreement are

fulfilled”,


The same author further explains’ the nature of

hire-purchase contracts as follows:

“Tha contract of hire purchase 18. one of the
variations of the contract of baitment, but it is a
modern development and the rules with regard to
bailments, which were laid down before any contract
of hire purchase was contemplated, cannot be
applied without modification because such a
contract has in it not only the elemant of bailment
but also the element of sale. At common law “hire
purchase” properly applies only to contracts of
hire conferring an option to purchase, but it is
aften used to describe contracts which are in
reality agreements to purchase chattels by
instalments, subject to a condition that tha
property in them is not ta pass until all
instalments, have been paid. The distinction
between these two types of 00701 6008 is, however, a
most important one, because under a contract to
purchase by instalments there 1s a binding

ligation on the buyer and he can therefore pass a

good title to a purchaser or pledgee dealing with
him in good faith and without notice of the rights
of .the true owner, whereas in the. case of a
contract which merely confers an option to purchase
there is no binding obligation on the hirer to buy,

atid a purchaser or pledgee can obtain no better


title than the hirer had, except in the case of a
sate in markat overt, the contract not being an
agreement te buy within the Factors Act, 1889 or
the Sales of Goods Act, 1893.”
1.4.5 The similarity between contracts of sale and
hire-purchase is accentuated by the artificial nature of
most hire-purchase agresmeants. This is evident by
consideration of three points. Firstly, the real object
of a contract of hire-purchase is almost invariably the
witimate sale of goods. Secondly, the amount which the

18 bound to pay under the contract is usually far in

excess of that which he would have had to pay if he were
really hiring the goods. And thirdly, the lega? purchase
price for which the hirer has the option to buy the goods
is frequently nominal only and, in fact is sometimes not
exacted in practice. There is further 8 practical
complication about hire-purchase contracts which makes
them distinet from contracts of sale. ' A transaction under
which a person ‘buys’ goods on hire-purchase is often and,
in the motor trade is usually,- a complex transaction
involving three and not two parties. Many retailers have
no wish to act as financiers themselves supplying credit
to consumers. So ai hire-purchase transaction often
invelves, .first, a sale, under which the retailer sells

to a finance company, and then secondly, a

contract, under which the finance company

lots dhe gouds on hire-purchase terms to the ‘buyer’. It


follews that the ‘buyer’ has no contractual relations with
the seller and this somatimes has important legal

consequences’.

1.5 Certain important cases relating to hire-purchase

ided by courts in  India:- Industrialisation and

commercial activities im India were introduced by the
British rulers which were designed and devised for
safeguarding the economic interests of our colonial
masters, The advent of hire-purchase transaction in
England was subsequently introduced into various colonies
of Great Britain depending on the sconomic and commercial
development in the colonies, India was no exception,
Disputes involving hire-purchase transactions in India
perhaps reached the court in the first quarter of the
twentieth century. Perhaps the first important reported
case is that of A,Cecil Cola ४५, Nanalal Moraji Dave and

Another in which Justica Martin observed? :

“Now the very expression “hire-purchase agreement”

a

is not one that originated in this country, It i
clearly a form of an agreement which has originated
in England and has been created by those engaged in
the trade of particular articles. Substantially in
this* country there is Tittle ar no authority on

hire purchase agreement. . . -



1.5.1 In Auto Supply Company Ltd. ४: Vv. Raghunatha

Chetthyl®, a company had agreed to offer a bus on a
lire-purchase agreement, on condition that Rs. t140/were to
be paid by the hirer on delivery, and 11 monthly
ingtalmants were to be paid thereafter, each of Rs.226,
and the owners were to be. entitled to terminate the
contract on default occurring if hirer for any month was
in arrears. A suit was brought by the owners for
possession of the bus on the happening of the said
condition. Lord Coutts-Trotter, C.d. held that thaugh
there was no such explicit condition, yet it was the

ary implication that when the agreement terminated

2s.

either by the choice or defauit of the hirer, atl sums

paid by him are to be retained by the owners, the amount

Rs,1140/- being construed either as the first instalment

i hire money or as the premium taken by the owner for

granting lease and in either case money received was not

refunded, The money was not to be regarded as

advange of rent. Justice Ananthakreishnan Ayyar held! !-

"In a contract of sale: for a price payable by
instalments, the purchaser has “no eption of
terminating the contract and returning the chattel,
whereas in a contrast of hire-purchase the hirer
fas such an option. In the case of hire purchase
contract, the hirer has got option to purchase,
which he may exercise or not according to his sweet

will and pleasure; but in the case ef a contract of


\
in
1

aale the purchaser has become the owner of the
chattel, but the price is by agreement payable by

instalments.

1.5.2 In the case of §.S8.Tiwari v.

Incerperated, Grilla, 3.0. heldt2 -

“where in the agreement to purchase a typewriter,
there is a clauses by which the hirer is entitled ta

put an end to the contract by return of the machine

i

at any time, forfeiting former payments, it a
contract for hire-purchase and not a contract for
sale, In such a casa there is nothing illegal or
inequitable in the company enforcing its rights on
the contract to recover the arrears of the
instalments while recovering the machine at the
same time. Once the machine is in the possessian
of tha company whether it is handed over by the
hirer or recovered otherwise, it is the company’s
property to be disposed of by them as they wished,
and such disposal can have no bearing whatever oan
the arrears which are arrears” for hire and not
instalments of the purchase money in respect of a
purchase which the hirer was bound to fulfil.”

of Babu Balmakund v. Mahesh Narayan

Singh & Ore,, the court heldt? that-

Q



~ 6 -

“Where under a hire-purchase agreement, the
purchaser is given the option to terminate the
contract of hire at any time by returning the goods
and paying the hire dus upto the date of such
return, the transaction cannot be regarded as an

out and out sate.”

In ¥.Bakshinamurthi Mudaliar v. General and Credit

ation. (India) Ltd., the Madras High Court, inter

observedt4 as follows:-

"To sum up, the law of hire and hire-purchase stems
from the law of contract of which it forms an
important segment. It is comparatively modern in
origin and is designed to serve the needs of credit
buying while at the same time protecting the vendor
from being caught in the meshes of the Taw relating
to sales stricto sensu. In effect hire-purchase is
Lailment with an optian to purchase though it is
sometimes used in a wider sense ta ine luda
agreements where there is-an irrevocable agreamant
to buy in instalment terms with the proviso that
the title shail not pass until the instalments are
baid. A hire-purchase agreement thus creates a
bailment, but is 8 bailment plus an option to

purchase. The transaction is compounded «of the



elament of beth the 18४ of hire and sale and it
would be clearly wrong to assimilate it to a

hypathecation of moveable property.”

1.5.5 10 Damodar yalley. Corporation v. State of Bihar,

the Supreme Court observed's the distinction between a
mere contract of hiring, a sate or 6 hire purchase as

follows:-

"RB... the sole question for determination in this
appeal is whether, in respect of the machinery and
equipments admittedly supplied by the Corporation
to the Contractors, it was a mere contract of
hiring as contended on behalf of the appellant
Corperation, or a sate or 8 hire purchase, as
contended on behalf of the respondent State. The
Jaw on the subject is not in doubt, but the
difficulty arises in applying that law to the facts
and eircumstances of a particular case on 8 proper
construction of the document evidencing the
transaction between the parties, It is well
settled that a mere contract of hiring, without
more, 78 a species of the contract of bailment,
which does not create a title in the bailee, but
the law of hire purchase has undergone considerable
development during the last half a century or more

a number of variations, thus

and has introduc

Iealing Lo categories, and it becomes a question of



aome oicety as to which category a particular
combrack between the parties comes under,

Ovdtinacily, a contract of hire purchase confers no

title on tha hirer, but a mere option to purchase option to purchase

3१1 ६1 11 t of certain conditions, But a

tract. of hire purchase may also provide for the vide for the

agreement to purchase the thing hired by deferred thing hired by  deferrad

payments subject to the condition that title to the Litls to the

thing shall not pass_until all the instatments hava

been paid. Thare may be other variations of a
contract of hire purchase depending upon the terms
agreed betwaen the parties. When rights in third
parties have been created by acts of parties or by
operation of law, the quastion, which does not
arise here may arise as to what exactly were the
rights and obligations of the parties to the
original contract. It ie equally well settled that
Cor tha purpose of datermining as to which category
हे राह ५ पी शा contrack comes under, the Court wilt
Jook at the substance of the agreement and not at
the mere words describing the category. One of the

to datermine the quastion whether a

particular agreement is a contract of mere hiring
er whethar it is a cantract of purchase on a system

of deferred payments of the purchase price is

whether there is any binding obligation on the

hirer te purchase the ao Another useful

te determine such a controversy is whether there is


a right reservad to the hirer to return the goods
at any time during the subsistence of the contract.

Th thera is

cha right reserved, then  chearly
there 15 no centract of sale, vide Helby ४.
Hatthews, 1895 AG 471. Applying these two tests to
the transaction in the present case, it becomes
clear that it was a case of sale of goods with a
condition of re-purchase on certain conditions
dapending upon the satisfaction of the Corporation
as to whether the “residual life” of the machinery
or the equipment was not less than one-third of the
standard life in accordance with the terms agreed

between the parties.” (emphasis laid)

1 6 H/s K.L.Johar & Co. v. The Deputy Commer

arti 16, is the case relating to hire-purchase which

came un for decision before the Supreme Court of India.

lant was a finance company doing business of

Thee apy
advancing money to persons who purchased motor vehictes
hut wera themselves not in a pesition to find ready money
to pay the price. The appellant since the commencement of
their business had entered into several hire-purchase
agreements with persons desirous of purchasing motor
vehicles. On April 28, 1956, the appalltant submitted a

return toa the Assistant Commercial Tax Officer Coimbatore,

wing A turnover for the purposes of sales tax for

The Asstt

the year 1955

Officer mada a provisional as on


the basis of tha return submitted by the appellant and
fisert instalments for payment thereof. The appellant paid
the instalments but preferred a revision to the Commercial
Tax Officer mainly on the ground that hire-purchase
agreements were not transactions of sale liable to be
taxed under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, The
matter came in appeal to the Supreme Court and it was

observed in paragraphs 11 and 17 as fallows:-

“This brings us to a consideration of the validity
of Explanation 1, which wea have already set out.
It is necassary in this connection to understand
the nature of a typical hire-purchase agreament as
distinct from a sale in which the price is to te
paid later by instalments. In the case of a sale
in which the price is to be paid by instalments,
the property passes as soon as the sale is made,
sven though the price has not been fully paid = and
may later be paid in instalments. Thies follows
from the definition of sale in $.4 of the Indian
Sale of Goods Act (as distinguished from. an
agreement to 5911) which requires that the seller
transfers the property in the goods to the buyer
for a price. Tha essence of a sale is that the

property is transferred from the seller to the

buyer for a price, whether paid at once or
Tater in instalments, oO the other hand, a

agreament, as its very name implies,



has two aspects. Thare is first an aspect of
bai lment of the goods subjected to the
hire-purchase agreement, and there is next an
alemant of sale which frustifies when the option to
purchase, which is usually a term of hirta-purchase
Agremncanits , is axarcicacd by the intending
purchaser. Thus the intending purchaser 185 known
as the hirer so long as the option to purchase i5
not exercised, and the essence of 8 hire-purchase
agreement properly so called is that the property
in the goods does not pass at the time of the
agreement but remains in the intending seller, and
only passes later whan the option is exercised by
the intending purchaser. The distinguishing
feature of a typical hire-purchase agreament
therefore is that the property does not pass when
the agreement is made but only passes when the

sed after complying with

option is finally exere

atl the terms of the agreement.”

“The naxt question that arises is whether a
hite-purchase agreamant ever ripans into a sale and
if so when. We have already pointed out that a
hire-purchasa agreament has two elements; (7)
element of bailment, and (2) element of sate, in
the sense that it contemplates an evantual sate,
The element of sate fructifies when tha option is

4d by thes fiotending purchaser after

myers


fulfitling the terms of the agreement. When all

the terms of the agreement are satisfied and the

option is exercised a sale takes place of the goo
which till then had been hired. When this sale
takes place it will be liable to sates tax under
the Act for the taxable event under the Act is the
taking place of the sale, the Act providing for 4
multi-point sales tax at the relevant time. Where,
however option is not exercised or cannot be
exercised because of the inability of tha intending
purchaser to (७1111 the terms of the agreement,
there is no sale at all. As the taxable event is
the sale of goods, the tax can only be levied when
the option is exercised after fulftiling att the
terms of the hire-purchase agreemant. We cannot
agree with the view of the High Court that becuase
in most of such cases the optian is exercised, tax
is leviable immediately on tha making of the
hire-purchase agreement and that in a few ८
where there is failure to carry out the terms of
the agreement or ta exercise the option, there can
be adjustment by elimination of such portion of the
turnover - As we have pointed out the taxable event
under the Act is tha sale of goods and until that
taxable evant takes place there can be no liability
to pay tax, Therefore, even though eventually mast
cases of hire-purchase may result in sales by the

exercise of the option and the fulfilment of the



terms of the agreement, tax is not exigible at the
tine when the hire-purchase ayreement is made, for
abo Bhat Lime the taxable event bas nob taken place;
it can only be exigible when the option has been
wrercised and all the terms of agreement fulfilled
and the sale actually takes place. When sale takes
place dn a particular case will depend upan the
terms of the hire-purchase agreement but till the
sale takes place there can be no liability to sales
tax under the Act. The High Court therefore was in
errer in holding that transactions of hire-purchase
of the kind with which wa are deating having regard
to their main intent and purpose might be treated
as sales at thea time the agreemant is entered 11100;
in all hire purchase agreements of the type with
which we are dealing sale anly takes place whan the
aption is exercised after all the terms of the

reaments are fulfilled and it is at that time

that the tax is exigible.”

4.5.7 The next important case decided by the Supreme
Court on thea point of hire-purchase 185 Sundaram Financa
Lid, ४, State _of Keralat?, thea appellants in this case
were a company incorporated under the Companies Act and

s of motor

en ‘business of financing purcha

op security of these vehicles, The short

question in this case was whether the hire-purs

Abscnents entered into by the appeViant with its



Cede were transactions of sate of goads or were only
hoomrnts securing the return of the loans advanced by it
to ihe  cushamers, The Suprame Court tn its judgment in

paras 23 amd 24 held:

"A hire purchase agreement is normally one under
which an owner hires goods to another party called
the hirer and further agreas that the hirer shall
have an option to purchase the chattel when he has
paid A certain sum, or when the hire-rental
Laynents hava reached the htre-purchase prices
stipulated in the agreement. But there are
variations when a financier is interposed beatween
the owner of the goods anit the customer. The
agreamant, ignoring variations of detait, broadly
Laken one or the other of two 0115: (1) when the
awner is unwilling to 16060 to the purchaser of
goods to recover tha balance of the price, and the
finaneier who pays the balance undertakes the
recovery. In this form, goods are purchased by the
finaneier from the dealer and the financier obtains
A hire-purchase agreamant from the customer under
which the latter becomes the owner of the goods on
payment of all the instalments of the stiputated
liretand exercising his optian to purchase the
seeds on payoent of a nominal price. The decision
of the Court in ATR 1965 $C 10382 dealt with ते

transaction of this character. (2) In the ather


form of transactions, goods are purchased by the
customer, who in consideration of executing a
hire-purchase agreement and allied documents
remains in possession of the goods, subject to
liability to pay the amount paid by the financier
on his behalf to the owner or dealer and the
financier obtains a hira purchase agreement which
gives him a license to seize tha goads in the svent
of failure by the customer to abide by the

conditions of the hire-purchase agreement.“

“The true effect of a transaction may be determined
from the terms of the agreement considered in the
Fight of the surrounding circumstances. In @ach
case, the Court has, unless prohibited by statute,
power to go behind the documents and to determine
the nature of the transaction, whatever may be the

who

rm of the documents. An owner of goo

purports absolutely to convey ar acknowledges to
have conveyed goods and subsequently purperts to
hire them under a hire-purchase agreement is not
estopped from proving that the real bargain was a
loan oy the security of the goods. If there is a
» evidenced by

bona Fide and

ompleted sale af good

documents, anterior to and independent of a

vent and distinct hiring to tha vendor, the

subs

transactions may not be regarded as ते toan

ansaction, even though the reasen for which it



-~ 26 -

was entered into was to raise money. If the real
transaction is a loan of money secured by 6 right
vf seizure of the goods, the property obstensibly
passas under the documents embodying the
transaction, but subject to the terms of the hiring
agreement, which become part of the buyer’s title,
and confer a licance to. seize. When 8 person
desiring to purchase goods and net having
sufficient money on hand borrows the amount needed
from a third person and pays it over to the vendor,
the transaction between the customer and the lender
will unquestionably be a loan transaction. The
real character of the transaction would not be
altered if the lender himself is the owner of the
goods and the owner accepts the promise of the
purchaser to pay the price er the balance remaining
due against delivery of goods. But a hire-purchase
Agreament is a more complex transaction, The owner
under the hire-purchase agreement anters into a

transaction of hiring out dsoon the terms and

conditions set out in the agreement, and the eption
to purchase exercisable by the customer on payment
of all the instalments of hire arises when the
instalments are paid and not befere. In such a

hire purchase agreement there is no agreement to

fotty Qaoods ; the hirer being under na te

Btion either to return

obligation ta buy, has an

gq

the aeocds or to became its owner by payment 11) 111



of the stipulated hire and the price for exercising
the aption. This class of hire-purchase agreement
muck be distinguished from transaction in which the
customer is the owner of the good and with 0 viaw
to finance his purchase he enters inte an
arrangement which is in the form of a hire purchase
Ayreanent with the Cinancier, but कक substance
evidences a Toan transaction, subject to hiring
agreement under which the Tender is) given the

license to seize the goods.“

In The Instatment Supply Ltd. vs. $.T.G.

ie)

Atimeclat

badt®, the petitioner, a limited company carried oon
the bsinesa of financing the purchase of motor vehicles,
The person desiring te purchase a motor vehicte entered
inte a hire-purchase agreement with the petitioner company

em certain terms and conditions. The question before the

Supreme Court was when doas a sale liable to sates tas

place under a hire-purchase agreement. the Supreme

para 7:-

“A contract of sate should be distinguished from a
contract of hire-purchase, A contract OF
hire-purshase is properly speaking a contract of
hire by which the hirer is granted an option to buy
antract of sale, uncer a

bet is net, as under a

The cantract

legal obligation to da

hire-purchase jis one of the variations of the



contract of bailmant, but it is a modern
development of commercial 1118, and the rules with
regard to bailments, which were laid down before
any contract of hire-purchase was contemplated,
cannot be applied simplicitear, because such
contract has in it not only the element of bai lment
but also the element of sale. At common law the
term “hire-purchase” properly applied = only to
contracts of hire conferring an option to purchase
but it is often used to describe contracts which
are in reality agreement to purchase chattels by
instalmants, subject te a condition that the
property in them is not to pass until atl
instalments have heen paid. The distinction
between these two types of hire purchase contracts
is, however, a most impartant one, because under
the latter type of contract there is a binding
abligation on the hirer to buy and the hirer can
therefore pass a good title to a purchaser or
pledgee dealing with him in good faith and without
notica of the rights of the true owner, whereas in
the case of a contract which merely confers an
option -to purchase there is no binding obligation

ee can

on the hirer to buy, and a purchaser or pled
obtain no better title then the hirer . had.

(Halshbury'’s Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vot. 19,



yA 123, pages 510-511). These propositions of
law have been quoted with approval by this Court in

1.1 two decisions earlier referred to.”

1,4.9 Thus the concept of hire-purchase has been put
beyond the pale of doubt by the courts in our country.

However, it cannot be gainsaid that a separate Act should

be enacted to regulate hire-purchase transactions, Wea
proveed on to consider the views obtained on the

qertionnaire circulated by us.


o

6.

- 30 -

TNOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER_I

Eighth Report, p.4 para 12

See Parliament of India, Rajya Sabha Committee on
Homa Affairs, Twanty-First Report, The Hire
Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989, (Rajya Sabha
Secretariat, New Delhi July, 1995) p.2

H.Simpson Cook; J.Anderson Hermon and H.Pearse,

Purchase Accounts and Finance (London, 1959

edn.), page 17.

A.R. Biswas in Mitra’s Legal and Commercial
Dictionary, IInd Edition, page 367
Venkataramaiya’s Law Lexicon Vol.1, 1971 Edition,
page 551

Halsbury'’s Laws of England (Fourth Edition, London,
1979) Vol.22, para 37, p.34:

Id., para 209, p.173

he Sata of Goods (Delhi, 1995), p.12.

P.S.Atiyah,

AIR 1925 Bom 18
AIR 1929 Mad. 884
Id., 9.886

AIR 1934 Nagpur 151
AIR 1934 Oudh 133
ATR 1960 Mad 328

AIR 1961 SC 440


1K, AIR 1965 SC 1082

7, AIR 1966 SC 1178

18. AIR 1974 SC 1105



- 32 -

CHAPTER 11

he]
>
0
m7
es

ANALYSIS OF VIEWS ON QUESTIONNAIRE _

2.4 Views of respondents considered:- Pursuant to the

questionnaire issued by the Law Conmission on 18th May
1998, several responses were received. The High Court of
Madhya Pradesh, Government of Assam, Government of
Haryana, Board for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction, Madras High Court Bar Association, the Lok
Ayukta of Karnataka, a number of District Judges of the
Karnataka Cadre and cartain other interested individuals
and organisations replied to the questionnaire. Almost
All oof them have supported the amendments preposed by the
1989 Amendment 8111 and the modifications suggested by the
law commission. One individual! who claims toa be the
aulhor of the book “Lease Financing and Hire Purchase", a
book running inte 2000 pages, has expressed the view that
the very idea of a Hire-Purchase Act should be dropped and
a Consumer Credit Act on the lines of the British and
Australian enactments be enacted. A similar objection has
hean put forward by another gentleman? , whose letter has
heen forwarded to us by the Federation of All India Hire
Purchase Financers. This objection/suggestion is not
aceaptable for more than one reason, but before we record

te to deal with the English law

theo, 1. weatdol be Prope



ancd the UK Acts on the subject including the UK Consumer
Credit Act, 1974, since the aforasaid objection/siuggestion

18. based mainty on the Acts of UK.

21? Views regarding dropping of Hire-Purchase Act_ and

introduction of Consumer Credit Act on the pattern of the

British and.

The hires

rai

enactments,

purchase transactions in the United Kingdom were not
regulated by Taw until 1938, In that year, the Hire
Purchase Act, 1938 was enacted which defined the hire
feechase agreement as an agreement for the baitment of
goods under which the bailea might buy the goods or under
which the property in the goods might pass to the bailee,
This Act, however, did not take in the conditional sale
2001 PeMeENts, This was done by the Hire Purchase Act, 1964
which defined the conditional sale agreements as
Agreements for the sale of goods under which the purchase
price or part of it was payable by instalments and the
property in the ygoods was to remain in the settler until
5.11) conditions as to the payments or instalments or
otherwise, as might be specified in the agreement, were

fulfitled.

2.2.1 The 1938 Act was amended and enlarged by the Hire

Purchase Act, 1954 and again by the Hire Purchase Act,

1164. The 1964 Act had a specific part, i.e. part Il



which protected the bonafide purchasers of motor vehicles
covered by an hire purchase agreement/conditional sala

AGL eamearnnt.

2.7.2 In the year 1965, the ®Aritish Parliament enacted
the tire Purchase Act, 1965, repeating the Acts of 1938,
1954 and 1964 (except part III of the 1964 Act). This Act
purported to ba a consatidating Act on the subject of
Agreements in tha United Kingdom. Section 1 dafined the

sions “hire purchase agreement", “credit sale

agreenent” and “sonditionat sale agreement" 170. the

following words:

“Hire purchase agreement” means an agreement for
the bailment of goods under which the bailee may
buy the goods, or under which the property in the

geods will or may pass to the bailee;

edit sale agreement” means an agreement for the

sale of goods under which the purchase price is

by five or more instalments, not being A

conditional sale agreemant;

“Conditional sale agreement” maans an agreement for
the sale of goods under which the purchase price ar
part of it is payable by instalments, and the
property in the goods is to remain in the seller

Chobtwithstanding that the buyer is to be in


pessession of the goods) until such conditions as
to the payment of instalments or otherwise ac may

be specified in the agreament are fulfilled.

2.2.2 The 1965 Act applied to hire purchase
agresmants/conditional sale agreements whereunder the hire
purchase price or total purchase price, as the case may
be, did not axcead 2000 pounds. Of course, the said Timit
could be raised by the Government in the manner prescribed
by section 3, Section 4 excluded from its ambit
agreements entered into by or on behalf of a corporate
body as the hirer or buyer of the goods. Section 5
provided that an agreement of hire purchase/credit sate
agrenment/conditional sale agreement shalt hot be
enforceable unless the agreement was signed by the
hirer/buyer and the requiremants of sections 6, 7, 8 and 9
were complied with. Section 6 required that before
entering into an agreement, the buyer must have been
infarmed of the cash price of the goods which meant the
price at which the concerned goods might be purchased for
eash., Section 7 provided the form and contents of the
Agreements. Section 8 provided for supply of copy of
agreement to the hirer. Section 9 provided for supply of
capies of agreement to hirer or buyer within a “particular
perioc where the agreement was signed at a place other
than the ‘apprepriate trade premises’. Section 10 clothed
the court with the power to dispense with the requiremente

of veetiens 6, 7, 8 and 9 where it was satisfied that


- 36 ~-

failure to comply with any of the said requirements had
not prejudiced the hirer/buyer. Section 11 conferred upon
the hirer/buyer a right to cancel and section 12 provided
the mode in which the notice of cancellation was to be
served. Section 13 provided for the situation following
the cancellation of agreement including redelivery and
interim care of the concerned goods. Sections 14 and 15
dealt with certain other aspects of cancellation of the

agreement by the hirer.

2.2.4 Sections 16 to 20 dealt with representations,
conditions and warranties. Section 16 provided that any
representation by a person other than the owner/seller
with respect to the goods, whether orally or in writing,
shall be deemed to be a representation made by him 89 the
agent of the owner/seltler. Section 17 set out the implied
conditions and warranties, It provided that every
agreement shall be deemed to imply a stipulation on the
part of the owner/setler that he had the right to 5811 the
goods, that the hirer/buyer shat] have and enjoy a quiet
possession of the goods and further that the goods were
free from any charge or encumbrance in favour of any third
party. This was of course subject to the rider that where
any such defect was made known to the hirer/purchaser
specifically in writing, section 18 permitted the parties
to exclude the warranties mentioned under section 17 by
express stipulation, Section 19 set out the further

implied conditions where the goods were sold in bulk with


~37 -

reference to a sample or where they were sold by
dascription. Section 20 contained certain special
provisions with respect to the conditional sale

agreements.

2.2.5 Sections 21 to 24 deait with duties of the
owner/seller to supply information and to furnish other
relevant documents to the hirer/buyer. Section 21
provided, inter alia, that the agreement shall
specifically provide the amount paid by the hirer/buyer,
the amount remaining unpaid under the agreement, the date
on which each instalment became due and the amount of such
instalment etc. Failure to comply with the above
requirements made the agreement unenforceable so long as
the failure continued. Sections 22 and 23 dealt with the
contract of guarantee accompanying an agreement ६00. the
documents to bea supplied to the guarantor. Section 24
cast an obligation upon the hirer/buyer to give
information about the whereabouts of the hired goods, if
so requested by the owner/seltler and also allow the same
to be inspected. Section 25 provided that in case of
default in payment of instalments in accordance with the
agreanent, the right of termination shall not be exercised
by the owner/seller unless he served a notice in that
behalf upon the hirer/buyer. Section 26 contained certain
supplementary provisions concerning notices of default
contemplated by saction 25. Section 27 conferred upan tha

hirer/buyer tha right to terminate the agreement any time



- 38 -

before the final payment was made under the agreement and
the consequences flowing therefrom. Section 28 dealt with

the 11690111६158 of the hirer/buyer ih cases where he

terminated the agreement.

2.2.6 Section 29 declared that certain stipulations
specified therein shal? not form part of an agreement and,

if provided, shall be void.

2.2.7 Section 30 dealt with death of a hirer/buyer where
an agreement provided for its termination on the happening
of stich event or any other specified event. In the
absence of such a stipulation, the right of the
hirer/buyer was made heritable. Sections 31 and 32 mada
certain supplemental provisions which need not be referred

to herein.

2.2.8 Part III defined “protected goods” and restrictions
on the right of an owner to recover possession thereof in
certain situations. Section 41 provided that where the
owner initiated an action for . recovery of goods under
section 35, he shall not take any steps to enforce payment
of any sums due under the agreement or under the contract
of auarantesa relating to the said agreement. Section 42
conferred upon the court power to makes appropriate orders
in cases of non-compliance with orders for specific

delivery of goods. Section 45 applied the provisions of


-~ 39 -

sections 35 to 44 to conditional sale agreements as well.
Soctions 46 to 50 contained certain supplementary

provisions which need not be dealt with herein.

2.2.9 Section 51 dealt with appropriation of payments by
the hirer/buyer having two or more agreements with the
same owner/selter. Section 52 stated that refusal to
surrender goods shall not be treated as conversion where
the right to recover possession of the goods by the
owner/seller was subject to any restriction and that
restriction was subsisting. Sections 57 to 62 contained
certain supplementary provisions. It may be reiterated
that while repealing the 1964 Act under the 1965 Act, Part

III of the 1964 Act was not repealed.

2.2.10 In 1974, the British Parliament enacted the
Consumer Credit Act, 1974, This Act was made to give
effect to a number of recommendations made by the Crowther
Conmitteea on Consumer Credit (1971). The Act establishes
a camprehensive code of regulation for the supply to
individuals (including sole traders and partners) of
credit not exceeding 5000 pounds throughout the U.K. It

provides for’ ticencing of those who carry on the business

of aranting consumer credit and ancillary credit
businesses, It covers transactions which were not
previously regulated by any enactment. It applies to
bankers, financial houses, building societies, Jacal

authorities, Tifa insurance offices, moneylenders, pawn


- 40 -

trokers, cheque and voucher traders, issuers of credit

cards, mail order companies, retailers, service
industries, mortgage companies and other businesses
providing financial accommodation. It also affects
mortgage, finance and insurance brokers, solicitors,

estate agents, debt collectors, factors, companies engaged
in block discounting, debt counsellers, debt adjustors,
credit insurers and credit reference bureaux. This Act
not merely applies to hire purchase transactions, but 0180
to lease transactions. Certain provisions of the Act
namely those which dealt with extortionate credit
bargains, however, apply to all credit agreements where
the debtor is an individual regardless of the amount of
the credit advances. It repeals Hire Purchase Act, 1964
(except Part III) and the Hire Purchase Act, 1965, Asa
matter of fact, Schedule IV to this Act substitutes entire
Part III of the Hire Purchase Act, 1964, which deals with
title to motor vehicles on hire purchase or conditional
sale, It seeks to protect the rights of a _ bonafide
purchaser of motor vehicle from a person who has obtained
it under a hire purchase or conditional 5818 agreement but
who disposes it. of before the property’ in thea vehicle
vests in him. It also contains certain other supplemental

provisions.

2.2.11 “The draftsman of the Act has found it impossible

to set up a system of wide ranging control without

D

devising new concepts and consequently has introduced in


Part II of the Act an entirely new and sometines comp lex
terminology. However, despite its tength (containing 193
sections) the Act is merely a blueprint for the system of
regulation and licencing which it establishes. It will be
supplemented by a mass of regulations, orders and other
subordinate legislation. This subordinate legislation
will inevitably be far more voluminious and complex than

the Act itself3.”

2.2.12 The Consumer Credit Act, 1974 contains as many as
193 sections divided into 12 parts in addition to five
Schedules, which too are quite elaborate. Part I
(sactions 1 to 7) sets out the duties of the Director
General of Fair Trading. His main duty is to administer
the licencing system set up by the Act and to exercise the
adjudicating functions conferred upon him by the Act with
respect to issue, renawal, variation, suspension and
revocation of licences. He is vested with the power of
general superintendence over the working and anforcement
of tha Act and regulations made thereunder. The Secretary
of the State is empowered by section 2 to confer
additional powers upon the director. The adjudicating
functions of the director are subject to the supervision
of souncil on tribunals created under the Tribunals and
Inquiries Act, 1971. Sections 4 to 7 obligate the
director to arrange for dissemination of such information
and advice as it may appear to him expedient to give to

the public and to submit annual reports. They 08७


- 42 -

provide the form in which applications are to be made to
him. Section 7 provides a penalty for furnishing 6198

(Information in any application made under the Act.

2.2.13 Before referring to the other provisions of the

Act, it wouid be appropriate to mention that section 189

dafines various expressions occurring in the Act. It
Inter__alia, defines the expressions ‘conditional sale
agreement’, ‘consumer credit agreement’, ‘consumer hire
agreement’, ‘credit sale agreement’,
‘debtor-creditor-supplier agreement’, ‘hire purchase
agreement’, ‘debtor’, ‘hirer’, ‘owner’, ‘creditor’,

‘protected goods’, ‘regulated agreements’, ‘restricted-use

credit agreement’, ‘surety’, ‘supplier’ and ‘total price’.

2.2.14 Part II deals with credit agreements, hire
agreements and linked transactions. section 8 defines the
expressions personal credit agreement and consumer credit
agreement. A personal credit agreement is a mere credit
arrangement without limit on the amount, while a consumer
credit agreement is a personal credit agreement
stipulating a credit not exceeding 5000 pounds. A
consumer credit agreement is called ‘regulated agreament’
within the meaning of the Act provided it does not. falt
under any of the exemptions provided by section 16.
Section 9 defines the expression “credit” while section 10
says that a credit agreement can be a ‘running account

credit facility’ or a ‘fixed sum credit facility’.


Section 11 defines the expressions ‘restricted-use credit
agreement’ and ‘un-restricted use credit agreement’. A
restricted-use credit agreement is a regulated consumer
credit agreement to finance a transaction between the
debtor and the creditor whether forming part of that
agreement or not, or to finance a transaction between a
debtor and a person other than the creditor. An
un-nestricted-use credit agreement is a regulated consumer
credit agreement not falling within the ambit or
restricted-use credit agreement, Section 12 specifias
what a ‘debtor-creditor-supplier agreement’ means, while
section 13 defines ‘debtor-creditor agreement’. Section
14 specifies what ‘credit-token agreements’ mean whereas
section 16 defines ‘consumer hire agreements’. A consumer
hire agreement, according to section 15 “is an agreement
made by a person with an individual (“the hirer”) for thea
Gailment or (in Scotland) the hiring of goods to the hirer
being an agreement which - (a) is not a hire purchase
agreement, (ft) is capable of subsisting for more than
three months and (c) does not require the hirer to make
payment exceeding 5000 pounds” - in other words lease
agreements not amounting to hire purchase ‘agreements. A
consumer hiresagreement is also a regulated agreement if
it i not exempted under section 16. It may be stated at

hire purchase

this stage itself that the expressian
agremment” Cas defined in section 189) means “an agreement
other than a conditional sale agreement under which - (9)

goed. are bailed or (in Scotland) hired in return far


~ 44 -

periodical payments by the person to whom they are bailed

or hired and (b) the property in the goods will pass ta

that person if the terms of the agreement are complied

with and one or more of the following occurs -

(i) the exercise of an option to purchase by that
person.

(ii) the doing of any other specified act by any party
to the agreement.

(iii) the happening of any other specified event.”

2.2.15 Section 16 provides for exemptions. According to
this section, the Act does not regulate a consumer credit
agreement where a creditor is a local authority or a
building society or a body specified by the Secretary of
State being an insurance company, a friendly society, an
organisation of amployers or of workers, a charity, a land
improvement company or a body corporate named or
specifically referrad to in any public or generat Act.
The section further specifies the types of agreements
which are exempted thereunder. Section 17 defines ‘smatl
agreements’ as agreements for .credit not excaading 30
pounds and section 18 defines ‘multiple agreements’.
Section 19 -defines Tinked transactions, while saction 20
contemplates the Secretary of State making regulations for
determining the true cost to the debtor of the credit
previded or to be provided under a consumer credit

agreamant.



- 45 -

2.2.16 Part III deals with licencing of credit and hire
businesses. Section 21 indicates that a licensee is
required to carry on the consumer credit business or
consumer hire business. (As already stated, a consumer
credit business is concerned with only provision of credit
while consumer hire agreement is a Teasing agreement as
defined in section 15). Section 22 says that licences

under section 21 could be standard licences or, as the

7२1५७ may be, group licences. Sections 23 to 28 deal with
matters to be provided in the ticence, qualifications of a
licensee, the conduct of business of the licensee and the
manner in which the applications for licence are to be
dealt with. Sections 29 to 42 deal with tTength,
variation, suspension and revocation of licancas. Thy
also provide for situations in which a licensee dies or
becomes bankrupt. Appeals are provided against the orders
of a director, counselling, suspending or otherwise

curtailing the licence.

2.2.17 Part IV containing sections 43 to 654 daal with
advertisements or advertising business as it may be
called. The Part applies to such adverttsements as are
published jndicating that the advertiser is willing to
provide credit or to enter into an agreement for the
bailmant or hiring of goods. Section 44 deals with tha
form and content of advertisements. It provides that the
Secretary of State shall make regulations as to the farm

and content of such advertisements. Sections 45, 46 and


- 46 -

47 prohibit advertisements which are false or misleading
or otherwise infringe the Act or regulations made
thereunder. Section. 48 prohibits the canvassing or
soliciting of the regulated agreements at any placa other
than the trade premises. Section 49 contains a simitar
Prohibition with respect to debtor-creditor agreements.
Section 50 punishes circulation of such material to minors
Section 53 obliges a person carying on consumer credit
business/consumer hire business to display the prescribed

information in the prescribed manner.

2.2.18 Part V containing sections 55 to 74 deals with
entering into of credit or hire agreements and their
cancellation. Section 55 obliges the creditor to furnish
ali relevant information to the debtor/hirer while section
56 brings into net even the antecedent negotiations.
Section 57 provides for the withdrawal of a party from the
prospective agreement i.e., before the agreement qs
concluded. Section 59 declares that an agreement to enter
into a prospective regulated agreement is void against the
debtor/hirer. Section 60 provides for the form and
content of ‘regulated agreements’ which axpression is
defined in -section 189 in the following terms:

“tregulated agreement’ means a consumer credit agreemant

or consumer hire agreement, other than an ¢xempt
agreement, and ‘regulated’ and ‘unregulated’ shall be
construed accordingly”. This section contamptates the

Seerebary of Stats making regulations in this behalf with



a view to ensuring that the debtor/hirer is made aware of
atl the relevant information concerning the agreement.
Section 61 provides for signing of the agreement by both
the hirer/debtor as well as the creditor/owner. It says
that the document should contain all the terms of the
agreement other then the implied terms. A document which
is not executed in accordance with section 61 is declared
as “not properly executed”. Section 63 places an
obligation upon the owner/creditor to supply a copy of the
agreemant to the debtor/hirer. Section 64 provides that
in the case of cancellable agreement, a notice in the
prescribed form setting out the conditions in which the

cancellation can bs effected must be enclosed to the

agreement. Section 65 declares that an improperly
executed agreement is unenforceable against the
debtor/hirer. Section 67 deals with and specifies what

cancellable agreemant is. Section 69 deals with notice of
cancellation and section 70 provides for the consequences
and situations pursuant to cancellation of a regulated
agreement. Sections 71, 72 and 73 also deal with the same
subject-matter. Section 74 excludes certain agreements
(non-commercial agreements, overdrawal agreements etc.

from the ambit of Part V).

2.2.19 Part (1 containing sections 75 to 86 provides for
matters arising out of currency of credit or hire
agreemants. Section 75 declares that if a debtor under a

debtor-craditor-supplisr agreement (section 12(0) or


- 48 -

12(c}) has, in relation to a transaction financed under an
agreement, any claim against the supplier in respect of a
misrepresentation or breach of contract, the said claim
shall extend equally against the creditor who is made
Jointly and severally tiable along with the supplier to
the dabtor. Saction 76 says that no action for any breach
or any other type of action shall be taken against the
debtor/hirer by the creditor/owner unless a prior notice
of seven days is given in that behalf. Section 77 sets
out the duties of a creditor under a regulated agreement
for a fixed-sum credit white section 78 deals with the
duty of the creditor to give information under 8 running
account credit agreement. Section 79 places an obligation
upon the owner under a regulated consumer hire agreement
to furnish all information asked for by the debtor with
respect to the agreement and the matters concerning it.
Failure to furnish such information disentitles the owner
from anforcing the agreement. Section 81 deale with
payments made by the debtor/hirer who is having two or
more regulated agreements with the same owner/creditor.
It antitles the debtor/hirer to direct the appropriation
of tha sums paid by him and also provides for the
situation where no such direction 15 made. Section 8&2
provides for variation of the agreements by the
creditor/owner by giving notice to the debtor/hirer of the

consequencas of such variation. Sactions 83, 684 andj RS


~49 -

contain certain further safeguards for the debtor in case
of credit agreements. Section 86 provides for the

situations where the debtor/hirer dies.

2.2.20 Part VII containing sections 87 to 104 deals with
default and termination of agreements. Section 87
declares that before the owner takes any action for any
default or breach by the debtor/hirer under aie regulated
agreement, he shall give a prior notice. Section 88
prescribes the contents of such a notice and section 39
Says that before the prescribed period, if the debtor
takes action to repair the default or tha breach, the
owner/creditor shall not be entitled to take the proposed

action.

2.2.24 Section 930 speaks of “protected hire purchase
agreements” and “protected conditional sale agreements”,
It imposes rastrictions upon the owner’s right to recover
the aoods under such an agreement (regulated agreement) in
certain situations. Section 91 declares that if goods are
recovered by the creditor in contravention of the
provisions of section 90, the agreement shall come to an
and and the debtor shall be released from all Tiabiltitias
thereunder. Sub-section (1) thereof says that “sx.cept
under an order of the court, the creditor or owner shall
not be entitled ta enter any premises to take possassian
of yoods subject to a ragulatad hire purchase agreement

regulated conditional sale agreement or regulated consumer


- 50 -

hire agreement”. Section 93 prohibits the owner from
increasing the interest in the case of default by the
hirer, Section 94 confers a Power upon the debtor to
complete the payments ahead of time and saction 95
provides for the rebate he is entitled to in such a
situation. Section 97 casts an obligation upon the
creditor to furnish all information as may be called for
by the debtor concerning the agreement. Section 99
confers upon the debtor a right to terminate the hire
purchase or conditional sale agreement by giving the
Prescribed notice (except in a case where the title to tha
land has passed to the debtor under the conditional sale
agreement), and section 100 provides for the liabilities
of the hirer in case of such termination. Sub-section (1)
of saction 100 reads thus : “Where a regulated hire
purchase or regulated conditional sale agreement is
terminated under section 93 the debtor shal? be liable,
unless the agreement provides for a smaller payment, or
does not provide for any payment, to pay te the creditor
the amount (11 any) by which one-half of the total price
exceads the aggregate of the sums paid and the sums due in

pect of the total price immediately before the

n

termination”. The other sub-section provides for matters
ancillary to termination of the agreemant. Sectian 101
similarly confers upon the hirer the power to terminate

the hire agreement,


2.2.22 Part VIII containing sections 105 to 126 deals with
form and content of securities, pledges, negotiable
instrumants and land mortgages. Section 105 declares that
any security provided in relation to a regulated agreemant
shall be 170 writing and shal? be in a form and contain
contents as may be specified in the regulations. Section
107 casts an obligation upon the creditor under a
regulated agreement for a fixed sum credit, in relation to
which security 16 provided, to furnish atl information as
may be called for by the debtor concerning such agreement
and security. A similar obligation is placed upon. the
creditor for furnishing information to the surety under a
‘running account credit agreement’ by section 108. To the
same effect is section 109 which casts a similar
obligation upon the owner to furnish information to a
surety under consumer hire agreement. Duty is also placed
upon the creditor/owner to furnish ai relevant
information to the debtor/hirer in respect of the security
executed in relation to his agreement. Section 111 says
that where a default notice is issued by the owner, a copy
of it shall also be served upon the surety, where the
surety is liable to be proceeded against by virtue of the

security executed by him.

2.2.23 Sections 114 to 122 deal with pledges which includs
A pawning agreement. Section 123 prohibits the
creditor/owner from taking a negotiable instrument other

than a bank note or a cheque 17 discharge of any sum


payable by the debtor/hirer under a regulated agreement or
by a surety in relation to such agreement. It also
prohibits the creditor/owner from taking a negetiable
instrument as security for the discharge of any sum
payable as mentioned therein. Section 124 provides for
the consequences of breach of the prohibitton contained in
saction 123. Section 125 deals with ‘holders in due

course’.

2.2.24 Part IX deals with judicial control over the
agreements governed by the Act. The said part confers
extensive powers upon the courts to modify and extend the
terms of the agreement in appropriate situations. If.an
agreement is found to be an extortionate credit bargain,
it 19 open to the court to modify the same and reopen it

and redetermine the liabilities of the debtor thereunder.

2.2.25 Part X containing sections 145 to 160 deats with
ancillary credit business, its licensing, the contents of
agreements executed in that behalf and other matters
connected therewith. Part XI. provides for enforcement.
authorities, their powers and other matters. Section 173
Prohibits -, incorporation of any stipulation 10. the
regulated agreements contrary to the provisions of the Act
er the regulations made thereunder. Part XII contains
certain supplemental provisions. It includes section 159

which contains several expressions occurring in the Act


2.2.26 It would thus be evident that the Consumer Credit
Act, 1974 deals mainly with credit transactions
(moneylending and loan transactions) and hire agreements
(leasing agreements). It is true that it also deals with
hire purchase and conditional sale agreements but the main
emphasis is upon credit and hire agreements. AS against
this, the Hire Purchase Act, 1965 dealt exclusively with
hire purchase agreements (in its broadest sense). The
Indian Act (Hire Purchase Act, 1972) was drafted keaping
in view the provisions of the said 1965 Act of U.K.
Further, 1989 Bill has also been drafted keeping in view
the abjections raised by the Financiers’ organisations.
In this view of the matter, 10 would not be right to
suggest (as has been suggested by some respondents’ that
the 1972 Act has become outdated now and that the Indian
Parliament should enact a Consumer Credit Act on the lines
of the U.K. Act. These gentlemen evidently do not taka
into account the fact that “money-lending” is exclusively
a State subject under our Constitution (Schedule VII List
II Entry 30) and hence Partiament cannot make a law on
that subject. So far 88 leasing transactions are
concerned, a separate enactment can be thought of on that
subject but we-do not see why for that reason, the Hire
Purchase Act, which was enacted as far back as 1972 should
hot be enforced now at least, with 811 appropriate

modifications suggested in 1989 Amendment Bill and this


- 54 -

Report. Indesd, there is a pressing demand from the
consumers’ organisations for enforcing the Act to protect

their rights.

2.2.27 We may now pass on to the major and extensive
objections, suggestions and amendments suggested by the

Federation of Hire-Purchase Financiers.

2.3 The Federation of All India Hire Purchasa
Financiers having its registered office at Secunderabad
(hereinafter referred to as the “Federation” ) has
submitted two sets of objections/suggestions. With its
letter dated 13th July 1998, the Federation has enctosed
the representations made by it with respect to the Hire
Purchase Act and the Amendment 8111 to the then Prima
Minister, taw Minister, Finance Minister, Minister for
Surface Transport, Law Secretary and the present Prime
Minister, the Home Minister and some others. In
particular, Annexure IX to its letter sets out in extenso,
in a tabular form, various amendments, changes and
modifications suggested by the Federation and the reasons
in support of each such suggestion, modification and
objection. «In a subsequent communication dated 28001
August 1898, the Federation brought to our notice that the
aforesaid Annexure Ix enclosed to their

jetter/representation dated 13th July 1998 was an


uncorrected one and was sent to the Law Commission by
mistake. It stated that it was enclosing the revised and

correct copy of the said Annexure.

2.3.1 It would be clear from a perusal of the two
Annexures (hereinafter referred to as the first set of
objections and the revised set of objections), that the
objections and suggestions urged by the Federation pertain
not only to the 1989 Amandment Bill but also to the
origina? Act as passed by Parliament in 1972 and the
suggestions, changes and additions proposed by the Law

Commission in their questionnaire.

2.4 The questionnaire issued by the Law Commission was
confined to the 1989 Amendment 8111 and the modifications
and changes suggested by the Law Commission. It was made
clear therein that no objections/suggestions were being
invited with respect to the original enactmant for the
reason that the draft of the original enactment was
prepared by the Law Commission under the chairmanship of
late Shri Justice T.L. Venkatarama Aiyer after extensive
consultations. Even so, after raceipt of the said
objections, of the Federation, the Commission has decided
that with a view to removing any grievance that all its
objections were not considered, the Law Commission will
consider all objections including those relating te the
original enactment. Accordingly, it has examined = and

dealt with each and avery suggestion/objection made by the


oo

Federation both in the first set of objections and the
revisad set of objections. This has been done in the
interest of fairness and also because the original

consultation took place about 26 years ago.

2.5 We have, accordingly, considered all the objections
received with respect to original enactment, 1989
Amendment Bill and the suggestions of the Law Commission
contained in the questionnaire, as woutd be evident from a

perusal of Part II.

2.6 As the Law Commission had made it clear in the
questionnaire, it is accepting and adopting 811. the
amendments suggested in the 1989 Amendment Bil? subject,
of course, to the changes and modifications suggested by
it which were set out in full in the questionnaire. The
discussion in Part II may be viewed keeping this

background in mind.


- 57 -

PART JI

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

2.7 Section 2(c) definition of the  “hire-purchase

agreement”":- The Federation has urged that this definition
be substituted altogether. The reason given for this
change is contained in their letter dated 24th August,
1998 accompanying the revised set of objections. It has
been submitted that the hire-purchase transaction is one
where “the goods (purchased at the request of the hirer)
are delivered on hire with an option to purchase (and not
an advance made on the security of goods, as 15 prasumad
so far, which 18 clearly indicated in the text of the
present Act)". The said submission, in the opinion of the
Law Commission, is based upon an incomplete reading of the
definition. The definition as suggested herewith, which
is fully recast by the Law Commission, also takes in the
type of transactions referred to by the Federation. The
objection urged is thus devoid of substance. In its
objections submitted earlier along with their letter dated
13th July, 1998, it had suggested addition of the words
“together with:such incidental charges and expenses as may
be payable“ in the definition. The Federation wanted the
said words to be added at the end of clause (11) in the

definition. In the opinion of the Law Commission, this


- 58 -

suggestion is unnecessary and irretevant in the light of
the definition now suggested by it. The definition of

“hire-purchase agreement” shall now read as follows:-

“(c) “hire-purchase agreement” means

(i) an agreement under which goods are lat
on hire and under which the hirer has an
option to purchase them in accordance with

the terms of the agreement and

(11) an agreement for the sale of goods
under which the purchase price or part of
it is payable in instalments, and the
property in the goods is to remain in the
owner (notwithstanding that the hirer is to
be in possession of the goods) until such
conditions as to the payment of instalments
or otherwise, as may be specified in tha

agreement, are fulfilted."

In the light of this definition, the definition of
the expression “owner” also requires to be modified
slightly, though no such modification is required with
definition of the expression “hirer”. The definition of

the expression “owner” shalt read as follows:-


- 59 -

"(f) “owner” means the person who lets or has

Jet, or the person who delivers or has

delivered possession of goods, to a hirer

under a hire-purchase agreement and

includes a person to whom the owner’s property in the

goods or any of the rights or liabilities under the

agreement has passed by assignment or by operation of
Jaw."

2.8 Section _—-2(d):definition of “hire-purchase

price":The only addition the Federation had asked for in
its original set of objections is of the words “authorised
by the owner" after the words “to the owner or ta any
other person" and before the words “or is to be or has
been discharged”. The Law Commission seas no objection to
the addition . of the said words which are merely
clarificatory in nature. The Federation has also
suggested that the words “hire-purchase charges” should be

substituted with the words “hire charges”. The reason

o

given in support of this change is an extension of it

3

si

w

2

objection to the definition of the expra

“hire-purchase agreement” which .has been found to be

unacceptable.
2.8.1 It may be mentioned that the Law Commission had
Proposed the substitution of the said definition with a

view to simplifying it but on a further consideration, the

uw

Commission has decided to retain the definition as it i

contained in the original Act with the amendment indicated


-60 -

in the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989. Accordingly,
the definition of the expression “hire-purchase price” in

clause (d) of section 2 80811 read as follows:-

"(d) “htre-purchase price” means the total sum
payable by the hirer under a hire-purchase
agreement in order to complete the purchase of or
the acquisition of property in, the goods to which
the agreement relates; and inctudes any sum so
Payable by the hirer under’ the hire-purchase
agreement by way of a deposit or other initial
payment, or credited or to be credited to him under
such agreement on account of any such deposit or
payment, whether that sum is to be or has been paid
to the owner or to any other person authorised by
the owner or is to be or has been discharged by
payment of money or by transfer or delivery of
goods or by any other means; but does not include
any sum payable as a penalty or as compensation or
damage for a breach of the agreement, and also does

not include any sum -

(i) payable as expenses for delivering the goods to
the hirer and = the installation thereof, in

accordance with the terms of the agreement, or



(ii) payable as any fee, in respect of the goods
and the agreement, for the purposes of registration
or otherwise under any law for the time being in

force, or
(111) payable as insurance premium, or

(iv) payable as penalty, compensation or damages

for a breach of the agreement.”

2.9 The 1989 (Amendment) Bill has added clause (०) in
sub-section (1) of section 3 which sets out the
requirements of a hire-purchase agreement. The AIHPA
wants this clause to be deleted. At the same time, it
wants the addition of the following words: “containing
the main rights and obligations of the parties thereto” at
the end of clause (a) of sub-section (1). The Law
Commission sees no reason to agree to the said suggestion.
The Federation has also suggested addition of certain
words in sub-section (1) which suggestion is fully given
effect to by the Law Commission by introducing sub-section
(4) in this section. Yet another objection, which is
repeated ad -naseum is. that the expression “surety” be
substituted by the expression “guarantor” for which there
does not appear to be any good or substantial reason,

Section 3 as contained in the original Act and as proposed



- 62 -

Lo be amended in 1989 (Amendment) 8111 is whotly
appropriate and needs no change. Accordingly, section 3

should read as follows:

"3, Hire-purchase agreement to be in writing and

signed by parties therata

(1) Every hire-purchase agreement shall be-

(a) in writing;

(b) signed by all parties thereto;
and

(c) accompanied by a daclaration in
the prescribed form containing the
main rights and obligations of the
hirer and signed by all the parties

ta the agreement.

(2) A hire-purchase agreement shall be void
against the hirer if any of the
requirements specified in sub-section (1)

has not been compiled with;

(3) Where there is a contract of guarantee,
the hire-purchase agreement shall be siaqned

by the surety alsa, and if tha


- 63 -

hire-purchase agreement is not so signed,
it shal? be voidable at the option of the

owner.”

2.10 The Law Commission had suggested addition of
sub-section (1A) in Section 4. The Federation has not
objected to it but has submitted that this provision
should be incorporated in Section 3. This suggestion is
accepted. Accordingly, it is recommended that a new
sub-section, namely, sub-section (4) be added in section 3

to thea following effect:

“(4) The Hire-purchase Agreement and the
declaration shal? be executed in two sets, duly
signed by the parties. One such set shall be
handed over to the hirer and where there is a
surety, yet another set to the surety, immediately

after the execution of the Agreement.”

2.11 Section 4:- In the later set of objections
submitted by the Federation, no specific objections ur
suggestions were put forward with respect to section 4,
The changes suggested are merely phraseological in nature,
which have already been rejected. Accordingly, there need
be no changes in section 4 except those proposed in the

1989 Amendment Bill.



- 64 -

2.42 Section 7:- The first objection of tha Federation
urged in the earlier set of objections is to the title of
section 7. The present title of section 7 is “Limitation

on hire-purchase charges". The Federation wants it to be

ray

substituted as “Statutory Hire-purchase charges". We se

no particular reason for this change.

2.12.1 No objections were raised to any of the definitions
contained in sub-section (1) of section 7 as proposed to
be amended by the 1989 (Amandment) Bill. No objections
were also raised to the substitution of the said
definitions as proposed by the Law Commission in paragraph
6 of thea ‘Questionnaire’ except certain phraseotogical
changes {see the revised set of objections by the
Federation). Accordingly, sub-section (1) of section 7

shall read as follows ~
“(1) In this section :

(a) “Cash price of goods“ means the price at which a
prospective buyer may, at the date of the hire

purchase agreement, purchase the goods for cash

(b) “deposit” means any sum payable by the hirer under
the hire-purchase agreemant by way of deposit ar
ather initial payment credited or to be credited to

him under the agreement on account of any such



deposit or payment, whether that sum is to be oor
has been discharged by payment of money or by
transfer or delivery of goods or by any. other

means;

(८) “hire purchase charges” means the difference
batween the balance hire purchase price and. the

balance cash price of the goods;

(४) “balance cash price of goods” means the cash price

of goods tess any deposit;

(e) “balance hire purchase price” means the hire

purchase price less any deposit;

(f) “statutory hire purchase charges” means the amount
as determined by the formula contained in
sub-section (2)";

2.12.2 Sub-section (2) of section 7 is proposed ta be

substituted in full by the 1989 (Amendment) Bill. The Law

Conmission agrees with the said substitution as pointed

out in the .-“questionnaire”. The Law Commission his alse

proposed to add an illustration to the said sub-section
with a view to clarifying the the meaning of the formula
contained in the sub-section. The only suggastion made by
the Federation in the first set of objections is that the

words “ab the rate of 18% per centum per ताप on if a



lower rite is specified in sub-section (3), at such lewer
rate” in the said sub-section should ba deleted and in
their place tha words “at mutually agreed rate per ceantum
“per annum” should be substituted. In the revised set of
objections, not only two rates of interest (18% for new
goads and 24% for old goods) but several other
pPhraseological changes are suggested. Indeed, the
Federation has asked for deletion of sub-section (7)
Altogether on the ground that it affects tha fundamental
right of citizens to carry on business. It is not
possible to agree with the suggestion since it would
strike at ane of the main objects behind the Act and fhe
Amendment Bi11. The limit on the rates of interest is in
the nature of reasonable restriction within the meaning of
article 19(6) of the Constitution of India. Having regard
to the present interest rates prevailing in the market and
keeping in view the fact that the owner has to Maintain an
establishment and staff for the purpose of his business,
the Law Commission is of the opinion that the rate of
eighteen per cent proposed is just and proper. The said
rate shall be uniform for both the new and old goods,
Accordingly, sub-section (2) of section 7 alongwith the

itlustration shall read as follows:



- 67 -

"(2) The statutory hire-purchase charges shalt
be an amount calculated (at the rate of eighteen
per centum pear annum, or if 8 lower rate is
specified under sub-section (3) at such lower rate)

in accordance with the following formula:-

sc = N¢_ x R x T
100
where sc - represents the statutory
hire-purchase charges:
NC - represents the net cash price:
R - represents the rate; and
T- represents the time expressed in

years and fractions of years, that
elapses between the date of the
agreement and the date on which the
Tast hire-purchasa instalment is

payable under the agreement.

"Illustration to sub-sections (1) & (2)

hirer purchases a car from 8, the owner, on hire
purchase basis. The cash price of the car is
Rs.65,000/- . A pays a deposit of Rs.15,000/- an

the date of hire purchase agreement which moans


- 6a -

that Rs.80,000/- is the balance cash price of — the
ear. The rate of interest permitted by this
section 15 18% per annum. The period of agreement
between the parties is five years and the balance
hire-purchass price is payable in GO equal monthty
instalments. Ascordingly, applying the above
formula, the statutory hire purchase charges in
this case would be Rs.45,000/- arrived at in the

following manner-

50,000 x 18 x 5 = Rs.45,000/-

100

The hire purchase charges cannot axcead the

statutory hire purchase charges. Thus in this

illustration, the hire purchase price is Rs.1,10,a0n0/i.e.,

purchyss

Rs.65,900/- plus Rs.45,000/-.

wp

price is Rs.95,000/- i.a., Rs.1,10,000/- minus
Rs.15,000/(deposit). This sum of Rs.95,000/- is payable

in 60 monthly instatments.

Further this amount of Rs.45,000/- being the

statutory hire purchase charges should be worked out by

the parties on the date of entering into the hire purchase
agreement and should 62 mentioned in the agreement as

such,"



-169:-

i 7A:- It was suggested by the Law

Commission in its ’Questionnaire’ that after section 7, a
hiew Sactioan 7A should bea added and eub-sections 4, 8 and 6
of section 7 be omitted. No objection has been raised to
this suggestion. Accordingly, it is recommended that
sub-sections 4, 5 and 6 of section 7 be deleted and after

section 7, the Following Section 7A shall be inserted -

“Section 7 A - Hire Purchase Charges not ta exceed

Statutory Hire Purchase Charges: Any stipulation in the

hire-purchase agreement whereunder the hirer is obliyed to
pay hire purchase charges in axcess of the statutory hire
Purchase charges as specified in sub-sections (1) and (2)

of section 7 shall be null and void and shalt not he

ceable, Any owner coltecting hire purchase charges
in excess of the statutory hire purchase charges shall
refund the amount so collected with interest at the rate
of 18% to the hirer immediately after it is cotlected ot
whenever it is demanded by the hirer. If the owner fails
to discharge this obligation, it shall be open कि the
hirer to approach the court for recovering the said ercess
amount,”

9:- Ne objections have been mate with

respect to the amendments proposed by the 1989 (Amendment )
Bill to section 9 of the Act in both the sate of

objections, except some minor phraseoltogical changes. Mes

objection is also taken to the addition ef an 11051) ation



after sub-section (2) of section 9 with a view to clearly
explaining the formula contained in sub-section (2) of

section 9. Accordingly, section 9 shall read as follows:

"9, Right of hirer to purchase at any time with

rebate. 7:

(1) The hirer may, at any time during the
continuance of the hire-purchase agreement and
after giving the owner not less than fourteen days’
netica in writing of his intention so to do,

complete the purchase of the goods by paying or

tendering to the owner the hire-purchase price or

the balance thereof togather with such incidental

harges and expenses as may be payable under the

lo

terms of the agreement, as reduced by the rebate

calculated in the manner provided in sub-section
(2).

(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section
(1) shall be an amount calculated at tha rate of
18% (or at such lesser rate of interest as may have
been provided in the Agreement) on the amount
outstanding on the date on which the hirer seeks to

complete the purchase of goods.


Tilustration: For the purpose of this
illustration, the figures: as mentioned in the
illustration to sub-section (2) of gection 7 are
adopted. The hirer seeks to exercise the option ta
purchase the goods as contemplated by this section
at the end of three years i.9., after 36 months,
Twenty-four months are 80111 remaining. In such a
case, the hirer will be entitled to a rebate of

1२७, 0, 840/- worked out 170 the following manner:

In this illustration (as contained in seactian 7),
the monthly instalment 18 Rs.1563.33p. i.e.,
Rs,96,000/- divided by 60. The hirer has paid 36
instalments, which means he has paid
Rs.56,999.88p., i.e. Rs.57,000/- and the balance
payable is Rs.38,000/-. 800, since he has opted ta
purchase at the and of 36 months, he is entitled to
a rebate of Rs.6,840/-, which means that he has ty

pay Rs.31,160/- for purchasing tha goods.

(3) The provisions of this section shall have
effect notwithstanding anything to the cantrary
contained in the hire-purchase agreamant, but where
the terms of the agreement entitle the hirer to a
rebate higher than that allowed by this section,

the hirer shall be entitled to the rebate provided

by the agreement.”



(The formuta indicated in the amanding Bill is
substituted by the aforesaid simple formila’ for
easy understanding and in the interest of
simplicity).

2.15 10:- The next objection taken by the

Federation is to section 10. It wants addition of the
werds “as also repair and recondition charges incurred on
the goods”. (No such objection was urged in the first set
of objections). We have examined the suggestion and find
that it has no relationship with sub-section (3) which
merely speaks of the hirer’s liability accrued prior to
termination of hire-purchase agreement. The words
proposed to be added are alse ambiguous. Accordingly, the

said suggestion is not acceptable.

2.16 tion 11:- Several objections have been made with
respect to section 11. Section 11 which has) remiined

untouched by the 1989 (Amendment) Bill provides for a
right in the hirer to appropriate payments in respect of
two or more agreements. The section entitles the hirer to
specify the agreements to which the payment made by him
should be appropriated and also provides for the situatian

s not indicate such preference. The

where he =
Federation wants that section 11 should be deleted

ther. By daleting this section, the said Federation

wants to have an unregulated discretion in the

owner /financier to appropriate the payments made by the



hirer in such manner as tha owner thinks fit. Tt is
peinted out by the Federation that if the right to
indicate appropriation 18 given to the hirer, it may lead
ta serious prejudice to the owner in certain situations.
It submitted, “It is likely that at a particular point of
time a hirer, who is having three or four Hire Purchase
Agreements with a Hire-Purchase Financier may have a large

पा) of arrears in one or two accounts, while the othe

accounts may be with only a smaller. number of arrears, Tn
such an avent, if either the Hirer is given the autharity
to appropriate the amount paid as he wishes or if tha

Financier has to appropriate it only against the accounts

in the order in which they were entered into, it is likalty

that the accounts with lesser arrears may gat clesad
faster, whereas those with larger arrears will reimain as
it is." (drawn from the first set of objections). The Law

hin,

Conn ion does not sea much merit in this ob

Section 11 trecognises and gives effect to a well-bnawny
principle of law of contract (vide sections 59 and 60 of
the Indian Contract Act, 1872) and there is no good reason
to make a departure therefrom. Tha situation contemplated
by the Federation is more imaginary than real, Hennes, we

do recommend any change in section 11.

the Act has remained

incidental charges and

may be payable under the terms i theo



agreement” after the words “under the Hire Purchase
Agresment.” in sub-section (4). The Federation, however,
has taised sevaral objactions to section 12, which are te
the following effect:-

(a) The words “or if his consent is unreasonably
withheld, without his consent” at the end of sub-section

(1) should ba deleted.

(b) Sub-section (2) should be deleted altogether,
Similarly, sub-section (3) and the explanation thereto

should also be deleted.

2.17.1 The Faderation’s objections are based upen the
following reasoning: “A hire-purchase agreement is
basically like a contract of bailmant where the asset of
hire-purchase financier is entrusted to a hirer in good
faith with very limited rights of using the vehicle fer
his own purpose with strict condition that he should net
fart with it to any one till property in the vehicle
Passes to him. Before selecting the hirer, the Financier
makes elaborate enquiry about his credentials ane
repayment. capacity and only thereafter the vehicle is
bought and hired to him. It may so happen that oan
unacceptable person who has been refused finance ty a
financier may stealthily take possession of a vehicle by
offering a wmore than reasonable price to an esistina

hirer, Once the vehicle is in his custody, he can deal


|

~

हर
1]

with it as he likes and even dismantle it and thus cheat
the financier. If the financier refuses to assign the
contract, the hirer has been permitted to rafer the matter
to a court of Jaw which in effect will only mean that the
matter will be dragging for a number of years and in the
meanbime no payment will be forthcoming....." (drawn fran
the first set of suggestions which 15 substantially

similar to the objections/suggestions in the revised set)

2.17.2 There appears to be some substance in this
objection, Keeping in view the objections and
apprehensions expressed by the Federation and with a view
to protecting the interests of both the hirers and the
owners (financiers), sub-section (2) has been rerast
herewith, while no change is recommended in any other
sube-sections of this section. Sub-section (2) 8 recast

as follows:

"(2). (a) Every request for according consant fr
such assignment shall be in writing and the owns
shall reply to the same in writing within one week

of the receipt of such request.

(कि) If the owner withholds his consent te the

wd

assignient by the hirer of his right, title 2

ut

interest under the Hire Purchase Agreement an fhe
aqreund that his demand for an 510» 1 8880 ae

consideration of which there is no mantion in the


Hire Purchase Agreement, is not satisfied or agresd
to, the consent shatl be deemed to be unreasonably

withheld.”

2.17.3 The above substitution of sub-section (2) takes
care of the apprehensions of the owners/financiers. The
schemes of the section is that where the owner unreasonably
withholds his consent to assignment of hirer’s right,
title and interest under the Hire Purchase Agreement, it
shall be permissible for the hirer to go ahead and assign
his right, title and interest without the consent of the
owner. For this purpose, the section defines what is an
unreasonable withholding of consent by the owner. If the
withholding of consent is not unreasonable within the
meaning of the section, the hirer cannot assign his right,
title and interest without obtaining the consent of the
Owner, Now sub-section (2), as recast by the Law
Commission clarifies that only where consent is refused on
the ground that the owner’s demand for a higher amount
which 088 not form part “of the agreement is not.
satisfied, the withholding of consent shall be deemed to
be unreasonable within the meaning of sub-section (1),
entitling the ‘hirer to assign his right, title and
interest under the Agreement without obtaining the consent

of the owner.


ction 13:- No objections hava been raised with

2.18 §

ig

respect. to saction 13 which has also remained untouched by
the (984 Amondmant 3111.

2.49 Section_14:- Section 14 has remained untouchad by
the 1989 Amendment Bill. It sets out the obligations of
the hirer in the matter of the care to be taken of hired

The Federation, howaver, has raised certain

jections to it. They are - (1) clause (७) of

8015 ction (1) should be deteted and (ii) at the end of

sub-section (2), the words “or on loss of goods itself”
should ba added. In the revised set of objections, a
fresh suggestion is made to the effect that in clause (a)
of sub-section (1), tha words “subject to reasonable wear

ang tear” shall be added.

2.19.1 We have carefully considered the suggestions of the
Federation including the reasons stated in suppert fhore
of (mentioned in both the sets of objactions) but are
unable to accede to tha same. Section 14, as it stands,
strikes a careful balance between the rights and
obligations cf the hirer as well as the owner, Dealation
of clause (७): of sub-section (1) will create A very

alous situation and would be extremely unjust to the

are
hirer besides being unreasonable in the context of such
aAgreamants, The proposed addition of words at the snd of

sub-section (2) would be inconsistent with the pravicions



of sub-section (1). The new objection raised with respec

to clause (a) of sub-section (1) is equally unfound

Section 14 will, accordingly, remain unchanged.

2.20 Section 15:- No objections are raised with respect

to section 15 which has also remained untouched by the

Amendment Bill.

16:- Section 16 speaks of the obligation of

Jon 1

the hirer to give information as to whereabouts of the

goods. The Federation has suggested that the words “where
the goods are at the time when the information is given or
if it 18 sent by post, at the time of pesting” appearing
at the end of sub-section (1) should be substituted by the
words “the time, date and place to enable the owner to
inspect the goods within a period of 14 days from the dats
of the receipt of information from the hirer". In the
revised set of objections, yat another obligatinn is
sought to be cast upon the htrer viz., to produce the
goods for inspection by the owner. In our opinion the
first mentioned suggestion is reasonable and is
accordingly accepted but not the second-mentioned one (pur

forward in the revised set of objections).

2.21.1 The next suggestion of the Fedaation with respect
to section 16 relates to sub-section (2) thereof. The
Federation suggests that the words “he shal? be punishable

with fine which may extend to Rs.200/-" appearing at the


end of sub-section (2) should be substituted by tha words
“thie owner may take action in accordance with the
provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section
18, " The Law Commission is, however, not in favour of this
suggestion. The rights of the owner are amply protected
by sub-section (2) of section 18 and it is unnecessary to
add yet another right of termination by way of sub-section

(2) of section 16. Accordingly, section 16 will read as

follows:-

“16. Obligation of hirer to give information_as to

whereabouts of goods -

(1) Where by virtue of a hire-purchase
agreement, a hirer is under a duty to keep in his
possession or control the goods to which the
agreement relates, the hirer shall, on receipt of a
request in writing from the owner, inform thea owner
the time, date and place at which the goods can be
inspected within a period of fourteen days from the

date of the receipt of the requast by the hirer.

(2) . If the hirer fails without reasonable cause
to give the said information within fourteen days
of the receipt of the notice, he shatl = be
punishable with fine which may extend शि two

hundred rupees.”


- 80 -

2.72 Section 17:- Section 17 provides for the rights of
the hirer in case of seizure of goods by the owner. This
Section has been proposed to be amended in several
particulars by the 1989 (Amendment) Bill. In particular
sub-section (5) is proposed to be inserted in the said
section. These proposed amendments are acceptable and are

accordingly adopted by the Law Commission.

2.22.1 Though no abjections were raised in the first
response, objections have been raised with respect
sub-sections (1), (2) or (3) of this section in the
revised set of objections. It has been submitted that the
words "falls short" in sub-section (14) should be
- substituted with the word “exceed”. No reasons are given
in support of this change and hence the Law Commission is
unable to consider this suggestion. The other suggestion
- addition of certain words in clause (1) of this
sub-section - is really superfluous since those words are
already added by the Amendment 8111 in the main Jimb of
the sub-section. The substitution of certain words
suggested in sub-section (2) is also unacceptable for the
reason that the words proposed to be substituted do not
fit into the structure or scheme of the sub-section. With
respect to suggestion for adding certain words in
sub-section (3), no reasons have been given 17 support
thereof, Accordingly, the suggestions given with respect

to sub-sectians (2) and (3) cannot be accepted.


2.22.2 In sub-section (4) of section 17, the Federation
has suggested that after the words “that could be
reasonably obtained by him", the following worde “in case
where the goods are required by any law for the time being
in force to be registered in the owners name, on the date
of such registration and in other cases" should be
substituted. We have not really been able to comprehend
the reasons for addition of the words suggested. The only
reason given by the Federation in its first response was
to the following effect:“But for the goods which is
subject to registration to be made by the Government, the
date of registration in the name of the owner has been
considered as the date for such valuation, vide amendment
sub-section (2) under the forthcoming Bill. Hence, in
compliance with the said section, the sub-section (4) 8150
equally requires to be amended accordingly, for such
goods.” The purpose behind the provision in sub-section
(2) and the provision contained in sub-section (4) is,
however, not identified by the Federation. The
substitution suggested in sub-section (4) is therefore not
acceptable.
पा

2.22.3 So far as sub-section (5) which is sought to be
inserted by the Amendment 8111 in section 17 is concerned,
the Federation had suggested in its first set of
objections that after the words “the owner at his
discretion” in the last limb of sub-section, the words "on

his reinstating the hiring" should be inserted. It has

1


>> 82 -

been further suggested that the fotlowing words “as if the
agreement had not been terminated and the owner had not
taken possession of the goods" occurring at the end of
sub-section should be deleted. The reasons given in
support of these suggestions are wholly unacceptable.
Sub-section (5) provides for a relief to a hirer in case
of seizure of goods by the owner under clause (c) of
section 19. In such 8 situation, the suggestions
put-forth by the Federation cannot be accepted. In the
revised set of objections, while the aforesaid suggestion
is not reiterated, a new suggestion is put forward viz.,
substitution of clause (iii) of ‘sub-section (5). In
effect, by means of this substitution, the Federation
seeks to bring in the concept of ’reinstatement of hiring’
under the hire-purchase agreement. A distinction is
sought to be made between the ‘agreement’ and the
*hiring’, which has no basis in principle. ४७ are unable

to accede to these suggestions.

2.22.4 The Government of Haryana has suggested that the
words “the owner, at his discretion may" should be
substituted with the words “the owner shall". The Law
Commission agrees with the reasoning behind this change.
Once the hirer has rectified the default (on account of
which the goods were seized) there should be no further
discretion left in the owner either to return the goods or
not. He shoutd return the goods-unless ofcourse, he has

disposed of the said goods befor the hirer makes the


payment or remedies the breach as contempleted by this
section. Accordingly, the Jast para in sub section (5) of

S.17 may be recast as follows :

“the owner shat] return the goods to the hirer,
except in 8 case where the goods are disposed of by
way of sale or by way of hire purchase as the case
may be before the hirer makes the payment or
ramedies the breach as contempleted by this
sub-section, and on such return the 90048 shal! be
recovered and held by the hirer pursuant to the
terms of the hire-purchase agreement as if the
agreement had not been terminated and the owner had

not taken possession of the goods”.

2.23 Section 18:- Section 18, which is the first section
in Chapter V dealing with the rights and obligations of
the owner, entitles the owner to terminate the
hire-purchase agreement for default in payment of hire or
any unauthorised act or breach of express condition.
Sub-section (1) provides that in case. of more than one
default in the payment of hire as provided in the
agreement, the owner shall. be entitled to terminate the
agreement subject to section 21 and after giving the hirer
a notice in writing of not less than one week in case the
hire is payable at weekly or lesser intervals and two
weeks’ notica in any other case. In its first set of

objections, the Federation stated that in case of even a


single default, the owner shat? be entitled to terminate
the agreement. The Federation is also opposed to the
provision of giving the hirer a notice in writing of not
less than one week or two weeks, as the case may be, as
provided in sub-section (1). The only reason given is
that since the hirer knows thea dates on which he has to
make the payment, even a single default should entitle the
owner to terminate the agreement subject of course to
section 21. In the revised set of objections, the plea of
a single default is dropped but the objection to the
requirement of notice is reiterated. Acceptance of this
suggestion made by the Federation would result in making
the provision in sub-section (1) very harsh. The law must
take note of the actual prevailing conditions.
Sub-section (1) of section 18 as proposed to be amended by
the 1989 (Amendment) Bill is, therefore, eminently

reasonable and should remain unchanged.

2.23.1 The amendments suggested in sub-section (2) of
section 18 are merely formal. The Federation wants the
expression “agreement”, wherever it occurs to be
substituted by the expression “hiring".*’ No good reasons
are assigned-for this phraseological change. The only
anendment proposed by the 1989 (Amendment) 8111 in this
behalf is the substitution of the words “together with
such incidental charges and expenses” in the place of the

words "together with such interest thereon” occurring in

the proviso to sub-section (1). This amendment is



- 85 -

perfectly reasonable and should be accepted. Accordingly,
section 18 should remain unchanged except for the

amendmants suggested by the 1989 (Amendment) Bill.

2.24 Section 19:- Section 19 which provides for the
rights of the owner on termination of the hire-purchase
agreement, is proposed to be amended by the 1989

(Amendment) Bill in the following manner:-

(i) In clause (a) of section 19 for the words "arrears
of hire due” the words “together with such
incidental charges and expenses as may be payable
under the terms of the agreement” should be

substituted; and

(ii) In clause (c) for the words “to enter the premises
of the hirer and seize the goods", the words “to

seize the goods” should be substituted.

Though certain phraseological changes are suggested by the
Federation in this behalf, no cogent reasons are assigned
by it in support thereof. Accordingly, section 19 should
remain unchanged except for the amendments proposed by the
1989 (Amendment) 8111 which are accepted by the Law

Commission.



r

- 86 -

2.25 Section 20:- Section 20 places a restriction on the
ewner’s right to recover possession of goods otherwise
than through Court. The 1989 (Amendment) 3111 proposes to
change the figures mentioned in the “Explanation” appended
to sub-section (1); for the words “fifteen thousand
rupees” and “five thousand rupees", wherever they occur,
the words “twenty thousand rupees” and “ten thousand
rupees” respectively are sought to be substituted. The
only and the main objection of the Federation to this
section (as put forward in the first set of objections) is
that wherever it mentions ‘hire-purchase price’, it should
be substituted by the words “net hire-purchase price”.
According to the Federation, since the deposit is already
paid at the inception, that should not be taken into
account for the purpose of determining the “statutory
Proportion”. In the revised set of objections, however,
several objections ‘have been raised to this section.
Firstly, it has been submitted that section 20 is bad
altogether inasmuch as it violates the Fundamental Rights
of the owner. Alternatively, it is suggested that there
ought to be a change in the amounts mentioned in the
several clauses of the ‘Explanation’. The reasons given
in support of these new suggestions are that by entering
into a hire-purchase transaction, the owner is running a
great risk and that this section has the effect of driving
the owner to court where proceedings may drag on for years
together, and that this would be putting him to greater

risk. It is submitted that this section is wholly biased



in favour of the hirers and is prejudicial to the interest
of the owners. The Law Commission does not find it
possible to agree with any of these suggestions. Firstly,
it may be noted that deposit too forms part of the
hire-purchase price. Secondly, the proportion at which
the “statutory proportion” is:fixed is fair and just. The
right of the owner to recover possession is interfered
with only where the ‘statutory proportion’ is either paid
or tendered by or on behalf of the hirer - and not in all
cases. Such a provision 18 necessary to prevent unjust
and oppressive seizures by the owners. The suggestions
put forward are, therefore, unacceptable. Accordingly,
Section 20 should remain unchanged except for the changes

indicated in the 1989 (Amendment) Bill.

2.26 Section 21:- Section 21 provides relief against
termination for non-payment of hire. No serious
objections have been raised by the Federation against this
provision except some phraseological changes. It may be
noted that the Amendment 8111 of 1989 has substituted the
words “together with such incidental charges and expenses”

for the existing words “together with ‘such interest

thereon”, This amendment is acceptable to the Law
Conmisston. There is no substance in the changes
suggested by the Federation. Accordingly, section 21

should remain unattered except for the amendment suggested

by the 1989 (Amendment) Bill.


- 88 -

2.27 Section 22:- Section 22 prevides for relief against

termination of hire-purchase agreement for unauthorised
act or breach of express condition. This section has
remained untouched by the Amendment 8111. The Federation
has also not raised any particular objection to this
provision except a certain phraseological change, the kind

of which has already been rejected by us. Accordingty,

section 22 will remain unchanged.

2.28 Section 23:- Section 23 sets out the obligation of
the owner to supply copies and information. The 1989
(Amendment) 811 not onty proposes to amend sub-section
(1) in certain particulars but also seeks to insert
sub-section (1A) after sub-section (1). A consequential
amendment is also suggested in sub-section (3). AS
proposed to be amended by the 1989 Bill, sub-sections (1)

and (1A) of Section 23 read as follows:-

“Section 23: Obligation of owner to supply

copias and information:

(1) It shalt ba the duty of the ownar to
. supply, free of cost, a true copy of the
hire-purchase agreement and a true copy of

the declaration referred to in clause (०)

of sub-section (1) of Section 3, signed by

the owner -



- 89 ~-

(a) to the hirer without undue
delay after execution of the

agreement; and

(0) where there is a contract of
guarantee to the surety on payment
made at any time before the final
payment has been made under the

agreement.

(1A) It shall be the duty of the owner, at any
time before the final payment has been made
under the hire purchase agreement, to
supply to the hirer additional copies of
the hire purchase agreement and the
dectaration referred to in clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of Section 3 within

fourteen days after the owner receives the

request in writing from the hirer in this

behalf and the hirer tenders to the owner

the prescribed fees for expenses.”

\

2.28.1 The objections of the Federation relating to
sub-section (1) of Section 23 are merely phraseological in
nature. In short, ‘the Federation wants the expression
‘surety’ to be substituted by the expression ‘guarantor’

which has already been rejected in earlier part of this

report, However, in view of the Law Commi jon’s


- 90 -

recommendation to insert sub-section (4) in section 3,
sub-section (1) of section 23 becomes superfluous and may
be deleted. So far as sub-section (1A) proposed to be
added by the Amendment Bill is concerned, two objections
were raised by the Federation: (1) to omit the words “and
the declaration referred to in clause (c) of sub-section
(1) of section 23" and (11) substitution of the words "and
the hirer tenders to the owner the prescribed fee for
expenses” with the words "along with the prescribed fee
towards expenses”. We are unable to see any substance in
these objections. Once a declaration has been executed as
required by section 3 and also because it accompanies the
hire-purchase agreement, its inctusion in sub-section (1A)
is totally justified. Similarly, the substitution of the
words asked for by the Federation has no particular
significance. Accordingly, it is recommended that
sub-section (1A) as proposed to be introduced by the 1989
(Amendment) Bill be incorporated in section 23 but in view
of the deletion of sub-section (1), the proposed
sub-section (1A) has to numbered as sub-section (1) in

section 23.

2.28.2 With respect to sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), the
objections of the Federation are merely phraseological in

nature and need not be dealt with individually.


The Federation, inter atia, wants that the words
"sum of one rupee" in sub-section (2) shoutd be
substituted by the words "sum of rupees two hundred". we
do not see any basis for this exaggerated amount.
However, the sum of rupee one in sub-section being too
low, the words “sum of one rupee” eccurring in sub-section
(2) should be substituted by the words “sum of ten
rupees”, With this minor change in sub-section (2), the
aforesaid sub-sections, as proposed to be amended by the
Amendment Bill, will remain unaltered. However, the
amendment proposed by clause (c) of Section 14 of the
Amendment Bi11 will mot be required because the proposed
sub-section (1A) is sought to be numbered as sub-section

(1).

2.29 Section 24:- Section 24 has not onty remained
‘untouched by the Amendment Act, no objections have been
raised thereto by the Federation or by any one else.

Accordingly, section 24 remains unchanged.

2.30 Section 25:- Section 25 provides for a situation
where the hirer becomés insolvent. The ‘Amendment 8111
proposes to insert a proviso to sub-section (2) of section

25 as under :


“provided that before’ any such permission is
granted, the Insolvency Court, or the court, as the
case may be, in which the winding up proceedings
are pending, shall grant the owner an opportunity

of being heard in the matter.”

2.30.1 While the Federation has not taken any objection to
sub-section (1) of section 25, it has asked for
substantial changes both in sub-section (2) as well as “in
the proviso proposed to be added thereto by the Amendment
Bill. Sub-section (2), as it stands, reads : “The
official Receiver or the tiquidator, as the case may be,
may with the permission of the Insolvency Court or the
Court in which the winding up proceedings are pending,
assign the rights of the hirer under the agreement to any
other person, and the assignee shal) have 811 the rights
and be subject to all the obligations of the hirer under
the agreement”. The Federation wants sub-section (2) to
be substituted altogether. The substituted provision
suggested by the Federation makes no reference to the
Court. At the same time, it creates an obligation upon
the official Receiver or liquidator to inform the owner
within 7 days of his taking charge about the insolvency of
the hirer and also to intimate the owner whether he
intends to continue to make the periodic payments under
the agreement or return the goods subject to rebate
provided by section 9. While the substitution suggested

by the Federation cannot be accepted in its entirety, it



must be conceded that there is some force in its
submissions. Accordingly, it is recommended that after
sub-section (1), a new sub-section, namely, sub-section

(1A), may be inserted, which shall read as follows

“C1A) The official Receiver or liquidator, as the
case may be, shall, subject to the orders
of the Insolvency Court or the Court, if
any, inform the owner, as soon as he takes
possession of the hired goods, of the fact
of his taking possession of the hired goods
and shall also intimate the owner whether
he proposes to continue to make “the
payments in accordance with the
hire-purchase agreement. On receiving such
intimation, it shall be open to the owner
to approach the Insolvency Court or the
Court, as the case may be, for appropriate

directions,”

2.30.1 With the incorporation of the aforesaid sub-section
(1A), the objections of the Federation with respect to
section 25 waquid be substantially met. Accordingly,
sub-section (2) along with its proviso proposed to be
amended by the Amendment 8111, and the ‘Exptanation’ shall

remain unchanged.


2.31 Sections 26 and 27:- Sections 26 and 27 have

remained untouched by the Amendment Bill. No objections
have been raised with respect to these sections,

Accordingly, sections 26 and 27 will remain unchanged.

2.32 Section 28:- Saction 28 contemplates a situation
where the enforcement of the right of the owner to recover
possession of goods from a hirer is subject to a
restriction and during the subsistence of such
restriction, the hirer refuses to give up possession of
the goods to the owner. The section says that such a
refusal on the part of the hirer shat] not be treated as
conversion of the goods. This section remains untouched
by the Amendment Bill. The Federation has, however, asked
for a total substitution of the section including its
title. According to the substitution suggested by the
Federation, an obligation is placed upon the hirer not to
refuse to give possession of the goods and not to seek any
restriction on the owner’s right to obtain possession. It
is obvious that the substitution suggested by the
Federation is altogether a different proposition from the
provision contained in section 28. Section 28 indeed
states the obvious. If the right of the owner to recover
possession is subject to a restriction, it is obvious that
the refusal of the hirer to give up possession of the
goods, during the subsistence of such restriction, cannot
be treated as conversion. Accordingly, we see no

justification to make any change in section 28.


2.33 Section 23:- Section 29 deals with service of
notice, The slight amendment suggested by the Federation
is phraseological in nature and does not constitute any
real change. Section 29 shall accordingly remain

unchanged.

2.34 Section 30:- Section 30 confers upon the Central
Government the power to sxempt hire-purchase agreements
relating to certain categories of goods from the operation
of sections 6, 9, 10, 12 and 17. The submission of the
Federation is that this section should be deleted
altogether. We are not agreeable to the said suggestion,
The power of exemption is provided to meet various
contingencies and other exigencies which may arise in
future and which may call for special treatment. Section
30 has not only specified the sections from which
exemption can be granted but it has also specified the
situations in which such power can be exercised. It is,
accordingly, a well-defined provision containing
sufficient guidance. This is also 8 welt-established
feature of legislation to which no valid objection can be

taken. Section 30 should, therefore, remain unchanged.

2.35 Section 31:- Section 31 merely states that the Act
shalt not apply in relation to any hire-purchase agreement
made before the commencement of the Act. No objections

are urged with respect to this section. Similarty, 00


objections are urged with respect to Sections 32 and 33
Proposed to be inserted by the 1989 (Amendment) Bill.
Section 32 confers the rule-making power upon the
Government and Section 33 contains, what is called, the
‘removal of difficulties clause’. For obvious reasons,
the Federation has not raised any objections to these
sections. No comments are called for from the Law

Commission on these provisions.

Before concluding, the Law Commission is of the
opinion that new sections be inserted in the Act, |
dealing with the insurance of the goods which are the
subject-matter of a hire-purchase agreement and the other
regarding the application of law relating to illegal
contracts. The new sections, numbered 28A and 28B shall

read as follows:-

“28A, Insurance.- (1) The owner may require any
goods comprised tn a hire purchase agreement to be
insured, and at all times during the period of the
agreement kept insured, in the names of the owner
and the hirer against any risk ‘that the owner

thinks fit at the expense of the hirer.

(2) Where in raspect of the insurance of goods
comprised in a hire purchase agreement, the insurer
allows a no-claim rebate or a rebate of a similar

nature, the hirer under the agreement is entitled


to the benefit of the rebate, and any person who
knowingly pays or allows any such rebate to the
owner under the agreement shat] not be relieved of

his obligation towards the hirer.

(3) Nething in this section shall limit or restrict
the right of the owner to provide insurance without

charge to the hirer.”

The Commission thinks it equally advisable, in the
interest of both the hirer and the owner that the Act
should specifically provide for the enforceability of the
agreements which contravene any of the provisions of the
Act. Accordingly, the following provision be inserted as

Section 28B:

"288. Application of law relating to illegal
contracts.- If an agreement has been entered into
in contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act or an act which contravenes any of the
provisions of this Act, is committed ‘in the course
of the performance of an agreement, it shall not
make tha agreement illegal and the agreement shall
be and shall continue to be binding and enforceable
except with respect to the provisions inconsistent

with the Act.”


-.98-99~

We recommend accordingly. For the sake of
convenience, the Amendment Bilt to be introduced in the
Parliament is appended herewith {Annexure-A). The
appended Bill incorporates the provisions of the
Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989, as well as those
suggested by the Law Commission, to the Hire-Purchase Act,
1972 and the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) 8111, 1989. For
the sake of convenience and ready reference again, we have
set out in Annexure-B the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972
incorporating the amendments proposed in the Hire-Purchase
(Amendment) 8111, 1999 (Annexure-A). In other words, if
all the amendments suggested by the Law Commission are
accepted by Parliament, the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 would

read as set out in Annexure-B.

(MR. JUSTICE 8, P. JEEVAN REDDY) (RETD. )

CHAIRMAN
ax g ae J |) ५
हर SETH) (8 Ve ee,
८ =
(MS, JUSTIC ILA ETD) (OR. él HATATE) (DR.SUBHASH C.JAIN)
MEMBER MEMBER MEMBER~SECRETARY

DATED:17 MARCH, 1999



-:100:-

FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER II

Shri Vinod Kumar Kothari

Shri Sunil Kamoria

See “Ganeral Note” to the Act in the Current Law
Statutes Annotated, 1965, Sweet and Maxwell, London,

7.39.

Suggestions by Mr Vinod Kumar Kothari and Mr Sunil
Kanoria whose views have been echoed by the

Faderation of Al? India Hire Purchase Financiers.


- 101 -

ANNEXURE-A

Bill No. __—of,_: 1999

THE HIRE-PURCHASE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999

BILL

to amend the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year

of the Republic of India as follows :-

1. Short title and commencement.- (1) This Act may

be called the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act, 1999.

(2) It shall come into force on such date 88 the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official

Gazette, appoint.

2. Amendment of Section 2.- In Section 2 of the
Hire-purchase Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the

principal Act),-



- 102 -

(8) for clause (०), the following clause shall be

substituted,

‘(c)

namely :-

“hire-purchase agreement” means

(1) an agreement under which goods are let
on hire and under which the hirer has an
option to purchase them in accordance with

the terms of the agreement and

(ii) an agreement for the sale of goods
under which the purchase price or part of it
is payable in instatments, and the property
in the goods is to remain in the owner
(notwithstanding that the hirer ts to be in
possession of the goods ) until such
conditions as to the payment of instalments
or otherwise, as may be specified in the

agreement, are fulfilled.’

(b) for clause (d), the following clause shall be

substituted, namely :-

"(d)

“hire-purchase price” means the total sum
payable by the hirer under a
hire-purchase agreement in order to
complete the purchases of or the

acquisition of property in, the goods to


- 103 -

which the agreement relates; and includes any sum so
Payable by the hirer under the hire-purchase
agreement by way of a deposit or other initial
payment, or credited or to be credited to him under
such agreement on account of any such deposit or
payment, whether that sum is to be or has been paid
to thea owner or to any other person authorised by
the owner or is to be or has been discharged by
payment of money or by transfer or delivery of goods
or by any other means; but does not inctude any sum
payable as a penalty or as compensation or damage
for a breach of the agreement, and also does not

include any sum ~

(i) payable as expenses for delivering
the goods to the hirer and the
installation thereof, in accordance with

the terms of the agreement, or

(ii) payable as any fee, in respect of
the goods and the agreement, for the
purposes of registration or otherwise
under any law for the time being in

force, or

(iii) payable as insurance premium, or


~ - 104 -

(iv) payable as penalty, compensation or

. damages for a breach of the agreement.’

(c) for clause (f), the following clause shall be

substituted, namely i

"(f) “owner” means the person who lets or has
let, or the person who delivers or has
delivered possession of goods, to a hirer
under 8 hire-purchase agreement and
includes a person to whom the owner’s
property in the goods or any of the
rights or liabilities under the agreement
has passed by assignment or by operation

of law.’

(0) After clause (1), the following clause shall

be inserted namely :-

९ (11) “prescribed” means prescribed by rutes

made under this Act;’

2. Amendment of Section 3.- For section 3, the

following saction shall be substituted, namely :-

‘3. Hire-purchase agreement to be in writing and

signed by parties thereto.—


- 105 -

(1) Every hire-purchase agreement shall be-

(8) in writing;

{b) signed by al? parties thereto;
and

(०) accompanied by a declaration in
the prescribed form containing the
main rights and obligations of the
hirer and signed by all the parties

to the agreement.

(2) A hire-purchase agreement shalt be void
against the hirer if any of the
requirements specified in sub-section (1)

has not been compiled with.

(3) Where there is a contract of guarantee,
the hire-purchase agreement shall be signed
by the surety also, and if the hire-purchase
agreement is not so signed, it shall be

voidable at the option of the owner.

(4) The Hire-purchase Agreement and the
declaration shall be executed in two sets,
duly signed by the parties. One such set

shalt be handed over to the hirer and where


-— 106 -

there is a suraty, yet another set to the

surety, immediately after the execution of

the Agreement.’

Amendment of section 4.- In section 4 of the

principal Act in sub-section (1),-

(a) in clause (d), the word “and”, occurring at

the end, shall be omitted;

{b) in clause (७), the word "sand" shall be added

at the end;

(०) after clause (9), the following clause shall

be inserted namely :-

"“(f) such additional particulars as may

be prescribed.";

(d) for sub-section (2), the following

sub-section shall be substituted, namely :-

“(2) Where any part of the hire-purchase
price is, or is to be, paid or given
otherwise than in cash or by cheque, the
hire-purchase agreement shall contain a
description of that part of the

hire-purchase price, and shall also state


- 107 -

the date on which such part is to be paid
er given and the value thereof as, agreed
to by the parties or where different
portions of such part are to be paid or
given on different dates, the date on
which each such portion is to be paid or
given and the value thereof as agreed to

by the parties.”

4, Amendment of section 7.- In section 7 of the

principal Act,-

{a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section

shalt be substituted, namely :-
'(1) In this section :

(a) “Cash price of goods” means the price at
which a prospective buyer may, at the date of the
hire purchase agreement, purchase the goods for
cash;

(b) “deposit” means any sum payable by the hirer
under the hire-purchase agreement by way of
deposit or other initial payment credited or to
be credited to him under the agreement on account

of any such deposit or payment, whether that sum


- 108 -

is to be or has been discharged by payment of
money or by transfer or detivery of goods or by

any other means;

(c) “hire purchase charges" means the difference
between the batance hire purchase price and the

batance cash price of the goods;

(d) “batance cash price of goods" means the cash

price of goods 18588 any deposit:

(e) “balance hire purchase price” means the hire

purchase price less any deposit;

(f) “statutory hire purchase charges" means the
amount as determined by the formula contained in

sub-section (2)';

(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section

shalt be substituated, namely :-

“(2) The statutory hire-purchase charges shalt
be an amount calculated (at the rate of eighteen
per centum per annum, or if a lower rate is
specified under sub-section (3) at such lower rate)

in accordance with the following formuta:-


- 109 -

sc = NC x Rx T
100
where sc ~ represents the statutory

hire-purchase charges;

NC - represents the net cash price;
R- represents the rate; and
T- represents the time expressed in

years and fractions of years, that
elapses between the date of the
agreement and the date on which the
last hire-purchase instalment is

payable under the agreement.

“Lilustration to  sub-sections (1) & (2): A, a

hirer purchases a car from 8, the owner, on hire

purchase basis. The cash price of the car is
Rs.65,000/- . A pays a deposit of Rs.15,000/- on
the date of hire purchase agreement which means
that Rs.50,000/- is the batance cash price of the
car. The rate of interest permitted by this
section is 18% per annum. The period of agreement
between the parties is five years and the balance
hire-purchase price is payable in 60 equal monthly

instalments. Accordingly, applying the above


- 1190 -

formula, the statutory hire purchase charges in
this case would be Rs.45,000/- arrived at in the

following manner—

50,000 x 18 x 5 = RS.45,000/-

100

The hire purchase charges cannot exceed the
statutory hire purchase charges. Thus in this it}lustration,
the hire purchase price is Rs.1,10,000/i.e., Rs.65,000/plus
Rs.45,000/-. The balance hire purchase price is
Re.95,000/i.e., Rs.1,10,000/- minus Rs.15,000/(deposit).
This sum of  Rs.95,000/- is payable in 60 monthly

instalments.

Further this amount of Rs.45,000/- being the
statutory hire purchase charges should be worked out by the
parties on the date of entering into the hire purchase

agreement and should be mentioned in the agreement as such.”

(०) in sub-section (3),-

0

(1) the words ", being a rate which shall not b
less than ten per centum per annum,” shall be

omitted;


(11) for the words “statutory charges”, the words
“statutory hire~purchase charges” shal? be

substituted;

(d) sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) shalt} be omitted.

5. Insertion of new section 7A.- After section (7)
of the principal Act, the following section shall ba

inserted, namely :-

“Section 7 A - Hire Purchase Charges not to exceed
Statutory Hire Purchase Charges: Any stipulation in the
hire-purchase agreement whereunder the hirer is ebliged to
pay hire purchase charges in excess of the statutory hire
purchase charges as spacified in sub-sections (1) and (2) of
section 7 shail be null and void and shall not ba
enforceable. Any owner collecting hire purchase charges in
excess of the statutory hire purchase charges shall refund
the amount so collected with interest at the rate of 18% to
the hirer immediately after it is collected or whenever it
18 demanded by the hirer. If the owner fails to discharge
this obligation, it shall be open to the hirer to approach

the court for racovering the said excess amount.”

6. Amendment of section 9.- For sub-sections (1) and
(2), the following sub-sections shall he substituted,

namely :—



- 12 -

"9, Right of hirer to purchase at any time with

rebate. -

(1) The hirer may, at any time during the
continuance of the hire-purchase agreement and
after giving the owner not less than fourteen days’
Notice in writing of his intention so to do,
complete the purchase of the goods by paying or
tendering to the owner the hire-purchase price or
the balance thereof together with such incidental
charges and expenses as may be payable under the
terms of the agreement, as reduced by the rebate

calculated in the manner provided in sub-section

(2).

(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section
(1) shall be an amount calculated at the rate of
18% (or at such lesser rate of interest as may have
been provided in the Agreement) on the amount
outstanding on the date on which the hirer seeks to

complete the purchase of goods.

Illustration: For the purpose of this
illustration, the figuras as mentioned in the
illustration to sub-section (2) of section 7 are
adopted. The hirar seeks to exercise the option to
purchase the goods as contemplated by this section

at the end of three years i.e., after 36 months.


- 113 -

Twenty-four months are still remaining. In such a
case, the hirer will be entitled to a rebate of

RS.6,840/- worked out in the following manner:

In this illustration (as contained in section 7),
the monthly instalment is Rs.1583.33p. j.e.,
Rs.95,000/- divided by 6a. The hirer has paid 36
instalments, which means he has paid Rs.56,999.88p.,
1.9. Rs.57,000/~ and the balance payable is
Rs.38,000/-. But, since he has opted to purchase at
the end of 36 months, he is entitled to a rebate of
Rs.6,840/-, which means that he has to pay

Rs.31,160/- for purchasing the goods.’

7. Amendment of section 10.- In section 10 of the

principal Act,-

(a) in sub-section (1), the words “sub-section (9)"
in the end shatt 99 substituted by the words

“section 9":

(b) in sub-section (1) the words “together with
such incidental charges and expenses as may be
Payable under the terms of the agreement” shall

be added at the end.



—114:-

8. Amendment of section 12.- In section 12 of the
principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following

sub-section shall be substituted, namely :-

"€2), (a) Every request for according consent for
such assignment shall be in writing and the owner
shall reply to the same in writing within one week

of the receipt of such request.

(b) If the owner withholds his consent to the
assignment by the hirer of his right, title and
interest under the Hire Purchase Agreement on the
ground that his demand for an amount or
consideration of which there is no mantion in the
Hire Purchase Agreement, is nat satisfied or agreed
to, the consent shall be deemed to be unreasonably

withheld.”

9. Amendment of section 16.- For sub-section (1),

the following sub-section shall be substituted, namety:-

(1) Where by virtue of a hire-purchase
agreement, a hirer is under a duty to keep in his
possession or control the goods to which the
agreement relates, the hirer shatl, on receipt of
a request in writing from the owner, inform the

owner the time, date and place at which the goods



10.

- 116 -

can be inspected within a period of fourteen days
from the date of the receipt of the request by

the hirer.’

Amendment of section 17.- In section 17 of the

principal Act,-

(a) in sub-section (1),-

(1) in the opening portion, after the
words “by which the hire-purchase price”, the
words “together with such incidental charges and
expenses as may be payable under the terms of the

agreement” shall be inserted;

(11) im clause (11), the words “on the

date of seizure” shall be omitted;

(b) in sub-section (2), in the opening
portion, for the words “the value of any goods on
the date of seizure", the words “the value of any
goods in a case where the goods are required by any
law for, the time being in force to be registered in
the owner’s name, on the date of such registration
and in any other case on the date of seizure” shall

be substituted;



(०) after sub-section (4), the following

sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-

"(5) Where the owner seizes the goods under clause
{c) of section 19, the goods let under a hire-purchase
agreement and if, within fourteen days of the date of such

seizure, the hirer-

{i) pays or tenders to the owner the hire in
arrears up to the date of payment or tender,
together with such incidental charges and expenses

as may be payable under the terms of the agreement:

(ii) remedies any breach of agreement or
(where he is unabte to remedy the breach by
reason of the fact that the owner has seized the
goods) pays or tenders to the owner the costs and
expenses reasonably and actually incurred by
the owner in doing any act, matter or thing

necessary to remedy the breach;

(ii1) pays or tenders to the owner the
reasonable costs and expenses of the owner of and
incidental to his seizure of the goods and of his
returning them to or to the order of the hirer,
the owner shalt return the goods to the hirer,
except in a case where the goods are disposed of

by way of sale or by way of hire purchase as the



>> Wt7-

case may be before the hirer makes the payment or
remedies the breach as  contempleted by this
sub-section, and on such return the goods shall
be recovered and held by the hirer pursuant to
the terms of the hire-purchase agreement as if
the agreement had not been terminated and the

owner had not taken possession of the goods’.

11. Amendment of Section 18.- In section 18 of the
principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the Proviso, for the
words “together with such interest thereon", the words

“together with such incidental charges and expenses” shall

be substituted,

12. Amendment of Section 19.- In section 19 of the

principal Act, -

(i) in clause (a), after the words “arrears of
hire due" wherever they occur, the words
“together with such incidental charges and
expenses as may be payable under the terms of the

agreement” shall be inserted;

(ii) in clause (०), for the words “to enter the
premises of the hirer and seize the goods", the

words “to seize the goods” shall be substituted,



- 418 -

13. Amendment of Section 20.- In section 20 of the
principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “fifteen
thousand rupees” and “five thousand rupees”, wherever
they occur, the words “twenty-five thousand rupees” and

“ten thousand rupees” shall, respectively be substituted.

14, Amendment of Section 21.- In section 21 of the

principal Act, for the words “together with such interest

thereon", the words “together with such incidental

charges and expenses” shall be substituted,

15.

Amendment of Section 23.- In section 23 of the

principal Act, -

(a) For sub-section (1) of the principal Act, the

following sub-section shal? be substituted, namely :-

"(1) It shall also be the duty of the owner,
at any time before the finat payment has been made
under the hire-purchase agreement, to supply to the
hirer additional copies of the hire-purchase
agreement and the declaration referred to in clause
(८०) of sub-section (1) of section 3 within fourteen
days after the owner receives the request in writing
from the hirer in this behalf and the hirer tenders

to the owner the presecribed fees for expenses":


16.

- 119 -

(0०) In sub-section (2) of the principal Act, for the
words “sum of ons rupee", the words “sum of ten

rupees" shall be substituted;

Amendment of Section 26.-

(a) After sub-section (1), the following sub-section

shall be inserted, namely:—

"(1A) The official Receiver or liquidator, as the
case may be, 80811, subject to the orders of
the Insolvency Court or the Court, if any,
inform the owner, as soon as he takes
possession of the hired goods, of the fact
of his taking possession of the hired goods
and 50811 also intimate the owner whether he
Proposes to continue to make the payments in
accordance with the hire-purchase agreement.
On receiving such intimation, it shall be
open to the owner to approach the Insolvency
Court or the Court, as the case may be, for

appropriate directions.

(b) In sub-section (2), the following proviso shal}

be inserted at the end, namely:-


17.

section

- 120 -

“Provided that before any such permission is
granted, the Insolvency Court or, as the case may
be, the court in which the winding up proceedings
are pending shall grant the owner an opportunity of

being heard in the matter.”

Insertion of new sections 28A and 288.- After

28 of the principal Act, the following sections

shall be inserted, namely:-

"2BA, Insurance.- (1) Thea owner may reguire any
goods comprised in a hire purchase agreement to be
insured, and at all times during the period of the
agreement kept insured, in the names of the owner
and the hirer against any risk that the hirer thinks

fit at the expense of the hirer.

(2) Where in respect of the insurance of goods
comprised in a hire purchase agreement, the insurer
allows a no-claim rebate or a rebate of a similar
nature, the hirer under the agreement is entitled to
the benefit of the rebate, and any persan who
knowingly pays or allows any such rebate to the
owner under the agreement shall? not be relieved of

his obligation towards the hirer.


- 121 -

(3) Nothing in this section shall limit or restrict
the right of the owner to provide insurance without

charge to the hirer.

288. Application of law retating to illegal
contracts.- If an agreement has been entered into in
contravention of any of the provistons of this Act
or an act which contravenes any of the provisions of
this Act, is committed in the course of the
performance of an agreement, it shall not make the

agreement illegal and the agreement shall be and

shall continue to be binding and enforceable except with
respect to the provisions inconsistent with the Act,"

18, Insertion of new section 32 and 33.- After saction
31 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be

inserted, namely:-

“32. Power to make rules .- (1) The Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions

of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters,

hamely:-



- 122 -

(8) the form and manner in which all. or
any particulars shatl be specified in avery
hire-purchase agreement under clause (c) of

sub-section (1) of section 3:

(0७) the additional particutars which
shalt be specified in every hire-purchase
agreement under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of

section 4;

(०) any other matter which is required to

be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rute should not be made,
the rule shalt thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, 88 the

case may be; so however, that any such



- 123 -

modification or annulment = 8811 be. without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously

done under that rule.

33. Power to remove’ difficulties.- (1) If any
difficulty arises 11 giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of

this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing

the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made
after the expiry of a period of five years from the

commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section
- shall be 18106, as soon as may be, after it is made,

before each House of Parliament”.



—:4124:-

_ANNEXURE-B

THE HIRE-PURCHASE ACT, 1972
(Incorporating the amendments of the Hire-Purchase (Amendment)

Bill, 1999)

CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1

Preliminary

Section Page
1. Short title, extent and commencement

2. Definitions

CHAPTER II

Form and Contents of Hire-Purchase Agreement

3. Hire-Purchase agreement to be dn writing
and signed by parties thereto

4. Contents of hire-purchase agreements

5. Two or more agreements when treated as a

single hire-purchase agreement

CHAPTER III
Warranties and Conditions, Limitation on Hire-purchase charges

and passing of Property


6,

7.

TA.

8.

9.

19.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

17.

-:125:-

Warranties and conditions to be implied in
hire-purchase agreements

Limitation on hire-purchase charges
Hire-Purchase charges not to exceed statutory
Hire-purchase charges

Passing of property

CHAPTER IV
Rights and Obligations of the Hirer

Right of hirer to purchase at any time
with rebate

Right of hirer to terminate agreement at

any time

Right of hirer to appropriate payments in
respect of two or more agreements

Assignment and transmission of hirer’s right
or interast under hire-purchase agreement
Obligations of hirer to comply with agreement
Obligation of hirer in respect of care to be
taken of goods

Obligation of hirer in respect of use of goods
Obligation of hirer to give information as to
where abouts of goods

Rights of hirer in case of seizure of goods |

by owner


18,

19.

20.

-“-:126:-

CHAPTER V ~

Rights and Obligations of the owner

Rights of owner to terminate hire-purchase
agreement for default in payment of hire or
unauthorized act or breach of express conditions
Rights of owner on termination

Restriction on owner’s right to recover

" possession of goods otherwise than through court

21.

22.

23,

24,

25.

26.

27.

258.

288.

Relief against termination for non~payment of hire
Relief against termination for unauthorized act
or breach of express condition

Obligation of owner to supply copies and information

CHAPTER VI

Miscellaneous

Discharge of price otherwise than by
payment of money
Insolvency of hirer, etc.

Successive hire-purchase agreemants between
\

\

same parties

Evidence of adverse detention in suit or
application to recover possession of goods
Hirer’s refusal to surrender goods not to
ba conversion in certain cases

Insurance

Application of law.rdélating to illegal contracts


>ै:127:-

29. Service of notice

30. Power to exempt from provisions of sections 6, 9,
10, 12 and 17 in certain cases

31, Act not to apply to existing agreements

32. Power to make rules ;

33, Power to remove difficulties


—1428:-

THE HIRE-PURCHASE ACT, 1972 ~
(Incorporating the amendments of the Hire-Purchase (Amendment)

8111, 1999) '

An Act to define and regulate the rights and duties of parties
to hire-purchase agreements and for matters connected

therewith or incidental thereto

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-third Year

of the Republic of India as follows:
CHAPTER 1
Preliminary

1. Short title, extent and commencement.- This Act may be

called the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of

Jammu and Kashmir.

\
(3) It shall come into force on such date’ as the Central
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette,

appoint.

2. Definitions - In this Act, unless the context

otherwise requires -



—:129:-

(a) “contract of gttarantee” in relation to any
hire-purchase agreement, means a contract whereby a
person (in this Act referred to 85 the surety)
guaranteed the performance of all or any of the

hirer’s obligations under the hire-purchase agreement:

(b) “hire” means the sum payable periodically by the

hirer under a hire-purchase agreement;
(c) “hire-purchase agreement” means

(i) an agreement under which goods are let on
hire and under which the hirer has an option
to purchase them in accordance with the terms
of the agreement and

(ii) an agreement for the sale of goods under
which the purchase price or part of it is
payable in instalments, and the property in
the goods is to remain in the owner
{notwithstanding that the hirer is to be in
possession of the goods) until such conditions
as to the payment of instalments or otherwise,
.a$ may be -specified in the agreement, are

fulfilled.

(d) “hire-purchase price” means the total sum payable
by the hirer under a hire-purchase agreement in order

to complete the purehase of or the acquisition of


~2130:-

property in, the goods to which the agreement relates:
and includes any sum so payable by the hirer under the
hire-purchase agreement by way of a deposit or other
initial payment, or credited or to be credited to him
under such agreement on account of any such deposit or
Payment, whether that sum is to be or has been paid to
the owner or to any other person authorised by the
owner or is to be or has been discharged by payment of
money or by transfer or detivery of goods or by any
other means; but does not include any sum payabte as a
penalty or as compensation or damage for a breach of

the agreement, and also does not include any sum -

(1) payable as expenses for delivering the
goods to the hirer and the installation
thereof, in accordance with the terms of the

agreement, or

(ii) payable as any fee, in respect of the
goods and the agreement, for the purposes of
registration or otherwise under any law for

the time being in force, or
(iii) payable as insurance premium, or

(iv) payable as penalty, compensation or
damages for a breach of the agreement.’


-:131:-

(8) “hirer" means the person who obtains or has
obtained possession of goods from an owner under a
hire-purchase agreement, and includes a person to whom
the hirer’s rights or liabilities under the agreement

have passed by assignment or by operation of law:

(f) “owner” means the person who Jets or has let, or
the person who delivers or has delivered possession of
goods, to a hirer under a hire-purchase agreement and
includes a person to whom the owner’s property in the
goods or any of the rights or tliabilities under the
agreement has passed by assignment or by operation of

law;

(ff) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under

this Act;

(g) each of the words and expressions used and not
defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Contract
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), or the Sale of Goods Act, 1930
(3 of 1930), shal? have the meaning assigned to it in

that Act.
CHAPTER II

Form and Contents of Hire-Purchase Agreements


3.

—:132:-

Hire-purchase agreement to be in writing and signed by

parties thereto.-

(1) Every hire-purchase agreement shall be-

(a) in writing;

(b) signed by all parties thereto; and

{c) accompanied by a declaration in the
prescribed form containing the main rights and
obligations of the hirer and signed by all the

parttes to the agreement.

(2) A hire-purchase agreement shat] be void against
the hirer if any of the requirements specified in

sub-section (1) has not been complied with.

(3) Where there is a contract of guarantee, the
hire-purchase agreement shall be signed by the surety
also, and if the hire-purchase agreement is not so
signed, it shat] be voidable at the option of the
owner.
हि

(4) The. -Hire-purchase Agreement and the declaration
shall be executed in two sets, duty signed by the
parties. Qne such set shall be handed over to the
hirer and where there is a surety, yet another set to

the surety, immediately after the execution of the

Agreement. eed


4, Contents of hire-purchase agreements.- (1) Every

hire-purchase agreement shall state -

(8) the hire-purchase price of the goods to which the

agreement relates

(b) the cash price of the goods, that is to say, the
price at which the goods may be purchased by the hirer

for cash;

(c) the date on which the agreement shall be deemed to

have commenced;

(d) the number of instalments by which the
hire-purchase price is to be paid, the amount of each
of those instalments and the date, or the mode of
determining the date, upon which it is payable, and

the person to whom and the place where it is payable:

(8७) the goods to which the agreement relates, in a
manner sufficient to identify them; and

(1) such additional particulars as may be prescribed.

(2) Where any part of the hire-purchase price is, or
is to be, paid or given otherwise than in cash or by cheque,

the hire-purchase agreement shall contain ai description of


-:134:-

that part of the hire-purchase price, and shalt also state the
date on which such part is to be paid or given and the value
thereof as, agreed to by the parties or where different

rtiona of such part are to be paid or given on different

p
dates, the date on which each such portion is te be paid or

given and the value thereof as agreed to by the parties.

(3) Where any of requiramants specified in sub-section
(1) or sub-section (2) has not bean complied with, the hirer
way institute a suit for getting the hire-purchase agreement

rescinded; and the Court may, if it is, satisfied that the
failure to comply with any such requirement has prejudiced the
hirer, rescind the agreament on such terms as it thinks just,
or pass such other order as it thinks fit in the circumstances

of the case.

5. Two or more agreements when treated as ai single
hire-purchase agreement.- Where by virute of two or more
agreements in writing, none of which by itself constitutes a
hire-purchase agreement, there is a bailment of goods and the
bailee has an option to purchase the goods and the
requirements of section 3 and section 4 are satisfied in

relation to such agreements, the agreements shall be treate

a

for the purpose of this Act as 8 single hire-purchase
agreement made at the time when the last of the agreements was

made.

CHAPTER IIT


~1135:-

Warranties and Conditions, Limitation on Hire-purchase Charges

and Passing of Property

6. Warranties and conditions to be implied to
hire-purchase agreements.- (1) Notwithstanding है anything
contained in any contract, in every hire-purchase agreement

there shall be an implied warranty -

(a) that the hirer shall have and enjoy quiet

possession of the goods; and

(b) that the goods shatl be free from any charge or
encumbrance in favour of any third party at the time when the

property is to pass.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any

contract, in every hire-purchase agreement there shall be -

(a) an implied condition on the part of the owner that.
he has a right to 5811 the goods at the time when the proparty
is to pass; \

(b) an implied condition on that the goods shall be of
merchantable quality, but no such condition shall be implied

by virtue of this clause -


~1136:-

(1) as regards defects of which the owner could not
reasonably have been aware at the time when the

agreement was made, or

(ii) as regards defects specified in the agreement
(whether referred to in the agreement as defects or by

any other description to the like effect), or

(iii) where the hirer examined the goods, or a sample
thereof, as regards defects which the examination

ought to have revealed, or

(iv) if the goods are second-hand goods and the

agreemant contains a statement to that effect.

(3) Where the hirer, whether expressly or by

implication, ८

(a) has made known to the owner the particular purpose

for which the goods are required, or

(b) in the course of any antecedent négotiation, has
made that purpose Known to any other person by whom

t

hose negotiations were conducted,

there shall be an implied condition that the goods shall be

reasonably fit for such purpose.


-“-:137:-

(4) Where the goods are tet under a hire-purchase

agreement by reference to a sample there shall be -

{a) an implied condition on the part of the owner
that the bulk will correspond with the sample in

quality, and

(b) an implied condition on the part of the owner that
tha hirer will have a_reasonabte opportunity of

comparing the bulk with the sample.

(5) Where the goods are 180 under a hire-purchase
agreement by description there shall be an implied condition
that the goods will correspond with the description: and if
the goods are let under the agreement by reference to a sample
as well as by dascription, it shall not be sufficient that the
bulk of the goods correspond with the sample if the goods do

hot alse correspond with the description.

(6) An owner shall not be entitled to rely on any
provision in a hire-purchase agreement excluding or modifying
the condition sat out in sub-section (3) unless he proves that

ore the agreenent was made the provision was brought to the

notice of the hirer and its effect made clear to him.


(7) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the

operation of any other enactment or rule of law whereby

any

condition or warranty is to be tmplied in any htre-purchase

agreement.

Limitation on hire-purchase charges.-
(1) In this section :

(6) "Cash price of goods" means the price at
which a prospective buyer may, at the date of the
hire purchase agreement, purchase the goods for

cash;

{b) “deposit” means any sum payable by the hirer
under the hire-purchase agreement by way of
deposit or other initial payment credited or to
be cradited to him under the agreement on account
of any such deposit or paymeNt, whether that sum
is to be or has been discharged by paymant of
money or by transfer or delivery of goods or by

any other means:

(c) “hire purchase charges” means the difference
between the balance hire purchase price and the

balance cash price of the goods;


-14139:-

(d) “balance cash price of goods” means the cash price

of goods less any deposit:

(8) “balance hire purchase price” means the hire

purchase price less any deposit:

(f) “statutory hire purchase charges" means the amount
as determined by the formula contained in sub-section

(2).

(2) The statutory hire-purchase charges shal? be
an amount calculated (at the rate of eighteen per
centum per annum, or if a lower rate is specified

under sub-section (3) at such lower rate) in

accordance with the following formula:-

sc = NC XRXT
100
where sc - represents the statutory

hire-purchass charges;

.NC - represents the net cash price;

R- represehts the rate; and


“:140:-

क्र represents the time expressed in
years and fractions of years, that
eltapses between the date of the
agreement and the date on which the
last hire-purchase instatment is

payable under the agreement.

Illustration to sub-sections (1) & (2): A, 8 hirer
purchases a car from 8, the owner, on hire purchase basis.
Tha cash price of the car is Rs.65,000/- . A pays a deposit
of Rs.15,000/- on the date of hire purchase agreement which
means that Rs.50,000/- is the balance cash price of the car.
The rate of interest permitted by this section 18 18% per
annum, The period of agreement betwean the parties is five
years and the balance hire-purchase price is payable in 60
equal monthly instalments. Accordingly, applying the above
formula, the statutory hire purchase charges in this case

would be Rs.45,000/- arrived at in the following manner-

50,000 _x 18 x 5 = Rs.45,000/-

The hire -purchase charges cannot exceed the statutory

hire purchase charges. Thus in this iltustratian, the hire
purchase price is Rs.1,10,000/- i.e., Rs.65,000/- plus
रि8 , 45 , 000/- . The balance hire purchase price is १७, 95, 000 /-

i.e., Rs.1,190,000/- minus Rs.15,000/- (deposit). This sum of

Rs.95,900/~ is payable in 60 monthly instalments.


“:141:-

Further this amount of Rs.45,000/- being the statutory
hire purchase charges should be worked out by the parties on
the date of entering into the hire purchase agreement and

should be manttioned in the agreement as such.

(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the
official Gazette, and after consultation with the Reserve Bank
of India, specify the rate per centum per annum, at which
statutory hire-purchase charges may be calculated under
sub-section (2) and different rates may be so specified in
respect of hire-purchase agreements relating to different

classes or sub-classes of goods.

7A. Hire Purchase Charges not to exceed statutory hire
purchase charges.- Any stipulation in the hire-purchase
agreement whereunder the hirer is obliged to pay hire purchase
charges in excess of the statutory hire purchase charges as
specified in sub-sactions (1) and (2) of section 7 shall be
null and void and shall not be enforceable. Any owner
collecting hire purchase charges.in excess of the statutory
hire purchase charges shall refund the amount 80 collected
with interest; at the rate of 18% to the hirer immediately
after it is collected or whenever it is demanded by the hirer,
If the owner fails to discharge this obligation, it shall be
epen ote the hirer te approach the court for recovering the

said excess amount.



-:142:-

8. Passing of property.- Subject to the provisions of
this Act, the property in the goods to which a hire-purchase
Aygreoment retates shall pass to the hirer only on the
completion of the purchase in the manner provided in the

agreement.

CHAPTER IV

Rights and Obligations of the Hirer

9. Right of hirer to purchase at any time with rebate.-

(1) The hirer may, at any time during the
continuance of tha thire-purchase agreement and after giving
the owner not less than fourteen days’ notice in writing of
his intention so to do, complete the purchase of the goods by
paying or tendering to the owner the hire-purchase price or
the balance thereof together with such incidental charges and
expenses as may be payable under the terms of the agreement,
as reduced by the rebate calculated in the manner provided in

sub-section (2).

(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section (1)
shall be an amount catcutated at the rate of 18% (or at such
Jesser rate of interest as may have been provided in the
Agreement) an the amount outstanding on the date on which the

hirer seeks to complete the purchase of goods.


~1t43i-

I? lustration: For the purpose of this i}lustration,
the figures as mentioned in the illustration to sub-section
(2) of section 7 are adopted. The hirer seeks to exercise the
option to purchase the goods as contemplated by this section
at the end of three years 1.e., after 36 months. Twenty-four
months are still remaining. In such a case, the hirer will be
entitled to a rebate of Rs.6,840/- worked out in the following

manner:

In this illustration (as contained in section 7), the
monthly instalment is Rs.1583.33p. 1.e., Rs.95,000/-
divided by 60. The hirer has paid 36 instalments,
which means he has paid Rs.56,999.88p., 1.8.
Rs.57,000/- and the balance payable is Rs.38,000/-,
But, since he has opted to purchase at the end of 36
months, he is entitled to a rebate of Rs.6,840/-,
which means that he has to pay Rs.31,160/~ for
purchasing the goods.

(3) The provisions of this section shall have effect
hotwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
hire-purchase agreement, but where the terms of the agreement
entitle the hirer to a rebate higher than that allowed by this
section, the hirer shall be entitled to the rebate provided by

the agreement.


-:144:-

10. Right of hirer to terminate agreement at any time.-(1)
The hirer may, at any time before the final payment under the
hire~purchase agreement falls due, and after giving the owner
not Jess than fourteen days’ notice in writing of his
intention so to do and re-delivering or tendering the goods to
the owner, terminate the hire-purchase agreement by payment or
tender to the owner of the amounts which have accrued due
towards the hire-purchase price and have not been paid by him,
including the sum, if any, which he is liable to pay under
section 9 together with such incidental charges and expenses

as may be payable under the terms of the agreement.

(2) Where the hirer terminates the agreement under
sub-section (1), and the agreemant provides for the payment of
a sum named on account of such termination, the liability of
the hirer to pay that sum shal? be subject to the following

conditions, namely:

(a) where the sum total of the amounts paid and = the
amounts due in respect of the hire-purchase price
immediately before the termination exceeds one half of
the hire-purchase price, the hirer shal} not be liable

to pay the sum so named;

(b) where the sum total of the amounts paid and = the
amounts due in respect of the hire-purchase price,
immediately before the termination does not exceed

one-half of the-hire-purchase price, the hirer shalt


—2146:-

be liable to pay the difference between the said sum
total and the said one-half, or the sum named in the

agreement, whichever is tess.

(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall relieve the hirer
from any liability for any hire which might have accrued due

before the termination,

(4) Any provision in any agreement, whereby the right
conferred on a hirer by this section to terminate the hire
purchase agreement is excluded or restricted, or whereby any
Tiability in addition to the Viability imposed by this Act is
imposed on a hirer by reason of the termination of the
hire-purchase agreement by him under this section, shalt be

void.

(5) Nothing in this section shall prejudice any right
of a hirer to terminate a hire-purchase agreement otherwise

than by virtue of this section.

14. Right of hirer to appropriate payments in respect of
two or more agreements.~ A hirer who is ‘Vable to make
payments in respect of two-or more hire-purchase agreements to
the same owner shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the
contrary, be entitled, on making any payment in raspect of the
agreements which is-not sufficient to discharge the tetal
amount then due under al? the agreements to appropriate the

sum so paid by him in or towards the satisfaction of the sum



-:146:-

due under’ any one of the agreements, or in or towards the
satisfaction of the sums due under any two or more of tha
agreamenta in such proportions as he thinks fit, and if, he
fails to make any such appropriation as aforesaid the sum so
paid shall, by virtue of this section, stand appropriated
towards the satisfaction of the sums due under the ‘respective
hire-purchase agreements in the order in which the agreements

were entered into.

42. Assignment and transmission of hirer’s right or
interest under hire-purchase agreement.- (1) The hirer may
assign his right, title and interest under the hire-purchase
agreement with the consent of the owner, or if his consent is

unreasonably withheld, without his consent.

(2) (a) Every request for according consent for such
assignment shall be in writing and the owner shall reply to
the sama in writing within one week of the receipt of such

request.

(b) If the owner withholds his consent to the
assignment by the hirer of his right, title and interest under
the Hire Purchase Agreement on the ground that his demand for
an amount or consideration of which there is no mention in the
Hire Purchase Agreement, is not satisfied or agreed to, the

consent shall be deemad to be unreasonably withheld.



-:147:-

(3) Where on a request being made by a hirer in this
behalf the owner fails or refuses to give his consent to an
assigninent under sub-section (1) the hirer may apply to the
Court for an order daclaring that the consent of the owner to
the assignment has been unreasonably withheld, and where such
an order is made the consent shalt be deemed to te

unreasonably withheld.

Explanation.- In this sub-section, “Court” means a
court which would have jurisdiction to entertain a suit for

the relief claimed in the application.

(4) As a condition of granting such consent, the owner
may stipulate that all defaults under the hire-purchase
agreement shatl be made good and may require the hirer and the
assignee to execute and deliver to the owner an assignment
agreement, in a form approved by the owner, whereby, without
affecting the continuing parsonal tiability of the hirer in
such respects, the assignee agrees with the owner to be
personally liable to pay the instalments of hire remaining
unpaid and to perform and observe all. other stipulations and
conditions of the hire-purchase agreement during the residue
of the term tharsof and whereby the assignee indemnifies, the

hirer in respect of such liabilities.

(5) The right, title and interest of a hirer under a
hire-purchase agreement shalt be capable of passing by

operation of law to the legal representative of the hirer but


-:148:-

nothing in this sub-section shall relieve the legal
representative from comptiance with the provisions of the

hira-purchase agreement.

Explanation. - In this sub-section, the expression
“legal representative” has the same meaning as in clause (11)

of saction 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).

(6) The provisions of this section shalt apply
hotwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the

hire~purchase agreement.

13. Obligations of hirer to comply with agreement.-Subject

to the provisions of this Act, a hirer shal? be bound -

(a) to pay the hire in accordance with the agreements,
and
(b) otherwise to comply with the terms of the

agreement.

14. Obligation of hirer in respect of care to be taken of
goods.- (1) A hirer in the absence of a contract to the

contrary, ८5 a



-:149:-

(8) shall be bound to take as much care of the goods
to which the hire-purchase agreement relates as a man
of ordinary prudence would under similar
circumstances, take of his own goods of the same bulk,

quality and value:

(b) shall not be responsible for the toss, dastruction
or deterioration of the goods if he has taken the

amount of care thereof dascribed in clause (a).

(2) The hirer shall be liabte to make compensation to
the owner for any damage caused by failure to take care of the
goods in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1).
15. Obligation of hirer in respect of use of goods.- If
the hirer makes any use of the goods to which the
hire-purchase agreement relates which ts not according ta the
conditions of the agreement, the hirer shal? be tiable to make
compensation to the owner for any damage arising to the goods

from or during such use.

16. Obligation of hirer to give information as to

whereabouts of .goods.-

(1) Where by virtue of a hire-purchase agreement, a
hirer is under a duty to keep in his possession or control the
goods te which the agreement relates, the hirer shat), on

receipt of a request in-writing from the owner, inform the


“:150:-

owner the time, date and place at which the goods can be
inspected within a period of fourteen days from the date of

the receipt of the request by the hirer.

(2) If the hirer fails without reasonable cause to
give the said information within fourteen days of the raceipt
of the notice, he shall be punishable with fine which may

extend to two hundred rupees.

17. Rights of hirer in case of seizure of goods by
owner.-(1) Where the owner seizes under ctause (०) of section
19 the goods let under a hire-purchase agreement, the hirer
may recover from the owner the amount, if any, by which the
hire-purchase price together with such incidental charges and
expenses as may be payable under the terms of the agreement

falls short of the agreement of the following amounts, namely:

{i) the amounts paid in respect of the hire-purchase
price up to the date of seizure;

(ii) the value of the goods.

(2) For the purposes of this section,: the value of any
goods in a casa. where the goods are required by any law) for,
the time baing in force to ७8 registered tn the owner’s name,
on the date of such registration and in any other case on the
date of seizure is the best prica that can be reasonably
obtained for the goods by the owner on that date less the

aggregate of the following amounts, namely:


—:181:-

(1) the reasonable expenses incurred by the owner for

seizing the goods;

(ii) any amount reasonably expended by the owner on

the storage, repairs or maintenance of the goods:

(111) whether or not the goods have subsequently been
sold or otherwise disposed of by the owner the
reasonable expenses of selling or otherwise dispasing

of the goods; and

(iv) the amount spent by the owner for Payment of
arrears of taxes and other dues which are payabla in
relation to the goods under any Yaw for the time being

in force and which the hirer was liable to pay.

(3) If the owner fails to pay the amount due from him
under the provisions of this section or any portion of such
amount to the hirer within a period of thirty days from the
date of notice for payment of the said amount is served on him
by the hirer, the owner shall ba liable: to Pay interest on
such amount at’ the rate of twelve per cent per annum from the

date of expiry of the said period of thirty days.



~:182:-

(4) Where the owner has sold the goods seized by him
the onus of proving that the price obtained by him for the
goods was the best price that could be reasonably ecbtained by

him on the date of seizure shall be upon him.

(5) Where the owner seizes the goods under clause (c)
of section 19, tha goods tet under a hire-purchase agreement
and if, within fourteen days of the date of such seizure, the

hirer-

(1) pays or tenders to the owner the hire in
arrears up to the date of payment or tender, together
with such incidental charges and expenses as may ba

payable under the terms of the agreement;

(ii) remedies any breach of agreement or
(where he 1s unable to remedy the breach by reason of
the fact that the owner has seized the goods) pays or
tenders to the owner the costs and expenses reasonably
and actually incurred by the owner in doing any = act,

matter or thing necessary to!’ remedy the breach:

« (111) pays or tenders to the owner the
reasonable costs and expenses of the owner of and
incidental to his seizure of the goods and of his
returning them to or to the order of the hirer, the
owner shall return the goods to the hirer, except in a

case where the goods are disposed of by way of sale or


-:153:-

by way of hire purchase as the case may be before the
hirer makes the payment or remedies the breach as
contempleted by this sub-section, and on such return
tha goods shall ba recovered and held by the hirer
pursuant to the terms of the hire-purchase agreement
as 11 the agreement had not been terminated and the

owner had not taken possession of the goods.
CHAPTER V
Rights and obligations of the owner

18. Rights of owner to terminate hire-purchase agreement
for default in payment of hire or unauthorised act or breach
of express conditions.- (1) Where a hirer makes more than one
default in the payment of hire as provided in the
hire-purchase agreement then, subject to the provisions of
section 21 and after giving the hirer notice in writing of not

less than -

1) one week, in a case where the hire is
payable at weekly or lesser intervals; and

ji) two weeks, in any other case,

the owner shall be entitled to terminate the agreement

by giving the hirer notice of termintion in writing:


-“-:154:-

Provided that if the hirer pays or tenders to the
owner tha hire in arrears together with such incidentat
charges and expenses as may be payable under the terms of the
agreement before the expiry of the said period of one week or,
as the case may be, two weeks, the owner shall not be entitled

to tarminate the agreemant.
(2) Where a hirer-

(a) does any act with regard to the goods to
which the agreement relates which is
inconsistent with any of the terms of the

agreement; or

(b) breaks an express condition which provides
that, on the breach thereof, the owner may

terminate the agreement,

the owner shall, subject to the provisions of section
22, be entitled to terminate the agreement by giving
the hirer notice of termination in writing.
19. Rights of owner on termination.—- Where‘a hire-purchase
agreament is terminated under this Act, then the owner shall
be entitted,-
(a) to retain the hire which has already been paid
and to recover the arrears of hire due
together with such incidental charges and

expenses as may be payable under the terms of


the agreement:

Provided that when such goods are seized by
the owner, the retention of hire and recovery of the
arrears of hire due together with such incidentat
charges and expenses as may be payable under the terms
of the agreament shall be subject to the provisions of

section 17;

(b) subject to the conditions specified in clauses
(a) and (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10,
to forfeit the initial deposit, if so provided
111 the agreement;

(०) subject to the provisions of section 17 and
section 20 and subject to any contract to the
contrary, to seize the goods;

(d) subject to the provisions of section 21 and
section 22, to recover possession of the goods
by application under section 20 or by suit;

(a) without prejudice to the provision of
sub-section (2) of section 14 and section 15,
to damages for non-delivery of the goods, from
the date on which termination 18 effective, to

. the date on which the goods are delivered to

or seized by the owner.

20. Restriction on owner’s right to recover possession of
goods otherwise than through Court.- (1) Where goods have been

let under ai hire-purchase agreement and the statutory


—2156:-

proportion of the htre-purchase price has been paid, whether
in pursuance of the judgment of a court or otherwise, or
rendered by or on behalf of the hirer or any surety, the owner
shall not enforce any right to recover possession of the goods
from the hirer othewise than in accordance with sub-section
(3) or by suit. है
Explanation.- In this section, “statutory proportion”

means , ८

1) one-half, where the hire purchase price is
less than twenty-five thousand rupees; and
ti) three-fourths, where the hire-purchase price

is not less than twenty-five thousand rupees:

Provided that in the case of motor vehicles as
defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939),

“statutory proportion” shall mean,-

i) one-half, where the hire purchase price is
less than ten thousand rupees;

ii) three-fourths, where the hire purchase price
ig not less than ten thousand rupees but lass
than twenty-five thousand rupees;

iii) . three-fourths or such higher proportion not
exceeding nine-tenths as the Centrat
.Governmant may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, where the hire-purchase
price is not tess than twenty-five thousand

rupees, हा



“5 157:

(2) If the owner recovers possession of goods in
contravention of the provisions or
sub-section{1), the hire-purchase agreement,
if not previously terminated, shall terminate,

and -

{a)the hirer shall be released from all
Viability under the agreement and shall ba
entitled to recover from the owner all sums
paid by the hirer under the agreement or under
any security given by him in respect of; and

(b)tha surety shall be entitled to recover
from the owner atl sums paid by him under the
contract of guarantee or under any security

given by him in respect thereof.

(3) Where, by virtue of the provisions of
sub-section (1), the owner is precluded from enforcing
a right to recover possession of the goods, he may
make an application for recovery of possession of the
goods to any court having jurisdiction to entertain a

suit for the same relief.

(4) The provisions of this section shal} not apply
in any case in which the hirer has terminated the agreament by

virtue of any right vested in him.


—:188:-

21. Relief against termination for non-payment of hire
Where the owner, after he has terminated the hire-purchase
agreement in accordance with the provisions of sub-saction (1)
of section 18, institutes a suit or makes an application
against the hirer for the recovery of the goods, and at the
hearing of the suit or application, the hirer pays or tenders
to the owner the hire in arrears, together with such
incidental charges and expenses as may be payable under the
terms of the agreement and the cost of the suit or application
incurred by the owner and complies with such other canditions,
if any, as the Court may think fit to impose, the Court may,
in liau of making a decree or order for specific delivery,
Pass an order relieving the hirer against the termination: and
thereupon the hirer shall continues in possession of the goods

as if the agreement had not been terminated.

22. Relief against termination for unauthorized act or
breach of express condition.- Where a hire-purchase agreement
has been terminated in accordance with the provisions of
clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2)'of section 18, no
suit or application by the owner against the hirer for the
recovery of the goods shall lie untess and until the owner has
served on the hirer a notice in writing,-

(a) specifying the particular breach or act

comptained of; and
(b) if the breach or act is capable of remedy,

requiring the hirer to remedy it,


>ै1159:-

and the hirer fails, within a period of thirty days from the
date of the service of the notice, to remedy the breach or act

if it is capable of remedy.

23. Obligation of owner to supply copies and information.-
(1) It shalt also be the duty of the owner, at any time before
the final payment has been made under the hire-purchase
agreement, to supply to the hirer additional copies of the
hire-purchase agreemant and the declaration referred to in
clause (०) of sub-section (1) of section 3 within fourteen
days after the owner receives the request in writing from the
hirer in this behalf and the hirer tenders to the owner the

presecribed fees for expenses.

(2) It shalt also be the duty of the owner, at any
time befora the final payment has been made wnder the
hire-purchasa agreemant, to supply to the hirer, within
fourteen days after the owner receives a request in writing
from the hirer in this behalf and the hirer tenders to the
owner the sum of ten rupees for expenses, a statement signed

by the owner or his agent showing-

(a) the amount paid by or on behalf of the hirer;

(b) the amount which has become due under the
agreement but remains unpaid, and the date upon which
each unpaid instalment became due, and the amount of
each such instalment; and

(2) the amount which has become due under the


-:160:-

agreement and the date or the mode of determining the
date upon which each future instalment is to become

payable, and the amount of each such instalment.

(32) Where there is a failure without reasonable cause
to carry out the duties imposed by sub-section (1), or

sub-section (2), then while the default continues,-—

(a) the owner shall not be entitled to enforce the
agreement against the hirer or to enforce any cantract
of guarantee relating to the agreement, or to enforce

any right to recover the goods from the hirer: and

(b) no security given by the hirer in respect of money
payable under the agreement or given by a surety in
respect of money payable under such a contract of
guarantee as aforesaid shall be enforceable against
the hirer or the surety by any holder thereof,
and, if the default continues for a period of two months, the
owner shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two

hundred rupees.

(4) Nothing in sub-section (3) shall be construed as affecting
the right of a third-party to enforce against the owner or
hirer or against both the owner and the hirer any charge or
encumbrance to which the goods covered by the hire-purchass

agreement are subject.


-:164:-

CHAPTER VI
Miscellaneous

24, Oischarge of price otherwise than by payment of
money.Where an owner has agreed that any part of the
hire-purchase price may be discharged otherwise than by the
payment of money, any such discharge shall for the purposes of
section 19, section 11, section 17, section 20 and section 23,
be deemed to be a payment of that part of the hire-purchase
price.

25. Insolvency of hirer, etc.- (1) Where, during the
continuance of the hire-purchase agreement, the hirer is
adjudged insolvent under any law with respect to insolvency
for the time being in force, the official Receiver or where
the hirer is a company, then in the event of the company being
wound up, the liquidator, shall have, in respect of the goods
which are in the possession of the hirer under the agreement,
the same rights and obligations as the hirer had in retation

thereto,

(1A) 1118 official Receiver or liquidator, as the case
may be, shall, subject to the orders of the Insolvency Court

or the Court, if any, inform the owner, as soon as he takes

Pessession Of the hired goods, of tha fact of his taking
possession of the hired goods and shall also intimate the

owner whethar he proposes .to continue to make the payments in


-:162:-

accordance with the hire-purchase agreement. On receiving
such intimation, it shal? be open to the owner to approach the
Insolvency Court or the Court, as the case may be, for

appropriate directions.

(2) The official Receiver or the liquidator, as the
case may be, may, with the permission of the Insolvency Court
or the Court in which the winding up proceedings are pending,
assign the rights of the hirer under the agreement, to any
other person, and the assignee shall have all the rights and
be subject to all the obligations of the hirer under the

agreement.

Providad that before any such permission is granted,
the Insolvency Court or, as the case may be, the court in
which the winding up proceedings are pending shal? grant the

owner an opportunity of being heard in the matter.

Explanation - In this section, “official Receiver”
means an official Receiver appointed under the Provincial
Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), and includes any person
holding a similar office under any other law with respect to

insolvency for the tima being in force.

26, Successive hire-purchase agreements between same

Parties.- Where goods have been let under 8 hire-purchase

n

agreement, and at any time thereafter the owner makes a

subsequent hire-purchase agreement with the hirer, whether


“>:163:-

relating exctusively to other goods or to other goods together
with the goods to which the first agreement relates, any such
subsequent hire-purchase agreement shall not have effect in se
far as it affects prejudicially any right which the hirer
would have had by virtue of section 20 under the first
agreement, if such subsequent hire-purchase agreement had not

been made,

27. Evidence of adverse detention in suit or application to
recover possession of goods.- (1) Where, in a suit or
application by an owner of goods which have been let under a
hire-purchase agreement, to enforce ai right to recover
possession of the goods from the hirer, the owner proves that,
before, the commencement of tha suit or application and after
the right to recover possession of the goods accrued, the
owner mada a request in writing to the hirer to surrender the
goods, the hirer's possession of the goods shall, for the
purpose of the owner's claim to recover passesston thereof, be

deemed to be adverse to the owner.

(2) Nothing in this section shall affect a claim for
damages for conversion,
28. Hirer’s refusal to surrender goods not to be conversion
in certain cases.- If during the subsistance of any
restriction to which the enforcement by an owner of a right te

recover possession of goods from a hirer is subject by virtue


—1164:-

of this Act, the hirer refuses to give up possession of the
goods to owner, the hirer shal? not, by reason only of such
refusal, be liable to the owner for conversion of the goods.
!

286A. Insurance.~ (1) The owner may require any goods
comprised in a hire purchase agreement to be insured, and at
811 times during the period of the agreement kept insured, in
the names of the owner and the hirer against any risk that the

hirer thinks fit at the expense of the hirer,

(2) Where in respect of the insurance of goods
comprised in a hire purchase agreement, the insurer allows a
no-claim rebate or a rebate of a similar nature, the hirer
wnder the agreement is entitted to the benefit of the rebate,
and any person who knowingly pays or allows any such rebate to
the owner under the agreement shall not be retieved of his

abligation towards the hirer.

(3) Nothing in this section shall limit or restrict
the right of the owner to provide insurance without charge to

the hirer.

288. Application of law relating to illegal contracts.- If
an agreement has been entered into in contravention of any of
the provisions of this Act or an act which contravenes any of
the provisions of this Act, is committed in the course of the

performance of an agreement, it shall not make the agreemant


-1165:-

iltegal and the agreement shall be and
shall continue to be binding and enforceable except with

respect to the provisions inconsistent with the Act.

29. Service of notice.- Any notice required or authorized
to be served on or given to an owner or a hirer under this

Act, may be so served or given.-
(a) by delivering it to him personally; or

(b) by sending it by post to him at his last known

Place of residence or business.

30. Power to exempt from provisions of sections 6,9,10,12 and

17 in certain cases.- Where the Centra? Government is

satisfied that having regard to -

(a) the short supply of any goods or class of goods,
or

(b) the use or intended use of any goods or class of
goods and the persons by whom such goods or class of goods are

used or intended to be used, or ‘

(०) the restrictions imposed upon the trade or

commerce in any goods, or

(4d) any other circumstances in relation to any goods



“:160:-

it is nacessary or expedient in the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, direct that clause (9) of sub-section (2) of section
6, section 9, section 10, section 12 and section 17 or any of
them shal} not apply or shall apply with such modifications as
may be specified in the notification, to hire-purchase

agreements relating to such goods or class of goods.

31, Act not to apply to existing agreement.-This Act shatl
not apply in relation to any hire-purchase agreement made

before the commencement of this Act.

32. Power to make rules.~ (1) The Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for

carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice toa the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for

all or any of the following matters, namety:-

(8) the form and manner in which al? or any
particulars shall be specified in every hire-purchase
agreement under clause (८) of sub-section (1) of

section 3;



~1167:-

{b) the additional particulars which shall be
specified in every hire-purchass agreement under

clause (1) of sub-section (1) of section 4;

(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a

total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one

oD

ession or in two or more successive sessions, and if, befor

n

the expiry of the sassion immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rute shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so howaver, that any such modification or annulment shail
be without prejudica to the validity of anything previously

done under that rule.

33. Power to remove difficulties.- (1) If* any difficulty
arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the

Central Government may, by order, published’ in the Official

t

Gazette, maka such provisions not inconsistent with th
provisions of this Act as may appear ta be necessary for

removing the difficulty:



—1168:-

Provided that no such order shail be made after the

expiry of a period of five years from the commencement of this

Act.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be 1610,
as soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of

Parliament.



~ 169-

To BE CNTRODICED LN +r

r¥A Sarna

of 1889

FIVE TIRE-PURCTIASE: AMENDMENT) RELE) Lose

‘ A
SILL
Vag bot to amend the Hire-purchase Act, 1972.

Be it enacted hy Parliament in the Worticth Ye:
of India as follows: — '

of Ure Reprbtic

oth, (1), ‘Fbis Act may be called the Iire-purchase (Amendment) Act,

: 8
of {ay “Ye shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
fay, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

eye

©} 2. Hi'section 2 of the Hire-purchase Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to

४38 the principal Act), — 1

(०) in clause (१), for the words “but does not include any sum

payable as a penalty or as compensation or damay of

the agreement”, the following shall be substituted, name
“But does not include any डाशा--

1 1.6) payable as expenses for delivering the goods to

tte ¢ the hiver and the installation thereof, in accordance with
on the terms of the agreement,

ANNEXURE-C

Short
te
ond
com:
tee.
sent,

Amend-
ment of
section %

|



|

2

(i) payahle as any fee, jn respect of the goods ahd Wt
agteement, for the pitposes of registration or other wit}
trader any law for the time being force, .

Gi) payable as jnstranece premium, and

‘able asa penatty ता as compensation or damnéged’l
ch of the asrecmont

(8) afler clauze (1), the following clause shall be inserted,
amely: | :

a
“CD “proscribed” means prescribed by rites made under,

this Act:
Aavend Sdn section 2 of the principal Act, in sith-seelion (1),-—
ment of
seetion 3, G) in clause (a), the word “and”, occurring at the end, shalt bé
omitted: i
(की in clause (b), the werd “and shall he added at the end;
(ii) आता clause (0), the following clause shall he inaérted, |है
namely: | '
(6) accompanied by a declaration inthe presertbed form!
containing the main vigthts and obligations of the hirer and slgmed.
hy all fhe patties to the apweement.”
Amena 40 In section dof the principal Act, in sub section (1),-- 20

pint का
ne (0) in cliise (व), the word “and”, occurring at he end, shall be

omitted: 1 ‘

nection |

(0) in ebaise (७), Ihe werd “Sand” shall he added at the end;

(c) afler clause (6), the following, clause shall bo Inserted, i
umnely: |

“CD oneh additional particulars as may be preseribed.;

(7)

ob हल्ला (2), the following: stth-section shall be stb.
stllited, हि

nly: {

rho
“@) Where any part of ihe hire-purehase price fa, or td
paid ar given otherwise than in cash or by cheque, the Hilté
plireliase agreement shalt confaint a description of that port) ! 08
hire-pnrchase price, and shalt alsa state the date on which 4
part ts to be paid or given and the valine thereof: aa, agreed
hy the parties or where different portions of such part are (0.11
paid or given on different dates, the date an which each — aitell
portion is to be paid or given and the value thereof: as agteed
hy the parties.”. ,

5. In seelion है of the principal Act,

Amend

ment of (0) in stib-seetion (),
recthen 7,

G) el
(iid ol

tre (a) shall be omitted:

aune (by shall be re-lettered as clanse (a);

Gil) clausé (०) shall be ré-lettered as ctause (0), abd
clause (9) as so tetetteted: for the words, bédckits aiid: Tal



‘as defined in clause (b)”, the words, brackets and letter “as
defined in clause (a)” shall be substituted
(iv) clause (d) shal! be re-lettered as clause (c), and in
efause (९0) as so re-lellered, for Whe words “net hire-purchase
charges", the words “hire-purchase charges” shall be substituted;
(v) clause (e) shall be re-teltered as clause (d), and in
clause (d) as so re-leltered,—
(A) in the opening portion, for the word “less.--" the
words, brackets and letter “less any deposit as detincd , in
clause ();" shall be substilu(ed;

(B) sub-clauses (i) lo (ii) shall be omitted;
{vi) for clause (f), the following clause shall be sibstitut-

ed, namely: — |

‘(e) “statutory hire-purchase charges”, in selation to a
Nire-purchase agreement, means the amount caleulated in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2).’;

(0) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shal! be 500-
stituted, namely: —
“(2) The slatutory bive-purchase charges shall be an amount
calculated at the rale of eighteen per centium per ennum, or if
a lower rate ts specified under sttb-section (3), al such lower
rate, in accordance with the foliowing formuta:—

NCKRXxT
80५ -—-—-—---—
100
where SC—represents the  slatutory — hire-purchase
charges;

NC—represents the net cash price;
R---represents the rate; and

T--represents the‘time expressed in years and
fractions of years, that clapses between this
date of the agreement and the date on
which the last hire-purchase instalment is

(पे payable under the agreement.”;

(९) in sttb-section (3)

(t) the words “, being a. rate which shalf not be less than
fen per centum per annurz,” shall be omitted
the words “statutory

(H). for the. words “stalutgry charges
hire-purchase charges” shall be substituled

1. वे) in-sub-section (4),
.  ). for the words “net” hire-purchase charges”, wherever
they occtir, the words “hire-pufchase charges” shall be substi-
tuted; 1

"7 |. (मै) for the words “statutory charges”, wherever they occur,
the words “statutory hire-purchase charges” shall be substiltled.



Amend.
ment of
section 9.

Amend-
ment of
section
10,

Amend-
iment of
section

12,

Amend-
ment of
section
17.

4

है. In section 9 of the principal Acti

(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “or the balance thereof”,
the words “together with such incidehtdl charges and expenses as
may be payable under the terms of the agréement” shall be insert-
ed; 1

(b) for sub-seclion (2) and the Explanation, the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:— °

“(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section (1) shalt he
calculated in accordance with the followthg fotmula:—
CxM> (M+1)

Nx (N+)
where R—represents rebate;

R=

C—representsi hire-purchade charges as defined
in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of
statutory hire-purchase charges as defined in
clause (९) of sub-section (1) of section 7,
whichever is Jess;

M—represents the number of complete months
still remaining in the period of the agreement;

N—represents total number of complete monthe
in the period of the agreement.”.

7. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), the words

“together with such incidental chatges and expenses as may be payablé
under the terms of the agreement” shall tie added at the end.

8, In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), after thé

words “under the hire-purchase agreement”, the words “together with
such incidental charges and expenses as may be payable under the fermd:
of the agreement” shall.be inserted

9. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(०) in sub-section (1),

(0 in the opening portion, after the words “by which id
hire-purchase price”, the words “together with such intent
charges and expenses as may be payable under the terms of
agreement” shall be inserted

(ii) in clause (ii), the words “on the date of seizure” shall
be omitted:

(b) in ‘sub-section’ (2), in the opening portion, for the « 3
“the value of any goods on the date of seiztité’, the words “i
value of any goods in a case wheré the goods are required by
Jaw for the time being in force to be registered in the ow!
name, on the date of such registration and itt any other case
the date of seizure” shall be substituted:

(c) after sub-section (4), the following .sub-section shall
inserted, namely: —


5

1

“(5) Where the owner seizes the goods under clause (टी
of gection 19, the goods lel under a hire-purchase agreement
and if. within fourteen days of the dale of such seizure, the
hirer-- |

(i) pays or lenders lo the owner the hire in arrears up
(0 the date of payment or tender, together with such inci-
dental charges and expenses as may be payable under

' the terms of the agreement; .

{ii) remedics any breach of agreement or (where he is
unable to remedy the breach by reason of the fact that the
owner has seized the goods) pays or lenders to the owner
Ure costs and expenses reasonably and actually incurred
hy the owner in doing any act, miter or thing necessary

‘ to remedy the breach;

{iii) pays or Lenders to the owner the reasonable costs
and expenses of the owner of and incidental to his seizure
of the gonds and of his returning them to or to the orde
of the hirer,

1. the owner. al his diseretion, may return the goods (6 the hirer
and the goods shall be received and held by the hirer pursuant
to Une terns of the hire-purehase agreement as if the agree-
ment had net been terminated and the owner had not tken

Possession of the goods.”.

10. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the pre-
viso, for the words “together with such interest thereon”, the words
“together with such incidental charges and expenses” shall be substitut-

ed.
11. In section 19 of the principal Act-—

@) in clause (a), after the words rrears of hire due"
wherever they occur, the words “logether with stich incidental
charges and expenses as may be payable under the terins of the
agreement” shall be inserted;
sof the
shall be

ver the premis
Uke goods

Gi) in clause (c}, for the words “to
hirer and seize the goods”, the words “lo se
substituted. .

1. - 42. In section 20 of the pcincipal Act, in sub-section (1). for the words
“Bfleen Nhousand rupees” and “five Lhousand ss”) wherever they
vecur, te words “twenly-five thousand rupees” and “ten thousand
rupees” shall, respectively, be substituted.

13. In seclion 2{ of the principal Act, for the words “Lloxether with
such inlerest thereon”, the words “together with such incidental charges
and expenges” shall be substituted. :

" #4. In section 23 of the principal Act —
(मे in sub-section. (1),—

6) in the opening portion, after the words “a teuc copy lof
the ‘tive-piirchase ‘agreement”, the words. brackets, letter and
figures “and a true copy of the declaration referred lo in clause

(० of siib-section' (1) of section 3" shall-he inserted

Aniend-
ment of
section

18.

Amend-
ment of
section
19.

Ainend
ment of
ien

20,

Amend.
ment of
section
21.

Amend-
ment of
section
23,


Amend-
ment of
section

Inser-
tion of
new
sections
32and
33.
Power
to make
rules.

6

Woe
(ii) in clause (०), for the word “immediately”, the words
“without undue delay” shall be substituted; है

(b) गीला sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall b

inserted, namely: — हु

“(1A) It shall also be the duty of the owner, at any timé

before the final payment has been made under the hire-purchasé

agreement, to supply to the hirer additional copies of the hire-

purchase agreement and the declaration referred to in clausé!

(c) of sub-section (1) of section 3 within fourteen days after

the owner receives the request in writing from the hirer if

this behalf and the hirer tenders to the owner the prescribed:

fees for expenses. ‘

{c) in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure “sub-

section (1)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter «or sub-section
(1A)” shall be inserted.

15, In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following

proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely: —

“Provided that before any such permission is granted, the In-
solvency Court or, as the case may be, the court in which the wind- F
Ing up proceedings are pending shall grant the owner an opportunity
of being heard in the matter.”. 1

16. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following sections shall

be inserted, namely: — 1

“32. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in {
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act. पु

(2) Tn particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of thé
following matters, namely: — °

(a) the form and manner in which ail ता any ead
shall be specified in every hire-purchase agreement under ९8058
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 3;

(b) the additional particulars which shall be specified fi
every hire-purchase agreement under clause (f) of ir |
(1) of section 4; .

(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may’ 4
prescribed. a

(3) Every rule made by thé Central Government under ७४]
Act shail be laid, as soon as may he ater it is made, before each"
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of:
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or,
more sue ive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sessit
immediately following the session or the successive sessions afores
said, both Houses agree in making. any modification in the rule of
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effech



7

as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.

33. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with tbe pro-
visions of this Act as may appear 10 be necessary for removing the
dificully: \

Provided that no such order shali be made after the expiry of
a period of five years from the commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order 11]
as may be, after if ts

under this section shall be laid, as soon
de, before each House of Parliament.”.

‘Power to
remove
diMeul-
ties.



_ ~ rey हा
STATEMENT OF ona ge A

The Wire-purchase Act, 1972 was enedied, in ptirsuance of the teconi-
mdridalions of Ihe |.aw Commission contained वन ils Twentieth Report,
nidinly lo regulate the righls and duties of parties to hire-purchase
agreements. As the developmental activities undertaken. hy organisations
की the small-scale industrial sector are mainly through the device of
Ietting, out machinery, implements, ete, on hire-purchase basis and as
\hé provisions of the Mire-purchase Act involved devising of new forma
and hlre-purchase agreements, ete. it was decided to allow sufficient time
foe the various organisations, the trade and (he public to teatise the
implicatiens and impact of the legislation and to make the necessary
adjustments in their affairs by the time lhe Act was brought into force.
However, before the Act could be brought into force, several reptesétila-
lions were received from the public against bringing the Act into foree
on account of certain difficulties pointed out ffom seveal quarters in the
implementations thercof. This matter was if examined, inter alia, by
the Banking Law Committee appointed by the Reserve Bank of India.
The Committee on Petitions of the Rajya Sabha had occasion to consider

the guestion of bringing into force the Hire-purchase Act and iecom-
mended that immediate stops be taken to notify and implement the
: Hire-purchase Act without any further delay. In view of this, it 18 felt +
: that the Ack should be hrought into force as carly as possible after *
1 mecling the main difficulties noticed. y

2. The subject dealt with by the Act is of a highly technical nature |
wilh far-reaching consequences. The difficuilies are mainly in tespect
of mallers relating to the limiling of hire-purcbase charges, the right
of hirer to purchase at any time with rebale, the modifications necessary
16 bring the Hire-purchase Act in harmony with the present economical
and other conditions and the absence of any provision for making rules
for bringing out more clearly the implications of some of the provision:
of the Act and particularly those which involve mathematical calculattons,
These difficulties appeared to be felt more in respect of hire-purchasé;
agreements providing for obtaining credit for such assets as ate intended,
for gencraling income of a husiness. For the purpose of removing thtsé;
difficulties. the proposed legislation makes suilable amendments tn {hii
parent Act on the analogy of similar legislations in various other :

tries. 1

3. Cerlain other amendments of administrative or procedural mati
which would be helpful and beneficial particularly 10 the hirers, are ali
proposed. In view of the highly fechnical nature of the subject malté
of the parent Act, a provision is also being included, on usual patle
empowering the Central Government to remove diffictillies by makld
suitable orders. a i]

i
4. This Bill seeks fo achieve the above objectives.

| New Dena: BR. SIIANICARANANG|
The 66 April. 1929,



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Flause 16 of’ the Bill seeks to insert a new section 32 in the Mire.
chase Act, 1972 (26 of 1972): empowering the Central Government to
ke rules to carry oul the provisions of the said Act. ‘The rules may
yide for the form and’ manner in which all or any of the particulars
॥ be specified in every hire-purchase agreement, {h lional parti-
irs which shall be-specifled in every such hire-purchase agreement and
matters which may. be required for bringing ott more clearly the
lications of some of the provisions of the parent Act and particularly
e-which involve mathematical calculations

f-Im.view. of the .nature of legislation relating to bire-purchase
Nved;. clause 16 of the Bill also inserls a new section 33 in the Hire-
thase: Act empowering the Central Government to. remove by order
diffoulty: which may arise in giving effect to the provisions, of that
«This. is-hy way of abundant caution and for covering difficulties
th.may. arise. [t has, however, been provided that no such order
J.be. made after the expiry of a period of 5 years from the com-
wement of the Hire-purchase Act. 11 has also been provided that a
fof every such order made shall be laid before each House of Parlia-

हु

. The matters in relation to which rtles or orders may be made are
ers of administrative detail and procedure and it is difficult to
106 for the same in the Bill itself, The delegation of legislative power
serefore, of a normal character.



ANNEXURE ’
Exvracts From tim Jline-runctiase Act, 1972

(26 oF 1972)

+ + ‘ * *
Deft. 2 In this Act, unless the conlext otherwise requires,—-
tions.

* +, + + *

(a) “hire-purchase price” means the total sum payable by i
hirer under a hire-purchase agreement in order to complete
purchase of, or the acquisition of property in, ‘the goods to. Wwhb
the agreement relates; and includes any sum so payable by
hirer under the hire-purchase agreement by way of a oe
other initial payment, or credited or to be credited to him ७
such agreement on account of any such deposit or payment, whet
t sum is to be or has been paid to the owner or to any 0!
person ar is to be or has been discharged by payment of hi
or hy transfer or delivery of goods or by any other means; but
not include any stm payable as a.penally or as compensatlod |
damages for a breach of the agreement

+ * + * *

CHAPTER IL
FORMS AND CONTENTS OF IUIR-PURCHASE AGREEMENTS

Hire- 3. (1) Every hire-purchase agreement shall be-—
purchase
agree- (a) in writing, and
Hig lo (b) signed by all the parties thereto:
writing
and * * * . *
signed
by parties
thereto,
Contents 4. (1) Every hire-purchase agreement shail state—
of hire- '
putchase + * * * *
agree- ‘, “os i
ments, (व) the number of instalments by which the hire-purchase pri

‘is to be paid, thé amount of each of those instalments, artd the dal
or the mode of determining the date, upon which it is payable, a
the person to whom and the place where it is payable; and

(९) the goods to which the agreement relates, in a imfhl
ssuMficient to identify them. ‘

10


H

{2) Where any part of the hire-purchase price is, or is to be, paid
otherwise than in cash or by cheque, the hive-purchase agreement shall
contain a description of that part of the hire-purchase price.

* * * * *

7. (i) In this section,--

(०) “cash price instalment”, in relation (० a hire-purchase instal-
ment, means an amount which bears to the net cush price the same
proportion as the amount of the hire-purchase instalment bears to
the tolal amount of [४४९ purchase price;

(0) “deposit” méans any sum payable by the hirer under the
hire-purchase agreement by way .of deposit or other inilial payment
or credited or to be credited to him under the agreement on account
of any such deposit or payment, whether that sim is to be or has
been discharged by payment of money or by transfer or delivery of
goods or by any other means;

{c) “nel cash price”, in relation to. goods comprised in a hire-

purchase agreement, means the cash price of such goods as required
: to be specified in the hire-purchase agrecment under clause (b) of

sub-section (J) of section 4, less any deposit as defined in clause (b);

(व) “net hire-purchase charges”, in relation to a hire-purchase
agreement for any goods, means the difference between Lhe net hire-
purchase price and the net cash price of such goods;

(e) “net hire-purchase price”, in relation lo goods comprised in
a hire-purchase agreement, means the total amount of bire-purchase
price of such goods as required to be specified in the bive-purchase
agreement under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of seclion 4 105:

(i) any amount which is payable to cover the expenses of
delivering the goods or any of them to or to the order of the hirer
and which is specified in the agreement as included in the hire-
purchase price;

Gi) any amount which is payable to cover registration 07
other fees under any law in respect of the goods or the agree-
ment or both and which is specified in the agreement as included
in the bire-purchase price; and

(iii) any amount which is payable for insurance (other than
third party insurance) in respect of the goods and which — is
specified in the agreement as included की the hire-purchase
price;

G) “statutory charges”, in relation to a hire-purchase — agree-
ment, means lhe agyregaté of the amounts calculated in accoritance
-with the provisions of sub-section (2) as statutory charges in respect
of each of the cash price instalments corresponding lo each of the
hire-purchase inslalments under the agreement.

है (2) The stalulory charges, in respect of a cash price instalment; shall
' be an amount calculated at the rate of thirly per centton per annum

Limita-
tion on
hire-pur-
chase
charges,


Right of
hirer to
purchase
at any
time
with
Tobate,

12

or, if a lower rate is specified under stth-section (2), at such lowelih

JN accordance with the following formula: -—

CIXRXT

भर

ton
where. SC, - represents the statutory charges;

represents the amount of cash price instatnedl
expressed in rupecs or fractions of rupees;

represents the rate: and

--represonts the time, expressed in years and :
lions of years, thal elapses between the date. (
Ibe agreement and the ditle on which the ‘hi
purchase instalment corresponding lo the ca
price instalment is payable under the apreemélt, |

Q) The Central Gevermnent inay, hy volificalion in Une Ofte
Gazette, and afler consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, spel
the vale per cenfum per annum, heing 2 rate which shalt not be 4
than fon per centem per annum, at which statutory charges niay be ci
culated onder sub-section (2) and different rates may be so spectfléd
respec! of hire-purchase agreements relating to differeht classes Wf gu
clarses of goods.

(4) Where the net hite purchase charpes in relation toa hirepurdt
agreement exceed the stalutery charges in relation to such agreeti
calealated in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2);
hirer may, hy notice in wriling to the owner, either elect 0 treat
agceement as void or to have his liability reduced by the amolet,
which the net hire-puréhase charges exceed the statutory charges fi
said,

* . + + +
CHAPTER IV.
RIGHTS AND OPLIGATIONS OF THR TIRER

9. (1) ‘The hirer may, al any lime during the continuance of 4 h

purchace agreement and afler piving the owner not less than fout!

‘days’ notice in writing | his intention so to do, complete the pul

of the goods by paying or tendering toithe owner the hirespurchase pI
Gr dhe halance thereof as reduced by the rehate calculated in the inf
provided in sub-section (2). है

(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section (1) shall be equat
two-thirds of an amotint which bears to the hire-purchase charges
sane proportion as the balance of the hire-purchase price not yet
hears to the hive-purchase price.

planation.in this su! on, “hire-purchase charges” meats
difference between the “purchase price and the cash price tis &
fn the hire-purchase agreement. ‘



3

10. (1) The hirer may, at any Line before the final payment under
the hire-purchase agreement falls due, and afier giving the ewner not
fess than fourteen days’ notice in writing of his intention so lo do and
redelivering or ‘lendering the goods to the owner, (erminate the hire:
purchase agreement by payment or tender lo the owner of the amounts
“which have ‘accrued due ‘towarils the Jire-purchase price and have not
‘been pak by-him, inetuding the sum, if any, which he is liable to pay
under sub-section (2) !

+ . + + *

42. (1) * . + 4 *

(३) As a condition of granting such consent, the owner may stipufaly
that ail defaults under the hire-purchase agreement shall’ he made good
and may veyuire the hirer and the assignee to execule and deliver to
fhe owner an assignment agreement, in a form appreved by the owner,
whereby, without affecting the continuing personal Viability of the hirer
in. such respects, Ube assignee agrees wilh the owner lo be personally

Miable to pay the instalments of hire remaining unpaid and to perform
and observe all other glipulations and conditions of (he hire-purchase
*apreement during the residue of the term thereof and whereby the
‘assignee indemnifies the hirer in respect of such Jiabilifies.

!

. * * « *

+ 1, (3) Where the owner seizes under clause (लो of section 19 the
goods fet under a hire-purchase agreement, the hirer may recover from
the owner the amount, if any, by which the hire-purchase price falls
Short of the aggregate of the following amounts, namely: —

{i) the amounts paid in respect of the hire-purchase price up
to the date of seizure;

(ii) the value of the goods on the dale of seizure.

(2) For the purposes of Lhis section, the value of any yoods on the
date of seizure is the best price that can be reasonably obtained for the
goads by the owner on that date 1655 the aggreyale of the following

mounts, hamely: —

(४) Ube reasonable expenses incurred by the owner fur seizing
the goods;

:(ii) .any -amount reasonably .expended by the owner on the
islorage, repairs or maintenance of the goods;

(iii) -(Qwhether or not the goods have subsequently beea sold or
sotherwise disposed of by the owner) the reasonable expenses of
selling -or otherwise disposing of (he goods; and

‘
(६०) the amount spent by the owner for payment of arrears of
_ \faxes ‘and other dues whieh are payable in relation to the Rooks
under any law for the time being in force and which the hirer was
liable-to pay.

* + * * +

Right

of hirer
to ter-
mninate
agree.
ment at
any time,

Assign-
sucat and
Iransntis-
sion of
hiner’s
right or
interest
undec
hive-
purchare
agree
nent,

Rights

of hirer
की case

Of seizttre
of goods
by owner.

d


Rights of

purchase
agree.
ment fer
default
in pay-
ment nt
hire or
unauthori-
sed act
or breach
of
express
condi-
tions,

Rights

of

owner
on ter.
mination,

Restric-
tion on
oymer's
right
io

posses
of poads: j
cother-

wise than
सिर
court,

14
CHAPTER V

Ric

15 AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE OWNER

18. (1 Where a hirer makes more than one default in the "4
of hire as provided in the hire-purchase agreement then, subject to a e
provisions of section 21 and after giving the hirer notice in writing,
not less than— , .

@)} one week, in a case where the hive is payable at weekly 0
Jesser infervals; and

(ii) two weeks, in any other case,
the owner shalt he entitled to terminate the agreement by glving id]
hirer notice of termination in wriling: है

Provided that if the hiver pays or tenders to the owrer thé 4
arrears fovelher wih such interest thereon as may be payable under tht
terms of the agreement before the expiry of the said period of one w é
er, as the case may he, two weeks, the owner sball not be entitled
terminale the agreement.

* + * * *

f
19. Where a hire-purchase agreement is terminated under this Acta
then the owner shall he cutitted.- Jef
(6) fo reta'n the hire which has rlready been paid and to te-

cover the atreats of hire due:

Provided that when such goods are seized by the owner, the 4
retention of hire and recovery of the arrears of hire due shall be
subject fo the provisions of seclion 17;
* « eo, + *
i

(c) subject to the provisions of section 17 and section 20 aad ‘
subject to any contract to the contrary, to enter the premises of the
hirer and seize .the goods; : : .

2 : + t * हु *
,

20. (2) Where goods nave been tet under 8 hire-purchase aa
‘and the statulory proportion of the hire-pirchase price has been paid,
whether in plrsnance of the judgment ef a cour) or otherwise, or ten-
‘dered by ot on behalf of the hirer or any surety. ihe owner shalj not
enforce any Tight [0 récover possession of the geods from the hires
otherwise than in areordance with sub-seclion (3) or by suit.

:Explanation.-4n this section, “statutory preportion”™ means,—

(7) one-half, where the hire-purchase price is less than fiftee

thousand rupees; and -
Gi) three-fourths, where Ure hire-purchase price is not tel
than fifteen thousand rupees:


is

Lrovided that in the case of motor vehicles as defined in the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, “statitlery propoction” shall mean,-—

t (i) one-half, where the hire-purchase price is Jess than five
thousand rupecs;

Gi) three-fourths, where the hire-purchase price is not less than
five thousand rupees but less than fifleen thousand rupees; 1

(i) three-fourths or such higher proportion not excceding
nine-lenths as the Central Government may, by notification in thé
OMicial Gazette, specify, where the hire-purchise price is not Sess
than fifteen thousand rupees. 1

* * oF * +

21, Where the owner, aller he has terminated the hire purchase agree-
ment in accordance wilh the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 18
inslitules a suit or makes au application against the hirer for lhe re-
covery of the goods, and at the hearing of the suit or application, the
hirer pays ov (enders lo the owner the hire in arrears, logelher with such
interest thereon as may be payable under the terms of the agreement
and the costs of (he suit or application incurred by the owner and com-
piles with such other conditions, if an: the court may think fit to
impose, the court may, in Tiew of making a decree or order for specific
delivery, pass an order relieving the hirer against the teemination; and
therenpon the hirer shall continue in possession of the goods as if the
agreement had not heen terminated. न

. + + * *

23. (1) It shall be the duty of the owner to supply, free of cost, a true
copy of the hire-purchase agreement, signed by the owner,—

(०) lo the hirer, imtnecdiately after execution of the agreement,
and

* * * * *

(3) Where there is a failure without reasonable cause lo carry out
the duties imposed by sub-section (1), or sub-seelion (2), then, while
(he default continues,— '

(a) the owner shall vet be entitled lo enfurce the agreement
against the hirer or lo enforce any contract of guarantee relaling to
the agreement, or to enforce any right to recover the goods from

1. the hirer; and

(b) no security given by the hirer in respect of money payable
under the agreement or given. by 8 surely in respect of money pay-
able under such a contract of guarantee as aforesaid shall be enforce-
able against the birer or the surely by any holder thereof,

and, if the default continues for a period of two months, the owner shall
be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupecs.

t * * * * *

Kelict
against
termina.
Gon for
non-
payment
of hire,

Obliga- ,
ton of
owner.
to supply
copies
and
informa-
tion,


Insole
vency of
hirer,
ale

16
on (ay * * we *, डा

(2) The Official Receiver or the liquidator, as the case may
Wilh the permission of the Insol¥ency Court or the eburt की willl
winding up proceedings are pending, assign the rights -of the hirer th
the agreement. to any other person, and the assignee shall have ail thi
rights and Be subject ts all the obligations of the hiter under the age
ment, n

Fxplanation.--In this section, “OMetal Receiver” means: ar eit
Receiver appointed under the Provincial Insolvency Act. 1920; atd fi
cludes! any person holdings a similar office under: Any other aie! wit
respect to insolvency for the time being in: force,

+ * t * «


Vi

RAIVA SARA

ooamend Vane Uiresparchase Act, 1972,

(Shri कै. Shenkaranand. Minister of Liar and Justice)


ANNLEXURE-D
Po No.6(3) (39 -LC(LS fi it
FP .No.6(3) (39) /96-LC(L3) fafa आयोग
R. L. MEENA
Member - Secretary &

Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tel, 3383382

भारत सरकार

शास्त्री भवन

LAW COMMISSION

GOVERNMENT OF !NDIA

~ SHASTRI BHAWAN

~ नई दिल्‍ली

NEW DELHI-110 001

To
May 18, 1998

Chief df the Organisation,
EN, Bank,
a

Hindust Times, 6th & 9th Floor,
18, K.G. Marg, Néw Delhh.

Subject:- Questionnaire on Law of Hire-Purchase.

Sir/Madam,

During the past few decades, there has been a mushroom growth

of

hire-purchase transactions in India which prompted the Law Commission to

undertake a study on the subject. The Commission made an indepth = study

on the subject and submitted its 20th Report on “The Law

Hire-Purchase” in May, 1961. The Indian Parliament enacted
. Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 following the recommendations of the
. Commission. Because of pointing out certain anomalies in the Act by

of
the
Law
the

Chairman of the Joint Committee of Parliament, and by a number of

companies involved in business of financing, the Act was not brought
force as pointed out in the appended papers. The report dated April
1987 of the Committee on Petitions, Rajya Sabha recommended

into

24,
for

a implementing the Act expeditiously. In due course, the Ministry of Law &

Justice prepared a comprehensive Amendment 8111 for the amendment of
Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on

the
5th

May, 1989. The Parliamentary Standing Committee has vide its 21st report
dated August 7, 1995 recommended that Government may consider referring
the issue of hire-purchase to the Law Commission for an indepth
examination, keeping in view the observations of the Committee.
> Accordingly, the subject of hire-purchase was referred by the Government

of India to the Law Commission for an indepth examination.

. 2. The Law Commission has drawn up a questionnaire on the aforesaid
subject and is interested to have the views of allt interested

persons/bodies on the subject. A copy of the questionnaire alongwith

a

copy of the Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 and the Hire-Purchase (Amendment)

Bill, 1989, is enclosed for your ready reference.

3. The Commission would, request you to convey your views on
Questionnaire so as to reach the Commission at the earliest and in
case not later than 15th June, 1998. The Commission would atso
grateful, if copies of this questionnaire are made and distributed to
concerned with a request to directly transmit their views to the
Commission.

Yours faithfully,
)
bids

- Encl: As stated Aon

the
any

be
the
Law


QUESTIONNAIRE ON LAW OF HIRE- PURCHASE

Sinca law operates in a society, social ethics and
values do play an important role in the framing, operation
and implementation of laws. Customary laws, codes and
legislation quite often consolidate the prevailing norms of a
given society. Cases are not, however, uncommon in which
legislation provides for or embodies new rules of Jaw which
create rights and obligations different from the norms
prevailing in the society. Commercial transactions form one
set of such legislation in which new rights and obligations
may be created for the parties. - It needs no mention that
whenever a society which is primarily an agricultural society
transforms into an industrialised society commercial or

business law is needed.[ 1)

Viewed in this context, despite rapid developments of
industries in India and despite a general acclaim that tndia
ranks in the top ten industrialized countries of the world,
10 still remains basically an agricultural society anda
large chunk of its population still lives in villages which

are far away from the aura or influence of industrialization.

Industrialization and commercial activities in India were

. The Law of Hire Purchase (London, 1966) pl



strencthened by the British-rulers which were designed and

devised for safeguarding thé economic interes of our

colonial masters~

Industrialization in Europe started long back and it

has passed through centuries as of today. England occupied a

leactir position in the race of industrialization in Europe.
Colonisation of Asia, Africa and certain parts of America by

the European Powers started with the objectives of securing

supply of raw rials to their industries and ta on
markets for their products. The colonial markets, however,
were originally not attractive in view of their poverty,
backwardness and ignorance. The colonial masters, therefore,

had to find alternate markets for their procucts. One of the

novel methods of achieving th object was perhaps hire

purchase and credit sale.

In England, the practice of selling goods on credit,
the price being payable by installments, is of very early

as oa commercial

origin; but the appearance of hire-purcha
institution dates substantially to the second half of the
nineteenth century when the Singer Manufackuring Company

began to offer to housewives and others the opportunity of

quiring sewing machines on “hire and purchase” terms. The

precedent thus set ow quickly followed by the venders oF
furniture, pianos and other household consumer coods. In the

industrial sphere, at about the same time, -the Morth Central

and Br Companies began to finance the purchase by



eollierias of the railway ms needed for the carriage of

coal सता Be

curity fer the advances nade was pravided by

bire-purchase transactions. The subseqweni: acdvent of 4 bye

motor-car immensely extended the ambit of hire-purchase, ane

hire ptered terms are voy:

vailable over a Jarae range of

constiner durables.

The wore “his

purchase” are Precquentiy teed in

general ciscussion to denote all forms of instalment trading.

There are, in fact, two clas: of instalment contrack in

common use, the hire-purchase agreement and the credit sale
agreement. A hire-purchase agreement usual Ly provides that
the wendor of the goods will let them and the customer wih

hire than for a Fixed period and wilt pay an adreed rental by

aA Se of installments throughout the  hir ing oporioads are

that when tha consumer has paid all the in

tLimentss fie stad
become the owner of the goods. It is also customary that:
Ghat the custemer shall have the right to return the gooda in

goo order at any time during the biting period and to

disconlLinue the hiring, provided that he Pays an ayreed
proportion of the etalk hiring cost and any everdue
instatiments. fhe transaction is thus a contract of hire

with an option to purchase and until that eplion ia
exercised, the vendor remains the owner of the woods. ५]
credit sale agreement, on Lhe other hemd is ai contract of
sabe एव. provides thek thas omer witb 5001 and ble

pure hosar

will buy che goods anc will pay an agreed priea by

of  Instal tment ships ef hha ceorte pancnass



immediately the agreement is signed and the purchaser becomes
an ordinary debtor for the several installments of the
purchase price.

Industrial isation and commercial activities in India
were introduced by the British rulers which were designed and
devised for safeguarding the economic interests of our

'
colonial masters. The advent of. hire-purchase transaction in

England was subsequently introduced into various colonies of
Great Britain depending on the economic and commercial
development in the colonies. india was no exception.
Disputes involving hire~purchase transactions in India
perhaps reached the court in the first quarter of the
twentieth century. Perhaps the first important reported case
¥...._.Nanalal

(AIR 1925 Bom 18) in which Justice Martin observed:

is that of @.Cecil

“Now the very expression “hire-purchase agreement” is
not one that originated in this country. It is
clearly 8 form of an“éareement which has originated
in England and has been created by those. engaged in
the trade of particular articles. Substantially in

this country there is little or no authority on hire:

purchase agreement..-.."

¥._..Gene: d.. (AIR 1960 Mad
328) the Madras High Court, inter alia, observed as follows:-

“To sum up, the law of hire and hire-purchase stems


from the law of contract of which it forms an
important segment. It is comparatively modern in
origin and is designed to serve the needs of credit
buying while at the same time protecting the vendor
from being caught in the meshes of the law relating
to sales stricto sensu. In effect hire-purchase is
-bailment with an option to purchase though it is

sometimes where there is an irrevocable agreement to

buy in instalment terms with the proviso that the-

title shall not pass until the installments are paid.
मै. hire-purchase agreement thus creates a bailment but
1. is 3 bailment plus an option to purchase. The
transaction is compounded of the element of both the
law of hire and sale and it would be clearly wrong to
assimilate it to a hypothecation of moveable

property.”

During the past few decades there has been a mushroom
growth of hire-purchase transactions in India. The growth of
hire-purchase transactions and the complexities surrounding
such transactions perhaps prompted the Law Commission to
undertake a study of the subject. The Commission made an
in-depth- study of the subject and submitted its 20th Report
on "The Law of Hire-Purchase” in May, 1961. The Commission
also appended a Bill to its report on the Hire-Purchase. The
Indian Parliament enacted the Hire Purchase Act, 1972

following the recommendations of the Law Commission.


The Government of India by G.S.R- 228 (E) dated

13.4.1973 hotified that the act will come into force with
effect from 1.6.1973. A number of companies which were
carrying on hire~purchase business or financing of
hire-purchase transactions made representations to the

Government pointing out certain deficiencies in the Act and

requested for postponement of decision of the enforcement of

the Hire Purchase Act. This resulted into the issuance of"

notification 9851२ No.288(E) dated 31.5.1973 rescinding the
earlier notification and appointing 1.9.1973 as the date on
which the Act would come into force. Meanwhile Shri
R.T.Parthasarathy, 4.P. who was the Chairman of the Joint
Committee which examined and reported upon the Hire Purchase
Bill wrote a letter dated 10.8.1973 to the Minister “in the

Ministry of Law and Justice pointing out certain anomalies in

°

the Act. As a result GSR No.402(E) dated 30.8.1973 was

issued rescinding the operation of the Act from 1.9.1973 as

notified earlier.

«

The Report dated April 24, 1987 of the Committee on

Petitions, Rajya Sabha relating to the question of bringing

into force the Hire Purchase Act, 1972 noted the sad state of

affairs and recommended that immediate steps be taken to

notify and implement the Hire Purchase Act, 1972 without any

further delay.
>....+-_--


In due’ course, the Ministry of Law & Justice prepared
a comprehensive Amendment Bill for the amendment of the Hire
Purchase Act which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
Sth May, 1989. A copy of the Bill is annexed hereto for
ready reference. In pursuance of the rules relating to the
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee, the
Chairman of Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee on
Home Affairs for examination and report. The Committee
considered the Bill and heard the representative of Ministry
of taw, Justice & Company Affairs. The Committee vide its
2ist Report dated August 7, 1995 recommended that Government
may consider referring the whole issue of hire-purchase to
the Law Commission for an in-depth examination, keeping in
view the observations of the Committee and thereafter bring
in a fresh comprehensive legislation on the subject before
Parliament, as expeditiously as possible. Accordihgly, the
subject of hire~purchase was referred by the Government to
the Law Commission for an in-depth examination.

The Law Commission has thoroughly examined the Act
and the Amendment 8511. The Commission is of the opinion
that the Hire Purchase Act enacted in 1972 was based upon the
20th Law Report submitted by the Law Commission, which was
prepared under the chairmanship of Justice Shri
T.L.Venkatrama Iyer~ one of the greatest judges produced by
this country. The report was prepared after extensive
consultations. The basic framework of the Act is sound and
needs no change. Indeed, no one asked for such a total

change. It is fairly simple and capable of being understood



by the persons likely to be governed by it. (The changes and
additions “now proposed. by the Law Commission make it more
simpler) as would be evident from what follows.) 0019 the
trading community had raised two objections. The Amendment
Bill meets and satisfies the two objections raised by the
trading community to the Act. The formula in sub-section (2)
of section 7 has been completely substituted. ‘certain
unnecessary definitions in section 7 have been omitted and
certain others amended. However, with a view to simplify and
clarify the material provisions of the Hire Purchase Act, the
following changes/amendments ate suggested in the act (as

proposed to be amended by the 1989 Amendment Bill).

I In section 2, the ‘derinitions of “contract of
guarantee", “hire” and “hire purchase agreement” need no
amendment. However, the definition of “hire purchhse price“
in clause (d) requires to be simplified. The present
definition, as proposed to be amended by 1989 Amendment Bill,
reads as follows:
“€d) "hire purchase price” means the total sum
payable by the hirer under a hire purchase agreement
in order to complete the purchase of, or the
acquisition of property in, the goods to which the
agreement relates; and includes any sum so payable by
the hirer under the hire purchase agreement by way of
a deposit or other initial payment, or credited or to
be credited to him under such agreement on account of

any such deposit or payment, whether that sum is to


be or has been paid to be owner to to any other

person

of money or by transfer or delivery of goods or by

any other means; but does not include any sum-

(1) payable as expenses for delivering the goods to

the hirer and the installation thereof, in accordance

with the terms of the agreement,

Cii) payable as any fee, in respect of the goods and

the agreement, for the purposes of registration or

otherwise under any law for the time being in force,
(1141) payable as insurance premium, and

(iv) payable as “a penalty or as compensation or

damages for a breach of the agreement”.

The above definition can be simplified and clarified

as follows:

(" (व) "Hire purchase price’ means the total sum

payable by the hirer under a hire purchase agreement
in order to complete the purchase of or the

acquisition of the property in the goods to which the

agreement relates and includes any sum payable by the

hirer under the hire purchase agreement by way of a

deposit or other initial payment (whether paid by the

hirer or any other person on his behalf and whether

paid in cash or in any other manner) and also

es the hire.purchase charges but does not

include any sum-

or is to be or has been discharged by payment


(i) payable as expenses for delivering the goods to
the hirer and the installation thereof, in accordance

with the terms of the agreement,

(ii) payable as any fee, in respect of the goods and
the agreement for the purposes of registration or

otherwise under any law for the time being in force,
(iii) payable as insurance premium, and

(iv) payable as a penalty or as compensation or

damages for a breach of the agreement”.

(The portion underlined is added with PY view to
remove any doubts whether the “hire purchase price" includes.

“hire purchase charges” or not)}

The other definitions contained in clauses (७), (1),
(ff) (proposed to be added in 1989 Amendment Bill) and (9g)

can remain as they are.

It In section 4(1), the present clause (b) be

substituted with the following:

“(b) The cash price of the goods as defined in clause

(७) of section 7(1)."


In section 4(1) the proposed clause (1) (proposed to
be added by the 1989 Amendment 8111) may be renumbered as (g)

and a new clause (f) may be introduced in the following

terms:

“(f) The name of the owner of the goods and his
address, the name of the hirer of the goods and his
address, the name and addresses of the sureties, if
any, and the place where the hire purchase agreement

is executed.“

After sub-section (1) in section 4, the following
sub-section may be inserted in the following terms:
\

" (18) The hire purchase agreement shall be executed

in two sets, signed by both the parties, and one such

set shall be handed over to the hirer immediately

after the execution of the agreement."

Tir Section 7 is the most material section in the Act.
It is proposed to be extensively amended by the 1989
Amendment Bill. Section 7(1) contains six definitions in
clauses (a) to (f). The Amendment Bill rightly proposes to
omit and delete the definitions of “cash price instalment” in

clause (a) and net hire purchase charges” in clause (b).
The Amendment Bill proposes to redesignate clause (b) - which
defines the expression “deposit” - as clause (a) and proposes

to enact clause (b) in the following terms:



“(b) Hire purchase charges in relation to a hire
purchase agreement for any goods means the difference
between the net hire purchase price and the net cash

price of such goods.”

The Amendment Bill further seeks to substitute the
last words “as defined in clause (b)" in clause (c) - which
defines the expression "net cash price" - with the words “as
defined in clause (4)". This is merely a consequential and a

formal change.

Similarly, in clause (d) which defines the expression
“net hire purchase price”, the entire portion begihning with
the word “less” is proposed to be deleted altogether and in
its place only the following words “less any deposit as
defined in clause (a)” are proposed to be substituted.
Clause (f) is redesignated as clause (e) and has been

substituted altogether as follows:

“(e) “Statutory hire purchase charges" in relation to

a hire purchase agreement means the amount calculated

in accordance With the provisions of sub-section

(2).”

definitions in section 7(1)

may be recast as follows:



(5) + (3) "Cash price of goods” means the price at which a
prospective buyer may, at the date of the hire

Purchase agreement, purchase the goods for cash.”

(2) The definition of “deposit” in clause (a) can remain

as it is, but shall be renumbered as clause (४७).

(3) The definition of “hire purchase charges” in the

proposed clause (b) may be recast as follows:

“(c) “Hire purchase charges" means the difference
between the balance hire purchase price and the

balance cash price of the goods.”

(4) Clause (c) which defines the expression “het cash
price” may be omitted and the following definition may be

inserted as clause (d):

“(d) ’Balance cash price of goods’ means the cash

price of goods less any deposit.”

(Ss) Instead of the proposed clause (d) which defines the

expression net hire purchase price", the following

definition may be substituted:

“Ce) *Balance hire purchase price’ means the hire

purchase price less any deposit.“



(6) After clause (d), a new clause (f) may be inserted as

‘follows:

“(f) “Hire purchase charges” means the difference
between the (balance) hire purchase price and the

balance cash price of the goods.

(7) The proposed clause (e), which defines “statutory
hire. purchase charges” should be redesignated as clatise (g)

,

and should read as follows:

“(g) “Statutory hire purchase charges means the
amount ‘as determined by. the ‘formula contained in

sub-section (2).”

(8) " Sub-section (2) Can remain as it is but the following |

illustration may be added at the end of clause (2):

“Illustration to sub-sections (1) & (2): 6. (hirer)

‘purchases a car from 8 (owner) on hire purchase

basis. The cash price of the car is Rs.65,000/~.'%: @
pays a derosit of Rs.15,000/on the: date of hire
purchase agreement which means that Rs.50,000/- is
the balance cash price of the a eods (car). The rate

of interest permitted by this section is 18% per

annum and the period of agreement is five years.

payable in 60 equal monthly instalments.

Accordingly, the statutory hire purchase charges in


this case would be Rs.45,000/arrived at in the

following manner-

Rs.45,000/-

can not exceed the

Thus in this

hase ||

plus Rs.45,000/~ = Rs.1,10,000/-. The balance hire

e@ charges are Rs.1,10,000/- minus Rs.15,000/-

(deposit) = Rs.95,000/-. This sum of Rs.95,000/- is

payable in 60 monthly instalments.

Further this amount of Rs.45,000/-, y being the

statutory hire purchase charges should be worked out
by the parties on the date of entering into the hire
purchase agreement and should be mentioned in the

agreement as such.”

Iv After section 7, a new section 7A may be added in the

following words:

Hire Purchase Charges not to exceed

Statut

Purchase Charges: Any stipulation in
the agreement of hire purchase with the hirer to pay
hire purchase charges in excess of the statutory. hire
purchase charges as specified in sub-section (1) &
(2) of section 7 shall be null and void and shall not

be enforceable. Any owner collecting hire purchase


charges over and above the statutory hire purchase
charges shall refund the excess amount collected with
interest @ 18% to the hirer immediately after it is
collected or whenever it is demanded by the hirer.
If the owner fails to discharge this obligation, it
shall be open to the hirer to approach the court for

recovering the said excess amount.")

In view of this new section, sub-sections (4), (5)

and (6) of. section 7 may be omitted.

1५) Section 9 of the Act which is the first section in
chapter IV, which sets out the rights and obligations of the

hirer is sought to be amended extensively by \the 1989

‘@mendment Bill. The Amendment Bill adds certain words in

sub-section (1) and substitutes sub-section (2) altogether.
It does not touch sub-section (3). As proposed to be amended
by the 1989 Amendment Bill, sub-sections (1) and (2) of

section 9 read as follows:

"9. Right of hirer to purchase at any time with
rebate - (1) The hirer may, at any time during the
- continuance of the hire purchase agreement and after
giving the owner not less than fourteen days notice
in writing of his intention so to do, complete the
purchase of the goods by paying or tendering to the
owner the hire purchase price or the balance thereof

together with such incidental charges and expenses as


may be payable under the terms of the agreement as
reduced by the rebate calculated in the manner

provided in sub-section (2).

(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section (1)

shall be calculated in accordance with the following

formula +

R=G «Mx (M + 2)

Nx (N + 1)

where R - represents rebate;

0 - represents hire purchase charges as defined
in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 7
or statutory hire purchase charges} as defined
in clawse (७) of sub-section (1) of section

7, whichever is less;

कं ~ represents the number of complete months
still remaining in the period of the
agreement;

N ~ represents total number of complete months

in the period of the agreement.”

In the light of the changes suggested herein, it
would be appropriate to substitute (C) and the matter
thereunder occurring in sub-section (2), with the following:

"C= represents the statutory hire purchase

charges as defined in clause (9) of


~: 18 :-

sub-section (1) of section 7 or the lesser
amount, if any, provided in the hire purchase

agreement.”

It would be most appropriate if an illustration is
also added after sub-section (2) to explain the working of
the formula contained in the said sub-section. For this

“purpose, we take the very same illustration as has been
appended to sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 7. It may be
mentioned that the object of sub-section (2) of section 9 is
to ascertain the amount of rebate in a given case. For the
purpose of illustrating the said formula we take the case
where the period of repayment is five years bug the hirer

“wants to complete the purchase of goods by tendering to the
owner the balance of the hire purchase price after the
completion of three years. The question is, what would be
the amount of rebate in such acase. The amount of statutory
hire purchase charges (or the hire purchase charges, as they
may be called since the hire purchase charges can ‘never
exceed the statutory hire purchase charges) is Rs.45,000/+ in
the aforesaid illustration. If so, the formula has to be

worked in the following manner:
45,000 X 24 months x 25
हे 60 X 61

The working of the above formula leads to an amount: of

Rs_7377.05, which is the amount of rebate to which the hirer

{is entitled to.


VI No changes are called for in the other sections of
the Act as proposed to be amended by the 1989 Amendment 8111
except in section 23. In view of sub-section (1A) proposed
to be added in section 4° (in this report) clause (a) in
sub-section (1) of section 23 becomes unnecessary and has to
be deleted, in which case sub-section (1) of section 23 shell

read as follows:

“(1) It shall be duty of the owner to supply, free of

cost, a true copy of the hire purchase agreement,

signed by the owner, to the surety, where there is a

‘contract cf guarantee, on demand made at any time

before the final payment has been made under the
‘

_ agreement.”

In asmuchas the 1972 Act was made on the basis of the
20th Report of the Law Commission and whereas the Law
Commission has had exhaustive consultations with "ail
concerned and interested persons, bodies and organisations
before submitting the said report, the Law Commission does not
think that any more consultation process is necessary so far
as the Act is ‘concerned, also because the objections put
forward by the trading community to the Act have been met and
satisfied through the Amendment Bill. "The Consumers

Organisations have . however been pressing for early.



implementation of the Act. This questionnaire is thus
confined to the Amendment 8111 of 1989 and to the changes

proposed by the Law Commission.

The Law Commission seeks your cooperation, valuable
views, opinions, suggestions, ideas and comments on the
changes proposed by the Amendment Bill of 1989 and the
changes propesed by the Law Commission. For proper
examination of the subject, your views on the following
questions would be of immense use for finalising our report

on the subject:-

'

l(a}. The Hire~Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
proposes to delete the following words in the
definition of “hire purchase price” in clause (d) of

Sec.2 of the Hire Purchase Act, 1972:-
“but does not include any sum payable as a
penalty or a compensation or damages for a

breach of the agreement”,

and, in their place, substitute the following

matter :—

“but does not include any sum —



2 21.४८

(i); payable as expenses for delivering the
goods to the hirer and the installation
thereof, in accordance with the terms of the

agreement.

(51) payable as any fee, in respect of the
goods and the agreement, for the purposes of
registration or otherwise under any law for

the time being in force,

Ciii)payable as insurance premium, and

(iv) payable as a penalty or as compensation

or damages for a breach of the agreement”

Have you any suggestions, objections or

comments to offer on the proposed amendment?

l(b). The Law Commission proposes, in the interest
of clarity and simplicity, to define the expression

“Hire Purchase Price” in the following words:

“ (06) ’Hire Purchase Price” means the total
sum payable by the hirer under a hire purchase
agreement in order to complete the purchase of or the

acquisition of the property in the goods to which the


agreement relates and includes any sum payable by the
hirer under the hire purchase agreement by way of a
deposit or other initial payment (whether paid by the
hirer or any other person on his behalf and whether

paid in cash or in any other manner) and. aiso

hire purchase charges but does not

include any sum ८

(i) payable as expenses for delivering the
geods to the hirer and the installation
thereof, in accordance with the terms of the

agreement,

Cii} payable as any fee, in respect of the
goods and the agreement for the purposes of
registration or otherwise under any law for
the time being in force,

(iii) payable as insurance premium, and

(iv) payable as the penalty or as compensation

or damages for a breach of the agreement”.

(The portion underlined is added with a view
to remove any doubt whether the “hire purchase price”

includes “hire purchase charges” or not)



a
nN
w

1

Have you any suggestions, objections or

comments to offer on the proposed change?

2(a). The Law Commission proposes that the existing
Clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 4 in the Act

be substituted by the following clause :~

* (9) Cash price of the. goods as defined in

clause (७) of Section 7(1)".

What are your suggestions, comments and

objections to the above proposal?

3(a). The Amendment Bill proposes to introduce
clause (#) in Sub-section (1) of Section 4 to the

following effect:-

“{#) Such additional particulars as may be

prescribed” .

The Law Commission proposes to recommend that
the proposed Clause (f} be re-lettered as "Clause
» ke)" “and the following Clause (f) be inserted
” therein. ,


“(f) The name of the owner of the goods ard
his address, the name of the hirer of the
goods and his address, the name and addresses
_of the sureties, if any, and the place where

the hire purchase agreement is executed."

Have you any objections or sudgestions to the

above proposal?

3({b)}. The Law Commission proposes to recommend that
after sub-section (1) of Section 4, the following
sub-section (1A) be inserted:-

“(ay The hire purchase agreament shall be
executed in two sets, signed by both the
parties, and one such set shall be handed over
to the hirer immediately after the exectition

of the agreement”.

Have you any suggestions or objections to this
broposal?
4, The Amendment Bill proposes to substitute
sub-Section (2) of the Act, as proposed in 8७०.
4Ui1) of the amendment Bill. Have you any objections

or suggestions to offer in this behalf?


-it 25 tin
5. The 198? amendment Hill proposes extensive
ohanges in Section 7 So far as sub-section (t) is

concerned, the Foltowing ate the changes proposed by

the amendment Rill: ~-

(i) clause (8) to be omithed:

(ii) clause (9) to be re-lettered as clause
(a), and after such Clause (a) the foltowing

Clause (9) is to be inserted:-

“(b) “hire-purchase charges", in relation
to a hire-purchase agreement for any
doods, means the difference between the
reat hire-putrchase price and net cash

price of such goods”

(iii) consequential changes in Clause (c);

(iv) omission of Clause (d);

६४) re-lettering Clause (e} of the act as
“clause (d)” and = substitutig? the entire

matter beginning with the word : " and in

its place substitution of the words “!ess any

deposit as defined tm Clause (a)":~



(vi) in the place of the existing clause Cf)
in the Act, substitution of the following
clause (8): “Statutory hire purchase charges"
in relation to a hire purchase agreement means
the amount calculated in accordance with the

provisions of sub-section (2)”-.

Have you any suggestions, objections or

comments to offer with respect to the above changes?

6.

The Law Commission proposes to recommend that

the definitions in sub-section (1) of Section 7 be

substituted altogether with the following

-definitions:- an

(a)

. (०)

J

i

“Cash price of “goods” means the price at which.
a prospective buyer may, at the date of the
hire purchase agreement, purchase the goods

for cash";
oe

“deposit” means any sum payable by the hirer
under the hire-purchase agreement by way of
deposit or other initial payment or credited
or to be credited to him under the agreement
on account of any such deposit or payment,

whether that sum is to be or has been


discharged by payment of money or by transfer
or delivery of goods or by any other means";

we

..-. LNo Change)

(०) “hire purchase charges” means the ‘difference
between the balance hire purchase price and

the balance cash price of the goods";

हि (a) “balance cash price of. goods” means the cash

'

price of goods lese any deposit";

(e) “balance hire purchase price” means the hire

purchase price less any deposit”;

(1) “hire-purchase charges" means the difference
between the balance hire purchase price and

‘ “the balance cash price of the goods";

(9) .; “statutory hire purchase charges" means the
; ‘amount as’ determined by the formula contained

cin sub-section (2)":

The above changes are proposed to be
recommended to bring in simplicity and clarity in the
definitions. Have you any suggestions, objections or

comments to offer on the aforesaid proposed changes?



f(a). 118. Amendment wt 11. preopoman 1.0. miubet tute
sub-section (2) altogether as mentioned in the Bill.
Thea Law Commission is of the opinion that it is a
very welcome amendment/substitution. Have you any

suggestions and objections to the said substitution?

7(b) With a view to explain the formula contained
in sub-section (2) of Section 7, and to make it
easily understood by all concerned, the taw
Commission proposes to recommend to add the Following

illustration at the end of sub-section (2):-

“dd Lustration.. to.

ections. (1). & (2): 06 hirer
purchases a car from B owner on hire purchase basis.
The cash. price of the car is २३.७५, 000/-. A pays a
deposit of Rs.15,000/- on the date of hire purchase
agreement which means that Rs.50,000/~ is the balance
cash. .price..of the soods. (car). The rate of interest
permitted by this section is 18% per annum and = the

period of agreement agreed between the parties is

five years, payable in 60 equal monthly instalments.
Accordingly, the statutory hire purchase charges in

this case would be Rs.45,000/arrived at 10. the

following manner~


59,0090 x 18

Rs.45,000/-

100

The hire. purchase charges can not exceed the
statutory. hire.purchase charges. Thus in this
illustration, the hire purchase price is Re.65,000/-
plus Rs.45,000/- = Rs.1,10,000/-. The balance. hire
purchase. charges are Rs.1,10,000/- minus Rs.15,000/-

(deposit) = Rs.95,000/-. This sum of Rs.95,000/- is

payable in 60 monthly instalments.

Further this amount of Rs.45,000/-, being the

१३ should be worked out

by the parties on the date of entering into the hire
purchase agreement and should be mentioned in the

agreement as such.“

It may be mentioned that in the above
illustration, various expressions which are defined
in sub-section (1) of Section 7 (as recommended by

Law Commission) have been duly underlined.

Have you any suggestions/objections or
comments to offer to the proposed insertion of

illustration to sub~sections (1) and (2).


1
a
n
w
°

1

7(c) Alternatively, is it advisable to omit
sub-section (2) of section 7 altogether (together
with the proposed illustration) and provide simply,
~since the provisions of the Bill seek to apply a

Flat rake formula,- that the owner shall not charge,

ipulate or collect hire-purchase charges in excess
of the amount calculated at the rate of 18% per annum
Cor if a lower rate Is specified under sub-section
(3), at such lower rate) on the balance cash price,
payable during the period. expressed in years and

fractions of years, as the case may be, that elapses

between the date of agreement and the date on which

the last hire purchase instalment is payable under
the agreement. Provided that such amount calculated
shall be payable In equated periodic instalments.
Then there will be consequential modification in
clause (qa) by deleting words “by the formula
contained in sub-section (2)" and substituting by “by

subsection (2)".

8. In sub-section (3) of Section 7, the Amendment

11111 proposes Lo delete the fol bowlna words: “bedi

a rate which shat) not be tess than 10% per annum".
Have you any suggestions or objections to

offer in this behalf.



5. The Law Commission proposes to recommend that
sub-section (1) of after Section 7, a new sub-section

"14" be inserted in the following terms:~-

“any stipulation in the agreement of hire
purchase with the hirer to pay hire purchase
charges in excess of the statutory hire
purchase charges as specified in sub-sections
(1) and (2) of section 7 shail be null and
void and shall not be enforceable. any owner
collecting hire purchase charges over and
above the statutory hire purchase charges
shall refund the excess amount collected, with
interest 8 18%, to the hirer, immediately
after it is collected or whenever it is
demanded by the hirer. If, the owner fails to
discharge this obligation, it shall be open to
the hirer to approach the court for recovering

the said excess amount with interest"

The Law Comnission further proposes to
recommend that in view of the said insertion of
sub-section 1A to the existing sub-sections (4), (5)

and (6) of Section 7 in the Act may be deleted.

Have you any suggestions, objections or

comments to offer to the proposed recommendations?


10(a). The amendment 811 proposes to delete the
existing stuub-section (2) and the Explanation appended
thereto in Section 9 of the Act and in its place
substitute a new sub-section (2) as contained in
Section 6 of the Amendment Bill. Law Commission

agrees with the said amendment/substitution.

Have you any suggestions, objections and

comments to offer on the proposed amendment?

10(b) With a view to make the formula contained in
new sub-section (2) of Section 9 easily
understandable, the Law Commission proposes to
recommend the addition of the following illustration

in sub-section (2) in the following terms:-

“Tlustration:- For the purpose of this

illustration, the very same facts as are
mentioned in the illustration proposed to be
added to sub~sections (1) and (2) of section 7
are being adopted. The object of sub-section
(2) of section 9 is to ascertain the amount of
rebate in a given case. In the aforesaid
illustration, the hirer wants to complete the
purchase of goods by tendering to the owner

the balance of the hire purchase price after



the completion of and at the end of a period
of three years. The rebate he is entitled to

in such a situation is the following:-

15,000 % 24 months x 25

60 X 61

the working of the above formula leads to an
amount of Rs.7377.05, which is the amount of rebate

to which the hirer is entitled to.

Have you any suggestions or objections to the

proposed recommendation?

dd. The amendments proposed by the Amendment Bill
in Seckions 10 and 12 are merely formal. Similarly,
the amendments proposed in sub-section (1) and
sub-section (2) of Section 17 are also formal. The
Amendment Bill, however, proposes to insert
sub-section (5) in Section 17 as set out in section

9{c) of the Bill.

Have you any suggestions, objections or

comments to offer to the above amendment?


12. While, the amendments proposed by the
Amendment Bill ins sections 38, 19, 20 and 21 are
formal, the amendments proposed in section 23 are
material. Even here the amendments proposed in
sub-section (1) again are Formal but the addition of
sub-section (1A) in section 23 may calt for your
comments . The proposed amendments are set out in

section / 4 of the Amendment Bill.

Have you any objections, suggestions or

comments to offer?

13. The Law Commission proposes to recommend that
in view of the new sub-section (18) recommended by it
to be added in Section 4, the existing clause (a) in
sub-section (1) of section 23 of the Act may be
deleted, in which case sub-section (1) of section 23

shall read as follows:-

"(1) Lt shalt be the duty of the owner to
supply, free of cost, a true copy of the hire
purchase agreement, signed by the owner, to
the surety, where there is a contract of
guarantee, on demand made at any time before
the final payment has been made under the

agreement” _


‘
B
w
wn
ते

Have you any stggestions or objections to

offer to the proposed recommendations?

14. The Amendment Bill proposes to add Section 32
in the act to confer upon the Central Government = the
power to make the Rules. Similarly, it proposes to
add section 33 to confer upon the Centrat Government
the power to remove difficulties. The proposed
sections 32 and 33 are set out in section 16 of the

Amendment Bill.

Have you any suggestions, objections and

comments to offer on the above additions?

flag



THE HIRE-PURCHASE. ACT, 1970

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS हे

CHAPTER 1.,
PRELIMINARY

SECTIONS

1,
2.

Short title, extent and commencement,
Definitions. .

_ CHAPTER II
ForM AND CONTENTS OF HIRE-PURCHASE AGREEMENTS

3. Hire-purchase agreements to be in’ writing and signed 3

4

parties thereto.
Contents of hire-purchase agrecments.

5. Two or more agreements when treated as a single hire-purchase

agreement.
CHAPTER. प्रा

WARRANTIES AND CONDITIONS, LIMITATION ON HIRE-PURCUASE CHARGES AND

pe

1k

13.
14.
15.
16.

PASSING OF PROPERTY

Warranties and conditions to be implied in hire-purchase agree-
ments .

. Limitation on hire-purchase charges.
. Passing of property. ”

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE HIRER -

. Right of hirer to purchase at any time with rebate. * *
10.

Right of hirer to terminate agreement at any time
Right of hirer: to appropriate ' payments.‘in respect of two or
more agreements. .

. Assignment and transmission of hirer’s right or interest unde:

hire-purchase- agreement.
Obligations of hirer to comply with agreement.
Obligation of hirer in respect of care to be taken of goods.
Obligation of hirer in respect of use of goods.
Obligation of hirer to give information as to where-abouts of

goods.

. Rights of hirer In case of seizure of woods by owner

150 -

FES a
Cure :

Awvax


DY

Arrangement of Secttons 151
CHAPTER V ___-
RIGHTS AND ONLIGATIONS OF TIE OWNER

SecTIons

18. Rights of owner to lerminate hire-purchase agreement for
default in payment of hire or unauthorised act or breach of

express conditions.

19. Rights of owner on termination.

20. Restriction on owner's right to recover possession of goods other-
wise than through court. .

21. Relief against termination for non-payment of hire.

22, Relief against termination for unauthorised act or breach of
express condition.

23. Obligation of owner to supply copies and information.

CHAPTER VI
MIscELLANEOUS
24. Discharge of price otherwise than by payment of money.
25, Insolvency of hirer, ete.
26. Successive hire-purchase agreements between same parties.
27. Evidence of adverse detention in suit or application to recover
possession of goods.
28. Hirer’s refusal to surrender goods not to be conversion in certain
cases,
29. Service of notice.

80. Power to exempt from provisions of sections 6, 9, 10, 12 and 17
in certain cases.

$1 Act not to apply to existing agreements.

S


Short-
title,
extent
and
com-
mence-
ment,

Defini-
tions,

THE HIRE-PURCHASL ACT, 1972."

. No, 26 oF 1972

(8th June, 1972]

An Act to define and regulate the rights aud duties of parties to hire-
purchase agreements and for matters connected therewith or

incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-third Year of the Kepublic

of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Hire-purchase Act, 1972,
: (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govertment

may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “contract of guarantee”, in relation to any hire-purchase
agreement, means a contract whereby a person (in this Act refer-
red to as the surety) guarantees the performance of all or any of

the hirer’s obligations under the hire-purchase agreement;

(b) “hire” means the sum payable periodically by the hirer
under a hire-purchase agreement;

152


9 of 1872,
3 of 1930.

-Act 26 or 1972] Ilive-Purchase 153

(९०) “hire-purchase agreement” means an agreement ander which
goods are Jet on hrire and under which the hirer has an option to
purchase them in accordance with the terms of the agreement and
includes an agreement under which—

(i) possession of goods is delivered by the owner thereof
to a person on condition that such person pays the agreed amount
in periodical instalments, and

(४) the property in the goods is to pass to such person on
the payment of the last of such instalments, and

(iii) such person has a right to terminate the agreement at
any time before the property so passes;

{d) “hire-purchase price” means the ietal sum payable by the
hirer under a hire-purchase agreement in order to complete the pur-
chase of, or the acquisition of property. in, the goods to which the
agreement: relates; and includes any sum so payable by the hirer
under the hire-purchase agreement by way of a deposit or other
Initial payment, or credited or to be credited to him under such
agreement on account of any such deposit or payment, whether that
sum is to be or has been paid to the owner or to any other. person or
is to be or has been discharged by payment of money or by transfer
or delivery of goods or by any other means; but does not include any
sum payable as a penalty or as compensation or damages for a breach
of the agreement;

(2) “hirer” means the person who obtains or has obtained pos-
session of goods from an owner under a hire-purchase agreement, and
includes a person to whom the hirer’s rights or liabilities under the
agreement have passed by assignment or by operation of law;

(f) “owner” means the person who lets or has let, delivers or has
delivered possession of goods, to a hirer under a hire-purchase sgree-
ment and includes a person to whom the owner’s property in the
goods or any of the owner's rights or liabilities under the agreement
has passed by assignment or by operation of law;

(g) each of the words and expressions used and not defined
in this Act but defined in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 or the Sale
ef Goods Act, 1930 shall have the meaning assigned to it in that Act.

हे CHAPTER व्‌
FORMS AND CONTENTS OF HIRE-PURCHASE AGREEMENTS
3.. (7) Every hire-purchase agreement shall be—
(व) in writing, and
(8) signed by all the parties thereto.
ty: (2)-sA-hire-purchase agreement shall -be void if in respect thereof any

of the requirements specified in sub-section (1) has not been complied

with.

(3) Where there is a contract of guarantee, the hire-purchase agree-
ment shal! be signed by the surety also, and if the hire-purchasc agree-
ment. is- fot so signed, the hire-purchase agreement shall be voidable at
the option of the owner.

Hire-pur-
chase
agree-
ments

to be

in tt
writing
and
signed

b:

९4
parties
thereto.


Contents
of hire-
purchase
agree-
ments.

‘Two or
more
agree-
ments
when
treated
as a sin.
gle hire~
bucchase
agree.
ment,

Warran-
tees
fond
ns
be”

imptied
in hire-
purchase
nree-
ments.

40

154 Hire-Purchase facr 26
4, (7) Every hire-purchase agreement shall state—

(a) the hire-purchase price of the goods to which the agreement
relates; है

(9) the cash price of the goods, that is to say, the price at which
the goods may be purchased by the hirer for cash;

(c) the date on which the agreement shall be deemed to have
commenced;

(4) the number of instalments by which the hire-purchase price.
is to be paid, the amount of each of those instalments, and the date,
or the mode of determining the date, upon which it is payable, and
the person ta whom and’ the place where it is payable; and

(९) the goods to which the agreement relates, in a manner suffi-
cient to identify them.
(2) Where any part of the hire-purchase price is, or is to be, paid
otherwise than in cash or by cheque, the hire-purchase agreement shall
contain a description of that part of the hire-purchase price.

(3) Where any of the requirements specified in sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) has not been complied with, the hirer may institute a
suit for getting the hire-purchase agreement rescinded; and the court
may, if it is satisfied that the failure to comply with any such require-
ment has prejudiced the hirer, rescind the agreement on such terms as it
thinks just, or pass such other order as it thinks fit in the circumstances
of the case.

5. Where by virtue of two or more agreements in writing. none of
which by itself constitutes a hire-purchase agreement, there is a bailment
०६ goods and the bailee has an option to purchase the goods and the re-
quirements of section 3 and section 4 are satisfied in relation to such
agreements, the agreements shall be treated for the purposes of this Act
as a single hire-purchase agreement made at the time when the last of

the agreements was made.

CHAPTER वा

WARRANTIES AND CONDITIONS, LIMITATION ON IIRE-PURCIIASE CHARGES AND
PASSING OF PROPERTY
6. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract, in every
hire-purchase agreement there shall be an implied warranty—

(a) that the hirer shall have and enjoy quiet possession of the
goods; and

(b) that the goods shall be free from any charge or encum-
brance in favour of any third party at the time when the property
is to pass. 1

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract, in every
hire-purchase agreement there shall be—

(a) an implied condition on the part of the owner that he has
a right to sell the goods at the time when the property is to pass;


a

or 1972) Jlire-Purchase 155

(>) an implied condition that the goods shall be of merchant-
able quality, but no such condition shall be implied by virtue of this
elause— ¥

(४) as regards defects of which the owner could not reason-
~ ably have been aware at the time when the agreement was made,
or : ee eT
(ii) as regards defects specified in the agreement (whether
referred to in the agreement as defects or by any other descrip-
tion to the like effect), or
(iii) where the hirer has examined the goods, or a sample
thereof, as regards defects which the examination ought to have
revealed, or
(iv) if the goods are second-hand goods and the agreement
contains a statement to that effect,
(3) Where the hirer, whether expressly or by implication,—

(a) has made known to the owner the particular purpose for
which the goods are required, or

(७) in the course of any antecedent negotiations, has made that
purpose known to any other person by whom those negotiations were
conducted,

there shall be an implied condition that the goods shail be reasonably
fit for such purpose.

(4) Where the goods are let under a hire-purchase agreement by
reference to a sample there shall be—
(a) an implied condition on the part of the owner that the bulk
will correspond with the sample in quality, and
_-(b) an implied condition on the part of the owner that the hirer
will have a reasonable opportunity of comparing the bulk with the
sample,

(5) Where the goods are let under a hire-purchase agreement by des-
cription there shall be an implied condition that the goods will correspond
with the description; and if the goods are let under the agreement by
reference to a sample as well as by description, it shall not be sufficient
that the bull of the goods correspond with the sample if the goods do not
also correspond with the description,

(8) An owner shail not be entitled to rely on any provision in a hire-

. Purchase agreement excluding or modifying the condition set out in sub-

section (3) unless he proves that before the agreement was made the

provision was brought to the notice of the hirer and its effect made clear
to hire. :

(7) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the operation of any other
enactment or rule of law whereby any condition or warranty is to be
implied in any hire-purchase agreement.

7. (2) In this section,— Limito-
‘ tion on

(a) “cash price instalment”, in relation to a hire-purchase instal- pire pase
ment, means an amount which bears to the net cash price the same chorges,
proportion as. the amount of the hire-purchase instalment bears to

the total amount of hire-purchase price;


42

186 Hire-Purchase . > [act 26

(0) “deposit” means any sum payable by the hirer under the
hire-purchase agreement by way of deposit or other initial. payment
or credited or to be credited to him under the agreement on account of
any such deposit or payment, whether that sum is to be or has been
discharged by payment of money or by transfer or. delivery of goods
or by any other means; . ,

(०) “net cash price”, in relation to; goods comprised in a hire-
purchase agreement, means the cash price of such goods as required
to be specified in the hire-purchase agreement -under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 4, less any deposit as defined in clause (b);

(९) “net. hire-purchase charges”, in relation to a,hire-purchase
agreement for any goods, means the difference between the net hire-
purchase price and the net cash price of such goods,"

(e) “net hire-purchase price”, in relation to goods comprised in
a hire-purchase agreement, means the total amount of hire-purchase
price of such goods as required to be specified in the hire-purchase
agreement under clause (७) of sub-section (1) of section 4 less,—

(i) any ‘amount which is payable to cover the expenses of
delivering the goods or any of them to or to the order of the
hirer and which is specified in the agreement as included in the
hire-purchase price;

(ii) any amount which is payable to cover registration or
other fees under any law in respect of the goods or the agree-
ment or both and which is specified in the agreement as included
in the hire-purchase price; and

(iii) any amount which is payable for insurance (other than
third party insurance) in respect of the goods and which is speci- .
fied in the agreement as included in the hire-purchase price;
(J) “statutory charges”, in relation to a hire-purchase agreement,

means the aggregate of the amounts calculated in accordance with

the provisions of sub-section (2) as statutory charges in respect of

each of the cash price instalments corresponding to each of the hire-

purchase instalments under the agrecment. , |

(2) The statutory charges, in respect of a cash price instalment, shall
be an amount calculated at the rate of thirty per centum per annum or,
if a lower rate is specified under sub-section (3), at such lower rate,:in
accordance with the following formula: —~

पु CIxXRxT 1
sc = - —
न ve ly fwd
where,—SC,—represents the statutory charges;--...”
Cl,—represents tie amount of cash price instalment
: expressed in rupees or fractions of rupees;
हि R,—represents ‘the rate; and
T,—represents the time, expvessed in years and frac-
lions of years, that clapses between the date of the
agreement and the date on which the hire-pur-
chase instalment corresponding to the cash price
instalment is payable under the agreement.
(3) The. Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, and after corisultalion with the Reserve Bank. of India, specify .


. 43

OP 19721 Hire-Purchase ae? * 157

the rate per centum per annum, being a rate which shall not be less than

‘ten per cention per annym, at which statutory charges may be cal-
‘culated under sub-section (2) and different rales may be so specified in

respect of hire-purchase agreements relating to different classes or stib-
classes of goods.

(4) Where the net hire-purchase charges in relation to a. hire-pur-
chase agreement exceed the statutory charges in relation to such agree-
ment calculated in accordance wiih the provisions of sub-section (2),
the hirer may, by notice in writing to the owner, either elect to treat-the

“agreement as void or to have his liability reduced by the amount by

which the net hire-purchase charges exceed the statutory charges
aforesaid

(5) Where a hirer elects, in accordance with the provisions of sub-

" section (4), to treat-the hire-purchase agreement as void, the agreement

shall be void, and the amount paid or provided whether by cash, cheque
or other consideration, by or on behalf of the hirer in relation to the
agreement shall be recoverable by the hirer as a debt due to him by the

owner,

(6) Where the hirer elects to have his lability reduced by the amount
referred to in sub-section (4), his liability shall be reduced by that
amount and that amount may: be set off by the hirer against.the amount
that would otherwise be due under the agreement and, to the extent to
which it is not so sét off, may be recovered by the hirer as a debt due
to him by the owner.

+ है, Subject to the provisions of this Act, the property in the goods
to which a hire-purchase agreement relates shall pass to the hirer
only on the completion of the purchase in the manner provided in the

_ agreement,

CHAPTER Iv
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE HIRER

9. (1) The hirer may, at.any time during the continuance of the
hire-purchase agreement and after giving the owner not less than
fourteen days’ notice in’ writing of his intention sé to do, cumplete the

“purchase of the goods by’ paying or tendering to the owner the -hire-

purchase price or’ the balance thereof as reduced by the rebate cal-
culated in the manner provided in sub-section (2)

. “4

(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section (1) . shall be equal
to two-thirds of an ‘amount which bears to the hire-purchase charges
the same. proportion 85. the balance of the hire-purchase:price not yet
due bears to. the hire-purchase price.

Explonation—In ‘this sub-section, “hire-purchase charges” means’ the
difference betweerithé hire:purchase price and the: cash price as stated
in ‘the hire-purchase agreement. ve :
हि (3). The provisions of, this section shali have effect notwithstand
ing anything to the contrary contained in the hire-purchase agreement,

-but where the terms of the agreement entitle the hirer to a rebate

higher than that allowed by this section. .the hirer shall be entitled to
the rehate provided by the agreement.

Passing
of pros
perty.

Right of
hirer to
purchase
at any
time
with
rebate,


Hight of
hirer to
terminate
agree-
ment

at any
time.

Right of
hirer to
appro-
priate
payments
in respect
of two

or more
agree-
ments.

Abe

158 Hire-Purchase [acr 26

10. (1) The hirer may, at any lime before the final payment under
the hire-purchase agreement falls due, and after giving the owner
not less than fourteen days’ notice in writing of his intention so to
do and re-delivering or tendering the goods to the owner, terminate
the hire-purchase agreement by payment or tender to the owner of
the amounts which have accrued due towards the hire-purchase price
and have not been, paid by him, including the sum, if any, which he
is liable to pay undes sub-section (2).

(2) Where the hirer terminates the agreement under sub-section
(J), and the agreement provides for the payment of a sum named on
account of such termination, the liability of the hirer to pay that sum
shall be subject to the following conditions, namely :—

(a) where the sum total of the amounts paid and the amounts
due in respect of the hire-purchase price immediately before the
termination exceeds one-half of the hive-purchase price, the hirer
shall not be liable to pay the sum so named;

(b) where the sum total of the amounts paid and the amounts
due in respect of the hire-purchase price immediately before the
termination does not exceed one-half of the hire-purchase price,
the hirer shall be liable to pay the difference between the said sum
total and the said one-half, or the sum named in the agreement,
whichever is less.

(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall relieve the hirer from any
liability for any hire which might have accrued due before the termi-
nation.

(4) Any provision in any agreement, whereby the right conferred
on a hirer by this section to terminate the hire-purchase agreement
is excluded or restricted, or whereby any liability in addition to the
liability imposed by this Act is imposed on a hirer by reason of the
termination of the hire-purchase agreement by him under this section,
shall be void.

(5) Nothing in this section shall prejudice any right. of a hirer to
terminate a hire-purchase agreement otherwise than by virtue of this
section. .

हा. A hirer who is liable to make payments in respect of two or
more hire-purchase agreements to the same owner shall, notwith-
standing any agreement to the contrary, be entitled, on making any
payment in respect of the agreement which is not sufficient to dis-
charge the total amount then due under all the agreements to appro-
priate the sum so paid by him in or towards the satisfaction of the
sum due under any one of the agreements, or in or towards the satis-
faction of the sums due under any two or more of the agreements in
such proportions as he thinks fit, and, if he fails to make any such
appropriation as aforesaid, the sum so paid shall. by virtue of this
section, stand appropriated towards the satisfaction of the sums due
under the respective hire-purchase agreements in the order in which
the agreements were entered into. | .


4s”

%!0R-1972)} 3.22 Hire-Parchase ce - 189

: 12.) The hirer may assign -hig right, title and interest.under the
hire-purchase agreement, with the.consent of the owner, or, if hjs con-
sent is unveasonably withheld, without his consent... : ‘

1. (2) Except‘as ‘otherwise provided in this sectioh, no payment or: other
~ gonsideration shall be ‘required by an owner for his’consent to an assign-
ment under sub-section (1), and #Here'an: ownerrequires any stich -pay-
-ment or, other consideration jor his consent, that consent shall be deemed
do be, unreasonably.. withheld. a teas fre utes

77. (3) Where ‘on ‘a request being made by'"a hirer! in this behalf the
ewner fails or refuses'to give his‘ con¥ent 1ए ‘in Assignment. under sub-
section {1} the hirer may apply to the court for an order declaring that
the consent of the‘ owner tothe assi¢riment has been unréasonably' witb-
held, and ‘where ‘suidti‘an ofdet i¥'made the consent 'shall*be deemed to be
““wmreasonably withher pS oR cab फय '

Wry

Explanation.—In, thi uub-section; “court? means a court which would
have jurisdiction to ent rtain a suit for the relief claimed in the applica-
tlon. दा Bene thei

foo + के whe rent 1 + 5
(4) As a condition:6£ granting such consent, the owner may stipulate
that all defaults under the hirg-purchase agreement shall be made good
and may require tile hirer ‘and the assignee td ‘execute atid adlivet to the
owner an assignment agreement, in'a form’ approved by the owner, Wwhere-
by, without affecting the continuing persona’ liability’ ¢f the hirer
in such respects, the assignee ees With the owner to bé personally
‘Habte’teé pay! the’ fAstainents of hire 'Hefaining- unpaid: and to perform
and observe all other stipulations and conditions of the hite-purchase
agreement during: the residue’ .of the.term thereof and: whereby the
-sassignee {ndemnifies, the hirer in, respect. nf such liabilities. +) -

ny (5) The tight!"titlé and‘ interést’ of e'hteer’ tmder a hireiparchnase

*"hareement shall be ‘cafiable ‘of pissing’ by''dferation of Jaw to the legal
representative of the hirer but nathing: in this sutesedtion: shall relieve
4he Tegal representative from: compliance: with: the-provisions of the hire-
purebase agreement. A

ork

Explenetion—In this sub-section, the expression “egal ‘representa-
tive” has the same meaning «is in clause (17) of section 2 of the Code of
Sotigoa , Civil Procedure, 1908.

nee ag

(6) The provisions.of this. section हि hal}, apply. notwithstanding any-

y» thing to the contrary contained in the hire-purchase agreement
+ १.0७ ३६ be

13, Subject toi the provisions of, this Act, a hire shall, be bound--
es dots oat
{a} to pay the hire in accordance with the agreement, and

. (b), otherwise, to comply, with the terms of, the agreement

14, yA 11181 the ‘absence 0// ‘Gonttaet Ss" 196 Contrary, LY

aot ved ceri ३ fe
t: 4» (a)yshalk be tbound. to: take: as much carejof the goods to which
the hire-purchase: agreement relates as a,man of ordinary, prudence
would, under, similar circumstances, take of his own goods of the
vsame, bul, quality and value; ae
wee de

25 Law—22

Assign-
anent and
transmis
sion of
birer's
right of
interest
under
hire-pur-
chase
agréé. '
ment,’

Obliga-
tions of
hirer to
comply
with
agrees
ment.

Obliga-
tion of
hirer in
respect
of care
to be

taken of
goods.


Obliga-
tlon of
hirer tu
reépect
of use of
goods.
Obtiga-
tion o¢
hirer to
give
intorma-
tion as

to where-
abouts of
goods,

Rights
ot hirer
in case of
seizure of
goods by
owner.

“46

160 Hire-Purchase [act 26

(8) shall not be résponsible ‘for the 1063, destruction ot deterio-
ration of the goods, if he has taken the amount of care thereof des-
cribed in clause (a).

(2) The hirer shall be liable to make compensation to the owner for
any damage caused by failure to take care of the goods in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (1).

15. If the hirer makes any use of the gouds to which the hire-purchase
agreement relates which is not according to the conditions ef the agree-
ment, the hirer shail be liable to make compensation to the owner for any
damage arising to the goods from or during such use.

16, (1) Where by virtue of a hire-purchase agreement a hirer is under
a duty to keep in his possession or control the goods to which the agree-
ment relates, the hirer shall, on receipt of a request in writing from the
owner, inform the owner where the goods are at the time when the in-
formation is given or, if it is sent by post, at the time of posting.

(2) If the hirer fails without reasonable cause to give the said infor-
mation within fourteen days of the receipt of the notice, he shall be
punishable with 196 which may extend to two hundred rupees.

Vi. (1) Where the owner seizes under clause (c) of section 19 the
goods let under a hire-purchase agreement, the hirer may recover from
the owner the amount, if any, by which the hire-purchase price falls
short of the aggregate of the following amounts, namely: —

(४) the amounts paid in respect of the hire-purchase price up to
the date of seizure;
{ii) the value of the goods on the date of seizure.

{2) For the purposes of this section, the valtie of any goods on the
date of seizure is the best price that can be reasonably obtained for the
goods by the owner on that date less the aggregate of the following
amounts, namely: —~

(४) the reasonable expenses incurred by the owner for seizing
the goods; ~

(# any amount reasonably expended by the owner on the
storage, repairs or maintenance of the goods:

(i) (whether or not the goods have subsequently been sold or

otherwise disposed of by the owner) the reasonable expenses of sell- *

ing or otherwise disposing of the goods; and ५ i

(iv) the amount spent by the owner for payment of arrears of
taxes and other dues which are payable in relation 10 the goods under
any law for the time being in force and which the hirer was liable to
pay. ‘

(3) If the owner fails to pay the amount due from him under the
provisions of this section or any portion of such amount, 10 the hirer
within a period of thirty days from the date notice for the payment of the
said amount is served on him by the hirer the owner shall be liable to
pay interest on such amount at the rate of twelve percent ver annum
from the date of expiry of the said reriod of thirty days.

: -

(4) Where the owner has sold the goods seized by him the onus of
proving that the price obtained by him for the goods was the best price
that could be reasonably obtained by him on the 4th date of seizure Shall

ry

lie upon him. -


AT

oF 191] Hive=Purchaie 161
CHAPTER V .
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF TIE OWNER

18. (1) Where a hirer makes more than one default in the payment of Rights
hire as provided In the hire-purchase agreement then, subject to the ptu- ofownet

visions of section 21 and after giving the hirer notice in writing of not foie

less than— . hire-purs
(i) one week, in a case where the hire is payable at weekly er aare

lesser intervals; and ment fot
default

(ii) two weeks, in any other case, . in pays

ihe owner shall be entitled to terminate the agreement by giving the mentot

hirer notice of termination in writing: ane athon

Provided that if the hirer pays or tenders to the owner the hire in Tiseg act

arrears together with such interest thereon as may be payable under the of express
terms of the agreement before the expiry of the said period of one week condi-
or, as the case may be, two weeks, the owner shall not he entitled to ter- tons,
minate the agreement.

2) Where a hirer—

{@) does any act with regard to the goods to which the agree-
ment relates which is inconsistent with any of the terms of the
., Agreement; or
(b) breaks an express condition which provides that, on the
breach thereof, the owner may terminate the agreement,

the owner shall, subject to the provisions of sectton 22, be entitled
to terminate the agreement by giving the hirer notice of termination in
writing.

“19, Where a hire-purchase agreement is terminated under this Act, rights
then the owner shall be entitled,— of owner

ter-
(a) to retain the hire which has already been paid and to recover paination.

the arreara of :hire due:

Providell that when such goods are seized by the owner, the re-
tention of hire and recovery of the arrears of hire due shal} be sub-
ject to the provisions of section 17;

- (b) subject to the conditions specified’ in clauses (a) and (b)
of sub-section (2) of section 10, to forfeit the initial deposit, if 80
provided in the agreement; a

(० subject to the provisions of section 17 and section 20 and
subject-to any contract to the contrary, to enter the premises of the
hirer and seize the goods;

(d) subject to the provisions of section 21 and section 22, to re-
cover possession of the goods by application under section 20 or by
sult;

(९) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2) of
section 14 and of section 15, to damages for non-delivery of the goods,
from the dgte on which termination ts effective, to the date on which
the goods sre delivered to or seized by the owner.



Restric-
tion on
owner's
right to

vecover:.

possene
sion of
goods,
other.
wise
than *
through
court.

Relief
against
termina-
tion for
aot-pay-

rant of |

hire.

48
162 ‘Hire-Purchase tacr 28

20. (1) Where goods have been Jet under a hire-purchase agreement
and the slatulory proportion of the*hire-purchase price has been paid,
whether in pursuance of the judgment of a court or otherwise, or
tendered by of on behalf of the hirer orlany surely, thé owner ‘ Shall
awoi enforce any right to recover possession of ‘tlie goods frdém the hirer
otherwise’ ‘than in accordance with 'sub-section' (3) ‘or by ‘suit.’

Explanation.—In this section, “statutory proportion” means,—

(i) one-half,“ whete the hire-purchase price is less than fifteen
thousand rupces; and

(ii) three-fourths, where the hire-purchase price is not'less than
fifteen thousand «rupees;

Provided that in the case of moter vehicles 85 defined in thé Motor
Vehicles -Act, 1939, “stalutory, proportion” shall mean,—

(i) one-half, where the bire-purchase price, is, less , than. five
thousand rupecs;

(ii) three-fourths, where the hire-purchase price is not less than
five thousand rupees but less than fifleen thousand rupees;

(iii) three fourths or such higher proportion not exceeding nine-
tenths as the Central Government may, by nolification in the OMicial
Gazette, specify, where the hire-purghase price is not less than fifteen
thousand -rupees,

(2) 16 the owner recovers possession of goods in contravention of the
Provisions: of sub-section (1), the’ hire-pyrchase' agreement, ‘if not pre-
viously terminated, shall terminate, ,and-~

(५) the hirer shall be released from all liability under,the agrev-
ment and ghall; be, entitled 1o.recover from the. owner all sums paid
by the hirer under the agreement or under any security given by
him in respect thereof; and

" (b)'the surety'shall' be “entitled to recover from thé” owntr all
sums paid by him under the contract of guarantee‘or ‘under any
security given, by,,him. in. respect, thereof,

(3) Where, by virtue of the provisions ‘of 'sub-section (1), the ‘owner
is precluded from enforcing a right to recover possession ofthe goods, he
may make. an,appligation for ,recevery of possession of :the goods to any
court having jurisdiction to entertain a.syit for: the. same: relief,

. (4), The provisions of this section shall-not apply in any ¢ase in which
the hirer, has terminated. the agreement. by..virtue of any right.vested in
him.

21, Where the owner, alter’ he has,lerminated the hire-purchase
agreement in accordance with ihe provisions of sub-section. -(/) of section
18, institutes a suit or makes an application. against the. hirer for the
recovery of the goods, and at the hi aring of the suit or application, the
hirer pays or tenders to the owner the lise in arresrs, together with
such interest thereon as may ‘be payable wnder the tcrms of’ thé agree;
ment and the costs of the suit or application incurred py the owner and
complies with such other conditions, if any, as the court. may think fit to
impose, the court may, in-lieu of making a decree or urder for, specific
delivery, pass an order relieving the hires against the termination; and
thereupon the hirer shall conti in possession -of the goods as if the
agreement had not been terminated.

4 91 1939.



“4

# for 1072} . Hire-Purchase 165

22. Where a hire-purchgse agreement has been terminated in accord-

ance willi the provisions of clause (a) or clause (6) of sub-section (2) of
section 18, no suit or application by the owner against the hirer for the
recovery of the guods shall lie unless and until the owner has served
on the hirer a notice in writing,—

(a) specifying the particular breach or act complained of; and

(6) if the breach or act is capable of remedy, requiring the hirer
to remedy it,

and the hirer fails, within a period of thirty days from the date of the
service of the notice, to remedy the breach or act if it is capable of
remedy.

i123. (2) It shall be the duty of the owner to supply, free of cost,

@ true copy of the hire-purchase agreement, signed by the owner,

payment has been made under the hire-purch.
the hirer, within fourteen days after the owne:

the duties imposed b
default continues,—

and, if the defay
,be punishable With fine which ma:

- 7 future instalment is to become payable,

(ay to the’ hirer, immediately after execution of the agreement;
and - bw

(b) where there is a contract of guarantee, to the surety, on de-

mand made at any time before the final payment has been made
under the agreement.

, (2) It shall also be the duty of the owner,

(a) the amount paid by or on behalf of the hirer;

(७) ithe amount which has become due under the agreement but

remains unpaid, and the date upon which each unpaid instalment he-
. came due, and:the amount of each such instalment; and

(०) the amount which is to become payable under the agreement,
and the date or the mode of determining the date upon which each

; and the amount of each such
, instalment, के पि

(3), Where there 15! failure without reasonable cause to carry out

y sub-section (2), or sub-section (2), then, while the

> (d)'the owner shall not be entitled to
‘against the hirer or taenforce any contrac!
_ hirer; and .
* (by no Security given by thé hiver in respect of money payable
under the agreement or given by a surety in respect of money pay-
able under such a contract of guarantee a:

a Ros 3 aforesaid shall be onforce-
able agalrist he hirer or the surety by any holder thereof,

continues for a period of two months,

Reliet
against
termina-
tion for
anautho-
rised

act or
breach of
express
condition.

Obliga-
tion of
owner to.
supply
copies
and
informa-
ton.


Dis~
charge
of. price
other-.
wise +
than by
payment
of
money,

whe
Insolvency
of hirer,
ete,

So
164 Hire-Purchase + . back 38
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS

24. Where an owner has agreed that any part of the hire-purchase price
may be discharged otherwise than by the payment of money, any such
discharge shall, for the purposes of section 10, section 11, settion 17, section
20 and section 23, be deemed to be a payment of that part of the hire-pur-
chase price.

» 25. (7) Where, during the continuance of the hire-putchase agreement,
the hirer is adjudged insolvent under any law with respect’ to insolvency

*’ for the time being in force, the Officia], Receiver or where the hirer is a

1 company, then in the event of the company being wound up, the Lliqui

Sueces~
sive hire-
purchase
agree-
ments
between
same
parties,

Evi-
dence of
adverse
deten-
tion in
suit or
appli-
cation to
recover
posses-
sion of
goods.

dator, shall have, in respect of the goods which are in the possession of
the hirer under‘the agreement, the'same rights and obligations as the
hirer had in relation’ thereto.

(2) The Oficial Receiver or the liquidator, as the case may be, may,
with the permission of the Insolvency Court or the court’ in which the
windizg' up proceedings are pending, assign the rights ofthe hirer under
the agreement, to any other person, and: the assignee shall have al) the
rights and be subject to all the obligations of the hirer under the agree-
ment.

Explanation.—In this section, “Official Receiver” means an Official Re-
ceiver appointed, under the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, and includes
any person holding, a similar..office under any other'law with respect to
insolvency for the time being in force.

26, Where goous nave been Jet under a hire-purchase agreement, and
at any time thereafter the owner makes a subsequent hire-purchase agree-
ment with the hirer, whether relating exclusively to other goods or to
other goods together. with the goods'to which the first agreement relates,
any such subsequent hire-purchase agreement shall not have effect in so
far as it affects prejudicially any. right which the hirer wauld have had
by virtue of Section 20 under the first agreement, if such. subsequent hire-
purchase agreement had not been made.

21. (1) Where, in a suit or application by an owner of goods which
have been 1९६ under a hire-purchase agreement, to enforce a right: to re-
cover possession of the goods from the’ hirer, the owner proves that, be.
fore the commencement of the suit or application and after the right to
recover possession of the goods accrued, the owner made a request in
writing to the hirer to-surrender the goods, the hirer’s ‘possession of the
goods shall, for.the purpose ‘of ‘the owner's claim to recover possession
thereof, be deemed to be adverse to the owner.

(2) Nothing in this section shall affect a claim for dainayes for couver-
sion.

Sof 1926.


Sk

or 1972) Hire-Purchase है 165

28. If, during ‘the subsistence of any restriction to which the enforce-
ment by an owner of a right to recover possession of goods from a hirer
is subject by virtue of this Act, the hirer refuses to give up possession of
the goods to the owner, the hirer shall not, by ccason only of such refusal
be liable to the owner for conversion of the goods.

29. Any notice required or authorised to be served on or given to an
owner or a hirer under this Act may be so served or given-—

(a) by delivering it to him personally; or

(b) by sending it by post to him at his last known place of resi-
dence or business.

, भी, Where the Central, Government is satisfied that having regard to—
(a) the short supply.of any goods or: class of goods, or

(9) the use or intended use of any goods or class of goods and the
persons by whom such goods or class ते goods are used or intended to
be used, or

(c) the restrictions imposed upon the trade or commerce in any
goods or class of goods, or

(९) any other circumstances in relation to any goods or class of
goods,

it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that clause
हु)! of sub-seétion ‘(2) of sectioi' 6, kectiot! 9, Section 10,-sectién 12. and
+ section 17 or any of them shall not apply or shall apply with such modifi-
cations as may be specified in the notification, to hire-purchase agreements

1 yelating ‘to 'guéf’ goods'or class ‘of goods.’ ea

-31, This Act shall not apply in relation to any, hire-purchase agree-
+ ment made before the commencement of this Actewousuid °° ‘

Sfirer’s
refusal
10 sure
render

b gods

not te be
conversion
in cer-
tain

cases,

Service
of notice.

Power
10 ex-
empt
from pro-
visions
of 5९९-
tions 6, 9,
10, 12
and 17

in cer-
tain
cases.

Act not
to apply
10 exist.
ing
apret-
ments, *