  
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
One Hundred Sixty Ninth Report 
ON 
Amendment of Army, Navy and Air Force Acts 
April 1999

Justice 
B.P. JEEVAN REEDY 
Chairman, Law Commission of India 
Law Commissiosn of India, 
Shastri Bhawan, New Dethi-110 001 
Tel. : 3384475 
Residence: 
1, Janpath 
New Dethi- 110 001 
Tel. : 3019485 
D.O. No. 6(3)(58)/99-LC(LS) dated : 3-5-1999 
Dear Shri Kumarmangatam, 
| am forwarding herewith the 169th report on "Amendment of Army, Navy and Air Force Acts.” 
2. The subject was taken up suo motu in view of the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Lt. Col. Prithi 
Pal Singh V. Union of India, 1982(3) SCC 140 underlining a glaring deficiency in the Army Act 177 absence of the 
remedy of appeal against the orders of courts martial, and the desirability of recording reasons by courts martial in 
support of their conclusions and orders. The Court in this case has also reviewed the developments in other coun- 
tries such as UK. and U.S.A. while making its recommendations. 
3. The idea underlying the report is that while maintaining the discipline in the Armed Forces, the dignity of the 
individual must be respected. It is necessary to ensure that Armed Forces are not deprived of the services of the 
bright and courageous young men of the society on account of inadequate machinery for getting justice in the 
Armed Forces, or for fear of being punished for no wrong done by them or for imposition of disproportionate punish- 
ment for an offence. Effective justice system needs to be evolved to safeguard interests of officers in the military 
with due regard to higher standards of conduct and discipline in the Armed Forces. Justice and discipline should go 
together. . 
4. ln. as much as no action has been taken by Parliament so far in pursuance of judgement of Prithi Pal Singh's 
case the Law Commission considered it appropriate to undertake review of the existing laws on the subject. 
5. The Law Commission had extensive discussions with the retired as well as serving officers of the three Armed 
Forces before finalising its conclusions. 
6. The recommendatiaons in this report Seek to meet the deficiencies pointed out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court 
in its decisions on the subject by suggesting measures for expeditious disposal of appeals against the orders of 
courts martial. The report also recommends certain measures for prompt redressal of grievances relating to condi- 
tions of service of the mambers of the Armed Forces. 
With regards, 
Yours Sincerely, 
(B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
Shri P. Kumarmangalam, 
Minister for Law, Justice & 
Company Affairs, 
Shastri Bhavan, 
New Delhi

Chapter | 
Chapter II 
Chapter II! 
Chapter !V 
Chapter V 
Chapter VI 
Chapter VII 
INDEX 
Contents 
Introduction 
Indian Military Law—it's Origin and Extent 
Observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India 
Relevant Statutory Provisions 
How the Objectives can be Attained 
Other Conclusions 
Recommendations 
Notes and References 
Page No. 
2-3 
4-5 
6-7 
9-11 
12-13 
14

  
Chapter | 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Objective:—The idea underlying this report, 
taken up -ve wo/y, is that while maintaing the 
discipline in the Armed Forces, the dignity of the 
individual must be respected. It is necessary to ensure 
ihat Armed Forces are not deprived of ihe services 
of the cream of the society and that the bright and 
courageous among them do not keep out on account 
of inadquate machinery for getting justice in the Armed 
Forces, or for fear of being punished for no wrong 
done by them. It is equally necessary to ensure that 
punishment is not disproportionate to the offence and 
also to make the military law more humane and 
dynamic to bring it in tune with the culture in the armed 
forces of the developed countries. tt should be 
remembered that a soldier's life is not a comfortable 
one. Most of the time he is away from his family. It is 
the sense of pride and sacrifice in the cause of 
country's defence that sustains him. It would not be 
proper to deny him justice which is available to other 
citizens of the country. It must also be remembered 
that military discipline cannot be based only upon 
domination and implicit obedience to the orders of 
the superiors. The superiors must continuously 
demonstrate their competence and technical ability 
in order to command respect and loyalty of those 
under them. Keeping this in mind, many democratic 
nations have felt it necessary to rewrite their military 
laws to provide greater protection against arbitrary 
action. It is not correct to say that in as much as the 
numiber of persons affected by military flaw and the 
courts martial are smail or because the members of 
the Armed Forces have voluntarily submitted 
themselves to the existing system with all its defects, 
no reform of the jaw is catled for. It should not be 
forgotten that military justice system is evolved to 
enforce certain standards of behaviour, some of which 
are identical to standards enforced in civilian life. The 
higher standards of conduct and discipline in the 
Armed Forces are called for not only to keep in 
readiness an efficient fighting machine but also to 
command public respect for the Armed Forces. 
Justice and discipline should go together. 
1.2 It should also be borne in mind that even today 
interference by High Court and Supreme Court with the 
decisions and findings of courts martial are not totalty 
excluded. instead of each High Court adopting its own 
approach in these matters. it would be desirable, and it 
would be conducive to better disciptine, if a single 
appellate tribunal is created to hear the appeals against 
the findings, decisions and orders of the courts martial 
under all the three enactments. The Army Act and the 
Air Force Act were enacted in 1949-50 and are based 
mostly upon the British Acts. While the law in the United 
Kingdom has made several advances as indicated 
hereinbefore, the military law in India has remained more 
or less rooted in the past. This report is an attempt to 
rectify the situation in certain respects.

Chapter | 
INDIAN MILITARY LAW—ITS ORIGIN AND EXTENT 
(i) Introductory 
2.1 Origin of the indian Army:—The origin of Indian 
Military Law is succintly described in the Manual of 
Military Law 1. The Indian Army sprang from very small 
' beginnings. Guards were enrolled for the protection of 
the factories or trading posts which were establinsed 
by the East India company at Surat, Masulipatam, 
Armagon, Madras, Hooghly and Balasore in the first half 
of the seventeenth century. These guards were at first 
intended to add to the dignity of the Chief Officials as 
much as for a defensive purpose, and in some cases 
special restrictions were even Dlaced by treaty on their 
strength, so as to prevent their acquiring any military 
importance. Gradually, however, the organisation of 
these guards was improved and from them sprang the 
East Indian Company's European and Indian troops. 
Both these steadily increased in numbers, until in 1857, 
it numbered (including local forces and contigents, and 
a body of 38,000 military police) no less than 311038 
officers and men (Imperial Gazetter of India, 1907, Vol. 
IV (Ch. XI). 
2.2 E.L., Company's Mutiny Act:—-Statutory provision 
was first made for the discipline of the East India 
Company's troops by an Act (27 Geo Il, Cap 9) passed 
in 1754 for "Punishing Mutiny and Desertion of officers 
and soliders in the service of the United Company of 
Merchants of England trading to the East Indies, and 
for the punishment of offences committed in the East- 
indies, or at the Island of Saint Helena". Section 8 of 
this Act empowered the Crown to make Articles of War 
for the government of these troops, and such articles 
were accordingly made and published. The terms of 
the Act were wide enough to cover both European and 
Indian troops, but the language of the articles 
themselves showed that they were originally intended 
for Europeans only. In the absence of any other code, 
however, the Government of Bengal, Madras and 
Bombay seem to have applied these articles, with such 
modifications and omissions as appeared necessary, 
to the bodies of Indian troops maintained by them, of 
which the present Indian Army is the descendant. In 
1813, owing to doubts having arisen as to the legal 
validity of the existing arrangements for the discipline 
of the Indian troops, provisions were inserted in the Act 
(53 Geo lit, Cap 155 ss 96 and 97) which was passed 
in that year to extend the Company's privileges for a 
further term, which legalised the existing system and 
gave power to each of the Governments of Fort William, 
Fort Saint George and Bombay to make laws, 
regulations, and Articles of War for the government of 
all Indian officers and soldiers in their respective 
services. It was further provided in 1824 (4 Geo Iv, Cap 
81,5 63), that such legislation should apply to the Indian 
troops of each presidency, wherever serving, and 
whether within or beyond His Majesty's dominions. 
2.3 Each Presidency Frames its own code :—Under 
the statutory sanction of these two enactments a military 
code was framed by the government of each presidency 
and put in force as regards its own troops. These codes 
still followed to a great extent the Articles of War then 
applicable to the Company's Europeans, but the only 
punishments awardable to Indian officers seem to have 
been death, dismissal, suspension and reprimand and 
to Indian soliders, death and corporal punishment. 
Transportation and imprisonment were not awardable. 
(ii) The Articles of War 
2.4 Government of India Act, 1833, and the "Articles 
of War" :— By section 73 of the Government of India 
Act, 1833 (3 and 4 Will. IV, Cap 85) the power to legislate 
for the whole Indian Army was restricted to the Governor 
General of Council and laws so made were given 
general application to all Indian Officers and soldiers 
wherever serving. Under the powers conferred upon it 
by the Act of 1833 the indian Legislature, for the first 
time, provided a common code for the Indian officers 
and soldiers in 1845, “Articles of War" being enacted 
for them by the Governor General in Council as Act XX 
of that year. This Act was shortly afater repealed and 
replaced by Act XIX of 1847 which, having been 
frequently amended (Acts of Governor General in 
Council VI of 1850, XXXVI of 1850, il! of 1854, X of 
1856, VII] of 1857, XXII of 1857, and VI of 1860 in the 
intervening period) was in turn repealed by Act XXXIX 
of 1861. This was repealed by Act V of 1869 (“The Indian 
Articles of War") which replaced it. The preamble to this 
Act indicates that for the first time recognition was 
granted to the existence of what are commonly known

as "followers" and Act V was equally made applicable 
to them. 
2.5 Amendment of “Articles” in 1894 .—The 
amalgamaticn of the three armies maintained by ithe 
Presidencies into one in 1895 necessitated considerabie 
amendments in the "Indian Articles of War". These 
amendments were effected by Act XI of 1894 and 
the Indian Articles of War, as altered by this Act, and 
by various minor amendig Acts, (Acts of Governor- 
General in Council, Xil of 1891, | of 1900, | of 1901, 
1X of 1901, Xill of 1904, and V of 1905) furnished the 
Statutory basis of the Indian Military code until 1911. 
As time went on, however, and the Indian Army began 
to take its share in the imperial responsibilities of the 
British Army, it was found that an Act originally framed 
for three separate local forces, each serving as a rule 
in its own Presidency, failed to provide adequately 
for the discipline and administration of that army under 
modern conditions. Owing also to the mass of 
amendments super-imposed on the original articles, 
these were often difficult to understand and sometimes 
even self-contradictory. 
2.6 The Indian Army Act, 1911 :—The amendment of 
the Indian Articles of War was, therefore, again taken 
up in 1908, but the consideration then given to the 
subject showed that a new consolidating and amending 
Act wouid be necessary, any further amendment of the 
articles of 1869 being only likely to accentuate the 
existing confusion. Accordingly, Indian Army Act, 
consolidating the existing law as to the Indian Army into 
one simple and comprehensive enactment and adding 
such provisions as experience had shown to be 
necessary, was passed into law in March, 1911 and 
came into force on 1st January. 1912. All previous Acts 
dealing with the subject were repeated by section 127 
of the said Act. Amendments were subsequently made 
to this Act by various amending Acts. (Acts of Governor- 
General in Council, XV of 1914, X of 1917, X! of 1918, 
XVI of 1949, H of 1920, XXXVII of 1920, XXXIII of 1923, 
VIII of 1930, XXXIII of 1934 and VII of 1935). 
2.7 The indian Army (Suspension of Sentences) Act, 
1920 :—During the 1914-18 was temporary Acts (Acts 
of Governor General in Council IV of 1917 and XVII of 
1918) were passed to provide for the suspension of 
sentences. These measures were found to be beneficial 
and on 23rd March, 1920 a permanent Act to provide 
for the suspension of sentences of imprisonment or 
iransportation passed by courts martial on persons 
subject to the Indian Army Act, which repealed the 
temporary Acts, came into force. This Act which is 
known as the “Indian Army (Suspension of Sentences) 
Act" (Act of Governor General in Council XX of 1920) 
was to be read as one with the indian Army Act. 
2.8 Army Act, 1950 :—The need for a general revision 
of the Indian Army Act, 1911 was feit for some time 
prior to 1947. Some of the provisions of the said Act 
had become out of date and insufficient for modern 
requirements: but after 15 August 1947, the need for 
revision became imperative for obvious reasons. A Bill 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the 
government of the reguiar Army was, therefore, 
introduced in the Constituent Assembly of India on 21 
December, 1949. This was passed into law by the 
Paniiament on 20th May, 1950 as Army Act (Act XLVI of 
1950) and came into force on 22nd July, 1950. 
Amendments subsequently made by the amending Acts 
are Acts XIX of 1955, XXXVI of 1957, adaapted by 3 
ALO 1956. 
2.9 Ruies and other “subordinate legislation" :—The 
present military code of Army is thus contained in the 
Army Act, 1950 and certain rules and other matters 
which latter, being made in pursuance of the Army Act 
by authorities therein empowered to do so, have the 
force of jaw. Examples of this latter class of "subordinate 
legislation” are the Army Rules, 1954 framed by the 
Central Government under Section 191 of the Army Act, 
and those as to “Summary and Minor punishments" 
contained in para 443 of the Regulations for the Army, 
1962 which derive their statutory force from orders 
issued by the COAS with the consent of the Central 
Government in pursuance of AA.s.82.

Chapter Ill 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
3.1 Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh's case :—As far back as 
1982, the Supreme Court had, in its decision in Lt. Col. 
Prithi Pal Singh v. union of India’ pointed out a glaring 
deficiency in the Army Act ‘1’, absence of the remedy 
of appeal against the orders of courts martial. The court 
also pointed out the changes brought about in recent 
decades on this subject both in U.K. and U.S.A. and 
observed that Parliament should bring about similar 
legislation consistent with the changed value system. 
They also pointed out the desirability of recording 
reasons by the court martial in support of their 
conclusions and orders. it would be appropriate to notice 
the relevant observations of the Supreme Court in 
paragraphs 44 and 45 of the said judgment :— 
"Reluctance of the apex court more concerned with 
civil law to interfere with the internai affairs of the 
Army is likely to create a distorted picture in the minds 
of the military personnel that persons subject to Army 
Act are not citizens of india. It is one of the cardinal 
feature of our Constitution that a person by enlisting 
in or entering Armed Forces does not cease to be a 
citizen so as to wholly deprive him of his rights under 
the Constitution. More so when this court held in Sunil 
Batra v. Delhi Administration (1979) 1SCR 392, 
495 that even prisoners deprived of personal liberty 
are not wholly denuded of their fundamental rights. 
in the larger interest of national security and military 
discipline, Parliament in its wisdom may restrict or 
abrogate such rights in their application to the Armed 
Forces but this process should not be carried so far 
as to create aclass of citizens not entitled to the 
benefits of the liberal spirit of Constitution. Persons 
subect to Army Act are citizens of this ancient land 
having a feeling of belonging to the civilised 
community governed by the Siberty-oriented 
Constituion. Personal liberty makes for the worth of 
human being and is a cherished and prized right. 
Deprivation thereof must be preceded by an enquiry 
ensuring fair, just and reasonable procedure and trial 
by a judge of unquestioned integrity and wholly 
unbiased. ...Absence of even one appeal with 
power to review evidence, legal formulation, 
conclusion and adequacy or otherwise of 
punishment is a glaring lacuna in a country where 
a counterpart civilian convict can prefer appeal after 
appeal to hierarcy of courts. Submission that full 
review of finding and/or sentence in confirmation 
proceeding under section 153 is provided for is 
poor solace. A hierarchy of courts with appellate 
powers each having its own power of judicial review 
has of course been found to be counter-productive 
but the converse is equally distressing in that there 
is not even a single judicial review. With the 
expanding horizons of fair piay in action even in 
administrative decision, the universal declaration of 
human rights and retributive justice being relegated 
to the uncivilised days, a time has come when a 
step is required to be taken for at least one review 
and it must truly be a judicial review as and by 
way of appeal to a body composed of non-nilitary 
personnel or civil personnel. Army is always on 
alert for repelling external aggression and 
suppressing internal disorder so that the peace-loving 
citizens enjoy a social order based on rule of law; 
the same cannot be denied to the protectors of this 
order. And it must be realised that an appeal from 
Ceaser to Ceaser's wife—confirmation proceeding 
under section 153—has been condemned as 
injudicious and merely a lip sympathy to form. The 
core question is whether at least there should be 
one appeal to a body composed of non-military 
personnel and who would enjoy the right of 
judicial review both on law and facts as also 
determine the adequacy of punishment being 
commensurate with the gravity of the offence 
charged. Judicial approach by people well-versed in 
objective analysis of evidence trained by experience 
to look at facts and law objectively, fair play and 
justice cannot always be sacrificed at the altar of 
military discipline. Unjust decision would be 
subversive of discipline. There must be a 
judicious admixture of both. And nothing 
revolutionary is being suggested. Our Army Act was 
more or less modelled on the U.K. Act. Three decades 
of its working with winds of change blowing over the 
world necessitates a second look So as to bring it in 
conformity with liberty-oriented constitution and rule 
of law which is the uniting and integrating force in 
our political society. Even U.K. has taken a step of 
far reaching importance for rehabilitating the 
confidence of the Royal Forces in respect of judicial 
review of decisions of court martial. U.K. had enacted 
a Court Martial (Appeals) Act of 1951 and it has 
been extensively amended in Court Martial 
(Appeals) Act, 1968. Merely providing an appeal by

  
itself may not be very reassuring but the personnel 
of the appellate court must inspire confidence. The 
court martial appellate court consists of the ex-officio 
and ordinary judges of the Court of Appeal, .such of 
the judges of the Queen's Bench Division as the Lord 
Chief Justice may nominate after consultation with 
the Master of the Rolls, such of the Lords, 
commissioners of Justiciary in Scotland as the Lord 
Chief Justice generally may nominate, such Judges 
of the Supreme Court of the Northern Ireland as the 
Lord Chief Justice of the Northern Ireland may 
nominate and such of the persons of legal experience 
as the Lord Chancellor may appoint. The cour martial 
appellate court has power to determine any question 
necessary to be determined in order to do justice in 
the case before the court and may authorise a new 
trial where the conviction is quashed in the light of 
fresh evidence. The court also has power inter alia, 
to order production of documents of exhibits 
connected with the proceedings, order the attendance 
of witnesses, receive evidence, obtain reports and 
the like from the members of the court martial or the 
persons who acted as Judge-Advocate, order a 
reference of any question to a Special Commissioner 
for Enquiry and appoint a person with special expert 
knowledge to act as an assessor (Halasbury's Laws 
of England, 4th Edn., paras 954-55, pp 458-459). 
Frankly the appellate court has power of full judicial 
review unhampered by any procedural claptrap. 
Turning towards the U.S.A., a reference to Uniform 
Code of Military Justice Act, 1950, would be 
instructive. A provision has been made for setting up 
of a court of militry appeals. The Act contained many 
procedural reforms and due process safeguards not 
then guaranteed in civil courts. To cite one example, 
the right to legally qualified counsel was made 
mandatory in general court martial cases 13 years 
before the decision of the Supreme Coun in Gideon 
v. Wainwright (372 US 335 (1963). Between 1950 
and 1968 when the Administration of Justice Act, 
1968 was introduced, many advances were made in 
the administration of justice by civil courts but they 
were not reflected in military court proceedings. To 
correct these deficiencies the Congress enacted 
Military Justice Act, 1968, the salient features of which 
are: (1) a right to legally qualified counse! guaranteed 
to an accused before any special court martial; (2) a 
military judge can in certain circumstances conduct 
the trial alone and the accused in such a situation is 
given the option after learing the identity of the military 
judge of requesting for the trial by the judge alone. A 
ban has been imposed on command interference with 
military justice, etc. Ours is still an antiquated 
system. The wind of change blowing over the 
county has not permeated the close and 
sacrosanct precincts of the Army. If in civil courts 
the universally accepted dictum is that justice must 
not only be done but it must seem to be done, the 
same holds good with all the greater vigour in case 
of court martial where the judge and the accused 
done the same dress, have the same mental 
discipline, have a strong hierarchical subjugation and 
a feeling of bias in such circumstances is 
irremovable". 
(emphasis supplied) 
The Supreme Court concluded with the following 
observations :— 
"We, therefore, hope and believe that the 
changes all over the English-speaking 
democracies will awaken our Parliament to the 
changed value system. In this behalf, we would 
like to draw pointed attention of the 
Government to the glazing anomaly that courts 
martial do not even write a brief reasoned order 
in support of their conclusion, even in cases 
in which they impose the death sentence. This 
must be remedied in order to ensure that a 
disciplined and dedicated Indian Army may not 
nurse a grievance that the substance of justice 
and fair play is denied to it." 
(emphasis supplied) 
3.2 S.N. Mukherjee's case :—In 1990, a Constitution 
Bench of the Supreme Court, in S.N. Mukherjee v. 
Union of India? while emphasising the undeniable 
desirability of the recording of reasons as a principle of 
natural justice, held that the same cannot be insisted 
upon in the proceedings taken under the Army Act. The 
court pointed out that the Army Act and the rules made 
thereunder provided for recording of reasons only in 
two situations and in no other situation. The two 
situations in which reasons are required to be recorded 
are—(a) where the court martial makes a 
recommendation of mercy and (b) where the 
proceedings of the summary court martial are set 
aside or the sentence imposed by it is reduced. The 
court held further that; 
“reasons are not required to be recarded for an order 
passed by the confirming authority confirming the 
findings and sentence recorded by the court martial 
as well as for the order passed by the Central 
Government dismissing the post-confirmation 
petition”.

Chapter IV 
RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
41 in the year 1992, Parliament enacted the Army 
(Amendment) Act, 1992, being Act No. 37 of 1992. 
Several provisions of the Army Act were amended but 
nd provisions were made as recommended by the 
Supreme Court in Prithi Pal Singh. However, under 
SRO 17E dated December 6, 1993, sub-rule (7) or rule 
§2 of the Army Rules was amended obliging the tribunal 
to give brief reasons in support of its decision. The 
amendment reads :— 
"(1) The finding on every charge upon which the 
accused is arraigned shall be recorded and, except 
as provided in these rules, shall be recorded as 
finding as 'Guilty* or of ‘Not Guilty’. After recording 
the finding on each charge, the court shall give brief 
reasons in support thereof. The judge advacate or, if 
there is none, the presiding officer shall record or 
cause to be recorded such brief reasons in the 
proceedings. The above record shail be signed and 
dated by the presiding officer and the judge advocate, 
if any.” 
4.2 Inexplicably, similar armnendment has not been 
effected in respect of courts martial under the Navy and 
Air Force Acts. 
4.3 Need for taking up the subject suo motu -—in 
as much as no action has been taken on Parliament so 
far as recommended by the Supreme Court in Prithi 
Pal Singh, where the developments in other countries 
such as in U.K. and U.S.A. had aiso been taken into 
consideration, the Law Commission has considered it 
appropriate to undertake review of the existing laws on 
the subject suo motu. 
4.4 Brief survey. of the Army Act, 1950 -—The Army 
Act, enacted in the year 1950, contains as many as 
16 chapters. Chapter VI sets out the various offences 
and chapter VII sets out the punishments. We are, 
however, concerned only with the provisions 
contained in chapters X, X{ and Xi} which deal with 
courts martial, procedure of courts martial and 
confirmation and revision, respectively. Chapter X 
comprises sections 108 to 127. Section 108 provides 
for four kinds of courts-martial, namely, genera! 
courts-martial, districts courts-martial, summary 
genera] courts-martial and summary courts-martial. 
The other provisions in the chapter provide for 
convening of the various kinds of courts martial, their 
powers and other incidental matters. 
4.4.1 Chapier Xt comprises sections 128 to 152. As 
the itle of the chapter itself indicates, these sections 
prescribe the procedure to bs followed by court martial 
4.42 Chapter Xil comprising sections 153 to 165, 
provides for confirmation and revision of the orders of 
court martial. Section 153 says that no finding or 
sentence of a general, district or summary general 
court-martial shal! be valid except so far as it may be 
confirmed as provided by Act. (The finding and sentence 
of a summary court martial, however, is not required to 
be confirmed and it can be carried out forthwith as 
provided in section 161. Of course, the very section 
provides an exception to the said rule yz, if the officer 
hoiding the trial is of less than five years service, he 
shail not, except on active service, carry into effect any 
sentence until it has received the approval of an officer 
commanding not less than a brigade.) Section 160 
provides for revision of a finding or sentence recorded 
by the court-martial. it says " any finding or sentence of 
a court martial which requires confirmation may be once 
revised by order of the confirming authority and on such 
revisions, the Court if so directed by the confirming 
authority, may take additional evidence.” Section 163 
provides that even where the finding of guilty by a court 
martial has been confirmed or where such a finding does 
not require confirmation, is found for any reason to be 
invalied or not supported by evidence, the authority 
competent to commute the punishment undersection 
179 may substitute a new finding and pass a sentence 
for the offence specified or involved in such finding. 
Section 164 provides for confirmation and the remedy 
for the persons against whorn a finding or sentence of 
the court martial has been confirmed. It would be 
appropriate to reproduce section 164 in its entirety - 
"164. Remedy, against order, finding or sentence 
of court-martial :-—(1) Any person subject to this Act 
who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed 
by any court-martial may present a petition to the 
officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding 
or sentence of such court-martial, and the confirming 
authority may take such steps as may be considered 
necessary to satisfy itself as to the correctness, 
legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the

regularity of any proceeding to which the order 
relates. 
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers 
himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any 
court-martial which has been confirmed, may present 
a petition to the Central Government, the Chief of 
the Army Staff or any prescribed officer superior in 
command to the one who confirmed such finding or 
sentence, and the Central Government, the Chief of 
the Army Staff or other officer, as the case may be, 
may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.” 
4.4.3 Section 165 empowers the Central Government, 
the Chief of the Army Staff or any prescribed officer to 
annual the proceedings of any court martial on the 
ground that they are illegal or unjust. 
4.5 No existing right of appeal against the order 
of the courts matial :—It is thus evident that in the 
case of a final finding or sentence awarded by the 
ganeral courts martial, district courts martial and 
summary general courts martial, the only remedy 
provided to the accused persons is the one provided 
in sub-section (2) of section 164 as pointed out by 
the Supreme Court in S.N. Mukherjee's case. (The 
opportunity to make a representation to the confirming 
authority before confirmation is not a remedy but only 
an opportunity to make a representation before the 
final order is passed). The said remedy under section 
164(2) can be invoked only after the finding of the 
sentence has been confirmed by the confirming 
authority and not before the confirmation of the 
same. The power or revision and the power to alter 
the finding or sentence in certain cases or for that 
matter the power to annual the proceedings provided 
by sections 160, 163 and 165 are not so much the 
remedies given to the accused persons but are really 
the powers of the various specified authorties. In sum, 
there is no right of appeal against the order of the 
court martial (/-, where it has been confirmed as 
required by law or where it does not require such 
confirmation, as the case may be), or against an 
orader passed under sub-section (2) of sectio 164, 
with which the accused is aggrieved. 
4.6 Differences in the procedures in the Navy Act 
and the Anny Act :—Pausing here, we may point out 
that the procedure provided by the Navy Act, 1957, in 
this behalf is different from that under the Army Act in 
certain respects. The differences between the two 
are :— 
(a) The Navy Act does not require confirmation of the 
sentence or order recorded by the courts martial 
as is required by the Army Act. The only exception 
is where a sentence of imprisonment is awarded to 
an officer-in which case the sentence pronounced 
by the court martial cannot be implemented until 
the same has been communicated to the Chief of 
Naval Staff, who is entitled to pass such orders 
thereon as he may think fit. The sentence or order 
shall be implemented subject to such directions as 
he may make. It is the responsibility of the convening 
authority to take necessary steps to give effect to 
the sentence (Regulation 194 of the Regulations 
for the Navy Part-il). 
(b) The Navy Act provides for judicial review of the 
proceddings of trials held by court martial. The 
power of judicial review is vested in the Judge 
Advocate General which power can be exercised 
either suo motu or on an application made by the 
aggrieved person. It is open to the Judge Advocate 
General to afford an opportunity of persona! hearing 
to the convict if the circumstance of the case so 
cail for. The convict can be heard either in persons 
or through an advocate or an officer of the Indian 
Navy. The Judge Advocate General then makes a 
report to the Chief of Nava! Staff for such orders 
thereon as the latter may think fit. (Section 160). 
Section 161 of the Navy Act provides that in all 
cases of capital sentence and in all cases where 
the courts martial is ordered by the President, the 
Chief of Naval Staff shall send the matter with his 
recommendations to the Central Government. In 
other cases, the discretion lies with him to send such 
a report to the Central Government or not. 
(c) According to sub-section (2) of section 161, an order 
of acquittal made by the courts martial cannot be 
interfered with or set aside either by the Judge 
Advocate General or the Chief of the Naval Staff. 
(d) Section 162 provides that it is open to a person 
aggrieved with the finding or sentence of any court 
martial to present a petition to the Central 
Govemment or the Chief of Naval Staff. This remedy 
is in addition to the remedy of filing an application 
before the Judge Advocate General provided by 
section 160. Section 163 provides that on such 
petition being filled the Central Government or the 
Chief of Naval Staff may make any of the orders 
specified therein except on order to enhance the 
sentence.

Chapter V 
HOW THE OBJECTIVES CAN BE ATTAINED 
5.1 Conclusions regarding appeals against the fina! 
orders passed by the courts martial :—The Law 
Commission is of the opinion that in order to achieve 
the objectives discussed in the Chapter | -— 
It is necessary to provide an appropriate appellate 
forum to enterin appeals against the final orders 
passed by the courts maratial. As explained 
hereinabove, while the Army and Air Force Acts 
provide for confirmation of the sentence or finding 
made by the courts martial (except the summary 
courts martial), the Navy Act does not provide for 
any such confirmation. In this connection, we are also 
of the opinion that it is not necessary fo compel every 
aggrieved person to necessarily adopt the procedure 
prescribed by sub-section (2) of section 164 of the 
Army Act-or for that matter corresponding provision 
of the Air Force Act, 1950. An appeal should be 
available against the final order (sentence or finding) 
of court martial. Indeed in view of the Tribunal 
proposed herein, sub-section (2) of the Section 164 
and the corresponding provision in the Air Force Act 
may as weil be deleted. Even the provisions relating 
to judicial review by Judge-Advocate General in the 
Navy Act can also be deleted. 
5.1.1. The appellate tribunal, in our opinion, should not 
be a totally civilian appellate tribunal as has been 
provided in the United Kingdom since it may not be 
conducive to the discipline of the Armed Forces. We 
think it more appropriate to create a tribunal headed by 
a civilian judge whose other members shall be drawn 
from the retired members of the Armed Forces, and, 
from among those who have acted as or worked in the 
Judge Advocate General's department. To be precise, 
it shall be a three-member tribunal consisting of (1) a 
retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief 
Justice of High Court who shall be the Chairman for a 
term of 4 years, (2) a retired officer of the Army of the 
rank of Major General or above, or a retired officer of 
the Air Force of the rank of Air Vice Marshal or a retired 
officer of the Navy of the rank of Rear Admiral, and (3) 
a retired Judge Advocate General of the Army/Air Force/ 
Navy. 
The term of the-President and members shall be four 
years. However, if an appeal is preferred by a person 
holding a rank higher than the rank held by the person 
appointed as member at the time of his retirement from 
category 2 above, the President of the Tribunal will write 
to the’ Central Government to nominate a retired officer 
for the case as a member of the Tribunal, who shail be 
of a rank not lower than that of the person who has 
preferred an appeal, in place of the member from 
category 2. 
5.1.2 The quorum for the tribunal shall be two, but no 
decision shall be rendered by the tribunal except with 
the participation of the President. 
5.1.3. The tribunal shall be common to Army, Navy and 
Air Force. The seat of the tribunal shall be Delhi, but it 
shall be open to the tribunal to hold its sittings at such 
other places as it may decide in the interest of 
convenience of all concerned. 
5.1.4 From the decision of the tribunal, a direct 
statutory appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court. This is 
not something new since such direct appeals are already 
provided by certain other enactments. For example, 
section 130-E of the Customs Act, and section 35-L of 
the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, or for that matter 
section 23 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. In 
view of proposed statutory appeal to the Supreme Court, 
it is expected that no High Court will entertain a writ 
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India 
against the orders of the appellate tribunal. if such an 
appeal is provided, it would be appropriate to delete 
clause (2) of Article 436 of the Constitution which 
provides that the power to grant special leave to appeal 
conferred upon the Supreme Court by clause (1) of the 
said article shall not apply to any judgment, 
determination, sentence or order passed or made by 
any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law 
relating to the Armed Forces.

Chapter VI 
OTHER CONCLUSIGNS 
6.1 Examination of Views of the Armed Forces 
Personnel :—Before finalising this report, the Law 
Commission had extensive discussions with the retired 
as well as serving officers of the three armed forces. 
They not only supported the proposals contained in 
Chapter-V, but also requested that that the tribunal so 
created should not be confined ta the orders passed hy 
courts martial but should also have jurisdiction in respect 
of disputes relating to conditions of service of the 
members of these armed forces. They brought to our 
notice that every year hundreds of writ petitions were 
being filed by members of the armed forces in several 
High Courts in India concerning their service matters 
including questions of seniority, promotion, pension and 
other conditions of service. They submitted that in many 
High Courts such matters were entertained and 
disposed of by a single judge. against whose orders a 
writ appeal/special appeal lies to the division bench of 
that High Court and against the orders of the division 
bench the appeals are being filed in the Supreme Court 
with the leave of the courl under article 136(1) of the 
Constitution. They submitted that in the interest of 
discipline of the Armed Forces and for the prompt 
redressal of any grievances concerning their conditions 
of service, there ought to be a special tribunal against 
whose orders an appeal should directly lie to the 
Supreme Court. The present position, they submitted, 
was not satisfactory, apart from the fact that the remedy 
of writ was a restricted remedy where the courts 
interfered only on certain limited grounds. They painted 
out that even while adjudicating the disputes relating to 
service conditions, the adjudicating authority should be 
aware of the discipline and working culture of the Armed 
Forces to arrive at an appropriate decision. 
6.2.1 it would be seen at once that the aforesaid 
request practically amounts to a request for creation of 
aservice tribunal for Armed Forces more of tess onthe 
pattern of administrative tribunals created under the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 except for the fact 
that the proposal contemplates a direct statutory appeal 
to Supreme Court. If so, one must, in this connection, 
take note of the fact that such a tribunal may fail within 
the four comers of article 323-A of the Constitution. We 
must also take notice of the decision of ‘ne seven-Judge 
Bench of the Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar v. 
Union of India‘ and the background and development 
leading up to the said decision. One must also take note 
of the mecharism created by the said decision 
whereunder all service disputes are directed to be raised 
in the first instance before ihe administrative tribunal 
against whose decision, remedy of judicial review under 
article 226 is made available, subject to the condition 
that such a petition for judicial review should be heard 
oy a division beach. One of the considerations 
underlying this decision was to stop the unmanageable 
flow of appeals filed in Supreme Court under article 
136 againsi the decisions of the Administrative 
Tribunals—indeed even against the decisions rendered 
by administrative members sitting singly. The 
Administrative Tribunals Act, however, did not provide 
for a statutory appeal as is provided by the Central 
Excise Act/Customs Act (in certain matters) and the 
Consumer Protection Act and, therefore, the appeals 
against the orders of the Administrative Tribunal had to 
be and were being filed under article 136. Yet the 
reluctance of the Supreme Court to entertain appeals 
in service matters has to be taken into Consideration. 
Of course, had the Administrative Tribunals Act provided 
4 Statutory appeal to Supreme Court against the orders 
of Administrative Tribunals, the decision in L. Chandra 
Kumar could not have created the alternative 
mechanism aforesaid. Keeping al! the above 
considerations, we have objectively examined the 
request of these retired and serving members of the 
Armed Forces to create a forum for adjudication of their 
service disputes. 
6.2.2 In Bonkya Alias Bharat Shivaji Mane and 
others v. State of Maharashtra’, the Supreme Court 
held regarding exclusion of the jurisdiction of the High 
Court under Section 19 of TADA as follows -— 
"20.... Learned counsel submitted that the appellants 
should not be denied the opportunity to get the first 
hearing in the High Court because in the event of 
their faialure in the High Court, they still have a 
chance to approach this Court under article 136 of 
the Constitution of India. The argument is fallacious 
and runs in the teeth of the express provisions of 
Section 19 of TADA. Section 19 (1) and (2} of TADA 
read as follows :— 
"19. Appeal—(1} Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code, an appeal shall lie as a matter of right 
from any judgement, sentence or order, not being an

intertocutory order, of a Designated Court to the 
Supreme Court both on facts and on law. 
(2) Except as aforesaid, no apneal or revision shail 
lie to any Court from any judgement, sentence or 
order including an interlocutory order of a Designated 
Court.” 
-21. A bare perusal of the above Section shows that 
an appeat against the judgement, sentence or order, 
of the Designated Court (except an interlocutory 
order) shall iie on facts and on law to the Supreme 
Court and that no appeal or revisio shall life to any 
other Court. In the face of this express provision. there 
is no scope to urge that the appeal may be transferred 
to the High Court because of the acquittal of the 
appellants for the offence punishable under Section 
3 TADA by us. In a case where the Designated Court 
fiads that no offence under TADA is made out, it is 
open ic the said Count tc transfer the case to the 
regular Criminal Court under Section 18 TADA but 
once the charge is framed and the case is tried by 
the Designated Court, an appeal against conviction, 
sentence of acquittal ties oniy to the Supreme Court 
and to no other Court.” 
62.3 in $.S. Jain Samiti vs. Management 
Committee, R.J.!. College, Agra’, it was observed .— 
"8.... The writ jurisdiction is meant for doing justice 
between the parties where it cannot be done in any 
other forum." 
6.2.4 An aggrieved party will not have a right of 
recourse to the writ jurisdiction under articte 226 against 
the decision cf the proposed Tribunal since it is setteled 
law that where adequate remedy of appeal is there, one 
cannot have recourse to the writ jurisdiction of the High 
Court under article 226 of the Constitution of India. Thus 
when an aggrieved person is conferred right to appeal 
to the Supreme Court directly against the final judgement 
or order of the proposed Tribunal, then he will not have 
a right of recourse to the writ jurisdiction under article 
226 against the decision of the proposed Tribunal. 
6.2.5 In the backdrop of the above fegal position, we 
proceed to give our conclusions. 
6.3 Conclusions regarding adjudication of service 
disputes :—Hereinbelow, we recommend the 
following :— 
6.3.1 The Army, Navy and Air Force Acts should be 
amended providing for creation of a Tribunal to 
adjudicate the disputes and complaints with respect to 
conditions of service of persons appointed to Army, 
10 
Navy and Air Force. The Amendment should further 
provide for a statutory appeal to the Supreme Court 
against the final decisions and orders of such a Tribunal. 
An appeal against tne interlocutory orders should be 
expressely barred. It is hoped that the High Courts would 
give due regard to the legislative intention behind such 
a provision, concemed in the public interest of discipline 
in the Armed Forces. In this behalf, the observations of 
the Supreme Court in para 108 (x) of the decision in 
Mafatlal industries Ltd. v. Union of India* may be 
referred ito :—._ 
"90 far as the surisdiction of the High Courts under 
article 226 of tne Constitution—or of this Court under 
article 32—is concerned, it remains unaffected by 
the provisions of the Act. Even so, the Court would, 
while exercising the jurisdiction under the said 
articles. have due regard to the legislative intent 
manifested by the provisions of the Act... This is for 
the reason that the power under article 226 has to 
be exercised to effectuate the regime of law and not 
for abrogating it. Even while acting in exercise of the 
said constitutional power, the High Court cannot 
ignore the law nor can it override it. The power under 
article 226 is conceived to serve the ends of law and 
not to transgress them.” 
6.3.2 It would be appropriate to provide further that 
every Service matter should necessarily be decided by 
a Bench of two members, one of whom shal! be a 
Judicial Member. In case of difference of opinion 
between the Members of the Bench, the matter shall be 
referred to the Bench of three members, one of whom 
shall be a Judicial Member. 
in such a situation, it would be easier to convince the 
Supreme Court of the desirability of such a direct appeal 
mainly on the ground that the necessity of prompt 
disposal of service disputes in the Armed Forces and in 
the interest of the discipline therein justify such a course. 
While indisciptine in any public service is not desirable 
and every service dispute should be adjudicated 
promptly. their need is much more so in the case of 
Armed Forces. In this context, It must be remembered 
that the Armed Forces are treated as a separate class 
even by the Constitution; article 33 provides that 
Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any 
of the Fundamental Rights (in Part Ill) shail apply to 
Armed Forces. Article 311 including clause (2) thereof 
which contains very important protections to members 
of service-is made inapplicable to defence forces; the 
artaicie applies only to civil services. 
The Service Tribunai so created shall be common to 
all three services. There shall be four Benches of the

Tribunal, :77 at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai anc Calcutta, 
with the Dethi Bench being treated as the Principal 
Bench. (The machinery provisions of the Admunistrative 
Tribunals Act. 1985 can be imported ic tne exterit 
necesary, for giving shane to this idea). Such a course 
will undoubtedly contribute towards a more Satisfactory 
and prompt adjudication of such disputes But this has 
to be an independent service tribunal apart from and in 
addition to the Appellate Tnbunal recommended in 
Chapter V of this Report. 
6.3.3 In case such a Tribunal is created, the 
Parliament may also consider to bring other para- 
military services too under the jurisdiction of this 
Tribunal. 
14 
§.4 Pending the amendment of Army, Navy and Air 
Force Acts on above lines, the proper thing to do so 
expedite disposa! of petitions in High Courts would be 
for the Cenirali Government to make a request to ail the 
Chief Justicies of various High Courts in the country to 
amend the respective High Court rules and to provide 
that ail service disputes concerning the Army, Navy and 
Air Force shall be entertained and adjudicated only by 
a division bench of the High Court and that such disputes 
should be given priority over other matters as far as 
possible. In such a case, the High Court would mean 
only cne stage of litigation whereafter an appeal may 
lie to Supreme Court by special leave under article 136 
of the Constitution. This recommendation can be 
adopted straight away.

Chapter Vil 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
7.1 To sum up, the Law Commission makes the 
following recommendations :— 
(a) The Army Act, 1950 be amended providing for the 
creation of an Armed Forces Appellate Tribunal 
which shall entertain appeals against the sentence/ 
finding/order of the courts martiat under the Army 
Act. The appeals can be preferred against the final 
orders of the courts martial. It shall be open to the 
person concerned either to file an appeal before’ 
the tribunal directly against the final order, finding 
or sentence of the courts martial or to adopt the 
remedy under sub-section (2) of section 164 in the 
first instance and then approach the appellate 
tribunal. The choice should be left to the aggrieved 
person. Indeed, it would be more appropriate to 
delete sub-section (2) of section 164 of the Army 
Act and the corresponding provision in the Air Force 
Act. Similarly, the provisions in the Navy Act relating 
to.judicial review by the Judge Advocate General 
too may be deleted. 
(Paragraph 5.1, Chapter V, supra) 
(b) Such appellate tribunal shail consist of (1) a retired 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief 
Justice of the High Court who shall preside over 
the tribunal (President), (2) a retired officer of the 
Army of the rank of Major General or above, or a 
retired officer of the Air Force of the rank of Air Vice 
Marshal or a retired officer of the Navy of the rank 
of Rear Admiral, and (3) a retired Judge Advocate 
General of the Army/Air Force/Navy. The term of 
the President and members shail be four years. 
However, if an appeal is preferred by a person 
holding a rank higher than the rank heid by the 
person appointed as member at the time of his 
retirement from category 2 above, the President of 
the Tribunal will write to the Central Government to 
nominate a retired officer for the case as a member 
of the Tribunal, who shall be of a rank not lower 
than that of the person who has oreferred an appeal, 
in place of the member from category 2. 
The terms and conditions of members shail be as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(Paragraph 5.1.1, Chapter V, supra) 
12 
(c) The quorum for the tribunal shall be two, but no 
decision shall be rendered by the tribunal except 
with the participation of the President. 
(Paragraph 5.1.2, Chapter V, supra) 
(d) Against the orders of the tribunal, an appeal shall 
lie to the Supreme Court and subject to such appeal, 
if any, and the orders passed therein, the decision 
of the tribunal shail be final. 
(Paragrah 5.1.4, Chapter V, supra) 
(e) The Navy and Air Force Acts may be so amended 
as to adopt the appellate tribunal created by the 
Army Act for their purposes as well, with all the 
above features. 
(Paragraph 5.1.3, Chapter V, supra) 
7.2 (a) It would contribute to greater discipline and 
prompt disposal of service disputes pertaining to the 
three Armed Forces if a separate Service Tribunal is 
created. The Army, Navy and Air Force Acts should be 
amended providing for creation of a Tribunal to 
adjudicate the disputes and complaints with respect to 
conditions of service of persons appointed to Army, 
Navy and Air Force. The Amendment should further 
provide for a statutory appeal to the Supreme Court 
against the final decisions and orders of such a Tribunal. 
An appeal against the interlocutory orders should be 
expressely barred. It is hoped that the High Courts would 
give due regard to the legislative intention behind such 
a provision, concerned in the public interest of discipline 
in the Armed Forces. In this behalf, the observations of 
the Supreme Court in para 108 (x) of the decision in 
Mafatlal Industries Ltd. v. Union of India’ may be 
referred to :-— 
"_.. So far as the jurisdiction of the High Courts under 
article 226 of the Constitution of this Court under 
article 32-is concerned, it remains unaffected by the 
provisions of the Act. Even so, the Court would, while 
exercising the jurisdiction under the said articles, have 
due regard to the legislative intent manifested by the 
provisions of the Act.... This is for the reason that the 
power under artaicle 226 has to be exercised to 
effectuate the regime of law and not for abrogating

it. Even while acting in exercise of the said 
constitutional power. the High Court cannot ingnore 
the law nor can « override it. The power under articie 
226 is conceived to serve the ends cf law and not to 
transgress them.” 
tt would be appropriate to provide further that every 
service matter Should necessarily be decided by a 
Bench of two members, one of whom shali be a Judicial 
Member. {n case of difference of opinion between the 
Members of the Bench, the matter shall be referred to 
the Bench of three members, one of whom shail be a 
Judicial Member. 
In such a Situation. tt would be easier to convince the 
Supreme Court of the desirability of such a direct appeal 
mainiy on the ground that the necessity of prompt 
disposal of service disputes in the Armed Forces and in 
the interest of the discipline therein justify such a course 
While indiscipline in any public service is not destrabie 
and every service dispute should be adjudicated 
promptly, their need is much more So in the case of 
Armed Forces. In this context, it must be remembered 
that the Armed Forces are treated as a separate class 
even by the Constitution; article 33 provides that 
Parliament may, by iaw, determine to what extent any 
of the Fundamenta! Rights (in Part lif) shall apply to 
Armed Forces. Article 311 including clause (2) thereof 
which contains very important protections to members 
of service-is made inapplicable tc defence forces: the 
articie applies only to civil services. 
The Service Tribunal so created shall be common to 
all three services. There shal! be four Benches of the 
Tribunai, 77 at Defhi, Murmbai, Chennai and Caicuta, 
with the Delhi Bench being treated as the Principal 
Bench. (The machinery provisions of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985 can be imported, to the extent 
necessary, for giving shape to this idea). Such a course 
will undoubtedly contribute towards a more satisfactory 
and prompt adjudication of such disputes. But this has 
to be an independent service tribunal apart from and in 
addition to the Appellate Tribunal recommended in 
Chpater V of this Report. 
(Paragraph 6.3.1 and 6.3.2, Chapter VI. supra} 
In case such a Tribunal is created, the Parliament 
may also consider to bring cther para-military services 
too under the jurisdiction of this Tribunai. 
(Paragraph 6.3.3, Chapter V!, supra) 
13 
An aggrieved party will not have 4 right of recourse 
to the wri jurisdiction under article 226 against the 
decision of the oronosed Tribunal since it is settied law 
thai where adeauate remedy of appeal is there, one 
cannot have recourse to the writ jurisdiction of the High 
Court under article 22€ of the Constitution of India. Thus 
when an aggrieved person is conferred right to appeal 
to the Supreme Court directly against the final judgement 
or order of the proposed Tribunal, then he will not have 
_ aright of recourse to the writ jurisdiction under article 
226 against the decision of the proposed Tribunal. 
(Paragraph 6.3.4, Chapter V!, supra) 
(b) Pending the amendments of the Army. Navy and 
Air Force Acts as proposed in paragraph 7.2 (a), the 
Central Government may request the Hon'ble Chief 
Justices of various High Courts to amend their 
respective High Court ruies to provide that all service 
disputes conceming the said three Armed Forces should 
be heard only by a division bench and that such disputes 
should be disposed cf as promptly 3s possible in the 
circumstances but not later than six months. 
(Paragraph 6.4, Chapter Vi, supra) 
Sdi- 
(Mr. Justice B.P. Jeevan Reedy) (Retd.) 
Chairman 
Sdi- . Sd/- 
(Ms. Justice Leila Seth) (Reid.) (Dr. N.M. Ghatate } 
Member Member 
Sd/- 
(Dr. Subhash C. Jain) 
Member Secretary 
Dethi, dated the 29th April, 1999

NOTES AND REFERENCES . 
Chapter! 
1. Ministry of Defence, Government of India, Manual of Military Law, Vol. |, Part |, Chpater 1, pages 1-3 (edn., 
1983). 
Chapter Ill 
1. Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh vs Union of India, 1982 (3) SSC 140. 
2. $.N. Mukherjee vs Union of India, 1990 (4) SSC 594. 
Chapter IV 
1. L. Chandra Kumar vs Union of India, 1997 (8) SCC 261. 
2. Bonkya Alias Bharat Shivaji Mane and Others vs State of Maharashtra, AIR 1996 SC 257. 
3. $.S. Jain Samiti vs Management Committee, R.J.I. College, Agra, AIR 1996 SC 1211. 
4. Mafatial Industries Ltd. vs Union of India, (1997) 5 SCC 536 at p. 635. 
Chapter vu 
1. Mafatial industries Ltd. vs Union of India, (1997) 5 SCC 536 at p. 635. 
14