LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

SEVENTEENTH REPORT

(REPORT ON TRUSTS ACT, 1882)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW
342 L—1


जे. L. VENKATARAMA ATYAR

D.O. No. F.3(5) /57-LC
8, Jor Bagh, New Delhi—3.
January 6, 1961.
‘Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law, Government of India,
New Delhi.

“My 72858 MINISTER,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the
‘Seventeenth Report of the Law Commission on the Indian
“Trusts Act.

2. In its meeting held on the 11th May, 1957, the previous
‘Law Commission decided to take up the revision of the Indian
“Trusts Act, and Dr. N. C. Sen Gupta who was entrusted with
athe work had also prepared some notes on the subject. Ata
ameeting of the Commission held on the 7th December, 1957,
the question was raised whether the law should deal with
‘public trust also, and a decision on the point was deferred to
calater stage. After the constitution of the present Commission,
the matter was entrusted to जात P. Satyanarayana Rao and
ait was also decided that the law should be limited to private
trust. The draft Report prepared by him was considered by
athe Commission at its meeting held on the 18th and 190 March,
1960, and was revised in accordance with the decisions taken
‘therein. The revised draft was circulated for the opinion of

“the State Governments and other persons and _ bodies
interested. The opinions received from them were considered
by the Commission at its meeting held on the 18th and 19th
November, 1960. It was left to the Chairman and
‘Shri P. Satyanarayana Rao to finalize the Report in the light
ef the decisions taken in the meeting.


Gi)

3. The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services:
rendered by Shri Durga Das Basu, Joint Secretary, and by
Shri P. M. Bakshi, Deputy Draftsman, in connection with the-
preparation of the Report.

Yours sincerely,
व्‌, L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR.


REPORT ON TRUSTS ACT, 1882
CONTENTS

Part [
Genera

YPARAGRAPHS

1. Historical background

2. Trusts Act, 1882

3. Scope of revision

.4. Public trusts. + : . . . . .
Part II

Proposals Relating to Sections

5 to 93. Sections I to 96

-94. Schedule . . पु . . . . .

‘95. Appendices. . . . . . . .
APPENDICES

Appanpix I.—Proposals as shown in the form of draft
amendments - . .

Appanpix II.—Suggestions in respect of other Acts « .

(iti)

PAGE

27
29

29
46


REPORT ON TRUSTS ACT, 1882

PART 1
GENERAL
1. The concept of trust as it obtains in India is not Historical

merely a transplantation of the En, lish concept of trust, sckgroun3.
Indeed, there is little that. is. exotic about it, though in the
course of the adrhinistration of the law of trusts many: of
the detailed mules have been borrowed fromthe English
law of trusts. Untramelled. by any technical notions and
distinctions such as legal and equitable estates, the Indian
systems of law evolved a concept of trust in the wider
sense “of possession or dominion over property coupled
with the obligation to use it, either wholly or partially,
for the benefit of others than the possessor”.' This wider
concept of trust was an integral part of both the Hindu
and the Muslim systems. Owever, the detailed rules
applicable to trusts in this sense were not free from doubt,
especially in the case of Hindu Law. As pointed out by
West J.,2 while the substantive Hindu Law insisted strong-
ly on the suppression of fraud and the fulfilment of pro-
mises, it failed: to furnish the detailed rules by which
effect was to be given to its principles. The usual Practice
of the English judges was, therefore, to determine the es-
tate of the trustee with reference to the personal law of
property and to determine the duties annexed to the trust
estate, the rights of beneficiaries, and. the means by which
thosg rights are made effectual, by reference to rules of
English equity. In short, with the Indian concept of trust
as the basis, a system of detailed rules of law embodying
well-established principles of English equity came to be
developed. a

Till 1882 the process of development of the law of trusts
was almost completely left to the courts. There were only
a few statutory provisions® relating to trusts. Provision
was made in the Penal Code for the punishment of eri-
minal breach of trust. The Specific Relief Act embodied
definitions of the terms ‘trust’ and ‘trustee’ and provided
for suits by trustees for possession of trust property. The
Civil Procedure Codet made provisions for suits by and
against trustees as also for suits relating to public chari-
ties. The Limitation’ Act contained certain provisions as

1Ganendra Molian Tagore v. Upendra Mohan Tagore, 4 Beng. O.C.J.
134.
‘In the matter of the petition of Kahandas Narandas, 5 Bom. 154 (174).

*See the Statement of Objects and Reasons attached to the Private Trust
Bill, Gazette of India, 1880, Pr. V. 494.

“Ret 10 of 1877.
$Act 15 of 1877.


‘Trusts Act,
1882,

Scope of
revision.

2

to limitation in acticn pertaining to trusts and trust pro-
porties. Apart from these, there were a few others—the
statute of Frauds, sections 7 to 11, which were in force
only in the Presidency Towns and the Indian Trustee Act,
1866 and the Trustees and Mortgagees Powers Act, 1866
(Acts 27 and 28 of 1866 respectively) both! of which were
generally regarded as applicable only in cases where the
parties were European British subjects.

2. Such in short was the position when Whitley Stokes
prepared a draft Bill of the law relating to private trusts
in 1878-79. This Bill was referred to the Fourth Law Com-
mission consisting of the author of the Bill besides Sir
Charles Turner and Raymond West. The Bill as modified
by the Commission came to be enacted with a few changes
as the Indian Trusts Act, . 1882. ©

The Bill was confined in its application cnly to private
trusts. It gave recognition to the wider concept of trust
as already established in Indian Law. Subject to this and
taking into account the peculiar circumstances of India, it
adapted the rules of English law of trusts. The provi-
sions of the Bill, as the marginal notes? thereto make
clear, were based upon leading English and Indian cases
and the writings of—to mention only some—Kent, Story,
Smith, Lewin and Underhill. Underhill’s treatise on
Trusts and Trustees appeared in 1878, about the same time
when the Bill was being fashioned out, and it was also
used. A few of the provisions were based on the New
York Civil Code. Besides, the provisions of the various
English Acts relating to trusts were taken note of. With
few exceptions, as stated in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons, “the rules contained in the Bill are substantially
those now administered by English courts of equity and
(under the name of justice, equity and good conscience)
by the courts of British India’’’, हु

The Trusts Act has proved to be a very successful piece
of legislation. It has stood the test of time. Its provi-
sions are remarkable alike for lucidity and conciseness.
There have been practically very few difficulties felt in
the interpretation of the Act. This is as much due to the
skilled draftsmanship of Whitley Stokes as to the fact that
the rules of the English law of trusts were well-developed
by the time of the drafting of the Act.

3. We have in revising the Act taken note of the changes
that have taken place in English Law, both by judicial
decisions and by statutes, since the passing of our Trusts
Act, and considered how far the same would be suited to

4Hoth these Acts were repealed by Act 48 of 1952.

See the Bill as printed in the Reports of the Fourth Law Commission,
Gaette of India, 1880, Supplement p. 155, है

*Gaxette of India, 1880, Pt. ४, 9. 494.


3

“India. We have also gone through the Indian case Jaw
von the subject. We have also examined the provisions of
‘the American law relating to trusts.

We are satisfied on the whcle that the Act requires a
few changes only. We are not in favour of any elaborate
cand detailed statement of rules pertaining to administra-
ction of trusis as has been attempted by the (English)
“Trastee Act, 1925, as we are of the opinion that it is better
“to leave it 10 the courts to evolve the detailed rules. This
“would be conducive to greater flexibility.

4. We have decided not to include public trusts in the
Act and that it is better to keep the law relating to pri-
wate trusts separate. We have, therefore, not touched that
wsubjrct. If necessary, it may be considered separately.,

382 Mof L—2

Public
Trusts,


‘Preamble,

Section 1,

Section 2.

“Section 3.

PART I

PROPOSALS RELATING To SECTIONS
CHAPTER I—Preliminary

5. The preamble merely repeats what is stated in the»
Tong title, and may be omitted.

The word “Indian” may be omitted from the title, as.
has been recommended by us in the case of other Acts.

6. The Act does not extend to the State of Jammu and-
Kashmir’, It does not also extend to Andaman and Nico-.
bat Islands, though power is reserved for the Central Gov-.
ernment to extend the Act to them. We recommend that
it should extend to those Islands.

The exceptions mentioned in the second paragraph may
remain. The exception relating to distribution o prizes -
taken in war among the captors is based on the decision.
in Alexander v. Duke of Wellington'. Therein it was decid--

. éd that all prizes taken in war vest under law in the sove-

reign. The practice in England was to grant under a.
Royal warrant the property so taken upen trust to distri-
bute the same amongst the captors. The House of Lords.
held that such an instrument did not clothe the cestuis que-
trust with any interest and, therefore, the cestuis que trust
had no right in equity to enforce the trust. Before gene-
tal distribution the trust itself could, at the pleasure of
the sovereign, be revoked or varied,’ This principle was.
applied in Kinloch v. Secretary of State for India in Coun«
ctl? wherein it was held that even though the instrument
uses the word “in trust”, it is thereby intended only to-
convey that the person named wag appointed as an agent
of the sovereign to effect distribtuion, and dces not create:
a trust. The occasion for the application of the principle
may be rare, but we see no reason to omit it.

7. This section and the Schedule to the Act may be-
omitted, as they are now unnecessary.

8. It is better to number separately each of the defini-.
tions as sub-clauses of section 3. .

*See Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Schedule, and also the Jammu and Kashmir
(Extension of Laws) Act, 1956 (62 of 1956).

*(1830) 2 Russ. & M. 35.

37 App, Cas. 619, affirming the decision of the Court of Appeal im:
Kinloch vs. Secretary of State fos कफ Council, 15 Ch. D. 1,

4


5

9. The Act uses the expression “principal civil court of “ district
‘original jurisdiction” to denote the district court (outside court”.
presidency-towns). In the Report on Judicial Adminis-
tration! the Law Commission opined that there should be
devolution of some of the functions of the district court
On subordinate courts to relieve the congestion of the work
in the district courts. We think that the State Govern-
ments should be empowered to authorise subordinate courts
to exercise the powers under the Act. A definition, there-
fore, of district court to bring out these ideas may be in-
cluded. Consequential changes in the provisions of the
Act may be made.

So far as presidency-towns are concerned, we were, at
one stage, of the view that the City Civil Court should be
treated as the district court for the purposes of the Act.
From the comment received from the High Court of Cal-
cutta, however, it appears that in Calcutta, the City Civil
Court Act, 1953, (West Bengal Act, 21 of 1953), section 5(4)
read with the Schedule, expressly excludes the jurisdiction
of the City Civil Court in suits and proceedings relating to
or arising out of trusts or endowments. In view of this, we
have not mentioned the City Civil Court in the proposed de-
finition. It will be for the State Governments to deal with
the matter by notification, if they want to transfer the juris-
diction to the City Civil Court,

10. In order to simplify the various investments which “Public
are contemplated by section 20 of the Act and to bring the Goren?
authorised investments into accord with various kinds of ment se-
securi‘ies which are available for investment, we think, a curities ”.
definition of public securities and also a definition of Gov-
ernment securities may be included. The definition of public
securities is naturally of wider scope, as it includes also
Government securities and other securities which are not
stric‘ly Government securities though they stand, for the
purposes of investment, on the same footing as Government
securities. In this connection the provisions of the Bombay
Public Trusts Act, 1950, section 2(1), may be kept in view.

These definitions, being relevant only to section 20, may be
placed in that section.

We 950 recommend that all certificates, etc., issued as
a part of the National Savings Scheme should be included
expressly in the definition of public securities, since these
may not strictly fall within “Government securities”.

11. To make the law uniform and to ampilfy the definition “ Notice".
in the existing Act, the definition of notice in section 3 of
the Transfer of Property Act may be adopted,

12. Suggestions have been received that there should be « Trustee
a provision defining the liability of a trustee de son tort de son tort”,
on the lines of sections 303-304 of the Indian Succession
Act, 1925.

“Inguh Report, Vol. T. page 270, para. ro.



6

Section 303 of the Indian Succession Act defines an
executor de son tort and section 304 of the said Act defines
the extent of his liability. A trustee who inter-meddles
with tne trust estate would also stand more or less on the
same footing as an executor de son tort and his liability
‘aiso would extend to the extent of the asse.s which have
come into his hands and which have not been rightfully
applied.

In the definition of executor de son tort in section 303
it is stated that an executor de son tort can come into exis-
tence only when there is no rightful executor or adminis-
teator. This condition, we think, need not be engrafted in
the proposed definition. In the first place, even with regard
to executor de son tort this condition has been held inappli-
cable in cases governed by Hindu Law.' Secondly, this
condition is not included in the definitions of executor de
son tort as given in Halsbury and Williams. In Halsbury’s
Laws of England the expression is defined thus:

“An executor de son tort is one who takes upon
himself the office of an executor, or intermeddles
with the goods of a deceased person, without
having been appointed an executor by the
testator’s last valid will or a codicil thereto, or
without having obiained a grant of administration
from, a competent cour’; and the term is thus
equally applicable in the case of an intestacy as
in the case of testacy, for there is no such term
known to the law as an administrator de son
tort”?

In Williams on Executors and Adminisira‘ors the ex-
pression has been thus defined:

“Tf one, who is neither executor nor administrator, in-
termeddles with the goods of the deceased, or
does any other act characteristic of the office of
executor, he thereby makes himself wha: is
called in the law, an executor of his own wrong,
or more usually, an executor de son tort’

It would thus be seen that the propriety of retaining the
condition as to there being no lawful executor under section
303 of the Indian Succession Act is open to question.

In the case of trust estate, there is no reason why the
cestui que trust himself should not be enabled to sue the
trustee de son tort without waiting for the rightful trustee
10 take action against him even if one is in existence.

In Lewin on Trusts,! it is stated that “ifa person by
mistake or otherwise assumes the character of trustee,
when it really does not belong to him, and so becomes a
trustee de son tort, he may be called to account by the

“Narayanasami v. Esa Abbavi, 28 Mad. 351 (353)-

S¥falsbury's Laws of England (3rd Edn.) Vol, 16, 120.

aWilliams on Execurors and Administraters, (13th Edn.) Vol. 1, 27.
‘Lewin on Trusts, (13th Edn.) page 178.


7

cestui que trust, for the moneys he received under colour
of the trust”. The learned author does not introduce the
condition of the absence of a rightful trustee in order to
constitute the intermeddler a trustee de son tort. For
these reasons we think that the condition that in the
absence of a rightful trustee alone a person becomes a
trustee de son tort by intermeddling with the trust estate
need not be engrafted in the section.

Subject to the above observations, we have accepted the
supe estion to insert a new section on the lines of section
304. We have, however, considered it unnecessary to have
a provision defining the expression “trustee de son tort”,
and then providing for his Uability. . It would, in our
opinion, suffice if the substance of the definition contained
in section 303 is incorporated in the substantive section’
itself.

Cuapter Il —Of the Creation of Trusts

18. To convey the meaning better, for the heading “law-
ful purpose” the words “purpose of trust to be lawful” may
be substituted. In other respects, the section does not re-
quire any alteration. It will be better to number the two
paragraphs as sub-sections.

14 In consonance with the policy adopted in the case of
other Acts, the illustrations, wherever they occur, may be
omitted.

15. To avaid uncertainty in the language of the sections,
and to state clearly the requirements for the creation of a
valid trust by will or non-testamentary instrument when
the subject-matter of the trust is moveable or immoveable
property or when the trustee is the author of the trust or a
stranger, it is better to re-arrange the two sections, sec-
tions 5 and 6, and re-draft the clauses,

16. While section 5 states that a valid trust in relation
to moveable property could be created by a declaration as
aforesaid, meaning thereby by an instrument in writing,
signed and registered, section 6 seems to require that even
in such a case there should be a transfer of trust property
to the trustee. This difficulty was noticed in some of the
decisions? and may be obviated by the proposed rearrange-
ment of the clauses of the sections.

a 17. Clause (9) requires a-slight verbal modification.
"™e word “by” may be omitted as a minor cannot, under
the procedural law, apply to a court without a guardian.

Section 4.

Sections
5&6.

Seetion 7.

18. A suggestion has been made that the words “it must Section 8.

not be merely beneficial interest under an existing trust”,

3866 s2ction 30A (as proposed), in Appendix I.
169 "See Allahabad Bank Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-Tax, I-T.R, (1952)


Section 9.
Section 10.

should be omitted. It is no doubt true that in England,
there can be a trust of an equitable estate or chose in
action or of a right or obligation under an ordinary legal
contract just as much as a trust of land! In India equit-
able estates are not recognised. The Indian: Law Commis-
sion which considered the Indian Trusts Bill, 1879, was not
in favour of creating trusts in respect of the beneficial in-
terest of a beneficiary, the reason given being that the
recognition of such a trust would give rise to complications.
This opinion was endorsed by the Government, as could be

19. No change,

20. The first paragraph of section 10 consists of two
parts, The first part lays down that every person capable
of holding property may be a trustee. If the section stops
there, minors, lunatics and People of unsound mind who
are not competent to contract may also be proper trustees
as they are persons capable of holding property. Several
difficu, ties will arise if such persons ere हक to be
trustees, as the office of a trustee requires the exercise of
discretion and judgment in various matters relating to the
administration ‘of the trust. The section, therefore, in the
“second part proceeds to draw a distinction between acts
which involve the exercise of discretion and acts which do
not so involve. In the former case, it is provided that a
Person who is not competent to contract cannot be a trustee.
ln other cases, it is permissible to have a person who is
either a minor or an idiot or a lunatic as a trustee. It is
very difficult to draw the line of distinction between matters
of purely ministerial character involving no. exercise of
discretion or judgment and matters which involve exercise
of discretion ‘and judgment, Further, a Person appointed
as trustee has to choose whether to accept or refuse to
accept the office. This is also an act involving exercise of
discretion. Until there is a valid acceptance by him he
cannot act. The trust cannot function. To permit, there-
fore, a person incompetent to contract to be a trustee would
be to create serious difficulties and deadlock in the adminis.
tration of trust. In England, by section 20 of the Law of

vit i

appoint a new trustee to fill the vacancy. This z rovision
has to be read with section 36 of the Trustee Act, 1925
which Provides the machinery for filling up the vacancy,
Lewin® ig strongly against the appointment of infants as
trustees, Lunatics or idiots also stand on the same footing.

4See the ob: ५ का
coat Ss Ne cngeevations of. Lord s Shaw in Strathcona 3.5. Co. ५, Dominion

"Gazette of India, 1880, Part V, p, 494.

‘Lewin on Trusts (sth Edn.) p, 29.



9

it is, therefore, suggested that without drawing a distinction
Wetween acts which require exercise of discretion and acts
~which do not it will be better to alter the law by providing,
that (while every perso:. sapable of holding property may
be a trustee), if a person incompetent to contract is ap-
pointed to be a trustee, he should not be permitted ६०
+execute the trust until the disability ceases and he accepts
the trust. Section 10 should be amended according)y, and
sto save the trustee’s rights, section 73 may be amended to
authorise the court to appoint another person to be a
trustee in his place until the disability ceases and he
~accepts the trust.

21. Another suggestion that has been made with re-
-ference to this section is, that express provision should be
cmade making ‘corporations’ eligible for appointment as
trustees. We think that that is unnecessary, as the word
“person” includes a corporation, and the objection that to
repose confidence a conscience is required and that the cor-
‘poration has not such a conscience, has long been for-
gotten in English law and corporations were made eligible
-for appointment as trustees.

Cuapter U]—Duties and Liabilities of Trustees

22. The first patagraph of section 11 authorises a Section rr.

smodification of the trust with the consent of all the
beneficiaries who are competent to contract. If all the
‘beneficiaries are competent to contract, the matter does
‘mot create any difficulty, for, they, being the beneficiaries
entitled to the property, have the power to modify or vary
“the trust in any manner they please. The trouble arises
only when some or all of the beneficiaries are not compet-
-ent to contract, in which event itis provided in the second
paragraph of the section that consent in such cases may

8 given by a principal civil court of original jurisdiction
‘on behalf of the persons who are not capable of
contracting. The section, however, is silent regarding the
‘principles which should guide the discretion of the court
in giving or refusing such a consent. It has been sug est=
ved that we should embody the principles establish by
decisions for guidance of the courts and also extend the
‘protection to unborn beneficiaries. It has been held in
Rajagopala Gramani v. Baggiammal! that the section ts
“based on the well recognised principles of English Law.
“There is a sharp divergence of opinion in the English
courts on the subject w1 ether the court has unlimited in-
herent jurisdiction to modify or vary trusts where such
‘modification or variation is clearly shown to be for the
benefit of all persons interested who are not sui juris, in-
-cluding unborn persons. The House of Lords had occasion
-tecently to examine the question in Chapman v. Chap-
man, which is an appeal against the judgment of the

156 Mad, 508, sr0-5r1.
(1954) 1 All. BAR. 798,


10

Court of Appeal in that case’. A perusal of these twoe
decisions would enable one to assess the extent to which
the divergence of opinion exists. One view is that the
jurisdiction is not unlimited but is confined only to excep--
tional cases, the exceptions having been enumerated in
the judgment of the House of Lords. The other view
found favour with Denning L. J., who in his. dissenting
judgment in the Court of Appeal, traced the history of”
the jurisdiction from the time of Lord Hardwick and
coneluded that if the proposed modification or variation
of trust is beneficial to the beneficiaries who are not sui
juris, the court has the power and duty to-approve the-
modification or variation, as the case may be. ‘he-
rule, as stated by Denning L. J., has simplicity in its
favour while an examination of the other views express--
ed in the courts of England from 1901 onwards wouk?
‘show that the judges were striving from time to time to
introduce exceptions which cover a wide field. फल
think it unnecessary to follow the majority opinion of”
the English courts and embody, the complicated rules re-
cognised by them. It wo simplify the law if we-
adopt the principle laid down by Denning 11. J., in his.
dissenting judgment in the Court of Appeal vesting in
the court a wider discretion. The limitation suggested
by Denning L. J., would be sufficient to safeguard the-
interests of the beneficiaries who are not sui juris or are
unborn.

Whenever a minor’s interests are involved, the test:
applied is to consider whether the proposed action of the
guardian is for the benefit of the minor or not, and that
test may équally be applied here. We therefore, sug;
that in granting permission the court should take all the
circumstances into consideration and decide whether the-
proposed modification or variation is beneficial to the-
interests of the beneficiaries concerned. This principle-
may be embodied in the second paragraph of. section 11.

While extending the section to unborn persons, the-
word “consent” should be ‘substituted by- “approval”
which is more appropriate with reference to unborn per-
sons (Compare the English Act also on this point).

The decision of the House of Lords in Chapman v.
Chapman? provoked criticism, and the Lord Chancellor-
invited the Law, Reform Committee “to consider whe-
ther any alteration is desirable in the powers of the
court to sanction a variation in the trust or a-settlement
in the interests of beneficiaries under disability and un-
born persons, with particular reference to the decision in
Chapman v. Chapman”?. On the recommendation of -the-

1(1953) 7 All. E.R. 103.
41954) 1 All. E.R. 798,


1

Committee that the view of Denning L. J. should be pre-
ferred to that of the majority, the Act known as the
Variation of Trusts Act, 1958, was passed, giving effect
to the dissenting judgment of Denning L. J. The Act
of 1958 has thus set at rest the sharp divergence of
opinion which obtained in England till then. Our view
accords with the existing law in England,

23, It is perhaps more convenient to notice one other
aspect of the matter. Section 57 of the (English) Trustee
Act, 1925, conferred upon the court jurisdiction to sanc-
tion certain powers to the trustees which are necessitated
in the course of the administration or management of a
trust and a corresponding provision is also made in the
Settled Land Act, 19251. The substance of both the sec-
tions is more or Jess the same. These sections, as
observed by the Court of Appeal in the decision already
referred to (Chapman v. Chapman)? do not purport to
codify the entire jurisdiction of the courts of equity to
alter or modify the terms of the trust, but are intended
merely to empower the courts to give directions to the
trustee even though not found in the instrument of the
trust, on the ground of expediency and in the interests
of better administration. A similar principle may be
embodied at the appropriate place, preferably after
section 34.

24. No change. Sections
19, 73, 14.
25. It was suggested that a qualification on the lines Section 15.
of the rule in section 174 of the American Restatement
on Trusts® should be engrafted. The qualification is that
“$f the trustee has greater skill than that of a man of
ordinary prudence,’ he is under a duty to exercise such
skill as he has”. The section, as it now exists, embodies
the rules recognised in England from very early times
and has not been altered since. We see no reason to
imerease the standard of care required by a trustce. Be-
sides, it is very difficult to apply the suggested qualifica-
tion if it is embodied in the Act, as there are no means
for determining the degrees of skill between persons.
The trustee, it has been held, is not absolved from his
responsibility even if he has taken legal advice. We do
nof therefore accept the suggestion.

26. No change. Section 16,

27. The language of paragraph 2 of section 17 may be Section 17,
altered to improve the drafting.

'Section 64.
See para, 22, supra.
2Vol. 1, p. 448.

342 M of L—-3.


Section 18,

Szetion 19.

Section 20,

Section 208.

12

28. No change.

29. It was suggested that a section on the lines of
Article 49 in Underhill’s Trustst providing rules for the
apportionment of the charges on the corpus and the
income should be included with suitable modifications.
The principles embodied in Article 49 of Underhill’s
Trusts are based on decided cases. It is generally under-
stood that all capital charges should be paid out of the
capital, and interest and local fates, etc., should be paid
out of the income. These are established rules and have
to be applied subject to any contrary rules in the deed of
trust. No necessity has been felt for including them in
a statute thereby making them inflexible. Liberty
should be left to courts to apply them according to the
facts of each case. Sometimes the income msy not be
sufficient and recourse to the corpus may be necessitated.
Again, if the current income is insufficient to discharge
the interest, it may be a good rule of economics to post-
pone the payment till the income acerues in the subse-
quent year; but it is doubtful whether the person who is
entitled to payment would stay his hands without en-
forcing payment by resorting to court. If the principles
embodied in them’are petrified by giving them statutory
force and if the trustee does not carry out the duties in
accordance with the rule, he may be guilty of breach of
trust. Third parties entitled to payment may not be
bound by such rules. We think that it is a needless
complication to enact any rigid rules regarding appor-
tionment.

30. The securities mentioned in the existing section
have become outmoded. We, therefore, suggest that the
existing Government securities and public securities may
be included in the section? In this connection section 35
of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 may be generally
kept in view. It is better not to enumerate particular
securities but to give a general definition of all categories
of securities which are in vogue in the market, The
securities which have become obsolete may be omitted.

31. The provision in clause (f), enabling the High
Court to prescribe the other valid securities, should be
omitted with a view to obtaining uniformity. Besides,
it may not be possible for the High Court to determine
easily which are safe investments and which are not.

Deposit of money in the State Bank of India or its
subsidiaries should ‘also be allowed,

32. In the proviso to section 20A, for the reference to
(९) and (4) of section 20, reference to the corresponding
provisions in the new draft may be en the new draft may be substituted.

{Underhill’s Lew relating to Trusts and Trustees (10th ed.) page 295,

38८९ also the discussion in Paragraph 10, supra.


18

33. A saving provision to retain investments which Section 21.

have ceased to be authorised may be substituted for exist-
ing section 21 on the lines of section 4 of the (English)
Trustee Act, 1925.

34. We recommend the omission of the clause relating
to investment on a mortgage of immovable property al-
ready hypothecated for an advance under the Land Im-
provement Act, 1883 for the reason that in that event the
mortgage that has to be created in favour of the trustee
will be a second mortgage and as such involves risk, for
the sccurity may not be adequate. The only reason
given in justification of this clause in the Statement of
Objects and Reasons! of the original Bill of 1880 is that a
similar provision is to be found in England in 27 and 28
Vict. Chap. 114, section 161. The provision as to
deposit of trust money in Government Savings Bank may
be transposed to section 20.

35. No change.

36. A suggestion was made that a section protecting
the trustee from the consequences of a breach committe
by him where he acts honestly and reasonably should be
introduced in the Act. When the Trusts Act, 1882, was
passed there was no power in English courts to save a
trustee from the consequences of breach of trust. Sec-
tions 8 and 9 of the Trustee Act, 1893 and section 3 of the
Trustee Act, 1896 provided for relief in such cases. These
sections are now replaced by section 61 of the Trustee
Act of 1925. This section empowers the court to relieve
a trustee from the consequences of a breach when he
has furnished the court with information that he acted
in the matter honestly and reasonably. The standard
of care required by a trustee is not laid down in any of
the provisions of the Trustee Act, 1925; but in India we
have section 15. The standard of care and prudence that
is required of a trustee has to be borne in mind when
considering the proper discharge of the duties enjoined
by the Act upon a trustee. If a trustee violates a statu-
tory duty laid down under the Act, he cannot be said to
have acted as a man of ordinary prudence even though
he might have been honest and reasonable. The stand-
ard of prudence has to be judged in the light of the pro-
visions of the Act and not with reference to any objective
standard. On this principle it has been held in Tirupa-
tirayudu v. Lakshminarasamma*? by a bench of the
Madras High Court that where a trustee in violation of
the provisions of section-20 of the Trusts Act made an
unauthorised investment he was not absolved from his
liability even though he might have acted honestly and

Gazette of India, 1880, Pt. ५, p. 494.
*LL.R. 38 Mad. 71, 75.

Section 22,

Section 23


Sections 24
and 25.

Sections 26
and 27.

Section 28,

Section 29,’

14

reasonably. If a trustee violated a definite direction con-
tained in the Act he cannot be said to have acted reason-
ably and the protection under a provision similar to sec-
tion 61 of the Trustee Act, 1925 would be of no avail
and the court has no power to relieve the trustee from
the comsequences of a bre:ch. In view of these con-
siderations, we think it unnecessary to make a provision
on the lines of section 61 of the Trustee Act, 1925.

37. The corresponding sections in the American Re-
statement are: Sections 205!, 207? and 216 which are
general provisions corresponding to sections of the Trusts
Act, 1882.

38, No change.

39, These sections may be altered by recasting the
clauses so as to make the scheme more logical. That part
of section 27 which refers to “neglect” may be put as a
residuary clause under section 26.

40. It is rather difficult to gather from the language of
section 26 of the Act what exactly is meant by the ex-
pression “subject to the provisions of sections 13 and 15”.
So far as English and American laws are concerned, no
such limitation is imposed. The three exceptions in the
proviso to section 26 are well-established under English
law, under which a trustee is liable for the acts and de-
faults of his co-trustee. The rule is clear and simple and
is devoid of all complications. Sections 13 and 15, on the
one hand, deal with certain specific heads of liability, while
section 26 is an independent provision dealing with a differ-
ent head of liability. The two need not be linkecl up to-
gether. The expression quoted above may as well be cmit-
ted. ना

41. The substance of the last paragraph of section 26
may be transposed to section 30, which, we think, is its
proper place.

42. Section 28 exonerates the trustee from liability
when he pays or delivers trust property to a person who
would have been entitled thereto but for the vesting of
the right of the beneficiary in another before payment and
without knowledge of it. It does not, however, provide a
remedy in favour of a person rightfully entitled to recover
it from the trustee. We think that as, under general law,
a right of suit against the person whe received the money
or property lies at the instance of the rightful owner, it is
unnecessary to make a special provision.

43. No change.
~Wol, 1, 553 @)-

*Ibid, 566.
*Ibid, 609.



15

44. This section is analogous to section 30 of the Trustee
Act, 1925, which re-enacts section 24 of the Trustee Act,
1893 which replaced section 31 of the Law of Property
(Amendment) Act, 1859. The last part of section 26
should be placed in this section’. The section may also
be made subject to section 27. It may not be necessary
to add at the end of the section, the words “unless the
same happens through his own wilul default” which occur
in section 30 of the Trustee Act, 1925.

The questicn of adding a section regarding a trustee
de son tort has been discussed already*. “ The section may
be added after section 30,

Cuarrer IV.—Rights and Powers of Trustees

45. No change.

46. In order to give a speedy remedy, we think it neces-
sary to enlarge the scope of section 34 on lines analogous
to the originating summons procedure in England, which
has been followed and adopted in the original side rules
of the Bombay and Madras High Courts. Many questions
which arise in the course of the administration of the trust
may be easily disposed of on an application instead cf driv.
ing the parties to a suit. We theretore, recommend that the
scope of the section may be enlarged. At the same time,
we recommend a restriction to the effect that the court
shall not determine questions involving charges of breach
of trust unless the parties have consented for the decision
of the question in the proceedings by an application under
section #4. Similarly, the court would not decide claims
made adversely to the trust and involving the investigation
of the title of third parties. Further, if any question of
importance arises for decision and the court is of opinion.
that it should not be disposed of in a summary manner,
it may refer the parties to a suit. With these safeguards
we think that the amplification of section 34 should work
as a boon to the parties concerned,

47. We have provided for one appeal against the deci-
sion of the court under section 34. Orders under section
34 of the Act are not now appealable®. As we have now
proposed‘ to enlarge the scope of section 34 and make the
jurisdiction and the procedure more or Jess analogous to
that of the Chancery Division of the High Court in Eng-
land under O, 55 (the procedure relating to originating
summons), we think it is necessary to provide for an
appeal against the decision of the court from an order

1558 the discussion relating ro section 26, supra.

१85३७ paragraph 12, supra.

*Trimbak Mahadev vs, Narayan Hari, 1.L.R, 24 Bom 429, 432.
‘See para. 46, supra,

Section 30,

Section 304
(To be
added),

Sections 31,
32 and 33.६
Section 34


16

made on the application. In England such orders are
appealable under O. 55, R. 14(d). But appeal hes only with
the leave of the Judge or the court of appeal. We think
that it would suffice if the order is made appealable but
without any restriction.

48. We are of the view that it will be beneficial if the
provisions of the section are made applicable, as far as
may be, to broceedings before the court under sections 11,
22, 32, 26, 41, 45, 46, 49, 53, 59 (as proposed) 72, 73 and 74
of the Act and to proposed section 73A, and we recommend
accordingly.

Section 34A This may be added on the lines already indicated.!
(to

Section 35.

Section 36,

Sections 37
to 41.

Section 42,

49. No change.

50. It may not be necessary to retain the provision that
the section is subject to the provisions of section 17. It
may be omitted.

51, The period for which a trustee may lease property
without the permission of the court is 21 years. Whatever
might have been the justification in 1882 when the Act was
passed, in the present conditions, such a long per:od whe-
ther for agricultural or non-agricultural leases is not
justified, as it would result in alienating away the benefit
of the future for a longer period. Under some of the pre-
sent Acts, both Central and State, the period fixed is 5
years. Most of the State Acts relating to religious endow-
ments fix periods ranging from five to ten years. The
Bombay Public Trusts Act fixes a period of ten years in
the case of an agricultural lease and three years in the
case of a non-agricultural lease. This is the only Act
which makes the poricd as long as ten years, but in view
of the recent Acts we think it proper io reduce the period
from 21 years to five years.

52. No change.

53. The expression “any trustees or trustee” cecurring
in the beginning of the section has given rise to some diffi-
culties in interpreting the section. What is meant by the
expression is, as pointed out in Nethiri Menon v. Gopalan
Nair? that when there is only one trustee, that trustee,
and when there is more than one trustee all the trustees,
must concur in giving receipt in order to give a valid
discharge to the person paying the amount. Section 14
of the (English) Trustee Act, 1925, which corresponds to
section 42, merely says ‘trustee’. No doubt, the singular in-
cludes the plural, but that again may give rise to a difficulty

ASee para, 23, supra.
*Section 36.
439 Mad, 597, 601.


7

in interpretation. Hence it is better to modify the language
of the section to make the intention clear.

54, The last clause “This section applies only to trusts
created after this Act comes into force” may be deleted
as it is now unnecessary.

55. No change.
56. No change.

Cuaprer V.—Of the Disabilities of Trustees

57. This section seems to create some difficulty in the
light of sections 70, 71 and 73, The intention of the legis-
lature, no doubt, seems to be that renunciation under sec-
tion 46 would operate as.a discharge creating a vacancy as
provided under section 70, though on a literal interpreta-
tion of section 70 a vacancy would not arise on mere re-
nunciation. Section 73 does not provide for filling up a
vacancy caused by reason of a valid renunciation. It may be
assumed that renunciation is equal to a discharge. Two
of the grounds in section 46(b) and (20 which justify re-
nunciation are algo grounds for discharge in section 71.
Tf a renunciation is based on grounds (b) and (c) in sec-
tion 46, no permission of the court is required. It would
operate automatically to create a vacancy in the office. We
think that this is a lacuna which has to be supplied. The
proper solution would be to insert a provisicn in section TL
to cover cases of renunciation. This would necessitate the
omission of section 71, clause (९), which would become re-
dundant in view of section 46(b).

58. This secticn is very important, as it lays down the
conditions under which a trustee may delegate his office
or any of the duties either to a co-trustee or to his agent.
The principles which govern permissible delegation may
be crystallised under four heads. Delegation is permissi-

le if—

(1) the instrument of trust so provides, or

(2) it is in the regular course of business, or

(8) the delegation is necessary, or

(4) the beneficiary being competent to contract, con-
sents to delegation.

After 1926 the law in England was considerably altered
and the power of delegation and the appointment of agents
by trustees have been liberalised. In this respect attention
is drawn to sections 23 and 25 of the Trustee Act, 1925.

Section 43.

Section 44,

Section 45.

Section 49.

Section 47.


18

Construing the provision, in section 23(1), Maugham, J.,
in Re Vickery! remarked:

“Tt will be observed that sub-section (1) has no pro-
viso or qualification to it such as we find in
relation to section 23(3). It is hardly too much
to say that it revolutionises the position of a
trustee or an executor so far as regards the em-
ployment of agents. He is no longer required
to do any actual work himself, but: he may em-
ploy a solicitor or other agent to do it, whether
there is any real necessity for the employment
or not. No doubt, he should use his discretion
in selecting an agent, and should employ him
only to do acts within the scope of the usual
business of the agent, but, as will be seen, a
question arises whether even in these respects
he is personally liable for a loss due to the em-
ployment of the agent unless he hs been guilty
of wilful default”. .

In another case, In Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co.,?
it has been observed that a person is not guilty of wilful
default “unless he knows that he is committing, and intends
to commit, a breach of his duty, or is recklessly careless in
the sense of not caring whether his act or cmission is or
is not a breach of duty”.

From the statement of the law laid down by Maugham
J., in Re Vickery’s Case? one is led to the conclusion that
the power conferred by, section 23(1) of the Trustee Act,
1925, is very wide and the trustee is not responsible at all
for the loss caused to the trust estate through the default
of his agent so long as he satisfies the court that he acted
in good faith in the matter of appointing an agent. The
earlier law, therefore, as laid down in Speight v. Gaunt*
and embodied in section 47 cf our Act, has been given the
go-bye completely, and for the test of “regular course of
business” and “moral necessity” which justified delegation
under the old law the test of good faith has been substi-
tuted. If the trustee acts honestly, though foolishly, he
will not be responsible for the acts and omissions and de-
faults of an agent appointed by him.

It may be observed that there is difference of opinion
between text-book writers whether the interpretation of
Maugham J., of section 23(1) of Trustee Act, 1925 is
correct or not. It is no doubt true that the observations
of the learned Judge are obiter in the case. The learn-
ed editor of the latest edition of Lewin on Trusts takes

2(1931) 1 Ch. 572, $81.
(1925) 1 Ch. 407; 434.
4(1931) 7 Ch. 572.
49 A.C.1, §, 19, 29.


19

the view that the interpretation is correct.' Keeton
thinks that the observations of the learned judge quoted
above are too wide “in as much as they would render
unnecessary section 23(3) and perhaps section 25 of the
Trustee Act”. If, however, they are to be regarded as
the true interpretation of section 23(1), it has been sug-
gested by an eminent critic that they would confer too
great an immunity upon the trustee and leave the bene-
ficiary insufficiently protected? A suggestion? has been
made that the object of scction 23(1) is primarily decla-
ratory, since it is only by such interpretation that any
real significance can be attached to the language o2 see-
tion 23(1) and section 25. But as against this it may be
pointed out that apart from other considerations, the
language of section 28 seems to support the view taken
by the editor of Lewin on Trusts. The section says that
the trustee may employ and pay an agent, whether a
solicitor, banker, stockbroker, or other person to transact
any business or do any act required io be transacted or
done in the execution of the trust, or the administration
of the testator’s or intestate’s estate, including the receipt
and payment of money and shall be entitled to be «low-
ed and paid all charges and expenses so incurred, and
shall not be responsible for the default of any such agent
if employed in good faith.

If, as contended by Keeton, the law is merely declara-
tory and does not in any manner alter or vary the pre-
vious law, there is no necessity for us to change section
47. If, on the other hand, the view takcn by Lewin is
vight and the interpretation of Maugham J., is correct—
which undoubtedly goes too far—the section leaves the
beneficiaries “insufficiently protccted”.

The Indian cases under this section do not indicate
any difficulty in applying the section to the particular
facts in each case; nor is there any suggestion anywhere
that the language of the section should be amplified sc

as to enlarge the scope of the power of delegation by a
trustee.

59. In order to exclude clearly a beneficiary, the ex-
pression “any other person” may be substituted for
the words “a stranger”.

60. No change. Sections 4६

to 53.
61. At one stage, we thought that after section 53 a
provision should be added that a trustee (or a person
who has recently ceased to be trustee) authorised to buy

‘Lewin on Trusts (15th edn.), 0, 185,

"Keeton: Law of Trusts (2nd edn.), p. 257.

"Keeton : Law of Trusts (2nd edn), p. 257.
342 M of L—4.


Section 54

Section 55.
Section 56.

Section 57.

Sections 58,
59 and 60.

20

property on behalf of a trust cannot sell his own pro-
perty to the trust without the permission of the district
court and that a sale made without such permission,
should be void. On further consideration, we decided
to drop the proposed provision, as adequate relief can be
obtained under the general provisions of section 88.

62. No change.

Cuapter VI.—Of the rights and liabilities of the beneficiary

63. No change.

64. The only point for consideration in connection with
this section is whether the last paragraph in section 56
and the proviso in section 58, and the last paragraph of
section 68 should be omitted. These are similar to the
proviso to section 10 of the Transfer of Property Act, which
embodies the English rule of restraint on the power of
anticipation! In England, under the Married Women’s
(Restraint upon Anticipation) Act, 19497, the power of
restraint on ariticipation has been removed and the married
woman holds the property now free from such restraint.
a: is necessary, therefore, that the jaw in India should be
brought in line with the law in England. We therefore
recommend that the Trusts Act should be amended straight~-
away, removing the provisions relating to married women
referred to above. We further recommend that section 10
of the Transfer of Property Act may be amended, bringing
it on a line with the provisions of the (English) Married
Women’s (Restraint upon Anticipation) Act, 1949. We
would like to emphasise the need for introducing the neces-
sary amendment in the Transfer of Property Act at an
early date, for the sake of uniformity.

65. No change.

66. The proviso to section 58 should be omitted.” As
regards section 59, wo think that there should be no neces-
sity of filing a suit; the procedure can be by way of appli-
cation. We also recommend that not only the beneficiary
but any person interested in the trust must have a right
to take proceedings under the section. Further, the words
“where no trustees are appointed” cannot apply at the
stage of ercation of trust. They apply only to later stages.
(See section 6). This requires to be clarified. Mecessary
changes may be made.

In section 60, Explenation I, the words “unless the per-
sonal law of the beneficiary allows otherwise” should be
omitted. A minor should not be considered a proper person
to administer the trust property.

3556 also s. 20 of the Indian Succession Act, 1५25:

*72, 13and 14 Geo. 6, ९, 78. See also Graveson : A Century of Family
Law, page 125.

१96६ paragraph 64, supra.



21

The provision to the effect that a married woman is
not a proper person should be omitted, as out of tune with
modern social notions.

67. No change. The American Restatement, section Section 6r-

199, summarises the remedies of the beneficiary. The
beneficiary under a trust can maintain a suit:

(a) to compel the trustee to perform his duties as
trus‘ee;

(b) to enjoin the trustee from committing a breach
of trust;

(c) to compel the trustee to rediess a breach of
trust;

(9) to appoint a receiver 10 take possession of the
trust property and administer the trust;

(९) to remove the trustee,

It will be noticed that all these remedies are available
under the law as now obtains in India. A trustee may be
compelled to perform his duties as trustee by mandatory
injunction and by restraining him from committing a
breach by a permanent injunction as provided for by the
Specific Relief Act.

As regards remedy (c), in a suit instituted for the pur-
pose, the beneficiary may get redress for the breach, that is,
for the loss which the trust property has sustained on
account of the breach. An administrative action to admin-
ister the trust is also permissible under the Code and in
that aciion, under Order 40 of the Code of Civil Procedure
a receiver may be appointed to carry on the administration,
pending the suit. A trustee can also be removed by suit.
It is, therefore, unnecessary to include a pvovision analozous
to section 199 of the American Restatement on Trusts.
The existing law is adequate to protect the rights of the
beneficiary.

68. We do not see any distinction for the purposes of the
tule in the section between a person who purchases the trust
property with notice of the trust from the trustee on the
one hand and a person who has acquired it without con-
sideration from such trustee. We therefore recommend
that the section may be made applicable to the latter cate-
gory of persons also, with such modifications as may be
appropriate.

69. Section 53 prohibits a trustee from buying the kene-
ficiary’s interests without permission of the court, whilc
clause (b) of section 62 provides that a beneficiary com-
petent to contract may ratify the unauthorised sale oy a

Section 62+


Sections 62
and 63.

Scetion 625
(10 be
inserted),

Section 63.

Section 64.

22

trustee of trust property, provided the ratification is made
with full knowledge of the facts of the case and without
being under undue influence. The two relate to distinct
matters. Section 53 has reference to the purchase by the
trustee, and the court may grant permission only if the
purchase is manifestly for the advantage of the beneficiary.
In the case of ratification, where the beneficiavy is sui juris
and is competent to contract, the question of advantage or
disadvantage does not arise because it is open to him either
to modify or refuse to ratify the same and the question of
permission of the court or protecting the interest of the
beneficiary does not arise. We have also made some
drafting changes of a formal nature in the wording of
section 62.

7). In sections 62 and 68 it may be made clear that the
beneficiary would be entitled to such other reliefs in res-
pect of the property as he may be entitled to under
the law. This change is necessary in view of the
decision in Chidambaranatha v. Nelaasiva! and Janakirama
Ayyar ए. Nilakanta Ayyar? where the contention was raised
iha: the beneficiary was entitled only to a declaration and
not to any other relief. No doubt, the two learned judges
who considered the contention negatived it. But, to avoid
ail future disputes regarding the language of the sections, it
is necessary to clarify the sections. The di 2ussion re-
lating to the placing of section 65 may be seen.’

71, A provision should be made in section 63 treating
security deposits as trust proper:y whether or not there is
a stipulation for payment of in‘erest, This would sel at
rest the conflict of decisions.

72. Section 64 gives projection to a iransferee of trust
property for consideration from a bona fide purchaser with-
out notice of the trust.

In Engiand the rule as pointed out in Lewin’ is that
a purchaser with notice from a purchaser withaut notice is
exempt from the trust and this is by reason of the protec-
tion which the bona fide purchaser without notice enjoys.
It is also pointed out that if the innocent purchaser is pre-
vented from disposing of the beneficial interests it would
result in stagnation of property. The same rule obtains in
America and is contained in section 316 of the American
Restatement.®

ALL.R. 41 Mad. 124,
*LL.R. (1954) Mad. 537.

3866 para. 75, infra.

‘See in Re Travancore puilon Bank Lid,, ALR. 1939 Mad. 337 and

Kshetra Mohan v. Official Liquidator, ALR. 1943 Cal. 105, and the ‘cases
referred to therein,

"Lewin on Trusts (15th edn.}, p. 733,
"Vol. 2, 9. 953.



23

Under section 64, a transferee for consideration from a
transferee in good faith for consideration, without notice of
the trust, is protected and this protection extends whether
such a transferee had or had not notice of the trust, for the
section does not say that he should also be a person
acting in good faith and without notice. There is no reason,
therefore, to introduce into the section any other qualifica-
tions. When once we reach the stage of a bona fide trans-
feree without notice, for consideration, of the trust property,
the right to follow the trust property comes to an er.d and
enables such a transferee to pass on good title. It is pro-
bably on this ground that a transferee for consideration
from him is protected whether he had or had not notice
of the trust.

But the question for consideration is whether a mere
volunteer, that is, a transferee for no consideration with or
without notice should also be protected. On principle,
when an indefeasible title is vested in a bona fide trans-
feree without notice, there is no reason to exclude the pro-
tection to a volunteer and draw a distinction between a
person who paid consideration and one who had not, and a
person who had notice and one who had not. We think
that such volunteers should also be protected.

78. There is also another suggestion which may be con-
sidered in this connection. If the trustee himself purchases
the property from the transferee who fulfils the conditions
of clause (a) of section 64, should he be allowed to retain
the property in his own right or should it go back to the
trust? In England and America, the law is that the property
in his hands in that event is subject to the trust. The
same is the position under section 65 of the Indian Act.
We see no reason to alter the law on this point.

74. The reference in the section to the Contract Act may
be replaced by appropriate references to the Sale of Goods
ct.

75. Section 65 should be placed after section 62.

76. The view of the Calcutta High Court in Lalit Mohan
प्र. Kishort Mohan Roy,? which holds that “transfer” in the
section includes also “involuntary transfer”, may not be
strictly correct; but the conclusion is justified, as it is :n the
interests of the trust that the trustee should not by asubter-
fuge allow the trust property to be sold in an execution
sale with a view to acquiring the same subsequently from
the court auction purchaser. Such sales also must be
brought within the net of section 65. To achieve this
object, we think that the expression “otherwise transfers”
should be amplified.

1Lewin on Trusts (1gth edn), p. 723 ; American Restatement on Trusess
Vol. 2, 5. 317 (953)-
AA.LR, (1949) Cal. 288 (291-292).

Section 65.


Section 66,

शव

77. In section 65, provision should also be made on the
analogy of section 62, though not to the same extent, that
the beneficiary should recover the property only on con-
dition that he pays the purchase-money which was paid to
the benefit of the trust when the trustee in the first instance
wrongfully alienated the trust property.

78. In order to make the position just and equitable in-
stead of the existing provision that trust property re-
acquired by the trustee, under the cireumstances stated
in the section, becomes subject to the trust, it may be pro-
vided, as in section 62, that the beneficiary has « right to
have the property declared subject to the trust or to have
it re-transferred by the trustee.?

79. The principle of section 65 should also apply to a
case where a person is pay to a breach of trust by the
trustee. Suitable amendment of section 65 may be made.
The American Restatement, section 318? would afford
useful guidance in making the alteration. Tt runs as
follows:—

“Tf the trustee in breach of trust transfers trust
property to a person who has notice of the breach of
trust and the property is thereafter transferred to a
bona fide purchaser and subsequently is transferred to
ihe first transferee, that transferee holds it subject to
the trust”,

80. It was suggested that in section 66 the word “wrong-
fully” should be omitted so as to make the principle appli-
cable whether the mixing of the trust funds is rightful or
wrongful. The basis for the suggestion is the decision of
the Judicial Committee in Official Assignee, Madras v.
Krishnaji Bhatt’ The aforesaid decision, however, does
not support the view underlying the suggestion. ‘Where
the mixing is rightful, the telationship would then be re-
duced to that of a debtor and creditor, as the money in the
hands of the trustee in such an evert would cease to bear
the character of a trust. Tf, on the other hand, a crustee
wrongfully mixes trust funds with his own, the trust
continues and the right to follow the trust property will
accrue.* In the case before the Judicial Committes* the
fund itself was deposited with a view to investment and,
therefore, initially in the hands of the teustee it was im-
pressed with trust. Whether the trustee thereafte- invests

108 regards the broader question as to whether section 64 should be
changed and the trustee protected, sce the discussion above undei section 64
supra.

Vol. 2, 954.
*LLR. 56 Mad, 570.
“See the discussion in Mulla ; Law of Insolvency in India (1958 edn.),
457.

356 LL-R. Mad. 570.


25

it separately or invests in his own business, that is, whether
the disposition is rightful or wrongful, makes no difference
as he still continues to hold the property as trustee. It is
not a case of wrongful mixing of trust money at the in-
ception. We therefore, think that the word “wrongful”
need not be omitted.

81, Section 67 needs no change. Section 67,

82, The words “or does, not within a reasonable time Section 68.
take proper steps to protect the interests of the other bene-
ficiaries” in clause (०0) may be omitted, as it would be
wholly unreasonable to throw a burden on the beneficiary
to protect the interests of the other beneficiaries, merely
because he has knowledge of the breach of trust, on pain
of his becoming liable for the loss which the other bene-
ficiaries and himself may suffer. We have tried to find out
the basis for this rule in English law, and we found
that this section was based on Raby v. Ridehalgh, as
could be seen from the marginal note in the original Bill
as modified by the Commission. On an examination of the
case we find that the case itself does not go to that length,
and there is nc authority either in England or in America
to support that view. We think it is an unjustified burden
thrown upon the beneficiary. The last paragraph of sec-
tion 68 may be omitted?

83. No change. Section 69.

Cuaprer VII—Of vacating the Office of Trustee

84. These sections may be considered together. Section Sections 70

70 speaks of a vacancy occurring in the office of a trustee to 74:
either by death or by his discharge from his office. ‘The

discharge from office is either under seciion 71 or under

section 72. There may be a need to appoint a trustee wnen

the trustee appointed disclaims (section 59). In all these

three cases, a trustee has to be appointed. Some other

reasons for appointing a new trustee are enumerated in

section 73, viz., where the existing trustee—

(8) is absent for a continuous period of six months
from. India; or

(b) is leaving India for the purpose of residing
abroad; or

(c) is declared insolvent; or
(d) desires to be discharged from the trust; or

(९) refuses or becomes, in the opinion of a principal
civil court of original jurisdiction, unfit or personally
incapable to act or accepts an inconsistent trust.

17 De G.M. & G, 104, 705, 109,
‘See para, 64, supra.



Sections 75,
76 and 77.

Section 78.

Section 79

26

Regarding the desire to be discharged from the trust,
that has to be done on an application under section 72, read
with clause (f) of section 71.

Section 71 should be amended to cover cases of renuncia-
tion! Further, the discharge under s. 71(a) to (e) is auto-
matic, while that under s. 71 (f) requires an order of the
court. To make this clear, suitable verbal changes may
be made.

The first principle of filling up a vacancy is to have
regard to clauses (a) and (b) of section 73. Lf that is not
possible, recourse must be had to court under section 74
which also lays down the qualifications or the considerations
that should be taken into account in selecting a new trustee.
A logical and intelligible arrangement af the provisions
would be to provide, firstly, for the vacancy in the office of
a trust by death or by discharge or by disclaimer; then to
provide for other reasons for which a new trustee has to be
appointed; and then to lay down the method cf filling up
the vacancy, first by following the rules in clauses (a) and
(b) of section 73 and, if they cannot be applied, by having
recourse to court under section 74, and, lastly, to provide
for the considerations to be taken into account in selecting
a new trustee. Necessary changes may be made to give
effect to this arrangement. In this connection, reference
may pe made to section 47 of the Bombay Public Trusts

ct also,

Section 73 should also cover the case of a trustee under
disability, ete?

85. In section 75, the reference to sections 73 and 74 may
be suitably changed consequential on the prop osed = re-
arrangement of the matter at present contained in those
sections. In section 76, the case of disclaimer should be
covered. No change is required in section 77.

86. Objection has been taken 1o the statemer.t in section
78 that a trust created by a will may be revoked by the
testator, on the ground that it is an elementary principle of
Jaw that a will being ambulatory in effect can be revoked
by the testator any time before his death. Probably it was
intended to make sure of the law in 1882 when things were
not so clear as they are now. It may, however, be modified
in a suitable manner. Similarly, it would be better to state
in clause (०) the proposition in a positive form rather than
in the negative. A trust in favour of creditors becomes
operative once it has been communicated, and before that it
will be imperfect and can be revoked at any time.

87. No change.

1866 discussion under 8. 46.
"See discussion above under section 10,


27

Cuapter IX.—Certain obligations in the Nature of Trusts

88. No change.

The language of the second paragraph should be
modernised and made comprehensive enough to include all
involuntary sales,

89, The illustrations to the section constitute a useful
gloss on the expression ‘trusts incapable of being executed’.
AS we are omitting illustrations, we suggest that a clause
be introduced in the section enumerating the cases con-
templated by the illustrations and declaring the same to
be deemed to be included among cases where the trust is
incapable of being executed,

90, No change.

91, In the report of the Law Commission on the Indian
Contract Act, it was observed:

“The doctrine underlying section 84 of the Trusts
Act is obviously different. But the conditions for the
application of the rule are the same in the Trusts Act
as under the principle of quasi-contract and the result
is similar, The extension of the provision in section 84
to include the contractual aspec! would result in the
advantage f having a comprehensive provision relat-
ing to the subject of frustration of an illegal purpose
instead of having two parallel provisions in two
separate enactments. The title of the Chapter of the
Trusts Act in which section 84 is included is also wide
enough to admit of the extension, inasmuch as it does
not deal with cases of trusts proper but of ‘Certein
Obligations in the nature of trusts’!

On further consideration we think that this provision
should be inserted in the Contract Act. We recommend
that this may be borne in mind when the Contract Act is
amended.

92. No change.

93. We have carefully considered whether there is need
for any other reform of the provisions in this Chapter, and
have examined the cases and the opinions of text book
writers. We have come to the conclusion that no other
changes are needed.

94. The Schedule to the Act should be omitted?

Ar3th Report, pages 47-48, para, 100.
4See paragraph 7, supra.

Sections 80
and 81.

Section 82,

Section 83,

Section 84,

Sections 85
to 96.

Schedule,


28

Appendices. 95. With a view to presenting a clear picture of the
proposals made by us in this Report, we have shown our
proposals in the form of draft amendments to the existing
‘Act, in Appendix 1.

Appendix II contains the suggestions made by us in res-
pect of other Acts.

1, T. L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR--Chairman.
2. P, SATYANARAYANA RAO. |

3. L. S. MISRA,

4. G. BR. RAJAGOPAUL. है Members.
5. 5. CHAUDHURI. i

6. N. A. PALKHIVALA. J

P. M. BAKSHI, Deputy Draftsman.
New Der.xr;
The 6th January, 1961.


APPENDICES

APPENDIx I.—Proposals as shown in the form of Draft
Amendments.

(This is a tentative draft only).

2 of 1882, The preamble to the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (hereinafter Preamble.
referred to as the principal Act), shall be omitted.

__ For the expression “‘a principal civil court of original Substitutior
jurisdiction”, wherever it occurs in the principal Act, the of the ex-
expression “the district court” shall be substituted.’ Pression

“the dis-
trict court *
for “a
Principal
civil court
of original
jurisdic-
tion”,

All illustrations appearing below any section of the Omission of

principal Act shall be omitted. illustrations.
In-section 1 of the principal Act,— “Section 1.
(a) in the first paragraph, the word “Indian” shall
be omitted;

(9) in the second paragraph, the words “and the
Andaman and Nicobar Islands; but the Central Gov-
ernment may, from time to time, by notification in the
Official Gazette, extend it to the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands or to any part thereof” shall be omitted.

Section 2 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Section 2.
For section 3 of the principal Act, the following हि
section shall be substituted, namely:—- Section 3.

| “3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise re- Interpreta-
quires,— tion.
(a) “breach of trust” means a breach of any duty

imposed on a trustee. as such, by any law for the
time being in force;

(b) “district court” means, the principal civil oy s oO
court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other [ dinate a=
civil court which may be specified by the State Gov-rioge Act,
ernment, by notification in the Official Gazette, as 1955-
having jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt
with in this Act;

386९ the discussion in the body of the Report under Section 3—" district
court.”

29


30

(०) “instrument of trust’ means the instrument,
if any, by which a trust is declared;

(d) “notice”.—A person ig said to have notice of
28 fact when he actually knows that fact, or when but
for wilful abstention from an inquiry or searc.a which
he ought to have made or gross negligence, he would
have known it.

Explanation (1) —Where any transaction relating
to immovable property is required by law tobe and
has been effected by a registered instrument, any
person acquiring such property or any part of, or
share or interest in, such properly shall be deemed
to have notice of such instrument as from the date
of registration or, where the property is not all situat-
ed in one sub-district, or where the registered instru-
ment has been registered under sub-section (2) of
section 30 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, from
the earliest date on which any memorandum of such
registered instrument has been filed by any Sub-
Registrar within whose sub-district any part of the pro-
perty which is being acquired, or of the property
wherein a share or interest is being acquired, is
situated:

Provided that—

(i) the instrument has been registered and
its registration completed in the manner  pres-
cribed by the Indian Registration Act, 1908, and
the rules made thereunder;

Gi) the instrument or memorandum has
peen duly entered or filed, as the case may be,
in books kept under section 51 of that Act; and

(iii) the particulars regarding the transaction
to which the instrument relates have been cor-
rectly entered in the indices kept under section 55
of that Act.

Explanation (2)—Any person acquiring any im-
movable property or any share or interest in any
such property shall be deemed to have notice of the
title, if any, of any person who is for the time being
in actual possession thereof.

Explanation (3)—A person shall be deemed to
have had notice of any fact if his agent acquires
notice thereof whilst acting on his behalf in the
course of business to which that fact is material:

16 of 1908,

16 of 1908.


9 of 1872,

31

Provided that, if the agent fraudulently conceals
the fact, the principal shall not be charged with
notice thereof as against any person who was a party
thereto or otherwise cognizant of the fraud.

(९) “registered” means registered under the law for
the time being in force for the registration of docu-
ments;

(f) “trust” means an obligation annexed to the
ownership of property, and arising out of @ con-
fidence reposed in and accepted by the owner, or
declared and accepted by him, forthe benefit of an-
other, or of another and the owner; and—

(i) “author of the trust’ means the person
who reposes or declares the confidence out of
which the trust arises;

(ii) “beneficiary? means the person for
whose benefit the confidence, out of which the
trust arises, is accepted;

(iii) “beneficial interest” or “interest of the
beneficiary” means the right of the beneficiary
against the trustee as owner of the trust property;

(g) “trustee” means the person who accepts the
confidence out of which a trust arises;

(h) “trust-property” or “trust-money” means the
subject-matter of the trust; and

G) all words and expressions used and rot defin-
ed_in this Act but defined in the Indian Contract Act,
1872, shall have the meanings respectively assigned
to them in that Act”,

For section 4 of the principal Act, the following sec-

tion shall be substituted, namely :—

“4. (1) A trust may be created for any lawful
purpose,
(2) The purpose of a trust is lawful unless—
{a) it is forbidden by law, or

(b) it is of such a nature that, if permitted, it
would defeat the provisions of any law, or

(९) it is fraudulent, or

(d) it involves or implies injury to the person:
or property of another, or

(e) the court regards it as immoral or oppose
ed to public policy,

Cf. s. 349)
and 4(2}
of the
Genera]
Clauses Act
1897.

Section 4.

Purpose of
trust to be
Jawful.


Sections 5
and 6,

‘Ceeation of
trust,

Formalities
for creation
of trust.

Cf. existing
8. 5, 1४
para, first
24 words
and 2nd
paz earlier
alf,

Of. existing
$. 5, 181 para,
last 14 words
and and

para.
earlier half.

Cf. existing
8 5) 2nd
ara, latter
alf.

Of. enisting
8. 6» paren-
thesis and
last 6 words.

Cf. existing
है, 5, last
para,

32

(3) Every trust of which the purpose is unlawful
is void, and where a trust is created for twc purpos-
es, of which one is jawful and the other unlawful,
and the two purposes cannot be separated, the whole
trust is void.

Explanation.—In this section, the expression
“law” includes, where the trust-property is immov-
able and situate in a foreign country, the law of such
country.”.

For sections 5 and 6 of the principal Act, the following
sections shall be substituted, namely:—-

बहु, Subject to the provisions of section 8, a trust
is created when the author of the trust indicates with
reasonable certainty by any words or acts—

(a) an intention on his part to ereate there-
by a trust;

(b) the purpose of the trust;
(c) the beneficiary; and
(9) the trust-property.

6. (1) No trust in relation to any property shall
pe valid unless created in the manner hereinafter
provided in this section—

(2) A trust may be declared—

(a) by a_ non-testamentary instrument in
writing signed by the author of the trust or the
trustee and registered; or

(b) by the will of the author of tae trust or
of the trustee. .

(3) A trust in relatian to movable property may
also be created by transferring the ownership of the
property to the trustee in any manner permitted by
aw.

(4) Except where the trust is declared by will
or the author of the trust is himself to be the trustee,
the author of the trust shall in every case transfer
the trust-property to the trustee.

(5) The provisions of this section de not apply
where they would operate so as to effectuate a fraud”.


In section 7 of the principal Act, for clause (b), the Section 7.
following clause shall be substituted, namely:—~

“(b) on behalf of a minor, by his lawful guardian
with the permission of the district court;”.

For section 10 of the principal Act, the following Section 10.
section shall be substituted, namely:—

“10. (1) Every person capable of holding property Competence |

may be a trustee. trustee and

a tance of
(2) No one is bound to accept a trust. tus, ee

(3) A trust is accepted by any words or acts! of
the trustee indicating with reasonable certainty such
acceptance.

(4) Instead of accepting a trust, the intended
trustee may, within a reasonable period, disclaim it,
and such disclaimer shall prevent the trust-property
from vesting in him.

(5) A disclaimer by one of two or more co-
trustees vests the trust-property in the other or
others, and makes him or them sole trustee or
trustees from the date of the creation of the trust.

(6) Where a person incompetent to contract by
reason of minority or other disability is appointed to
be a trustee, he cannot execute the trnst until the
disability ceases and he accepts the trust ”.

In section 11 of the principal Act, for the se*cnd para- Section 11,
graph, the following paragraph shall be substituted,
namely:—

“Where a beneficiary is incompetent to contract,
or unborn? the district court may, for the piposes of
this section, give its approval to any modification,
provided the court is of opinion that the modification
is or would be for the benefit of the beneficiary.”.

In section 17 of the printipal Act, for the second Para- Section 17.

graph, the following paragraph shall be substituted,
namely:—

“Where the trustee has a discretionary power,
nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise
the court to control the exercise of such discretion, so
Jon, as that discretion is exercised reasonably and in
ood faith.”

"tin the India Gode, Vol. VIIIB, Part 1%, page a5, in seco lovee ection 10, third
para, the word * facts" is printed 3 bue it shoul be * nets 9० ) thir

*Cf. s. 1 (00 (0, Variation of Trusts Act, 1958 (6 & 7 Eliz, 2, Ch, 53).


84

Section 20. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely:—

“90, Where the trust-property consists of money

Tavestment

of trust and cannot be applied immediately or at an early

moneys date to the purposes of the trust, the trustee is bound

Cf. ४350) (subject to any direction contained in the instrument

main para. of trust)--

of the Bom-

bay Ace (a) to deposit the money in the State Bank

Be 31, Indian of India or any bank which is its subsidiary bank

‘Trusts Act, as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary

1882) last 7 Banks) Act, 1959; or 38 of 1959..

(9) to deposit it in a Government Savings

Cf.s. > .

chs 35. Bank; or

of the Bom-

bay Act. (c) to deposit it in a co-operative bank speci-
Cf. s. 20 (०) fied in this behalf by the State Government by
On (४), notification in the Official Gazette; or

indjan

‘Trusts Act, (a) to invest it in public securities; or

cf $.

Site Benke

of India

{e) to invest it in shares in the Stace Bank

Act, 1955.
of India;? or
Gf. existing
$. 20
indian ©
Trusts Act, (f) to invest it on a first mortgage of immov-
1882, able property situated in any part of the territor-
jes to which this Act extends, if the property is
not a leasehold for a term of years and the
वि value of the property exceeds by one-half the
CF existing mortgage-money; or
Proviso,
Andian (g) to invest it in securities, both the princi-
wee ee al whereof and the interest whereon shall have
° een fully and unconditionally guaranteed by

Cf. existing the Government; or

3. 20 (f),

Indian

‘Tyasts Act, (४) to invest it in any other manner express~
. ly authorised by the instrument of trust;? and to

invest it in no other manner.
tft is considered unnecessary to add subsidiary banks here.

‘Investments authorised by rules made by the High Court have been
omitted as proposed.



35
Explanation.—In this section, “public securities” Cf. s. 2 (12)
means— Bombay
Public
‘Trusts Act,
1950.

(४) Government securities, that is to a
securities of the Governm2nt. including securities
created or issued by the Government for the pur-
pose of raising a public joan in any of the follow-

ing forms, namely:——

(i) stock traasferable by registration incy. s. 2 (2)
the books of the Reserve Bank of India; (9) @ and
(ii), Public
Debt Act,
1944, which
replaces
s, 2 (a) of
the Indian
Securities
Act, 1920.

(ii) promissory notes payable to order;

(b) certificates, ponds and other documents
issued by the Central Government as a part of
the National Savings Scheme, whatever be the
designation under which they are issued;

(0) stocks, debentures or shares in any com- CFS 2o(e)
pany or corporation, the interest or dividend on indian ‘Act
which has been guaranteed by the Government; 1882. °

(d) debentures or other securities for money C/.s. 20 (i,
issued by or on behalf of any local authority in I ian
exercise of the powers conferred by any Central, teat Ast
State or Provincial Act.”.

In section 20A of the principal Act, in the proviso to Section 204°
sub-section (1), for the words. letters, brackets and

figures “clauses (c) and (d) of section 20”, the words

letters, brackets, and figures “elauses (c) and (d) of she
Explanation to section 20” shall be substituted.

For section 21 cf the principal Act, the following sec- Scetion 24.

tion shall be substituted, namely:—
“99, A trustee shall not be liable for a breach (हर 4 Non-liability
(inglish) for retain-

‘of trust by reason only of his continuing to hold. i
. . i st
an investment which has ceased to be an invest- AES, «ments which

ment authorised by the instrument of trust or bY (15 and have ceased

the general law.” 16, 000. be autho-
5. 6 29.

In section 26 of the principal Act,— Section 26.

“ (a) in the first paragraph, the words and figures
Subject to the provisions of sections 13 and 15” shall
be omitted;


36

(b) to the proviso, the following clause shall be
added, namely:—

Cf. existing “(d) where he has, otherwise by his neglect,
3... 27 Ist enabled the other trustee to commit a breach of
Para, trust.”,

(c) the last paragraph shall be omitted.’

Section 27, In section 27 of the principal Act, for tke first para-
graph, the following paragraph shall be substituted,
namely:— *

“Where co-trustees jointly commit a breach of
trust, or where one of them becomes liable under the
proviso to section 26 for any breach of trust commit-
ted by his co-trustee, each is liable to the beneficiary
for the whole of the loss occasioned by such breech.”,

Section 30, For section 30 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely:—

हि “30. (1) Subject to the provisions of the instru-

Jpemnity of ment of trust and of sections 23, 26 and 27, a trustee

of. Se 2000, shail be chargeable only for money, stocks, funds and
(English) securities actually received by him. and shall be

Prustec Act answerable and accountable only for his own acts,

(5 & 16 receipts, neglects or defaults, and not “or those of
Geo. $ Ch. any other trustee, nor for any banker, broker or
19). other person in whose hands any trust-properiy may
be placed, nor for the insufficiency or deficiency of
any stocks, funds or securities, nor otherwise for in-
voluntary losses.
Of. 26 (2) A co-trustee who joins in signing a receipt
last as for trust property and proves that he has not receiy-
Tadian ed the same is not answerable, by reason of such
Tags Ace signature only, for loss or misapplication of the pro-
7 perty by his co-trustee,”.
section 3c. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following
iNew]. section shall be inserted, namely:—
Liability of a “30A. When a person intermeddles with the
wtustee de son trust-property or does any other act which belongs
tort. to the office of the trustee, he is answerable to the
oh 8 383 rightful trustee or to the beneficiary, to the extent of
Yndian 304 the trust-property which may have come to his
Succession hands, after deducting payments made to the right-
Act, 1925, ful trustee and payments made in due course of ad-

ministration of the trust.

I. Section 26, last paragraph is proposed to be omitted, since its sub—
stance is em odiéd in section 30 a8 proposed.


37

(2) A person who intermeddles with the trust- 8.55 वन
property for the purpose of preserving it or provid- (2am At”
ing for the immediate necessities of the property, or 1925. i
dealing in the ordinary course of business with trust-
property received from another, shall not be arswer-

able under this section”?

For section 34 of the principal Act, the following Section 34.
section shall be substituted, namely:—

“34. (1) Any trustee or beneficiary may, without Right to
instituting a suit, apply by petition to the district epply t0
court for— opinicn,

(a) its opinion on any question affecting the
rights and interests of any other person claiming
to be a beneficiary;

(b) a direction—(i) for the furnishing of
any particular accounts by the trustee and the
vouching, when necessary, of such accounts, or
Gi) for the auditing of any particular accounts
in a manner to be specified by the court;

(०) a direction to the trustee to do or abstain
from doing any particular act in his character 2s
such trustee;

(व) its opinion, advice or direction on any Cf. existing
other present question respecting the manage- ee TS
ment or administration of the trusi property, para.

(2) Notice of such petition shall be served upon, Cf. existing
and the hearing thereof may be attended by, such > ah 2nd
of the persons interested in the application as the
court thinks fit.

(8) Where the trustee is a respondent. the issue
of summons on such petition shall not interfere with
or control any power or discretion vested in the
trustee, except in so far as such interference or control
is necessarily involved in the particular relief sought.

(4) The jurisdiction of the court on 3. petition
made under this section shall not extend to the
determination of—

(9) questions involving charges of breach of
trust, unless the parties have consented;
(9) claims made adversely to the trust;

(९) questions of detail, difficulty or import- Cf. existing.
ance not proper in the opinion of the court for oa ts
summary disposal. Para

3566 the discussion jn the body of the Report under section 3—
“Trustee de son tort”,


Of. cxisting

3. 34, ठा।
para.

Ch. 5... उक
4th para,

Section 34A.

38

(5) The trustee stating in good faith the facts in
such petition and acting upon the opinion, advice or
direction given by the court shall be deemed, so far
as regards his own responsibility, to have cischarged
his duty as such trustee in the subject-matter of the
application.

(6) An order made under this section shall be
binding, subject to the result of any appeal under
sub-section (9), on all persons who are parties to the
proceedings and on all persons on whom notice is
served under sub-section (2).

(7) The court may, in a proceeding under this
section, take evidence, if it thinks necessary, and
after hearing the parties or the persons interested
or their pleaders, shall pass such order as it thinks fit.

(8) The costs of every petition under this section
shall be in the discretion of the court to which it is
made.

(9) Aga‘nst an order made by the court under
this section, an appeal shall lie to the court to which
appeals ordinarily lie from the decrees of that court,

(10) The provisions of this section shail apply,
as far as may be, to proceedings before the court
under sections! 11, 22, 32, 36, 41, 45, 46, 49, 53, 59, 72,
73, 73A and 74.”.

After section 34 of the principal Act, the following

section shall b2 inserted, name'y:—

Power of
court to
authorise
dealings with
trust-
property.

Cf 8. st
(Engiish)
Trustee Act,
1925. (15 &
16 Geo. 5.
Ch. 19)

“34A. (1) Where in the management or adminis-
tration of any trust-property, any sale, lease, mort-
gage, surrender, release or other disposition, or any
purchase, investment, acquisition, expenditure or
other transaction is. in the opinion of the court, expe-
dient, but the same cannot be effected by reason of
the absence of any power for that purpose vested in
the trustee by the instrument of trust (if any), or
by law, the court may, by an order made on an ap-
plication under section 34 confer upon the trustee,
either generally or in any particular case, the neces.
sary power for the purpose, on such terms, and
subject to such provisions and conditions, if any, 2s
the court may think tit, and may direct in what
manner any money authorised to be expended, and
the costs ot any transaction, are to be paid or borne.
as between capitat and income.

‘Section 34A, proposed to be added, is not mentioned here, as that

section refers back to section 34. Section ६0 speaks of a “contract and
hence has not been mentioned here.


39

(2) The court may, from time to time, rescind
or vary any order made under this section, or may
make any new or further order.

(3) An application to the court for the purposes

of this section may be made by the trustees, or by

any of them, or by any beneficiary”?

In section 36 of the principal Act,— Section 36.
(a) the words and figures “and to the provisions

of section 17” shall be omitted;
(9) for the words: “exceeding twenty-one years’,

the words “exceeding five years” shall be substituted.

In section 42 of the principal Act, for the words “Any Section q2.
trustees or trustee may give a receipt in writing for any
money, securities or othzr moveable property payable,
transferable or deliverable to them or him”, the words
“A trustee, or, if there are more trustees than one, all
of them jointly, may give a receipt in writing for any
money, securities or other movable property payable,
transferable or deliverable to him or them” shall be
substituted.

In section 43 of the principal Act, the last paragraph Section 43.
shall be omitted.

In section 47 of the principal Act, for the first para- Section 47-
graph, the following paragraph shall be substituted,
namely:—

“A trustee cannot delegate his office or any of
his duties either to a co-trustee or to any other
person, unless—

(a) the instrument of trust so provides, or

(b) the delegation is in the regular course
of business, or

(c) the delegation is necessary, or

(d) the beneficiary, being competent to con-
tract, consents to the delegation.”.

In section 56 of the principal Act, the last paragraph Section 56,
shall be omitted.

In section 58 of the principal Act, the proviso shal] Section 58.
be omitted. Principal Act, the Proviso shal

For section 59 of the principal Act, the following Section sg.
Section shall be substituted, namely:—

“59. Where, after a trust has been validly ett fe

created!— apply for

execution

(a) all the trustees die, disclaim or are dis- OF trust.
charged; or

*Proposed section 34A is based on the suggestion made in the body of
Report, vide the discussion relating te section ai ¥of the


0

(b) for any other reason the execution of
the trust by the trustee is or becomes impracti-
cable,

the beneficiary or any other person interested in the
trust may make a petition to the district court for
the execution of the trust, and the trust snall, so far
as may be possible, be executed by the Court until
the appointment. of a trustee or new trustee.”

Section 60. In section 60 of the principal Act, in Explanation 1,
the words “unless the personal law of the beneficiary
allows otherwise, a married woman and” shall te
omitted.

Section 62. For section 62 of the principal Act, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—

Wrongful “2, (1) Where a trustee has wrongfully purchas-

purchase of ed trust-property, the beneficiary has a right to have

property by the property declared subject to the trust or re-

trustee. transferred by the trustee, if it remains in his hands
unsold, or, if it has been purchased from him by any
person with notice of the trust or aequired from hiay
by any person without consideration, by such person
but in such case the beneficiary must repay the pus
ehase-money paid by the trustee, with interest, ant
such other expenses (if any) as have beea properly
curred in the preservation of the property by the
trustee or purchaser or such person; and the trustee
or purchaser or such person must—

(a) account for the net profits of the pro-
perty,

(b) be charged with an occupation rent, if
he has been in actual possession of the property,
and

(c) allow the beneficiary to deduct a propor-
tionate part of the purchase-money if tke pro-
perty has deteriorated by reason of any act
or omission of the trustee or purchaser or such
person.

(2) Nothing in this section shall—

(a) impair the rights of lessees and others.
who, before the institution of a suit to have the
property declared subject to the trust or re-
transferred, have contracted in good faith with
the trustee or purchaser or such person; or

(b) entitle the beneficiary to have the pro-
perty declared subject to the trust or re-transfer-
red where he, being competent to contract, has

1As death, disclaimer and discharge are the only situations in which
a vacancy arises, the words “110 trustees arc appointed”? have been omitted
consequential on the proposal to confine the section to subsequent vacan—
cies,


Cf. existing
section 65.

4)

himself, without coercion or undue influence
having been brought to bear on him, ratified the
sale to the trustee with full knowledge of the facts
of the case and of his rights as against the trustee;
or

(c) be construed as impairing any right of
the beneficiary to obtain any other ‘relief to
which he may be entitled in respect of the pro-
perty.”.

After section 62 of the principal Act, the following

section shall be inserted, namely:—

“62A. (1) Where a trustee wrongfully sells or
otherwise transfers trust-property and afterwards
himself becomes the owner of the property, the
beneficiary has a right to have the property declared
subject to the trust or retransferred by the trustee,
notwithstanding any want. of notice on the part of
intervening transferees in good faith for considera-
uon.

(2) Where a trustee, in breach of trust, sells or
otherwise transfers trust-property to a person who
has notice of the breach of trust, and the transferee
transfers the property to any other person and after-
wards himself becomes the owner of the property,
the beneficiary has the right to have the property
declared subject to trust or retransferred by the first-
mentioned transferee, notwithstanding any want of
notice on the part of intervening transferees in good
faith for consideration.

(3) The beneficiary shall not be entitled to the
benefit of this section unless he pays to the trustee
or the transferee, as the case may be, the value of
the consideration for the wrongful sale or transfer
which, having been received by the trustee for the
wrongful sale or transfer, has been applied for the
benefit of the beneficiary,

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, a
trustee who wrongfully allows the trust-property to
be sold by or under the decree or order of a compet-
ent court or in pursuance of any law for the recovery
of arrears of land revenue or sums recoverable as
such arrears, shall be deemed to have wrongfully
sold the property, and the provisions of this section
shall apply in relation to such sale accordingly.”.

To section 63 of the principal Act, the following para-

graph and Explanation shall be added, namely: —

_ ‘Nothing in this section shall be construec| as im-
pairing any right of the beneficiary to obtain any other

Section 6228...

Acquisition
by trustee of
his transferee
of trust-
Property

wrongfully
converted.

Section 63.


Section 64.

3 of 1930.

Section 65,

Section 68,

Section 71.

42

relief to which he may be entitled in respect of the pro-
perty.

Explanation.—Where money? or other property is
deposited with any person as security for the due dis-
charge of the duties of any office or for the perfor-
mance of any contract, such person shall, for the pur-
poses of this section, be deemed [0 be holding such
money or other property in trust for the depositor, and
the provisions of this section shall apply thereto
accordingly”.

In section 64 of the principal Act,—

(a) in the first paragraph, in clause (9), the words
“for consideration” shall be omitted;

(b) in the Jast paragraph, for the words, figures and
brackets “the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (IX of 1872),
section 108”, the words and fig ures “sections 27, 28, 29
and 30 of the Indian Sale of Gonds Act, 1930”, shall be
substituted,

Section 65 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

In section 68 of the principal Act,—

(i) in the first paragraph, for clause (c), the follow-
ing clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(c) becomes aware of a breach of trust com-
mitted or intended to be committed and actually
conceals it, or”;

(ii) the last paragraph shall be omitted.

In section 71 of the principal Act,-—

(i) for the words “may be discharged”, the words
“ig discharged” shall be substituted;

(ii) for clauses (e) and (f), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
+ (६) by renunciation under section 46; or

(0) by an order of the Court ta which a petition
for discharge is presented under section 72.”

1As to ‘money or other property’? compare existing secticn ae

paragraph also. For money ‘that has passed in circulation to @ bona fide
holder, see section 64.

This is consequential on the proposed addition of szction 62A,


43

Sections 73, For sections 73 and 74 of the principal Act, the follow-
734 and74- ing sections shall be substituted, namely:

“73, (1) Whenever any trustee, either original or Appointment

sti new
substituted,— trustee.

Gf. existing - (a) disclaims or dies; or
8.73, Open-
ing part. (b) is for a continuous period of six months
absent from India, or leaves India for the purpose
of residing abroad; or

(९) is declared an insolvent; ov
(d) desires to be discharged from the trust; or
(e) refuses to act as a trustee: or

Of... 47 (£) becomes, in the opinion of the district court.

ge Bom- unfit or physically incapable to act in the trust or

न Public aecep's a position which is inconsistent with the
‘rusts Act, trust:

7950, Trust,

then, a new trustee may be appointed in his place.

Explanation.—The provisions of this sub-section
relating to a trustee who is dead include the case of a
person nominated trustee in a will but dying before the
testator.

(2) Where a person incompetent to contract by
reason of minority or other disability is appointed to
be a trus'ee, the district court shall appoint another
person to act as a trustee in his place until the  dis-
ability ceases and he accepts the trust.

Cf. existing 738A. (1) The appointment 0 8 new trustee under Person com-
& 73, ost section 73 may be made by— perent to
para., clauses. il up
(@) and (5) वि f vacancy.
(a) the person nominated for that purpose by
the instrument of trust (if any); or
(b) if there be no such yerson, or no such
person able and willing to act.
(i) the author of the trust, if he be alive
and competent to contract; or
(ii) the surviving or continuing trustees or
trustee for the time heing; or
iii) the legal representative of the last
surviving and continuing trustee; or
(iv) (with the consent of the district
court), the retiring trustees, if they ail retire
simultaneously, or, with the like consent, the
last retiring trustee.

Cf. existing (2) Every such app ointment shall be rnade by
x 32, wid writing under the hand of the person making it.
‘parts.


44

(3) On an appointment of a new trustee the: num-
ber of trustees may be increased,

(4) The Official Trustee may, With his consent and
by the order of the court, be appointed under this
section, in any ease in which only one trustee is to be
appointed and such trustee is to be the sole trustee.

Explanation.—The provisions of this section relat-
ing toa continuing trustee include the case of a refus-
ing or retiring trustee if willing to act in the execution
of the power.

Appointment 74. (१) Whenever a trustee is to be appointed under

by comrt. section 73 and it is found impracticable to make an ap-
pointment under section 73A, the beneficiary may, with-
out instituting a suit, apply by petition to the district
court for the appointment of a new trustee, anc. the
court may appoint a new trustee accordingly. -

(2) In making an appointment under sub-section
(1), the court shall have regard—

(a) to the wishes of the author of the trust as
expressed in or to be inferred from the instrument
of trust;

(9) to the wishes of the

powered to appoint new trustee: 3

(301, if any, em-

(९) to the question whether the appointment
will promote or impede the execution of the trust;
and

(व) where there are more heneficiaries than
one, to the interests of all such beneficiaries”.

‘Section 75. In sec ion 75 of the principal Act, for the words and
figures “section 73 or séction 74”, the words — and figures
“section 73, section 7A or section 74” shall be substituted.

Section 76. For section 76 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—

Survival of “76. On the death or discharge of one of several
crust and co-trustees or the disclaimer of the trust by one of them,
छिप on the trust survives and the trust-property passes to the
death, others, unless the instrument of trust expressly declares
discharge or otherwise.”,

disclaimer,

‘Section 78. For section 78 of the principal Act, the following section

shall be substituted, namely;~——

Revocation “78. (1) A trust created by will does not become
of trust, effective until the death of the testator and may be

revoked at the pleasure of the testator.

Cf. existing
8. 76.


45

(2) A trust created otherwise than by will can be
revoked only—

(a) where all the beneficiaries are competent
to contract, by their consent; or

(b) in exercise of a power of revocation ex-
pressly reserved to the author of the trust.

(3) Where the trust is for the payment of the debts
of the author of the trust, it does nat become effective
until it has been communicated io the creditors, and
may be revoked, before it is so communicated, at the
pleasure of the author of the trust”.

In section 82 of the principal Act, for the second para-
graph, the following, paragraph shall be substituted,
namely:—

“Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect
the provisions of section 66 of the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, or any similar provision in any law relat-
ing to recovery of arrears of land revenue or sums re-
coverable as such arrears.”

5 of 1908,

To section 83 of the principal Act, the following Ex-
planation shall be added, namely: —

“Explanation —In particular and without prejudice
to the generality of the provisions of this section, the
following shall be deemed to be cass where the trust
is incapable of being executed:—-

(a) where property is conveyed upon trust, and
no trust is declared;

(b) where property is conveyed upon trust to
be declared afterwards, and no such declaration is
ever made;

(९) where the trusts are too vague to be ex-
ecuted;

{d) where the trusts beccme incapable of tak-
ing effect;

(९) where the beneficiary rencunces his interest
under the trust”.

The Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.

‘This is consequential on the proposed omission of section 4.

Section 82,

Section 33.

The Sche~
dule,


Appenpix IL
Suggestions in respect of other Acts
1. The Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

Section 10 should be amended‘ on the lines of the
(English) Married Women (Restraint upon Anticipation)
Act, 1949,

2. The Indian Contract Act, 1872.

A comprehensive provision to deal with the subject of
frustration of an illegal purpose should be inserted in the
Contract Act?

1866 paragraph 64 of the body of the Report.

See paragraph 97 of the body of the Report.

46
GMGIPND—TSWing—3q2 M of Law—6-4-61—2,000.