                                                  LAW COMMISSION HOME PAGE 
  
  
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
         
                 
173RD REPORT 
  
ON 
  
PREVENTION OF TERRORISM BILL, 2000 
  
APRIL, 2000 
  
  
  
  
D.O. No.6(3)(53)/98-LC(LS) 
  
April 13, 2000 
  
Dear Shri Jethmalaniji, 
  
            I am forwarding herewith the 173 rd Report on “Prevention of Terrorism Bill, 
2000”. 
  
2.         The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India requested the Commission 
to undertake a fresh examination of the issue o f a suitable legislation for combating 
terrorism and other anti-national activities in view of the fact that security environment 
has changed drastically since 1972 when the Law Commission had sent its 43rd Report 
on offences against the national security.  The Government emphasised that the subject 
was of utmost urgency because the erstwhile Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) 
Act, 1987 had lapsed and no other law had been enacted to fill the vaccum arising 
therefrom.  The Commission was asked  to take a holistic view on the need for a 
comprehensive anti -terrorism law in the country.   The Commission circulated a 
working paper to all the concerned authorities, organisations and individuals for 
eliciting their views with respect to the proposals c ontained therein.  Two seminars 
were also held for this purpose.  
  
3.         The Commission took note of several points addressed by the speakers and after 
taking into consideration the several opinions expressed in these two seminars and the 
responses received, the present Report has been prepared.  

  
4.         The Commission has taken into consideration the original Criminal Law 
Amendment Bill, 1995 introduced in Rajya Sabha, as also the Official Amendments 
proposed by the Ministry of Home Affairs which are set out in the working paper 
(Annexure –I) annexed with  this Report.  The Report brings out that a legislation to 
fight terrorism is today a necessity in India.   It is not as if the enactment of such a 
legislation would by itself subdue terrorism.   It may, however, arm the State to fight 
terrorism more effecti vely.  Besides recommending for various measures to combat 
terrorism, the Commission has at the same time provided  adequate safeguards designed 
to advance the human rights aspects and to prevent abuse of power.   We have 
thoroughly revised the Criminal Law Amendment Bill and have suggested a new Bill 
“Prevention of Terrorism Bill” for it. 
 
 
5.         For the sake of convenience, the Bill entitled “Prevention of Terrorism 
Bill, 2000”  as modified by the Law Commission is  annexed with the Report. 
  
With  warm regards, 
  
Yours sincerely, 
  
  
(B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
Shri Ram Jethmalani, 
Minister for Law, Justice & Co. Affairs, 
Shastri Bhavan, 
New Delhi 
  
  
         
         
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
         
                 Sl.No.         Contents                        
         
                   1.           CHAPTER I 
                              INTRODUCTORY      
                  
                    2.        CHAPTER II 
                                 
         SECURITY SITUATION 
IN                               
                   THE COUNTRY 
  
                   3.        CHAPTER III                

WHETHER THE 
PRESENT                          
          LEGISLATION IS AT ALL 
NECESSARY?                    
  
                   4.        CHAPTER IV           
                      PARTs I-III OF THE 
CRIMINAL                                                  
   LAW AMENDMENT BILL 
  
                   5.         CHAPTER V 
                          PART IV OF THE CRIMINAL LAW 
             AMENDMENT BILL 
  
                   6.        CHAPTER VI 
                           SUGGESTIONS FOR INCLUSION OF 
                           CERTAIN ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 
         IN THE BILL 
                                           
                7.        ANNEXURE I 
                           WORKING PAPER ON LEGISLATION 
                             TO COMBAT TERRORISM              
  
8.                    ANNEXURE II –  
THE PREVENTION 
                        OF TERRORISM BILL, 2000 
          
  
  
  
                       CHAPTER I          
                     INTRODUCTORY 
         
         The Government of India in the Ministry  of  Home 
        Affairs requested the Law Commission to undertake a fresh 
        examination  of  the  issue of a suitable legislation for 
        combating terrorism and other anti-national activities in 
        view of the fact that security  environment  has  changed 
        drastically  since  1972 when the Law Commission had sent 
        its  43rd  Report  on  Offences  against   the   National 
        Security.  The government emphasised that the subject was 
        of  utmost  urgency  in  view  of the fact that while the 
        erstwhile   Terrorists    and    Disruptive    Activities 
        (Prevention)  Act, 1987 had lapsed, no other law had been 
        enacted to fill the vacuum arising therefrom.  The result 
        is that today there is no  law  to  combat  terrorism  in 
        India.   The Commission was asked to take a holistic view 
        on the need for a  comprehensive  anti-terrorism  law  in 
        India    after    taking   into   consideration   similar 
        legislations enacted in other countries  faced  with  the 

        problem of  terrorism.    Accordingly, the Commission had 
        taken up the study of the subject and prepared a  Working 
        Paper  (Annexure  I)  which  was  circulated  to  all the 
        concerned authorities, organisations and individuals  for 
        eliciting  their  views  with  respect  to  the proposals 
        contained therein.  Two seminars were also held for  this 
        purpose.  The first seminar was held on December 20, 1999 
        at the  India  International  Centre,  New Delhi.  It was 
        inaugurated by Shri Justice J.S.    Verma,  former  Chief 
        Justice  of  India  and  presently the Chairperson of the 
        National Human Rights Commission.  The following  persons 
        spoke at the  said  seminar:    Shri  P.P.    Rao, Senior 
        Advocate, Supreme  Court  and  former  President  of  the 
        Supreme Court  Bar  Association,  Brig.    Satbir  Singh, 
        Senior Fellow and OSD in Institute  for  Defence  Studies 
        and Analysis, Prof.     V.S.    Mani,  Jawarharlal  Nehru 
        University and Secretary-General, the Indian  Society  of 
        International Law,  Shri  K.T.S.  Tulsi, Senior Advocate, 
        Supreme Court and former  Additional  Solicitor  General, 
        Shri D.R.      Karthikeyan,   former  Director,  CBI  and 
        presently  holding  the   post   of   DG(Investigations), 
        National  Human Rights Commission, Shri Prashant Bhushan, 
        Advocate, Supreme Court and an activist in  human  rights 
        field, Prof.  B.B.  Pandey of Delhi University, Shri P.S. 
        Rao, Legal Adviser, Legal and Treaties Division, Ministry 
        of External  Affairs,  Shri  K.P.S.    Gill,  former DGP, 
        Punjab, Shri Ravi  Nair  from  South  Asia  Human  Rights 
        Documentation Centre,   Ms.      Kamini  Jaiswal,  Senior 
        Advocate, Supreme Court and  an  activist  in  the  human 
        rights field, Shri  Shiv  Basant  and Dr.  P.K.  Agarwal, 
        Joint Secretaries in the Ministry of Home  Affairs,  Shri 
        B.A.    Agrawal,   Joint  Secretary  and  Legal  Adviser, 
        Ministry of Law,  Justice  &  Co.    Affairs,  Shri  S.V. 
        Singh, Additional  DGP  Crime,  Punjab,  Shri S.S.  Puri, 
        Additional DGP(L&O),  Maharashtra,  Shri  M.L.    Sharma, 
        Joint Director,  CBI,  Shri  N.   Kumar, Senior Advocate, 
        Supreme Court,  Shri  Justice  Rajinder  Sachhar,  Senior 
        Advocate and former Chief Justice, Delhi High Court. 
         
         The  Commission made a note of the points made by 
        all the above speakers.  Shri Tulsi  has  also  sent  his 
        comments in writing.  The Addl.  DGP, CID, Assam has sent 
        his comments  in writing.  Amnesty International has also 
        sent a communication in this behalf  dated  December  18, 
        1999.   Though  the said organisation said in this letter 
        that they would be sending a detailed response later, the 
        Commission has not so  far  received  any  such  detailed 
        comments. 
         
         A  second seminar was held on January 29, 2000 in 
        association with the India International  Centre  in  the 
        auditorium of  India International Centre.  The following 
        persons spoke at this seminar:  Shri N.N.  Vohra,  former 
        Home  Secretary  and  Director of the India International 
        Centre  (who   co-chaired   the   seminar),   Shri   R.K. 
        Khandelwal,    former    Chairman,   Joint   Intelligence 
        Committee,  Shri  Prashant  Bhushan,  Advocate,   Supreme 

        Court, Shri P.K.    Dave,  former Lt.  Governor of Delhi, 
        Shri S.K.  Singh, former Foreign  Secretary,  Ms.    Maja 
        Daruwalla,    Director,    Commonwealth    Human   Rights 
        Initiative, Air  Chief  Marshal  N.C.     Suri,   Lt.Gen. 
        Raghavan, Shri  P.N.   Lekhi, Senior Advocate, Delhi High 
        Court, Shri D.R.  Karthikeyan, DG(Investigations),  NHRC, 
        Shri U.R.    Lalit,  Senior Advocate, Supreme Court, Shri 
        Ashok Bhan, Advocate (Kashmiri Pandit  -  migrant),  Shri 
        K.P.S.  Gill,  former DGP, Punjab, Shri P.P.  Rao, Senior 
        Advocate, Supreme Court, Dr.  Ajit Muzoomdar, IAS(Retd.), 
        Shri Sushil Kumar, Senior Advocate, Supreme  Court,  Shri 
        P.S.   Rao, Joint Secretary, Legal and Treaties Division, 
        Ministry of External Affairs, Brig.  Satbir Singh, Senior 
        Fellow and OSD in the Institute for Defence  Studies  and 
        Analysis  and  Shri  Ravi  Nair from the South Asia Human 
        Rights Documentation Centre.  (On account of  paucity  of 
        time,  several other participants could not speak on this 
        occasion.) Shri H.D.  Shourie, Director, "Common  Cause", 
        sent  his  written comments since he could not attend the 
        seminar personally.    Other  persons  who  sent  written 
        comments include the following:    Dr.    M.L.   Chibber, 
        General(Retd.), Shri L.  David, IPS, Assam,  Shri  K.T.S. 
        Tulsi,  Senior  Advocate,  Shri Rakesh Shukla, Secretary, 
        Peoples'  Union  for   Democratic   Rights,   Shri   K.G. 
        Kannibaran,  President,  PUCL, Shri Tapan Bose, Secretary 
        General, South-East Forum for  Human  Rights,  Shri  D.R. 
        Karthikeyan,   Director   General,  NHRC  and  Shri  A.K. 
        Srivastava, Judge  Advocate  General's  Branch.    Later, 
        South  Asia Human Rights Documentation Centre also sent a 
        written representation. 
         
         The Commission has taken note of  several  points 
        made by   the   above   speakers.     After  taking  into 
        consideration the several opinions expressed in these two 
        seminars and the responses received, the  present  report 
        has been prepared. 
  
  
         
                            CHAPTER II           
          SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY 
  
         
         In  its  Working Paper the Law Commission had set 
        out the following facts and figures in paragraphs 1.2  to 
        1.15 in chapter I.  They read as follows: 
         
         "1.2    The  law  and  order  situation  for some 
                years  has  continued  to  remain  disturbed   in 
                several parts    of    India.      Militant   and 
                secessionist activities in Jammu and Kashmir  and 
                the    insurgency-related    terrorism   in   the 
                North-East have  been  major  areas  of  concern. 
                Bomb  blasts  in  different parts of the country, 
                including  those  in  Tamil   Nadu,   constituted 

                another disquieting  feature.    There  has  been 
                extensive smuggling in of arms and explosives  by 
                various terrorists groups.  The seizures of these 
                items,  which represent but a small percentage of 
                the total quantities brought in indicate the kind 
                of  sophisticated  arms  and   explosives   being 
                brought into the country illegally. 
         
          The    security    situation    in   some 
                states/regions of the country is indicated below. 
         
         1.3     Jammu and Kashmir 
          There  have  been  45,182  incidents   of 
                terrorist  violence  in  J&K  since 1988 and upto 
                March 1999.  In  this  violence,  20,506  persons 
                have lost   their   lives.    3421  incidents  of 
                violence took place in Jammu  and  Kashmir  which 
                included  2198  cases  of  killing in 1997 alone. 
                5523 incidents and 2858 killings  took  place  in 
                1996.  In  1998, there were 2213 killings.  There 
                were numerous  cases  of  abductions,  robberies, 
                extortions,  explosions,  incidents  of arson and 
                killings.  Civilians remained the  major  victims 
                of violence (1333 killed in 1996, 864 in 1997 and 
                416 in the year 1998 upto June).  Security forces 
                personnel,  `friendly  militants'  and  political 
                activists  were  the  priority  targets  of   the 
                militants.   There  has  been  an increase in the 
                number of casualties among security forces. 
         
         1.3.1   The  militants  are  found  to  be   well 
                trained.   Most  of  them  are of foreign origin. 
                Mercenaries and fanatic fundamentalist terrorists 
                from  Afghanistan,  Sudan,  Pakistan  and   other 
                countries  are  being  inducted increasingly into 
                this movement.  According to several reports, one 
                of the prime targets of  international  terrorist 
                leaders, like  Osama  Bin Laden, is Kashmir.  The 
                terrorism in India has  thus  become  a  part  of 
                international  terrorism  and  India  one  of its 
                prime targets.  Their targets are security forces 
                personnel,   political    activists,    `friendly 
                militants',   suspected   informers   and   their 
                families, as also  Hindus  residing  in  isolated 
                pockets.   They  indulge in acts of demonstrative 
                violence, mainly with  the  help  of  explosives; 
                induction   of   more   and   more  sophisticated 
                weaponry, including anti-aircraft guns  and  RDX. 
                They  have  extended  the arc of terrorism to the 
                Jammu region, particularly  Rajouri,  Poonch  and 
                Doda districts. 
         
         1.3.2   The  militancy  in  Jammu and Kashmir has 
                left a large number of  Hindu  families  homeless 
                and  they  had to migrate to other places outside 
                the State. 
         

         1.4     Punjab 
          The State remains vulnerable to  sporadic 
                terrorist   actions   by   the  remnants  of  the 
                militants, numbering about 300, who appear to  be 
                under pressure to revive the separatist movement. 
                The  militant  bodies  are  funded  and  equipped 
                mainly by overseas activists. 
         
         1.4.1   The need for high level of vigil in order 
                to checkmate any attempts at revival of terrorism 
                in the State, hardly need be overemphasised. 
         
         1.5     North-Eastern Region 
          Militant activities of various  insurgent 
                and  extremist  groups  and  ethnic tensions have 
                kept the conditions disturbed in large  areas  of 
                the North East. 
         
         1.5.1   In  Assam,  ULFA, Bodo and Naga militancy 
                shows an upward trend in 1998, accounting for 735 
                incidents (603 killings) as against 427 incidents 
                (370 killings) in 1997.  This trend has continued 
                in the first eight  months  of  1999,  which  has 
                witnessed 298 incidents (208 killings).  Nalbari, 
                Nagaon  and  Kamrup  districts  remain  the worst 
                affected and Lakhimpur, Dibrugarh,  Goalpara  and 
                Jorhat  districts  moderately  affected  by  ULFA 
                violence. 
         
         1.5.2   The Bodo militants were  responsible  for 
                178  incidents (215 killings) in 1997, as against 
                213 incidents  (260  killings)  in  1996.    Bodo 
                militants were also responsible for 10 explosions 
                (22 deaths)  in  1997.    During  1998, an upward 
                trend has been evident. 
         
         1.5.3   The NSCN(I) and its satellite,  the  Dima 
                Halam  Deogah (DHD) in NC Hills and Karbi Anglong 
                districts and the NSCN(K) in Golaghat, Jorhat and 
                Sibsagar  districts  also  indulged  in   violent 
                activities.   There  was  a `ceasefire' agreement 
                (July 25,  1997)  between  the  NSCN(I)  and  the 
                Government of India. 
         
         1.5.4   Overall  militancy  in  Assam  showed  an 
                upswing in 1998, accounting for 735 incidents  as 
                against 427  in  1997.    The  upward  trend  has 
                continued in the  first  eight  months  of  1999. 
                Police,    security    forces    personnel    and 
                uncooperative  businessmen  have  been  the  main 
                targets of the outfits. 
         
         1.6     In  Manipur, despite large scale security 
                forces operations, there has been a sharp rise in 
                the overall violence, involving  Naga,  Kuki  and 
                Valley   extremists,   as   also   ethnic  groups 
                resulting in several deaths. 

         
         1.6.1   The State witnessed a  particularly  high 
                rate   of   security   forces  casualties  -  111 
                personnel lost their lives in 92 ambushes in 1997 
                as against 65 killed in 105 ambushes in 1996.  As 
                against total 417 incidents and 241  killings  in 
                1996,  these  groups  were  responsible  for  742 
                incidents in which 575  persons  were  killed  in 
                1997.   In  1998,  250 persons were killed in 345 
                incidents.  During 1999 (upto August), there have 
                been 153 incidents claiming 100 lives. 
         
         1.7     In Nagaland, there was no let up by  NSCN 
                and  its  factions in its violent activities such 
                as  extortions,   abductions   and   attacks   on 
                civilians, etc.      In   1998,  there  were  202 
                incidents which claimed 40 lives.    Upto  August 
                1999,  10 persons have been killed in 126 violent 
                incidents. 
         
         1.8     In Tripura,  violent  activities  of  the 
                various  tribal  organisations  like the ATTF and 
                the  NLFT,  and  assorted   groups   of   lawless 
                elements, continued.  During 1997, there were 303 
                violent   incidents,  involving  270  deaths,  as 
                against 391 incidents (178 deaths) in 1996.    In 
                1998,  251  persons  were  killed  in 568 violent 
                incidents.   During  1999  (till   August),   417 
                incidents   of   violence   have  been  reported, 
                resulting in 152 deaths. 
         
         1.8.1   The violence in all  above  cases  mostly 
                took  the  form  of ambushes, looting, extortion, 
                kidnapping  for  ransom,  highway  robberies  and 
                attacks  on trucks/vehicles as well as attacks on 
                the   security   forces   personnel,   government 
                officials and suspected informers. 
         
         1.9     In Meghalaya, on the militancy front, the 
                level  of  violence  and killings by the HNLC and 
                Achik National Volunteer Council remained  almost 
                unchanged.   It is feared that in the North-East, 
                certain  development  funds  allocated   by   the 
                Central Government have been siphoned off to fund 
                insurgent groups.    The  insurgent groups in the 
                North-East  are  also  being  helped  across  the 
                country's borders  with  illegal arms.  They were 
                responsible for three deaths in 14  incidents  in 
                1997  and 14 killings in 16 incidents in 1998 and 
                22 killings in 28 incidents in 1999 (till  August 
                1999). 
         
         1.10    Religious Fundamentalist Militancy 
          Religious   militancy,  which  had  first 
                raised its head in 1993 with bomb  explosions  in 
                Mumbai, continue  to  make its presence felt.  In 
                1997, there were 23 blasts  in  Delhi  and  three 

                each in  Haryana  and Uttar Pradesh.  In the year 
                1998,  Mumbai  witnessed  three  explosions  just 
                before the  Parliamentary  elections.   Al-Ummah, 
                the Principal fundamentalist militant  outfit  of 
                Southern  India, was responsible for 17 blasts in 
                different  areas  of   Coimbatore   (Tamil   Nadu 
                February 1998). 
         
         1.10.1  A  number  of miscreants, including a few 
                Pakistan nationals  and  Bangladeshis,  who  were 
                responsible  for  the  blasts  in  North India in 
                1997, were   arrested.      Investigations   have 
                provided  ample  evidence of a sinister game plan 
                to undermine the internal security and  integrity 
                of the  country.  Efforts are being made to forge 
                an  alliance   between   Muslim   militants   and 
                terrorists of Punjab and J&K.  Bases in Nepal and 
                Bangladesh, in addition to those in Pakistan, are 
                being    utilised    for   launching   disruptive 
                operations in India.  Recruits are  being  picked 
                up   from   amongst   fundamentalist   youth  for 
                undergoing training in Pakistan as a  prelude  to 
                being  inducted into Pakistan's proxy war against 
                India.  Weapons and explosives are  being  pumped 
                into   the   country   in  large  quantities,  in 
                pursuance of the above game plan." 
         
         Indeed,  over  the  last  few  months  since  the 
        Working  Paper  was  released, the security situation has 
        worsened.   The  hijacking  of  Indian  Airlines  flight, 
        IC-814,  the release of three notorious terrorists by the 
        Government of India to save the  lives  of  the  innocent 
        civilians and the crew of the said flight, the subsequent 
        declarations   of   the  released  terrorists  and  their 
        activities both in  Pakistan  and  the  Pakistan-occupied 
        Kashmir,  have  raised  the  level  of  terrorism both in 
        quality and extent.  The repeated attacks  upon  security 
        forces  and  their  camps by terrorists including suicide 
        squads is a new phenomenon adding a  dangerous  dimension 
        to the terrorist activity in India.  Even in the last two 
        months,  substantial  quantities  of  RDX  and  arms  and 
        ammunition have been recovered from various parts of  the 
        country.   Indeed,  it  is now believed that the plan for 
        hijacking of the Indian Airlines flight was  hatched  and 
        directed from within the country. 
         
         After  setting out the facts in paragraphs 1.2 to 
        1.15 in chapter I of the Working  Paper,  the  Commission 
        summed up the position in the following words: 
         
          "Some  time back, the Union Home Minister 
                declared his intention to release a  white  paper 
                dealing  with  subversive  activities of the ISI. 
                The ISI-sponsored terrorism  and  proxy  war  has 
                resulted  in  deaths  of  29,151 civilians, 5,101 
                security   personnel   and   2,730    explosions. 
                Property  worth  Rs.2,000  crores  is reported to 

                have been damaged.    Almost  43,700  kg.      of 
                explosives,  mostly  RDX,  had  been inducted and 
                61,900 sophisticated weapons  had  been  smuggled 
                into India.     It  is  estimated  that  security 
                related costs in countering ISI's activities have 
                totalled an  amount  of  Rs.64,000  crores  (Vide 
                Economic  Times,  New  Delhi,  21 December, 1998, 
                p.2) - which could alternatively have been  spent 
                on  better  purposes  like  education, health and 
                housing. 
         
         1.16.1  A  perception  has  developed  among  the 
                terrorist   groups   that  the  Indian  State  is 
                inherently incapable of meeting  their  challenge 
                that it  has  become  soft  and  indolent.   As a 
                matter of fact, quite a few  parties  and  groups 
                appear  to  have developed a vested interest in a 
                soft State, a weak government and an  ineffective 
                implementation of the laws.  Even certain foreign 
                powers   are   interested   in  destablising  our 
                country.  Foreign funds are flowing substantially 
                to various organisations and groups which  serve, 
                whether  wittingly  or unwittingly, the long-term 
                objectives of the foreign powers." 
         
         We do not see any reason to depart from the  said 
        analysis. 
         
         In   Chapter   II   of  the  Working  Paper,  the 
        Commission had set out the provisions  of  The  Terrorist 
        and  Disruptive  Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA) 
        and the decisions of the Supreme Court thereon.    We  do 
        not  think  it  necessary  to  reproduce the same in this 
        report over again since we are enclosing a  copy  of  the 
        Working Paper to this report.  It must, however, be added 
        that  it  has  since  been brought to our notice that the 
        State of Maharashtra has  enacted  a  law  to  deal  with 
        organised  crime,  namely,  The  Maharashtra  Control  of 
        Organised Crime Act, 1999.  The Commission has taken note 
        of the provisions of the Maharashtra  Act  and  would  be 
        referred to at the appropriate stage. 
         
         In   Chapter   III  of  the  Working  Paper,  the 
        Commission had set out in extenso the provisions  of  the 
        U.S.A.  Anti-terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 
        1996 and   the   following  U.K.    Acts  as  well  as  a 
        Consultation Paper: 
         
        1. The   Prevention    of    Terrorism    (Temporary 
                Provisions) Act, 1989. 
         
        2. Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1996 
                as amended in 1998. 
         
        3. The  Criminal  Justice (Terrorism and Conspiracy) 
                Act, 1998 and 
         

        4. The provisions of a Consultation Paper issued  by 
                the Government  of  U.K.    in  December  1998 on 
                "Legislation Against Terrorism (Cm 4178)". 
         
         We do not think it  necessary  to  reproduce  the 
        contents  of Chapter III of the Working Paper here again, 
        as a copy of the Working Paper is  enclosed  herewith  as 
        Annexure I.   It is, however, necessary to point out that 
        the  British   Parliament   has   since   introduced   an 
        anti-terrorism  Bill in the House of Commons, on December 
        2, 1999.  The Act is a comprehensive piece of legislation 
        containing as many as 99 sections and 14 Schedules.   The 
        Law Commission  has  perused  the said Bill.  It would be 
        appropriate to mention briefly the contents of  the  said 
        Bill.   Section  1 defines "terrorism" and the associated 
        expression "action" in the following words: 
         
         "Terrorism:  interpretation. 
         
         1.(1) In this Act "terrorism" means  the  use  or 
                threat, for the purpose of advancing a political, 
                religious or ideological cause, of action which- 
         
         (a)  involves serious violence against any person 
                or property, 
         
         (b) endangers the life of any person, or 
         
         (c) creates a  serious  risk  to  the  health  or 
                safety of the public or a section of the public. 
         
         (2) In subsection (1)- 
         
         (a)  "action"  includes action outside the United 
                Kingdom, 
         
         (b) a reference to any person or to property is a 
                reference to any person, or to property, wherever 
                situated, and 
         
         (c)  a  reference  to  the  public   includes   a 
                reference  to  the public of a country other than 
                the United Kingdom. 
         
         (3) In this Act a reference to action  taken  for 
                the purposes of terrorism includes a reference to 
                action  taken  for  the  benefit  of a proscribed 
                organisation." 
         
         Part two containing sections 3 to 12  deals  with 
        proscribed organisations mentioned in Schedule two.  This 
        Part provides for notifying the proscribed organisations, 
        appeals  against  such orders and the effect of declaring 
        an organisation as a proscribed organisation followed  by 
        forfeiture of  its properties.  Any person who belongs to 
        such organisation or  supports  the  activities  of  such 
        organisation,  is  liable  to be prosecuted and punished. 

        Part three  containing  sections  13  to  30  deals  with 
        `terrorist  property'  including  proceeds  of terrorism. 
        The provisions in this Chapter prohibit raising of  funds 
        for  terrorist  activity  including  money laundering and 
        provide for seizure, detention and forfeiture of property 
        of terrorists as well as cash belonging  to  them.    The 
        Chapter  also  places  an obligation upon the citizens to 
        disclose information relating to terrorist  activity  and 
        to cooperate  with  the police in that behalf.  Part four 
        containing  sections  31   to   37   include   provisions 
        concerning terrorist  investigations.    These provisions 
        empower the police to cordon areas, to search and to take 
        other actions  in  the  cordoned  areas  as  detailed  in 
        Schedule five  and  other  allied  provisions.  Part five 
        contains sections 38 to 51 dealing with counter-terrorist 
        powers of the police.  Section 38 defines the  expression 
        "terrorist" in the following words: 
         
         "38.  (1) In this part "terrorist" means a person 
                who- 
         
         (a)   has  committed  an  offence  under  any  of 
                sections 10, 11, 14 to 17, 52 and 54 to 56, or 
         
         (b) is or has been concerned in  the  commission, 
                preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism. 
         
         (2)  The  reference  in  subsection  (1)(b)  to a 
                person who has been concerned in the  commission, 
                preparation  or  instigation of acts of terrorism 
                includes a reference to a person  who  has  been, 
                whether  before or after the passing of this Act, 
                concerned  in  the  commission,  preparation   or 
                instigation  of  acts  of  terrorism  within  the 
                meaning given by section 1." 
         
         The provisions in this Part empower the police to 
        arrest without warrant, search premises and persons, stop 
        and  search  vehicles  and  the   provisions   incidental 
        thereto.    The   police   is  also  empowered  to  place 
        restrictions on and to regulate parking, to impose  ports 
        and  border  controls  and  to  search,  seize and detain 
        terrorists and their properties.    Part  six  containing 
        sections  52  to  61  deals with "miscellaneous" matters. 
        The provisions in this Part deal with terrorist  offences 
        including  possession  of  arms  and explosives (which is 
        made an offence),  with  training  in  weapons  including 
        biological,   chemical   and  nuclear  weapons  and  with 
        collecting information, etc.  useful to terrorists.   The 
        British    Parliament   has   assumed   extra-territorial 
        jurisdiction  in  this   behalf   in   the   sense   that 
        preparations  for  carrying out terrorist offences in any 
        other  country  (other  than  the  U.K.)  are  also  made 
        punishable  in U.K., which is a good development from our 
        country's point of view.  Part seven containing  sections 
        62 to 109 deals with Northern Ireland.  The provisions in 
        this  Chapter  are  far  more  stringent in all respects. 

        Part eight containing sections 110  to  124  carries  the 
        heading "general".    This  part specifies the additional 
        powers of the police conferred by the Bill over and above 
        the common law powers and the extent of such  powers  and 
        certain other matters. 
         
         Chapter  five  of  the Working Paper sets out the 
        proposals put forward by the Law  Commission  for  public 
        debate and discussion. 
         
         As  stated  hereinbefore,  the Law Commission has 
        considered the responses received and the  various  views 
        expressed at  the  two seminars.  So far as the structure 
        of our report is concerned, we  must  reiterate  that  we 
        have  taken  the  Criminal  Law  Amendment Bill, 1995, as 
        proposed to be amended by the Official Amendments as  the 
        basis.   The  reasons  for  this  approach are not far to 
        seek.  The TADA - whose improved version is  the  present 
        Bill  -  was  in force for more than ten years; indeed it 
        continues to be available for the  pending  cases.    The 
        constitutionality of the Act and the meaning and scope of 
        its  provisions  have  been the subject-matter of several 
        decisions of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.    In 
        this  view, we thought that instead of drafting a new law 
        altogether, it would be more appropriate - and convenient 
        - to take the Criminal  Law  Amendment  Bill  along  with 
        official  amendments as the basis and suggest appropriate 
        modifications and additions, wherever found necessary. 
         
         In the interest of convenience  and  clarity,  we 
        shall   deal  with  the  sections  in  the  Criminal  Law 
        Amendment Bill, as introduced in Rajya Sabha on 18th May, 
        1995 (together with the proposed "official"  amendments), 
        chapter-wise,  and suggest modifications and additions in 
        the light of  the  responses  received  pursuant  to  the 
        circulation  of the Working Paper and the views expressed 
        in the seminars. 
  
  
         
         
                              CHAPTER III           
           WHETHER THE PRESENT LEGISLATION  
                 IS AT ALL NECESSARY? 
         
         The   representatives   of   the   human   rights 
        organisations  and other activists in that field, namely, 
        S/Shri Prashant Bhushan, Advocate,  Supreme  Court,  Ravi 
        Nair  from  the  South  Asia  Human  Rights Documentation 
        Centre, V.S.   Mani  from  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University, 
        Kamini Jaiswal, Advocate, Supreme Court, Justice Rajinder 
        Sachar,  former  Chief Justice of Delhi High Court, Prof. 
        B.B.  Pande  of  Delhi  University  and  Maja  Daruwalla, 
        Director,    Commonwealth    Human   Rights   Initiative, 

        questioned the very necessity of such  a  legislation  at 
        the present  juncture.    Similar  stand was taken by The 
        Peoples Union  for  Civil  Liberties  (PUCL)  (who  while 
        declining  to  participate in the seminars, chose to send 
        the comments of Shri K.G.   Kannabiran  on  each  of  the 
        features  of  the Bill), The Peoples Union for Democratic 
        Rights (PUDR) (letter from Shri  Rakesh  Shukla)  and  by 
        another organisation "South Asia Forum for Human Rights". 
        They  submitted  that the proposed legislation was indeed 
        the very same TADA, in a new garb.  Indeed, some of  them 
        contended that the provisions of the proposed legislation 
        are harsher  than the provisions of TADA.  They submitted 
        that TADA was widely abused and  misused  by  the  police 
        authorities  while  it  was  in force and that it had not 
        succeeded in checking terrorism.  They submitted  that  a 
        number  of  accused  who  were  arrested  and  were being 
        prosecuted under the  TADA,  were  still  languishing  in 
        jails and their cases were still pending trial before the 
        designated  courts  notwithstanding  the  fact  that TADA 
        itself had lapsed in the year 1995.  If  TADA  could  not 
        successfully counter terrorism, they asked, how could the 
        present legislation  succeed.    They  submitted that the 
        police in this country is notorious for its third  degree 
        methods  and  illegal  methods  of investigation which is 
        indeed the  byproduct  of  their  inefficiency.      They 
        submitted further that the Law Commission should not look 
        to U.K.  and U.S.  or to the anti-terrorism laws in force 
        there,  because  the standards of behaviour of the police 
        in those countries were far more civilised and consistent 
        with the norms of law.  Introducing provisions similar to 
        the provisions existing in those enactments would not  be 
        appropriate,  they  submitted, inasmuch as the social and 
        political standards and the level of consciousness of the 
        citizens of this country are not the same as that of U.K. 
        or U.S.A.  The policeman is held in awe in  this  country 
        and this legislation would clothe him with more arbitrary 
        powers  which cannot but result in harassment of innocent 
        persons besides being unable to  achieve  its  objective. 
        They further raised the point that before enacting such a 
        legislation  there  must be a far wider debate throughout 
        the country and that the Commission must also  look  into 
        and  verify  several  abuses which had occurred under the 
        TADA.  They submitted that human rights of  the  citizens 
        of this country would be in great peril if such a law was 
        enforced.   Another  submission  put forward by Shri K.G. 
        Kannabiran  is  that  terrorism  is  a   consequence   of 
        socio-economic  injustice  and is thus really a political 
        problem and not a  `law  and  order'  or  `public  order' 
        problem. 
         
         On the  other  hand,  Brig.  Satbir Singh, Senior 
        Fellow and OSD in the Institute of  Defence  Studies  and 
        Analysis, Shri  K.T.S.    Tulsi, Senior Advocate, Supreme 
        Court, Shri K.P.S.  Gill, former DGP, Punjab,  Shri  Shiv 
        Basant,  Joint  Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, Shri 
        S.V.  Singh, Addl.  DGP, Punjab, Shri S.S.   Puri,  Addl. 
        DGP, Maharashtra, Shri M.L.  Sharma, Joint Director, CBI, 

        Dr.  P.K.    Agarwal,  Joint  Secretary, Ministry of Home 
        Affairs, Shri P.K.  Dave, former Lt.  Governor of  Delhi, 
        Shri S.K.    Singh,  former  Foreign Secretary, Shri U.R. 
        Lalit,  Senior  Advocate,  Supreme   Court,   Shri   A.K. 
        Shrivastava, Judge-Advocate-General, Army, Lt.Gen.(Retd.) 
        Dr.  M.L.  Chibber,  Shri  L.   David, Addl.  DGP, Assam, 
        Shri H.N.  Ray, former Finance Secretary,  Government  of 
        India  and  Shri  Ashok  Bhan,  Advocate  and  a Kashmiri 
        migrant Pandit, called for a more stringent law than  the 
        one proposed.   They submitted that some of the proposals 
        put forward by Law Commission  with  a  view  to  provide 
        protection   to   the   accused   were   unworkable   and 
        impractical.  They pointed out the serious  situation  in 
        which India was placed now with terrorism threatening its 
        security from  all  sides.    They pointed out that today 
        India was threatened not only with external terrorism but 
        also with internal terrorism.  They submitted that Indian 
        Penal Code was  not  conceived  and  was  not  meant  for 
        fighting  organised  crime;  that it was designed only to 
        check individual crimes and  occasional  riots  at  local 
        level.  Organised crime perpetrated by highly trained and 
        armed  fanatical elements or mercenaries who are trained, 
        financed,  armed  and  supported   by   hostile   foreign 
        countries  and  agencies  had to be fought at a different 
        level than as an ordinary law  and  order  crime.    They 
        pointed out that the anti-terrorism laws of the U.K.  and 
        U.S.A.   were  far  more stringent than the provisions of 
        the proposed legislation.  They submitted that  the  plea 
        that  police was likely to misuse or abuse the provisions 
        of the new legislation could not be a ground for opposing 
        the very legislation to fight terrorism.  It is one thing 
        to say,  they  submitted,  that  the  provisions  of  the 
        legislation must be so designed as to prevent or minimise 
        its  abuse and misuse and quite another thing to say that 
        because of the possibility of abuse, no such  law  should 
        be enacted  at  all.    For  that matter, they submitted, 
        there was no Act on  the  statute  book  either  in  this 
        country  or  anywhere else which was not open to abuse or 
        misuse.   Even  provisions  of  the  Code   of   Criminal 
        Procedure  or the Indian Penal code were liable to misuse 
        but that could not be a ground for asking for the  repeal 
        of those  enactments.    They  submitted  that  one  must 
        realise  the  extraordinary,   alarming   and   dangerous 
        situation  in  which the country was placed today because 
        of the  activities  of  the  hostile  neighbour  and  the 
        fundamentalist  Islamic  terrorism  which have made India 
        their prime  target.    They  pointed  out  that  foreign 
        terrorists  now  far  outnumbered the local terrorists in 
        Jammu and Kashmir and that thousands more were waiting to 
        enter J&K with  a  view  to  carrying  on  the  so-called 
        `Jehad'.   In  such a situation, any delay or inaction on 
        the part of the country to take measures to  fight  these 
        terrorist  elements  would be a grave dereliction of duty 
        on the part of the State.  The present enactment was  but 
        one  of the means of fighting terrorism and therefore its 
        enactment could not validly be opposed. 
         

         Shri Justice J.S.  Verma,  Chairperson,  National 
        Human  Rights  Commission,  while  inaugurating the first 
        seminar, opined that having regard to  the  extraordinary 
        situation  obtaining  in  the  country and in view of the 
        steadily worsening situation  in  certain  parts  of  the 
        country,  a  special law was necessary to fight terrorist 
        activities.  At the same time, he suggested that the  Act 
        must  contain  necessary  safeguards  and  it  must  be a 
        legislation with  a  human  face.     He   stressed   the 
        importance  of  maintaining  a balance between individual 
        rights and the rights of the society and opined  that  in 
        case of conflict between the two, the interest of society 
        must prevail.      Justice   Verma  referred  to  several 
        decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  rendered  under  TADA 
        including  the decisions in Kartar Singh, Sanjay Dutt and 
        Shaheen Welfare Society and suggested  that  the  several 
        guidelines  available in those decisions might be kept in 
        mind while enacting the new  legislation.    The  learned 
        judge  also  referred  to the Armed Forces Special Powers 
        Act and stated that its constitutionality had been upheld 
        by a  Constitution  Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  while 
        reading  certain  constitutional safeguards into the Act. 
        He pointed out the long pendency of cases under TADA  and 
        the  adverse  image  of  India  it  was  creating  in the 
        international arena.  He suggested that the  Preamble  to 
        the  Constitution  and  the  guarantees contained therein 
        should be kept in mind and that in the matter of bail,  a 
        classification  of cases may be provided for on the lines 
        indicated in the of decision in  Shaheen  Welfare.    The 
        learned  judge  also  stressed  the  importance of speedy 
        trial.  If bail was not granted and the  trial  was  also 
        not  proceeded  with  reasonable  promptitude, it becomes 
        oppressive, the learned judge stated.  Six months  should 
        be the  time  limit for a trial to conclude.  The learned 
        judge also affirmed the correctness of the argument  that 
        the  mere  possibility of abuse could not be a ground for 
        the very enactment of such a legislation.  On  the  other 
        hand, the learned judge pointed out that effort should be 
        made  to  try  to find out how best to prevent the misuse 
        and abuse of the provisions of such a legislation.    The 
        learned  judge then referred to the experience under TADA 
        and suggested that investing  powers  under  the  Act  in 
        higher  authorities  was an effective means of preventing 
        its misuse.  He also referred to the  experiment  of  the 
        Review Committees and to the desirability of plurality in 
        the composition   of   the  reviewing  authorities.    He 
        concluded his inaugural speech by  observing  that  while 
        the  legislation  was necessary, it was equally important 
        to incorporate provisions to prevent its misuse.  He also 
        suggested  that  the  authorities  found   misusing   the 
        provisions of the Act, should be sternly dealt with. 
         
         Shri P.P.    Rao,  Senior Advocate, Supreme Court 
        and  a  former  President  of  the  Supreme   Court   Bar 
        Association  spoke  in  the  same  terms  as Justice J.S. 
        Verma.  He welcomed the provisions relating  to  presence 
        of  counsel  during  the interrogation of the accused and 

        suggested that the power to arrest  or  the  approval  of 
        decision  to arrest should be by an authority higher than 
        the Superintendent of Police.  In the matter of bail, the 
        learned counsel suggested that the  basic  premise  being 
        liberty,  the  provisions with respect to bail should not 
        be made  too  stringent.     He   also   emphasised   the 
        desirability of speedy trial. 
         
         On a consideration of the various viewpoints, the 
        Law  Commission  is  of the opinion that a legislation to 
        fight terrorism is today a necessity in India.  It is not 
        as if the enactment of such a legislation would by itself 
        subdue terrorism.  It may,  however,  arm  the  State  to 
        fight terrorism more effectively.  There is a good amount 
        of substance in the submission that the Indian Penal Code 
        (IPC)  was  not  designed  to fight or to check organised 
        crime of the nature we are faced with now.    Here  is  a 
        case  of  organised groups or gangs trained, inspired and 
        supported by  fundamentalists  and  anti-Indian  elements 
        trying  to  destablise  the country who make no secret of 
        their intentions.  The  act  of  terrorism  by  its  very 
        nature generates terror and a psychosis of fear among the 
        populace.  Because of the terror and the fear, people are 
        rendered sullen.   They become helpless spectators of the 
        atrocities committed before their eyes.  They are  afraid 
        of   contacting   the   Police   authorities   about  any 
        information they may have about terrorist activities much 
        less  to  cooperate  with  the  Police  in  dealing  with 
        terrorists.  It is difficult to get any witnesses because 
        people are afraid of their own safety and safety of their 
        families.  It is well known that during the worst days in 
        Punjab, even the judges and prosecutors were gripped with 
        such  fear  and terror that they were not prepared to try 
        or prosecute the cases against the terrorists.   That  is 
        also  stated  to be the position today in J&K and this is 
        one reason which is contributing to the enormous delay in 
        going on with the trials against the terrorists.  In such 
        a  situation,  insisting  upon  independent  evidence  or 
        applying  the  normal  peace-time  standards  of criminal 
        prosecution, may be impracticable.  It  is  necessary  to 
        have a  special law to deal with a special situation.  An 
        extraordinary situation calls for an  extraordinary  law, 
        designed  to meet and check such extraordinary situation. 
        It is one thing to say that we must  create  and  provide 
        internal structures and safeguards against possible abuse 
        and misuse of the Act and altogether a different thing to 
        say  that  because  the  law  is liable to be misused, we 
        should not have such an Act at all.   The  Supreme  Court 
        has  repeatedly  held  that  mere  possibility  of  abuse 
        cannnot be a ground for denying the vesting of powers  or 
        for declaring  a  statute  unconstitutional.  In State of 
        Rajasthan v.  Union  of  India  (1978  1  SCR  p.1),  the 
        Supreme Court observed "it must be remembered that merely 
        because  power  may  sometimes be abused, it is no ground 
        for denying the existence of power.  The  wisdom  of  man 
        has  not  yet  been able to conceive of a government with 
        power sufficient to answer all its legitimate  needs  and 

        at  the  same  time  incapable of mischief" (at page 77). 
        Similarly, in Collector of Customs v.  Nathella  Sampathu 
        Chetty  (AIR  1962  SC  316),  the  Court  observed, "The 
        possibility of abuse of a statute  otherwise  valid  does 
        not impart   to  it  any  element  of  invalidity".    In 
        Kesavananda Bharati v.  State of Kerala  (1973  Supp  SCR 
        p.1), Khanna J.    observed  as follows at page 755:  "In 
        exercising the  power  of  judicial  review,  the  Courts 
        cannot  be  oblivious  of  the  practical  needs  of  the 
        government.  The door has to be left open for  trial  and 
        error.  Constitutional law like other mortal contrivances 
        has to  take  some  chances.  Opportunity must be allowed 
        for vindicating reasonable belief by experience." To  the 
        same effect  are observations of Krishna Iyer J.  in T.N. 
        Education Department v.  State of Tamilnadu (1980  1  SCR 
        1026 at 1031)   and   Commissioner   H.R.E.     v.    Sri 
        Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt (AIR  1954 
        SC 282).    All  these  decisions  were  referred  to and 
        followed by a recent  nine-Judge  Constitution  Bench  in 
        Mafatlal Industries  v.    Union  of  India [1997 (5) SCC 
        536]. 
         
         With  respect  to  the  plea  that  even  if   an 
        anti-terrorism  law is made, it should not be a permanent 
        enactment, we must say that this  objection  is  academic 
        since  the  Bill,  as drafted by the Government read with 
        the Official Amendments,  speaks  of  only  a  five  year 
        duration  for  the  proposed  legislation,  which feature 
        remains unchanged. 
  
         
         
                               CHAPTER IV             
      PART I OF THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL 
  
         
         Part I contains  only  two  clauses.    Clause  1 
        provides for the title and the extent of the Act.  In our 
        opinion  the  short  title  of  the  Bill  should  be the 
        Prevention of Terrorism Bill, 2000. 
         
         Sub-clause (2) and sub-clause (3) as proposed  by 
        the  Official  Amendments,  in  our  opinion, requires no 
        change. 
         
         Clause 2 defines certain expressions occurring in 
        the Bill.  In the original Bill,  there  were  only  five 
        definitions  with  the residuary clause saying that words 
        and expressions used but not  defined  in  this  Act  and 
        defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C.) shall 
        have  the  meanings  respectively assigned to them in the 
        Code.  We propose to define under  clause  (b)  the  term 
        `proceeds  of  terrorism'  as  explained  under paragraph 
        5.13.3 of the Working Paper (Annexure I).    By  Official 
        Amendments, however, two new definitions are sought to be 

        introduced,  namely,  the  definition of "High Court" and 
        "Public Prosecutor" by way of paragraphs (ba)  and  (ca). 
        With  respect  to  the definition of the expression "High 
        Court", it was pointed out in our Working Paper that  the 
        purpose behind  this  definition  was  not clear.  It was 
        pointed  out  that  if  the  intention  behind  the  said 
        definition  was  to empower a judge of a special court to 
        continue to try a matter which he may have been trying as 
        a special judge, even after his elevation to High  Court, 
        then  it  would  be  appropriate to provide expressly for 
        such a situation.  If that  is  not  the  intention,  the 
        definition is unnecessary inasmuch as the said expression 
        is already defined by clause (e) of section 2 of the Code 
        of Criminal  Procedure.   We have been unable to find any 
        provision in the Bill which says  that  a  special  judge 
        trying  a  particular  case shall continue to try it till 
        its conclusion even if he is elevated to the  High  Court 
        in the  midst  of  a  trial.  According to us, therefore, 
        either  the  said  definition  be  dropped  or   may   be 
        appropriately defined to achieve the intention underlying 
        it. 
         So far as the new definition of public prosecutor 
        is concerned, we have nothing to add. 
         
        PART II OF THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL 
         Part  two  of  the  Bill contains clauses 3 to 7. 
        Clause 3 defines the expression "terrorist act" and  also 
        provides   for   punishment  therefor  and  other  allied 
        provisions.  It  contains   six   sub-clauses.      While 
        sub-clause   (1)   defines   terrorism,   sub-clause  (2) 
        prescribes  the  punishment  for  terrorist   activities. 
        Sub-clause  (3)  punishes  those  conspiring, attempting, 
        advocating, abetting,  advising,  inciting  or  knowingly 
        facilitating   the   commission   of   a  terrorist  act. 
        Sub-clause (4) deals with  those  who  knowingly  harbour 
        terrorists  while  sub-clause (5) punishes the members of 
        terrorist gangs  and  organisations.     Sub-clause   (6) 
        declares the holding of proceeds of terrorism illegal. 
         
         Clause 3:    The  Official  Amendments propose to 
        substitute the opening words in sub-clause (1) of  clause 
        3.  In place of the words "whoever with intent to overawe 
        the  government as by law established or to strike terror 
        in the people or any section of the people or to alienate 
        any section of the people  or  to  adversely  affect  the 
        harmony  amongst different sections of the people, does", 
        the following words "whoever with intent to threaten  the 
        unity,  integrity, security or sovereignty of India or to 
        strike terror in the people or any section of the people, 
        does" are  proposed  to  be  substituted.    A  criticism 
        levelled  against the substituted definition was that any 
        person questioning the unity and integrity of the country 
        was sought to be branded as a terrorist.  It was  pointed 
        out  that  if  a person honestly believed and said that a 
        particular  part  of   the   country   should   be   made 
        independent,   he  would  come  within  the  mischief  of 
        sub-clause (1) of clause 3.  We do not  think  that  this 

        criticism or  apprehension is well founded.  A reading of 
        sub-clause (1) makes it clear that merely threatening the 
        unity or integrity of India is not by  itself  sufficient 
        to attract  the  offence  in  that  sub-clause.   What is 
        necessary is that the person  who  threatens  the  unity, 
        integrity,  security or sovereignty of India also does an 
        act or thing by using bombs, dynamite, etc.  in a  manner 
        which  causes  or is likely to cause death of or injuries 
        to any person or persons or  loss  of  or  damage  to  or 
        destruction  of property or disruption of any supplies or 
        services essential  to  the  life  of  the  community  or 
        detains  any person and threatens to kill and injure such 
        person in order to compel the  government  or  any  other 
        person to  do  or  abstain from doing any act.  These are 
        serious matters and the apprehension of those opposed  to 
        this provision is unfounded. 
         
         In  paras  5.3  and 5.4 of the Working Paper, the 
        Law Commission had suggested the retention of  the  words 
        "to overawe  the  government as by law established".  The 
        said suggestion was made in view of the fact that no good 
        reason can be  found  for  deleting  the  said  words  as 
        proposed in  the  official  amendments.  These words were 
        there in the original draft of the Bill and also  in  the 
        TADA.   On  a consideration of the entire material placed 
        before us, we are inclined to drop  this  proposal  since 
        the  element of "overawing the government" can be said to 
        be implicit in the sub-clause as modified/amended by  the 
        official amendments. 
         
         So far as the Law Commission's proposal to retain 
        the words "or to alienate any section of the people or to 
        adversely  affect  the harmony amongst different sections 
        of  the  people"  in  sub-clause  (1)  of  clause  3   is 
        concerned,  we  are  dropping it also for the reason that 
        the said words do not appear to fit into the  sub-section 
        once  its  direction  is oriented towards threatening the 
        unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India. 
         
         The Law Commission has observed in para 5.6  that 
        crimes   in   the   field  of  electronics/computers  are 
        increasingly  being  used  for  international  terrorism. 
        Reference   was   made   to   section  805  of  the  U.S. 
        Anti-terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act  of  1996, 
        which  provides  deterrent  sentence  for  any  terrorist 
        activity damaging  a  federal  interest  computer.     In 
        chapter  three,  the  Commission  had  also  referred  to 
        section 701 of the U.S.  Act which  defines  the  federal 
        crime  of  terrorism,  which  is of very wide application 
        taking in  all  violations  of  enactments  dealing  with 
        aircraft, airports, biological weapons, nuclear material, 
        destruction    of    government    properties   including 
        communication lines, stations and systems and so  on  and 
        so forth.   The Law Commission is of the opinion that any 
        damage to equipment  installed  or  utilised  for  or  in 
        connection  with defence or for any other purposes of the 
        government is equally an act of terrorism if it  is  done 

        with  intent  to threaten the unity, integrity, security, 
        sovereignty of India.  We are, therefore, of the  opinion 
        that  after  the words "supplies or services essential to 
        the life of the community", the following  words  may  be 
        added "or causes damage to or destruction of any property 
        or  equipment used or intended to be used for the defence 
        of India or in connection  with  any  other  purposes  of 
        Government of  India or any of its agencies".  Sub-clause 
        (1), may therefore  be  recast  incorporating  the  above 
        additions. 
         
         It would be seen that the definition of terrorist 
        act  in  our  Bill  is  put  into  one  sub-clause  viz., 
        sub-clause (1) of clause 3, whereas the U.K.  legislation 
        defines "terrorism"  in  section  1  and  "terrorist"  in 
        section 38  in  more  extensive terms.  The definition of 
        "terrorist" in the U.K.  Act speaks of a person  who  has 
        committed an offence under any of the sections 10, 11, 14 
        to 17, 52 and 54 to 56 of that Act.  Sections 10 to 17 of 
        U.K.   Act  deal with helping, raising funds or otherwise 
        having connections with proscribed  organisations,  while 
        section  52  and  54  to  56  speak  of weapons training, 
        directing terrorist organisations and  possession  of  an 
        article   for   the   purpose  connected  with  terrorist 
        activities.  It would be appropriate  that  our  Act  too 
        contains provisions which make the membership of a banned 
        organisation   and/or  raising  funds  for  or  otherwise 
        furthering  the  activities  of  banned  organisation,  a 
        terrorist act.     Similarly,  possession  of  unlicensed 
        firearms  and  explosives  and  other  weapons  of   mass 
        destruction  (in  the notified areas) may also be treated 
        as an act of terrorism.  Indeed, section 5  of  TADA  did 
        make  possession  of  arms and ammunition in the notified 
        areas punishable offence.  We, therefore, recommend  that 
        existing  sub-clause (1) may be numbered as paragraph (a) 
        of sub-clause (1) and a new  paragraph  (b)  be  inserted 
        therein.  Sub-clause (1) will read as follows:- 
         
         "3.  (1) Whoever, 
         (a) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, 
                security  or  sovereignty  of  India or to strike 
                terror in the people or any section of the people 
                does any act or thing by using bombs, dynamite or 
                other   explosive   substances   or   inflammable 
                substances  or  fire-arms or other lethal weapons 
                or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or 
                by any other substances  (whether  biological  or 
                otherwise) of a hazardous nature in such a manner 
                as  to cause, or as is likely to cause, death of, 
                or injuries to, any person or persons or loss of, 
                or damage to,  or  destruction  of,  property  or 
                disruption  of any supplies or services essential 
                to the life of the community or causes damage  to 
                or  destruction of any property or equipment used 
                or intended to be used for the defence  of  India 
                or  in  connection with any other purposes of the 
                Government of India, any State Government or  any 

                of  their  agencies,  or  detains  any person and 
                threatens to kill or injure such person in  order 
                to  compel  the Government or any other person to 
                do or abstain from doing any act, 
         
         (b)  is  or  continues  to  be  a  member  of  an 
                association  declared unlawful under the Unlawful 
                Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 or  voluntarily 
                does an act aiding or promoting in any manner the 
                objects  of  such an association and is either in 
                possession of any unlicenced firearm, ammunition, 
                explosive  or  other  instrument   or   substance 
                capable  of  causing mass destruction and commits 
                any act  resulting  in  loss  of  human  life  or 
                grievous   injury   to   any   person  or  causes 
                significant damage to any property, 
         
         commits a terrorist act." 
         
         Sub-clause  (2)  of  clause  3  which  speaks  of 
        punishment,  in  its  present  language, is comprehensive 
        enough to cover both the paragraphs of sub-clause (1) and 
        needs no change consequent upon the change in  sub-clause 
        (1). 
         
         The Government may also consider the desirability 
        of  introducing  a  new clause - which may be numbered as 
        clause 4 - in terms of section 5 of TADA.  The expression 
        "notified area" may also be defined in the very clause. 
         
         We may also mention at this stage  that  we  have 
        examined  the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 
        1999 but find that its focus and objective  is  different 
        from the  present  Act.    It is meant to fight organised 
        crime which may  not  necessarily  amount  to  `terrorist 
        activity'  as  defined  in  sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of 
        this Bill, though in some cases they may overlap.  We  do 
        not,  therefore,  think  it  necessary  to  deal with the 
        definitions of "continuing unlawful activity", "organised 
        crime" and "organised crime syndicate" occurring  in  the 
        Maharashtra Act.  So far as certain procedural provisions 
        contained  in the Maharashtra Act are concerned, they are 
        referred to hereinafter at relevant places. 
         
         Sub-clauses  (2)  and  (3)  do  not  require  any 
        change. 
         
         Sub-clause  (4)  seeks  to  punish  a  person who 
        "harbours or conceals or attempts to harbour  or  conceal 
        any person knowingly that such person is a terrorist" (as 
        proposed to be amended by "official" amendments).  It was 
        pointed  out  by certain participants at the seminar that 
        this sub-section, as it stood now, would also take in the 
        mother, father, sister or brother of a terrorist who came 
        home to hide himself and that it would be  wholly  unjust 
        to  punish  such relative of the terrorist merely because 
        he was allowed to stay in the house by such  a  relative. 

        It  was  also pointed out by some other participants that 
        such harbouring or concealing might be  out  of  fear  or 
        under the  threat  of violence by the terrorists.  It was 
        pointed out that in such a situation, the person supposed 
        to be harbouring or concealing a terrorist was himself  a 
        victim.   On  the  other hand, certain other participants 
        pointed out that the terrorists should  not  be  provided 
        any  sanctuary  and  that  any  person  who  harboured or 
        concealed a terrorist knowing that he  was  a  terrorist, 
        should  be  held  guilty of the offence under sub-section 
        (4).  On a consideration of the rival submissions, we are 
        of the opinion that it would be appropriate  to  add  the 
        word  "voluntarily"  after  the word "whoever" and before 
        the words "harbours or conceals".  This would  exclude  a 
        situation  where  a  person  harbours  a  terrorist under 
        threat or coercion even though he  may  be  knowing  that 
        that person  is  a terrorist.  So far as the wife/husband 
        harbouring  the  terrorist  is  concerned,  we  recommend 
        addition of an Exception in terms of Exception to section 
        212 of I.P.C.  to read: 
         
         "Exception.-  This sub-section shall not apply to 
        any case in which the harbour or concealment  is  by  the 
        husband or wife of the offender". 
         
         We are also of the opinion that there should be a 
        slight  change  in the minimum punishment provided by the 
        sub-clause.   Keeping  in  view  of  the  provisions   of 
        sub-clause  (2) as well as sub-clause (3) of clause 3, it 
        would be appropriate to reduce the minimum punishment  to 
        three years from five years. 
         
         Sub-clause (5)  requires  no  change.   So far as 
        sub-clause (6) is concerned, it is dealt with at a  later 
        stage. 
         In  para  5.9  of  its  Working  Paper,  the  Law 
        Commission had recommended addition of sub-clause (7)  in 
        clause 3 in the following terms: 
         "(7)  Whoever  threatens  any  person  who  is  a 
                witness or any other person in whom such  witness 
                may  be  interested, with violence, or wrongfully 
                restrains or confines the witness, or  any  other 
                person  in whom the witness may be interested, or 
                does any other unlawful act with the said intent, 
                shall be punishable with imprisonment  which  may 
                extend to three years and fine." 
         
         During  the seminars or in the responses received 
        by us pursuant to the Working  Paper,  no  objection  was 
        taken   to   this   proposal   except   in   the  written 
        representation  from   the   South   Asia   Human   Right 
        Documentation Centre  (SAHRDC).  We however see no reason 
        to drop this proposal which is considered to  be  in  the 
        interest of  a  free  and  fair trial.  Sub-clause (7) as 
        recommended above, should therefore  be  incorporated  in 
        clause 3. 
         In  para  5.10  of  the  Working  Paper,  the Law 

        Commission had also proposed addition of  sub-clause  (8) 
        placing  an  obligation  upon the persons receiving or in 
        possession of information as to any terrorist activity to 
        inform the Police as soon as practicable.  It may be that 
        when terror prevails, people may be  afraid  of  speaking 
        out.   As  a  matter of fact, one of the prime objects of 
        creating terror is to silence the people by instilling  a 
        psychosis of  fear  in  them.  At the same time it cannot 
        also be forgotten that  such  an  obligation  has  to  be 
        placed  upon the citizens of this country for effectively 
        fighting the terrorism.   The  incorporation  of  such  a 
        sub-clause  does  not  mean  that any or every person not 
        giving information would necessarily be punished.  If and 
        when a person is prosecuted under the proposed sub-clause 
        (8), the court  will  take  into  consideration  all  the 
        relevant  facts  and  circumstances  and even where he is 
        punished, the quantum of punishment to be  awarded  would 
        be within  the discretion of the court.  It may even be a 
        mere fine and that too of a small amount. 
         At  the  two  seminars  and  in   the   responses 
        received, an objection was raised that this would take in 
        even a journalist/media person who interviews a terrorist 
        and  he  would  be  obliged  to  disclose the information 
        relating to the terrorist interviewed  by  him  and  that 
        therefore  this  provision  is  not  consistent  with the 
        freedom of Press and media.  It may,  however,  be  noted 
        that in India, freedom of Press flows from sub-clause (a) 
        of  clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India 
        and it has been repeatedly held by our Supreme Court that 
        rights and privileges of the Press are  no  greater  than 
        that of  any  of  the  citizens of India.  Even in UK and 
        USA,  no  immunity  in  favour  of  journalists/Press  is 
        recognised  which  would  be  evident  from the following 
        statement of Law at page 203 of D.D.   Basu's  commentary 
        "Law of the Press" (Third Edition). 
         
         "The  same view, as in UK, has been arrived at by 
        the American Supreme Court, recently,  holding  that  the 
        guarantee  of  freedom of the Press does not immunise the 
        Press to render assistance to the investigation of crimes 
        which obligation  lies  on  every  citizen.    They  are, 
        accordingly,  bound  to disclose the information gathered 
        by journalists, with  their  sources,  even  though  such 
        information may have been obtained under an agreement not 
        to disclose, provided such information is relevant to the 
        investigation,  in  a  particular  case, and they are not 
        compelled to disclose more than  is  necessary  for  such 
        purpose." 
         
         We  are  accordingly  of  the  opinion that a new 
        sub-clause (8)  should  be  added  in  clause  3  to  the 
        following effect: 
         
         "(8)    A  person  receiving  or in possession of 
                information which he knows or believes  might  be 
                of material assistance - 
         

         (i)     in preventing the commission by any other 
                person of a terrorist act; or 
         
         (ii)    in securing the apprehension, prosecution 
                or  conviction of any other person for an offence 
                involving   the   commission,   preparation    or 
                instigation of such an act, 
         and  fails, without reasonable cause, to disclose 
                that   information   as   soon   as    reasonably 
                practicable to the police, shall be punished with 
                imprisonment  for  a term which may extend to one 
                year or fine or both." 
         
        Clause 4:        Clause  4  provides  for  punishment  for 
        disruptive activities.   The clause occurring in Criminal 
        Law Amendment Bill is proposed to be substituted  in  its 
        entirety by   the   Official   Amendments.     We  shall, 
        therefore,  deal  with  clause  4  as  contained  in  the 
        official amendments. 
         
         Sub-clause  (1) of that clause says that "whoever 
        questions, disrupts, whether directly or indirectly,  the 
        sovereignty or territorial integrity of India or supports 
        any  claim whether directly or indirectly for the cession 
        of any other part of India or secession of  any  part  of 
        India from  the  Union,  commits  a disruptive act".  The 
        Explanation  appended  to  sub-clause  (1)  defines   the 
        expressions "cession"  and "secession".  Paragraph (c) of 
        the Explanation, however, excludes "trade union  activity 
        or  other  mass  movement  without the use of violence or 
        questioning the sovereignty or territorial  integrity  of 
        India  or supporting any claim for cession of any part of 
        India or secession of any part of India" from the purview 
        of sub-clause (1).  Sub-clause (2) seeks to punish  those 
        who  commit,  conspire  or  attempt  to  commit  or abet, 
        advocate, advise or knowingly facilitate  the  commission 
        of  any  disruptive  act  or any act preparatory thereto. 
        Sub-clause (3) seeks to expand the  scope  of  disruptive 
        activity.   According  to  this  sub-clause,  "any action 
        taken whether by act or by speech or  through  any  other 
        media  or  in  any  other  manner  whatsoever,  which (a) 
        advocates, advises, suggests or incites or (b)  predicts, 
        prophesies  or pronounces or otherwise expresses, in such 
        manner as  to  incite,  advise,  suggest  or  prompt  the 
        killing  or  the  destruction  of  any person bound by or 
        under the Constitution  to  uphold  the  sovereignty  and 
        integrity  of  India  or  any  public servant" amounts to 
        disruptive activity.  Sub-clause (4) provides  punishment 
        for persons  who  knowingly  harbour  a disruptionist.  A 
        reading of clause 4 shows that it seeks to punish speech. 
        Though sub-clause (3) uses the expression "act", it again 
        appears to be confined to an act of speech.    Shri  K.G. 
        Kannabiran, Shri  H.D.    Shourie  and  some  others have 
        suggested segregation of offences relating to  disruptive 
        activities  from  the  provisions  of  the anti-terrorism 
        legislation. 
         

         In  our  opinion,  inclusion  of  mere  offensive 
        speech  in  this  Bill  is  liable to be termed a case of 
        over-reaction and a disproportionate response.    We  are 
        not  suggesting  that such speech is either valid or that 
        such speech should not be made punishable.  All  that  we 
        are  suggesting  is  that  such  speech or its punishment 
        should not find place in  an  anti-terrorism  law.    We, 
        therefore,  recommend that clause 4 be deleted altogether 
        from the Bill or it may be redrafted so  as  to  take  in 
        physical  acts  directed towards disturbing the integrity 
        or sovereignty of India so as to take in acts other  than 
        those mentioned  in  clause 3.  Mere offensive speech may 
        be dealt with by another enactment - may be  by  amending 
        the Indian  Penal  Code.    This  is  a  matter  for  the 
        government to decide. 
         
        Clause 5:        We have no comments to offer with respect 
        to clause 5. 
         
        Clauses 6 & 7:   Clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill, as  prepared 
        by   the  Government,  read  together,  provide  for  the 
        following: 
         
        (a)      If an officer investigating an offence under  the 
        Act has reasons to believe that "any property in relation 
        to which an investigation is being conducted" is property 
        derived  from terrorist activity and includes proceeds of 
        terrorism, he  shall  seize/attach  that  property  after 
        making  an  order in that regard so that such property is 
        not transferred or otherwise dealt with except  with  his 
        permission  or  with the permission of the special court. 
        The officer seizing/attaching such property has to inform 
        the special court of the said fact within 48 hours and it 
        shall be open to the court to either  confirm  or  revoke 
        the order. 
         
        (b)      It is equally open to the special court trying an 
        offence  under this Act to attach properties belonging to 
        the accused and where such trial ends in conviction,  the 
        property  shall  stand  forfeited  to the government free 
        from all encumbrances. 
         
        (c)      Where a person is convicted under  the  Act,  the 
        special   court   may,   in   addition  to  awarding  any 
        punishment, direct forfeiture of the properties belonging 
        to him. 
         
        (d)      If the property forfeited represents shares in  a 
        company,   the   company  shall  forthwith  register  the 
        government as the transferee of such shares. 
         
         The Law Commission had suggested in  its  Working 
        Paper  that  in  addition  to the provisions contained in 
        clauses 6 and 7, there should  be  a  parallel  procedure 
        providing  for  forfeiture/confiscation  of  proceeds  of 
        terrorism.  The expression "proceeds  of  terrorism"  was 
        defined  to mean "all kinds of properties which have been 

        derived or obtained from commission of any terrorist  act 
        or disruptive activity or has been acquired through funds 
        traceable to  terrorist  act or disruptive activity".  It 
        was also proposed in the Working Paper that there  should 
        be  a  specific section declaring the holding of proceeds 
        of terrorism itself as illegal and  providing  for  their 
        confiscation.   It  was  suggested  that  there should be 
        provisions  prescribing  the  procedure  following  which 
        proceeds   of   terrorism   can  be  seized/attached  and 
        forfeited to the government.  It was clarified  that  for 
        this  purpose it is not necessary that the person holding 
        such proceeds or owning such proceeds or in possession of 
        such proceeds should have been prosecuted under the Act.      
         The object behind the provision has been to reach 
        the properties of the terrorists, who, for some reason or 
        other cannot be arrested or prosecuted including for  the 
        reason that  they are safely ensconced abroad.  Reference 
        was made to the fact that certain persons are said to  be 
        directing,   controlling   and   carrying   on  terrorist 
        activities  within  India  while  stationed  outside  the 
        country.    It   was   pointed  out  that  attaching  and 
        forfeiting the  properties  belonging  to  such  persons, 
        irrespective  of  the  fact  in  whose  name and in whose 
        possession they were held, would be an effective  way  of 
        fighting terrorism.      It   was   suggested  that  such 
        attachment could be made only by an officer not below the 
        rank of Superintendent  of  Police  and  that  he  should 
        inform  the  special  court  of  such  seizure/attachment 
        within 48 hours. 
         It was further provided that it shall be open  to 
        the  officer  seizing/attaching  the properties to either 
        produce them before the court  where  the  person  owning 
        such properties is prosecuted under the Act or to produce 
        the  same  before  the designated authority (who shall be 
        distinct from a  designated  court).    If  the  property 
        seized/attached   is   produced   before  the  designated 
        authority, he shall issue a notice to the person in whose 
        name it is standing  or  in  whose  possession  they  are 
        found, to show cause as to why the said properties should 
        not  be  declared  to  be  the  proceeds of terrorism and 
        forfeited/confiscated in favour of the  government.    It 
        was  further  provided  that  in  such  a proceeding, the 
        burden shall lie upon the person  to  whom  a  notice  is 
        issued  to establish that the properties mentioned in the 
        show cause notice  do  not  represent  the  "proceeds  of 
        terrorism"  or  that  they  were earned by legitimate and 
        lawful means.  After making  appropriate  inquiry  (which 
        would  naturally  involve  an  inquiry into facts in case 
        there is a dispute as to facts), the Designated Authority 
        shall pass final orders either forfeiting  such  property 
        in  favour  of the government or releasing it as the case 
        may be.  Detailed procedure on the lines of the procedure 
        contained in SAFEMA  (whose  constitutionality  has  been 
        upheld  by a nine-judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme 
        Court) was provided.  The only objection which  has  been 
        put forward in the course of seminars to these provisions 
        is that the power to forfeit the properties should not be 

        vested  in  administrative  authority like the Designated 
        Authority but that it should vest in a court or a special 
        court, as the case may be.  Though it cannot be said that 
        the said objection is totally without any  substance,  it 
        is  necessary to mention at the same time that even under 
        SAFEMA,  the  power  to   forfeit   is   vested   in   an 
        administrative officer   and   not  in  a  court.    More 
        important - though the Designated  Authority  may  be  an 
        administrative officer, once he is designated as a 
         
        Designated  Authority,  he  becomes  a  tribunal  for all 
        purposes and would be obliged to observe  the  principles 
        of  natural  justice  while  making the inquiry and while 
        passing the final orders.  In fact, an appeal is provided 
        from the orders of the Designated Authority to  the  High 
        Court directly.    In  such  a situation, there can be no 
        room for any  valid  apprehension  that  the  proceedings 
        under this parallel procedure would result in miscarriage 
        of justice.   Accordingly, we reiterate our proposals and 
        recommend that provisions and modifications suggested  in 
        para 5.13.3  should  be  incorporated  in the Bill.  They 
        read as follows: 
         
         
         "6.     Holding of proceeds of terrorism illegal: 
                (1) No person shall hold or be in  possession  of 
                any proceeds  of  terrorism.    (2)  Proceeds  of 
                terrorism, whether they are held by  a  terrorist 
                or  by  any  other person and whether or not such 
                person is prosecuted or convicted under this  Act 
                shall  be  liable  to be forfeited to the Central 
                Government in the manner hereinafter provided. 
         
         
         6A.     Powers of investigating officers:  (1) If 
                an officer (not below the rank of  Superintendent 
                of  Police)  investigating  an  offence committed 
                under this Act has reason  to  believe  that  any 
                property in relation to which an investigation is 
                being conducted is a property derived or obtained 
                from  the  commission  of  any  terrorist  act or 
                represents proceeds of terrorism, he shall,  with 
                the  prior  approval  in  writing of the Director 
                General of the Police of the State in which  such 
                property  is situated, make an order seizing such 
                property and where it is not practicable to seize 
                such  property,  make  an  order  of   attachment 
                directing   that   such  property  shall  not  be 
                transferred or otherwise dealt with  except  with 
                the  prior  permission of the officer making such 
                order, or of the  Designated  Authority,  or  the 
                Special  Court,  as  the case may be, before whom 
                the properties seized or attached  are  produced. 
                A  copy  of  such  order  shall  be served on the 
                person concerned. 
         
         

         (2)     The  investigating  officer  shall   duly 
                inform  the  Designated Authority or, as the case 
                may be, the  Special  Court,  within  forty-eight 
                hours of the attachment of such property. 
         
         
         (3)     It   shall  be  open  to  the  Designated 
                Authority or the Special Court  before  whom  the 
                seized or attached properties are produced either 
                to  confirm  or revoke the order of attachment so 
                issued. 
         
         (4)     In  the  case   of   immovable   property 
                attached  by  the investigating officer, it shall 
                be  deemed  to  have  been  produced  before  the 
                Designated Authority or the Special Court, as the 
                case  may  be,  when the Investigating Officer so 
                notifies in his  report  and  places  it  at  the 
                disposal  of  the  Designated  Authority  or  the 
                Special Court, as the case may be. 
         
         6B      Forfeiture  of  proceeds  of   terrorism: 
                Where  any  property is seized or attached in the 
                belief that it constitutes proceeds of  terrorism 
                and  is produced before the Designated Authority, 
                it  shall,  on  being  satisfied  that  the  said 
                property constitutes proceeds of terrorism, order 
                forfeiture  of  such property, whether or not the 
                person from whose  possession  it  is  seized  or 
                attached, is prosecuted in a Special Court for an 
                offence under this Act. 
         
         6C      Issue   of   show-cause   notice   before 
                forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism: 
          (1) No order forfeiting any  proceeds  of 
                        terrorism shall be made under section 6B, 
                        unless   the   person   holding   or   in 
                        possession of such proceeds  is  given  a 
                        notice  in  writing  informing him of the 
                        grounds  on  which  it  is  proposed   to 
                        forfeit  the  proceeds  of  terrorism and 
                        such person is given  an  opportunity  of 
                        making a representation in writing within 
                        such  reasonable time as may be specified 
                        in the  notice  against  the  grounds  of 
                        forfeiture and is also given a reasonable 
                        opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
         
          (2)  No order of forfeiture shall be made 
                        under sub-section  (1),  if  such  person 
                        establishes   that  he  is  a  bona  fide 
                        transferee of  such  proceeds  for  value 
                        without   knowing   that  they  represent 
                        proceeds of terrorism. 
                  
          (3)  It  shall  be   competent   to   the 
                        Designated Authority to make an order, in 

                        respect  of  property seized or attached, 
                        (a) in the case of a perishable  property 
                        directing it   to   be  sold:    and  the 
                        provisions of section  459  of  the  Code 
                        shall,  as  nearly as may be practicable, 
                        apply to the net proceeds of such sale; 
         
          (b)  in  the  case  of  other   property, 
                        nominating  any  officer  of  the Central 
                        Government to perform the function of the 
                        Administrator of such property subject to 
                        such conditions as may  be  specified  by 
                        the Designated Authority. 
         
         6D Appeal:   (1)  Any person aggrieved by an 
                        order of forfeiture under section 6B may, 
                        within one month from  the  date  of  the 
                        communication   to  him  of  such  order, 
                        appeal to the  High  Court  within  whose 
                        jurisdiction  the  Designated  Authority, 
                        who  passed  the  order  to  be  appealed 
                        against, is situated. 
         
          (2)  Where  an  order under section 6B is 
                        modified or annulled by the High Court or 
                        where in a prosecution instituted for the 
                        violation of the provisions of this  Act, 
                        the  person  against  whom  an  order  of 
                        forfeiture has been  made  under  section 
                        6B, is acquitted and in either case it is 
                        not possible for any reason to return the 
                        proceeds  of  terrorism  forfeited,  such 
                        person shall be paid the  price  therefor 
                        as  if the proceeds of terrorism had been 
                        sold  to  the  Central  Government   with 
                        reasonable  interest  calculated from the 
                        day  of  seizure  of  the   proceeds   of 
                        terrorism   and   such   price  shall  be 
                        determined in the manner prescribed. 
         
         6E      Order of forfeiture not to interfere with 
                other punishments:  The order of forfeiture  made 
                under this Act by the Designated Authority, shall 
                not   prevent   the   infliction   of  any  other 
                punishment to which the person  affected  thereby 
                is liable under this Act. 
         
         6F      Claims by  third  parties:  (1) Where any 
                claim is preferred, or any objection is  made  to 
                the  forfeiture  of any property under section 6C 
                on the ground that such property is not liable to 
                such forfeiture, the Designated Authority or  the 
                Special  Court,  as  the case may be, before whom 
                such  property  is  produced,  shall  proceed  to 
                investigate the claim or objection. 
         
          Provided that no such investigation shall 

                be  made  where  the  Designated Authority or the 
                Special  Court  considers  that  the   claim   or 
                objection   was  designed  to  cause  unnecessary 
                delay. 
         
         (2)     In case claimant or objector  establishes 
                that  the property specified in the notice issued 
                under section 6C is not liable to be attached  or 
                confiscated  under  the  Act,  the  notice  under 
                section  6C  shall  be  withdrawn   or   modified 
                accordingly. 
         
         6G      Powers of  the Designated Authority:  The 
                Designated Authority, acting under the provisions 
                of this Act, shall have all the powers of a Civil 
                Court required for making a full and fair enquiry 
                into the matter before it. 
         
         6H      Obligation to furnish information:    (1) 
                Notwithstanding  anything  contained in any other 
                law, the officer investigating any offence  under 
                this Act, shall have power to require any officer 
                or authority of the Central Government or a State 
                Government  or  a  local  authority  or a Bank, a 
                company,  a  firm  or  any   other   institution, 
                establishment,  organisation or any individual to 
                furnish  information  in  their   possession   in 
                relation to such persons, on points or matters as 
                in  the  opinion  of such officer, will be useful 
                for, or relevant to, the purposes of this Act. 
         
         (2) Failure to furnish the information called for 
                under  sub-section  (1),  or   furnishing   false 
                information shall be punishable with imprisonment 
                for  a  term which may extend to three years or a 
                fine or with both. 
         
         (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
                Code, the offence under sub-section (1) shall  be 
                tried   as  a  summary  case  and  the  procedure 
                prescribed  in  Chapter  XXI  of  the  said  Code 
                [except  sub-section (2) of section 262] shall be 
                applicable thereto. 
         
         (4)     Any  officer   in   possession   of   any 
                information  may furnish the same suo motu to the 
                officer investigating an offence under this  Act, 
                if   in   the   opinion   of  such  officer  such 
                information will be useful to  the  investigating 
                officer for the purposes of this Act. 
         
         6I      Certain  transfers  to  be null and void: 
                Where after the issue of an order  under  section 
                6A  or issue of a notice under section 6B(1), any 
                property  referred  to  in  the  said  notice  is 
                transferred by any mode whatsoever, such transfer 
                shall,  for  the purpose of the proceedings under 

                this Act, be ignored  and  if  such  property  is 
                subsequently  confiscated,  the  transfer of such 
                property shall be deemed to be null and void." 
         
         The  above  provisions  suggested  by   the   Law 
        Commission  are  consistent with sub-clause (6) of clause 
        3;  indeed  these  suggested   provisions   advance   the 
        objective underlying the said sub-clause. 
         
        PART III OF THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL 
         
         Part   III   of   the  Bill  under  consideration 
        comprises clauses  8  to  17.    Clause  8   deals   with 
        constitution  of Special Courts and the qualifications of 
        the persons to be appointed as Judges/Addl.    Judges  of 
        the special  courts.    We have nothing to add or comment 
        upon this clause.  In the Working Paper also,  no  change 
        was suggested   in  this  clause.    Similarly,  the  Law 
        Commission has nothing to add to or comment upon clause 9 
        (which  deals  with  the  place  of  sitting  of  special 
        courts).  Clause 10 of the Bill provides for jurisdiction 
        of  Special  Court and transfer of cases from one Special 
        Court to any other Special Court  in  another  State,  on 
        motion  being  moved  by  the  Attorney-General  of India 
        before the Supreme Court.  We are of the opinion that the 
        right of applying for transfer should also  be  given  to 
        the interested   party   as  fair  play.    We  therefore 
        recommend that this clause be  recast  on  the  lines  of 
        sections 406  and  407  of Cr.P.C.  Clause 11 again is an 
        incidental provision of procedural  nature  to  which  no 
        exception can be taken by any one.  It provides that when 
        trying an offence, a Special Court may also try any other 
        offence  with  which  the  accused may, under the Code of 
        Criminal Procedure, be charged at the same trial  if  the 
        offence is connected with such other offence. 
         
         By  Amendment 6 of the Official Amendments, a new 
        clause, namely, clause 11A is sought  to  be  introduced. 
        It contains  two  sub-clauses.   Sub-clause (1) says that 
        "when a Police officer investigating a case requests  the 
        court  of  a  Chief Judicial Magistrate or the court of a 
        Chief Metropolitan Magistrate in  writing  for  obtaining 
        samples  of  handwriting,  finger  prints,  foot  prints, 
        photographs, blood, saliva, semen, hair  of  any  accused 
        person   reasonably  suspected  to  be  involved  in  the 
        commission of an offence under  this  Act,  it  shall  be 
        lawful  for  the  court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate or 
        the court of a Chief Metropolitan  Magistrate  to  direct 
        that  such  samples be given by the accused person to the 
        Police officer either through a medical  practitioner  or 
        otherwise, as the case may be".  Sub-clause (2) then says 
        that  "if  any  accused person refuses to give samples as 
        provided in sub-clause (1) in a trial under this Act, the 
        court shall presume until the contrary is proved that the 
        accused person had  committed  such  offence".    In  the 
        Working  Paper,  the  Law Commission had observed that in 
        view of the decision  of  the  eleven-Judge  Constitution 

        Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  State  of  Bombay  v. 
        Kathikalu, AIR 1961 SC 1808,  a  direction  of  the  kind 
        contemplated  by  sub-clause  (1) of clause 11A cannot be 
        held  to  contravene  clause  (3)  of  article  20  which 
        declares  that "no person accused of any offence shall be 
        compelled to be a witness against himself".  It cannot be 
        denied that such a provision is necessary in an enactment 
        designed to check terrorist activities.  One must keep in 
        mind  the  difficulty  of  procuring  witnesses  and  the 
        difficulty  in the way of collecting independent evidence 
        against the terrorists.  [In this  connection,  reference 
        may  be made to a letter dated February 12, 2000 from Sri 
        Veeranna   Aivalli,   Commissioner   of    Security(Civil 
        Aviation),  Bureau  of Civil Aviation Security, addressed 
        to Law Commission.  He has stated that he has spent  more 
        than  three decades in Jammu and Kashmir and on the basis 
        of his experience, he has, inter alia, made the following 
        comments:  "Our experience of TADA in J&K  has  not  been 
        good.   There  has not been a single case, which has been 
        decided by  the  Court  of   Law.      The   difficulties 
        encountered have been with regard to the non-availability 
        of  witnesses  to testify in the Courts of Law on account 
        of fear of reprisal.  There  is  another  difficulty  and 
        that  is  the  collection  of evidence in cases where the 
        search, seizure and arrest in areas  where  there  is  no 
        habitation  and  many  a time these have been by security 
        forces.  In such a case, the arrested persons' confession 
        to the security forces leading to the  recovery  of  arms 
        and  ammunition  and  explosives is the only thing, which 
        can be brought  on  record.    Even  the  security  force 
        personnel  do  not  come  forward  for tendering evidence 
        because they keep on  moving  from  place  to  place  for 
        performance  of their duties not only within J&K but even 
        outside J&K and sometimes outside India.    The  security 
        force  personnel  are  reluctant to depose in any case as 
        they feel that they are not  attuned  for  this  kind  of 
        exercise.   In  the  last  15  years of militancy in J&K, 
        thousands of people have been arrested, lakhs of  weapons 
        seized  and  millions of rounds collected and quintals of 
        explosive material seized.  These figures  are  real  eye 
        openers  and the fact that not a single case has ended in 
        conviction nor has there been any recording  of  evidence 
        and even  this  itself  is  very  disturbing.  TADA had a 
        provision that no arrested person could  be  released  on 
        bail  without  giving  an  opportunity  to  the  State to 
        present its viewpoints.  In thousands of cases, the bails 
        were granted in situations far from satisfactory and full 
        of suspicion.  The State High Court did not interfere  in 
        the  matter on the ground that the appellate jurisdiction 
        rested with the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court did not 
        interfere in the matter nor did they take  cognizance  on 
        the  ground that no one has filed a petition before it in 
        this matter...  The High Court Bar Association had passed 
        a resolution that no Member of the Bar should appear  for 
        the  State  and  they  wanted  the  judiciary to pass the 
        orders ex-parte.  Above facts are only indicators of  the 
        malady,  which  has  been prevailing in J&K on account of 

        terrorism...  Expression of honest  opinion  have  become 
        difficult on account of the damocles sword of contempt of 
        court  hanging  on  the  heads  of  the  people..."]  The 
        proposed clause 11A provides a legally permissible method 
        of collecting  evidence.    It  is  only  one  method  of 
        collecting evidence  and proving the offence.  Indeed, if 
        the accused is not guilty, such a provision would in fact 
         
        help him in establishing his innocence.   For  the  above 
        reasons,  the  insertion  of sub-clause (1) of clause 11A 
        cannot be legitimately opposed.  However, we  propose  to 
        add the word "voice" after the word "hair" but before the 
        words  "of  any accused" in sub-clause (1) so that sample 
        of the voice of the accused can be obtained by the police 
        officer. 
         Once sub-clause (1) is held to be  necessary  and 
        constitutionally valid, no real objection can be taken to 
        the  presumption created by sub-clause (2) but it appears 
        that   the   amptitude   of   presumption   provided   is 
        disproportionate and  excessive.    Instead  of presuming 
        that the accused person had committed  such  offence,  it 
        would  be  appropriate  and consistent with fair play and 
        good sense to provide merely that on  such  failure,  the 
        Court   would  draw  the  appropriate  adverse  inference 
        against the accused person. 
         Clause 12 of the said Bill deals with appointment 
        and  qualifications  of   public   prosecutors/additional 
        public  prosecutors/special  public  prosecutors  for the 
        Special Courts.    No  comment  is  called  for  on  this 
        provision. 
         Clause  13  sets  out the procedure and powers of 
        Special Courts.   Sub-clause  (1)  empowers  the  Special 
        Court  to take cognizance of any offence upon receiving a 
        complaint of facts which constitute such offence or  upon 
        a  Police  report of such facts without the accused being 
        committed to it for trial.  Chapter XVIII of the Code of 
         
        Criminal Procedure provides the procedure to be  followed 
        by  the  committal court in case of offences triable by a 
        sessions court.  This procedure is dispensed with in  the 
        case  of  offences  under  the  Act  by sub-clause (1) of 
        clause 13.  Sub-clause (2)  of  clause  13  empowers  the 
        special   court   to   try  an  offence  punishable  with 
        imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or with 
        fine or with both to try in a summary way  in  accordance 
        with the  procedure prescribed by the Code therefor.  The 
        two provisos to sub-clause (2) are  enabling  provisions. 
        The  minimum  punishment  that  can  be  imposed  in such 
        summary trial is however restricted to two years.  We may 
        point out that even  according  to  section  260  of  the 
        Cr.P.C.,  a magistrate of first class is empowered to try 
        offences punishable for two years or less, which can  not 
        be  said to be unreasonable, in view of the fact that the 
        Special Court is manned by a District Judge.   Sub-clause 
        (3)  clarifies  that  a  special court shall have all the 
        powers of a court of session while sub-clause  (4)  is  a 
        procedural provision to which no valid objection has been 

        or can  be  raised.   Sub-clause (5) empowers the special 
        court to proceed with the trial in  the  absence  of  the 
        accused  or his pleader and to record the evidence of any 
        witness, subject to the right of the  accused  to  recall 
        the witness   for   cross-examination.    This  power  is 
        conferred upon  the  special  court  notwithstanding  the 
        provisions  contained  in the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
        However, before exercising this power, the Special  Court 
        has to be satisfied that such a course is appropriate and 
        is also obliged to record the reasons for adopting such a 
        course.   Not  only  no  objection has been taken to this 
        sub-clause  by  anyone,  the  incorporation  of  such   a 
        provision in an anti-terrorism law, is obviously designed 
        in  the  interest  of  speedy  trial  and hence cannot be 
        reasonably objected to.   However,  it  does  not  appear 
        necessary  to  exclude  section  299  of  the  CrPC which 
        provides for   a   special   situation.      Accordingly, 
        sub-clause  needs modification to make it clear that that 
        section 299 is not excluded. 
         
         Clause 14 of the  Bill  contains  provisions  for 
        protection of   witnesses.    Sub-clause  (1)  says  that 
        notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the   Code   of 
        Criminal  Procedure, the proceedings under the Act may be 
        held in camera if the Special Court so desires.   It  may 
        not  be fair to leave this discretion totally unregulated 
        or unguided.  It would be fair and proper to provide that 
        the Special Court shall record its  reasons  for  holding 
        the trial  in  camera.    Sub-clause has accordingly been 
        modified.  Sub-clause (2) empowers the special  court  to 
        take  appropriate  measures  for keeping the identity and 
        address of a witness secret if it is satisfied  that  the 
        life  of  a  witness  in  any proceedings before it is in 
        danger.  Of course, the court has to record  the  reasons 
        for taking  such  measures.   This power can be exercised 
        either on the application made by the witness or  by  the 
        public prosecutor  or suo motu.  Sub-clause (3) of clause 
        14  specifies  some  of  the  measures  contemplated   by 
        sub-clause (2).    The  measures specified in sub-section 
        (3) are (a) holding of the proceedings at a place  to  be 
        decided by the special court; (b) avoiding of the mention 
        of the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders 
        or  judgments or in any records of the case accessible to 
        public; (c) issuing of any direction  for  securing  that 
        the  identity  and  addresses  of  the  witnesses are not 
        disclosed and (d) passing orders to the effect that it is 
        in the public interest that all or any of the proceedings 
        pending before such a court shall not be published in any 
        manner.  In para 5.15  of  its  Working  Paper,  the  Law 
        Commission  had  opined  that while it may be necessay to 
        protect the witness by keeping his identity  and  address 
        secret,  the  right  of the accused to cross-examine such 
        witness must also be protected at the same time.  It  was 
        observed  that  there  may  be  several  methods by which 
        effective  cross-examination  could  yet  be   undertaken 
        without  disclosing  the  identity  and  address  of  the 
        witness.  Accordingly, it was  suggested  that  paragraph 

        (c)  of sub-clause (3) of clause 14 may be substituted by 
        the following: 
         
         "(c) The making  of  necessary  arrangements  for 
                securing  that  the  identity  and address of the 
                witness  is  not  disclosed   even   during   his 
                cross-examination". 
         
         At the seminars, two conflicting view points were 
        projected.   One  set  of  participants submitted that no 
        effective  cross-examination  was  possible  unless   the 
        identity  of the witness was known to the accused and his 
        counsel and that therefore concealing the identity of the 
        witness would really  mean  denying  to  the  accused  an 
        effective opportunity  to cross-examine the witness.  The 
        proponents of this view emphasised the absolute necessity 
        of affording to the accused a reasonable  opportunity  to 
        cross-examine the  witness.    On the other hand, certain 
        other participants stressed the necessity  of  concealing 
        the  identity  of  the  witness  from the accused and his 
        counsel in cases where such a course  was  necessary  for 
        protecting  the  life  or  safety  of the witness and his 
        relatives.  They also emphasised the practical difficulty 
        in procuring witnesses in such matters and submitted that 
        if a person yet came forward as a witness but apprehended 
        danger to his life on that account, it was  the  duty  of 
        the court and the State to provide him protection. 
         
         We  have  considered  both  the  points  of view. 
        Sub-clause (3) is indeed illustrative  of  the  provision 
        contained in  sub-clause (2).  In other words, sub-clause 
        (3) is not an independent provision  but  a  continuation 
        and elaboration  of  sub-clause  (2).    This  means that 
        before taking any of the steps elaborated  in  sub-clause 
        (3),  the special court has to be satisfied that the life 
        of a particular witness is in danger and must also record 
        reasons for  formation  of  such   satisfaction.      The 
        requirement  of law that the court must be satisfied that 
        the life of the witness was in  danger  and  the  further 
        requirement that the special court is bound to record its 
        reasons   for  forming  such  satisfaction  are  adequate 
        safeguards  against  abuse  of  the  power  conferred  by 
        sub-clause (2) upon the special court.  Sub-clause (2) is 
        based  upon the doctrine of necessity, a cruel necessity. 
        It obviously takes note of the  fact  that  the  life  of 
        witnesses deposing against terrorists may be in danger in 
        many cases  and  provides for such cases.  Sub-clause (2) 
        which in reality includes sub-clause (3) within its fold, 
        is an exception rather than the rule.  Since the power is 
        given to the court, apprehension of its misuse cannot  be 
        lightly presumed.    Indeed,  so  far  as  the  right  of 
        cross-examination of the  accused  is  concerned,  it  is 
        undoubtedly  a  very  valuable  and  effective instrument 
        enabling the accused to defend himself appropriately  and 
        effectively,  but  this  right  of  the accused has to be 
        balanced against the interest of the society and may have 
        to be modified where the interest of  society  does  call 

        for such  modification.    All this discussion only means 
        that if the court  is  satisfied  that  for  the  reasons 
        mentioned  in the sub-clause, it is necessary to keep the 
        identity and address of the witness secret, it  may  have 
        to   take   appropriate   measures   and  make  necessary 
        arrangements   for   ensuring   both   the    right    of 
        cross-examination and  the protection of the witness.  In 
        this behalf, it may be relevant to notice the judgment of 
        the Supreme Court in Kartar Singh, (1994) 3 SCC  569,  at 
        pages 688-689 sub-para 11 of the summary in para 368.  We 
        are  also  of  the opinion that the power of the court to 
        take appropriate  measures  to  permit  cross-examination 
        even while protecting the identity of the witness must be 
        deemed  to be implicit in sub-clauses (2) and (3) as they 
        are found in the Bill.  It is  not  really  necessary  to 
        amend any of the paragraphs in sub-clause (3) as proposed 
        in  para  5.15  of our Working Paper inasmuch as the Bill 
        does  not   propose   to   take   away   the   right   of 
        cross-examination.   The  suggestion  for substitution of 
        paragraph  (c)  in  sub-section  (3)  made  by  the   Law 
        Commission  in  the  said  para  is accordingly withdrawn 
        keeping in view the opinions expressed in the seminars. 
         
         Sub-clause  (4)  is   merely   consequential   to 
        sub-clause   (3)  in  the  sense  that  it  provides  for 
        punishing the person violating a direction  issued  under 
        sub-clause (3). 
         
         Clause  15  provides  that  the  trial by special 
        courts shall have precedence over the trial of any  other 
        case  against the accused in any other court (not being a 
        special court).  It also provides that the trial of  such 
        other  case  shall remain in abeyance pending disposal of 
        the trial before  the  special  court.    This  provision 
        cannot  again  be reasonably objected to, particularly in 
        view of the fact that we are suggesting elsewhere a  time 
        limit  within which the special court should conclude the 
        trial.  It is hoped that in course of time,  the  special 
        courts   will   develop   expertise   in   dealing   with 
        terrorism-related offences, thus enabling speedy disposal 
        of the cases. 
         
         By way of official amendments a new clause 15A is 
        sought to be introduced.  Sub-clause (1) of  this  clause 
        makes  the  confession  made  by a person before a police 
        officer not lower in rank than a Superintendent of Police 
        admissible  in  evidence  provided  it  is  recorded   in 
        accordance with  the  provisions of the said clause.  The 
        proviso  to  sub-clause  (1)  further  provides  that   a 
        confession  made  by  a co-accused shall be admissible in 
        evidence against  other  co-accused.     This   provision 
        overrides  the  provisions to the contrary in the Code of 
        Criminal  Procedure  and   the   Indian   Evidence   Act. 
        Sub-clause  (2)  provides  that  a  police officer shall, 
        before recording any confession, explain to  such  person 
        in  writing  that  he is not bound to make confession and 
        that if he makes any confession, it could be used against 

        him.  The provisio to sub-clause (2) says  that  if  such 
        person prefers to remain silent, the police officer shall 
        not  compel  him  or  induce  him to make any confession. 
        Sub-clause (3) says that the confession shall be recorded 
        in an atmosphere free from threat or inducement and shall 
        be recorded in the same language in  which  it  is  made. 
        Sub-clause  (4)  creates  an  obligation  upon the police 
        officer, who has recorded a confession  under  sub-clause 
        (1),  to  produce  the person along with the confessional 
        statement, without unreasonable delay, before  the  court 
        of  a  Chief  Metropolitan  Magistrate  or the court of a 
        Chief Judicial  Magistrate.     Sub-clause   (5)   is   a 
        continuation of  sub-clause (4).  Sub-clause (5) provides 
        that  the  Magistrate  before  whom  the  person  is   so 
        produced, shall record the statement, if any, made by the 
        person so  produced  and  get  his signature thereon.  It 
        provides further  that  if  there  is  any  complaint  of 
        torture  by  such  person,  he  shall  be  directed to be 
        produced for medical examination before a medical officer 
        not lower in rank than an Assistant Civil  Surgeon.    In 
        our  opinion,  clause  15A, hedged in as it is by several 
        safeguards, is a necessary provision in such a law.    It 
        is  not as if the confession made before a police officer 
        is made admissible without anything more.   Not  only  is 
        the police officer under a duty to record a confession in 
        the  same language in which it is made and if possible by 
        employing mechanical devices  like  cassettes,  tapes  or 
        sound  tracks,  he is also under an obligation to explain 
        in writing to the person that any confession made by  him 
        will be  used  against  him.   But the more important and 
        truly  effective  safeguard  is  the  one  contained   in 
        sub-clauses  (4) and (5) which sub-clauses, it is evident 
        have been inserted in the light of and  in  pursuance  of 
        the  observations  made  by  the  Supreme Court in Kartar 
        Singh's case while  dealing  with  section  15  of  TADA. 
        Sub-clauses  (4) and (5) read with sub-clause (1) do mean 
        that unless a confession is recorded in  accordance  with 
        the several provisions contained in clause 15A, including 
        sub-clauses  (4)  and  (5),  such  confession will not be 
        valid and admissible.  As already stated, sub-clauses (4) 
        and (5) require that soon after recording  of  confession 
        by  the  police  officer,  the  person  shall be produced 
        before  a  Chief  Metropolitan  Magistrate  or  a   Chief 
        Judicial  Magistrate  along  with the recorded confession 
        and such magistrate  is  required  again  to  record  the 
        statement  of  the  person and take his signature thereon 
        and further, if the person complains of any  torture,  it 
        is  obligatory upon the Magistrate to send him to medical 
        officer not lower in rank than a Assistant Civil  Surgeon 
        for medical  examination.    It  is difficult to find any 
        legitimate  objection  to  such   a   provision   in   an 
        anti-terrorism law.    As has been repeatedly pointed out 
        during the course of seminars and the responses received, 
        in an extraordinary  situation  (such  as  the  India  is 
        facing  on  account  of  external and internal threats of 
        terrorism), an extraordinary law is called for.  In fact, 
        during the seminars, no serious objection  was  taken  to 

        this   provision   except   the  general  objection  that 
        confessions made before the police officers should not be 
        made admissible because in that event they will resort to 
        third degree methods to  obtain  confessions  and  as  an 
        excuse  for  their  inability  to  investigate  the crime 
        effectively.  In the light of the safeguards contained in 
        clause 15A and, in particular, the  safeguards  contained 
        in  sub-clauses  (4)  and  (5)  read  with sub-clause (1) 
        thereof, the said criticism must be held to be untenable. 
         
         So far as the proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 
        15A is concerned, a little explanation would be in order. 
        In the TADA (Act 28 of 1987), clause (c)  of  sub-section 
        (1)  of  section  21  provided  that  the confession of a 
        co-accused was admissible.  However,  by  virtue  of  the 
        1993  amendment to TADA, clause (c) in sub-section (1) of 
        section 21 was omitted and at the same time clause  15(1) 
        was  amended  by  introducing  the words "are co-accused, 
        abettor or conspirator" after the words  "trial  of  such 
        person".    In   sub-clause   (1),  a  proviso  was  also 
        introduced which read:    "provided  that  co-accused  or 
        conspirator  is  charged  and  tried  in  the  same  case 
        together with the accused".    The  effect  of  the  1993 
        amendment  was that unless the co-accused was charged and 
        tried in the same case together  with  the  accused,  his 
        confession  was  not  admissible  or relevant against the 
        accused.  Though this aspect was not considered in Kartar 
        Singh's case,  it  was  considered  in  Kalpnath  Rai  v. 
        State,  1997(8) SCC 732 by a two-Judge Bench and later by 
        a three-Judge Bench in State v.  Nalini, 1993 SCC  (Cri.) 
        691.   In  Nalini's case, the majority (Wadhwa and Quadri 
        JJ.) held that  because  of  the  clear  and  unambiguous 
        language  employed  in  section  15  and,  in particular, 
        having regard to the non-obstante clause with  which  the 
        sub-section  opens,  there  is  no  reason  to  read  any 
        limitation  upon  the  admissibility  of  confession   of 
        co-accused as  indicated  in  Kalpnath  Rai's case.  They 
        opined that overall decision in Kalpnath Rai's  case  and 
        rationale  thereof  practically brings back section 30 of 
        the Evidence Act into TADA by a back door.  The  majority 
        held that the confession of the co-accused is substantive 
        evidence and though it may not be substantial evidence in 
        the  sense that the value to be attached to such evidence 
        is a matter of appreciation of evidence in a given  case, 
        it is wrong to say that it requires to be re-corroborated 
        before it  is  made  admissible.    At the same time, the 
        majority cautioned that as  a  matter  of  prudence,  the 
        Court  may  look for some corroboration if the confession 
        is to be used against the co-accused. 
         
         It is evident that the proviso to sub-clause  (1) 
        of  clause  15A  (sought  to  be  introduced  by Official 
        Amendment in the  Criminal  Law  Amendment  Bill)  is  in 
        effect  a reproduction of the provision obtaining in TADA 
        as amended by the 1993  Amendment  Act.    The  question, 
        however,  still  remains  whether  such  a  provision  is 
        desirable.  It is one thing for the Court to  uphold  its 

        validity  because  the  Court looks at the provision from 
        the point of view of its constitutional validity  and  it 
        is  altogether a different thing when the question arises 
        about its desirability.  We are here concerned  with  the 
        desirability of  such  a  provision.   In our opinion, if 
        this  provision  is  retained,  the  very   concept   and 
        necessity  of the provision regarding approver's evidence 
        may become  unnecessary.    Since  the  evidence   of   a 
        co-accused is ordinarily not admissible, necessity arises 
        for  giving  pardon to one of the accused and make him an 
        approver  so  that  his  evidence  may  be  relevant  and 
        admissible against  the  other co-accused.  Section 30 of 
        the Evidence Act which merely says that the evidence of a 
        co-accused can be taken into  consideration  against  the 
        other accused  is  based  upon  good reason.  It does not 
        appear necessary to enlarge upon the principle of section 
        30 of the Evidence  Act.    We  are,  therefore,  of  the 
        opinion that proviso to sub-clause 15A(1) as suggested in 
        the Official Amendment should be dropped. 
         
         Clause  16  provides  for transfer by the special 
        court of an  offence  to  an  ordinary  court  where  the 
        special  court  finds it is not an offence triable by it. 
        This is a necessary procedural provision and no objection 
        has also been taken thereto.  Clause 17 which is the last 
        clause in Part III provides for  an  appeal  against  the 
        orders of the special court.  As originally provided, the 
        appeal was provided to a High Court both on facts and law 
        and  it was further directed that such an appeal shall be 
        heard by a Bench of two Judges.   An  appeal  against  an 
        interlocutory order  was,  of course, barred.  The period 
        of limitation for filing an appeal was prescribed  as  30 
        days  but  the  High Court was given the power to condone 
        the delay on proof  of  sufficient  cause.    By  way  of 
        Official  Amendments, the forum of appeal is sought to be 
        substituted.  Instead of a  High  Court,  the  appeal  is 
        sought to  be provided to the Supreme Court.  The proviso 
        to sub-clause (1) which  is  sought  to  be  inserted  by 
        Official  Amendments,  however,  says  that if the person 
        tried by special court for an offence under this  Act  is 
        convicted for any other offence (and is acquitted for any 
        offence under this Act), he can file an appeal before the 
        High Court.   The second proviso to sub-clause (1) sought 
        to be introduced by the Official Amendment provides  that 
        if  in  such  a case, an appeal is preferred by the State 
        against the order of acquittal in respect of  an  offence 
        under  this Act, the State can apply to the Supreme Court 
        to withdraw the appeal, if any, filed by the  accused  in 
        the  High  Court  for  being heard along with the State's 
        appeal in the Supreme Court.  As a  consequence  of  this 
        amendment,  sub-clause  (2)  of  clause  17 as originally 
        drafted is sought to be deleted.  Several participants in 
        the seminars and others have expressed the  opinion  that 
        provision  of an appeal to the Supreme Court as suggested 
        by the Official Amendments makes the said  remedy  almost 
        unavailable  inasmuch  as  many  accused  may not be in a 
        position to approach the Supreme Court having  regard  to 

        the  cost  involved  and, in many cases, the distance and 
        other inhibiting factors.  We are of the opinion that the 
        amendment proposed by Official  Amendments  ought  to  be 
        dropped  and  that clause 17 as originally drafted in the 
        Bill should remain unchanged. 
         
         
                               CHAPTER V              
     PART IV OF THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL 
  
         
         Part IV of the Bill contains clauses  18  to  24. 
        The Official Amendments not only propose to amend several 
        provisions  in this part but also propose to add one more 
        clause, namely,  clause  25.    Clause  18  provides  for 
        certain  modifications  in the Code of Criminal Procedure 
        in  its  application  to  the  offences  under  the  Act. 
        Sub-clause  (1)  provides  that  every offence punishable 
        under this section shall be deemed to  be  a  "cognizable 
        offence" and  a  "cognizable case".  Sub-clause (2) while 
        providing that  section  167  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 
        Procedure  shall apply in relation to a case involving an 
        offence punishable under this Act, provides for extension 
        of  several  periods  mentioned  in  sub-section  (2)  of 
        section 167.    A  proviso  is also sought to be added by 
        which the special court is given the power to extend  the 
        period  further  in  case  it is not possible to conclude 
        investigation within such extended period.    The  second 
        proviso  sought to be added enables the police officer to 
        ask for police custody of a person who may be in judicial 
        custody if such a course is found necessary.   Sub-clause 
        (3)  of clause 18 of the Bill provides that while section 
        268 of the  Code  shall  apply  in  relation  to  a  case 
        involving  an  offence  punishable  under  the  Act, such 
        application  shall  be  subject  to   the   modifications 
        provided in  the said sub-section.  The modifications are 
        more or less  formal  in  nature.    Sub-clause  (4),  as 
        originally  drafted, provided that sections 366, 367, 368 
        and 371 of the Code shall apply to a  case  involving  an 
        offence   triable   by   special  court  subject  to  the 
        modification that for the expression "Court of  Session", 
        it shall  be read as "Special Court".  By way of official 
        amendments, sub-clause (4) is sought to  be  substituted. 
        The  said  substitution  was  probably  thought  of  as a 
        consequence of changing the forum of appeal in clause 17. 
        (We have already expressed our opposition to the proposal 
        to change the forum of appeal).   Sub-clauses  (5),  (6), 
        (6A) (proposed to be inserted by Official Amendments) and 
        sub-clause  (7), constitute and represent a single scheme 
        dealing with the grant of bail.  Sub-clause (5) says that 
        section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure  shall  not 
        apply  to a person accused of having committed an offence 
        punishable under this Act.  Sub-clause (6) says  that  no 
        person  accused  of  an  offence  under this Act shall be 
        released on bail or on his own  bond  unless  the  public 

        prosecutor  has been given an opportunity of opposing the 
        application for bail.    Sub-clause  (6A)  sought  to  be 
        inserted  by Official Amendments provides that "where the 
        public prosecutor opposes the application of the  accused 
        for  release  on  bail,  no  person accused of an offence 
        punishable under this Act or any rule made therein  shall 
        be  released  on  bail  until the court is satisfied that 
        there are grounds for believing that he is not guilty  of 
        committing such  offence".   Sub-clause (7) provides that 
        the  limitations  of  granting  a   bail   specified   in 
        sub-clause (6) and sub-clause (6A) are in addition to the 
        limitations  under the Code or any other law for the time 
        being in force on granting of bail. 
         
         There was a good amount of debate and  discussion 
        on these  provisions  in  both  the  seminars.    In  the 
        responses received by  the  Law  Commission  also,  these 
        provisions have either been defended or opposed.  One set 
        of objections was that the provison in sub-clause (6A) to 
        the effect that no bail shall be granted unless the court 
        is  satisfied  that "there are grounds for believing that 
        he is not guilty of committing  such  offence"  makes  it 
        almost impossible  for  any  accused to get bail.  In our 
        opinion, there is no substance in this objection inasmuch 
        as  this  is  the  very  language  which  was   used   in 
        sub-section  (8) of section 20 of TADA and which has been 
        the subject-matter of elaborate discussion  and  decision 
        by the Supreme Court in Kartar Singh's case.  The Supreme 
        Court  has  pointed  out that the language of sub-section 
        (8) of section 20 of TADA is in  substance  no  different 
        from the language employed in section 437(1) of the Code, 
        section  35  of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1976 
        and section 104 of the Customs Act, 1962.    The  Supreme 
        Court  accordingly upheld the validity of sub-section (8) 
        of  section  20  of  TADA  holding  that  the  respective 
        provisions contained therein are not violative of Article 
        21 of the Constitution.  Be that as it may, having regard 
        to  the  purpose  and  object  underlying the Act and the 
        context in which the  Act  has  become  necessary,  these 
        restrictive  provisions  may not be likely to be assailed 
        on any reasonable basis.  The  objection,  therefore,  is 
        unacceptable. 
         
         However,  certain  other  useful suggestions were 
        made to which a reference is necessary. 
         
         Justice J.S.  Verma, Chairperson, National  Human 
        Rights Commission suggested that for the purpose of bail, 
        the offences in the Act should be classified on the lines 
        indicated by the Supreme Court in its decision in Shaheen 
        Welfare Society's case [1996 (2) JT 719 (SC)].  This view 
        was supported  by  Shri  P.P.   Rao, Senior Advocate, who 
        emphasised  that  a   routine   refusal   of   bail   was 
        unacceptable.   He  added  that since the normal rule was 
        bail, any restriction placed thereon in an anti-terrorism 
        law should  not  be  disproportionate,  making  the  very 
        provision for    bail   meaningless.      Several   other 

        participants also supported this line of reasoning  which 
        we find eminently reasonable and acceptable. 
         
         In  Shaheen  Welfare  Society's case (supra), the 
        Supreme Court has suggested  categorisation  of  offences 
        under  TADA into four categories for the purpose of bail. 
        The following observations are relevant: 
         
         "For  the  purpose  of  grant  of  bail  to  TADA 
                detenus,  we  divide  the  undertrials  into four 
                classes, namely, (a) hardcore  undertrials  whose 
                release  would prejudice the prosecution case and 
                whose liberty may prove to be a menace to society 
                in general and to the complainant and prosecution 
                witnesses in particular;  (b)  other  undertrials 
                whose  overt acts or involvement directly attract 
                sections  3  and/or  4  of  the  TADA  Act;   (c) 
                undertrials  who are roped in, not because of any 
                activity directly attracting sections  3  and  4, 
                but  by  virtue of sections 120B or 147, IPC and; 
                (d) those undertrials who were  found  possessing 
                incriminating  articles in notified areas and are 
                booked under section 5 of TADA. 
          
         Ordinarily, it is true  that  the  provisions  of 
                sections  20(8)  and 20(9) of TADA would apply to 
                all the aforesaid classes.  But while adopting  a 
                pragmatic  and  just approach, no one can dispute 
                the fact that all of them cannot be dealt with by 
                the same yardstick.  Different  approaches  would 
                be  justified  on the basis of the gravity of the 
                charges.  Adopting this approach we  are  of  the 
                opinion that undertrials falling within group (a) 
                cannot receive   liberal  treatment.    Cases  of 
                undertrials falling in group (b) would have to be 
                differently dealt with, in  that,  if  they  have 
                been  in  prison for five years or more and their 
                trial is not likely to be  completed  within  the 
                next  six  months,  they  can be released on bail 
                unless the court comes  to  the  conclusion  that 
                their  antecedents  are  such that releasing them 
                may be harmful to the lives  of  the  complaints, 
                the   family   members  of  the  complainant,  or 
                witnesses.   Cases  of  undertrials  falling   in 
                groups  (c)  and  (d) can be dealt with leniently 
                and they can be released if  they  have  been  in 
                jail  for three years and two years respectively. 
                Those falling in  group  (b),  when  released  on 
                bail,  may  be  released on bail of not less than 
                Rs.50,000/- with one surety for like  amount  and 
                those  falling  in  groups  (c)  and  (d)  may be 
                released on bail on their executing  a  bond  for 
                Rs.30,000/-  with  one  surety  for  like amount, 
                subject to the following terms: 
         
         (1) the accused shall  report  to  the  concerned 
                police station once a week; 

         (2)  the  accused shall remain within the area of 
                jurisdiction  of  the  Designated  Court  pending 
                trial  and  shall  not leave the area without the 
                permission of the Designated Court; 
         (3) the accused shall deposit  his  passport,  if 
                any, with  the  Designated Court.  If he does not 
                hold a passport, he shall file  an  affidavit  to 
                that effect  before  the  Designated  Court.  The 
                Designated  Court  may  ascertain   the   correct 
                position  from  the  passport  authorities, if it 
                deems it necessary; 
         (4) The Designated Court will be  at  liberty  to 
                cancel  the  bail  if  any of those conditions is 
                violated or a case for cancellation  of  bail  is 
                otherwise made out. 
         (5) Before granting bail, a notice shall be given 
                to the public prosecutor and an opportunity shall 
                be  given  to  him  to oppose the application for 
                such release.  The Designated  Court  may  refuse 
                bail in very special circumstances for reasons to 
                be recorded in writing. 
         
         These conditions may be relaxed in cases of those 
                under groups (c) and (d) and, for special reasons 
                to   be   recorded  in  the  case  of  group  (b) 
                prisoners.  Also  these  directions  may  not  be 
                applied  by the Designated Court in exceptionally 
                grave cases such as the Bombay  Bomb  Blast  Case 
                where  a  lengthy  trial is inevitable looking to 
                the number of accused, the  number  of  witnesses 
                and  the nature of charges unless the court feels 
                that the trial is being unduly delayed.  However, 
                even in such  cases  it  is  essential  that  the 
                Review  Committee  examines the case against each 
                accused bearing the above directions in mind,  to 
                ensure that TADA provisions are not unnecessarily 
                invoked." 
         
         Although  the Court observed in the said judgment 
        that the aforesaid directions were  "a  one-time  measure 
        meant  only  to  alleviate  the  current  situation", the 
        spirit and principle behind the said observations  should 
        serve  as  guidelines to the Special Courts while dealing 
        applications of bail of persons accused of offences under 
        the Act, for the purposes of bail. 
         
         Though we would like very much to incorporate the 
        said classification in sub-clauses (5) to (7)  of  clause 
        18,  we  find  it  difficult  to  do  so  in  view of the 
        difficulty in incorporating the various  ideas  contained 
        in the  above  judgment.  For example, the Court has said 
        that  their   classification   is   not   applicable   to 
        "exceptionally grave cases such as Bombay Bomb Blast Case 
        ..."  What  is an exceptionally grave case has to be left 
        to be determined by the special court in  a  given  case. 
        In  view  of this drafting difficulty, we have not chosen 
        to suggest an amendment to the said provisions.   It  may 

        be  noted  that  the  decision  of  the  Supreme Court is 
        binding on all courts by virtue of  Article  141  of  the 
        Constitution  and  hence  it can be presumed that even in 
        the absence of specific provisions  in  the  Act  on  the 
        lines indicated in the judgment, the ratio and the spirit 
        of  the  said  judgment  shall be followed by the special 
        courts.  However, a new sub-clause may be added in clause 
        18 providing that in case  of  foreign  terrorists,  bail 
        should    not    be   granted   except   in   exceptional 
        circumstances.  The sub-clause may read as follows : 
         
         "(8) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (7), 
                no bail shall be granted to a person  accused  of 
                an  offence  punishable  under this Act, if he is 
                not an Indian citizen, except in very exceptional 
                circumstances and for reasons recorded therefor." 
         
         Clause 19 deals with cognizance of offences under 
        the Act.  As originally drafted, the Bill  provided  that 
        notwithstanding   anything   contained  in  the  Code  of 
        Criminal Procedure, no information about  the  commission 
        of  an  offence  under  this Act shall be recorded by the 
        Police  without  the  prior  approval  of  the   District 
        Superintendent of Police.  By way of Official Amendments, 
        for  the  expression "District Superintendent of Police", 
        the words "Inspector General of Police or,  as  the  case 
        may  be,  the  Commissioner  of  Police" are sought to be 
        substituted.  Sub-clause (2) of section 19 as  originally 
        drafted  in  the  Bill provided that "No court shall take 
        cognizance of any offence  under  this  Act  without  the 
        previous  sanction of the Inspector General of Police, or 
        as the case may be the Commissioner of Police".   By  way 
        of  Official  Amendments, the words "Inspector General of 
        Police or as the case may be the Commissioner of  Police" 
        are   sought  to  be  substituted  by  the  words  "State 
        Government or as the case may be the Central Government". 
        It  was  pointed  out  by  several  participants  at  the 
        seminars  that  the  requirement  of  "prior aproval" for 
        recording an  information  about  the  commission  of  an 
        offence  under  the  Act was an impractical provision and 
        that therefore the requirement of prior approval  may  be 
        removed  and  in  its  place  a  subsequent  approval  or 
        ratification may  be  provided  for.    Indeed,  the  Law 
        Commission  has  recommended  in  its  Working  Paper the 
        insertion of clause 7A in Part II of the  Bill  providing 
        that  the police officer recording information in respect 
        of an offence  under  this  Act  shall  promptly  forward 
        copies  of  all  the  material  including the FIR and its 
        accompaniments to the DGP and the Review Committee.    It 
        was  further provided that it shall be open to the DGP or 
        the Review Committee to call for such further information 
        as they may deem necessary from the Police or  any  other 
        person  before approving or disapproving the action taken 
        by the subordinate authority.  It was further recommended 
        to be provided that  if  the  DGP  did  not  approve  the 
        recording  of aforesaid information within ten days or if 
        the Review Committee did not approve of the  same  within 

        30  days,  the recording of information shall become null 
        and void and no further action shall  be  taken  on  that 
        behalf  and the accused, if in custody, shall be released 
        forthwith. 
         
         Certain participants  in  the  Seminar  submitted 
        that  the  requirement of the approval of the DGP and the 
        Review Committee is not an effective  one.    So  far  as 
        taking  of approval of court is concerned, the suggestion 
        is misconceived and unacceptable.  It is not part of  the 
        functions  of the court to approve FIRs, either before or 
        after they are registered.  So far  as  approval  of  any 
        other  independent  authority  is  concerned, we have not 
        been able to find any such authority, now  in  existence, 
        whose approval  can  be provided for at this stage.  This 
        is a stage where the investigation too has not yet begun; 
        it beings with and  after  registration  of  FIRs.    The 
        suggestion     is,     therefore,    impracticable    and 
        inappropriate.  We are of the opinion that the  provision 
        suggested  by us is more appropriate and at the same time 
        more effective than the one contained in  sub-clause  (1) 
        of section 19.  Accordingly, we recommend that sub-clause 
        (1)  of  section  19  be  substituted  by  the  following 
        sub-section: 
         
         "(1) The police officer recording information  in 
                respect  of  an  offence  under  this  Act  shall 
                promptly  forward  copies  of  all  the  material 
                including  the  FIR and its accompaniments to the 
                Director  General  of  Police  and   the   Review 
                Committee. 
         
         (2)  It  shall be open to the Director General of 
                Police or the Review Committee to call  for  such 
                further  information, as they may deem necessary, 
                from  the  police  or  any  other  person  before 
                approving  or  disapproving,  as the case may be, 
                the action taken by the subordinate authorities. 
         
         (3) If the Director General of  Police  does  not 
                approve    the   recording   of   the   aforesaid 
                information within  10  days  or  if  the  Review 
                Committee  does  not  approve  the same within 30 
                days, the recording of the said information shall 
                become null and void with effect from  the  tenth 
                day or the thirtieth day, as the case may be, and 
                all   proceedings  in  that  behalf  shall  stand 
                withdrawn and if the accused is  in  custody,  he 
                shall  be  released  forthwith unless required in 
                connection with some other offence. 
         
         (4) Any action taken or any  order  passed  under 
                forgoing sub-sections shall be in addition to and 
                independent of the review of pending cases by the 
                Review Committee under section 27 of this Act. 
         
         Sub-clause  (2)  of  section  19 provides that no 

        court shall take cognizance of an offence under  the  Act 
        without the previous sanction of the State Government or, 
        as the case may be, of the Central Government (as amended 
        by Official  Amendments).  In our opinion, this is a very 
        salutory provision and  an  effective  safeguard  against 
        frivolous or unfounded prosecutions. 
         
         By  way  of  Official  Amendments,  a new clause, 
        namely, clause 19A is sought to be inserted dealing  with 
        arrest.   Sub-clause  (1)  of  the  proposed  new section 
        provides that "whenever a person is arrested, information 
        of his arrest shall be immediately  communicated  by  the 
        police  officer  to  a  family member or to a relative of 
        such person by telegram, telephone or by any other  means 
        which  shall  be recorded by the police officer under the 
        signature of  the  person  arrested".    Sub-clause   (2) 
        directs  that where a police officer arrests a person, he 
        shall provide a custody  memo  of  the  person  arrested, 
        while   sub-clause   (3)   provides   that   "during  the 
        interrogation  the  legal  practitioner  of  the   person 
        arrested  shall  be  allowed  to  remain  present and the 
        person arrested shall be informed of his right as soon as 
        he is brought to the police station".    In  its  Working 
        Paper, the Law Commission had supported the provisions in 
        all the  three sub-clauses of clause 19A.  In particular, 
        we  were  appreciative  of  the  provision  contained  in 
        sub-clause  (3)  which was evidently put in, in the light 
        of  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court   in   Nandini 
        Satpathy's case.    However,  certain participants in the 
        seminar including Mr.  K.T.S.  Tulsi,  former  Additional 
        Solicitor  General,  opposed  the  provision contained in 
        sub-section (3).    They  submitted   that   it   is   an 
        impractical  provision and is likely to hinder the proper 
        interrogation of the accused.  Mr.  Tulsi also  submitted 
        that  subsequent  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  had 
        explained the observations in  Nandini  Satpathy's  case. 
        Be  that  as  it  may,  we do not think it appropriate to 
        recommend the deletion of this provision which  has  been 
        designedly introduced by the Government of India. 
         
         A suggestion was put forward by Mr.  U.R.  Lalit, 
        Senior  Advocate,  Supreme  Court  that  this  protection 
        should be confined only to Indian citizens and should not 
        be made available to non-citizens.  He pointed  out  that 
        today, the foreign mercenaries and the foreign terrorists 
        outnumber  local  terrorists,  particularly, in Jammu and 
        Kashmir and  that  on  account  of  their  activities,  a 
        situation  of  proxy  war  is  prevailing  in  Jammu  and 
        Kashmir.  Learned counsel suggested that classifying  the 
        foreign  terrorists  for the purpose of sub-clause (3) of 
        clause 19A as a separate group and denying them the  said 
        protection  would  be  a  case  of  reasonable  and valid 
        classification.   The  suggestion  is   not   only   very 
        attractive   and  appealing,  there  is  good  amount  of 
        justification in Mr.  Lalit's contention that  the  entry 
        in  large  numbers  (according to certain estimates there 
        are already 5000 foreign terrorists in Jammu and  Kashmir 

        and  another  15000  to  30000  terrorists are waiting to 
        enter the State with a view  to  creating  conditions  of 
        total   anarchy   and  chaos)  is  certainly  creating  a 
        situation which is unparalleled anywhere  in  the  world. 
        The  more  disturbing  factor  is  that  the neighbouring 
        country whose hostile intentions towards India are not  a 
        secret,  is  actively  training,  arming,  directing  and 
        helping the foreign terrorists in all possible ways.   In 
        such a situation, classifying the foreign terrorists as a 
        distinct   category   from   the   local  terrorists  and 
        restricting the protection in sub-clause  (3)  of  clause 
        19A only to local terrorists i.e., who are citizens of 
         
        India,    may    not    be    either    unreasonable   or 
        unconstitutional.   In  this  connection,  it  is  highly 
        relevant  to  notice  that  the Constitution itself makes 
        such a  distinction  which  would  be  evident  from  the 
        following position:    Clause (1) of article 22 says that 
        "No person who is arrested shall be detained  in  custody 
        without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds 
        for  such  arrest  nor  shall  he  be denied the right to 
        consult, and to be defended by, a legal  practitioner  of 
        his choice".    Clause  (2) of the said article says that 
        "Every person who is arrested  and  detained  in  custody 
        shall  be produced before the nearest magistrate within a 
        period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding  the 
        time  necessary  for the journey from the place of arrest 
        to court of the magistrate and no such  person  shall  be 
        detained  in  custody  beyond the said period without the 
        authority of a magistrate".  But clause (3) of  the  very 
        same  article  says  that "Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) 
        shall apply- (a) to any person who for the time being  is 
        an enemy  alien".    In other words, the very significant 
        constitutional safeguards contained in clauses (1) and 
                                                
        (2) of article 22 are  not  available  to  enemy  aliens. 
        Indeed,  the  requirement in clause (1) of article 22 and 
        more particularly the one in sub-clause (1) of clause 19A 
        is not possible of compliance in the case  of  a  foreign 
        terrorist, inasmsuch as "a family member" or "a relative" 
        of  such  foreign  terrorist  may not be in India and may 
        also be difficult to locate.  We, therefore, suggest that 
        the  requirement  of  informing  the  family  member   or 
        relative shall be confined only to the person arrested if 
        he is an Indian citizen. 
         
         Clause  20 specifies the officers who alone shall 
        be competent to investigate an offence  under  this  Act. 
        Fairly  high  ranking  officers  are specified under this 
        section which is again  an  assurance  against  abuse  or 
        misuse of the powers under the Act. 
         
         Clause   21   of   the   Bill   creates   certain 
        presumptions in respect of the offences  under  the  Act. 
        Sub-clause (1) reads as follows: 
         
         "(1)  In  a  prosecution  for  an  offence  under 

                sub-section (1) of section 3, if it is proved- 
              
              
         (a) that the arms  or  explosives  or  any  other 
                substances  specified in section 3 were recovered 
                from the possession of the accused and  there  is 
                reason to believe that such arms or explosives or 
                other  substances  of a similar nature, were used 
                in the commission of such offence; or 
         (b)  that  by  the  evidence  of  an  expert  the 
                finger-prints  of  the  accused were found at the 
                site of the offence or on anything including arms 
                and  vehicles  used  in   connection   with   the 
                commission of such offence, 
         the  Special  Court  shall  presume,  unless  the 
                contrary  is  proved,  that   the   accused   had 
                committed such offence." 
         
         In our opinion, such a presumption cannot be said 
        to be uncalled for in an anti-terrorism law.  However, on 
        the  analogy  of disproportionate and excessive amplitude 
        of presumption as drawn in respect of sub-clause  (2)  of 
        clause  11A  (introduced  by  Amendment 6 of the Official 
        Amendment) discussed  above,  we  recommend  the  similar 
        modification here  also.    Sub-clause  (2)  creates  yet 
        another presumption.  It says that "in a prosecution  for 
        an  offence  under sub-section (3) of section 3, if it is 
        proved that the accused rendered any financial assistance 
        to a person, having knowledge that such person is accused 
        of or reasonably  suspected  of  an  offence  under  that 
        section,  the  special  court  shall  presume, unless the 
        contrary is proved, that such  person  has  committed  an 
        offence  under  that  sub-section"  (as  modified  by the 
        Official Amendments).  No objection  has  been  taken  to 
        these  proposals  by  any  of  the  participants  in  the 
        seminars.  However, as stated above, the disproportionate 
        and excessive amplitude  of  presumption  should  not  be 
        allowed to   be  drawn.    We,  therefore,  recommend  to 
        substitute the  words  "shall  presume...    under   that 
        sub-section"  in  the  sub-clause (2) by the words "shall 
        draw the adverse inference against the accused." 
         Clause 22 clarifies that the jurisdiction of  the 
        courts  or  authorities under the laws relating to naval, 
        military, air force or other armed forces  of  the  Union 
        are not  affected  by this Act.  It also clarifies that a 
        special court under the Act shall be deemed to be a court 
        of ordinary criminal jurisdiction. 
         Clause 23 gives  overriding  effect  to  the  Act 
        which again is unobjectionable.  Sub-clause (1) of clause 
        24   provides   for   indemnity   in  favour  of  Central 
        Government, State Government or any of their officers  or 
        authorities on whom powers have been conferred by the Act 
        in  respect  of acts done or purported to be done by them 
        in good faith.    This  is  a  usual  provision  in  such 
        enactments and no objection can be taken thereto. 
         However,  with  a  view  to  make  the  indemnity 
        effective and complete, the following proviso be added to 

        sub-clause (1) of clause 24 of the Bill:- 
         "Provided further that no  suit,  prosecution  or 
        other  legal  proceedings  shall  lie against any serving 
        member or retired member of the  Armed  Forces  or  other 
        para  military  forces  in respect of any action taken or 
        purported to be taken by him in good faith, in the course 
        of any operation directed towards combating terrorism". 
         
         Sub-clause (2) of section 24 makes it an  offence 
        for  a  police  officer  to  take proceedings against any 
        person for any offence  under  the  Act  for  corrupt  or 
        malicious reasons.    It  is  sought  to  be  modified in 
        certain minor respects  by  Official  Amendments.    This 
        provision  again is a very salutory addition and is to be 
        welcomed. 
         
         In this context, it may be appropriate to provide 
        a remedy to the person  who  has  been  arrested  and  or 
        proceeded against for offences under the proposed law for 
        corrupt,  extraneous  or  malicious reasons by the police 
        officers.  Provision of such a remedy is bound to act  as 
        a  check  upon the propensity of the police/investigating 
        officer to misuse their powers  and  rope  in  innocents. 
        The  person  so  dealt  with unlawfully should be awarded 
        monetary compensation appropriate in the circumstances by 
        the State itself.  Indeed, if the exercise  of  power  by 
        the  police  or  investigating  officer  is  found  to be 
        actuated   by   corrupt,    extraneous    or    malicious 
        considerations,  the  monetary compensation to be awarded 
        to  the  person  concerned  should  be  levied  upon  the 
        concerned police/investigating officers.  It is true that 
        while  ratifying  the International Covenant on Civil and 
        Political Rights (1996) (ICCPR), the Government of  India 
        filed  a specific reservation against article 9(5) of the 
        said Covenant on the ground that the Indian legal  system 
        did  not recognise a right to compensation for victims of 
        unlawful arrest or detention, but the Supreme Court  held 
        in D.K.  Basu v.  State of West Bengal (1997 SCC (Cri) 92 
        at  page  112)  that  the  said reservation "has lost its 
        relevance in view of the law laid down by this Court in a 
        number   of   cases   awarding   compensation   for   the 
        infringement  of  the  fundamental  right  to  life  of a 
        citizen".  Be that as it  may,  a  provision  of  such  a 
        remedy   would  be  not  only  fair  and  just  but  also 
        consistent with the democratic and developing concepts of 
        criminal jurisprudence. 
         
         Clause 25 sought to  be  introduced  by  Official 
        Amendments  empowers  the Supreme Court to make rules, if 
        any, as it  may  deem  necessary  for  carrying  out  the 
        provisions of  this  Act  relating to special courts.  We 
        are of the opinion that such a power should be  conferred 
        upon  the  High  Courts  in the country (and not upon the 
        Supreme Court) in view of the fact that we are suggesting 
        that an appeal against the  judgment  and  order  of  the 
        special  court should lie to the High Court concerned and 
        not to the Supreme Court. 

         
         Clause 26  sought  to  be  inserted  by  Official 
        Amendments  confers  rulemaking  power  upon  the Central 
        Government to carry out the purposes  and  provisions  of 
        the Act.    Sub-section  (2)  elucidates the purposes and 
        provisions mentioned in sub-section (1). 
         
         Clause 27 which is also proposed to  be  inserted 
        by  Official  Amendments  provides  for  constitution  of 
        Review Committees.  Sub-clause (1) says that the  Central 
        Government shall constitute a Review Committee consisting 
        of  the  Home Secretary, Law Secretary and Secretaries of 
        the other concerned Ministries, if any, to review, at the 
        end of each quarter in a year the cases instituted by the 
        Central Government under this Act.  The Review  Committee 
        shall  be  competent  to  give  such directions as it may 
        think  appropriate  with  respect  to  the  conduct   and 
        continuance  of any case or a class of cases, as the case 
        may be.   Sub-clause  (2)  contemplates  constitution  of 
        similar committees  by the State Governments.  The Review 
        Committee to be constituted by a State  Government  shall 
        consist  of  the  Chief Secretary to the Government, Home 
        Secretary, Law Secretary and  Secretaries  of  the  other 
        concerned departments. 
         
         
                              CHAPTER VI             
          SUGGESTIONS FOR INCLUSION OF CERTAIN 
            ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS IN THE BILL 
  
         
         (a)     It was   suggested   by   Mr.    Prashant 
                Bhushan,  Advocate,  Supreme  Court  that   there 
                should be a provision for appeal against an order 
                refusing bail.    We  are  inclined to agree with 
                this plea.  But the appeal  should  be  not  only 
                against  an  order refusing bail but also against 
                an order  granting  bail.    Accordingly,  it  is 
                recommended   that  the  following  provision  be 
                inserted as sub-section (5) in section 17 of  the 
                Act: 
         
         "(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
                        Code,  an  appeal  shall  be  to the High 
                        Court, against an order  of  the  Special 
                        Court granting or refusing bail." 
         
         (b)     Mr.  P.S.    Rao,  Joint Secretary in the 
                Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India 
                mentioned  during  his  presentation   that   the 
                foreign     governments,    especially    Western 
                governments, were objecting to special courts and 
                special laws to deal with terrorism in India  and 
                that this factor was giving rise to complications 

                in the matter of extradition requests from India. 
                So far as the special law is concerned, we do not 
                see  how it can constitute a ground for objection 
                when western democracies like U.S.  and U.K.  too 
                have enacted (and  are  enacting)  anti-terrorism 
                laws.   So  far  as special courts are concerned, 
                their creation has become  necessary  because  of 
                the  extraordinary  heavy  load upon our criminal 
                courts and the delays  endemic  to  our  criminal 
                judicial system.    It may, however, be seen that 
                there is no qualitative  difference  between  the 
                general criminal procedure applicable to ordinary 
                criminal   courts   and  the  criminal  procedure 
                applicable to special courts.  The principle  and 
                perhaps   the  sole  object  behind  creation  of 
                special courts is the anxiety to have these cases 
                disposed of expeditiously.  We cannot, therefore, 
                see any valid ground for objection on this score. 
                It is of  course  a  matter  of  policy  for  the 
                government   to   decide  whether  they  wish  to 
                dispense with the special courts, while retaining 
                the procedural changes provided by this  Act  and 
                invest  the jurisdiction to try these offences on 
                ordinary criminal courts with a direction to give 
                precedence to the trial of  offences  under  this 
                Act. 
         
         Some participants suggested that a new chapter be 
        included  in  this  Act  itself  providing for banning of 
        terrorist organisations.  If the Government accepts  this 
        proposal,  a  new chapter may be introduced providing for 
        banning  of  terrorist  organisations  and  making  their 
        membership an  offence.   It should also be provided that 
        any  person  rendering  any  assistance  to  such  banned 
        organisations  including  raising  of  funds  shall be an 
        offence.  In this  context,  the  provision  of  Unlawful 
        Activities  (Prevention)  Act,  1967 may be kept in view, 
        which Act  does  provide  for  declaring  an  association 
        unlawful and  the  consequences flowing therefrom.  It is 
        because of the existence of the said Act that we have not 
        ourselves suggested a new chapter providing  for  banning 
        of terrorist  organisations.    But  inasmuch  as certain 
        participants felt that the said 1967 Act is not adequate, 
        we are mentioning the said fact here.  Sub-section (5) of 
        Section 3 has also to be kept in view in this  behalf  as 
        also   Clause  (b)  of  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  3, 
        suggested by us. 
          
         Shri Prashant Bhushan, Advocate was of  the  view 
        that    special    training   should   be   imparted   to 
        investigators, prosecutors  and  special  judges  without 
        which terrorist activities cannot be countered.  Further, 
        for   effective   implementation   of  these  suggestions 
        sufficient finance must also be provided.  It is for  the 
        government to take a decision in this matter. 
         
         Brig.  Satbir Singh, Institute of Defence Studies 

        also  projected  his  experience in North East, J & K and 
        Punjab.  He was of the view that special courts should be 
        constituted  in  North-Eastern  States   to   deal   with 
        terrorist activities.    Besides,  there should be speedy 
        trial of such cases.  He suggested that defence personnel 
        and  para-military  forces  personnel  should   also   be 
        empowered to investigate the cases dealing with terrorist 
        activities.   It is for the Government to take a decision 
        in these matters. 
         
         We recommend  accordingly.    Besides  the  other 
        measures recommended, for the sake of convenience, we are 
        appending   the  `Prevention  of  Terrorism  Bill,  2000' 
        (Annexure II) which also incorporates the recommendations 
        set out above. 
         
         
         
         
         (MR.JUSTICE B.P.JEEVAN REDDY) (RETD.) 
         CHAIRMAN 
         
         
         
        (MS.JUSTICE LEILA 
SETH)(RETD)(DR.N.M.GHATATE)(MR.T.K.VISWANATHAN) 
         MEMBER                     MEMBER     MEMBER-SECRETARY 
         
         
         
         
        Dated:  13.04.2000 
                                         
  
  
                        ANNEXURE II         
         
         
                     DRAFT BILL AS RECOMMENDED BY 
                 THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
         
             THE PREVENTION OF TERRORISM BILL, 2000 
         
                  
        A BILL to  make  provisions  for  the prevention of, and for 
coping 
        with,  terrorist  activities  and  for   matters   connected 
        therewith. 
         
         BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-First Year 
        of the Republic of India as follows:- 
         
         PART I 
         PRELIMINARY 

         
        1.       Short title and extent.- (1) This Act may be  called 
        the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2000. 
         
         (2) It extends to the whole of lndia, and it applies 
        also to -- 
         
         (a) citizens of India outside India; 
         
         (b)  persons  in  the  service  of  the  Government, 
                wherever they may be; and 
         
         (c) persons on ships and  aircrafts,  registered  in 
                India, wherever they may be. 
         
         (3)  It  shall  remain in force for a period of five 
        years from the date of  its  commencement,  but  its  expiry 
        under the operation of this sub-section shall not affect - 
         
         (a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done 
                or suffered under this Act, or 
         
         (b)  any  right,  privilege, obligation or liability 
                acquired, accrued or incurred under this Act, or 
         
         (c) any penalty, forfeiture or  punishment  incurred 
                in respect of any offence under this Act, or 
         
         (d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in 
                respect  of  any  such right, privilege, obligation, 
                liability,  penalty,  forfeiture  or  punishment  as 
                aforesaid, 
         
         and,  any  such  investigation,  legal proceeding or 
                remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced  and 
                any  such  penalty,  forfeiture or punishment may be 
                imposed as if this Act had not expired. 
         
        2.       Definitions.- (1) In this Act,  unless  the  context 
        otherwise requires,- 
         
         (a)  "Code"  means  the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 
                1973; 
         
         (b) `proceeds of terrorism' shall mean all kinds  of 
                properties  which have been derived or obtained from 
                commission  of  any  terrorist  act  or  have   been 
                acquired  through  funds  traceable to terrorist act 
                and shall include cash,  irrespective  of  in  whose 
                name   such   proceeds  are  standing  or  in  whose 
                possession they are found; 
         
         (c) "property" means property and  assets  of  every 
                description,   whether   corporeal  or  incorporeal, 
                movable or immovable,  tangible  or  intangible  and 
                deeds   and  instruments  evidencing  title  to,  or 
                interest in, such property or assets; 

         
         (d) "Public Prosecutor" means a Public Prosecutor or 
                an Additional Public Prosecutor or a Special  Public 
                Prosecutor  appointed  under section 23 and includes 
                any person acting under the directions of the Public 
                Prosecutor; 
         
         (e)  "Special   Court"   means   a   Special   Court 
                constituted under section 18; 
         
         (f)  "terrorist  act" has the meaning assigned to it 
                in sub-section (1) of section 3, and the  expression 
                "terrorist" shall be construed accordingly; 
         
         (g)  words  and  expressions used but not defined in 
                this Act and defined in  the  Code  shall  have  the 
                meanings respectively assigned to them in the Code. 
         
         (2)  Any  reference  in this Act to any enactment or 
        any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in which 
        such enactment  or  such  provision  is  not  in  force,  be 
        construed  as  a  reference  to the corresponding law or the 
        relevant provision of the  corresponding  law,  if  any,  in 
        force in that area. 
         
        PART II 
        PUNISHMENT FOR, AND MEASURES FOR COPING WITH, 
        TERRORIST ACTIVITIES 
         
        3.       Punishment for terrorist acts.- (1) Whoever,- 
         
         (a)  with  intent  to threaten the unity, integrity, 
                security or sovereignty of India or to strike terror 
                in the people or any section of the people does  any 
                act  or  thing  by  using  bombs,  dynamite or other 
                explosive substances or  inflammable  substances  or 
                fire-arms  or  other  lethal  weapons  or poisons or 
                noxious gases or other chemicals  or  by  any  other 
                substances  (whether  biological  or otherwise) of a 
                hazardous nature, in such a manner as to  cause,  or 
                likely to cause, death of, or injuries to any person 
                or  persons or loss of, or damage to, or destruction 
                of, property or  distribution  of  any  supplies  or 
                services  essential  to the life of the community or 
                causes damage or  destruction  of  any  property  or 
                equipment  used  or  intended  to  be  used  for the 
                defence of India or in  connection  with  any  other 
                purposes  of  the  Government  of  India,  any State 
                Government or any of their agencies, or detains  any 
                person  and  threatens to kill or injure such person 
                in order to  compel  the  Government  or  any  other 
                person to do or abstain from doing any act; 
          
         (b) is or continues to be a member of an association 
                declared  unlawful  under  the  Unlawful  Activities 
                (Prevention) Act, 1967, or voluntarily does  an  act 
                aiding  or  promoting  in  any manner the objects of 

                such association and in either case is in possession 
                of any unlicenced firearms, ammunition, explosive or 
                other instrument or  substance  capable  of  causing 
                mass  destruction  and  commits any act resulting in 
                loss of human life or grievous injury to any  person 
                or causes significant damage to any property, 
         
         commits a terrorist act. 
           
         (2) Whoever commits a terrorist act, shall,- 
         
         (i)  if  such  act  has resulted in the death of any 
                person, be punishable with death or imprisonment for 
                life and shall also be liable to fine; 
         
         (ii)  in  any  other  case,   be   punishable   with 
                imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
                five  years but which may extend to imprisonment for 
                life and shall also be liable to fine. 
         
         (3) Whoever conspires  or  attempts  to  commit,  or 
        advocates,   abets,   advises   or   incites   or  knowingly 
        facilitates the commission of, a terrorist act  or  any  act 
        preparatory  to  a  terrorist  act, shall be punishable with 
        imprisonment for a term which shall not be  less  than  five 
        years  but  which  may  extend  to imprisonment for life and 
        shall also be liable to fine. 
          
         (4) Whoever voluntarily  harbours  or  conceals,  or 
        attempts  to harbour or conceal any person knowing that such 
        person is a terrorist shall be punishable with  imprisonment 
        for  a  term  which  shall  not be less than three years but 
        which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also  be 
        liable to fine. 
         
         Exception.-  This sub-section shall not apply to any 
        case in which the harbour or concealment is by  the  husband 
        or wife of the offender. 
          
         (5)  Any  person who is a member of a terrorist gang 
        or a terrorist organisation, which is involved in  terrorist 
        acts, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
        shall  not  be  less than five years but which may extend to 
        imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
          
         (6) Whoever holds any property derived  or  obtained 
        from  commission  of  any terrorist act or has been acquired 
        through  the  terrorist  funds  shall  be  punishable   with 
        imprisonment  for  a  term which shall not be less than five 
        years but which may extend  to  imprisonment  for  life  and 
        shall also be liable to fine. 
           
         (7) Whoever threatens any person who is a witness or 
        any  other  person  in  whom such witness may be interested, 
        with violence,  or  wrongfully  restrains  or  confines  the 
        witness,  or  any  other  person  in whom the witness may be 
        interested, or does any other unlawful  act  with  the  said 

        intent,  shall  be  punishable  with  imprisonment which may 
        extend to three years and fine. 
          
         (8)  A  person  receiving  or   in   possession   of 
        information  which  he  knows  or believes to be of material 
        assistance - 
         
         (i) in preventing the commission by any other person 
                of a terrorist act; or 
         
         (ii) in securing the  apprehension,  prosecution  or 
                conviction  of  any  other  person  for  an  offence 
                involving the commission, preparation or instigation 
                of such an act, 
         
         and fails, without  reasonable  cause,  to  disclose 
                that  information  as soon as reasonably practicable 
                to the police, shall be punished  with  imprisonment 
                for  a  term which may extend to one year or fine or 
                with both. 
           
        4.       Possession of certain unauthorised  arms,  etc.,  in 
        notified  areas.-  Where  any person is in possession of any 
        arms and ammunition specified in columns 2 and 3 of Category 
        I or Category III(a) of Schedule I to the Arms Rules,  1962, 
        or   bombs,   dynamite   or   other   explosive   substances 
        unauthorisedly in a notified area, he shall, notwithstanding 
        anything contained in any other law for the  time  being  in 
        force,  be  punishable  with  imprisonment  for a term which 
        shall not be less than five years but which  may  extend  to 
        imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
          
         Explanation.-  In this section "notified area" means 
        such area as the State Government may,  by  notification  in 
        the Official Gazette, specify. 
         
        5.       Enhanced  penalties.-  (1) If any person with intent 
        to aid any terrorist contravenes any provision  of,  or  any 
        rule  made  under,  the  Arms Act, 1959, the Explosives Act, 
        1884, the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 or the  Inflammable 
        Substances  Act,  1952,  he  shall, notwithstanding anything 
        contained in any of the aforesaid Acts  or  the  rules  made 
        thereunder, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
        shall  not  be  less than five years but which may extend to 
        imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
         
         (2) For the purposes of this section, any person who 
        attempts to contravene or abets, or does any act preparatory 
        to the contravention of any provision of any  law,  rule  or 
        order,  shall  be deemed to have contravened that provision, 
        and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, in relation  to 
        such  person,  have  effect subject to the modification that 
        the reference to "imprisonment for life" shall be  construed 
        as a reference to "imprisonment for ten years". 
         
        6.       Holding  of  proceeds  of terrorism illegal.- (1) No 
        person shall hold or be in possession  of  any  proceeds  of 

        terrorism. 
         
         (2)   Proceeds  of  terrorism,  whether  held  by  a 
        terrorist or by any other person and  whether  or  not  such 
        person  is  prosecuted or convicted under this Act, shall be 
        liable to be forfeited to  the  Central  Government  in  the 
        manner hereinafter provided. 
         
        7.       Powers of investigating officers.-    (1)     If    an 
        officer (not below the rank  of  Superintendent  of  Police) 
        investigating  an  offence  committed  under  this  Act, has 
        reason to believe that any property in relation to which  an 
        investigation  is  being  conducted, constitutes proceeds of 
        terrorism, he shall, with the prior approval in  writing  of 
        the  Director  General  of  the Police of the State in which 
        such property  is  situated,  make  an  order  seizing  such 
        property  and  where  it  is  not  practicable to seize such 
        property, make an order of attachment  directing  that  such 
        property  shall  not  be transferred or otherwise dealt with 
        except with the prior permission of the officer making  such 
        order, or of the Designated Authority, or the Special Court, 
        as  the  case  may  be, before whom the properties seized or 
        attached are produced and a copy  of  such  order  shall  be 
        served on the person concerned. 
         
         (2)  The investigating officer shall duly inform the 
        Designated Authority or, as the case  may  be,  the  Special 
        Court, within forty-eight hours of the seizure or attachment 
        of such property. 
         
         (3)  It shall be open to the Designated Authority or 
        the  Special  Court  before  whom  the  seized  or  attached 
        properties  are  produced  either  to  confirm or revoke the 
        order of attachment so issued. 
         
         (4) In the case of immovable  property  attached  by 
        the  investigating  officer, it shall be deemed to have been 
        produced before the  Designated  Authority  or  the  Special 
        Court, as the case may be, when the Investigating Officer so 
        notifies  in his report and places it at the disposal of the 
        Designated Authority or the Special Court, as the  case  may 
        be. 
         
        8.       Forfeiture  of  proceeds  of  terrorism.-  Where any 
        property is  seized  or  attached  in  the  belief  that  it 
        constitutes proceeds of terrorism and is produced before the 
        Designated  Authority, it shall, on being satisfied that the 
        said  property  constitutes  proceeds  of  terrorism,  order 
        forfeiture  of such property, whether or not the person from 
        whose possession it is seized or attached, is prosecuted  in 
        a Special Court for an offence under this Act. 
         
        9.       Issue  of  show-cause  notice  before  forfeiture of 
        proceeds of terrorism.- (1) No order forfeiting any proceeds 
        of terrorism shall be made under section 8 unless the person 
        holding or in possession of such proceeds is given a  notice 
        in  writing  informing  him  of  the  grounds on which it is 

        proposed to forfeit  the  proceeds  of  terrorism  and  such 
        person is given an opportunity of making a representation in 
        writing  within  such reasonable time as may be specified in 
        the notice against the grounds of  forfeiture  and  is  also 
        given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
         
         (2)  No  order  of  forfeiture  shall  be made under 
        sub-section (1), if such person establishes  that  he  is  a 
        bona  fide  transferee  of  such  proceeds for value without 
        knowing that they represent proceeds of terrorism. 
         
         (3)  It  shall  be  competent  to   the   Designated 
        Authority  to make an order in respect of property seized or 
        attached,- 
         
         (a)     in  the  case  of  a  perishable   property, 
                directing  it  to  be  sold  and  the  provisions of 
                section 459 of the Code shall, as nearly as  may  be 
                practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale; 
         
         (b)     in   the   case   of   any  other  property, 
                nominating any  officer  of  the  Central  or  State 
                Government   to   perform   the   function   of  the 
                Administrator  of  such  property  subject  to  such 
                conditions  as  may  be  specified by the Designated 
                Authority. 
         
        10.      Appeal.- (1) Any person aggrieved  by  an  order  of 
        forfeiture  under  section  8 may, within one month from the 
        date of the communication to him of such  order,  appeal  to 
        the  High  Court  within  whose  jurisdiction the Designated 
        Authority, who passed the order to be appealed  against,  is 
        situated. 
         
         (2)  Where  an  order under section 8 is modified or 
        annulled by  the  High  Court  or  where  in  a  prosecution 
        instituted  for the violation of the provisions of this Act, 
        the person against whom an order of forfeiture has been made 
        under  section  8,  is  acquitted  such  property  shall  be 
        returned to him and in either case if it is not possible for 
        any  reason  to  return the proceeds of terrorism forfeited, 
        such person shall be paid  the  price  therefor  as  if  the 
        proceeds   of   terrorism  had  been  sold  to  the  Central 
        Government with reasonable interest calculated from the  day 
        of seizure of the proceeds of terrorism and such price shall 
        be determined in the manner prescribed. 
         
        11.      Order  of  forfeiture  not  to  interfere with other 
        punishments.The order of forfeiture made under this  Act  by 
        the  Designated  Authority, shall not prevent the infliction 
        of any other punishment to which the person affected thereby 
        is liable under this Act. 
         
        12.      Claims by third  party.-  (1)  Where  any  claim  is 
        preferred,  or  any  objection is made to the seizure of any 
        property under section 7 on the ground that such property is 
        not liable to such seizure, the Designated Authority, or  as 

        the  case  may  be,  the  Special  Court,  before  whom such 
        property is produced, shall proceed to investigate the claim 
        or objection: 
         
         Provided that no such investigation  shall  be  made 
        where   the   Designated  Authority  or  the  Special  Court 
        considers that the claim or objection was designed to  cause 
        unnecessary delay. 
         
         (2)  In  case  claimant or objector establishes that 
        the property specified in the notice issued under section  9 
        is  not  liable to be attached or confiscated under the Act, 
        the said notice shall be withdrawn or modified accordingly. 
         
        13.      Powers of the Designated Authority.- The  Designated 
        Authority,  acting  under  the provisions of this Act, shall 
        have all the powers of a Civil Court required for  making  a 
        full and fair enquiry into the matter before it. 
         
        14.      Obligation     to    furnish    information.-    (1) 
        Notwithstanding anything contained in  any  other  law,  the 
        officer investigating any offence under this Act, shall have 
        power  to  require  any  officer or authority of the Central 
        Government or a State Government or a local authority  or  a 
        Bank,   company,   or  a  firm  or  any  other  institution, 
        establishment, organisation or  any  individual  to  furnish 
        information in their possession in relation to such offence, 
        on  points  or  matters,  as in the opinion of such officer, 
        will be useful for, or relevant to,  the  purposes  of  this 
        Act. 
         
         (2)  Failure  to  furnish the information called for 
        under sub-section(1), or furnishing false information  shall 
        be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
        to three years or fine, or with both. 
         
         (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the  Code, 
        the  offence  under  sub-section  (1)  shall  be  tried as a 
        summary case and the procedure prescribed in Chapter XXI  of 
        the  said Code (except sub-section (2) of section 262) shall 
        be applicable thereto. 
         
         (4) Any officer in  possession  of  any  information 
        shall furnish the same suo motu to the officer investigating 
        an offence under this Act, if in the opinion of such officer 
        such information will be useful to the investigating officer 
        for the purposes of this Act. 
         
        15.      Certain transfers to be null and void.- Where, after 
        the  issue  of an order under section 7 or issue of a notice 
        under section 9, any property referred to in the said  order 
        or  notice  is  transferred  by  any  mode  whatsoever, such 
        transfer shall, for the purpose  of  the  proceedings  under 
        this  Act,  be  ignored and if such property is subsequently 
        forfeited, the transfer of such property shall be deemed  to 
        be null and void. 
         

        16.      Forfeiture  of  property  of  certain  persons.- (1) 
        Where a person has been convicted of any offence  punishable 
        under  this  Act,  the  Special  Court  may,  in addition to 
        awarding any punishment, by order in writing,  declare  that 
        any  property, movable or immovable or both, produced before 
        the Courts and belonging to the accused and specified in the 
        order, shall stand forfeited to the Government free from all 
        encumbrances. 
         
         (2) Where any person is accused of any offence under 
        this Act, it shall be open to the Special Court  trying  him 
        to  pass an order that all or any of the properties, movable 
        or immovable or both belonging to  him,  shall,  during  the 
        period  of  such trial, be attached, if not already attached 
        under this Act, and where such trial ends in conviction, the 
        properties  so  attached  shall  stand  forfeited   to   the 
        Government free from all encumbrances. 
         
        17.      Company to transfer shares to Government.- Where any 
        shares  in a company stand forfeited to the Government under 
        this Act, then, the company shall, notwithstanding  anything 
        contained  in  the  Companies  Act, 1956, or the articles of 
        association  of  the   company,   forthwith   register   the 
        Government as the transferee of such shares. 
         
        PART III 
        SPECIAL COURTS 
         
        18.      Special  Courts.-  (1)  The  Central Government or a 
        State  Government  may,  by  notification  in  the  Official 
        Gazette, constitute one or more Special Courts for such area 
        or  areas,  or  for such case or class or group of cases, as 
        may be specified in the notification. 
         
         (2) Where  a  notification  constituting  a  Special 
        Court  for  any  area  or  areas or for any case or class or 
        group of cases is issued by  the  Central  Government  under 
        sub-section(1),  and  a  notification constituting a Special 
        court for the same area or areas or for  the  same  case  or 
        class  or  group  of cases has also been issued by the State 
        Government  under  that  sub-section,  the   Special   Court 
        constituted   by   the   Central   Government,  whether  the 
        notification constituting such Court  is  issued  before  or 
        after the issue of the notification constituting the Special 
        Court  by  the State Government, shall have, and the Special 
        Court constituted by the State Government  shall  not  have, 
        jurisdiction  to  try  any offence committed in that area or 
        areas or, as the case may be, the case or class or group  of 
        cases,  and  all  cases  pending  before  any  Special Court 
        constituted by the State Government shall stand  transferred 
        to the Special Court constituted by the Central Government. 
         
         (3) Where any question arises as to the jurisdiction 
        of  any  Special  Court, it shall be referred to the Central 
        Government whose decision thereon shall be final. 
         
         (4) A Special Court shall  be  presided  over  by  a 

        judge  to  be appointed by the Central Government or, as the 
        case may be, the State Government, with the  concurrence  of 
        the Chief Justice of the High Court. 
         
         (5)  The  Central Government or, as the case may be, 
        the State Government may also appoint, with the  concurrence 
        of the Chief Justice of the High Court, additional judges to 
        exercise jurisdiction of a Special Court. 
         
         (6)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment 
        as a judge or an additional judge of a Special Court  unless 
        he is, immediately before such appointment, a sessions judge 
        or an additional sessions judge in any State. 
         
         (7) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby provided 
        that  the  attainment by a person appointed as a judge or an 
        additional  judge  of  a  Special  Court  of  the   age   of 
        superannuation  under  the  rules  applicable  to him in the 
        service  to  which  he  belongs,  shall   not   affect   his 
        continuance as such judge or additional judge. 
         
         (8)  Where any additional judge or additional judges 
        is or are appointed in a Special Court,  the  judge  of  the 
        Special  Court may, from time to time, by general or special 
        order, in writing, provide for the distribution of  business 
        of  the Special Court among himself and the additional judge 
        or additional judges and also for  the  disposal  of  urgent 
        business  in  the event of his absence or the absence of any 
        additional judge. 
         
         (9) A Designated Court constituted under sub-section 
        (1)  of  section  9  of   the   Terrorist   and   Disruptive 
        Activities(Prevention)  Act,  1987  for any area or areas or 
        any case or class or group of cases shall be deemed to be  a 
        Special Court for the purposes of this Act. 
         
        19.      Place  of  sitting.- A Special Court may, on its own 
        motion or on an application made by the  Public  Prosecutor, 
        and  if it considers it expedient or desirable so to do, sit 
        for any of its proceedings at  any  place,  other  than  its 
        ordinary place of sitting: 
         
         Provided  that  nothing  in  this  section  shall be 
        construed to change the place of sitting of a Special  Court 
        constituted  by a State Government to any place outside that 
        State. 
         
        20.      Jurisdiction of Special Courts.- (1) Notwithstanding 
        anything contained in the  Code,  every  offence  punishable 
        under any provision of this Act shall be triable only by the 
        Special   Court  within  whose  local  jurisdiction  it  was 
        committed or, as the case  may  be,  by  the  Special  Court 
        constituted for trying such offence under section 7. 
         
         (2)  If,  having  regard  to  the  exigencies of the 
        situation prevailing in a State,- 
         

         (i) it is not possible to have a fair, impartial  or 
                speedy trial; or 
         
         (ii)  it  is  not feasible to have the trial without 
                occasioning the breach of peace or grave risk to the 
                safety of the accused,  the  witnesses,  the  Public 
                Prosecutor and the judge of the Special Court or any 
                of them; or 
         
         (iii)  it  is  not  otherwise  in  the  interests of 
                justice, 
         
         the Supreme Court  may  transfer  any  case  pending 
        before  a  Special  Court  to any other Special Court within 
        that State or in any other State. 
         
         (3) The Supreme Court may  act  under  this  section 
        either  on  the  application  of the Central Government or a 
        party interested and any such application shall be  made  by 
        motion,  which  shall,  except  when  the  applicant  is the 
        Attorney-General of India,  be  supported  by  affidavit  or 
        affirmation. 
         
        21.      Power  of  Special  Courts  with  respect  to  other 
        offences.- (1) When trying any offence, a Special Court  may 
        also try any other offence with which the accused may, under 
        the  Code,  be  charged  at the same trial if the offence is 
        connected with such other offence. 
         
         (2) If, in the course of any trial under this Act of 
        any offence,  it  is  found  that  the  accused  person  has 
        committed  any  other  offence  under  this Act or under any 
        other law, the Special Court may convict such person of such 
        other offence and pass any sentence authorised by  this  Act 
        or such rule or, as the case may be, such other law, for the 
        punishment thereof. 
         
        22.      Power to direct for samples, etc.- (1) When a police 
        officer  investigating  a case requests the Court of a Chief 
        Judicial Magistrate or the Court  of  a  Chief  Metropolitan 
        Magistrate in writing for obtaining samples of hand writing, 
        finger  prints,  foot  prints,  photographs,  blood, saliva, 
        semen,  hair,  voice  of  any  accused  person,   reasonably 
        suspected  to  be  involved  in the commission of an offence 
        under this Act, it shall be lawful for the Court of a  Chief 
        Judicial  Magistrate  or  the  Court of a Chief Metropolitan 
        Magistrate to direct that  such  samples  be  given  by  the 
        accused  person  to  the  police  officer  either  through a 
        medical practitioner or otherwise, as the case may be. 
         
         (2) If any accused person refuses to give samples as 
        provided in sub-section (1), in a trial under this Act,  the 
        court shall draw adverse inference against the accused. 
         
        23.      Public  Prosecutors.-  (1)  For every Special Court, 
        the Central Government or, as the case  may  be,  the  State 
        Government,   shall  appoint  a  person  to  be  the  Public 

        Prosecutor and may appoint one or more  persons  to  be  the 
        Additional    Public   Prosecutor   or   Additional   Public 
        Prosecutors: 
         
         Provided that the Central Government or, as the case 
        may be, the State Government, may also appoint for any  case 
        or class or group of cases, a Special Public Prosecutor. 
         
         (2)  A person shall not be qualified to be appointed 
        as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor or 
        a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has 
        been in practice as an Advocate for 
         
         
        not less than seven years or has held any post, for a period 
        of not less than seven years, under the Union  or  a  State, 
        requiring special knowledge of law. 
         
         (3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or 
        an   Additional   Public  Prosecutor  or  a  Special  Public 
        Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public 
        Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of section 2  of 
        the  Code,  and the provisions of the Code shall have effect 
        accordingly. 
         
        24.      Procedure and powers of Special Courts.- (1) Subject 
        to the provisions  of  sub-section  (5)  of  section  31,  a 
        Special  Court  may  take cognizance of any offence, without 
        the accused being committed to it for trial, upon  receiving 
        a complaint of facts which constitute such offence or upon a 
        police report of such facts. 
         
         (2)  Where  an offence triable by a Special Court is 
        punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding  three 
        years  or  with  fine  or  with both, the Special Court may, 
        notwithstanding anything contained  in  sub-section  (1)  of 
        section 260 or section 262 of the Code, try the offence in a 
        summary  way  in accordance with the procedure prescribed in 
        the Code and the provisions of sections 263 to  265  of  the 
        Code, shall so far as may be, apply to such trial: 
         
         Provided that when, in the course of a summary trial 
        under this sub-section, it appears to the Special Court that 
        the nature of the case is such that it is undesirable to try 
        it  in  a  summary  way,  the Special Court shall recall any 
        witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to  re-hear 
        the  case  in  the  manner provided by the provisions of the 
        Code for the trial of such offence and the  said  provisions 
        shall  apply  to  and in relation to a Special Court as they 
        apply to and in relation to a Magistrate: 
         
         Provided further that in the case of any  conviction 
        in  a  summary  trial under this section, it shall be lawful 
        for a Special Court to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a 
        term not exceeding two years. 
         
         (3) Subject to the other provisions of this  Act,  a 

        Special  Court  shall,  for  the  purpose  of  trial  of any 
        offence, have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall 
        try such offence as if it were a Court of Session so far  as 
        may  be  in  accordance with the procedure prescribed in the 
        Code for the trial before a Court of Session. 
         
         (4) Subject to the other  provisions  of  this  Act, 
        every  case  transferred to a Special Court under section 20 
        shall be dealt with as if such  case  had  been  transferred 
        under section 406 of the Code to such Special Court. 
         
         (5)   Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in,  but 
        subject to the provisions of section 299,  of  the  Code,  a 
        Special  Court  may,  if it thinks fit and for reasons to be 
        recorded by it, proceed with the trial in the absence of the 
        accused or his  pleader  and  record  the  evidence  of  any 
        witness,  subject  to the right of the accused to recall the 
        witness for cross-examination. 
         
        25.      Protection  of   witnesses.-   (1)   Notwithstanding 
        anything  contained  in the Code, the proceedings under this 
        Act may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, be  held  in 
        camera if the Special Court so desires. 
         
         (2)  A Special Court, if on an application made by a 
        witness in  any  proceeding  before  it  or  by  the  Public 
        Prosecutor  in  relation  to  such  witnesses  or on its own 
        motion, is satisfied that the life of  such  witness  is  in 
        danger,  it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, take 
        such measures as it deems fit for keeping the  identity  and 
        address of such witness secret. 
         
         (3)  In  particular,  and  without  prejudice to the 
        generality  of  the  provisions  of  sub-section  (2),   the 
        measures   which   a  Special  Court  may  take  under  that 
        sub-section may include - 
         
         (a)     the holding of the proceedings at a place to 
        be decided by the Special Court; 
         
         (b)     the avoiding of the mention of the names and 
        addresses of the witnesses in its orders or judgments or  in 
        any records of the case accessible to public; 
         
         (c)  the issuing of any directions for securing that 
        the identity and address of the witnesses are not disclosed; 
         
         (d)     that it is in the public interest  to  order 
        that  all  or  any  of the proceedings pending before such a 
        court shall not be published in any manner. 
         
         (4) Any person who contravenes any direction  issued 
        under  sub-section (3) shall be punishable with imprisonment 
        for a term which may extend to one year and with fine  which 
        may extend to one thousand rupees. 
         
        26.      Trial  by  Special  Courts  to have precedence.- The 

        trial under this Act of any offence by a Special Court shall 
        have precedence over the trial of any other case against the 
        accused in any other court(not being a  Special  Court)  and 
        shall  be concluded in preference to the trial of such other 
        case and accordingly the trial  of  such  other  case  shall 
        remain in abeyance. 
         
        27.      Certain  confessions  made  to Police officers to be 
        taken into consideration.- (1) Notwithstanding  anything  in 
        the Code or in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, but subject to 
        the  provisions  of  this  section,  a  confession made by a 
        person before a police officer not  lower  in  rank  than  a 
        Superintendent of Police and recorded by such police officer 
        either   in   writing  or  on  any  mechanical  device  like 
        cassettes, tapes or sound tracks from out of which sound  or 
        images  can  be reproduced, shall be admissible in the trial 
        of such person for an offence under this Act or  rules  made 
        thereunder. 
         
         (2)  A  police  officer  shall, before recording any 
        confession made by a person under sub-section (1) explain to 
        such person in writing that  he  is  not  bound  to  make  a 
        confession  and  that  if he does so, it may be used against 
        him: 
         
         Provided that where such person  prefers  to  remain 
        silent  the police officer shall not compel or induce him to 
        make any confession. 
         
         (3)  The  confession  shall  be   recorded   in   an 
        atmosphere  free  from  threat or inducement and shall be in 
        the same language in which the person makes it. 
         
         (4) The person  from  whom  a  confession  has  been 
        recorded under sub-section (1), shall be produced before the 
        Court  of  a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the court of a 
        Chief Judicial Magistrate along with the original  statement 
        of   confession,   written  or  recorded  on  mechanical  or 
        electronic device within 48 hours. 
         
         (5) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or  the  Chief 
        Judicial   Magistrate,   shall,   scrupulously   record  the 
        statement, if any, made by the person so  produced  and  get 
        his signature and if there is any complaint of torture, such 
        person   shall  be  directed  to  be  produced  for  medical 
        examination before a Medical Officer not lower in rank  than 
        an  Assistant Civil Surgeon and thereafter, he shall be sent 
        to judicial custody. 
         
        28.      Power to transfer cases to regular  courts.-  Where, 
        after  taking  cognizance of any offence, a Special Court is 
        of the opinion that the offence is not  triable  by  it,  it 
        shall,  notwithstanding  that  it has no jurisdiction to try 
        such offence, transfer  the  case  for  the  trial  of  such 
        offence  to any court having jurisdiction under the Code and 
        the court to which the case is transferred may proceed  with 
        the  trial  of  the offence as if it had taken cognizance of 

        the offence. 
         
        29.      Appeal.- (1) Notwithstanding anything  contained  in 
        the  Code, an appeal shall lie as a matter of right from any 
        judgment, sentence or  order,  not  being  an  interlocutory 
        order,  of  a  Special Court to the High Court both on facts 
        and on law. 
         
        Explanation - For the purposes of this section,  High  Court 
        means  a  High  Court  within  whose jurisdiction, a Special 
        Court which passed  the  judgment,  sentence  or  order,  is 
        situated. 
         
         (2) Every appeal under sub-section(1) shall be heard 
        by a bench of two Judges of the High Court. 
         
         (3) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall 
        lie  to  any  court  from  any  judgment,  sentence or order 
        including an interlocutory order of a Special Court. 
         (4)   Notwithstanding    anything    contained    in 
        sub-section (3) of the Code, an appeal shall lie to the High 
        Court  against  an  order  of  the Special Court granting or 
        refusing bail. 
         
         (5)  Every  appeal  under  this  section  shall   be 
        preferred  within  a  period of thirty days from the date of 
        the judgment, sentence or order appealed from: 
         
         Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal 
        after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it  is 
        satisfied  that  the  appellant had sufficient cause for not 
        preferring the appeal within the period of thirty days. 
        PART IV 
        MISCELLANEOUS 
         
        30.      Modified application of certain  provisions  of  the 
        Code.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or 
        any other law, every offence punishable under this Act shall 
        be  deemed  to be a cognizable offence within the meaning of 
        clause(c) of section 2 of the Code, and "cognizable case" as 
        defined in that clause shall be construed accordingly. 
         
         (2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in  relation 
        to  a  case  involving  an offence punishable under this Act 
        subject to the modifications that, in sub-section (2),- 
         
         (a) the references to  "fifteen  days",  "ninety 
                        days" and "sixty days", wherever they occur, 
                        shall  be construed as references to "thirty 
                        days", "ninety days"  and  "ninety  days"  , 
                        respectively; and 
         
         (b) after  the  proviso,  the following provisos 
                        shall be inserted, namely:- 
         
         "Provided further that if  it  is  not  possible  to 
        complete  the investigation within the said period of ninety 

        days,the Special Court shall extend the said period upto one 
        hundred and  eighty  days,  on  the  report  of  the  Public 
        Prosecutor  indicating the progress of the investigation and 
        the specific reasons for the detention of the accused beyond 
        the said period of ninety days: 
         
         Provided also that if the police officer making  the 
        investigation  under  this  Act, requests for police custody 
        from judicial custody of any person,  for  the  purposes  of 
        investigation,  he  shall  file  an  affidavit  stating  the 
        reasons for doing so and shall also explain  the  delay,  if 
        any, for requesting such police custody". 
         
         (3)  Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation 
        to a case involving an offence  punishable  under  this  Act 
        subject to the modifications that- 
         
         (a) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof- 
         
         (i)  to "the State Government" shall be construed as 
        a  reference  to  "the  Central  Government  or  the   State 
        Government", 
         
         (ii)  to  "order  of  the State Government" shall be 
        construed as a reference to "order of the Central Government 
        or the State Government, as the case may be"; and 
         
         (b) the reference in  sub-section  (2)  thereof,  to 
        "State  Government"  shall  be  construed  as a reference to 
        "Central Government or the State Government, as the case may 
        be". 
         
         (4) Sections 366, 367 and  371  of  the  Code  shall 
        apply  in relation to a case involving an offence triable by 
        a Special  Court  subject  to  the  modifications  that  the 
        reference   to   "Court  of  Session",  whereever  occurring 
        therein, shall be construed as  the  reference  to  "Special 
        Court". 
         
         (5)  Nothing  in section 438 of the Code shall apply 
        in relation to any case involving the arrest of  any  person 
        on  an  accusation of having committed an offence punishable 
        under this Act. 
         
         (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the  Code, 
        no  person  accused  of an offence punishable under this Act 
        shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond 
        unless the Public Prosecutor has been given  an  opportunity 
        to oppose the application for such release. 
         
         (7)   Where   the   public  prosecutor  opposes  the 
        application of the accused to release  on  bail,  no  person 
        accused  of an offence punishable under this Act or any rule 
        made thereunder shall be released on bail until the court is 
        satisfied that there are grounds for believing  that  he  is 
        not guilty of committing such offence. 
         

         (8) The limitations on granting of bail specified in 
        sub-sections  (6) and (7) are in addition to the limitations 
        under the Code or any other law for the time being in  force 
        on granting of bail. 
         
         (9)    Notwithstanding    anything    contained   in 
        sub-sections (6), (7) and (8), no bail shall be granted to a 
        person accused of an offence punishable under this  Act,  if 
        he  is  not  an  Indian  citizen  except in very exceptional 
        circumstances and for reasons to be recorded therefor. 
         
        31.      Cognizance of  offences.-  (1)  The  police  officer 
        recording  information  in  respect of an offence under this 
        Act shall  promptly  forward  copies  of  all  the  material 
        including  information given to the police under section 154 
        of the Code and its accompaniments to the  Director  General 
        of Police and the Review Committee. 
         
         (2)  It  shall  be  open  to the Director General of 
        Police or the Review Committee  to  call  for  such  further 
        information,  as they may deem necessary, from the police or 
        any other person before approving or disapproving the action 
        taken by the subordinate authorities. 
         
         (3) If the  Director  General  of  Police  does  not 
        approve  the  recording  of the aforesaid information within 
        ten days, or the Review Committee does not approve the  same 
        within  thirty  days,  the recording of the said information 
        shall become null and void with effect from the tenth, or as 
        the case may be, the thirtieth day and  all  proceedings  in 
        that  behalf  shall stand withdrawn and if the accused is in 
        custody, he shall be released forthwith unless  required  in 
        connection with some other offence. 
         
         (4)  Any action taken or any order passed under this 
        section shall be in  addition  to  and  independent  of  any 
        action taken by the Review Committee under section 39. 
         
         (5)  No  court  shall take cognizance of any offence 
        under this Act without the previous sanction  of  the  State 
        Government, or as the case may be, the Central Government. 
         
        32.      Officers  competent  to  investigate  offences under 
        this Act.Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code,  no 
        police officer below the rank,- 
         
         (a)   in  the  case  of  the  Delhi  Special  Police 
        Establishment, of a Deputy Superintendent  of  Police  or  a 
        police officer of equivalent rank; 
         
         (b)  in  the metropolitan areas of Mumbai, Calcutta, 
        Chennai  and  Ahmedabad  and  any  other  metropolitan  area 
        notified  as  such under sub-section (1) of section 8 of the 
        Code, of an Assistant Commissioner of Police; 
         
         (c) in any other case not relatable to clause(a)  or 
        clause (b), of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or a police 

        officer of equivalent rank, 
         
        shall investigate any offence punishable under this Act. 
         
        33.      Arrest.-  (1)  Whenever  any  person,  who  being  a 
        citizen of India, is arrested,  information  of  his  arrest 
        shall be immediately communicated by the police officer to a 
        family  member  or to a relative of such person by telegram, 
        telephone or by any other means which shall be  recorded  by 
        the  police  officer  under  the  signature  of  the  person 
        arrested. 
         
         (2) Where a police  officer  arrests  a  person,  he 
        shall prepare a custody memo of the person arrested. 
         
         (3)     During    the   interrogation,   the   legal 
        practitioner of the person  arrested  shall  be  allowed  to 
        remain  present and the person arrested shall be informed of 
        his right as soon as he is brought to the police station. 
         
         
        34.      Presumption as to offences under section 3.- (1)  In 
        a  prosecution  for  an  offence  under  sub-section  (1) of 
        section 3, if it is proved- 
         
         (a)  that  the  arms  or  explosives  or  any  other 
        substances  specified  in  section 3 were recovered from the 
        possession of the accused and there  is  reason  to  believe 
        that  such  arms  or  explosives  or  other  substances of a 
        similar nature, were used in the commission of such offence; 
        or 
         
         (b)  that  by  the  evidence  of   an   expert   the 
        finger-prints  of  the accused were found at the site of the 
        offence or on anything including arms and vehicles  used  in 
        connection with the commission of such offence, 
         
        the  Special  Court shall draw the adverse inference against 
        the accused. 
         
         (2)  In  a  prosecution   for   an   offence   under 
        sub-section  (3)  of  section  3,  if  it is proved that the 
        accused rendered  any  financial  assistance  to  a  person, 
        having   knowledge  that  such  person  is  accused  of,  or 
        reasonably suspected of, an offence under that section,  the 
        Special  Court  shall draw the adverse inference against the 
        accused. 
         
        35.      Saving.- (1) Nothing in this Act  shall  affect  the 
        jurisdiction exercisable by, or the procedure applicable to, 
        any  court  or other authority under any law relating to the 
        naval, military or air forces or other armed forces  of  the 
        Union. 
         
         (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
        that  for  the purposes of any such law as is referred to in 
        sub-section (1), a Special Court shall be  deemed  to  be  a 

        court of ordinary criminal justice. 
         
        36.      Overriding effect.- The provisions of this Act shall 
        have  effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
        contained in any enactment other than this  Act  or  in  any 
        instrument  having  effect  by virtue of any enactment other 
        than this Act. 
         
        37.      Protection  of  action  taken  in  good  faith   and 
        punishment  for  corruptly or maliciously proceeding against 
        any person under this Act.-  (1)  No  suit,  prosecution  or 
        other   legal  proceeding  shall  lie  against  the  Central 
        Government or a State Government or any officer or authority 
        of the Central Government or State Government or  any  other 
        authority on whom powers have been conferred under this Act, 
        for  anything which is in good faith done or purported to be 
        done in pursuance of this Act: 
         
         Provided further that no suit, prosecution or  other 
        legal  proceedings  shall  lie against any serving member or 
        retired member of the Armed Forces  or  other  para-military 
        forces  in  respect  of  any action taken or purported to be 
        taken by him in good faith, in the course of  any  operation 
        directed towards combating terrorism. 
         
         (2)  Any police officer exercising powers under this 
        Act, who knows that there  are  no  reasonable  grounds  for 
        proceeding  under  this Act and yet corruptly or maliciously 
        proceeds against any person, for an offence under this  Act, 
        shall  be  punishable  with imprisonment which may extend to 
        two years, or with fine, or with both. 
         
        38.      In any proceedings under this Act,  if  the  Special 
        Court  is  of  opinion that any person has been corruptly or 
        maliciously proceeded against,  the  court  may  award  such 
        compensation  as  it  deems fit to the person, to be paid by 
        the officer, person, authority  or  Government,  as  may  be 
        specified in the order. 
         
        39.      Review Committees.- (1) The Central Government shall 
        constitute  a Review Committee consisting of the Secretaries 
        in charge of the Ministries of Home, Law and Justice and the 
        other concerned Ministries, if any, to review, at the end of 
        each quarter in a year, the cases instituted by the  Central 
        Government under this Act. 
         
         (2)  The Review Committee shall be competent to give 
        such directions, as they may think appropriate, with respect 
        to the conduct and continuance of any case  or  a  class  of 
        cases, as the case may be. 
         
         (3)  Every  State Government shall also constitute a 
        Review Committee consisting of the Chief  Secretary  to  the 
        Government  and the Secretaries in charge of the Departments 
        of Home, Law and the other concerned Departments, if any, to 
        review, at the end of each quarter  in  a  year,  the  cases 
        instituted by the State Government under this Act. 

         
         (4)  The Review Committee shall be competent to give 
        such directions, as they may think appropriate, with respect 
        to the conduct and continuance of any case  or  a  class  of 
        cases, as the case may be. 
         
        40.      Power  of High Courts to make rules.- The High Court 
        may, by notification in  the  Official  Gazette,  make  such 
        rules, if any, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the 
        provisions of this Act relating to Special Courts. 
         
        41.      Power to make rules.- (1)      Without prejudice to 
        the  powers  of  the High Courts to make rules under section 
        39, the Central  Government  may,  by  notification  in  the 
        Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions 
        of this Act. 
         
         (2)  In  particular,  and  without  prejudice to the 
        generality of the foregoing power, such  rules  may  provide 
        for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 
         
         (a)     regulating the conduct of persons in respect 
        of  areas  the  control  of which is considered necessary or 
        expedient and the removal of such persons from such areas; 
         
         (b)     the entry into, and search of,- 
         (i)     any vehicle, vessel or aircraft; 
         or 
         (ii)    any place, whatsoever, 
         
         reasonably suspected of being  used  for  committing 
        the  offences  referred  to in section 3 or section 4 or for 
        manufacturing or storing anything for the commission of  any 
        such offence; 
         (c)     conferring powers upon,- 
         
         (i)     the Central Government; 
         (ii)    a State Government; 
         (iii) an  Administrator of a Union Territory under 
                        Article 239 of the Constitution; 
         (iv) an officer of  the  Central  Government  not 
                        lower   in   rank   than  that  of  a  Joint 
                        Secretary; or 
         (v) an officer of a State Government  not  lower 
                        in rank than that of a District Magistrate, 
         
         to make general or special orders to prevent or cope 
        with terrorist acts; 
         (d)     the arrest and trial of persons contravening 
        any of the rules or any order made thereunder; 
         (e)     the punishment of any person who contravenes 
        or  attempts  to contravene or abets or attempts to abet the 
        contravention of any rule  or  order  made  thereunder  with 
        imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or fine 
        or both. 
         (f)     providing  for  the seizure and detention of 
        any property in respect of which such contravention, attempt 

        or abetment as  is  referred  to  in  clause  (e)  has  been 
        committed  and  for  the  adjudication  of  such seizure and 
        detention, whether by any court or by any other authority. 
  
  
  
  
  
         
         
 