LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNORED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT

ON

THE FOREIGNERS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

SEPTEMBER, 2000


JUSTICE

B..P, JEEVAN REDDY
Chairman, Law Commission of tndfe

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI- 110001
TEL. : 3384478

NEW DELHI - 110 011

Residence :
1, JANPATH

TEL. : 3019465

D.O.No.6(3)(56)/99-LC(LS) Sept.21, 2000

T am forwarding herewith the One Hundred Seventy Fifth
Report on “The Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 2000”.

2. The subject was taken up in pursuance to the reference made by
the Government of India on 16" February, 1999. Prior to it, certain
amendments were mooted in the Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
introduced in Rajya Sabha by the Home Minister, Shri L.K. Advani.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs felt that the

. Government should undertake an in-depth study regarding the efficacy

of the proposed amendments in checking infittration of foreigners from
across the borders. The Committee favoured a holistic approach in
dealing with the acute problem of infiltration. Various suggestions
were made before it which included, inter alia, the desirability of
summary trials, setting up of special courts, making grant of bail more
difficult, etc. The matter was referred to the Law Commission for
consideration.

3. The Commission has considered the relevant material including
the reports and views of the States and Union Territories regarding their
experience in implementation of the provisions of the Foreigners Act,
1946 and other cognate statutory enactments. While dealing with the
issue, the Commission had to choose between two options which were
available. The first was to recommend a comprehensive Act repealing
the existing legsationnd ru rules and orders etc. The second option was
to recommend to the existing legislative frame-work.
Instead of codifying the entire law concerning the foreigners, the
Commission chose the second option of recommending incorporation of
new provisions in the Foreigners Act so as to make it effective enough
to meet the main problem confronted by the country today, namely,
illegal migration, without interfering with the existing legal frame-work.
The Commission is of the view that the problem of illegal migration
from neighbouring countries has to be tackled seriously by providing a
machinery for effective and speedy detection of illegal entrants. The
function of determining whether a person is an ‘illegal entrant’ or not is
proposed to be entrusted to the Immigration Officers whose orders shall
be appealable, to be heard and decided by an Immigration Tribunal,
manned by a person who is or has been a District Judge or an
Additional District Judge. The matters shall be decided by these

te vee?


-~2-

functionaries according to the principles of natural justice. Besides,
facilitation centres are also proposed to be provided for detaining the
foreigners pending the determination of their status and pending their
deportation. So far as the offences under the Act are concerned, they
are proposed to be tried by the Immigration Court which would be a
court of District & Sessions Judge to be specified by the appropriate
Government, in each district. We have also recommended the repeal of
The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 and The Illegal
Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983. In order to concretise
our recommendations, we have annexed with the report the Foreigners
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 by incorporating the proposed provisions in
the Foreigners Act, 1946.

4. The measures suggested by the Commission need to be
implemented expeditiously to curb the menace of illegal migration in

‘our country.
With regards,
a
(lustice B.P. eearere
Shri Arai Initley,
Hon’tle Minister of State for Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,
Given of India,

van,
New Delhi.


INDEX

Sl.No. Particulars Pages
1. Report on the proposed Foreigners

(Amendment) 8111, 2000 1-61
2. Annexure-1

(The Foreigners (Amendment) 8111, 2000 62-76

3. Annexure-II (Questionnaire) 77
4, Annexure-IIT
(Responses of the States and
Union Territortes) 78-81

5. References 82-84


REPORT ON THE PROPOSED FOREIGNERS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

1. Reference to the Law Commission

Certain amendments to the Foreigners Act, 1946 were
mooted by the Ministry of Home Affairs with a view to
providing for classification of offences and making its penal
provisions more deterrent. Keeping this in view, the
Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998 was introduced in Rasya
Sabha on 28th July, 1998 by the Home Minister Shri L.K.
Advani. It was then referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs which discussed the amendments at
its meeting held on 10th September, 1998. The Committee felt
that the Government should undertake an indepth study
regarding the efficacy of the proposed amendments in checking
infiltration of foreigners from across the borders. The
Committee favoured holistic approach in dealing with the
violations of the provisions of the Act specifically with a
view to effectively deal with the problem of infiltration.
Various suggestions which came up in the discussion, inter
alia, included the desirability of summary trials, setting up
of special courts, making grant of bail more difficult, etc.
The suggestions made by it raised important questions of law
which involved the national security interests. Consequently,
on 30th September, 1998 the Minister of Home Affairs referred
this matter to the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company

Affairs for the consideration of the Law Commission. The


>+:2 i-

Ministry of Law, Department of Legal Affairs, referred the
proposed amendments for the detailed examination by the Law

Commission of India on 16 February, 1999.

Tne issue has attained importance and urgency in the
context of the problem posed by illegal migration especially
from across the borders and delicate security situation

arising therefrom.

2. Probiem of Illegal Migration

2.1 The entry of illegal migrants and other undesirable
aliens into India has posed a grave threat not only to our
democracy but also to the security of India, especially in the

eastern part of the country and Jammu and Kashmir.

2.2 The problem has attained gigantic proportions as is
evident from an estimated population of about 18 million
foreigners living unauthor izedly in India. This has
aggravated the employment situation and has distorted the
electoral 70118 in some States. The undesirable activities of
foreigners inciude smuggling of narcotic drugs, spreading
terrorism and other such activities. It is, therefore, of
utmost importance to devise foolproof administrative measures
such as border fencing, modernized electronic surveillance
system as well as an effective legislation to deal with the

menace.


5:३3 :-

2.3 The present study is aimed at examining the existing
legislation and suggesting appropriate revision to deal with

the issue more effectively.
3. Situational Review

3.1 The migration of people from one place to another has
béen an ongoing phenomenon since the dawn of civilization.
India, being an ancient civilization, accepted new races and
new people at various stages of history. Even the invaders
made India their home and got submerged in the Indian society.
Different people and different races lived together in peace
and harmony for ages. The turmoil, however, began with ‘the
entry of the British, initially as traders and later on with
their acquisition of political power in India.

3.4.4 The British needed cheap labour for their plantations
and industrial establishments not only in India but in other
parts of the world under their political authority. This they
ensured through inter-country and intra-country migration of
Jabour. It is on record that since 1920, they moved people to
serve as labourers from eastern region of Bengal to Assam for
developing their tea industries. Later, the political divide
of the people on the basis of religion which ultimately led to


wih in

the Partition of the country resulted into the largest ever
a.
migratory movement in the world history. India had to absorb

the bulk of the migrants.

3.1.2. Partition was not the only event that reeulted in
large scale migration of population. Persecution of various
sections of the people in the newly created State of Pakistan
also resulted in the flow of people into India. Even after
the formation of Bangladesh in 1971, the migration of people

from the new State continued to the bordering states of India.

3.1.3 Infiltration also took place in 1948 from acrose the
border into Jammu and Kashmir following the armed attack by
Pakistan in the guise of ‘raiders’. The developments in Tibet
also resulted in exodus of a large number of people from Tibet
and their migration to this country. A number of other events
also led to the exodus of people from other countries to
India, @.g., the Chinese aggression against India in 1962; the
second attack by Pakistan in 1965; the insurgency in Sri Lanka
resulting in migration of a large number of Sri Lankan Tamils
to Tamil Nadu; the coming of many Afghans to India after the
takeover of Afghanistan by Taliban and, recently, the

infiltration into Kargil.


“15 t=

These events, in varying degrees, have been
responsible for entry into India of foreigners as refugees and

A pa
illegal migrants.

3.2 Since the liberation of erstwhile East Pakistan, the
influx of migrants from Bangladesh has remained unabated and
has acquired frightening proportions. There 18 no realistic
estimate of these migrants in India. In fact, no census has
been carried out to determine their number. According te the
Ministry of Home Affairs, the total number of Bangladeshis
illegally residing in India is estimated at 15 to 16 million
and every year at least 3.5 lac or more people are

infiltrating into the country?

3.2.1 On the basis of theoretical extrapolations the number
of illegal migrants in border states has been estimated to be
5.4 million in Weat Bengal, 4 million in Assam, and 0.8
million in Tripura. It is evident that the number of such
migrants is highest in the State of West Bengal. 10986
migrants have spread out to other parts of the country. In
Maharashtra, their number is estimated at 0.6 million, in
Rajasthan, 0.5 mitiion and, in Delhi, 0.3 mittion®? These
figures are mindboggting and alarming indeed. India with its
own unmanageable population 18 hardly in a possession to take
upon this additional burden.


w:6 tc

3.3 It was agreed by the Government of India, as a matter
of policy, that the Bangladeshis who entered India before 25
March 1971 would ultimately become Indian citizens (vide
Indira-Mujib Agreement 1974 and the Assam Accord 1985). But
all those who came on or after that date without valid travel
documents or without awful authority or overstayed after
validly entering into India would be considered illegal

migrants.

3.3.1 The number of Bangladeshis who entered India with
valid travel documents and overstayed is atso fairly large,
for example, 10,24,322 Bangladeshis, who entered the State of
West Bengal since 1972, have overstayed. The number of those
intercepted at the border while crossing iljegally into West
Bengal during 1972-98 is 573,334 The all India figures are

much higher.

3.4 Causes of migration:- There is a variety of causes
for guch migration including economic and religious. The push
factors on the other side of the border include steep and
continuous increase in population, sharp deterioration in
Jand-man ratio and low rates of economic growth, particularly
in the agriculture sector. The pull factors on this side
include ethnic, linguistic and religious proximity and kinship
facilitating easy shelter to the migrants, porous and easily
negotiable long border and better economic opportunities. The
availability of cheap labour from across the border is another

ढ़
factor which has been encouraging illegal migration.


3.5 One of the major causes of the aggravation of the
problem of illegal migration, especially in the border states,
has been the crisis of identity and absence of proper
mechanism for the identification of illegal migrants. The
available legal framework has failed to curb the illegal

migration.

3.5.1 This apart, the illegal migrants continue to stay in
India with impunity on account of rampant corruption in rank
and file of the enforcement agencies. One of their prominent

7
destinations is Mumbai.

3.6 Another cause of illegal migration is the clandestine
cross-border trade between India and Bangladesh which ie
estimated at $ 5 billion. This is three times more than the
official trade. The trade has created a network of agents and
middlemen working in connivance with the authorities on both
sides of the border. Thus strong vested interests also appear
to be behind illegal migration. further, the trade between

8
two countries has the backdrop of cultural and ethnic ties.

3.7 In most of the cases, the entry of migrants is
surreptitious and they easily mingle with local population due
to ethnic, linguistic, religious and physical similarities.
Their identification is extremely difficult. This has

resulted in aiteration of demographic composition in the


5:86 :-

border districts of several states! The bordering States have
recorded a high rate of population growth. It has been
reported that in the case of Assam, there is a higher
percentage of rate of population growth in comparison to the

10
national average.

3.8 There is evidence that many of the illegal migrants
have acquired ration cards, obtained various jobs and got
enlisted in electoral rolts by suppressing their identities
with the help of local toute, unscrupulous officials and

(|
politicians!

3.9 Impact of tllegal migration:- The illegal migration
has strained country’s economy generally and especially of the

ja
border states.

3.10 The illegal influx has assumed dangerous dimensions
affecting the security of the nation as a whole and especially
of the North-Eastern region because of its proximity with
Bangladesh. There are reports of 18196 scale clandestine
movement and smuggling of all kinds of articles by such

13
migrants.

3.41. Local inhabitants of these bordering area are under
constant fear of losing their identity as they have been
reduced to a minority in their own State. This has given rise

to various movements and violent agitations especially in the


kL a न
North-Eastern areas!’ The problem has economic implications
for the local people and security implications for the country

as a whole.

3.12 Failure of agencies in checking the menace:- The

Border Security Force (BSF), which is primarily responsible
for guarding our borders, has not been effective in preventing
infiltration across the border. The concerned agencies
required to process the cases of alleged illegal migrants
encounter numerous difficulties. When police tries to collect
evidence, people who are illegal migrants move to another

jocation or disappear.

3.13 The Mobile Task Force, sanctioned by the Central
Government for States to detect and push the migrants back, is

reported to be too meagre to deal with the probtem./>

3.14 Sometime back, the Chief Minister of Weet Bengal also
brought out the issue of continuous infiltration of
Bangladeshis into West Bengal and felt that Indira-Mujib
Agreement had not been implemented in full. He, however,
expressed his reservations with respect to forcible

deportation.

3.15 The foreigners Act, 1946, is the main legislation
which governs entry into, and departure of foreigners from,
India. The powere to identify, detect and deport illegal

migrants residing in various parts of the country have been


-210:-

delegated under this Act to the State Governments and Union
territory Administrations. In the State of Aseam, detection
of such persons, who entered India on or after 25 March 1871,
is being done by the tribunals established under the Illegal
Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 (hereinafter
referrad to 88 the IMDT Act). Recently however, the Central
Govt. appears to have entertained service doubts regarding
the validity of this act on the ground that it has been

enforced only in the State of Assam.

3.16 The Central Government has issued instructions to the
State Governments and Union territory Adminsitrations to speed
up the process of identification and deportation of i1]legal
migrants. It has also taken measures to supplement the
efforts of State Governments, such as the strengthening of
Border Security force, construction of border roads, fencing
and mechanized riverine patrolling, etc. Despite these

measures, the problem of illegal migration continues unabated.

4. Recommendations of the Estimates Committee

4.1 In 1992, the Estimates Committee of Parliament
considered the issue of illegal immigration and made following

recommendations :-


>:11:“

(i) Relevant provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 and the
Passports Act, 1967 be harmonised. Both the Acts made
provisions relating to departure of foreigners but the
punishment for the violation of provisions relating to

departure was much less in the latter.

(ii) There should be deterrent punishment for violation of the
provisions of the law and the offences should be made

non-bai lable.

(iii) There should be consultation with States having
responsibility to administer relevant laws in order to ensure
their enforcement and uniform application through out the

country.

(iv) Indian citizens hosting or receiving foreigners should

be made accountable for their overstay in the country.

(५) There should be periodic review of the enforcement

mechanism under the Foreigners Act.

(५1) Special passport arrangements with Bangladesh and &ri

Lanka should periodically be reviewed.

(vii) Separate system of passports for Bangladesh, Sri Lanka

and Pakistan should be scrapped.


wate

(viii) After completion of the sentence by the convicted
foreigner, his case should be proceeded with for immediate

deportation.

4.2 There was no concrete action on the Estimates
Committee report for some years but in 1998 10 found echo in
the deliberations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee for
Ministry of Home Affairs when it was considering the

Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998.

5. Conference of Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries

A Conference of Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries
held in 1992 took serious note of the problem of illegal
migration and suggested the enactment of a special legislation

to solve it.
6. Report of the Governor of Assam on 7110941 Migration

6.1 Recently, on 8 November, 1998 the Governor of Assam,
taking into account the dangers posed by the continuing silent
“demographic invasion” due to large scale illegal migration
from Bangladesh and after having discussed the problem with a
cross-section of people in Assam, as also the Indian High
Commissioner at Dhaka, submitted his report to the President

{ 18
of India titied “Report on Illegal Migration into Assam".


>:13:«

The report has traced the history of migration from
Bangladesh, took into consideration the present realities and
made recommendations for future strategy to tackle the menace

in an effective manner.

6.2 The Governor has especially highlighted, in the
report, the dangerous dimensions of the unprecedented
migration of Bangladeshis to Assam and drew the attention of
the Centre to the security threats to the North-Eastern region
arising out of such migration as also of the strategic and

economic consequences flowing from the same.

6.3 He has also pointed out the failure of the IMDT Act in
identifying such migrants as also of the Assam Accord to drive
them out of Assam. As regards the IMDT Act, he has noted that
crores of rupees had been spent on identification followed by
a meagre figure of deportation and found continuation of the

said Act as a wasteful exercise.

6.4 Recommendations: Apart from recommending an improved
border management including fencing, lighting, registration of
country boats plying in the border rivers, adequate speed
boate for the riverine sector and socto-economic development
of Bangladesh aiming particularly at the improvement of
women’s lot, the report of the Governor of Assam (supra)

recommends the following measures:


wr14i-

(1) Promotion of awareness about the illegal migration to
Assam being not only a threat to the identity of local people

but also a grave threat to our national security.

(11) Provision of multipurpose photo-identity cards to all
Indian nationals giving top priority to the border districts.

(111) Provision for the registration of births and deaths

and its scruplous implementation.

(iv) Provision for the National Register of Citizens,
updated and computerised and maintenance of a separate

register of stateless persons.

(४) Making of maximum efforts to stem the tide of illegal
migrants hereinafter and deportation of those who came after

24 March 1971 till date.

_ (४1) Repeal of the IMDT Act, which has proved to be an

exercise in futility.

(vii) The deportation of millions of Bangladeshis illegally
staying in India is no more a practical proposition because
unilateral action on the part of India cannot alone achieve
any result. A new legislation is, therefore, needed to ensure

a just, fair, practical and expeditious approach to the


“:15:«“

detection of illegal migrants and to declare them as stateless
persons without voting rights and without right to acquire

immovable property.
7. PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION

7.1 A petition in the nature of a public interest
litigation (PIL) was filed in the Supreme Court by All India
Lawyers’ Forum for Civil Liberties on 4 February, 1998 seeking
directions to the Union of India to make adequate arrangements
for the return of Bangladesh nationals illegally residing in
India, to check their further infiltration, to officially
declare them as “Bangladesh Nationals” as also to properly
identify them and the land purchased and jobs occupied by them
as well as their bank accounts. The State of West Bengal was

{7
also made a party.

7.2 The Union of India and the State of West Bengal were
directed by the Supreme Court to file status reports regarding
Bangladeshi migrants illegally staying in India. The other
North-Eastern States were also directed by the court to do so.
The Supreme Court expressed serious concern about the
infiltration from Bangladesh and the presence of infiltrators
in certain regions of the country and hoped that the Union of
India and bordering States would take effective steps to check

infiltration and deport illegal infiitrators.


~216:-

7.3. Status Report filed by the Union of India in the

Supreme Court

(1) The status report submitted by the Union of India in
the above case paints a grim picture of the illegal migrants
from Bangladesh in various parts of India, especially in West

Bengal and some North-Eastern States.

(ii) It brings out the magnitude and gravity of the problem
of illegal migration from Bangladesh, causes for the same as

also its impact, especially on the security of India.

(iti) It enumerates measures taken by the Government of
India to curb the menace of infiltration. These include
delegation of powers under the Foreigners Act to identify,
detect and deport illegal migrants to State Governments and
Union territory Administrations and issuance of instructions
to them to speed up the process of identification and
deportation; the strengthening of the BSF, construction of
border roads and fencing, sanction of poste under the
Prevention of Infiltration of Foreigners/Mobile Task Force
Schemes, mechanized riverine patrolling in certain parts of

the country and diplomatic initiatives.

(1५) It also brings out the following ground level
arrangements arrived at between the Border Security Force
(BSF) and Bangladesh Rifles (BDR) in respect of handing over

of illegal migrants:


>:117:-

(a) Persons convicted by courts would be accepted on
the basis of verification of nationality by the

respective prescribed authorities.

(b) Persons apprehended in the process of inadvertent
or deliberate border crossing would be accepted
immediately on the basis of disclosures. After
verification, they would be accepted within three

days.

(c) All other categories of illegal entrants would be
handed over within 7-15 days depending on the place of
arrest and place of claimed domicile after required

verification.

(५) There is a proposal to issue multipurpose national
identity cards to all citizens of India of the age of 14 years
and above. Those below 14 would separately be registered
under the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969, and
their names included in father’s/mother’s cards. Separate
colour cards would be issued to non-citizens. The main idea
behind this scheme is to stop illegal migration and to
identify and easily trace jllegal migrants. The scheme
envisages a National Registry having on-line access to data

from all the districts of the country.

(vi) In 1997, instructions were issued on the deportation

of illegal migrants from Bangladesh which are as follows:


“218:-

(a) The nationals of Bangladesh intercepted at the
border, while crossing into India unauthorisedly,

would immediately be sent back by BSF;

(9) Nationals, detected as unauthorisedly living in
India, would be deported after they are served
deportation order by the competent authority of the

concerned State Government.

These instructions were reviewed in 1998 by the
Government of India and the following decisions were
communicated to the State Governments and the Union territory

Administrations for compliance.

(a) While identifying and detecting such migrants, the
State Governments would send details of residential
address etc. claimed by the suspect to the Government
of the concerned State (of which he claims to be a
resident, being an Indian national) for verification

and report within 30 days.

(b) During this period, the competent authority will
ensure his detention (by obtaining permission of the

court, if necessary) for deportation.


~119:-

{c) If no report is received within this period, the
competent authority would take action to deport

illegal migrant.

(d) Advance information about the movement of
deportees under the police escort from one State to
another would be given by the State from where they

are being sent to the concerned State police.
7.4 Status Report by the State of West Bengal

(i) The Status Report filed by the State of West Bengal
also brings out the magnitude and the causes of the problem of

illegal migration.

(ii) The report indicates that it is a gigantic task to
detect and convict illegal migrants. Despite the number of
measures being taken by the Union of India at different levels
to prevent influx of illegal migrants, the magnitude of the

problem requires more concerted efforts for border management.

(iii) It is impossible to prosecute all migrants and secure
a conviction in respect of each one under the Foreigners Act.
Thereafter, to push them back is all the more difficult
keeping in view the international law and conventions. The

Union Government may possibly need to enter into an


-:20:-

international agreement with the Government of Bangladesh for
simplifying the procedure governing repatriation of

Bangladeshi nationals who are illegally staying in India.

8. Existing Legal Framework

The existing legislation governing the entry into,
stay in, and departure of foreigners from, India are the
Foreigners Act, 1946, the Passport (Entry into India) Act,
1920, and the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939. The
Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 and the Illegal
Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983, were enacted,
especially to control the unabated influx of illegal migrants
to the North-Eastern region. In addition, there are cognate
Acts as well having some bearing on the subject, namely, the
Indian Citizenship Act, 1955, and the Indian Passports Act,
1967.

8.1 The Principal Act dealing with this subject ise the
Foreigners Act, 1946. It was enacted, for the first time, in
1864 to enable the Government to prevent the subjects of
foreign states from residing or sojourning in, or passing
through or travelling in, British India without its consent.
This Act made it obligatory on every foreigner to report his
arrival in India in certain cases and not to travel in India
without a licence which was to be granted by the the

Governer-General of India or any of the Local Governments or


>:१21:-

the officers authorised by them so to do. It empowered the
Governer-General of India in Council to order removal of any
foreigner from British India. The Local Governments were also
empowered to make similar orders with reference to any
foreigner staying within the jurisdiction of such Governments.
The Act provided that, if any foreigner, who had been ordered
to remove himself from British India or therefrom by a
particular route, neglected or refused 80 to do or after
having been removed, wilfully returned back without a licence,
then he might be apprehended or detained in custody and
discharged upon such terms and conditions as the
Governer-General of India or the Local Government deemed
sufficient for peace and security of British India and of the

neighbouring States.

8.1.1 Two more laws were enacted in 1939. One was the
Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, 80111 in force, and the
other was the Foreigners Ordinance, 1939 promulgated to meet
the emergency arising out of the Second World War. The
Ordinance provided for the imposition of restrictions on the
entry of foreigners into, their presence in, and their
departure from, British India. It was replaced by the
Foreigners Act, 1940. Section 1(3) of the Act provided that

it would remain in force during the continuance of and for a


—:22:-

period of six months thereafter. It expired on 30 September,
1946. The Foreigners Act, 1946, was enacted on the expiry of

the Act of 1940.

8.1.2 The Foreigners Act, 1946, was amended five times twice
in 1947 and also in 1951, 1957 and 1962 each. The amendment
of 1947 was the result of the transfer of power from
Britishers to Dominion Government and the Partition of the
country. The amendment of 1951 was made as a result of the
incorporation of Hyderabad into Indian Union. The free entry
of nationals of certain Commonwealth countries was facilitated

by the amendment in 1957.

8.1.3 The Act 18 a small legislation, consisting of just 15
sections after the repeal of sections 10 and 17 respectively.
It was enacted with the objective to confer on the Government
certain powers with respect to the entry of foreigners into,
their presence in, and their departure from, India. The Act
was applicable to the whole of the country. The relevant

provisions of the Act are as follows:

(i) The Central Government is empowered under section 3(1)
to prohibit, regulate or restrict the entry into, departure
from, or presence in, India of all or any class or description
of foreigners and to make specific orders under section 3(2)
with respect to specific matters, such as, the proof of

identity of a foreigner, his photograph, specimen signature


>:23:«

and medical examination; prohibition of association with
certain persons or engagement in certain activities and
Prohibition to possess certain articles; the regulation of
conduct of foreigners in particular matters; and the execution
of bond for due observance of specified restrictions or

conditions; their arrest, detention or confinement.

(ii) Section 3A confers power on the Central Government to
exempt citizens of the Commonweatth countries and other
foreigners from the application of the Act in certain cases
specified in its order. It further empowers the Government to
apply, by order, the Act to foreigners only in certain
circumstances or subject to specified exceptions,

modifications or conditions.

(111) Section 4(1) confers powers on the Central Government
to issue orders laying down conditions as to the maintenance,
disciptine and punishment of offences and breaches of
discipline in respect of a foreigner (internee) who has been
ordered to be detained or confined under section 3(2)(g).
Under section 4(2), it can also require a foreigner on parole
to reside in a specified place and to observe the said

conditions,


“>:24:-

Civ) Section 4(3) prohibits any person from knowingly
assisting such an internee or a foreigner on parole to escape
from custody or knowingly harbouring such a foreigner. It
further prohibits any person from preventing arrest of escaped

internee or a foreigner on parole.

(५) The Government may regulate by order under section
4(4) the access to, and the conduct of a person in, places
where internees or foreigners on parole are detained or
restricted as also to regulate the despatch or conveyance of

prescribed articles from outside to such a person.

(vi) Section 5 prohibits a foreigner who enters India from
changing his name or using any name for any purpose other than
the name by which he was known immediately before he entered

India.

(vii) Section 6 casts an obligation on the master of any
vessel or pilot of an aircraft coming to, or going from, India
to furnish information in respect of foreigners whether as
passengers or as members of the crew to the prescribed
authority, any District Magistrate or any Commissioner of
Police in the prescribed manner. The section further empowers
the authorities to direct the master of a vessel or pilot of
an aircraft to provide accommodation on the vessel or aircraft
for removal of any foreigner who enters India in contravention
of the provisions of the Act or who has been ordered under

this Act not to remain in India.


>:25:-“

(viii) Hotel keepers and others are required under section 7
to furnish particulars of the foreigners accommodated in their
premises, to maintain record of such information and to keep
it open to inspection by any police officer or any person

authorised by the District Magistrate.

(ix) Under section 7A, the prescribed authority has the

power to control places frequented by foreigners.

(x) The determination of nationality in the case of a
foreigner, who is recognized as a national of more than one
country or where his nationality is uncertain, is dealt with
under section 8. The prescribed authority may treat him, in
the former case, as the national of the country with which he
appears to be most closely connected, for the time being, in
interest or sympathy and in the latter case, as the national

of the country with which he was last so connected.

The decision of the prescribed authority as to the
nationality of the above persons is final and conclusive and
not justiciable in any court. However, it can be revised by
the Central Government suo motu or on an application made by
the foreigner concerned.

(xi) Apart from determination of nationality, if a question
arises whether any person is or is not a foreigner of a
particular class, the onus of proving the same lies on such

person under section 9.


>:26:-

(xii) Under section 11, any authority empowered by the Act
to give any direction or to exercise any other power may, in
addition, take reasonably necessary steps or use reasonably
necessary force to secure the compliance of such direction or
to prevent breach of such direction or order or to ensure the
effective exercise of such power. Such a power is also

exercisable by any police officer.

Such authority or the police officer has been given
the right of access to any land or other property while

exercising the aforesaid powers.

(xiii) Any authority exercising powers under the Act is
competent under section 12 to delegate the same, conditionally

or otherwise, to a subordinate authority.

(xiv) The contravention of the provisions of the Act is an
offence under section 14. The term “contravention” has been
given a very wide scope under section 13. This section
provides that any person who attempts to contravene, abets or
attempts to abet 07 does any act preparatory to a
contravention of such provisions, orders or directions given
under any order, or fails to comply with such directions is

deemed to contravene the provisions of the Act.

(xv) Section 14 prescribes punishment up to five years’
imprisonment and fine for contravention of the provisions of

the Act or, any order made under it or any direction given in


“>:27:-“

pursuance of the Act or such order. The section also provides
for the forfeiture of bond if a person has executed it under
section 3(2) of the Act and makes him liable to pay the

penalty or satisfy the court otherwise.

8.2 A number of orders have been issued by the Central
Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 3,

3A, 4 and 8 of the Act. They are as follows:

8.2.1 The Foreigners Order, 1948, made under section 3 of
the Foreigners Act, 1946 provides for the appointment of a
“civil authority” by the Central Government and confers on
such authority numerous powers, @.g., the power to grant
permission to enter or to depart from India; the power to
examine foreigners who want to enter or to depart from India,
the power to require the master of a vessel or pilot of an
aircraft to remove a foreigner who has entered India without
permission; the power to permit a foreigner to reside in a
prohibited Place; the power to declare, with the prior
sanction of the Central Government, q any area to be a
protected area and to prohibit, inter alia, any foreigner from
entering that area; the power to permit a foreigner to
undertake employment or enter certain undertakings; the power
to impose restrictions on movement of foreigners and the power
to close clubs and restaurants to foreigners under certain

circumstances.


-128:-

Other provisions of the Order relate to the grant of a
special permit to land to seamen and crew of an aircraft,
restrictions on certain activities like production of a film,
mountaineering expeditions; removal of foreigners from

cantonments areas and expenses on deportation.

The “civil authority” has been defined under the Order
to mean an authority which may be appointed by the Central

Government in that behalf for such an area.

8.2.2 The Foreigners (Exemption) Order, 1957 was made under
section 3A of the Act to exempt citizens of some Commonwealth
countries and other persons from application of this Act and
the Foreigners Order but rescinded with effect from 18 June,

1964,

8.2.3 The Foreigners (Protected Areas) Order, 1958, made
under section 3, restricts the entry of foreigners into

protected areas.

8.2.4 The Foreigners (Restriction on Movements) Order, 1960,
made under section 3, restricts the entry into, or departure
of Chinese nationals (including indigenous inhabitants of the

Tibet region of China) in India.


~:29:-

8.2.5 The Foreigners (Restriction on Activities) Order,
1962, made under section 3, prohibits foreigners (other than
nationals of Bhutan and Nepal) from taking photographs etc.
in certain areas in the state of West Bengal without the

permission of the civil authority.

8.2.6 The Foreigners (Internment) Order, 1962, made under
sections 3, 4 and 8, provides for arrest and internment of
nationals of Pakistan and certain other countries at war with
India or which assist such countries as also other foreigners

assisting such countries.

8.2.7 The Foreigners (Restriction on Chinese Nationals)
Order, 1962, made under section 3, prohibits Chinese nationals
from absenting themselves from their registered residences
without permission or leaving India by air or sea except from

the ports at Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and New 09111.

8.2.8 The Foreigners (Restricted Areas) Order, 1963, made
under section 3, restricts the entry of foreigners except the
specified ones into restricted areas without the permission of

prescribed authorities.

8.2.9 The Internees (Discipline and Offences) Order, 1963,
made under section 4, prescribes penalties for offences
committed by an internee against internment camp discipline as

also procedure for dealing with other criminal offences.


-:30:-

8.2.10 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964, made under
section 3, empowers the Central Government to constitute a
tribunal and refer to it for its opinion the question whether

a person is or is not a foreigner.

8.2.11 The Foreigners (Restriction on Pakistani Nationals)
Order, 1965, made under section 3, prohibits a Pakistani
national from leaving his registered place without permission

of the civil authority concerned.

8.2.12 The Foreigners (Restriction on Residence) Order, 1968,
made under section 3, prohibits a foreigner (other than a
foreigner who is a member of a foreign diplomatic mission,
consular post or trade mission or member of his family or in
employment of such foreigner) from staying or residing in any
premises occupied by a diplomatic mission or consular post or
trade mission in India without the written permission of the

civil authority.

8.2.13 The Foreigners (Report to Police) Order, 1971, made
under section 3, casts an obligation on a householder or any
other person to report to the police about the arrival or

presence of a foreigner in his household or other premises.


>:31:-“

8.2.14 The Foreigners (Restriction on Pakistani Nationals)
Order, 1971, made under section 3, prohibited a Pakistani
national from leaving or absenting himself from his place of
residence without prior permission. The Order was rescinded

in 1978.

8.2.15 The Foreigners (Proof of Identity) Orders of 1983,
1985, 1986, 1987, 1988 and 1991, were made under section 3,
for short durations requiring the foreigners to carry their
travel documents, certificates of registration and residential
permits with them at all times and to produce the same on

demand.

8.3. The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950- This
Act was enacted to deal with the serious economic as well as
law and order problems created in the State of Assam as a
result of a large scale migration from erstwhile East Pakistan

(now Bangladesh).

(i) The Act conferred powers on the Central Government to
order expulsion of certain migrants from Assam who, being
ordinarily residents of any place outside India, had come to
Assam before or after 1 March, 1950, and their stay in the
opinion of the Central Government was considered detrimental
to the interest of general public of India or of any section

thereof or of any Scheduled Tribe in Assam. However, those


>:32:«

who migrated on account of civil disturbances or for the fear
of the same were exempted from the application of this

provision.

(ii) The Act empowered the Central Government, under
section 2, to direct such persons to remove themselves from
India or Assam within such time and through such route as
specified in the order and to give such necessary directions

for their removal.

(iii) The authorities empowered under the Act may, in
addition, under section 4, take such steps and use such force

as is reasonably necessary for the exercise of such powers.

Civ) Under section 5 of the Act, contravention, attempt to
contravene or abetting contravention of any order made under
section 2 of the Act has been made punishable with
imprisonment up to three years and fine. However, persons
acting in good faith have been exempted from prosecution or

other legal proceedings instituted under the Act.

(५) The Act was adapted by the State of Nagaland with
necessary amendments in 1962 and extended to the State of

Meghalaya in 1969.

8.4 The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act,
1983 - It was enacted to make special provisions for the

speedy detection, by a judicial process, of foreigners who


-:33:-

entered India on or after 25 March 1971 without a valid
passport and other travel documents so as to enable the
Central Government to expel illegal migrants from India as
well as to protect genuine citizens of India.

Tha Act, preceded by an ordinance, was deemed to have
come into force, in Assam on 15 October, 1983. The Government
is, however, empowered to apply the Act in different States
through notifications. Somehow, the Government confined it to

Assam only which was badly affected by illegal migrants.

(i) Section 5 of the Act empowered the Central Government
to establish as many tribunals for this purpose as were

necessary for the purpose.

(11) If any question arises as to whether any person is or
is not an illegal migrant, the Central Government may, under
section 8, refer the same for decision to the tribunal within
the territorial limits of whose jurisdiction the place of
residence of the person named in such reference, is situated.
The Central Government can make such reference on the
representation made by any person against whom any order under
the Foreigners Act requiring him not to remain in India has
been passed, or on the application of any other person. Thus,
any private person can also make an application to the
tribunal for deciding as to whether the person named in the

application, is or is not an illegal migrant.


7:34:-

(iii) Under section 9, the tribunal has the powers of a
civil court in regard to summoning and examining of witnesses,
discovery and production of any document, reception of
evidence on affidavit, requisitioning of public records from
any court or office and issuing of any commission for the

examination of witnesses.

(iv) The Act requires that the person named in the
reference be given sufficient opportunity to make his
representation. Section 13 mandates the tribunal to
expeditiously conclude the reference or the application within
a period of six months from the date of service of copy of

such reference/application.

(५) The Central Government or any person named 171. the
reference or the applicant, if not satisfied with any order of
the tribunal, may appeal to the appellate tribunal known as
Illegal Migrants (Determination) Appellate Tribunal,
established by the Central Government by virtue of section 15

of the Act.

(vi) The Central Government is empowered to direct removal
of the persons identified as illegal migrants from India

within specified time.

The police officers not below the rank of a
superintendent of police have been given powers to ensure

compliance of such orders and even arrest the defaulters.


>:35:«

(vii) In pursuance of the provisions of the Act, the Central
Government established 16 Tribunals and one Appellate Tribunal
in Assam. Out of 16 Tribunals, only five are functional and
the rest are virtually non-functional because of the paucity
of funds and resources. The Tribunals had taken cognizance of
about 23,976 cases and identified 9,599 migrants as illegal,
out of them only 1,454 could be deported over a period of 15
years!® These figures indicate that the tribunals could not
achieve the purpose for which they were established. The
entire process to identify foreigners is time consuming and

impractical. Therefore, illegal migration continues unabated.

9. Case-Law

9.1 Most of the cases which cropped up under the
Foreigners Act during the period from 1950 to 1970 relate to
the determination of the question whether a person concerned
was a foreigner!? The determination of this question became
simpler after the 1957 amendment of the Foreigners Act, 1946
saying that a foreigner meant a person who was not a citizen
of India. In Fateh Mohd. v. Delhi Administration? the
apex court said that the appellant was certainly nota
foreigner when he entered India under the pre-1957 amendment
of the definition of the foreigner. However, he was a
foreigner under the amended definition and committed a breach

of an order served on him after the amended definition came to


~:36:-

hold the field. The appellant had, therefore, committed an
offence within the meaning of section 14 of the Act by

disobeying the directions given to him by the 0७111

Administration.
‘2
In State of Andhra Pradesh v. Abdul _Khader,” the

Supreme Court observed that there could be no conviction under
the Foreigners Act unless it could be held on the evidence
that the respondent was a foreigner, i.e., a person who was

not an Indian citizen.

2
In State of Bombay ५० Ibrahim? the Bombay High Court

observed that a person who, having been originally a British
subject, entered India under a passport issued by a foreign
country and under a visa obtained by him claiming that he was
a national of a foreign country and desired to visit India for
a limited period was not a citizen of India under the amended

definition clause of the Act.

23
In Abdul Aleem v. State of Andhra Pradesh, the High

Court observed that what was essential for the applicability
of section 3 of the Foreigners Act, 1946, was that a person
should be a foreigner on the date the order under that section
was made. The date of his entry into India was irrelevant for
the consideration of the question arising under section

3(2)(c) of the Foreigners Act.


>:37:-

9.2 In the following cases the Courts have interpreted the

object and scope of the Act.

Poa
In Bawalkhan v. B.C.Shah, the Bombay High Court
referring to the object of the Act observed thus:

{Flrom 8.3... the object of the Act appears to be
provide for prescribing, regulating and restricting
amongst other things the presence and continued
presence of a foreigner in India. What appears to
have been intended is to confer power on the executive
authority to prescribe and specify conditions for
continuance of a foreigner in India. Extremely wide
kind of or unlimited restrictions and prohibitions and
regulations can be validly prescribed and specified.
The Legislature intended to give widest possible
powers to the government for obvious reasons. A
foreigner is not entitled to any guarantee or
fundamental rights as a citizen is entitled to under
the Constitution. A foreigner can be dangerous to to
security of India. His presence may be undesirable “tt 8 pre ce may be_undesir.
for security of India. His presence may be

undesirable for any reason of any kind and it appears
to have been intended by the Legislature to leave the
whole matter of the foreigner's presence in India to
the executive discretion of the Government. The
provisions of 8.3 make this object of the Act
abundantly clear.

The Madras High Court in Gilles Pfeiffer v. Union of
as
Indiqg held that the petitioner, being a foreigner, had no

fundamental rights under article 19(1)(@). The Act of 1946
vests the Central Government with absolute and unfettered

discretion and unrestricted right to expel a foreigner. Once

his application for extension of stay in India had been
rejected, he would have no right to claim to stay in the

country, much less a fundamental right. Further, the impugned


>:38:-“

order under section 3 was not vitiated on the ground that
either it was not a reasoned order or one passed in violation

of the principles of natural justice.

The Kerala High Court explained the scope of the Act

2
in B.S.Uitrich v. District Collector Lectof “and observed as follows:

[Tlhere is nothing either in the Jong title of the
preamble of the Act to anyway indicate that it is only
intended to operate as against the voluntary entry,
voluntary presence and voluntary departure of
foreigners. Whatever may be the circumstances under
which a foreigner comes to India, once he is present
in India, the civil authority has got ample
jurisdiction to take action under the Foreigners Order
read with the Foreigners Act.

9.3 Two cases in which the courts held that there was no
excessive delegation of power under section 3, are the

following:

In Khalil Ahmad v. State of Uttar Pradesh’ the High
Court held that the legislature had clearly specified the
matters in respect of which orders could be made under section
3 by the Central Government. It was only a piece of
conditional legislation and, consequently, the power conferred
on the Central Government could not be said to be in excess of

section 3 of the Act.

28
In A.H.Magermans v. S.K.Ghose, the Calcutta High

Court observed:


-139:-

{T]he legisiature has indicated both in the preamble
and in Section 3 and in... section 3A, the principle
and policy of the legislation. The standards and the
criteria. on which the power is to be exercised have
been clearly defined. The Court is not kept guessing
either with regard to the object or ... the policy of
the legislation. What has been left with the
executive, 18 not any determination with regard to
policy or principle; but the application of the
principles to individual cases. That being so, it
cannot be held that there has been excessive
delegation of powers under the Foreigners Act, 1948 in
favour of the executive:

9.4 The case law shows that the determination whether a
person is a foreigner is a question of fact and this does not
present any difficulty; that the widest possible powers have
been conferred on the government to deal with foreigners whose
presence may be a threat to the security of India; that
foreigners do not enjoy certain fundamental rights guaranteed
to citizens only; that the Act is intended to deal with all
foreigners without any reference to any circumstances under
which they may have come to India; and that the Act does not
suffer from the vice of excessive delegation as the
Legislature has clearly laid down the principies and policy of
the legislation as well as the criteria and standards for
determining the issue as is evident from the preamble and
sections 3 and 3A aimed at guiding the executive while

exercising powers under the Act.

9.5 It seams that not many cases have been decided by the
appellate/higher courts under the Foreigners Act. Only two

cases decided by High Courts which have been reported in All


~140:-

India Reporter (AIR) during the last six years (1994-99) are
Gilles Pfeiffer Pfeiffer? and Fred Howard Haering v. State of Himachal
Pradesh.3!

In Fred Howard Haering case, the petitioner, a
foreigner, had limited leave to anter or remain in India. He
did not register himself as per the provisions of the Act of
1946 and the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1939. He did
not apply for the extension of his stay before the expiry of
the period of visa. An order of deportation was, therefore,
passed against him under section 3 of the Act. The Himachal
Pradesh High Court held that there was no infirmity or
irregularity in the order; also there was no violation of the
principles of natural justice as there was nothing on which

the petitioner was required to be heard.

9.6 These cases, on one hand, indicate that the judiciary
has interpreted section 3 jJiberally in favour of the
Government action taken under the Foreigners Act. on the
other hand, these reflect that, in recent years, there has not
been much Titigation at the High Court or the apex Court
levels. Hence, the case law may not be of much help in

offering any guidelines.

9.7 In conclusion, despite various legal measures and some
other steps such as the improved border management and setting
up of the mobile task force, the problem does not show any

sign of recession; rather it has aggravated.


-14ti-

10. The Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998

10.1 The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the
said Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998 points out that the
Foreigners Act, 1946 does not classify the violations of its
provisions or orders or directions issued under it. It just
prescribes a sentence of imprisonment up to five years and
fine for the contravention of its provisions while the quantum
of punishment for various offences is left to the discretion
of the court. Moreover, the accused persons often managed to
obtain bail under the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) despite such cases being cognizable,
non-bailable and triable by the first class magistrates under
the Act. Keeping in view these deficiencies, the Bill seeks

to achieve the following objectives:

(1) to classify the offences,
(11) to provide punishment according to the gravity
of the offence committed, and

(iii) to enhance the punishment.

10.2 Provietons of the 8111

(i) The Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998, proposes to
substitute the original section 14 of the Foreigners Act,
1946, with sections 14, 144 and 148. The proposed section 14

imposes penalty of imprisonment up to five years and fine on a


-142:-

person who contravenes provisions of the parent Act or = any
order or direction under it, remains in India with or without
valid passport exceeding the period of valid visa or violates
the conditions of valid visa. It further provides for the
forfeiture of the bond, if any, and also the payment of
penalty by the person bound by the bond unless such person

satisfies the court otherwise.

(ii) The proposed section 144A imposes a penalty of
imprisonment up to eight years but not less than two years and
fine up to Rs.50,000 but not less than Rs.10,000 on a person
who enters into a restricted area without obtaining permission
from the competent authority or who stays beyond the permitted
period or enters into or stays in India without valid
documents required under the provisions of any order made
under the Act or directions given in pursuance of the order.
It also provides for the forfeiture of bond executed by him
for the due observance of any prescribed or specified
restrictions in pursuance of the Act. Section 14B proposes to
penalise those persons who abet any offence punishable under
sections 14 and 14A, with the same punishment as the offence
itself. ‘Explanation’ in section 148 clarifies that an act or
offence is said to be committed in consequence of the
abetment, when it is committed in consequence of an
instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the

aid which constituted the offence.


7143i-

A higher punishment prescribed in proposed sections
144A and 148 would consequently enable the courts of sessions
to try the offences and provide an opportunity to State
Governments to oppose bail applications under the Criminal
Procedure Code (CrPC). The last two sections, namely, 14A and
14B contemplate minimum imprisonment and fine for entry into
restricted areas and other areas and the abetment of this
offence. The punishment by way of imprisonment and fine has

also been enhanced to eight years with fine upto २१७, 50, 000/-.

11 Parliamentary Standing Committee on Foreigners
(Amendment) 8111

The Bill was referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee for the Ministry of Home Affairs for critical
analysis and suggestions. The Committee discussed the Bill at
length on 10th September 1998 in the context of the existing

problem of illegal migration into border areas.
11.1 Official presentation at the Standing Committee

(i) The official side highlighted the problem of illegal
migration from neighbouring countries especially from
Bangladesh (other countries being Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Myanmar
and Tibet) and the presence of militants and other criminal

elements carrying on clandestine activities. The officers


-144:-

explained the framework of the existing Foreigners Act, 1946,
previous amendments and pitfalls of the Act, namely, the lack
of proper machinery for identification of illegal migrants,
non-existence of classification of offences and offences being

bailable.

(11) The officers then dealt with the main features of the
Amendment Bill which attempted a classification of offences as
also prescribed a minimum and enhanced maximum punishment in
certain cases thereby enabling the trial of serious offences
by courts of session and rendering it imperative for the
courts to issue notice to the prosecution in case there was a
move for granting bail. In support, they cited the example of
Pakistan where an illegal entrant was not granted bail till
the trial was over. In their opinion, those who posed a
potential threat to the security of the country should be
severely dealt with. In their view, the proposed amendments

in the law, would make it more effective and deterrent.
11.2 Discussion on the Bill in the Standing Committee

(i) There was unanimity among the members on the gravity
of the problem posed by illegal migration to India. They were
also unanimous on the fact that the existing law was quite
inadequate to tackle the problem; that even the proposed
amendment might not be sufficient, though desirable, to
strengthen the parent legislation and that a more stringent

jegislation was needed to curb the menace which had become,


>+:45:-

over the years, an all India feature. There was 8 specific
Suggestion for enacting a comprehensive legislation on this

subject.

(11) The members, however, felt that the law alone could,
in no way, check the illegal infiltration but other measures
like complete border fencing and strict vigil had to be
strengthened. Some of the members felt that, in addition to
this, identity cards had to be issued to citizens so as to
easily identify non-citizens especially in view of ethnic and
religious similarities which had made their identification
difficult. This would greatly help solve the problem of
illegal migration. However, one member suggested the creation
of Indian National Security and Foreign National Detection
Force to identify and sternly deal with the illegal foreign

elements.

(iii) Some of the members suggested specific measures to

strengthen the legal regime, for example, the terms
“foreigner” and “citizen” should be precisely defined; summary

trial through a reasonable, fair and efficient procedure
should be provided wherein the burden of proof would 116 on
the accused; special courts to try offences under the Act
should be established; and that all the offences should be
made non-bailable under the Act. One member expressed the
view that there should be no denial of bail but special courts
may be given discretion to grant it in appropriate cases.

They also pleaded for repeal of the IMDT Act.


>:46:-

(1५) Members also suggested harmonisation between the
Passports Act and the Foreigners Act. Both the suggestions
were picked up by the Home Secretary who agreed that there was
a need to have a holistic view of the Foreigners Act in
relation to the Citizenship Act and Passports Act and for the

enactment of a comprehensive lTegislation.

11.3 The Committee could not take up the Bill for further
consideration and formulate its recommendations as it become
defunct on 26th April, 1999 on account of the dissolution of

12th Lok Sabha.

11.4 The new Committee after its constitution on 3180
December, 1999 took up further consideration of the Bill on
7th February, 2000. The following views/suggestion emerged
during the course of the meeting. (See pages 21-31 of the

Report) :-

(i) The proposed amendment to Section 14 of the

Act is not sufficient to achive the object.

(ii) Accused should not be granted bail ४111 the

trial is over

(iii) Time frame should be prescribed for the trial

of offences


>+:47:-“

(19५) Burden of proof shall lie on the accussed for
all kinds of violations/contraventions
including rules and orders of the act by

amending Section 9 of the Act.

(v) Offences under the act should be tried by
special courts manned by the judges of the

rank of sessions court

(vi) The court should be empowered to order
deportation of convicted foreigner while

announcing punishment for him.

12. Views of the States and Union Territories

12.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India,
sought the views of State Governments and Union territory
Administrations regarding the provisions of the Amendment Bill
and their experience in the implementation of the provisions
of the Foreigners Act, 1946, as also the difficulties
encountered by them in the implementation process. For this
purpose, the Ministry of Home Affairs addressed a

questionnaire containing specific questions and called for the

suggestions of the States and Union Territories. The
questionnaire is appended at Anneuxre IT. The responses

thereto are given in a tabulated form at Annexur-III.


~148:-

12.3 The States and Union territory Administrations, in
their responses, though favoured the amendment Bill, expressed
the necessity of the amendment of other provisions of the of
the Act for they encountered numerous difficulties in
implementing its provisions and made following suggestions

with respect to the Foreigners Act.

(i) A provision should be made to enable temporary
detention of foreigners by immigration authorities pending

finalization of their verification.

(ii) Offences should be classified and punishments accordingly
prescribed. The harbouring of foreigners or aiding or
assisting them in obtaining ration cards, driving licences and
citizenship as also in undertaking illegal activity should be

made an offence.

(iii) Any act under section 4(3)(a) of the Act should be
regarded as an act of abetment. This section prohibits every
person from knowingly assisting an internee or a person on
parole to escape from custody or a place earmarked for his

residence or knowingly harbouring such an internee or person.

(iv) Special cells should be established for the purpose of

speedy investigation.


-:49:-

(५) All offences under the Act should be tried by courts
of session. Special courts should be established to try
offences under the Foreigners Act on a day to day basis,
completing the trial within 90 days. Some of the States

wanted time-bound trial by courts of session.
(vi) There should be summary trial of all offences.

(vii) Foreigners contravening the provisions of the Act or
those entering clandestinely should not be granted bail to
prevent them from absconding. No anticipatory bail should be

granted to foreigners.

(viii) There should be a provision for the verification of
sureties offered by foreigners. Sureties should deposit the

amount of bail in the court.

(ix) Lawyers should be held accountable for obtaining bail

on forged documents.

(x) Stringent punishments should be provided for entry
without documents and with forged documents, for carrying fake
currency notes and indulging in terrorist activity as also for
the contravention of orders issued under section 3 of the
Foreigners Act, espionage activities and acts endangering the

security of State.


-:60:-

(xt) There should be a provision to seize the property
purchased by foreigners directly or benami especially on

conviction.

(xii) The term “whoever” in proposed section 14B should be
qualified by the terms ‘an Indian or foreigner’ so that Indian
nationals resorting to the abetment of offences may be

punished.

(xiii) There should be an instant deportation after the
completion of sentence by the foreigner-convict because,

during the intervening period, surveillance is very difficult.

(xiv) There should be special fund to meet the expense on

deportation in cases where aliens do not have enough money to

go back to their countries. This will prevent their going
underground.

\
(xv) Courts should not grant stay on ‘notice to leave

India’ issued to foreigners by the competent authority.

(xvi) The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, should not be

applicable to convict for offences under the Foreigners Act.

(xvii) The registration of tourists on arrival should be made
compulsory. Currently, they are exempted from registration
for a period of six months under the Registration of

Foreigners Act 1939.


“>:51:«

(xviii) Fine under section 5 of the Registration of Foreigners
Act should be enhanced to Rs. 20,000 for foreigners and to
Rs. 10,000 for Indians (The section provides imprisonment for

a term which may extend to one year in case of foreigners).

12.2 Some States also expressed the need to strengthen the
Passports Act, 1967, and suggested the following measures in

this regard.

(i) Provision for Pre-verification of sponsors/referees

before the grant of visa to foreigners.

(ii) Prohibition of granting of passport/visa to persons

convicted under the Foreigners Act at least for five years.

(111) Communication of Information regarding the issue of

passport to a person to the District Superintendent of Police.

Civ) Enhancement of punishment under the Pasports Act, 1967
on the lines of one prescribed in the proposed section 14A of

the Foreigners (Amendment 8111), 1998.

(v) Enhancement of penalty under rule 6 of the Rules made

under the Passports (Entry into India) Act, 1920.


>:52:-“

12.4 The need to strengthen the citizenship Act was pointed
out by a number of States and the Union Territory
Administrations. It was suggested that foreigners who are

convicted should not be granted Indian citizenship under any

circumstances.

13. The scheme __of amendments proposed by the Law
Commission

13.1 The Law Commission has considered the views expressed

by the Ministry of Home Affairs, recommendations of the
Estimates Committee of the Parliament and Conferences of Chief
Ministers and Chief Secretaries, Report of the Governor of
Assam on Illegal Immigration, the pleadings of the parties in
the public interest litigation pending in the Supreme Court
(including the Status Reports filed by the Union of India and
the State of West Bengal therein), views of the states and
Union Territory administrations regarding their experience in
implementation of the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946
and all the other relevant material referred to hereinbefore.
The Law Commission had to take a decision with respect to the
shape of proposals to be framed by it. One idea was to go in
for a comprehensive Act incorporating the features of the
several existing Acts and of the Orders/Rules made thereunder.
In short, the idea was to codify the entire law concerning the
foreigners, which is now scattered in several enactments and
Orders made thereunder, into one enactment. The other idea

was to introduce provisions in the Foreigners Act effective


“:53:-

enough to meet the main problem faced by this country today,
namely, illegal migration without interfering with the
existing legal framework. On a consideration of all the pros
and cons, the Commission has chosen to adopt the second
alternative. The Foreigners Act was enacted in 1946. A large
number of Orders (in exercise of the order-making power
conferred by section 3 of the Act) have been issued from time
to time, regulating various aspects concerning foreigners.
Besides the Foreigners Act, there are two other Acts, namely,
the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 and the
Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 (IMDT
Act), the former deals with expulsion of migrants from Assam
and the latter exclusively deals with determination and
deportation of illegal immigrants. There is the Registration
of Foreigners Act, 1939, the Passport (Entry into India) Act,
1920 and the Passports Act, 1967. Codifying the provisions of
all these Acts and of the Orders made thereunder would take a
long time and there is always the problem of new provisions
creating room for fresh litigation. The better course, we
thought, was to leave the existing mechanism unaffected except
insofar as it is inconsistent with the provisions now proposed
by way of this Amendment Bill. Accordingly, the Commission
has suggested insertion of certain definitions in section 2
and the insertion of new sections 7(B) to 7(U) 10 the
Foreigners Act, 1946. These provisions shall have effect
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other enactments
in force. We have defined the expression “illegal entrant”,

created a new category of officers called Immigration Officers


~164:-

with a Chief Immigration Officer at the head and laid down
their powers, duties and functions. We have also specified
that certain classes of persons are not to be admitted into
India even if they are holding a visa or other valid document
in that behalf. The function of determining whether a person
is an illegal entrant has been entrusted to the immigration
officers. Their orders are made subject to an appeal to be
heard and decided by an Immigration Tribunal, to be manned by
a person who is or has been a district judge or an additional
district judge. The immigration officers and the immigration
tribunals shall decide the matters according to the principles
of natural justice which necessarily means, after making such
inquiry as may be called for in a given case. We have also
provided for facilitation centres for detaining the foreigners
pending the determination of their status and pending their
deportation. So far as the offences under the Act are
concerned, they are, of course, to be tried by Immigration
Court. Immigration court is a court of District and Sessions
Judge to be specified by the appropriate government in that
behalf, in each district.

13.2 At this stage the Commission thinks it necessary to
refer to a particular aspect. According to the provisions of
the Amendment Bill suggested by us herein. a “foreigner”
means a person who is not a citizen of India - and “Citizen of
India” as proposed in clause (aa) of the Bill is “a person who

is a citizen of India within the meaning of and as provided in


>ै:55:-

Part II of the Constitution of India or the Citizenship Act,
1955". According to section 6-A of the Citizenship Act, 1955
(which section was introduced by Amending Act 65 of 1985
w.e.f. 7th December 1985), the position with respect to
citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord is the

following:

a) “All persons of ‘Indian Origin’ who came before the
first day of January 1966 to ‘Assam’ from the
‘specified territory’ (including such of those whose
names were included in the electoral rolls used for
the purposes of the General Election to the House of
People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily
residents of Assam since the dates of their entry to
Assam shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from
the 180 January 1966." (‘Indian origin’ is defined in
the said section in the following words “a person
shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he or either
of his parents or any of his grandparents were born in
undivided India.”) ("Assam" in the said section means
“the territories included in the State of Assam
immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship

(Amendment) Act, 1985.")

b) So far as persons of Indian origin who have come to
‘assam’ on or after first day of 1966 but before the
25th day of March 1971, are concerned, the position is

different. Where such person has been ordinarily


6)

9)

>:56:-“

residing in "Assam" since the date of entry into Assam
and has been detected to be a foreigner and has
registered himself in accordance with the rules made
by the Central Government in that behalf under section
18 of the Citizenship Act, with the prescribed
authority, he acquires all the rights of Indian
citizenship on the expiry of ten years from the date
on which he was detected to be a foreigner. In other
words, the position is that in case of a person of
Indian origin who has entered "Assam" but has not been
detected to be a foreigner and accordingly has not
applied for registration, will not become a citizen of
India irrespective of the length of his stay. (See
sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) of section 6A of

Citizenship Act).

It also follows from the above provisions that if a
person who is not a citizen of India according to the
provisions of the Constitution or the Citizenship Act,
has entered the territories of India (except the
territories included in “Assam"), he shall not be
treated as a citizen of India, irrespective of the

length of his stay in India.

Tne IMDT Act, 1983 is concerned only with a limited
class of persons, i.e., “foreigners who migrated into
India across the borders of the eastern and

north-eastern regions of the country on and after the


-:67i-

25th day of March 1971." Such persons were sought to
be identified and deported from India. This Act does
not purport to nor can it be construed as conferring
citizenship upon persons who have entered India before
25.3.1971. This Act is not indeed concerned with

conferment of citizenship.

However, according to the Note furnished to us by the
Home Ministry, "(2) According to Indira-Mujib Agreement 1974,
all persons from erstwhile Pakistan who came to India before
25.23.1971 would continue to live in India and would ultimately
become Indian citizens and those who had come to India on or
before (after ?) 25.3.1971 without any valid travel document
would be treated as illegal migrants and, therefore, have to
be deported to Bangladesh subsequently”. This note of the
Home Ministry does not appear to correctly reflect the legal
position as is evident from a perusal of the Constitution and
the Citizenship Act. It is, however, a matter of policy for
the government to decide whether the government wishes to
treat all migrants, to territories of India except “Assam”
from the territories which now constitute Bangladesh, prior to
25.3.1971 as illegal migrants or whether it would allow them
to be treated as Indian citizens. Another policy decision
which may have to be taken is what does the Central Government
propose to do to those Bangladeshis (to use a convenient
expression) who have entered “Assam” between 1.1.1966 and

25.23.1971 but who do not satisfy the requirements of


+:58:-

sub-section (3) of section 6-A of the Citizenship Act. Are
they to be treated as “illegal entrants” or not and if the

former, are they to be deported?

14. RECOMMENDATIONS

After considering the provisions of the existing
legislations on the subject, we are of the considered view
that the problem of illegal migration from neighbouring
countries has to be tackled seriously by providing a machinery
for effective and speedy detection of illegal entrants in the
statute. In order to concretise our recommendations, we have
drafted the Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 2000 (Annexed as
Annexure-I) to amend the Foreigners Act, 1946 by incorporating
Proposed provisions in the Foreigners Act, 1946. The radical

Proposals reflected in the Bill are as follows:

(i) The long title of the Bill provides for the
regulation of entry into, stay in and departure from, India of
foreigners and also to prevent their illegal migration from
neibouring countries and for matters connected therewith,

incidental or ancillary thereto.

(ii) We propose to include various definitions, the
important among them are ‘foreigner’, ‘citizen of India’,

‘removal order’ and ‘deportation order’.


~:69:-

(iii) We have specifically included the definition
of the term ‘illegal entrant’ in the definition clause so as
to make it more explicit as to how a foreigner who entered

into India is an illegal entrant.

Civ) A new definition has been included to define
‘inadmissible class’ which enlist the inadmissbile classes of
foreigners wno are barred entry into India. Such classes are

also enlisted in the immigration laws of other countries.

(v) Specific clause has been included in the 8111
empowering the immigration officer to refuse permission to
enter India if he belongs to an inadmissible class or fails to
Produce a valid passport or valid travel documents or is not
able to establilsh his identity or nationality. This
Provision will enable the authorities at the entry point or
port of entry to immediately deport the concerned foreigner,
thereby avoiding the need to decide whether a foreigner is an

illegal entrant or not through the processes of law.

(vi) In order to curb the menace of illegal
immigration, violations of conditions of visa, etc., by a
foreigner, we recommend for establishing a machinery

consisting of Chief Immigration Officer and immigration
officers to be appointed by the Central Government at the
grass roots level which can speedily and promptly decide and
act on the issues related to the subject. Firstly, at the

entry point, immigration officers are proposed to be empowered


~:60:-

to examine foreigners seeking entry into India. Such
examination would include whether a person possess passports
or travel documents, whether he belongs to a inadmissilble
class. If he is not in posession of such valid documents, the
immigration officer is empowered to order immediate
deportation or detain him in the facilitation centres pending
enquiry or deportation. Secondly, the immigration officers
are also proposed to be appointed for other areas in districts
whenever or wherever necessary. The officers are empowered to
detect whether a person is illegal entrant or not after
holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner. If he determines
a foreigner to be an illegal entrant, he can issue a removal
order against which an appeal may be made within 15 days
before the Immigration Tribunal proposed to be constituted by
the Central Government. Such a tribunal shall be manned by a
person of the rank of retired District Judge. Order of such a
tribunal shall be final. If it upholds the removal orders
passed by the immigration officer, such a foreigner will be
deported. The immigration officers and the immigration
tribunals shall decide the matters according to the principles

of natural justice.


>:61:-

(vii) In order to speedily try an accused person
alleged to have committed offence or offences under the Act,
we recommend that sessions court of a district be designated
as Immigration Court which may take cognizance of the
complaints against the offenders. Some of new offences are

Proposed to be added to curb the menace of illegal migration.

(viii) We have also made provisions for transfer of
cases now pending before the tribunals created under the IMDT
Act, 1983 and of the cases pertaining to offences under the
Foreigners Act pending in Criminal Courts, to the appropriate

author ities/Tribunal/Court.
We recommend accordingly.

(MR.JUSTICE B.P,.JEEVAN REDDY) (RETD.)
CHAIRMAN

a NA
i.
(DR.N.M.  GHATATE) (SHRI T.K. VISWANATHAN )
MEMBER MEMBER SECRETARY

DATED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2000


Annexure - I

THE FOREIGNERS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

A

Bill
Further to amend the Foreigners Act, 1946

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-

Short title and commencement.
1. (1) This Act may be called the Foreigners (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette appoint .

Substitution of long title

2. In the Foreigners Act, 1946 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) for the
Jong title, the following long title shall be substituted, namely:-

“An Act to provide for regulation of entry into, stay in, and departure from, India
of foreigners and to prevent their illegal entry and immigration and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto”

3. For section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shal! be substituted,
namely:-

“2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,--

(a) “Chief Immigration Officer’ means the Chief Immigration officer appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 7B;

(aa) “citizen of India" means a person who is a citizen of India within the meaning
of and as provided in Part II of the Constitution of India or the Citizenship Act,
1955;

(b)"Deportation Order" means an order passed by the Immigration Officer under
sub-section (1) of section 7-1, sub-section (2) of section 7-0, sub-section (6) of
section 7-J or section 7S;


(c)" foreigner ” means a person who is not a citizen of India :
(d) "illegal entrant” means a foreigner who, -

(i) has entered into India without a valid passport and visa or other
travel document or permit; or

(ii) has entered India, whether with or without a valid passport and
visa or other travel document entitling him to enter into India, through
a place or a point which is not a designated point or port of entry into
India; or

(iii) has stayed in India beyond the period specified in visa or other
travel document or permit under which he had entered into India; or

(iv) has contravened any provision of any Act governing the entry,
stay and departure of foreigners, or of any rule or order made under
any such Act; or

(v) has been subjected to an order of removal or deportation under
this Act or has entered India after having been deported from India;

(०) “Immigration Officer” means an Immigration Officer appointed under sub-
section (1) of section 7B;

(f) “Immigration Tribunal” means a tribunal established under section 70;

(g) “inadmissible classes of persons” means classes of persons referred to in
clauses (a) to (j) of section 7H;

(h) “permit” means a permit issued by the Central Government to any foreigner to
reside in India for a particular purpose including employment in India;

(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by Orders or rules made by the Central
Government under this Act;

(j)"Removal Order" means an order passed by the Immigration Officer under sub-
section (1) of section 7 M;

(k) “specified” means specified by direction of a prescribed authority.

(1) "travel document" means a travel document which is issued by or under the
authority of the Central Government permitting any foreigner to enter India;

eo


(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 or the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts, Orders and
rules made thereunder.

Insertion of new sections 7B to 7U

3. After section 7A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:-

Immigration Authorities

“7B. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Chief
Immigration Officer and as many Immigration Officers as it deems fit for the
purposes of this Act.

(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, define the area to
which the authority of an Immigration Officer so appointed shall extend and,
where two or more Immigration Officers are appointed for the same area, also
provide, by such order, for the distribution and allocation of the work to be
performed under this Act in relation to such area.

(3) The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary so to do in
public interest, authorize any person to perform all or any of the functions of an
Immigration Officer under this Act.

(4) The Immigration Officers shall perform the functions assigned to them by or
under this Act under the general superintendence and control of the Chief
Immigration Officer.

(5) The Chief Immigration Officer may, in addition to the special functions
assigned to him by or under this Act, perform all or any of the functions assigned
to an Immigration Officer.

General Duties of Immigration Officers.

7C. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every Immigration Officer shall, in
addition to the duties assigned to him by or under this Act, —

(a) prevent entry of foreigners into India without a valid passport and
visa or a valid travel document or residence permit, as the case may
be, permitting him to enter India;


(b) inspect for the purposes of clause (a), to such extent and in such
manner, as may be prescribed, —

(i) any aircraft, ship or vehicle, or any other conveyance if he has
reasons to believe that an illegal entrant is traveling therein,

(ii) any place or premises, if he has reason to believe that an
illegal entrant is staying or hiding in that place or premises

Points or ports of entry

7D. (1) The Central Government shall notify, by a notification published in the
Official Gazette, the designated points or ports of entry into India at such places as
may be specified.

(2) A designated point or port of entry shall be manned by an Immigration Officer
or such other Officers as may be specified by the Chief Immigration Officer.

Other Immigration Officers and staff.

7E. The Central Government may appoint such other officers and employees
(hereinafter referred to as the officers and employees of Immigration respectively),
as it may think fit, to assist the Chief Immigration Officer and the Immigration
Officers in the performance of their duties under this Act.

Immigration Officers to be public servants.

77%, The Chief Immigration Officer and Immigration Officers, the officers and
employees of Immigration shall be public servants within the meaning of section
21 of the Indian Penal Code.

Examination of persons disembarking in India

1G. (1) An Immigration Officer may examine any person who is disembarking or
seeking to disembark in India or entering or seeking to enter into India for the
purpose of determining whether he is a foreigner and if so whether he is in

possession of valid passport and visa or other travel document or residence permit,
as the case may be.

(2) Where the Immigration Officer, on examination of any person referred to in
sub-section (1), is of opinion that such person is a foreigner and is not in
possession of a valid passport and visa or a valid travel document or a residence
permit shall refuse to grant him leave to enter India and order his deportation.

6


Persons belonging to certain classes not to be admitted:

7.H. No foreigner shall be allowed to enter India notwithstanding the fact that such a
foreigner is in possession of a valid passport, visa or other travel document or
permit, if in the opinion of the Immigration Officer,he falls in any one of the
following classes, namely:-

(a) persons suffering from diseases or disabilities which are a danger to public health
or safety and would result in excessive demands on health or social services in the
country;

(b) persons unable or unwilling to support themselves or the persons dependent on
them;

(c) persons who are convicts or hardened criminals and have committed offences or
are likely to commit offences;

(d) persons engaged in trafficking in narcotics and psychotropic substances;

(९) persons engaged in planned and organized criminal activities;

(0 persons who are members of organizations involved in espionage, subversion or
terrorism;

(g) persons who are believed to be members of organizations who have committed
war crimes or crimes against humanity or genocide;

(h) skilled and unskilled labour from neighbouring countries having no work permit;

(i) foreigners previously deported from India on charges of misrepresentation to
procure illegal entry into India; or

0) such other classes as may be notified by the Central Government by general or
special order in the Official Gazette.

Persons refused entry to be deported

7.1 (1) Where any person is refused entry into India under sub-section (2) of section
7G or section 7H, he shall be forthwith deported to the place from where he embarked
or to a country or territory specified in sub-section (2) of section 7M, in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (2).

(2) Where a person arriving in India is refused leave to enter, an Immigration Officer
may, —

(a) give the captain of the ship or aircraft or any other mode of conveyance in
which he arrives, directions requiring the captain to remove him from India in
that ship or aircraft or conveyance as the case may be; or

(b) give the owners or agents of that ship or aircraft or conveyance directions
requiring them to remove him from India in any ship or aircraft or conveyance
specified or indicated in the directions, being a ship or aircraft of which they
are the owners or agents —


Provided that where the Immigration Officer is of the opinion that it would not be
suitable to give the direction of the nature contemplated by this sub-section, he shall
make the arrangements to remove him from India to the place of embarkation or to a
country or territory specified in sub-section (2) of section 7M at the cost of that
person or where such person is not in a position to bear the cost the Central
Government shall bear the same.

(3) A person in respect of whom directions are given under this section may be
placed, under the authority of an Immigration Officer, on board any ship or aircraft
in which he is to be removed in accordance with the said directions.

Detention pending examination of Foreigners while Disembarking in India ending examination of Foreigners while Disembarking in India

7-J (1) Any person disembarking in India, may be detained under the authority of
an Immigration Officer pending his examination and pending a decision to grant
or refuse to grant leave to enter.

(2) A person in respect of whom directions may be given under sub-section (2) of
section 7-I may be detained under the authority of an Immigration Officer pending
the giving of directions and pending his removal in pursuance of any directions
given.

(3) A person on board a ship or aircraft or other conveyance whose presence in
India is required by law, may, under the authority of an Immigration Officer, be
removed from the ship or aircraft or other conveyance for detention under this
section.

(4) If an Immigration Officer so requires, master of a ship or pilot of an aircraft or
a person in charge of any other conveyance shall prevent from disembarking in
India any person who has arrived in India in the ship, aircraft or other conveyance.

(5) Where any person is refused entry under sub-section (4), the master of the ship
or captain of an aircraft or the person in charge of other conveyance may detain such
person in custody on board the ship or aircraft or conveyance, as the case may be.

(6) The Immigration Officer shall order immediate deportation of a foreigner to a
country as specified in sub-section (2) of section 7M if the foreigner,-

(a) belongs to an inadmissible class; or

(b) has overstayed the period of his visa or permit unless granted extension by
the authorities; or

(०) has contravened any of the provisions contained in this Act or the orders or
rules made thereunder; or


(9) has completed his sentence for an offence under this Act or under any other law
for the time being in force, relating to foreigners; or

(e) is,in the opinion of the Immigration Officer, a threat to the national security and
his continued presence endangers the lives and safety of the people of India.

Facilitation Centres and Detention of Foreigners

7-K. (1) The Central Government shall establish or notify any place or centre as a
facilitation centre for the purposes of this Act.

(2) Persons liable for detention under sub-sections (1) to (3) of section 7J may be
detained, if so ordered by the Immigration Officer in facilitation centres or in such
other places as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

(3) Where a person is detained under sub-section (1) of this section, an
Immigration Officer, or any other person authorized by the Central Government,
may take all such steps as may reasonably be necessary for photographing,
measuring or otherwise identifying him.

Determination of question as to whether a person is an illegal entrant.
7-L. (1) If, on the basis of information received or otherwise, the Immigration
Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a person found residing within his

jurisdiction is an illegal entrant, he shall record that fact giving reasons in support

of such belief and shall call upon that person to show cause why he should not be
declared to be an illegal entrant.

(2) For purposes of sub-section (1) , the Immigration Officer shall conduct such
enquiry as may be prescribed and may determine-

(a) whether he is an illegal entrant,

(0) his nationality,

(c) the country from which he entered India,
(d) the duration of his stay in India, and

(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed.

(3) The Immigration Officer shall hold the enquiry in accordance with the
principles of natural justice and in accordance with the procedure, if any, as may
be prescribed by rules.


Removal Order

7-M. (1) Where the Immigration Officer determines that a person is an illegal
entrant he shall issue an order for his immediate removal, subject, if any, to the
order of an Immigration Tribunal made under section 7-P.

(2) The order of removal under sub-section (1) removal of an illegal entrant may
be made to a country or territory specified in the order, being either ,-

(a) a country of which he is a national or citizen; or

(b) a country or territory in which he has obtained a passport or other document of
identity; or

(०) a country or territory in which he embarked for India; or

(d) a country or territory to which there is reason to believe that he will be
admitted.

Detention pending enquiry and pending deportation

7-3, (1) Every person in respect of whom an inquiry under section 7-L is pending
and every person against whom an order of removal has been passed under section
7-M and who has filed an appeal under section 7-P, shall be detained in facilitation
centres or at such other places as the Central Government may, by general or
special order, specify:

Provided that no male below the age of 16 years or a female shall be
detained under this section.

(2) The person referred to in sub-section (1) may be released by the Immigration
Officer subject to observance and fulfilment of such conditions, as may be specified
by him in that behalf, if the Immigration Officer is satisfied that such person will

appear before him or any other authority under the Act, whenever called upon to do
so.

Establishment of Immigration Tribunals:

70. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish, for the
purposes of hearing appeals from the Removal Orders passed by the Immigration
Officer under section 7 M, as many Immigration Tribunals as it may deem necessary
and the Tribunal shall sit at such places as may be designated by the Central
Government or the State Government .

649


(2) The Central Government shail also specify in the notification referred to in

sub-section (1) the territorial limits within which, each such tribunal shall exercise its
jurisdiction

(3) No person shall be appointed as a member of any such Tribunal unless he
is or has been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge in any State.

(4) The Immigration Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908(5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles
of natural justice and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made
by the Central Government, every Immigration Tribunal shall have the power to
regulate its own procedure including the fixing of the places and times of its inquiry
and deciding whether to sit in public or in private.

Appeal against Removal Order

7-P (1). Any person aggrieved by an order of removal passed by the Immigration
Officer, may prefer an appeal to the Immigration Tribunal within fifteen days
from the date of communication of such order.

(2) The Immigration Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it may think fit,
confirming, modifying or annulling the order appealed against or may remand the
case to the Immigration Officer who had passed such order with such directions to
that Immigration Officer as the Immigration Tribunal may think fit, for fresh
determination after taking additional evidence, if necessary.

(3) Every endeavour shall be made by the Immigration Tribunal to dispose of the
appeal within thirty days from the date of filing of the appeal.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, or in any
other law for the time being in force, an order passed by the Immigration Tribunal
shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court of law.

(5) No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain a suit or other proceeding with
respect to a matter within the jurisdiction of the Immigration Officer or the
Immigration Tribunal and no injunction or any other order in respect of any action
taken or orders passed by the immigration Officer or an Immigration Tribunal in
respect of such matter, shall be granted or made by any civil court.

प्र


10

Immigration Courts

7-Q. (1) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall designate one or more Sessions
Courts in each district as Immigration Courts for the purpose of providing for speedy
trial of offences committed under this Act.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or
in any other law for the time being in force, all offences committed under this Act
shall be tried by the Immigration Courts on day to day basis.

(3) An Immigration Court may take cognizance of any offence under this Act
without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of
facts which constitute such offence.

(4) Where an offence triable by the Immigration Court is punishable for a term not
exceeding three years or with fine or with both, an Immigration Court may,
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), or section 260 or section 262
of the Code, try the offence in a summary way in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in the Code and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the Code, shall,
so far as may be, apply to such trial:

Provided that when, in the course of a summary trial under this sub-section, it
appears to the Immigration Court that the nature of the case is such that it is
undesirable to try it in a summary way, the Immigration Court shall recall any
witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to re-hear the case in the manner
provided by the provisions of the Code for the trial of such offence and the said
provisions shall apply to and in relation to an Immigration Court as they apply to in
relation to a Magistrate:

Provided further that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this
section, it shall be lawful for an Immigration Court to pass a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.

Special Provisions regarding Bail

TR. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, no person who is accused of having committed an offence under this Act, and
arrested by the police, shall be released on bail or on his own bond, unless —

(a) the public prosecutor is given an opportunity to oppose the application for
such release, and

(b) where the public prosecutor opposes the application, the Immigration
Court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
likely to abscond while on bail.

41


11

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to a foreigner who has stayed
in India beyond the period permitted in the visa or other travel document or permit
under which he has entered India.

(3) The limitations on granting of bail specified in this section shall be in addition
to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 or any other law for
the time being in force on granting of bail.

Deportation of illegal entrants

7-S. Where a Removal Order has been passed by an Immigration Officer or
where no appeal has been filed before the Immigration Tribunal against the
Removal Order passed by the Immigration Officer within the time specified in
section 7-O, or where the appeal has been filed but has been dismissed, the
Immigration Officer shall, deport the person in accordance with the order of
removal or the appellate order, as the case may be.

Power to search, seize and detain persons, conveyance, etc.

7-T. All the powers for the time being conferred by the Customs Act, 1962, on
officers of customs with regard to the searching and detention of persons, vessels
or aircraft or any other conveyance, or seizure of any document or thing or arrest
of any person or otherwise for the purpose of prevention or detection of any
offence under that Act or for apprehending a person suspected to have committed
any offence under that Act may be exercised by such officers, for the purpose of
prevention or detection of any offence under this Act or for apprehending a person
suspected to have committed any offence under this Act.

Authorities and officers to have certain powers of civil court.

7-U.(1) The Immigration Tribunal, the Chief Immigration Officer and the

Immigration Officer shall, for the purpose of discharging their functions under this
* Act, ave the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;

(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;

(9) receiving evidence on affidavits; and

(०) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.


12

(2) Every proceeding before the Immigration Tribunal ,the Chief Immigration
Officer or an Immigration Officer shall be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228 ofl the Indian Penal'Code and the Immigration
Tribunal,the Chief Immigration Officer and every Immigration Officer shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the

Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”

Insertion of new sections 12A and 12B

4. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:-

Prohibition of employing illegal entrants

“12A. No person shall knowingly employ or cause to be employed any
illegal entrant.

Prohibition of_harbouring illegal entrant of harbouring illegal entra:

12B. No person shall knowingly harbour or shelter or cause to be harboured or
sheltered any illegal entrant.”

Substitution of new sections for section 14,

5. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:-

Penalty for the contravention of the provisions of the Act, etc for the contravention of the provisions of the Act, etc.

“14, Whoever —

(a) contravenes such of the provisions of this Act, or of any order made thereunder
or any direction given in pursuance of this Act or such order, for contravention of
which no specific punishment is provided under this Act; or

(b) remains in India or in any area therein with or without a valid passport,
exceeding the period for which the visa or other travel document or permit issued
to him for such purpose is valid;

(c) does any act in violation of the conditions of the visa or other travel document
or permit issued to him for his entry and stay in India or any part therein; shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and shall also
be liable to fine, and if he has entered into bond in pursuance of clause (f) of sub-
section (2) of sections 3, his bond shall be forfeited, and any person bound thereby

13


13

shall pay the penalty therefore or show cause to the satisfaction of the Immigration
Court why such penalty should not be paid by him.

Penalty for entry in restricted areas, etc.

14A. Whoever —

{a) enters into any area in India, which is restricted for his entry under any
order made under this Act, or any direction given in pursuance thereof, without
obtaining a requisite permit from the authority, notified by the Central Government
in the Official Gazette, for this purpose, or remains in such area beyond the period
specified in such permit for his stay; or

(b) enters into or stays in any area in India without the valid documents
required for such entry or for such stay, as the case may be, under the provisions of
any order made under this Act or any direction given in pursuance thereof;

shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two
years, but may extend to eight years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to fifty thousand rupees; and if he
has entered into a bond in pursuance of clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 3,
his bond shall be forfeited, and any person bound thereby shall pay the penalty
therein, or show cause to the satisfaction of the Immigration Court why such
penalty should not be paid by him.

Penalty for abetment.

14B, Whoever abets any offence punishable under section 14 or section 14A shall,
if the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, be punished with
the punishment provided for the offence.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section.-

(i) an act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of the abetment, when
it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of a
conspiracy, or with the aid which constitutes the offence;

*(ii) the expression “abetment” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under
section 107 of the India Penal Code.”
Insertion of new section 15.4

6. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:-


14

Deportation to be without prejudice to any other action,

“154. Any Deportation Order or Removal Order made under this Act shall be
without prejudice to any other action which has been or which may be taken under
this Act with respect to such contravention.”

Insertion of new section 16A
7. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted:

Power to make rules

16A.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,-

(a) the powers and duties of officers and employees appointed for the
purposes of this Act and the terms and conditions of their service;

(b) the manner in which enquiry required to be held under this Act may be
held.”

(०) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

Orders and rules to be laid before Parliament.

“16B. Every order and every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the order or the rule or both Houses agree that the
‘order or the rule should not be made, the order or the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of any thing previously done under the order or the rule.”

73


15

Repeal and transfer of Proceedings

8. (1) The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950 and the Illegal Migrants
(Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 are hereby repealed.

(2) On the repeal of the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983
the Tribunals constituted under sub-section (1) of section 5 and the Appellate
Tribunals constituted under sub-section (1) of section 15 of that Act shall stand
dissolved and ,-

(a) all references pending before the Tribunals shall stand transferred to the
respective Immigration Officers within the territorial limits of whose jurisdiction
such Tribunals are situate;

(b) all appeals pending before the Appellate Tribunals shall stand transferred
to the respective Immigration Tribunals within whose territorial jurisdiction such
Appellate Tribunals are situate,

(c) the Appellate Tribunals and the Tribunals shall as soon as may be after
such transfer forward the records of such proceedings or appeal pending before
them to the concerned Immigration Officer or the Immigration Tribunal as the case
may be.

(3) Any reference or appeal transferred under this section shall be dealt with by the
Immigration Officer or the Immigration Tribunal as the case may be, in accordance
with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act.

Transfer of other_cases

9. (1) With effect from the commencement of this Act all proceedings relating to
offences committed under the principal Act pending before any court shall stand
transferred to the Immigration Court within whose jurisdiction such court is situate.

(2) The court shall as soon as may be after such transfer forward the records of such
proceedings pending before it to the Immigration Court.

76


77

ANNEXURE~IT

QUESTIONNAIRE

The Ministry of Home Affairs addressed the
following questions to the State Governments and Union

territory Administrations.

(1) Whether the proposed amendment to section 14 which,
inter alia, provides for higher punishment for serious
offences consequently making them triable by the court of
session and rendering the grant of bail more difficult, is
sufficient? If not, suggestions with regard to the

amendment of the said section may be spelt out.

(ii) Whether other provisions of the Act also need
amendment to make it more purposeful and effective to deal

with the problem of infiltration?
(iii) What has been your experience in the implementation
of the Foreigners Act and what difficulties have you come

across in this process?

(iv) Whether the proposed amendment would necessitate

strengthening of Passports Act/Citizenship Act?

{v) Do you have any other suggestions to make?


78

ANNEXURE-IIT

Response of the States and Union territory

Administrations to the questionnaire in the tabulated form:


79

TABLE

S.No, Responses

1 (a) Amendment Bill sufficient

(09) Desirable

2 (a) Further amendment to other provisions

of the Act necessary

States Union Territories

Goa, Haryana, Chandigarh,

West Bengal, Lakshdweep
Madhya Pradesh,

Orissa, Punjab

Rajasthan, Tamil

Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,

Delhi

Haryana, Madhya

Pradesh, Orissa,

Rajasthan, Tamil

Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,

delhi


(b)

3 (a)

(b)

4 (a)

No further amendment

Difficulties in implementing

provisions of Foreigners Act felt

No difficulties

Strengthening of Passports Act

needed

30

Goa, Punjab Chandigarh

Goa, Haryana, Madhya

Pradesh, Orissa,

Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,

Uttar Pradesh,

West Bengal, Delhi

Punjab Chandigarh, Lakshdweep

Goa, Haryana, Madhya Chandigarh,
Pradesh, Orissa, Lakshdweep
Punjab, Uttar

Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,

West Bengal, Delhi


fi

(b)

5 (a)

(0)

Strengthening of Citizenship Act

needed

Special courts for trial of offences

favoured

Stringent bail provisions

Goa, Haryana, Madhya Chandigarh, Lakshdweep
Pradesh, Orissa,

Punjab, West Bengal,

Dethi

Haryana

Goa, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Punjab,
Uttar Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu, West Bengal,

Delhi

8!


8२

References

7.

8.

18 million people crossed the artificially created
border between India and Pakistan during 1946-47.
See Savita Varde - Naqavi, “Uprooted and

unwelcome”, The Hindu (6th June, 1999).

See “Note on illegal migration from Bangladesh",
जा

Ministry of Home Affairs (Foreigners Division).

See “Influx and security” (the editorial) The

Hindustan Times (19 December, 1998).

According to the ‘Assam Accord’, those
Bangladeshi’s whoinfiltrated between ist January,
1966 to 25th March, 1971 were not to be deported
rather given Indian citizenship after a lapse of 10

years.

See ‘Status Report’ submitted by the Union of India
in All India Lawyers’ Forum v. Union of India

(W.P. No.125 of 1998).
See supra note 5.
See supra note 1.

Ibid.

See supra note 2.


10.

11,

12.

13.

14,

15.

8%

See Report on “Illegal Migration into Assam" by
Governor of Assam (1998). AS per Report, the

immigrants are, now, exclusively Muslim.

See supra note 5. The growth rate of electorate
has reached a new high in the areas inhabited by
migrants. The Statistics released by Election
Department of West Bengal has shown a very high
percentage of increase in the border districts of
West Bengal. See, “Bengal sees more claimants for
inclusion in voters’ list : i1legal immigrants may
be cause", The Hindustan Times (4 June, 1999): Also
“List revision rakes up infiltration issue”, The

Indian Express (3 June 1999).

The Chief Minister of West Bengal has observed that
infiltration has put the economy of the State under
strain. It has been specifically been reported in
the case of Assam by the Governor about the serious
economic consequences of the “perceptible charge in

the demographic pattern of the state.”

See V.N. Gadgil “Internal Security at Danger
Level", The Hindustan Times (25 October 1998).

AASU and AGP agigated and raised the issue of

foreigners during 1980-85 in Assam.

See supra notes 10 and 12.


16.

17.

18.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24,

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

See supra note 12.

All India Lawyers’ Forum v. Union of India (W.P.

No.125 of 1998).

See supra note 12 at 31-32

@.g. Chhanga Khan v. the State of U.P., AIR 1956
All 69; Ms.Bashiran v. The State of Rajasthan, AIR
1957 Raj 348; Mohd. Hussain v. The State of

Assam, AIR 1960 Assam 209.

AIR 1963 SC 1035.
AIR 1961 SC 1467.
AIR 1959 Bom.525.
AIR 1963 A.P.441.
AIR 1960 Bombay 27.
AIR 1996 Madras 322.
AIR 1960 Ker.177.
AIR 1962 A11.383.
AIR 1966 Cal.552.
Id. at 558.

Supra note 25.

AIR 1996 HP 27.

84