 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
          ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY SIXTH 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
       ON 
 
 
 
 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION 
 
 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2001 

 2 
 
 
 
 
Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy 
Chairman, Law Commission of India 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
SHASTRI BHAVAN 
NEW DELHI – 110001 
Tel. No.3384475 
Res: 1, Janpath, New Delhi-110011 
Tel. 3019465 
 
 12th September, 2001  
D.O.No.6(3)(69)/2001-LC(LS) 
 
Dear Shri Jaitley Ji, 
 
 I am forwarding herewith the 176 th Report on the “Arbitration 
and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2001”. 
 
 It was desired by you that the Commission may review the 
functioning of the Arbitration and C onciliation Act, 1996, in view of 
the various shortcomings observed in its provisions and certain 
representations received by you. The Commission considered the 
representations which pointed out that the UNCITRAL Model (on the 
basis of which the Arbitrati on and Conciliati on Act, 1996 was 
enacted) was mainly intended to enable various countries to have a 
common model for ‘International Commercial Arbitration’ but the Act 
of 1996 had made provisions of such a Model law applicable also to 
cases of purely domestic arbitration between Indian nationals.  This 
did give rise to some difficulties in  the implementation of the Act.  
Meanwhile there were also conflic ting judgments of the High Courts 
in regard to certain provision of the 1996 Act.  Certain other aspects 
about the difficulties in the working of the said Act were also brought 
to the notice of the Commission.  The Commission initially prepared a 
Consultation Paper (Annexure II of  the Report) and held two 
seminars, one at Mumbai and anot her at Delhi in the months of 
February and March, 2001 and gave wide public ity to the paper by 
putting it on the website.  Retired judges and leading lawyers were 

 3 
invited for the seminars.  Many lumi naries also participated in the 
seminars and gave their written notes  putting forth their suggestions.  
Proposals not contained in the Consu ltation Paper were also made and 
were exhaustively discussed.  Afte r making an in-depth study of the 
law relating to subject, looking into the position of the law in foreign 
jurisdictions, the Commission has made various recommendations for 
bringing amendments in the Arbitr ation and Conciliation Act, 1996.  
The summary of the recommendations are contained in Chapter III of 
the Report. A Bill entitled ‘The  Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2001’ has also been prepared by the  Commission 
bringing out various provisions through which the Arbitration and 
Conciliation  
 
 
Act, 1996 is proposed to be amended.   The said Bill is annexed as 
Annexure I to the Report.    
 
 With warm regards,  
Yours sincerely,  
 
 
 
(B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
 
Shri Arun Jaitely, 
Minister for Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,  
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS   
 
 
PAGES 
 
1. CHAPTER I  Broad framework of the Arbitration 1-14 
    and Conciliation Act, 1996 and 
    certain drawbacks experienced 
    in its working 
 
 
2. CHAPTER II Discussion on proposals for  15-196 
    amendments and Commission’s 
    recommendations 
 
 
3. CHAPTER III Summary of recommendation  197-227 
    with Explanatory notes 
 
 
4. ANNEXURE I The Arbitration and Conciliation (1-40) 
    (Amendment) Bill, 2001 
 
 
5. ANNEXURE II Consultation Pa per on review of (1-89) 
    working of the Arbitration and 
    Conciliation Act, 1996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 5 
 
 
 
 
   
CHAPTER I 
 
Broad framework of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,  1996 
and certain drawbacks experienced in its working 
 
 
 At the request of Shri Arun Jaitley,  Hon’ble Minister for Law, Justice 
& Company Affairs, Law Commission has taken up the review of the Indian 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act,  1996 and is proposing various 
amendments as suggested in this Report. 
 
1.1 The Arbitration & Conciliation Act,  1996 is an Act to consolidate and 
amend the law relating to domestic ar bitration, international commercial 
arbitration and enforcement of foreign ar bitral awards as also to define the 
law relating to conciliation and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  It came into force on 22.8.1996 and is deemed to have come into 
force on 25.1.96 (vide M/s Fuerst Day Lawson Ltd . v. Jindal Exports Ltd ., 
2001 (3) SCALE 708). 
 
 The Act is based on the Model Law (a set of 36 Articles) which was 
drafted to govern all international ar bitrations by a working group of the UN 
and was finally adopted by the U.N. Commission on International Trade 
Law (UNCITRAL) on June 21, 1985.  The Resolution of the UN General 
Assembly envisages that all countries should give due consideration to the 
Model Law, in view of the desirability of uniformity of the law on arbitral 
procedures and the specific needs of international commercial practice.  It  is 
also stated in the  Preamble of  Act of 1996:  “it is expedient to make law 
respecting arbitration and conciliation,  taking into account the aforesaid 
Model Law …”. 
  
The Act of 1996 covers both interna tional and domestic arbitration, 
i.e., where at least one party is not an  Indian national and also arbitrations 
where both parties are Indian nationals resp ectively.  By virtue of  sec. 85 of 
the 1996 Act, the old Arbitration Act, 1940 (relating to domestic arbitration) 
and also the Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937 and the 

 6 
Foreign Award (Recognition and Enfo rcement) Act, 1961, (relating to 
international arbitration) were repealed, thus enabling the Act of 1996 to 
govern both domestic and international arbitrations.   
 
1.2 Part I of the Act entitled `Arbitrati on’ is general and contains chapters 
I to X while Part II deals with `Enf orcement of Certain Foreign Awards and 
Chapter I of part II deals with New York Convention Awards and Chapter II 
deals with Geneva Convention Awards.   Part III of the Act of 1996 deals 
with Conciliation with which we are not concerned in this report.  Part IV 
deals with supplementary provisions.  The Act contains three Schedules.  
The First Schedule refers to Convention on the Recognition and 
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitra tion Awards (see sec.44); the Second 
Schedule refers to Protocol on Arbitration Clauses (see sec.53) and the Third 
Schedule to the Convention on the Execution of Foreign Arbitration Awards. 
 
 In this Report we are concerne d only with Part I of the 1996 Act 
which deals with arbitration in India a nd not with Part II and Part III of the 
Act. 
 
Although the Model Law does not take the form of a treaty, legislators 
of various countries  who decided to review their arbitration laws since 1985 
have all given `due consideration’ to the UNCITRAL Model Law. 
 
 Some countries adopted certain provisions of the Model Law, but 
considered that they could extend, simplify or liberalise the Model Law.  
Examples include the Netherlands in 1986 and Switzerland in 1987.  
Because of the specificity of their lega l systems, Italy a nd England decided 
not to follow the Model Law closely.  By March 31, 1999, a total of 29 
countries (including Australia, Bahrain, Bermuda, Bulgaria, Canada, Cypres, 
Egypt, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Ira n, Ireland, Kenya, 
Lithunia, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand,  Nigeria, Oman, Peru, the Russian 
Federation, Scotland, Sweden, Sri La nka, Tunisia, Ukraine, Zimbabwe 
alongwith Hong Kong, 8  American St ates and all 12 Canadian provinces 
and territories) adopted legislation ba sed to some extent on the UNCITRAL 
Model Law (see International Comme rcial Arbitration by Fouchard, 
Gaillard, Goldman, 1999, page 109, para 2.5; also website for 
updating:http//www.un.or.at/uncitral). 
 
 The importance of this gradual pro cess of harmonization is that court 
decisions applying Model Law, from all th e countries that have adopted or 

 7 
adapted it, have been published since 1992.  There is thus a growing body of 
case law concerning the interpreta tion of the Model Law (See CLOUT, 
available on Website http://www.ur.or at/uncitral and CLOUT XXII 
Y.B.Com. Arb. 297-300 (1997)(Fouchard, ibid, p.109, para 2.5). 
 
 The 1996 Act was the result of recommendations for reform, 
particularly in the matter of speeding up the arbitration process and reducing 
intervention by the court.  In Guru Nanak Foundations Vs. Rattan Singh 
(AIR 1981 SC 2075 at 2076-77), the Supreme Court, while referring to the 
1940 Act, observed that “the way in which the proceedings under the Act are 
conducted and without an exception cha llenged in courts, has made lawyers 
laugh and legal philosophers weep” in vi ew of “unending prolixity, at every 
stage providing a legal trap to th e unwary.”  The Public Accounts 
Committee of the Lok Sabha had also commented adversely about 
arbitration in India (9 th Rep. 1977-78 pp 201-202).   The matter came to be 
dealt by the Law Commission in its 76th Report, which recommended certain 
amendments, including a proviso to be in serted in section 28 of the Act of 
1940 forbidding, an extension beyond one year, in respect of the time for 
making the award except for special and adequate reasons to be recorded. 
 
 The Supreme Court in Food Corporation of India  Vs.  Joginderpal  
(AIR 1981 SC 2075at 2076-77) observed that the law of arbitration must be 
`simple, less technical and more res ponsible to the actual reality of the 
situations’, `responsive to the canons of justice and fair play’. 
 
1.3 Speedy disposal and least Court intervention are the basis of 1996 Act 
 
A reading of the 1996 Act shows th at speedy arbitration and least 
court intervention are its main objectives.  In fact, sec.5 of the Act declares:  
 
“Sec.5: Notwithstanding anything cont ained in any other law for the 
time being in force, in matters covered by this Part (Part I), no judicial 
authority shall intervene except where so provided in this Part.” 
 
This basic provision is found  in the la ws of all the countries which have 
adopted the UNCITRAL Model.  The pr ovisions as to waiving objections 
etc. contained in Sections 4, 12, 14(4), 16(5), 19(1) and 25 amply 
demonstrate that the objective is to see that the disputes are not unduly 
prolonged.  In fact, the UNICTRA L Model, wherever it permitted 
intervention by court, by way of appeal, before the passing of the award, left 

 8 
it to the arbitrator, to proceed or not to proceed further pending the appeal.   
This was intended to see that the app eal proceedings are not allowed to be 
unreasonably delayed. 
 
It is, therefore, necessary to emphasize  that the proposed amendments 
do not result in permitting parties to prolong the arbitration proceedings 
unnecessarily. While considering the need for amendments, the Commission 
has, therefore, not deviated from this main objective of the Act.  The 
Commission has rejected quite a lot of proposals that have been made before 
it as it felt that the said proposals woul d certainly contribute to the delay in 
arbitration proceedings. 
 
1.4 Representations regarding drawbacks in the Act: 
  
Ever since the Act of 1996 came into  force, requests  have been 
voiced for  amendments in the provisions  of the 1996 Act, in so far as they 
related to Arbitration. It was c onsidered by the Law Commission in 1998, 
that it would not be appropriate to take up amendments of the Act of 1996 in 
haste and that it would be desirable to wait and see how the courts would 
grapple with the situations that might arise. 
 
1.5 Representations regarding grounds for interference by the Courts after 
making of the award: 
 
Quite recently, representations ha ve come before the Commission 
pointing out that the UNCITRAL Mode l was mainly intended to enable 
various countries to have a common model for ‘international commercial 
arbitration’ and the Indian Act, 1996 has made provisions similar to the 
model law and made applicable to , what we may call, cases of purely 
domestic arbitration between Indian nationals  and that this has given rise 
to some  difficulties  in the implemen tation of the Act.  Certain problems 
which surfaced after 1996 have also been placed before us. 
  
1.6 In this report, the word s “PURELY DOMESTIC ARBITRATION 
BETWEEN INDIAN NATIONALS’ are used to refer to arbitration where 
NONE  of the parties is (i) an individua l who is a national of, or habitually 
resident in, any country other than I ndia, or (ii) a body Corporate which is 
incorporated in any country other than India; or (iii) a company or an 
association or a body of individuals w hose central management and control 
is exercised in any country ot her than India, and its words 

 9 
“INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION” is used where at least one of the 
above mentioned parties/bodies is in a country other than India.  This is done 
as a matter of convenience.  This shoul d not be confused with the proposed 
definition of the term ‘domestic arbitration’ in section 2(1)(ea). 
 
The grounds for objecting an award under sec.34 and Sec. 37 are now 
made common to purely domestic awards as well as international arbitration 
awards.  It has been suggested that the principle of least court interference of 
the award may be a fine principle for international arbitration awards but 
having regard to Indian conditions and the fact that several awards are 
passed in India as between Indian na tionals sometimes by lay men who are 
not well acquainted with law, the interfe rence with such awards should not 
be as restricted as they are in the ma tter of international arbitrations. This 
suggestion will be considered at the appr opriate stage.  The attention of the 
Commission has, in fact, been invited to a passage from Redfern and Hunter 
in Law and Practice of Inte rnational Arbitration, (2
nd Edition, pages 14 and 
15)  which reads as follows: 
 
“Amongst states which have a de veloped arbitration law, it is 
generally recognized that more freedom may be allowed in an 
international arbitration than is  commonly allowed in a domestic 
arbitration. The reason is evident. Domestic arbitration usually takes 
place between the citizens or reside nts of the same state, as an 
alternative to proceedings before the courts of law of that state…..it is 
natural that a State should wish (a nd even need) to exercise firmer 
control  over such arbitrations, involvi ng its own residents or citizens 
than it would wish (or need) to exer cise in relation to international 
arbitrations which may only take place within the state’s territory 
because of geographical convenience.” 
 
The above passage supports the view that in the matter of purely 
domestic arbitrations between Indian na tionals, the State can desire that its 
courts should have greater or firmer control on the arbitrations. 
  
At the other end, we fi nd that under the English Statutes, there has always 
been and even now, more supervision by Courts in respect of international as 
well as domestic arbitrations, than unde r the Model Law.  Sections 3 and 4 
of the English Act, 1979 allowed for the exclusion of various forms of 
appeal to the High Court if so provided for in a ‘non-domestic” arbitration 
agreement, which was defi ned to mean an arbitration agreement to which 

 10 
none of the parties was either a nati onal or resident in, or a company 
incorporated or managed in, England. It is important to note that the scope of 
interference as provided in sec.68 of  the English Act, 1996 includes wide 
interference under sec. 68(2)(a) to (i ) on grounds of  “ serious irregularity ” 
and these grounds are in fact appli cable to international and domestic 
arbitrations.  Section 4 of the Eng lish Act, 1996 refers to the mandatory 
provisions in Schedule I which cannot be contracted out.  The Schedule I 
includes among others, Sections 67 and 68 dealing with “ serious 
irregularities”.  In other words, both intern ational and domestic arbitration 
suffer increased interference from courts  in England after 1996 than in the 
UNCITRAL Model. The Department of Trade and Industry (UK) decided on 
30.1.97 that the part relating to modi fications for the purpose of domestic 
arbitration shall not come into for ce.  It quoted   the Corporate and 
Consumer Affairs Minister, John Taylor as follows: 
  
“….I have also decided that all arbitrations, whether domestic or    
          international, should be treated in the same way….” 
(see Russell on Arbitration, 1997 p.41 fn. 84)  
 
The Belgian, Swiss and Italian arbitr ation statutes do contain separate 
and special provisions applicable to international arbitrations permitting 
lesser interference by courts (see F ouchard and others , International 
Commercial Arbitration, 1999, page 54 para 105).  Therefore, it is a matter 
for consideration whether a few more  additional grounds for challenging the 
award are to be added in the case of purely domestic arbitrations. 
  
Some countries have adopted th e UNCITRAL Model as it is, while 
some other countries have adopted with some changes.  Some other 
countries, while adopting the Mode l Law, have incorporated some 
provisions from the English Act of 1996.   The latest Report of the Law 
Commission of South Africa takes note of these variations as follows in 
paragraph 2.4 of the Report:- 
 
“Sanders P "Unity and Diversity in  the Adoption of the Model Law" 
(1995) 11 Arbitration International 1 (hereinafter referred to as 
"Sanders") at pages 2-3 lists the following countries or states as 
having adopted the Model Law: Can ada in 1986 (at both federal and 
provincial level - in the provinces , with the exception of Quebec, it 
applies to international arbitrati ons only); Cyprus in 1987; Bulgaria 
and Nigeria in 1988; Australia (at federal level fo r international 

 11 
arbitrations only) and Hong Kong in  1989; Scotland in 1990; Peru in 
1992; Bermuda, the Russian Federation, Mexico and Tunisia in 1993; 
and Egypt and Ukraine in 1994.  Sanders also lists eight states of the 
United States of America as having adopted the Model Law, including 
California, Florida and Texas.  Ho wever, whereas Connecticut totally 
adopted the Model Law (Sanders 3)  it appears from a commentary on 
the Florida International Arbitra tion Act (see Loumiet C M "United 
States: Florida International Arbitration Act – Introductory Note" 
(1987) 26 ILM  949 at 960 n 13) that there are significant 
philosophical and textual differences  between the Florida statute and 
the Model Law.  Singapore adopted it fo r international arbitrations in 
1994.  Of the major industrial count ries in Western Europe, as yet 
only Germany has adopted the M odel Law.  (See the New German 
Arbitration Law, being the Tenth B ook of the German Code of Civil 
Procedure, which commenced on 1 January 1998.  An English 
translation is published in (1998) 14 Arbitration International 1-18.)  
The new German Arbitration La w adopts the Model Law with 
minimum changes and applies to both international and domestic 
arbitrations (see s 1025 and Böcks tiegel K-H "An Introduction to the 
New German Arbitration Act Based on the UNCITRAL Model Law" 
(1998) 14 Arbitration International 19 at 22-23).  New Zealand has 
also adopted the Model Law for both domestic and international 
arbitrations (see the Arbitration Act 99 of 1996, which commenced on 
1 July 1997).  (The New Zeala nd legislation is discussed by 
Richardson M "Arbitration La w Reform: the New Zealand 
Experience" (1996) 12 Arbitration International 57-66 and 
"Arbitration Law Reform: the New Zealand Experience - an Update" 
(1997) 13 Arbitration International 229-31.) The Kenyan Arbitration 
Act 4 of 1995 and the Zimbabwean Arbitration Act 6 of 1996 referred 
to in the text came into force on 1 January 1996 and 13 September 
1996 respectively.” 
 
 
That does not mean that the Commission is proposing to unduly 
increased court interference in cases of purely domestic arbitration.  In fact, 
the Commission proposes to further restri ct court interference, in certain 
respects than what is permitted by th e Model Law or the 1996 Act, both for 
international and purely domestic arbitra tion.  It proposes that all matters 
which come to the court against the aw ard are to be listed for preliminary 
hearing and could be rejected straight away before notice. It is also proposed 

 12 
to introduce a provision similar to s ec.99 of Civil Procedure Code (CPC) 
that awards should not be interfered w ith lightly unless substantial prejudice 
is shown.  It is also proposed to  remove the obstacle created by sec.36 
precluding enforcement of award merely because an application to set aside 
the award is filed and is pending.  Mere filing of such an application should 
not   amount to automatic stay of the award. Further, we propose to enable 
the court to impose conditions for comp liance with the award, partly or 
wholly, pending disposal of objections.    
 
Proposals are also being made to keep delays before the arbitral 
tribunal totally under control, by amending sections 23, 24 and 82 as also 
and inserting new sections 24A, 24B, 29 A, 37A.    Time limits are proposed 
to be imposed for passing awards subj ect to extension by Courts, however, 
providing that that, pending disposal of the application by the Court, the 
arbitration shall continue. Chapter XI is introduced for Fast Track 
Arbitration.   Sections 34 and 35 of  the Amending Act are proposed to be 
introduced to speed up arbitrations, a pplications and appeals under the Act 
of 1996 and also under the old Act of  1940. We shall advert to these 
provisions in para 1.8 hereinafter. Th erefore, it is not as if, the proposed 
amendments will increase court interven tion or thereby delay arbitration.  
On the other hand, the proposed amendments will speed up pending and 
future arbitrations. 
 
1.7 Other aspects brought to the notice of the Commission  
 
Several other aspects in the wo rking of the 1996 Act have been 
pointed out. Some of these can be referred to at this stage itself briefly to 
substantiate why the Commission has now  felt that it is appropriate to 
propose amendments to the Act.  Of c ourse, not all of these suggestions are 
being accepted by the Commission.                                                                                    
 
It has been stated that in severa l cases, Indian parties have been 
deprived of a right to seek prompt-interim relief under section 9 of the Act 
from the Court before the commencemen t of arbitration proceedings and 
after the award, in international arb itration awards, or after the passing of 
such awards where the seat of arbitra tion is outside India because sec.2(2)  
confines Part I of the Act to arbitrations in India.  This, it is said, has resulted 
in serious prejudice to Indian parties who are not able to obtain any interim 
orders under sec. 9 before commencemen t of international arbitration or 
during or after conclusion of the proceed ings, from Indian courts. In several 

 13 
cases the awards might remain only on pa per, at the end of the day.  This 
anomaly has led to conflicting judgments  in the High Courts. In fact all 
countries which have adopted the UNC ITRAL Model, apply Arts. 8, 9, 35 
and 36 of the Model Law to an international arbitration where the seat of 
arbitration is outside that country.  This was not noticed when the 1996 Act 
was passed. 
 
 It has been pointed out that inasmuch as there is no need to file an 
award in the Court under the new Act, th ere is a scope for tinkering with the 
award.  There is no public record of th e contents of the award.  Obviously, 
Stamp and Registration laws can easily be contravened under the new Act. 
  
Divergent views have been expre ssed as to the stage at which 
jurisdictional issues could be decided a nd also as to whether orders of the 
Chief Justice of India or his nominee or that of the Chief Justice of the High 
Court or his nominee, as the case may be, appointing arbitrators-should be 
treated as administrative orders or as judicial orders.   Treating the orders 
under Sec. 11 as administrative has led to several writ petitions being filed in 
the High Courts raising jurisdictiona l grounds and consequently stay of 
arbitration proceedings being obtained. 
 
It has been pointed out that sec. 8 of the Act has deviated from the 
Model Law by omitting  the words ‘unle ss it finds the agreement is null and 
void, inoperative and incapable of being enforced.’  It has also been pointed 
out that where the arbitrator rejects objections relating pleas of bias or 
disqualification under sec. 13 or objections as to jurisdiction under sec.16 by 
way of interim decision, no immediate right  of appeal is provided as in Art. 
13 or Art. 16 of the Model Law and parties have to go ahead with the 
arbitration proceedings till the award is  made.  This may involve them in 
waste of money by way of fees to arbitr ators and lawyers. This  again is a 
deviation from the Model Law.  Even af ter the award,  the objection relating 
to rejection of a plea of bias or juri sdiction is not included in the list of 
grounds specified under sec. 34.  It has  again been pointed out that while an 
appeal is permitted, where the award d eals with a dispute not contemplated 
by or not falling within the terms of the submission or matters beyond the 
scope of the submission for arbitration, no ground  is provided in a case 
where the arbitrator omits or refuse s, in spite of an application under 
sec.33(4) to decide an issue which defi nitely arises out of the pleadings of 
the parties.  It has been pointed out  that if arithmetical or typographical 
mistakes are not corrected after following the procedure under section 33(1),  

 14 
there is no remedy.  Similarly, it is stated that if no reasons are given in spite 
of the provisions of section 31(3) , there is no remedy.  Though, under 
section 28 the substantive law has to be followed, no provision is made in 
section 34 if there is an error of law a pparent on the face of the award.   Of 
course, some participants in se minars suggested that grounds of 
‘misconduct’ of the arbitral proceedi ngs must also be included in the 
grounds of challenge in section 34.  
 
 It has also been proposed that a provision similar to sec.21 of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 is necessary so that whenever, during the pendency of 
a suit or proceeding or appeal in High Court or Supreme Court, parties could 
agree to go to arbitration.  In such  cases, specific provision must also be 
made to enable objections to the award to be filed in the same court which 
referred the matter to arbitration rath er than driving them again to the 
District Court.  For example, if af ter 20 years of litigation, the Supreme 
Court, by consent of parties, refers the matter to arbitration, the objections 
have now to be filed in the District  Court according to the  recent judgment 
of the Supreme Court in P. Anandagjapathi Raju  vs. P.V.G. Raju (2000(4) 
SCC 539 = AIR 2000 SC 1886), while under the Act of 1940, they could be 
filed in the Supreme Court, since th at was the court which referred the 
parties to arbitration.   
 
It has been pointed out that section 43(3) is to be amended because of 
the amendments to section 28 of the Indian  Contract, 1872, in 1997.  By 
that amendment to the Indian Contract Act, the provision which  
extinguishes a right to a remedy even before the expiry of the time fixed in 
the Limitation Act, 1963, has become bad and hence there is no longer any 
need for approaching court to remove hardships. 
 
It has been pointed out that there is a conflict of judgments as to 
whether the time limits fixed in sec tion 11(4) and (5) of the 1996 Act are 
mandatory or not and whether in the event the opposite party does not 
appoint any arbitrator within the period, a party cannot move the court under 
section 11 for appointment.  It is also stated that section 11(6) does not fix 
any time limit. 
 
Under section 9, it is said that a party may obtain an interim order 
before taking steps for arbitration a nd after getting the order, he may not 
take steps to have an arbitrator appointed .  It is pointed out that section 9 is 
badly drafted and requires restructuring.   

 15 
 
It is urged that clauses in the contract  which enable a party to appoint 
his own employer or adviser or consultant  to be an arbitrator violate section 
18 of the 1996 Act relating to equal treatment to the parties. 
 
It was suggested that some more  powers are to be given to the 
arbitrators to see that their interim orders or dates of hearing given by them 
are duly honoured.  It is said that a “fast track procedure” may be proposed 
by way of a Schedule.  Sec tion 42, it is said, is va gue and requires a detailed 
restructuring.  Several important am endments to section 37 have been 
suggested to cover appeals against or ders passed by the arbitral tribunal 
under sections 13 and  16 where  certain  jurisdictional pleas are rejected by 
the tribunal.   
 
We are referring to these aspects only to point out the nature of 
defects that have been placed before the Commission for its consideration. 
 
 The above important aspects are, th erefore, the starting point of the 
review of the 1996 Act by the Commission.  The Commission prepared a 
Consultation Paper 
(Annexure-II) and held two Semina rs, one in Mumbai 
and another in Delhi in the months of February and Ma rch, 2001 and gave 
wide publicity to the Paper by putting it on the website.  Retired Judges and 
leading lawyers were invited for the Semi nars.  Several of them participated 
and also gave written notes putting forth their ideas.  During these seminars 
there was consensus on various proposal s and also divergence on some of 
the proposals.  Proposals not contained in the Consultation Paper were also 
exhaustively discussed.  Even in the month of May 2001, responses as well 
as fresh proposals have been received by the Commission. 
 
 In the light of the above, the Commission re-examined the proposals 
and has also considered the fresh propos als which were placed before it.  It 
has considered the various responses , either accepting or rejecting the 
suggestions in this Report.   
 
The Commission has accepted some of the proposals and has rejected 
a large number of other proposals.  In  fact, several proposals made in the 
Consultation Paper (Annexure-II) have not been accepted by the 
Commission in this report.  The Commi ssion has kept in mind the warning 
to keep away from any ‘mind-set’ of  the 1940 Act but it has also taken care 

 16 
to keep away from the other ‘mind-set’  that no amendments  at all need be 
made.  
 
1.8 Major reforms in speeding up pending and future arbitrations, 
applications and appeals under the 1996 Act and also under the 
1940 Act.  
 
The Supreme Court has, time and ag ain, lamented that there is 
enormous delay in the arbitral proce ss in our country.  We have already 
referred to the said remarks.  It has, therefore, been decided by the 
Commission that some serious reforms must be brought in to speed up the 
entire arbitral process, both before the arbitral tribunal and before the Courts, 
whether such proceedings are pending under the 1996 Act or under the 1940 
Act.   
 
Section 5 of the Act of 1996 is pr oposed to be amended by adding an 
Explanation as to the meaning of the words ‘any other law for the time being 
in force’.  Under the Explanation, th e above words will include the Code of 
Civil Procedure (5 of 1908), any law pr oviding for internal appeals within 
the High Court (like Letters Patent, or  High Court Acts) and any law which 
provides for intervention by one judicial authority in respect of orders passed 
by another judicial authority (e.g. tr ibunals under the Consumer Protection 
Act).  The effect of the Explanation is that intervention by resorting to 
remedies under all the above laws will be barred. 
 
So far as the procedure before the arbitral tribunal is concerned, the 
proposal is to amend sections 23 and 24 of the 1996 Act by permitting the 
arbitral tribunal to fix time schedules for filing pleadings and for recording 
evidence (including affidavit evidence) and omitting from the said sections 
those clauses which permit parties to  fix up the procedure or the time 
schedule.  The proposals under sections  23 and 24 give full power to the 
arbitral tribunal to fix the procedure and time schedule for filing of pleadings 
and for recording evidence and said time schedule shall be binding on the 
parties or those who represent them.  Further, under the proposed section 
24A, the arbitral tribunal is empowered to take serious action if its orders are 
not complied with and under the proposed  section 24B, the parties or the 
arbitral tribunal may approach the Court for implementation of the orders of 
the arbitral tribunal and the Court is gi ven wide powers to take steps to have 
such orders implemented.  The above said provisions in sections 23, 24, 24A 
and 24B are proposed to be applied not only to future proceedings under the 

 17 
new Act of 1996 but also the pending pr oceedings under the Act as also the 
pending proceedings under the 1940 Act, before the arbitrators. 
 
Next, for future arbitrations unde r the 1996 Act, the arbitrators will 
have one year and thereafter anothe r period not exceeding one year as 
agreed by the parties, under the proposed section 29A, for passing the award.  
Thereafter, if the award is not passed,  parties are to move the Court for 
extension and if the parties do not appl y, the arbitrators can also apply for 
the same.  Till the application is ma de, the arbitration proceedings are 
suspended, but once an application is made to the Court, the arbitration 
proceedings shall continue and are not to be stayed by the Court.  On the 
other hand, the Court shall pass an or der within one month fixing the time 
schedule or it may also pass orders as  to costs taking into account various 
factors which have led to the dela y and also the amount already spent 
towards fee etc.  The Court will continue to pass such orders granting time 
and fixing the procedure, till the award is passed.  The above procedure is 
also to be applied to arbitrations  which are pending under the 1996 Act for 
more than three years as provided in sec. 33 of the amending Act.  
Applications under section 34(1) to se t aside awards and appeals under sec. 
37(1) are to be disposed of within six months and appeals under sec. 37(2) 
within three months from the date of  commencement of the amending Act.  
A similar procedure is envisaged for future applications and appeals. 
 
For the purpose of speeding up of pending arbitration proceedings 
under the 1940 Act, separate provisions are proposed to be made in sec. 34 
of the Amending Act for granting one year for completion, failing which the 
procedure indicated in sec. 29A of the Court fixing the time schedule will 
apply, till the award is passed. 
 
So far as pending applications unde r the old Act of 1940 to make the 
award a rule of Court or objections to  set aside an award and appeals under 
sec. 39 of the old Act are concerned,  under sec. 34 of the Amending Act, 
they have to disposed of within one y ear from the date of the amending Act.  
Pending appeals/revisions against interim orders in proceedings arising out 
of the old Act are to be disposed of within six months from the date of the 
amending Act. 
 
The Commission hopes that the above reforms contained in the 
proposed amendments to sections 23 and 24, addition of proposed sections 
24A and 24B and sections  29 of the Principal Act, 33 and 34 of the 

 18 
Amending Act are many sections will bring about a welcome change in the 
attitude of all persons connected with ar bitrations – namely, the parties, the 
persons who represent them, the arbitrators and the Courts, and that hereafter 
not only arbitrations and Court pro ceedings under the Act of 1996 but also 
those under the 1940 Act, which are s till pending, will all get a big push 
within one year from the commencemen t of the proposed amending Act and 
the blot upon the Indian arbitration system will stand removed. 
 
Great care has been taken to see th at there is no change in the law 
relating to international arbitration.  

 19 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 Discussion on the proposals fo r amendments and Commission’s 
recommendations 
 
 The Law Commission after receiving representations regarding 
certain drawbacks in the working of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 published a Consultati on Paper on the subject and circulated it among 
the lawyers, judges and academicians to obtain their views.  It also 
conducted seminars at various places to discuss the working of the 
provisions of the Act.  In the light of representations,  responses to the 
Consultation Paper and deliberations in the seminars as also views of the 
experts in the field, the Commission has considered various provisions of the 
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 (herei nafter referred to as the Principal 
Act).   The Commission has accepted so me of the proposals made in the 
Consultation Paper but has not fina lly carried forward a number of 
suggestions made in the Consultati on Paper. The Commission proposes to 
deal in this Chapter various issues section-wise. 
 
 
2.1.1 Definitions - Section 2 
 
“Court” 
  
Section 2(1)(e) reads as follows: 
 
“Court” means the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction 
in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide 
the questions forming the subject-m atter of the arbitration if the 
same had been the subject-matter of a suit, but does not include 
any civil court of a grade inferior  to such principal Civil Court, 
or any Court of Small Causes;” 
 
  This provision defines 'Court’ as th e principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction in the district and includes the High Court wherever the High 
Court is exercising Original Jurisdiction. 
 

 20 
 The sections which use the word `Court’ are sec.9 (interim measures), 
sec.14(2) (impossibility on the part of the arbitrators to act), sec. 34(3) 
(filing of objection to the award), sec.36 (enforcement of award), sec.37 
(appeals), sec.39 (2) and (4) (lien and de posit), sec.42 (jurisdiction) and sec. 
43 (limitation). 
 
 The term `Judicial authority’ is used  in sections 5 and 8.  Here this 
term can also mean a District Court or  a Court subordinate to the District 
Court or the High Court on the original side.  It may also refer to a quasi 
judicial authority.  What ever the meaning intende d, the word 'judicial 
authority' includes a `Court’. 
 
 It has been proposed that in section 2(1)(e), the court of the Principal 
Judge of the City Civil Court in a c ity should also be included.  This 
suggestion made in the Bombay seminar has been accepted to avoid any 
unnecessary controversy. 
 
2.1.2 After such amendment, sec. 2(1)(e) will read as follows: 
  
“(e) ‘court’ means the principal Ci vil Court of original jurisdiction 
in a district, the Court of principal judge of the City Civil court  of 
original jurisdiction in a city and includes the High Court in exercise 
of its ordinary original civil jurisd iction, having jurisdiction to decide 
the questions forming the subject matter of an arbitration if the same 
had been the subject matter of a su it, but does not include any civil 
court of a grade inferior to such pr incipal Civil Court or to such Court 
of the principal judge City Civ il Court, or any Court of Small 
Causes;” 
  
 Recently, it has been held in Western Shipbreaking Corpn.  Vs. Clase 
Haren Ltd. (UK): (1997(3) Guj L.R. 1985) that the Additional District Judge 
cannot deal with an application under sec.8 of the 1996 Act but that the word 
'District Judge' includes a 'Joint District Judge'.  It is, therefore, proposed to 
make a provision enabling the principal c ourt in a district or a court of the 
principal Judge of a City Civil Court in  a city to transfer matters under this 
Act to other Courts of co-equal jurisdicti on in the district or city, as the case 
may be, to reduce congestion in the prin cipal courts.  This will help matters 
to be transferred to Additional Cour ts having powers and jurisdiction under 
various sections, viz., section 8 and proposed sections 8A, 17A, 29A and 
section 34 etc.  

 21 
 
2.1.2A The proposed addition to sec. 2 enabling transfer of matters 
from the Principal Courts to the Courts of co-ordinate jurisdiction, will read 
as follows: 
     
 “(10) The principal Civil Court of or iginal jurisdiction in a district or 
 the Court of the principal judge, C ity Civil Court exercising original 
 jurisdiction in a city, as the cas e may be, may transfer any matter 
 relating to any proceedings under the Act pending before it to any 
 court of coordinate jurisdiction, in the district or th e city, as the case 
 may be, for decision from time to time.  
 
2.1.3 Need for defining the scope of ‘domestic arbitration’,         
‘international arbitration’ and ‘international commercial arbitration’  
 
The words ‘International Commercial Arbitration’ are used in the 
Explanation to section 1(2), and in sections 11(9), 11(12)(a) and section 
28(1)(a) and (b) of the 1996 Act. 
 
 Section 2(1)(f) which defines th e term “International Commercial 
Arbitration” requires that at least one  of the parties is a national of, or 
habitual resident in, any country other than India or a body corporate 
incorporated in any country other than India, or a company or an association 
or a body of individuals whose central management and control is exercised 
in any country other than India or the government of a foreign country. 
 
 The Act has made a deviation from the Model Law. The model law 
lays emphasis on one of 
three factors namely the parties or place of 
arbitration or the subject matter.  Th e 1996 Act lays stress on the parties’ 
residence and nationality.  But, the Commi ssion is of the view that there is 
no need to amend this part of the definition in section 2(1)(f). 
 
 The word ‘commercial’ occurs in sec.2(1)(f) of Part I and  sec.44 of 
Part II of the Act (dealing with New York Convention).  Sec.44 uses the 
expression ‘foreign awards’ to a limited class of awards falling within sec.44 
and one of the conditions is that the aw ard must have been made in one of 
the reciprocator States notified by the Central Government under the Foreign 
Awards Recognition and Enforcement Act, 1961.  India is a signatory to this 
Convention subject to two reservations. 
 

 22 
 It is not in dispute that there are “international arbitration awards” 
which do not fall under Part II, may be because the dispute is not 
‘commercial’ or the agreement is not in writing or the award is made in a 
non-reciprocating state.  The Act in Pa rt I covers awards where all parties 
are of Indian nationality and award is ma de in India and also to international 
commercial awards, i.e., where at least one party is not an Indian national, 
where the seat of arbitra tion is in India.  Both these types of awards are 
called  ‘domestic awards’ under sec.2(7).  This is the broad  nomenclature 
used in the Act.   
 
 It has been suggested that the wo rd ‘commercial’ can be dropped so 
that the Act can apply to all interna tional arbitrations, whether commercial 
or not, where the seat of arbitration is  in India.  There is force in this 
suggestion.  Firstly, as disclosed fro m the case law dealing with New York 
Convention, on several occasions, an issue arises as to whether the 
arbitration is ‘commercial’ in nature.  This leads to unnecessary litigation.   
Secondly, there is no reason to omit from sec.2(1)(f) in Part I an arbitration 
which is international in nature but which is not ‘commercial’.  There was 
no dissent from this view during the di scussion on the Consultation Paper.  
The Indian Chamber of Commerce of Bombay, in fact, made a specific 
suggestion through a report prepared by a group of retired Judges of the 
High Court and others, for omission of the word ‘commercial’. 
 
 In fact, even in regard to the New York Convention some countries 
have withdrawn the ‘commercial’ reservation.  By letter dated 17.11.1989 to 
the Secretary General, UN, the French Government which ratified the New 
York Convention in 1959, withdrew the re servation so as to give the widest 
scope to the Convention. Out of 121 countries which adopted the New York 
Convention, only one-third  have made the ‘comme rcial’ reservation by 
1999. 
 
 There is one other reason as to w hy the word ‘commercial’ has to be 
dropped.  The 1985 UNCITRAL Model Law itself watered down the 
distinction by including in its definition a wide range of matters as is clear 
from the footnote below the definition in Art.1(1).  It says that the term 
‘commercial’ must be given a wide meaning to cover matters arising from 
all relationships of a commercial natu re and would also include any trade 
transaction for the supply or exchange  of goods or services; distribution 
agreements; commercial representation of agency; factories; leasing; 
construction work; consulting engineeri ng; licensing; investment; financing; 

 23 
banking; insurance; exploitation agreem ent or concession; joint venture or 
other forms of industrial or busine ss cooperation; carriage of goods or 
passengers by air, sea, rail and road.  The ‘footnote’ below Article 1(1) of 
the Model Law states that the above e numeration is not to be understood as 
being exhaustive.   
 
Unfortunately in sec.2(1)(f) of the 1996 Act, this wider definition of 
the UNCITRAL Model had not been refe rred to, even by way of a foot note 
or by way of an Explanation. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to apply Part I of the Act to international 
arbitrations whether commercial or not, where the place of arbitration is in 
India.  The result is that sec.2(7) shall now include international non-
commercial awards also, where the seat of arbitration is in India.   
 
 In order to remove any confusi on in understanding as to what is a 
domestic arbitration, it is proposed to define ‘domestic arbitration’ as an 
arbitration in India  where none of the parties are nationals of a country other 
than India. The definition include shall “international arbitration” in India, 
whether commercial or not, where at least one of the parties is a national of a 
country other than India and where the place  of arbitration is in India.  The  
definitions of the terms “domestic arbitration” and “international  
arbitration” are proposed to be added in section 2 of the Act and the existing 
definition of the term “internationa l commercial arbitration” mentioned 
under section 2(1)(f) is also proposed to be substituted in  next paragraph.  
These  definitions will help in understanding section 2(2) and 2(7) better.  
 
  Article 1(3) of the Model Law wh ich defines international arbitration 
does not refer to a company which is incorporated in a country being under 
the central management and control from outside that country.  Section 202 
of Title 9 of the Federal Arbitration Act of the USA also states that the 
incorporation of a company in USA will be sufficient to deem the company 
as the citizen of USA. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to drop the word ‘company’ from sub-clause 
(iii) if clause (f) of section 2(1).  Th e word ‘body corporate’ in sub-clause 
(ii) of section 2(1)(f) will obviously include a body corporate incorporated 
under a statute or under the Indian Co mpanies Act, 1956.  The same method 
is adopted in the new definition of ‘domestic arbitration in the proposed 
section 2(1)(ea).   

 24 
 
2.1.3A The new definitions as proposed will be as follows: 
 
(ea) ‘domestic arbitration’  means an arbitration relating to disputes 
arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, where 
none of the parties is,- 
(i) an individual who is a national of , or habitually resident in, any 
country other than India; or 
(ii) a body corporate which is inco rporated in any country other 
than India; or 
(iii) an association or a body of individuals whose central 
management and control is exerci sed in any country other than 
India; or 
(iv) the Government of a foreign country, 
 
and shall be deemed to include , international arbitration and 
international commercial arbitration where the place of arbitration is 
in India. 
 
(eb) ‘international arbitration’  means an arbitration relating to 
disputes arising out of legal relati onships, whether contractual or not, 
and where at least one of the parties is,- 
(i) an individual who is a nationa l of, or habitually resident 
in, any country other than India; or 
(ii) a body corporate which is incorporated in any country 
other than India; or 
(iii) an association or a body of individuals whose central 
management and control is exercised in any country 
other than India; or 
(iv) the Government of a foreign country: 
 
(f) ‘international commercial arbitration’ means international 
arbitration considered as commercial under the law in force in India; 
 
 
2.1.4 “Judicial authority”: Proposed  section 2(1)(fa) -   
   
 In view of the judgment of the S upreme Court in Fair Air Engineers 
Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M.K. Modi, AIR 1997 SC 533, holding that 'judicial authority' 

 25 
in sec.34 of the 1940 Act includes a quasi-judicial tribunal like the consumer 
court, it has become necessary to  defi ne the term  'judicial authority' in 
section 2(1).  In fact, in the above  case, a reference was made to 1996 
Ordinance which preceded 1996 Act. This  aspect has been dealt with under 
section 8 (see para 2.4.1 to 2.4.4).  As stated hereinaf ter in detail under 
section 8, , it was requested, at the Bomb ay seminar, that in section 8, the 
words “judicial authority” must include quasi-judicial statutory bodies also.   
 
 The definition of 'judicial authority' proposed to be added in section 
2(1) is as follows:- 
 
“(fa) judicial authority' includes any quasi-judicial statutory 
authority;" 
 
2.1.5  Application of Part I – Section 2(2):   
 
Section 2(2) occurs in Part I of the 1996 Act and reads as follows: 
 
“Section 2(2): This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in 
India.” 
 
In view of the new proposed de finition of the term "domestic 
arbitration" in proposed section 2(1)(ea)  and section 2(2) is proposed to be 
amended by introducing two clauses, viz., (a) and (b). 
  
Clause (a) will read as follows:- 
 
"(a)  This part shall apply to domestic arbitration".  
 
The study relating to proposed clause (b) is carried out in subsequent 
paragraphs.  This will mean that Part I of the Act will apply to the cases of 
purely domestic arbitrations between  Indian nationals and also in 
international arbitrations where at leas t one party is not an Indian national, 
and in both such arbitrations, the place of  arbitration is in India.  These two 
types come under the definition of ‘domestic arbitration’.  The word 
‘domestic’ signifies ‘all the arbitrations in India’. 
 
The existing sec. 2(2) is in confor mity with the broad principle in 
international commercial arbitration that (subject to exceptions as decided by 
the Courts in various countries) the ar bitration is governed by the law of the 

 26 
country where it is held, namely, the “s eat” or “forum” or “laws arbitri” of 
the arbitration.  Such provisions ar e contained in the Geneva Protocol 1923 
and the New York Convention, 1958. 
  
2.1.6 Omission in Section 2 (2) of the Ac t in not applying sections 8, 9, 35, 
36, to international arbitration outside India: 
 
 Some problems have arisen in cases  of international arbitration where 
the seat of arbitration is outside India.  It is part of the law of arbitration in 
several  countries to allow a few provisi ons of their arbitration statutes to 
apply to international arbitrations he ld outside their countries.  Such 
provisions are those which correspond to  Articles  8, 9,  35 and 36 of the 
Model Law.  In this behalf, there ha s been a serious omission in the 1996 
Act in not following the provisions of the UNCITRAL Model Law.  This 
has led to litigation. 
 
(i)  Omission  to apply sec. 9 to international arbitrations outside 
India to be rectified-  
 
 We shall first take up the disadvantag es so far as omission of section 9 
is concerned. In cases of international arbitration where the seat of 
arbitration is outside India, a serious controversy has arisen in the Indian 
Courts.  These are cases where interim measures could not be granted by 
Indian courts under Section 9 to an Indian national before commencement of 
arbitration (or after the award) against property of a foreign party.  By the 
time the Indian party takes steps to move  the courts in the country in which 
the seat of arbitration is located, the property may have been removed or 
transferred.   
 
Art. 1(2) of the Model Law reads as follows: 
 
“Art. 1(2): The provision of the la w, except Articles 8, 9, 35 and 36 
apply only if the place of arbitration is in the territory of the State.” 
 
(Art. 9 of the Model Law corresponds to sec. 9 of the 1996 Act). 
 
This aspect somehow escaped attenti on, when sec.2(2) was drafted in 
the 1996 Act.  That section confined Pa rt I (including sec tions 8, 9, 35 and 
36) only to arbitrations where the place of arbitration is in India.  As stated 
above, this provision has caused serious prejudice to an aggrieved party in as 

 27 
much as these provisions do not apply to  international arbitrations where the 
place of arbitration is outside India, or  where the seat of arbitration is not 
defined in the arbitration agreement. 
 
 Almost all countries which ha ve adopted the UNCITRAL Model 
apply provisions in their legislation corresponding to Art.8, 9, 35 and 36 to 
international arbitration held outside their countries. 
 
 The Delhi High Court, in certain  judgments, took the view that 
sec.2(2) read with sec.2(5) would enable  sec.9 to be applied even in cases of 
international arbitration held outside India (see Dominant Offset pvt. Ltd. vs. 
Adamovoske Strajirny : 1997(2) Arb.L.R.335 (Del), Suzuki Motors 
Corporation vs. UOI 1997(2) Arb. L.R. 477 (Del) and in Marriot 
International Inc.  vs. Ansal Hotels  1999(82) DLT 13.  Similar view was 
taken by the Delhi High Court by a Bench in Olex Forcas Ltd.  vs. Skoda 
Export Co. Ltd.  AIR 2000 Delhi 161, referring in sec.2(5).  But a contrary 
view has been taken by a nother Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in 
Marriot International Inc. vs. Ansal Hotels 1999(82)DLT 13 and it held that 
interim measures could be granted in  such cases.  The Calcutta High Court 
has also held in East Coast Shipping Ltd. vs. M.J. Scrap (P) Ltd. 1977(1) Cal 
HN. 444 that interim measures could be granted in view of the clear 
language in sec.2(2).  A Division Bench in Kaventers Agro Ltd. vs. Seagram 
of the same High Court (APO 449, 448/97,  dated 27.1.98) has also taken the 
same view. 
 
 The Supreme Court Judgment in Thyssen Stahlunion GMBH  vs.  
Steel Authority of India Ltd. : 1999(9) SCC 334 did refer to sec.2(2) and 
sec.2(7) but this aspect did not directly fall for consideration. 
 
 There has been an absolute unanimity  that this deficiency in sec.2(2) 
has to be immediately remedied by making sec.9 (and other provisions like 
sections 8, 35 and 36) applicable to international arbitrations where the place 
of arbitration is outside India or where the place of arbitration is not 
specified in the arbitration agreement. 
 
 In fact, the provision in sec.2(3) of the English Act, 1996 applies sec.9 
even to other international arbitrati ons where no seat of arbitration is 
referred to in the arbitration agreement.  It also extends the support of sec.43 
and 44 of that Act to such arbitration.   Section 43 of the English Act deals 

 28 
with ‘securing the attendance of witnesse s’ and is akin to sec. 27 of the 
Indian Act 1996.  
 
Therefore, in sec. 2(2) it can be stated that the provisions of sec. 9 and 
sec. 27 shall also apply to interna tional arbitrations where the place of 
arbitration is outside India or where the place of arb itration is not specified 
in the agreement. 
 
(ii) Omission to apply sections  8, 35 and 36 to  international 
arbitrations outside India to be rectified:  
 
It has been noticed that Art. 1( 2) of the Model Law makes not only 
Art. 9 but also Articles 8, 35 and 36 of the Model Law applicable to such 
international arbitrations where the seat of arbitration is outside the country. 
In fact, almost all statutes of various countries which have adopted the 
UNCITRAL Model Law do permit the app lication of provisions of their 
statutes which correspond to Arts. 8, 35 and 36 of the Model Law. There is 
need to extend the provision of sections 8, 35 and 36 also to such 
arbitrations, apart from sec. 9 and sec. 27 as stated above.  The reason is that 
in a suit or other legal proceeding f iled before a judicial authority under 
sec.8 of the 1996 Act, where one of the pa rties is not an Indian national, the 
opposite party may plead an arbitration clause where the place of arbitration 
is outside India or the place of arbitra tion is not specified. In such cases, the 
Court must be enabled to refer the pa rties to arbitration under sec.8. Some 
objections based on reciprocity have b een raised in this behalf but the 
Commission is of the view that the 1996 Act is one of the statutes which 
deals with alternative methods of reso lution of disputes and the need to 
encourage such procedures should override considerations of reciprocity.        
Sections 35 and 36 of the Act deal  with recognition and enforcement 
of the arbitration awards. In the case of arbitration of an international nature 
where the place of arbitration is outside India or is not specified, then it is 
necessary to make sections 35 and 36 of  the Act to be invoked rather than 
stipulate that parties are to obtain a judgment in a foreign Court on the basis 
of award and then file a suit in India for enforcement in cases not covered by 
sec. 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC).  
Section 27 deals with Court assistance and this is also be applied to 
international arbitrations outside India. 

 29 
 
 Thus, sections 8, 9, 27, 35 and 36 are to be applied to international 
arbitrations where the place of arbitration is outside India or where the place 
of arbitration is not specified.  
 
2.1.7 An amendment to this effect is being proposed in clause (b) of section 
2 (2) as follows: 
  
“(b)  Sections 8, 9, 27, 35 and 36 of this Part shall apply also to 
international arbitration (wheth er commercial or not) where the 
place of arbitration is outside I ndia or is not specified in the 
arbitration agreement." 
 
2.2.1 ‘Extent of Judicial Intervention’: Section 5 of the Act 
 
 Section 5 corresponds to Art. 5 of the Model Law but has a non-
obstante clause added at the beginning of the section. It is to be noted that 
the important purpose of Art. 5, acco rding to the UN Commission, was not 
to negate court intervention altogether or cut down the proper role of courts 
but to list out, in the national law, a ll the situations which permit court 
intervention and exclude any plea ba sed on a remedy outside the Act or 
based on a residual power of the national courts.  (See paras 62 and 63 of the 
UN Commission’s Report (1985) on the Ad aptation of Model Law).  These 
paragraphs are worth quoting and read as follows: 
 
“In advancing the second objec tion, it was emphasized that 
article 5 expressed an excessively  restrictive view as to the 
desirability and appropr iateness of court intervention during an 
arbitration.  It was to the advantage of businessmen who 
engaged in international commerc ial arbitration to have access 
to the courts while the arbitration was still in process in order to 
stop an abuse of the arbitral procedure.  Furthermore, a 
limitation of the authority of the c ourts to intervene in arbitral 
proceedings might constitute an unwarranted interference in the 
prerogatives of the judicial power , and might even be contrary 
to the constitution in some States.  Finally, even if the authority 
of the court to intervene in supe rvision of an arbitration might 
have to be limited, the court should have a broader power to act 
in aid of the arbitration.  It was suggested, as a possible means 
of softening the extremely rigid ch aracter of Article 5, to give 

 30 
the parties to an arbitration the authority to agree on a more 
extensive degree of court superv ision and assistance in their 
arbitration than was furnished by the Model Law. 
 
 In response to the second objection, it was pointed out 
that resort to intervention by a court during the arbitral 
proceedings was often used only as a delaying tactic and was 
more often a source of abuse of the arbitral proceedings than it 
was a protection against abuse.  The purpose of Article 5 was to 
achieve certainty as to the maximum extent of judicial 
intervention, including assistance, in international commercial 
arbitrations, by compelling the drafters to list in the (Model) 
Law on international commercial arbitration all instances of 
court intervention.  Thus, if a need wa s felt for adding another 
such situation, it should be expressed in the Model Law.  It was 
also recognized that, although the Commission might hope that 
States would adopt the Model La w as it was drafted, since it 
was a model law and not a conve ntion, any State which might 
have 
constitutional problems could extend the scope of judicial 
intervention when it adopted th e Model Law without violating 
any international obligation.” 
  
  Article 5 of the Model Law read s: “in matters governed by the law, no 
court shall intervene except where so provided in this law”.  Corresponding 
section 5 of the 1996 Act contains a non-obstante clause which reads as 
follows: 
 
“Section 5: Notwithstanding any thing cont ained in any other law for 
the time being in force, in matters  governed by this Part, no judicial 
authority shall intervene except where so provided in this Part”. 
 
 The important question is as to what is the meaning of the words ‘in 
matters governed by this part’ and ‘inter vene’. Do they mean ‘intervention 
only after the arbitrators are appointed or only during the continuance of 
proceedings before the arbitral tribuna l? In the view of the Commission, the 
above words have to be liberally construed keeping in mind the broad 
purpose of sec. 5.  The purpose is to k eep court intervention restricted to the 
situations expressly indicated in the Act and to exclude all other remedies. 
The exclusion is not confined to the stages after the arbitral tribunal is 
appointed nor to the period during the pendency of the arbitration 

 31 
proceedings alone. The remedies exclude d are those that may be otherwise 
available, right from the stage of interim measures under sec.9 before the 
commencement of arbitration and also at the stage of reference to arbitration  
under sec. 8 in pending actions or at th e stage of appointment of arbitrators 
under section 11 applications.  
 
 In the view of the Commission, wher e, for example, orders under sec. 
9 relating to interim measures are passe d by a civil court as defined in sec. 
2(1)(e), the remedies under sec. 115 C.P.C. or under Letters  Patent or High 
Court Acts are excluded.  This is the effect of sec tion 5.  Then again, if in a 
matter filed before a Judicial author ity, an application under sec. 8 for 
reference is allowed or dismissed by the said authority all remedies to 
challenge the same under sec. 115 C.P.C. or under Letters Patent or the High 
Court Acts or by resort to the special remedies under the statute applicable to 
the Judicial authority are excluded.   
 
Similarly, under sec. 11 of the Act, if arbitrators are appointed by the 
High Court or not appointed, then such orders will not be amenable to 
Letters Patent or the High Court Acts, if they are passed by any single Judge 
of the High Court.  
 
It is proposed to add an Explanati on in section 5 at the end to make 
this position clear as stated hereunder: 
 
“Explanation:-  For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
the expression ‘any other law for the time being in force’ shall always 
be deemed to include,- 
(a) the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908); 
(b) any law providing for internal appeals within the High Court; 
(c) any enactment which provides for intervention by a judicial 
authority in respect of orders passed by any other judicial 
authority.” 
 
Thus the result of the “non-obstant e” clause will be to override ‘any 
other laws’ and interference under any la w is prohibited.  The policy of the 
Act being least court intervention, th e Commission is of th e view that the 
non-obstante clause need not be deleted.  In fact even with its deletion, the 
result will not be different in view of the words ‘except where so provided in 
this Part’.  Instead an Explanation as stated above,  is to be added below 
section 5, to strengthen the section and remove any doubts. 

 32 
 
Section 89 CPC 
 
2.2.2 In the context of Section 5, it has also been pointed out that in view 
the introduction of sec. 89(1)(a) and sec. 89(2)(a) in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, the courts in India woul d be empowered to refer matters to 
arbitration, and sec.5 should except sec. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure.   
(the amendment to the Code has been  passed by the Parliament but has not 
yet come into force as the date of its enforcement has not yet been notified).   
The Commission is of the view that ther e is no need to except section 89 of 
the Code from section 5 of the 1996 Ac t inasmuch as section 89 merely 
requires the application of the 1996 Ac t.  There is no conflict between 
section 5 of the 1996 Act and section 89 of the Code.  We may explain 
further.    
 
 Section 89 empowers the Court to re fer matters to arbitration if the 
Court thinks that a settlement is possi ble.  This power under Section 89 does 
not depend on the agreement of partie s.  On the other hand, the 1996 Act 
deals with reference to arbitration unde r an arbitration agreement.  As and 
when the provisions of sec. 89 come in to force, the reference by the Court 
will be governed by the provisions of th e present Act, 1996, so far as may 
be, as provided in sec. 89 itself.  Hence no amendment is necessary in 
section 5 of the Act in this behalf.  Further, if a reference is made by the 
court under section 89 CPC, such a reference, in the view of the 
Commission, does not fall under section 2(4)  inasmuch as the arbitration is 
not by an arbitrator appointed under the statute, i.e., the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, as is the case unde r the Cooperative Societies Acts. 
Similarly, section 42 is also not a ttracted because, there is no agreement 
between parties nor any a pplication before court.  There is, therefore, no 
need to except Section 89 CPC from Section 5 of the Act to make provisions 
in Section 42 of the 1996 Act. 
 
 Once a reference is made under s ection 89, the provisions of the 1996 
Act will apply.   
 
2.2.3 Of course, it is obvious that the words ‘notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force’, used in sec. 5 will 
not come in the way of the exer cise of powers under Art.227 of the 
Constitution of India by the High Court or under Art.136 by the Supreme 
Court of India in as much as these are constitutional provisions.   (See para 

 33 
62 of the U.N. Commission Report which no tices such a possibility).  We 
are referring to this aspect  because when we come to sec.8 of the Act which 
uses the words ‘judicial authority', orders passed by such judicial authorities, 
- if they are orders of quasi-judicial tribunals, they may be amenable to the 
above provisions in Art.227 and Art.136. 
 
2.2.4 In the result, the ‘non-obstante’ cl ause in section 5 is retained and an 
Explanation as stated earlier is proposed to be added. 
 
2.2.5 Administrative Assistance:  Amendments proposed in Section 6: 
 Section 6 of the Act as it stands now, reads as follows: 
“Administrative assistance :  In order to facilitate the 
conduct of the arbitral pro ceedings, the parties or the 
arbitral tribunal with the c onsent of the parties, may 
arrange for administrative assistance by a suitable 
institution or person”. 
 The above section was drafted on the model of Art. 8 of the 
UNCITRAL Report on Adoption of C onciliation Rules (prepared by the 
United Nations Commission on Internati onal Trade Law), which was, more 
or less, in the same language.  In fact, in that Report it was suggested that if 
the conciliators arrange fo r administrative assistance, they must not merely 
consult the parties but must also obtain the their consent. 
 
 In practice, however, at any rate in India, it is becoming increasingly 
common for arbitration proceedings be ing conducted at e xpensive venues.  
On several occasions, even when the proceedings last for a very short 
duration, the parties have to pay for a whole day.  If the venue is a five-star 
hotel, the expense will be heavier. Par ties feel embarrassed if they have to 
reject request for an expensive venue. 
 
 On the other hand, there are places available, which are fairly decent 
and not as costly as five star hotels.  Several public institutions do make their 
conference rooms available for arbitration and all facilities are available at 
inexpensive rates.  The Commission ha s been informed that in certain 
arbitrations which have been continui ng for years, the costs of meeting the 
expenses of the venue are running into lakhs of rupees.  One party who is 
rich enough may agree but another, not so rich, may not, but may have to 
share the huge costs ultimately, depe nding upon the order of the arbitral 
tribunal as to cost in the award. 

 34 
  
After taking into account these probl ems and with a view to reduce 
arbitration expenses for the parties,  the Commission proposes that section 6 
be amended as follows: 
 
“Section 6  Administrative assistance:-  In order to facilitate the 
conduct of the arbitral proceedi ngs, the parties may arrange for 
administrative assistance by a suitable institution or person”. 
  
 We are making this am endment applicable to pending arbitrations 
also.  We hope this amendment will help in reduction of costs of arbitration. 
 
   
2.3.1 Arbitration agreement: Section 7   
 
Sec.7 defines ‘arbitration agreemen t’ and is almost a verbatim 
reproduction of Art.7 of the Model Law except that a single paragraph in the 
Model Law is split up into different clause s.  It has been suggested that the 
definition of ‘arbitration agreement’ in sec.5 of the English Act of 1996 is 
wider than sec. 7 of the Indian Ac t of 1996 and can be  adopted under sub-
section (4) of Section 7 of our Act because the term includes, under sub-
section (4) of section 5 that “an agreem ent which is endorsed in writing if an 
agreement made otherwise than in writing is recorded by one of parties or by 
a third party, with the authority of the parties to the agreement.” 
 
The Commission is of the view that it is not necessary to amend sec.7 
of the Act by bringing into it the provisi on of sec.5(4) of the English Act, 
1996 in as much it is likely to result in  unnecessary litigation if the clause is 
to be based only on a record of one of the parties or of a third party. 
 
 It has been suggested that sec.5(2)(a) of the English Act says in 
brackets “whether or not it is signed by the parties” and those words should 
be introduced in section 7 of 1996 Act.  Now sec.7(3) says that an arbitration 
agreement shall be in writing.  Sec. 7(4)(a) suggests that an arbitration 
agreement is in writing if it is containe d in a document signed by the parties.  
In as much as sec.7(4)(a) does not us e the word ‘only’, it does not appear 
that it is a mandatory requirement that  the agreement must be signed.  In 
fact, the Supreme Court has held under the 1940 Act in 
Jugal Kishore 
Rameshwardes vs. Mrs. Gorbbi  AIR 1955 SC, Banardas vs. Carve 
Commission AIR 1963 SC 1417 (1425) and Satish Chandra vs. State of UP 

 35 
AIR 1983 SC 347: 1983(2)SCC 141 that a submission must no doubt be 
made in writing but need not be signed.  All that is necessary is that there 
should be a formal written agreement a nd the parties should agree to submit 
present and future disputes to arbitra tion.  This legal position was declared 
under sec.2(a) of the 1940 Act which us ed the words ‘written agreement’ 
and did not refer to any requi rement of signature of the parties.  In view of 
the law declared by the Supreme Court,  and the specific language of section 
7(4) it is considered not necessary to use the words “whether signed or not” 
as used in sec.5 of the English Act. 
 
2.3.2   It has been suggested that “share brokers” use certain documents 
which contain an arbitration clause  and these documents are received by 
other parties without demur, that is to say, accepting the clause by conduct.  
In the Bombay seminar, it was suggested  that this contingency is to be 
provided for in section 7(4)(b).  This  suggestion is accepted.  Hence certain 
other words are required to be added in sec. 7(4)(b).   
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to s ubstitute following words for the words 
‘an exchange of letters’ in section 7 (4) (b)  
 
“any written communication by one pa rty to another  and accepted 
expressly or by implication by the other party, an exchange of letters.”  
 
2.4.1 Amendments to Section 8  
 
‘Judicial authority’ in section 8 & proposed sec. 2(1)(fa) and new sub-
section (3) to section 42: 
 
 Several suggestions have been made with regard to section 8.  We will 
deal with these suggestions one after another.  Whether the term ‘Judicial 
authority’ in sec. 8 includes quasi judicial statutory authorities. 
 
Section 8 deals with a situation wh ere an action is filed before a 
“judicial authority” and the opposite party relies on an arbitration clause, and 
in such a situation the Court ‘shall’ refer the matter to arbitration.  The 
Supreme Court has held that by using the word ‘shall’ (in contrast to the 
word ‘may’ used in sec. 34 of the old Act of 1940), there is no discretion 
vested in the Judicial authority and th e reference to arbitration is mandatory 
(See 
P. Anandagajapathi Raju  vs. P.V.G. Raju  (2000)(4) SCC 539: AIR 
2000 SC 1886).  It is not proposed to deviat e from this principle.  It is true 

 36 
that the English Act still retains the disc retionary part in sec. 86 of that Act 
so far as domestic arbitration is con cerned but even in England, the said 
provision in section 86 has not been brought  into force and it is, in fact, said 
that it is not likely to be brought in force. 
 
 A two judge Bench of the Supreme Court has held in M/s. Fair Air 
Engineers Private Ltd.  vs. M.K. Modi  (AIR 1997 SC 533) while dealing 
with the identical words ‘judicial authority’ used in the corresponding 
provision, sec.34 of the old Act of 1940, that the said words will cover 
Consumer Courts.   It was held that the consumer fora are quasi judicial 
bodies falling within the meaning of the words ‘judicial authority’ and could 
refer disputes to arbitration, if the parties before the fora are parties to 
arbitration agreements.  Though the case arose under the 1940 Act, specific 
reference was made in the judgmen t to the Ordinance of 1996 which 
preceded the present Act and to section 8 of the Ordinance, interpreting it as 
applicable to quasi-judicial authorities also. 
 
2.4.2 In this context, we have also to refer to a latter three judge judgment 
of the Supreme Court in Skypack Couriers Ltd. vs. N.K. Modi (200(5) SCC 
294), wherein the Court set aside an award made by a third party to whom 
the National Consumer Commission referred the dispute for final 
adjudication without any further scope fo r filing objections.  In the order of 
the National Commission making the referen ce, it was stated that they were 
not invoking the provisions of the Arb itration Act but were referring the 
matter to a third party for consensual adjudication.  The Supreme Court set 
aside the award and held that the Commission could not have adopted the 
above procedure of reference to a thir d party, for final decision without a 
right to file objections thereto.  At the same time, the Supreme Court stated 
that it was not deciding whether the cons umer courts could refer matters to 
arbitration under the Arbitration laws.  We are referring to this case only to 
highlight that the earlier decision in M/s. Fair Air Engineers Ltd.  vs. M.K. 
Modi was neither referred to nor overruled in the Skypack Courier case. 
 
2.4.3 In the Consulta tion Paper ( Annexure II ), it was proposed that the 
words ‘judicial authority’ be droppe d and the words ‘Courts’ substituted 
instead.  This proposal was made keeping in view that the remedies that may 
be resorted to for questioning orders passed by different ‘judicial authorities’ 
may not be uniform.   But in view of the subsequent discussion in various 
seminars, it was pointed out that it would be better if quasi judicial 
authorities  before whom some actions are pending, are in a position to refer 

 37 
matters to arbitrators, wherever relian ce is placed upon an arbitration clause.  
The Commission is of the view that th e words ‘judicial authority’ can be 
retained to enable easy reference to arbitration under section 8 itself by the 
judicial authority concerned, (as held in Fair Air Engineers case ) before 
whom the matter may be pending rather than drive the party who is relying 
on the arbitration clause to a separate application under sec.11. 
 
2.4.4 It is true that remedies agains t an order passed by different judicial 
bodies under sec.8 may normally be different.  But because of sec. 5, remedy 
under sec.115 Code of Civil Procedure is barred and the remedy may be 
only under Art.227 of the Constitution of India.  If it is an order passed by 
any quasi-judicial statutory authority, th en because of sec. 5,  the remedy 
under the special Act applicable to the tribunal is barred and remedy may be 
only under Art.227.   Therefore, there is no scope for different remedies 
becoming available under different special  statutes applicable to different 
quasi-judicial authorities. Thus the remedies are perhaps restricted to Art. 
227.  Therefore the word ‘judicial aut hority’ will remain and will, therefore, 
cover quasi-judicial tribunals also as per the law declared by the Supreme 
Court in 
Fair Air Engineers case .  We have already referred to the proposal 
to add a definition of 'judicial authority' in section 2(1) as follows: 
  
Section 2(1)(fa): ‘judicial authority’ includes any quasi-judicial 
statutory authority. 
 
2.4.5 Whether certain preliminary issues at the stage of section 8 could 
be decided 
 
 We then turn to another and more im portant aspect  In Art. 8(1) of the 
Model Law, it is provided that the cour t before which an action is brought 
shall, if an arbitration agreement is pleaded, refer the parties to arbitration 
”unless it finds that the agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable 
of being performed ”.  These words have been  omitted in sec.8 of the 1996 
Act.  The result of the omission is th at, in view of sec.5, the judicial 
authority cannot decide if the arbitr ation agreement is ‘null and void, 
inoperative or incapable of being performed’.  In the Consultation Paper 
(
Annexure-II), it was proposed that sec.8 is to be amended to bring it in 
conformity with Art.8(1) of the Mode l Law, so as to enable the judicial 
authority to decide these jurisdictional issues at the initial st age.  It has been 
suggested at the Bombay seminar th at the ‘judicial authority’ may be 
empowered, if need be, to decide these issues, in case they can be decided on 

 38 
admitted facts or documents and without receiving oral evidence and if there 
is no likelihood of delay. 
 
 As far as deviation of the 1996 Ac t from the Model Law is concerned 
(as set out above), the only reason one can  find is that any decision rejecting 
the plea that the agreemen t is ‘null and void, inoperative or incapable of 
being performed’ may be challenged and th at this may lead to delay in the 
commencement of arbitrati on proceedings.  But even otherwise, any order 
under Section 8 is amenable to Art. 227 of  the Constitution of India.  So this 
cannot be a good reason to exclude these words.    
 
 Now these words have been th ere in the corresponding provision 
under the New York Convention, 1958 and are retained in sec.45 of the 1996 
Act.  In other words these words are re tained in Part II in sec. 45, however, 
they have been omitted  in sec.8 of Part I. 
 
 This aspect was exhaustively c onsidered by the UN Commission in its 
1985 Report (Report of the United Na tions Commission on International 
Trade Law on the work of its 18 Session,  21 August, 1985).   In its para 91, 
the U.N. Commission referred to the fundamental principle that if the 
jurisdictional issues were first raised  before court, “priority should be 
accorded to the court proceedings by recognizing power in the courts  to stay 
the arbitral proceedings or, at least,  by precluding the arbitral tribunal from 
rendering an award”.  The UN Commission felt  that the above words were 
to be retained in Art.8 and that the ar bitral tribunal is to be permitted, to 
continue the proceedings (including the making of an award), while the issue 
of jurisdiction is before the Court.   
 
 
The UN Commission in the said Repor t regarding deliberation of the 
Commission leading to the adoption of UNCITRAL Model in para 92 states:  
 
“It was pointed out that expenses could be saved by awaiting the 
decision of the Court in those cases where the Court later ruled against 
the jurisdiction of the arbitral tr ibunal.  However, it was for that 
reason not recommendable to provide for a postponement of the 
court’s ruling on the jurisdiction of th e arbitral tribunal.  Furthermore, 
where the arbitral tribunal had seri ous doubts as to its jurisdiction, it 
should either decide it under Art.16(2) as a preliminary issue or await 
the court’s decision." 

 39 
 
 Thus the UN Commission considered th is aspect in depth and retained 
the words “null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed” in 
the Model Law. 
 
 The above words ‘null and void etc. ’ which have been copied from  
the New York Convention, 1958 in to Art.8 of the Model Law are also found 
in the statutes of various countries which have adopted the Model Law  (See 
for example, section 1032 of the German  Act, 1998, Art. 9 of the  Korean 
Act 1999, Art 8 of the Canadian Act 1986,  Art.  8 of the Zimbabwe Act, 
1996 and also sec.15 of the British Columbia Act 1996 which is supposed to 
have been kept in view when the 1996 Act was drafted, see Dr. P.C. Rao’s 
Commentary on the Act at p.9).   
 
Section 9(4) of the English Act, 1996 also includes these words in the 
corresponding section and calls for a deci sion at that stage itself as done in 
the Model Law and other statutes which followed the Model Law. 
 
 Redfern and Hunter in Law and Practice of International 
Commercial Arbitration  (1999) (see para 3.34) ha s cited an example to 
show why these words have to be retained.  They explain as follows: 
 
“Suppose, for example, that one of th e parties claims that it was not a 
party to the main contract ("that’s  not my signature"), and therefore 
not a party to the arbitration clause within that contract.  If it is right, 
there can be no valid arbitration a nd no valid award.  No amount of 
insistence upon the autonomy of the ar bitration clause (i.e., Art.16) 
can make it valid if the respondent was not a party to it.” 
  
Russell in Russell on Arbitration  (21st Edn. 1997) (para 7.005) says: 
“if the arbitration agreement itself is  challenged the Court will have to 
decide its validity before granting stay  of the legal proceedings…The Court 
will however lean towards giving effect to  the arbitration agreement if at all 
possible”. 
 
Fouchard and others in International Commercial Arbitration 
(1999) have made an important distinction  between similar cases which 
come under sec.8 and those which come under sec.16 of our Act, i.e., cases 
which start from the court and cases wh ich are already before the arbitral 
tribunal to start with.  The authors said that these issues can  be left to be 

 40 
decided by the arbitral tribunal in cases where reference is made by parties 
without court assistance but not if the matter starts from the court.  They said 
(see para 680): 
 
“If the dispute is already before the arbitral tribunal, i.e., under sec.16, 
the Courts have no jurisdiction, because of the risk of deliberate delay.  
On the other hand, the attitude of a plaintiff who brings its dispute 
directly before the Courts is less lik ely to be in bad faith.  Since the 
dispute has not yet gone before the arbitral tribunal, the idea of 
avoiding duplication of effort re surfaces: the court will retain 
jurisdiction to rule on the merits of the dispute only if it considers the 
arbitration agreement to be  patently void.” 
  
The above reasons are, in the opinion of the Commission, very 
weighty and cannot be ignored.  Russell sa ys  that these words also include 
by implication a situation where there is no arbitration agreement or where it 
is invalid or is one to which the app licant (opposite party) is not a party.  
(Russell on Arbitration Act, (1999) (S ee 7.013, 7.004, 7.007 and 7.006).  It 
may also be a case where the plainti ff or petitioner before the judicial 
authority is not a party to the arbitra tion clause.  According to the decisions 
of our Supreme Court, under sec.20 of the old Act this jurisdiction covers 
also cases where there is no dispute  in existence.  In all these situations, 
should the judicial authority fold its hands ?   In fact, even if the Court is not 
to decide at that stage a nd the arbitral tribunal alone is to first  decide these 
issues, such a decision of the tribunal will anyway be subject to the decision 
of the Court ultimately.  Can’t time and money be saved by permitting these 
issues to be decided at this stage ? Or can we make a flexible provision in 
order to prevent delay at this stage ? 
 
Under sec.34 of the Act of 1940, the Supreme Court held that before 
the Court allows an application for refe rence to arbitration, the Court could 
decide about the existence, validity of the arbitration clause or its binding 
nature on the plaintiff or whether the applicant was a party bound by the 
clause or if there was a dispute. (See 
UOI vs. Birla Cotton Spg & Wg. Mills, 
AIR 1997 SC 6; Anderson Wright Ltd.  vs. Molan & Co., AIR 1955 SC 53; 
ITC Ltd.  vs. George Joseph Fernandes  AIR 1989 SC 839; Security & 
Finance (P) Ltd.  vs. Gurcharan Singh , 1969 SC WR 877).   But perhaps 
now, in view of sec. 5, unless the Court is empowered to decide these issues, 
it will have no jurisdiction under section 8 of the 1996 Act. 
 

 41 
2.4.6 Situations in which the prelim inary issues are to be decided under 
sec.8: 
 
It has been suggested at the Bomb ay seminar by retired Judges of the 
High Court that the position under sec. 8 and sec. 11 of the Act in this behalf 
should be similar.  They proposed th at a discretion may be conferred under 
sec. 8 and sec. 11 upon the Court to deci de the jurisdictional issues if facts 
are all admitted and documents are not in  dispute and if oral evidence is not 
to be adduced and there is no likelihood of undue delay .  They had proposed 
a similar discretion to be vested in the judicial authority under sec. 8 to 
decide these jurisdictional issues on the same lines.  In fact, the Model Law 
and the New York Convention give no choice to the judicial authority and it 
has to decide these jurisdictional issues at the initial stage.   
 
The proposal that is being made by us will, therefore, be an 
improvement over what is contained in Art. 8 of the Model Law or the New 
York Convention 1958  inasmuch as we are not compelling the judicial 
authority to decide these issues at the initial stage but we are proposing to 
vest a discretion upon the judicial authority to decide these issues, only if the 
documents and facts are admitted and no oral evidence is required and if the 
inquiry is not likely to be delayed and if the judicial authority thinks that 
costs could be saved .  This liberal procedure is also proposed to be 
introduced in sec. 11.  Today arbitrati on costs are very heavy.  Even if a 
simple issue is to be decided, the arb itral tribunal will have to list the case at 
least six times before even pleadings are completed.  In  cases where there 
are three arbitrators each ad journment can cost at leas t a lakh of rupees.  To 
eliminate this expense, we propose to  adopt the procedure as provided under 
Section 32 (2) of the English Act, 1996 that the court could decide these 
issues at the stage of Section 8 only,  if facts and documents are not in 
dispute and if it is found that no oral evidence is necessary.  We, therefore, 
propose not to include in sec. 8, th e compulsive element for a decision on 
these jurisdictional issues, as in Ar t. 8 of the Model Law and we are 
providing a flexible provision which we al so propose to provide in sec. 11.  
Our approach here is, therefore, better than under Art. 8 of the Model Law or 
under the New York Convention, 1958 and will have the advantage of 
cutting down arbitration costs substantia lly.  These issues will be decided 
only if the relevant documents are not in dispute and oral evidence is not 
necessary and there has b een no delay in raising the issues and the Court 
feels that arbitration costs can be saved. 
 

 42 
 Our recommendations in this beha lf are made at the end of the 
discussion under section 8. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to bring sec.8 in conformity with the Model 
Law by adding the words ‘unless it finds that the agreement is null and void, 
inoperative or incapable of being performed’, or there is no agreement in 
existence or no dispute in existence at the end of sec.8(1), subject to the 
discretionary power to decide these i ssues or not as mentioned above and 
these proposals are contained in the proposed sub-sections (4) and (5) of 
section 8 as extracted below. 
 
2.4.7 Provision to be made for stay of action in case reference is made 
under sec.8: 
 
 A question was also posed in the seminars as to what should happen 
to the action that has been filed before the ‘judicial authority’ in the event of 
a reference to arbitration is made unde r section 8.  The Commission is of the 
view that a separate sub-section should be added that in the event of a 
reference being made under section 8, the action before the judicial authority 
should remain stayed and the stay should  be subject to the result of the order 
of the judicial authority on jurisdic tional issues.  For example, if the 
agreement is declared void or not in existence or not enforceable, the action 
filed before the judicial authority has to go on for disposal on merits.   
 
2.4.8 Section 8(3) 
 
Whether parallel arbitrations under section 8 and section 11 are permitted by 
section 8 (3): 
 
 Sub-section (3) of section 8 states that notwithstanding that an 
application has been made under secti on (1) of that section and that the 
issues pending before the judicial authority, an arbitration may be 
commenced or continued or an arbitral award made.   
 
 There have been certain cases wher e even after the judicial authority 
has referred the matter to arbitration or has referred to refer the dispute to 
arbitrators, the arbitrators appointed  by one of the parties earlier, are 
continuing to deal with the disputes. 
 

 43 
 It is proposed to rectify this problem by adding a provision below sub-
section (3) of section 8 to the effect th at the decision of the judicial authority 
shall be binding on the parties and that the arbitrators otherwise appointed 
have to cease to perform their functions .  Primacy has to be given to the 
judicial authority’s order, i.e., 
passed after hearing the parties , including the 
party who has already appointed an arbitral tribunal. 
 
 Of course, in case the judicial authority holds that there is no 
arbitration agreement or dispute that the agreement is null and void etc., the 
arbitration which has already commenced, has to terminate. 
  
The above aspects are provided by way of a proviso to sec. 8(3). 
 
(Proposed section 8 (6) is also extr acted here but it is dealt with 
separately in para 2.7.1) 
 
2.4.9 The following amendments are proposed in sec. 8 
 
In section 8 of the principal Act,-  
 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely,- 
 
“(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), a judicial 
authority before which an action is  brought in a matter which is the 
subject of an arbitration agreement sh all, if a party so applies not later 
than when submitting his first st atement on the substance of the 
dispute, unless it has to decide any questions referred to in sub-section 
(4) as preliminary issues under that sub-section, refer the parties to 
arbitration. 
. 
 
(1A) The judicial authority before  which an action is brought shall 
stay the action before it for the pur pose of deciding the questions set 
out in sub-section (4) and the stay so granted shall be subject to the 
outcome of the  orders that may be passed under the said sub-section 
and sub-section (5).” 
 
 

 44 
(b) in sub-section (3),the following provi so shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:- 
 
“Provided that the arbitration proceeding so commenced 
shall stand terminated if th e judicial authority, after 
hearing all the parties, passe s an order under sub-section 
(4) to the effect, namely:-. 
 
(a) that a reference to ar bitration cannot be made 
because of its decision on any question referred 
to in clauses (a) to (e) of that sub-section; or 
 
(b) that though a reference to arbitration has to be 
made  ,the proceedings have to be conducted by 
a different arbitral tribunal.”  
 
 
 
 
    (c )  after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall  be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
“(4)  Where an application is made to the judicial authority by a party 
raising any question - 
 
(a) that  there is no dispute in existence; 
(b) that the arbitration agreement or any clause thereof is 
null and void or  inoperative; 
(c)  that the arbitration agr eement is incapable of being 
performed; 
                        (d)  that the arbitration agreement is not in existence ; 
                         
 

 45 
the judicial authority may, subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(5), decide the same. 
 
 
(5) Where the judicial authority finds  that the questions mentioned in 
sub-section (4) cannot be decided because,- 
 
(a) the relevant facts or documents are in dispute; or 
(b)  oral evidence is necessary to be adduced; or 
(c)  the inquiry into these questions  is likely to delay reference to 
arbitration; or 
(d)  the request for deciding the question was unduly delayed; or 
(e) the decision on the question is not likely to produce substantial 
savings in costs of arbitration; or 
(f)  there is no good reason why thes e questions should be decided at 
that stage,  
it shall refuse to decide the said questions and sha ll refer the said 
questions also to the arbitral tribunal for decision. 
 
(6) If the Judicial authority holds that though the arbitration agreement 
is in existence but it is null and void or inoperative or incapable of 
being performed and refuses to stay the legal proceedings, any 
provision in the arbitration agreem ent that the award is a condition 
precedent for the initiation of legal proceedings in respect of any 
matter, will be of no effect in relation to the proceedings.” 
 
2.4.10  Proposed section 8(6): Scott vs. Avery clause  
 
 
 A Scott vs. Avery clause is one which requi res an award to be first 
obtained as a condition for starting any le gal proceedings.  Such a clause is 
intended to see that parties do not bypass arbitration clauses and go to a 
Court of law so as to compel the oppos ite party to raise a plea based on the 
existence of an arbitrati on clause.  Both in England and in India, such 
clauses have been upheld. 
 
 However, there was a provision in sec. 19 of the 1940 Act for 
supersession of the arbitration agreemen t by the Court in certain situations. 

 46 
The old Act therefore had to deal w ith a situation where the arbitration 
clause was superseded by the Court, for, in that event, a party would not be 
in a position to obtain an award and then the condition of first obtaining an 
award would be a condition impossible of being complied with.  Hence sec. 
36 of the old Act provided that in case the arbitration agreement is 
superseded, the Court should also supersede the 
Scott vs. Avery clause.  A 
further provision was made in the old Ac t in sec. 37(2) that so far as the 
period of limitation is concerned, once the arbitration clause and the Scott 
vs. Avery clauses are not applicable, the period has to be reckoned from the 
date of the cause of action as done  normally.  Thus sec. 37(2) was 
consequential to sec. 36 which was in itself consequential to an order of 
supersession of the arbitration clause under sec. 19 of the old Act. 
 
 The 1996 Act makes a deviation and there is no provision 
corresponding to sec. 19 of the old Act for superseding an arbitration clause.  
Hence, the legislature rightly droppe d a provision corresponding to sec. 36 
and sec. 37(2).  This is understandable. 
 
 But then, we have to refer to anothe r similar situation that can arise as 
per the proposals made by us for amendi ng sec. 8 of the principal Act of 
1996 enabling the ‘judicial authority’ to decide (i) whether an arbitration 
agreement is null and void, (ii) i noperative or (iii) not capable of 
enforcement (iv) whether there is a dispute in existence or  (v) whether there 
is an arbitration clause in existence.  Of these contingencies, if under (i), (ii) 
and (iii), it is held by the judicial aut hority that the agreement which is in 
existence is null and void or inoperative or incapable of enforcement, then, 
the arbitration agreement cannot be of any help and it is not possible to 
obtain an award initially, as required by the Scott vs. Avery clause.  In that 
event, a provision has to be made that  the ‘judicial authority’ under sec. 8 
will refuse to stay the legal proceeding and will decide it on merits.  In other 
words, in as much as it is not possible in contingencies (i), (ii) and (iii) to 
pass an award though the arbitration clause is in existence, it is necessary to 
have a provision that the Scott vs. Avery  clause requiring an award to be 
obtained as a condition precedent is not applicable.  Therefore, a provision 
nullifying the Scott vs. Avery clause in situations covered by contingencies 
(i), (ii) and (iii) above referred to, ha s to be made as unde r the English Act, 
1996. 
 
 The English Act, 1996 contains a provision similar to the proposed 
sec. 8 and enables the Court to decide  whether an arbitration agreement is 

 47 
null and void or inoperative or incapable of enforcement.  If these pleas are 
accepted, the Court will refuse stay of the legal proceeding and decide the 
said proceeding on merits.  The English Act, 1996, therefore, made a special 
provision in sec. 9(5) that in case the arbitration agreement goes out of 
operation on any of these grounds, the Scott vs. Avery clause does not apply.  
Sec. 9(5) of the English Act, 1996 states as follows: 
 
“Section 9(5):  If the court refuses to st ay the legal proceedings, any 
provision that an award is a cond ition precedent to the bringing of 
legal proceedings in respect of any ma tter is of no effect in relation to 
the proceedings.” 
 
Therefore, in view of the proposal  to amend sec. 8 conferring power 
on the judicial authority to decide issues (i), (ii) and (iii), referred to above, a 
provision similar to sec. 9(5) of the English Act, 1996 becomes necessary, 
stating that if the judicial authority decides that the agreement is null and 
void, inoperative or unenforceable, then it will proceed to decide the legal 
proceeding on merits and refuse stay a nd that there is no need to obtain an 
award as a condition precedent.  Accordi ngly, it is proposed to have such a 
provision by inserting sub-section (6) in  sec. 8 as already mentioned in 
preceding para 2.4.9. 
 
2.4.11  Necessity for a separate provision in sec. 42 as to the forum 
where subsequent applications includi ng those under section 34 to set 
aside the award  are to be filed in cases arising under section 8 – 
proposed section 42 (3): 
 
 Here we are filling up an omission in sec. 42 of the 1996 Act in as 
much as it was not noticed that the action could be filed in Courts 
subordinate to the Principal District Cour t.  The question is as to what is to 
be done in the event of the applica tion being allowed and an award being 
passed by the arbitral tribunal and as to  where the objections or subsequent 
applications are to be filed.  This  aspect will again be dealt with in 
discussion under Section 42.   
 
Under the old Act of 1940, in view of the very general definition of 
‘Court’ in section 2 (e), objections to  the award could be filed under sec.39 
of that Act in the same court in wh ich the legal proceeding was stayed and 
which made the reference to arbitration.  Here Section 2 (1) (e) defines court 
differently.  What is to happen if the action under sec. 8 is filed before a 

 48 
Judicial authority which is a Court s ubordinate to the principal District 
Court. 
 
 Firstly, one would think prim a facie that under the 1996 Act, 
objections to the award could be filed before the same ‘judicial authority’ 
i.e., the subordinate Court which made th e reference.   Bu t Section 42 refers 
only to a ‘court’ as defined in Section 2 (1) (e).  Secondly, In view of the 
enlarged meaning proposed to be given to the words ‘judicial authority’, as 
including quasi-Judicial statutory authorities, it is not possible to direct 
objections to the award to be filed before “judicial authorities” which are not 
courts in the strict sense and which are only quasi judicial statutory 
authorities.  At the same time it is necessary to see that applications for 
setting aside awards are filed uniformly in one court (This will be so except 
under the proposed section 8A to same extent).  We proposed to resolve 
these two issues arising under sec. 42 in the context of sec. 8. 
  
Section 42 requires that if an appli cation has been filed in a court,  
then all subsequent applications under the Act are to be filed in the same 
Court.  In the case of section 8 whic h relates to reference by a ‘judicial 
authority’ having original jurisdiction,  if the judicial authority is the 
Principal District Court or the Court of the Principal Judge, City Civil Court 
or the High Court in its original jurisdiction, sec. 42 can apply in all its 
terms.  The action under sec. 8 can also be one before a court   inferior status 
to the above principal court.  In su ch a situation, we propose that the 
subsequent applications should be filed in the Principal Court of the District 
or City, as the case may be , as aforesaid and not in the inferior Court.  
Similarly, if the initial action is befo re a quasi-judicial authority like the 
District Consumer Forum or the State Commission or the National 
Commission – all of which have also or iginal jurisdiction – and where the 
said authorities refer matters to arbitr ation, all subsequent applications 
should be filed not before those tr ibunals which might have made the 
references to arbitration but the applica tions have to be filed in the Court as 
defined in Section 2 (1) (e).  To this effect, we are rectifying an omission in 
sec. 42 and we are clarifying the positi on by adding a sub-section in Section 
42, viz., Section 42 (3). 
  
 In view of what we have stat ed already under sec.5, there is no 
question of such orders on the jurisdic tional issues passed on the application 
referred to in sec.8 being challenged under sec.115, Code of Civil Procedure 
Code, 1908 or Letters Patent or Hi gh Court Acts or under any remedy 

 49 
provided by the special law applicable to  the judicial authority.  All these 
remedies are clearly excluded. Of c ourse, in cases wh ere the ‘judicial 
authority’ is subordinate to the High C ourt, an application may perhaps be 
filed under Art. 227 of the Constitution of India.  The Report of the UN 
Commission (see paras 62, 63 extracted earlier) accepts the availability of a 
constitutional remedy.  After all  Art.227 is also discretionary.  
 
 So far as future applications under sec. 34(1) or other applications in 
matters where reference to arbitra tion is made under sec. 8, see the 
discussion under sec. 42, in para 2.30.1 and the relevant sub section (3) of 
section 42 in para 2.30.3 and 2.30.6. 
 
2.5.1 Proposed section 8A: Separate provision for reference where, pending 
proceedings in courts of law, the parties agree to have the disputes 
referred to arbitration and corresponding amendments in Section 42(4) 
  
Under section 21 of the Act of 1940 there was a specific provision 
enabling a court to refer disputes to arbitration, pending suits or proceedings, 
if parties so agreed.  In fact in seve ral cases the trial courts or after long 
years of litigation, the High Court and the Supreme Court have been 
referring matters to arbitration because of subsequent agreement of parties 
with a view to shorten litigation.  The absence of such a provision in the Act 
of 1996 has given rise to serious difficulties.  As it is, sections 8, 11 and 16 
apply only in cases where there is already an ‘arbitration agreement’ 
between parties well before  the parties have gone to Court.  We are now 
considering a case where after parties go to court, they agree to resolve 
disputes by arbitration. 
 
 The UNCITRAL model, no doubt, does not expressly provide for a 
contingency where at any stage during the pendency of legal proceedings 
before a court of law, parties agree to go for arbitration.  Sometimes, it 
happens that after fighting litigation fro m the trial court upwards, the parties 
decide at the stage of an appeal in the High Court or the Supreme Court to 
go for arbitration. The British Columbia  Act, 1996 (which is said to have 
been followed while drafting the 1996 Act, (see Dr. P.C. Rao, The 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, A commentary 1997 edn., page 9), does 
contain in section 36 a provision simila r to section 21 of the 1940 Act which 
reads as follows:- 
 
 " Section 36: Reference by Court Order 

 50 
(1) The Court may order at any time that the whole matter, a question 
of fact arising in a proceeding, other than a criminal proceeding, be 
tried before an arbitrator agreed by parties if - 
 
(a) all the parties intende d, and not under disability, 
consent; 
(b) the proceeding requires a prolonged examination 
of documents or a scientific or local investigation 
before a jury or conduc ted by the Court through 
its other ordinary officers, or 
(c) the question in dispute consists wholly or partly 
matters of account". 
 
 Though there is no corresponding provision in the 1996 Act to cover 
such a case, the Supreme Court implied such a power in sec.11.  A separate 
provision is now proposed to be made to deal with agreements for arbitration 
entered into after the filing of suits before  courts.  Of course, this is different 
from what is proposed in sec.89 of the Code of Civil Procedure as stated 
earlier.  (That section has not yet come  into force).  That section would 
permit the Court, if it appears to the Court that there exist elements of 
settlement, to refer parties to arbitrati on, conciliation or to Lok Adalat or to 
mediator.  Section 89 does not depend upon consent of parties. 
 
 There are two cases of the Suprem e Court on this point.  The Supreme 
Court had occasion to deal with a civil proceeding which came up from the 
High Court in appeal from a suit in P. Anandagjapathi Raju vs. P.V.G. Raju 
(2000(4) SCC 539 = AIR 2000 SC 1886).  In Tamil Nadu Electricity Board  
vs. Sumathy 2000 (4) (SCC 543 = AIR 2000 SC 1603) the High Court had 
appointed an arbitrator in a writ petition  where damages were claimed 
against the Tami Nadu Electric ity Board on account of death by 
electrocution.  Reference to arbitration was made by the court after the 1996 
Act and award was passed which became a decree.  It was sought to be 
attacked in appeal to the Supreme C ourt.  The Board contended that the 
High Court could not have appointed an arbitrator by relying upon Articles 
21 and 226 of the Constitution.  This contention was rejected following the 
judgment in P. Anandgajapthy Raju’s  case.  The Supreme Court held that 
Section 8 of the Act applied not only to arbitration agreements entered into 
before the commencement of the suit or other proceeding but also those 
entered into pending suit or other proceedings. 
 

 51 
 To the above extent the problem was solved. But the Supreme Court 
still held that under section 2(1)(e) of  the 1996 Act, the award decree could 
be questioned only before the Court in which a suit for the relief could have 
been filed.  The result was that litigati on would start again, in the ‘Court’ as 
defined in Sec. 2(1)(e) and then m ove up to the High Court and Supreme 
Court. 
 
 It has been pointed out during the discussion on the Consultation 
Paper ( Annexure-II) that sec. 42 of the 1996 Act requires that further 
proceedings need be taken in the same  court and that the Supreme Court in 
the case of Sri P.Anandagujapathi Raju (supra) did not notice this provision 
when it directed the award to be filed in the principal District Court as 
defined in sec.2(1)(e). 
 
 Without going into the controversy, it is decided to have a separate 
section enabling reference to arbitra tion in pending legal proceedings, i.e., 
suits or appeals or writ petitions by any c ourt if parties so agree and file an 
application for reference to arbitration.   Application to set aside the award 
has to be filed before the same court which made the reference except in the 
case of courts co-equal, or inferior in rank to the principal civil court in the 
district or the court of the Principal J udge City Civil Court, in the city.  In 
such cases the subsequent applications including applications to set aside the 
award, will be made to the aforesaid Principal courts. These aspects will be 
covered by proposed section 8A and proposed amendments to section 42 
(see proposed section 42 (4) and Explanations proposed thereto). 
 
 In fact, in the 76 th Report of the Law Commi ssion, this aspect was 
dealt with in the context of making amendments to section 21 of the 1940 
Act (see paras 7.1 to 7.3).  The Commission suggested that the word "suit" 
in section 71 should be enlarged as "suit or appeal".  But now, in the light of 
the decision of the Supreme Court in  
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board's case, it 
is felt that there should be a new  provision like section 21 of the old Act, 
covering not only suits or appeals but al so other legal proceedings in Courts, 
in which parties agree to go for arbitr ation. We are not prepared to extend 
this benefit to proceedings before quasi-judicial authorities  as in section 8. 
There, the use of the words "judicial  authority" in the principal act 1996 
together with the law decided by the Supreme Court in 
Fair Air Engineers  
case (AIR 1997 SC 533), permitted quasi-j udicial tribunals also to come 
within section 8. But, when we are proposing a new provision thereby, we 
propose to restrict the new provision only for legal proceedings in a court at 

 52 
any stage of the proceedings.  The proposed  section will be section 8A.  It is 
also proposed to add an ‘Explanation’  below section 8A to clarify the 
meaning of the word “leg al proceedings” which will include not only suits, 
appeals or other civil proceedings at any stage but also proceedings in writ 
jurisdiction involving civil rights. 
 
2.5.2 Hence a new section 8A is proposed to be added as follows: 
 
“8A Parties in pending legal proceedings may agree to seek 
arbitration  
 
 Where at any stage of a legal pro ceeding in the Supreme Court or the 
 High Court or in the  principal Civ il Court of original jurisdiction in a 
 district or in the court of the principal judge of the City Civil Court of 
 original jurisdiction in a city or a ny Court of coordinate jurisdiction or 
 inferior in  grade to such Princip al courts, as the case may be, all the 
 parties enter into an arbitration agreement to resolve their disputes, 
 then the Court in which the said legal proceeding is pending shall, on 
 an application made by any party to  the arbitration agreement, refer 
 the disputes in relation to the subject matter of the legal proceeding  to 
 arbitration. 
  
 Explanation: For the purposes of this section, “legal proceeding” 
 means any proceeding involving civil rights of parties pending in the 
 courts mentioned in this section, whether at the stage of institution or 
 at the stage of appeal  or revi sion and includes proceedings involving 
 civil rights instituted in the Hi gh Courts under article 226 and 227 of 
 the Constitution of India or on furthe r appeal, if any, to the Supreme 
 Court.” 
 
2.5.3 In view of the proposed section 8A, a special provision is proposed to 
be made in Section 42 (4) and two excep tions, as discussed later. (see para 
2.30.4 and 2.30.6). 
 
2.6.1 Grant of interim measures etc by court:  Section 9 restructured 
into sub-sections (1) to (3) and sub-section (4), (5) and (6) added. 
 

 53 
Section 9 is not proposed to be a ltered but is only proposed to be 
restructured and clauses (4), (5) and (6) are being proposed to be added to 
prevent abuse of Section 9. 
 
The existing section 9 of the Act 1996 reads as follows:- 
 
  “9 Interim measures etc. by  court -  
 
(1) A party may, before or during arbitral proceedings or at any 
time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is 
enforced in accordance with section 36, apply to a court -    
 
(i) for the appointment of a guard ian for a minor or a person of 
unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings; or  
 
(ii) for an interim measure of pr otection in respect of any of the 
following matters, namely:- 
 
(a) the preservation, interi m custody or sale of any 
goods which are the subject-m atter of the arbitration 
agreement; 
(b)  securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration; 
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any 
property or thing which is the subject matter of the 
dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may 
arise therein and authorizing for any of the aforesaid 
purposes any person to ente r upon any land or building 
in the possession of any pa rty, or authorizing any 
samples to be take n or any observation to be made, or 
experiment to be tried, which may be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information 
or evidence; 
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver. 
(e) for such other interim measure of protection as may 
appear to the court to be just and convenient, 
 
 and the court shall have the same  power for making orders as it has 
for the purpose of and in relation to, any proceedings before it.” 
 

 54 
Section 9 of the 1996 Act deals with the power of the Court to grant 
interim measures before commencement of, or pending, or after conclusion 
of, the arbitration proceedings. This s ection has been adverted to in detail 
while dealing with sec. 2(2) and ma king it applicable to international 
arbitrations where the place of arbitration is outside India or where the place 
of arbitration is not specified in the arbitration agreement. Now we shall deal 
with certain other aspects relating to section 9. 
 
 So far as the ‘Court’ which can grant interim measures is concerned, it 
will be the ‘Court’ which falls under proposed sec. 2(1)(e), i.e., Principal 
civil court of original jurisdiction in a district or Court of Principal Judge 
Civil Court in a city or the High Court exercising original jurisdiction. 
 
 There have been suggestions that th e scope and width of sec. 9 of the 
Act have to be brought at par with the provisions of  sec. 44 of the English 
Act. But it is felt that in view of th e omnibus provision in section 9(e) “such 
other interim measures of protecti on as may appear to be just and 
convenient:”, there is no need to ame nd sec. 9 in this behalf but its 
restructuring is required.  
 
 A reading of section 9 as it stands  shows that the wider power of the 
court is placed at the end and the lim ited powers are set out at the beginning 
of the section.  This is rather mislead ing and is to be r ectified.  Section 9 
shows that the “interim measures ” contemplated by the section are 
enumerated in clauses (i) and (ii). Clause (ii) has sub-cl auses (a) to (e). 
Clause (ii) refers to “protection” and appears to govern sub-clauses (a) to (e) 
thereof but gives an impression that in terim measures in sub-clauses (a) to 
(e) are restricted to “protection”, i. e., protection of the subject matter of 
dispute in arbitration.  However, it a ppears that the Act has intended that at 
the stage before commencem ent of arbitration or during arbitration or after 
the award and before the enforcemen t of the award under order 21 CPC, it 
may be necessary for the parties to obtai n orders in respect of other property 
of the opposite party, such as attachment or by way of temporary or interim 
mandatory injunction.   In fact, th e Supreme Court of India in Sundaram 
Finance Ltd.  v. NEPC India Ltd.  (1999 (2) SCC 479 = AIR 1999 SC 565) 
has accepted that section 9 can be invoked before any application for 
reference is filed under section 11 (unlike under the 1940 Act) and made 
reference to Russel on Arbitration (21 st Edn.) (1999) to the effect that under 
sec. 9, the Court can even grant a Mareva injunction or interim mandatory 
injunction.  We may point out furthe r that the various items of interim 

 55 
measures enumerated appear to have been drawn from sec. 41 and Schedule 
II of the 1940 Act.  Section 41 enabled exercise of wide powers by the Court 
before commencement of arbitration.   
 
In the view of the Commission, a nd as pointed out by the Supreme 
Court, the present Act does not show any intention to exclude the wide 
powers which were there under the 1940 Act.   The clue in this behalf  is 
given by the last part of sec. 9 which says- 
 
“and the court shall have the same powers for making 
orders as it has for the purposes of, and in relation to, any 
proceedings before it.” 
 
These words are drawn from sec. 41 of  the old Act.  The words ‘same 
powers’ in this part of sec. 9, in the view of the Co mmission, are neither 
referable nor controlled by the enumerated measures in sub-clauses (a) to (e) 
of sec. 9 and, in fact, they clarify that the Court under sec. 9 shall have all 
the powers of the Court which it exerci ses in respect of  “any proceeding 
before it”, 
i.e., all the power of a Civil Court.   
 
It is thus clear that the place in which the above clause is found is 
likely to create an impre ssion that the words ‘same powers’ are referable to 
the enumerated categories (a) to (e) in clause (ii) of sec. 9.  The flaw in the 
framework of sec. 9 appears to be that the limited enumerated powers are 
referred to at the outset and the broad and wider pow ers are relegated to the 
end of the section.  The Commission is of the view that this has to be 
rectified by bringing the last para of sec.  9 to the forefront as sub section (2) 
and the enumerated powers are to be placed lower down in the section under 
sub section (3).   
 
2.6.2 Existing sec. 9 is proposed to be recast as follows: 
 
 
   Interim measures etc. by  court 
 
“9. (1) A party may, before or during arbitral proceedings 
or at any time after the maki ng of the arbitral award but 
before it is enforced in acco rdance with section 36, apply 
to a court for interim measures.  
 

 56 
(2) The Court shall have the sa me powers for making orders under 
sub-section (1) as it has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any 
proceedings before it. 
 
 (3) In particular and without prejudice to sub-section (2), a party 
may apply to the court for any of the following, namely:-  
 
(a) appointment of a guardian for a minor or a person of 
unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings;   
 
(b) interim measure of protecti on in respect of any of the 
following matters, namely:- 
 
(i) the preservation, interi m custody or sale of any 
goods which are the subject-m atter of the arbitration 
agreement; 
 
(ii)  securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration; 
 
(iii) the detention, preservation or inspection of any 
property or thing which is the subject matter of the 
dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may 
arise therein and authorizing for any of the aforesaid 
purposes any person to ente r upon any land or building 
in the possession of any pa rty, or authorizing any 
samples to be take n or any observation to be made, or 
experiment to be tried, which may be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information 
or evidence; 
 
(iv)interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver. 
 
(c) other interim measure of protection as may appear to the 
court to be just and convenient. 
 
2.6.3 One other aspect under sec. 9 is of some procedural importance.  In 
case interim orders are issued before the commencement of proceedings, can 
they be allowed to continue for ever even if the party who has obtained an 
order in his favour does not within reasonable time takes steps to have an 
arbitrator appointed under sec. 11? 

 57 
 
To obviate any such situation, it is  decided to introduce a provision in 
sec. 9 requiring the Court to prescribe a specific period to file the application 
under sec. 9 to take steps as envisage d under sec. 11 for appointment of an 
arbitrator, and with a further condition that the Court must also prescribe that 
if such steps are not taken within the prescribed time, the interim directions 
granted shall stand vacated unless the pr escribed time is extended.  It is 
proposed to confer a power on the Court to order restitution, if need be. 
 
Therefore, sub-sections (4), (5) a nd (6) are proposed to be inserted 
after the proposed sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of section 9 as follows: 
 
“(4) Where a party makes an application under subsection(1) for the 
grant of interim measures before the commencement of arbitration, 
the court shall direct the party in whose favour the interim measure is 
granted, to take effective steps for the appointment of the arbitral 
tribunal in accordance with the pro cedure specified in section 11, 
within a period of thirty days from the date of the said order. 
 
(5)The court may direct that if such steps are not taken within the 
period of thirty days  specified under sub-section (4), the interim 
measure granted under sub-sections (2) and (3), shall stand vacated on 
the expiry of the said period: 
 
Provided that the court may on sufficient cause being shown for 
the delay in  taking such steps, extend the said period. 
 
(6) Where an order granting an in terim measure stands vacated under 
sub-section (5), the court may pass such further orders as to restitution 
as it may deem fit against the party in whose favour the interim 
measure was granted under this section.” 
 
A suggestion was made that at the stage of section 11, the court, i.e., 
section 2 (1) (e), court should itself be able to appoint arbitrators.  It is 
pointed out that there is no need to drive the parties to the High Court or the 
Supreme Court under section 11.   They have to incur extra expense and 
even travel upto the seat of the High Court for purpose of appointment under 
section 11, in case there is no agreement in the appointment.  
 

 58 
The Commission does feel that this is a very legitimate point but feel 
that it is not possible now to alter the scheme of the 1996 Act that in the case 
of disagreement, parties have to a pproach the Chief Justice of the High 
Court or the Chief Justice of India,  as the case may be, for appointment 
under section 11.  Therefore, we are not able to make any provision in 
section 11 for reference by the court as defined in section 2 (1) (e).  
 
A suggestion has been made that even at the stage of sec. 9 
proceedings, the Court must be enabled to  first decide jurisdictional issues if 
raised.  It has been held in Alpic Finance Ltd. vs. Allied Resins & Chemicals 
Ltd.  2000 C.L.C. 293 (Cal) that the existe nce of an arbitration agreement is 
necessary for application of sec. 9 though not the existence of a dispute.  In 
the opinion of the Commission, it is not necessary for the Court to decide 
jurisdictional issues as preliminary i ssues before granting interim measures 
under sec. 9.  After all, the grant of interim measures is discretionary, and 
while exercising the discretion, the Court is supposed to take into account 
various factors including the existence of a prima facie case on jurisdictional 
issues.  Hence no provision need be made in this behalf. 
 
2.7.1 Proposed Section 10A, Section 11 (5A) and Section 13: 
Disqualification of an employee of one party or of a person having 
business connection to be an arbitrator:  
 
During the debate under sec.13, this was one aspect upon which 
strong and divergent views were expre ssed by several partic ipants.  It was 
pointed out that in the case of contracts with Government and public sector 
undertakings or statutory corporations, it has been customary all along to 
incorporate a clause in the contract th at the arbitrator will always be an 
employee of the Government or of the Public Sector undertaking or statutory 
corporation, as the case may be.  In fact, in some contracts it is said that if it 
is not a departments’ employee, there will be no arbitration!  It is pointed out 
that this method of appointing an empl oyee as an arbitrator has to be done 
away with in view of sec.18 of the Act which speaks of “equal treatment” of 
parties.  Section 18 reads as follows: 
 
“Section 18: Equal treatment of parties :  The party shall be treated 
with equality and each party sha ll be given a full opportunity to 
present his case”. 
 

 59 
The first part of the section speak s generally about equality and is 
independent of the second part which refers to equal opportunity during the 
course of arbitration. 
 
It is true that under the law decl ared by the Supreme Court under the 
1940 Act, if parties had with open eyes  agreed that the employees of one 
them is to be an arbitrator then it was not permissible for the parties to 
challenge the arbitrator on the ground of lack of independence.  (see 
Secretary vs. Muniswamy: 1988 Suppl SCC 651 and Nandyal Corporation 
Spinning Mills vs. K.V. Mohan : (1993(2)SCC 654).  That was also the 
earlier English law. 
 
But it is pointed out that in sec. 24 of the UK Act, 1950 there was a 
power granted to the Court to gran t relief where it was felt that the 
arbitration is not or may not be impartial.  Sec. 24(1) is as follows: 
 
“Sec. 24(1):  Where an agreemen t between any parties provides 
that disputes which may arise in  the future between them shall 
be referred to an arbitrator named or designated in the 
agreement, and after a dispute ha s arisen any party applies, on 
the ground that the arbitrator so named or designated is not or 
may not be impartial, for leave to revoke the authority of the 
arbitrator or for an injunction to restrain any other party or the 
arbitrator from proceeding with th e arbitration, it shall not be a 
ground for refusing the application that the said party at the 
time when he made the agreement knew, or ought  to have 
known, that the arbitrator, by reason of his relation towards any 
other party to the agreement or of his connection with  the 
subject referred, might not be capable of impartiality”.   
 
The ICC Rules require prospective arbitrator to disclose: 
 
“whether there exists any past or present relationship, direct or 
indirect, with any of the parties or any of their counsel, whether 
financial, professional,  social or other kind  and whether the 
nature of such relationship is su ch that disclosure is called for 
pursuant to….criteria … (of such  a nature as to call into 
question the arbitrator’s inde pendence in the eyes of the 
parties.” 

 60 
 
Some statutes refer only to impartiality such as the 1996 UK Act 
while the Model Law in Art.12(2) refers to impartiality and independence.  
Section 12(1) of the Indian Act also refers to both of them. 
 
Fouchard and others (see para 1028) point out that ‘impartiality’ is a state of 
mind while ‘independence is a situation of  fact or law.  Bias might, in some 
cases be a factor which affects an i ndependent decision.  To some extent 
they overlap each other.   
 
Sec. 8 of the Swedish Arbitration Act refers to three aspects of 
‘impartiality’: 
(a) or otherwise may expect significant benefit or detriment, as 
a result of the outcome of the dispute.  
(b) Where the arbitrator is a pers on closely associated to him is 
the director of a company or any other association which is a 
party, or otherwise represents  a party or any other person 
who may expect significant bene fit or detriment as a result 
of the outcome of the dispute. 
(c) where the arbitrator has taken a position in the dispute, as an 
expert or otherwise, or ha s associated a party in the 
preparation or conduct of his case in the dispute. 
 
French courts desc ribe independence as follows: (see Fouchard and 
others, para 1029): 
 
“The independence of the arbitrator  is essential to his judicial 
role, in that from the time of his appointment he assumes the 
status of a Judge, which excl udes any 
relation of dependence, 
particularly with the parties.  Further, the circumstances relied 
on to challenge that independe nce must constitute, through the 
existence of material or intellectual links, a situation which is 
liable to affect the judgment of  the arbitrator by creating a 
definite risk of bias in favour of a party to the arbitration.” 
 
In para 1030, the authors refer to  case of an employee or paid 
consultant or a person who is paid for advice or technical assistance, 
cannot be treated as an independent arbitrator.  They say that, in the 

 61 
following situations, the arbitrators ha ve not been held independent in 
several cases. 
 
(1) where, at the same time as the arbitral proceedings, an arbitrator 
was personally paid to provide advice or technical assistance to 
one of the parties to the arbitration. 
(2) Where, at the time of signature of a submission agreement in 
which he was appointed as a replacement arbitrator, an 
arbitrator was acting as a paid consultant to a company of the 
same group as that of the parties to arbitration. 
(3) Where the arbitrator was employed by a party on the day after 
he had made is award. 
 
The principle is based on a party’s ‘r easonable doubt’ as to the arbitrator’s 
independence or impartiality.  The M odel law uses the word ‘justifiable 
doubts’ (clauses (ii) of Art. 12).  It is the justifiable doubt of the ‘reasonable 
man’. 
 
In the Consultation Paper ( Annexure II), it was suggested that so far 
as Government or Public Sector Unde rtakings or statutory Corporations 
are concerned, such provisions be not  disturbed and that so far private 
parties are concerned, they should not be allowed to have their employees 
or consultants or persons having bus iness connections with them as 
arbitrators.  This distinction was based upon the fact that in private 
employment, the threat of some action by the employer looms larger than 
in the case of public servants. 
 
Some of those who intervened in th e debate on behalf of Government 
or Public Sector stated that such clauses must be allowed to continue.  It 
was pointed out that in some organi zations, the contractors stood to gain, 
as disclosed from statistics.  It has al so been alternatively suggested that 
officers from some other department of  Government or the Public Sector 
organization can be allowed to be appointed as arbitrators.  One objection 
to this latter alternative was that the reason for appointing those in the 
same department was to  take advantage of their experience in that 
department.  In the debate, there was, of course, consensus that in regard 
to private parties such clauses should not be allowed to operate. 
 

 62 
The Commission felt that so far as private parties  are concerned they 
have greater control over their employ ees or consultants. In the public 
sector there are ample safeguards unde r the service rules and actions are 
also subject to judicial review by the High Court. A distinction between 
private parties and public sector is permissible.  The Commission also 
felt that the provision making such clauses void should not apply to 
international arbitration where seat of arbitration is in India. 
 
After giving our earnest consideration to this question, we are of the 
view that so far as private parties  are concerned, such clauses enabling 
employees or consultants or those having business connections to be 
arbitrators must be prohibited and any su ch clause in contracts between such 
parties must be treated as not enforceab le except in the case of international 
arbitration in India.   
 
It was no doubt suggested that Dutch law is more explicit and it 
permits a party to seek a court or der, departing from an arbitration 
agreement which “gives one of the parties a privileged position with regard 
to the appointment of the arbitrators (see Art. 1028 of the Netherlands Code 
of Civil Procedure).  Similarly, it wa s said that the German Arbitration 
Statute, which differs on this issue from the UNCITRAL Model Law, has 
adopted an equitable rule.  Art.1034, para 2 of the ZPO states as follows: 
 
“If the arbitration agreement grant preponderant rights to one 
party with regard to the composition of the arbitral tribunal 
which places the other party at a disadvantage, the other party 
may request the court to appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators in 
deviation from the nomination made, or from the agreed 
nomination procedure.  The request must be submitted at the 
latest within two weeks of the pa rty becoming aware of the 
constitution of the arbitral tri bunal.  Section 1032 sub section 3 
applies mutatis mutandis.” 
 
(See 1998 Rev Arb. 291 and also 15. J of Int’nl Arb., 85(1998), 1. 
Int’nl Arb L.Rev 121 (1998) in this part, (see also Fauchard, 1999, no.464, 
465). 
 
Reference was made to Fouchard (see para 787) that even in the 
absence of specific provisions in the st atute, such a clause giving special 

 63 
rights to one party could be treated as opposed to due process or ‘public 
policy’ of the country where enforcement of such awards is sought.  Number 
of cases have been cited in support.  A principle of procedural public policy 
of a fair trial is applied, drawing the spirit from international conventions 
like Art.6 of the European Convention wh ich refers to the fundamental right 
to a fair trial.  Though the Convention applies only to courts, the spirit of it 
is kept in view by the courts while d ealing with attacks against awards.  No 
doubt, the ICCPR to which Indi a is a party, also contains a similar principle 
of fairness to be adopted by courts. 
 
At one stage, it was felt that the provision as in the German Law could 
be adopted.  But, if a person is permitte d to object to an employee etc. of the 
Government or public sector, etc., to be an arbitrator, then it was felt that in 
every case, objections are likely to be raised by filing application in Courts 
and there is every likelihood of most ar bitrations involving such clauses in 
respect of these public bodies, bei ng stayed by the Courts.  So the 
Commission considered the question whethe r such clauses are to be treated 
as unenforceable even where the Government, or Public Sector 
Undertakings or statutory corporati ons, have included a clause in the 
agreements so as to have their own em ployees or consultants etc. as sole 
arbitrators.  It was felt that the above  bodies require some special treatment 
as already stated above, and that they  cannot be placed in the same position 
as private parties.  Priva te parties have greater control over their employees 
or consultants etc.  In the case of Government and othe r bodies referred to 
above which come within the scope of Art. 12 of the Constitution, there are 
statutory rules under Art. 309 or othe r statutory regulations, which give 
protection to the employees. The right to  take action against such employees 
etc. is also subject to judicial revie w.  Hence it was felt that in the case of 
these bodies, such clauses need not be treated as unenforceable.  Therefore, 
it has been decided that such clause s in the case of Government, Public 
Sector Undertakings or statutory corporations should not be made 
unenforceable.  In any event, the exis ting provision of challenge under sec. 
13 is always there and the aggrieved party can always avail of the same.  But 
the order of the arbitral tribunal rej ecting a plea of bias can be challenged 
only after the award is passed in cases of employees, etc. of Government and 
other bodies. 
 
In the result, section 13 is not amended but a new section 10A is 
proposed to be added as stated below. 

 64 
2.7.2  After section 10 of the principa l Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
“ 10A.  (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), 
where any arbitration agr eement contains a clause 
enabling one of such parties to appoint his or its own 
employee or consultant or a dvisor or other person having 
business relationship with  hi m or it, as an arbitrator, 
such a clause shall be void to that extent. 
 
 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not-  
 
(a) apply to an agreement in international 
arbitration (whether commercial or not). 
             
(b) render any clause, in an  arbitration agreement  
which enables the     Central or a State 
Government or a Public Sector Undertaking or a 
statutory body or statutory corporation or other 
public authority, as the cas e may be, to appoint its 
own employee or consultant or advisor or any 
other person having busine ss relationship, as an 
arbitrator, void;” 
 
2.7.3 In the context of proposed s ection 10A, consequent changes have 
been made in section 11 by the proposed sub-section (5A) in section 11. 
 
2.8.1 Appointment of arbitrators – Various issues under section 
11: 
 
During discussions in the seminar, several issues  were raised under 
section 11, i.e., whether the applicati ons under section 11 are to be made to 
the 'Chief Justice of India' or to  the 'Supreme Court' in the case of 
international arbitration;  whether the applications under section 11 are to be 
made to the 'Chief Justice of the ‘Hi gh Court' or the High Court' in case of 
purely domestic arbitration; in othe r words, should the appointment of 
arbitrators be made on, the administrativ e side or the judicial side?  Whether 
there will be less scope for court inte rvention if the orders under section 11 

 65 
are to be 'administrative'; these f unctionaries are acting as “ persona 
designata”;  or they can be deemed to  be acting as persona designata so that 
even article 226 will not be available; will the stages of court intervention be 
less if the orders are to be made on th e 'judicial side'?  In case the orders 
under section 11 are to be on the judici al side, whether it will save time and 
costs of arbitration.  Therefore, wh ether jurisdictional issues, if raised, 
should be decided by the Supreme Court or the High Court on the judicial 
side in the section 11 applications or there should be a discretion to refuse to 
deal with them. Whether there is any possibility of having a flexible 
provision in section 11 which will enab le the Supreme Court or the High 
Court to decide jurisdictional issues only if they can decide, without undue 
delay, where the relevant documents are admitted and no oral evidence is 
necessary.  Should the same flexible procedure as in the case of similar 
issues in action under section 8 not be inserted in section 11? 
 
Another issue raised is with regard to the time schedules prescribed in 
sections 11(4) and (5). Should they be construed as mandatory?  Whether 
time limits should be fixed under section 11(6) also? 
 
These are the various issues that have been raised before us under 
section 11.   
 
2.8.2 Orders under section 11: Whether administrative in nature:  
 
The question whether orders under Sec. 11 of the Act passed by the 
Chief Justice of India or of the Chie f Justice of the High Courts or their 
nominees are administrative or not has come up before the Supreme Court in 
the Konkan Railway case no. 1 ( AIR 2000, SCW 2960 = 2000 (7) SCC 
201).  The three Judge Bench  held that the orders are administrative in 
nature. 
 
 In the Konkan Railway case No. II AIR 2000 SCW 3908 2000 (8) 
SCC 159, the question whether prelimin ary issues can be decided at the 
stage of Sec. 11 was referred for decisi on to a larger Bench.  When that case 
came before a Constitution Bench ( 2001(4) SCALE 225), the five Judge 
Bench recorded the contentions of counsel on both sides that orders under 
Sec. 11 are administrative in nature.  The court, however, issued notice to 
the learned Attorney General on the question whether preliminary issues 
raised by the parties could be decided at that stage on the administrative 
side.   

 66 
 
 Therefore, the position of law now is clear that orders passed by the 
Chief Justice of India or his nominee or of the Chief Justice of the High 
Court or his nominee under section 11 are administrative orders. 
 
2.8.3 Preliminary or jurisdictional issu es raised at sec. 11 stage – 
whether can be decided by an administrative authority.   
 
The question whether, at the stag e of Sec. 11, if parties raise 
preliminary issues – such as (i) there is no dispute in existence because athe 
contractor has given in writing that he has no claim, or (ii) the dispute relates 
to an excepted matter, or (iii) only departmental arbitrator should be 
appointed, or (iv) there is no arbitrati on agreement in existence, or (v) the 
arbitration agreement is null and voi d, or not valid or capable of 
enforcement.  Whether they can be decided?  This question is now before 
the Constitution Bench. 
 
 We may, however, point out in this connection that under the ICC 
Rules, 1998, the ICC Court appoints the arbitrators and the decision of the 
arbitrators appointed by it is to be s ubmitted to the ICC Court for scrutiny.  
The ICC Court is a private body to which parties frequently resort for 
international arbitration. It is not a court of law established under any statute 
by any State.  It is an institution whic h facilitates arbitration. Under Art. 6 
(2), the ICC Court 
does go in to the preliminary issues and if it is held that 
there is no arbitration or agreement under the ICC Rules of arbitration, it can 
refuse to appoint arbitrators.  We may refer to Articles 6 (2) of the ICC 
Rules.  It reads as follows: 
 
“Art.6(2):  If the Respondent does not file an answer as provided by 
Art. 5, or if any party raises one or more pleas concerning the 
existence, validity or scope of ar bitration agreement, the Court may 
decide,  without prejudice to the admi ssibility or merits of the plea or 
pleas, that the arbitration shall proceed if it is prima facie satisfied that 
an arbitration agreement under the Rules of Arbitration of the ICC 
may exist.  In such a case, any d ecision as to the jurisdiction of the 
Arbitral Tribunal shall be taken by th e Arbitral Tribunal itself.  If the 
Court is not so satisfied, the parties shall be notified that the 
arbitration cannot proceed .  In such a case, any party retains the right 
to ask any Court having jurisdiction whether or not there is a binding 
arbitration agreement.” 

 67 
 
 Similarly, Redfern and Hunter in their book on arbitration (para 5.34) 
opined on the same point as follows: 
 
“When any question is raised as to  the jurisdiction of the arbitral 
tribunal a two stage procedure is followed.  At the first stage, if one of 
the parties raises “one or more pleas concerning the existence, validity 
or scope of the agreement to arbitr ate”, the ICC’s Court must satisfy 
itself of the prima facie  existence of such an  agreement (ICC Arb. 
Rules 6(2).  If it is satisfied that such an agreement exists, the ICC’s 
Court must allow the arbitration to  proceed so that, at the second 
stage, any decision as to the jurisd iction of the Arbitral Tribunal shall 
be taken by the Arbitral Tribunal itself.” 
 
 Fouchard and others (1994) had also referred the same point in 
their book (para 854) as follows: 
 
“Midway between those two views, a third interpretation is that 
in international arbitration, the Court should only verify that the 
clause is not patently void, as it would be unreasonable to 
require it to appoint an arbitrat or where there is no indication 
that an arbitration clause exists .  The Court should not be seen 
to automatically appoint arbitrators  in cases where the 
arbitration clearly has no contractual basis and the award has no 
chance of being recognized in any jurisdiction.” 
 
 It is, therefore, clear that the ICC Rules and the opinion of jurists 
support the view that at the stage of S ec. 11, it is permissible to decide  
preliminary issues.  There are considerable advantag es if such issues are 
decided at that stage, in as much as  a decision at that stage saves time and 
expense for the parties.   As pointed by Fouchard and others, there is no 
question of an ‘automatic appointme nt’ of arbitrators, whenever an 
application is made for an appointment of arbitrators.  The appointing 
authority normally considers if a cas e is made out for appointment of 
arbitrators and such a decision can be taken on undisputed facts available at 
that stage.   
 
 The Commission proposes here to refer to another important aspect of 
arbitration in India.  It is not as if delays in arbitration in India are only on 
account of intervention by courts before th e stage of the awar d.  In the view 

 68 
of the Commission, in most of the arbitr ations in India, wherever there is 
delay before the award is passed, it is mostly because of delays on the part of 
the arbitrators and the counsel appeari ng in arbitrations.  Arbitrations are 
taking years to be completed even unde r the new Act.  One can understand a 
complaint of delays due to court inte rvention after the stage of the award 
under the old Act of 1940, i.e., because  of Sections 16, 30 and 31 of the 
1940 Act. 
 
Delay in arbitration affecting the cost of arbitration. 
 
 Another more important aspect is the huge expense in arbitrations.  
While the Judges who decide cases in courts are paid by the State, the case 
of arbitrators is different.  Parties ha ve to pay fee to arbitrators also.  
Lawyers’ fee is anyway th ere whether before courts or before arbitrators.  
These days fee payable to arbitrators is  quite heavy.  We have obtained the 
views of lawyers and arbitrators.  But we  have to take care of interest of the 
parties also. 
 
 Further it needs to be considered what happens if the appointment of 
arbitrators is to be automatic and if the appointing authority under Section 
11 should consider nothing else.   
 
The prevalent procedure be fore the arbitrators today is that at the first 
hearing, the claimant is directed to file his claim statement and documents in 
support thereof.  At the second hearing,  the opposite parties are directed to 
file their reply and documents.  Then, th e claimant files his rejoinder at the 
third hearing.  Normally at each of th ese stages, there are at least two or 
three adjournments.  Sometim es, applications for interim directions are also 
filed.  Thus, today, the first occas ion for considering any question of 
jurisdiction does not normally arise till at least 6 adjournments have gone by.  
If the respondent is the State or a pub lic sector undertaking, the number of 
adjournments are certainly more.  Parties pay fees to the arbitrator s for each 
hearing running into thousands of rupees. 
 
 If indeed it is a party’s plea that there is no dispute that can be referred 
to arbitration (because the contractor ha s given a ‘no claims’ letter) or if it is 
the plea that the dispute is ‘excepted’ from arbitration or if a person says, he 
is not a party to the arbitration, or th at the arbitration agreement is not in 
existence, these issues can normally be taken up only after at least five or six 
adjournments have taken place.  By that time, quite a large amount of money 

 69 
would become payable towards the arbitr ation fees or may have been paid.  
Therefore, the cost factor is also important for the parties and cannot be left 
out of consideration.   
 
Lastly, if the Government or a public sector undertaking has clear 
documents to show that there is no dispute in existence or that the dispute 
relates to an ‘excepted item’, or if a person says, he is not a party to the 
arbitration agreement, there is no r eason why an expensive procedure of 
arbitration should be invariably em barked upon.  These aspects were 
highlighted in Redfern and others and have been referred to in our 
discussion under Section 8 on a similar issue (para 2.4.1).  Therefore, we 
have to see that these issues are decided without undue delay at sec. 11 stage 
or sec. 8 stage and the inquiry into th ese preliminary issues does not lead to 
delay in appointment of arbitrators.   
 
We shall presently go into with these aspects.   
 
 In fact, arbitrations arise in three  categories of cases:   
 
(i) where parties on both sides ag ree upon the arbitrators or where 
the party authorized to unilate rally appoint an arbitrator, 
appoints an arbitrator under sec. 11; 
(ii) where parties move the Chie f Justice of India or the Chief 
Justice of High Court under Sec. 11 for appointment because 
the parties are not able to agree; 
(iii) where in a pending suit or ot her proceeding, under sec. 8 the 
opposite party relies on an arbitration agreement. 
 
In the later two situations, i.e., (ii) and (iii), the application for 
appointment is, to be made before the Judge and, in the opinion of the 
Commission, it is advantageous (- as before the “ICC Court”), if those issues 
are straightaway decided as preliminary issues – provided they can be 
decided without much delay - so that it could save lot of expense for the 
parties.  This aspect highlighted by Fouchard has been referred to in our 
discussion under Section 8 on a similar issue.  
 
2.8.4 Preliminary issues to be decided only if some conditions are satisfied 
(as in the case of section 8): 
 

 70 
 The Commission, therefore, proposes to take care to see that these 
issues are, if possible, decided at s ec. 11 stage and also that there are no 
delays.  The Commission  is proposing a via media  procedure as suggested 
at the Bombay seminar by several em inent Judges and as suggested by the 
Indian Merchants Chamber, Bombay.   The procedure is like this.  In case 
the jurisdictional issues can be decided on the basis of the documents  which 
are not in dispute and if oral evidence is not necessary, and if the enquiry is 
not likely to take time , then in such cases al one, these issues can be 
permitted to be decided at the stage of sec. 8 or sec. 11 applications by the 
Court.  If documents are in dispute or oral evidence is necessary or there is 
likelihood of delay, then the jurisdictional issues will also have to be referred 
by the judge to the arbitrators proposed to be appointed.  Such a  procedure 
will, in the view of the Commission, balance the avoidance of unnecessary 
expense on the one hand and avoidance of delays on the other.   
 
 The Commission has, therefore, felt that additional stringent 
conditions are to be attached to such situations – as done under section 8 -,  
such as those under sec. 32 (2) of the English Arbitration Act, 1996, namely 
that the Judge, if he wants to decide the preliminary issues,  is to be satisfied 
that  
 
(i) the determination of the questions is likely to produce avoidable 
savings in costs; 
(ii) the application for decision of these issues was made without 
delay; 
(iii) there is good reason as to why these issues should be decided at 
that stage, and 
(iv) the decision on the issues is not likely to lead to delay. 
 
Such a flexible provision which was pr oposed at the Bombay seminar will, 
in our view,  squarely meet the objecti on about delays.  If the point raised is 
simple and can be decided without oral evidence on the basis of the 
documents which are not in dispute, it is  better the judge dealing with sec. 8 
or 11 applications decides them at th e threshold rather than leave these 
issues invariably in all cases to be  decided by the arbitrators after six 
adjournments.    There n eed not, therefore, be an automatic appointment of 
arbitrators whenever app lications are filed under sec. 11 or sec. 8.  The 
Commission is aware of the normal rate s of fee charged by arbitrators for 
each hearing.  Whether it is the case of a sole arbitrator or three arbitrators, 
the savings to the litigants is surely  a matter which cannot be ignored.  

 71 
Experience shows that if one party is  the Government or a public sector 
undertaking, nobody bothers about the public monies which are spent 
towards expenses of arbitration.  On ce the delay part is taken care of as 
stated above, the above procedure will meet the ends of justice and there can 
be no serious objection to the procedure on the ground of delay. 
 
 Thus, with the flexible provision th at is proposed, there can, therefore, 
be no objection if the preliminary issues are allowed to be decided, as in the 
ICC Court, at the stage of appointment under sec. 11 or at sec. 8 stage.  The 
provisions which we have proposed in sections 8 (4) and (5) as also in sub-
sections (13), (14) of section 11 (s ee para 2.8.15) are, in fact, an 
improvement even over the ICC Rules. 
 
2.8.5 Difficulties arising if preliminary issues are not to be decided under 
sec. 11 – Examples: 
 
 Before parting with the subject , in order to support the above 
procedure, we may refer to two or three decisions of the Supreme Court 
under the 1996 Act.  In Wellington Associates Ltd.  vs. Kirit Mehta  ( AIR 
2000 SC 1379), at the stage of sec. 11 applications it was argued for the 
respondent that the relevant clause  which was relied upon by the petitioner 
as being an arbitration clause was, on th e face of it, not an arbitration clause, 
and that it only permitted parties to agree, in future, to go to arbitration.  The 
Court straightaway held that the clau se was not an arbitration clause and 
dismissed  the sec. 11 application.  Th e matter ended there.  If such a simple 
issue were to be referred to the arbitrators and they should decide it after 
more than six adjournments , there would be unnecessary delay and expense. 
 
 Again in Datar Switchgear Case (AIR 2000 SCW 3925) = 2000 
Suppl. (2) J.T. 226), the applicants’ request under sec. 11 (6) to the opposite 
side for appointment of an arbitrator was not honoured and an arbitrator was 
appointed by the opposite party after consid erable delay.  Then the applicant 
filed a petition under sec. 11 seeking a ppointment by Court contending that 
the opposite party not having appointed an  arbitrator within reasonable time, 
the said appointment was bad and therefore the Court could appoint an 
arbitrator under sec. 11.  The opposite  party contended that there was no 
time limit in sec. 11 (6) to take ac tion upon a request for appointment of 
arbitrator and the periods fixed in sec. 11(4) and 11(5) were not applicable to 
sec. 11(6) and even otherwise, not manda tory.  In such a case, if the Court 
were to automatically appoint an arbitr ator ignoring the arbitrator appointed 

 72 
initially by the opposite party, though bela tedly, the question would arise as 
to which arbitrator would decide the case on merits.  Such  a case has arisen 
before the Delhi High Court as stated before us by a retired Judge of the 
Delhi High Court who is one of such arbitrators.  We are referring to this 
case only to show that even if the Judge is dealing with the sec. 11 
applications on the administrative side , some peculiar situations can arise 
requiring the Court to decide some issues before appointing an arbitrator. 
 
 In yet another case, Malayasian Airlines 2000(7) Scale 724, the filing 
of the application under sec. 11 by a pow er of attorney holder under a power 
of attorney which was not properly st amped as per Indian Stamp Act, was 
objected to.  The applicant  agreed to pay the penalty and stamp duty.  An 
order had to be passed pe rmitting parties to pay the duty and penalty before 
the concerned authority.  It was not possible to straightaway appoint an 
arbitrator unless the issue of stamp duty was decided. 
 
 Like this, a variety of situations may arise where some decision on 
various issues which are raised at th e stage of sec. 11 or sec. 8 becomes 
necessary.   
 
 But once we improvise a procedure wh ich will steer clear of delays, as 
stated above, the Judge at the stage of sec. 11 can have power to decide the 
various issues and the objections on the ground of delay in arbitration will 
not hold good.  
 
 So far as delays in filing appeal s etc., against orders in sec. 11 
applications are concerned, we shall ta ke up these questions separately.  We 
shall demonstrate that the number of stages of court intervention are more if 
the order of the Judge is an administrativ e order rather than if it is a judicial 
order.  Unfortunately, an indepth study of the various ramifications of this 
problem has not been made by those who pleaded before us for retention of 
the existing provisions.  We shall shortly advert to those issues. 
 
 The result of the above discussion is that at the stage of sec. 11 
applications, as under the ICC Rules, the Judge can be enabled to decide 
preliminary issues that may be raised.  This would save lot of expense and 
time.  However the procedure for decision on the issues should not be 
allowed to be abused.  A flexible provision is to be made, as suggested at the 
Bombay seminar, that the Judge w ill embark on a decision on preliminary 
issues only if they can be decided on basis of the undisputed documents and 

 73 
where no oral evidence is necessary, and if the Judge feels that the enquiry is 
simple enough and will not lead to delays and feels that this will save costs.  
Otherwise the Judge shall be bound to send these preliminary issues also to 
the arbitrators.   
 
2.8.6 The comparative advantages or disadvantages of the order under sec. 
11 to be an administrative order or judicial order:    
 
 The Commission has received a larg e number of responses to the 
Consultation Paper.  So far as sec. 11 is concerned, some suggested that the 
orders under sec. 11 should remain ‘adm inistrative’ by retaining the words 
‘Chief Justice of India’ or ‘Chief Justice of the High Courts’ or their 
nominees.  Some others suggested that , if certain preliminary issues of 
jurisdiction could be settled at that stage (provided oral evidence was not 
necessary) the orders better be made on the judicial side by the ‘Supreme 
Court’ or ‘the High Court’, as the cas e may be.  In particular, the latter 
suggestion came at the Bombay seminar organized by the Indian Merchants 
Chamber where several retired Judges and others participated.  The Indian 
Merchants Chamber, in fact, gave a draf t of the provision to be inserted in 
the place of the existing sec. 11. 
 
 The Commission was cautioned in the several responses to the 
Consultation Paper that it should not  go by ‘1940 Act mindset’ but has to 
keep the UNICTRAL Model in mind.  At the end of the day, it appeared to 
the Commission that while the ‘1940 Act mindset’ should not be there, one 
should also be receptive to other alterna tive suggestions, if such alternatives 
could be improvements on the UNCITRAL Model.  Several countries which 
have adopted the Model Law, as the basi s, have made some changes to suit 
their local needs.  While we should not have the ‘1940 Act mindset’, that 
does not mean we should have a closed  mind and not try to improve on the 
Model Law.  Thus for an objective cons ideration of what is best for the 
parties, who seek arbitration, neither an undue adherence to the ‘1940 Act 
mindset’ nor an unnecessary anxiety to  maintain ‘UNCITRAL mind set’ in 
its totality is desirable. 
 
 As we shall presently show, thos e who suggested that the ‘1940 Act 
mindset’ is to be eschewed have not in fact, made any indepth study of the 
advantages and disadvantages resulti ng from adoption of one or the other 
alternatives.  Those who assumed that  there would be uncalled for court 
intervention if sec. 11 orders are made on the judicial side, appeared to the 

 74 
Commission to have not gone into the matter in detail but had come to 
entertain such a view with some kind of preconceived notions.  The 
Commission, therefore, felt it is necessary  to examine in detail the practical 
advantages and disadvantages of the alternative suggestions. 
 
 We start with the principle accep ted by the Supreme Court that the 
orders under sec. 11 by the Chief Ju stice of India or his nominee are 
‘administrative orders’.  This is also  the position with regard to orders under 
sec. 11 by the Chief Justices of the High Courts or their nominees. 
 
 After the Konkan Railways Case No.1 several writ petitions have 
been filed in the High Courts under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India 
questioning the orders of the Chief Ju stices of the High Courts or their 
nominees.  Most of these writ petitions ar e filed by the State or public sector 
undertakings questioning the orders of appointment of arbitrator by the 
Chief Justice or his nominee.  The points raised generally are –  
 
(i) that the dispute related to ‘excepted’ matters, 
(ii) that the contractor had signe d a receipt for payment acknowledging 
that he has no more claims, 
(iii) only a departmental officer s hould have been appointed as the 
arbitrator or that there should be  no arbitration if a departmental 
arbitrator was not to be appointed. 
 
2.8.7 Order of Chief Justice of India 
 
Now, an administrative order of th e Chief Justice of India or his 
nominee or an administrative order of th e Chief Justice of the High Court or 
his nominee can as a matter of law , be subjected to judicial review under 
Art. 226.  May be, an administrative order of a Judge cannot be straightaway 
challenged under Art. 136 but it can be challenged under Art. 226.  But in  
Konkan Railway  Case 1 it was accepted that if  an arbitrator was not 
appointed, the parties could seek a wr it of mandamus under Art. 226.   In 
fact, before a mandamus is issued, the order of the Chief Justice has to be set 
aside and removed from the scene.  Un less initially the administrative order 
not appointing an arbitrator is quashed or set aside, the question of issuing a 
mandamus does not arise. 
 
If the order of the Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justice of the 
High Court is an order of an ‘administrative authority’, then sec. 5 of the Act 

 75 
which prohibits any ‘judicial authority ’ from intervening in the proceedings 
will not be attracted because the orders are passed by the Judge under sec. 11 
on the administrative side.  In any event, sec. 5 cannot prohibit an 
application under Art. 226.  A single Judge’s judgment in a writ petition can 
be questioned before a Bench of two learned Judges and then the matter can 
go to the Supreme Court under Art. 136.   Thus, after an order under sec. 11 
by the Judge in the Supreme Court or the High Court, on the administrative 
side, there can be litigation starting with an application under Art. 226, going 
through three levels. 
 
 What is the position if these orders under sec. 11 ar e to be passed by 
the Court on the judicial side rather than by the Judge on the administrative 
side?  Is it more advantageous? 
 
 Taking the case of an order under. Sec. 11 in an international 
arbitration,-  if the order is to be passed on the judicial side by the ‘Supreme 
Court’ (and not by the Chief Justice of India or his nominee on the 
administrative side), 
i.e., by a Bench of  two or more Judges, there is no 
question of any writ petition under Art. 226 being thereafter filed in the High 
Court.  In fact, the order of the ‘Supreme Court’ will become final and 
binding once for all.  Obviously, the th ree levels of litigation, which are 
possible if the order is on the administ rative side, are all avoided at once.  
This is certainly a better alternative.   
 
 Likewise, if as under the ICC Model,  in the sec. 11 applications, the 
preliminary issues are to be decided on the judicial side, rather than on the 
administrative side, the decision of th e Supreme Court on the jurisdictional 
issues will also become final at the sec. 11 stage itself and the three stages of 
further litigation against such orders before a single Judge under Art. 226, 
then before a Bench and then under Art. 136 are clearly avoided. 
 
2.8.8 Orders of the Chief Justice of High Courts 
 
So far as cases of purely domestic arbitration between Indian nationals 
under sec. 11 are concerned, if the orde r is on the administrative side, it can 
be challenged under Art. 226 again befo re a Single Judge, then a Division 
Bench (since sec. 5 does not apply to administrative orders) and the Supreme 
Court under Art. 136 of the Constitution of  India.  If the order under sec. 11 
is to be passed by the ‘High Court’ on the judicial side, then in as much as it 
is a judicial order under sec. 11 of th e Act even if it is passed by a single 

 76 
Judge of the High Court, there will be no appeal to a Division Bench 
because of sec. 5 which excludes app eal to a Division Bench which we are 
proposing to clarify by inserting an Expl anation.  The only stage for attack 
will be under Art. 136.   If an order under sec. 11 is to be initially passed by 
a Division Bench as per the rules of procedure in some High Courts, again 
the only other remedy against it is the one under Art. 136.  Thus, while the 
order is by a Judge on the administrative side, will be amenable to judicial 
review in a  fresh writ petition unde r Art. 226 before a single Judge, a 
Division Bench and then the Supreme Court.  The position if it is on the 
judicial side, is that there will only be  one appeal under Art. 136.  This is 
also advantageous. 
 
 Summing up the advantages, if th e order under sec. 11 is on the 
judicial side, so far as international arbitration is concerned, all the three 
stages of further litigation are excluded and so far as purely domestic 
arbitrations between Indian nationals ar e concerned, instead of three stages, 
there is only one stage of attack under Art. 136. 
 
 The above discussion obviously proves that those, who consider that 
the existing position of the orders under sec. 11 being on the administrative 
side to be more advantageous, may not be fully aware of the aspect of 
advantages or disadvantages of two alte rnative.  Therefore, in the view of 
the Commission,  the applications unde r sec. 11 are to be made on the 
“judicial side” to the Supreme Court in cases of international arbitration in 
India and to the High Court in the cases of purely domestic arbitrations.   
 
 In fact, the UNCITRAL Model says that the applications under Art. 
11 are to be before the ‘Court’.  Other countries have also enacted laws on 
the basis of the UNCITRAL Model conf erring power on ‘courts’ to decide 
these applications.  (See Art 11(4) of the Model Law, Art. 11 of the 
Canadian Act 1985, Art. 11 of the Korean Act, 1999, Sec. 14 of the Swedish 
Act 1999 and Art. 11 in Schedule I of the New Zealand Act 1996).   
 
In the view of the Commissi on, the recent Irish Act 1996 gives us the 
correct guidance.   The Irish Act 1996 which enables the President of the 
High Court or his nominee to decide thes e and other applications says that 
the applications are to be made to the ‘High Court’ and it defines ‘High 
Court’ to mean the President of the Court or his nominee.   It is clear that the 
applications are only on the “judicial side”.   
 

 77 
The relevant provisions of the Irish Act, 1996 are as follows: 
 
“Sec. 6: (1) The High Court  is specified for the purposes of Article 6 and 
is the Court for the purposes of Ar ticle 9 and the Court of competent 
jurisdiction for the purposes of Articles 27, 35 and 36 
. 
2. The functions of the High Court unde r an article referred to subsection 
(1)  and its functions under Sections 7, 11(7) and (9) and 14(1) shall be  
 performed by – 
 
(a) The President of the High Court, or  
(b) Such Judge of the High Court as may be nominated by the  
          President, subject to rules made in that behalf.” 
 
 In the light of the above, the Commission has proposed that sec. 11 be 
appropriately amended by substituting the words ‘Supreme Court’ for the 
words ‘Chief Justice of India’ and the words ‘High Court’ for the words 
‘Chief Justice of the High Court’. 
 
2.8.9  Whether the Chief Justice of I ndia or the Chief Justice of the High 
Court are ‘persona designata. 
 
 In one of the responses to the Cons ultation Paper, it was urged that the 
‘Chief Justice of India’ and the ‘Chi ef Justice of the High Court’ are only 
acting as a ‘persona designata’ when  they are exercising power under  
section 11 to appoint arbitrators and this  they are doing in the their ‘personal 
capacity’ and not in their official cap acity and also not as constitutional 
functionary and that such orders are not  amenable even to judicial review 
under any statute, (appellate or revi sional)/or even under Art. 226 of the 
Constitution of India.  If the Chief Justi ce of India or the Chief Justice of the 
High Court are not even administrative authorities but are passing orders 
under sec. 11 in their personal capacitie s, that may exclude a remedy even 
under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India.   
 
The Commission, in fact, felt that if  these authorities were acting as 
‘personal designata’, it could even insert an Explanation in Sec. 11 that these 
authorities must be deemed to be ex cising powers as ‘persona designata’  so  
that there would be no scope of cour t intervention even under Art. 226.  
Such a situation would be ideal and w ould be much better than a situation 
where the orders were treated as ‘administrative’ or even as ‘judicial’. 

 78 
 
 But the difficulty here is that the Supreme Court in Konkan Railway 
No. 1 has clearly held that the orders under Sec. 11 are “administrative” in 
nature and it has also held  that a Writ of Mandamus could issue to the Chief 
Justice of India or the Chief Justice of  the High Court or their nominees.  It 
is, therefore, difficult to bring the orders down to a level of orders passed by 
these Judges in their private capacity. 
 
 Our attention was invited to the decision of the Supreme Court in 
Central Talkies Ltd. vs. Dwarka Prasad (AIR 1961 SC 606) and to the 
following passage therein: 
 
“A ‘persona designata’ is a person who is pointed out or described as 
an individual 
as opposed  to a person ascertained  as a member of a 
class, or as filling a particular character (see Osborne’s Concise Law 
Dictionary, 4th Ed., p.253)”. 
 
The Supreme Court observed: 
 
“In the words of Schwabe CJ in Parthasaradhi Naidu vs. Kotewara 
Rao, ILR 47 Mad 369 (AIR 1924 Ma d. 561) (FB), personae 
designatae are ‘persons selected to  act in their private capacity as 
Judges” 
 
It is this latter passage that is re lied upon to say that the Chief Justice 
of India or the Chief Justices of the High Courts are ‘persona designata’.  
But, in our view, the passage cannot help if one keeps in mind the reasons as 
to why in section 11 Chief Justice is designated as the authority to appoint 
arbitrators – namely that in their c onstitutional capacity, any appointment of 
arbitrator by them would inspire greater confidence. 
 
 In our view, it cannot be said that the ‘Chief Justice of India’ or the 
‘Chief Justice of High Court’ is chosen to act under sec. 11 
not in his 
capacity as a Judge but only in his private capacity as a Judge.  In the 
opinion of the Commission, it is not po ssible to accept that the legislature 
chose the Chief Justice of India  or the Chief Justice of the High Court in 
Sec. 11 de hors  their Constitutional status as Judges of the superior courts.  
These high functionaries appear to have  been specially c hosen because of 
their office and the idea was to infuse greater confidence in the procedure for 
appointment of arbitrators and  in par ticular, to assure foreign nationals or 

 79 
companies who may be parties to internati onal arbitration agreements (when 
the seat of arbitration is in India) about the independence and fairness of the 
arbitrators appointed by these high func tionaries.  In that background, it is 
difficult to accept that these high ranking judicial functionaries were chosen 
in Sec. 11 not in recognition of their Constitutional office.  In the very case 
in General Talkies, the plea that the ‘District Ma gistrate’ was invested with 
powers under the UP (Temporary) Contro l of Rent and Eviction Act (3 of 
1947) as persona designata was rejected. 
 
2.8.10 Is it advantageous if the Chie f Justice of India or Chief Justice 
of High Court is to be statutorily deemed to be ‘persona 
designata’? 
 
 The question then is whether ev en so, we can make a provision 
“deeming” the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justices as ‘persona 
designata’ by adding an Explanation in Sec. 11.  The Commission feels that 
this is indeed difficult.  In the General Talkies case, the Supreme Court 
approved the judgment of the Full Ben ch of the Madras High Court in 
Parthasaradhi Naidu vs. Koteswara Rao (AIR 1924 Mad 369).  That case 
concerned the vesting of powers on the District Judge as an Election 
Commissioner.  The High Court held that  the District Judge was not acting 
as a persona designata.   It is revealed from a latter decision of a Division 
Bench of the same High Court in Mahabaleswarappa vs. Gopalaswami 
Mudaliar (AIR 1935 Madras p. 673), that , after the 1924 decision, the 
Government of Madras made a deeming provision in Rule 1 (3) in the 
concerned Election Rules deeming th e District Judge as a ‘persona 
designata’ and not acting in his official capacity.  The new Rule was as 
follows: 
 
“An Election Commission exercising jurisdiction under these rules 
shall be deemed to exercise such jurisdiction as a persona designata 
and not in his capacity as a Judge or other officer of government as 
the case may be”. 
 
 In spite of deeming provision, th e Division Bench of the High Court 
held in Mahabaleswarappa’s case that this provision cannot help and that if 
by virtue of the functions exercisable by the District Judge under the Act, he 
was acting in a judicial capacity and not as a ‘persona designata’, he could 
validly make a complaint for purpose of Sections 195 and 476 of the 
Criminal Procedure Code (1898) and he would still be acting in a judicial 

 80 
capacity.  A similar view was taken by a Full Bench of Patna High Court in 
Dirji vs. Goabh , (AIR 1941 Pat. 65) where Chief Justice and Justices, 
Harries Fazl Ali, Manohar Lal and Fazl Ali observed that it was the 
functional aspect of a personal designata  that was important and ‘where an 
officer of the court, say a District Judge, is called upon to decide a certain 
matter not as a District Judge , but as a ‘ persona designata’, he may still be a 
court by reason of some special provisi on in the statute authorising him to 
decide the matter’.   
 
 
Section 11 of the 1996 Act here uses the word ‘decide’ in sub-section 
(7).  Therefore, on the same analogy, even if we make a deeming provision 
stating that the Judges in Sec. 11 are to  be deemed ‘persona designata’ their 
orders will still be amenable to Art. 226, as decided in the Konkan Railway 
case No. I.  That difficulty cannot be  by-passed by merely describing an 
administrative authority as a ‘persona designata’.   If a ‘judicial authority’ 
cannot be treated as a ‘persona designata’ by way of a deeming provision, 
then likewise, an administrative author ity cannot also be converted into a 
person acting in a purely private capac ity by making a deeming provision.  
Even after the said designation, the f unctional activity makes him to remain 
as an administrative authority (as per the principle decided in Konkan 
Railway No.I and as per the decision in Mahabaleshwarappa). 
 
In addition, if the Chief Justice of  India or the Chief Justice of the 
High Court is to decide certain preliminary issues under sec. 11 as is being 
done by the ICC Court under Art. 6 of the ICC Rules, 1998, then the 
question arises whether the Chief Justi ce can still be said to be acting in a 
purely personal capacity as a ‘persona  designata’.  Further, under the 
schemes framed by the Chief Justices of various High Courts in several 
States, the persons designated by the Ch ief Justices include judges of the 
High Court or the District Judges, depending upon the pecuniary value of the 
claims concerned.  In these circum stances, it is difficult for the Commission 
to accept the plea that the Ch ief Justice of India or the Chief Justices of the 
High Court can, by statute, be deem ed to be a 
persona designata, i.e., acting 
in a private capacity to keep him out of purview of Art. 226 altogether, when 
they appoint arbitrators or refer matte rs to another person or authority for 
such appointment. 
 
There is a distinction between cases where under the arbitration 
agreement, the parties straightaway agree to move the International Chamber 

 81 
of Commerce (ICC) or International Centre for Alternate Dispute Resolution 
(ICADR) or a Chamber of Commerce to appoint an arbitrator and cases 
under Sec. 11 where the statute empowers the Chief Justice of India or the 
Chief Justice of a High Court to appoint arbitrators and authorizes him 
further to designate anothe r person or authority to appoint arbitrators.  Thus 
if the statute has referred to thes e high constitutional functionaries to 
exercise these powers by virtue of their office as Judges of superior courts, it 
is difficult to accept the plea that they are persona designata. 
 
For the aforesaid reasons, we have to accept that the Chief justice of 
India or the Chief Justices of High C ourts in Sec. 11 cannot be treated as 
‘persona designata’ and that even if a statutory fiction is created by deeming 
them to be ‘persona designata’, it will be difficult to take them out of their 
status as constitutional functionaries exercising administrative powers in 
view of what has been deci ded by Konkan Railway case No. I  and, 
therefore, they cannot be kept out of the purview of Art. 226 of the 
Constitution. 
 
Coming back to the main point, as already referred to, the position is 
that by changing the jurisdiction from purely administrative to judicial, a 
three level hierarchy of remedies can be avoided  so far as international 
arbitration in India is concerned and Ar t. 226 will be totally avoided.  So far 
as purely domestic arbitration between Indian nationals is concerned, from 
three levels of litigation, it will be reduced because of Sec. 5 and the 
Explanation proposed in Sec. 5 to a single level remedy under Art. 136. 
Thus the suggestion to retain these functionaries as administrative authorities 
or as persona designata is not advantageous to the litigant. 
  
2.8.11  Mandatory or directory nature of sec.11(4), 11(5) and 11(6): 
 
 A question has arisen whether the time limits in sec. 11(4) and 11(5) 
are mandatory and whether in sec. 11(6) time limits have to be prescribed. 
 
  Section 11(4) provides that if a pa rty fails to appoint an arbitrator 
within 30 days from the receipt of a re quest to do so from the other party or 
where two other appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator 
within 30 days from the date of their appointment, the Chief Justice or any 
person or institution designated by him can pass orders regarding 
appointment of arbitrators. 

 82 
 
Again there is a similar time limit in sec.11(5) which states that failing 
any agreement referred to in sec. 11( 2), in an arbitration with a sole 
arbitrator, if the parties fail to agr ee on the arbitrator within 30 days from 
receipt of a request by one party from the other party to so agree, an 
appointment shall be made, upon a request from a party, by the Chief Justice 
or any person or institution designated by him.   
 
Question has arisen whether the time limit of 30 days (which we 
propose to increase to 60 days) in sec. 11(4) and sec. 11(5) is mandatory? In 
Naginbai C. Patel vs. U.O.I.  (1999 (2) Bom C.R: 1999(2) Arb, L.R.343), B. 
M.L. Ltd. vs. M.T.N.L. & others (2000(2) Arb. LR 190 (Del), the limit of 30 
days prescribed in sec. 11(4) and (5) were held to be mandatory and if the 
party who received notice did not take action within 30 days of receipt of 
notice, it would forfeit its right to appoint an arbitrator under the contract. A 
similar view was taken in Sharma & Co. vs. Eng.-in-Chief, Army Hqrs. New 
Delhi (2000 (2) Arb LR 31 (AP) under s ec.11(6).  However, in Datar 
Switchgears Ltd . vs. Tata Finance Ltd.  (2000(3) Arb. LR 447 (SC) = 200 
Suppl.(2) J.T. 226), the Supreme Cour t dealt with a case under sec. 11(6) 
which did not prescribe any time limit, unlike sub sections (4) and (5) of 
section 11. The Court held that it was not necessary to decide whether the 
time limits under sec.11(4) and (5) were mandatory or not. It held that under 
sec. 11(6) in as much as no time limit wa s fixed in that sub section, the right 
to appoint an arbitrator vested in the opposite party was not forfeited even 
after 30 days, provided the appointme nt was made by the opposite party 
before the first party, i.e., the part y which gave notice for appointment, had 
filed his application under sec.11. 
 
It has been suggested (i) that so far sec.  11(4) and sec. 11(5) are 
concerned, the view of the High Courts is correct and that the 30 days period 
which we propose to increase to 60 days must be treated as mandatory (ii) 
that so far as sec. 11(6) is concer ned, some time limit may be prescribed 
which again shall be mandatory. On  the other hand, it was submitted by 
some of those who participated in th e debate that the power under sec.11(4) 
and sec. 11(5) should not be treated as mandatory and no period should be 
prescribed under sec. 11(6). 
 
We shall deal first with sections 11 (4) and 11 (5) and then with sec, 
11 (6) separately:   
 

 83 
2.8.12  Section 11 (4) and 11 (5): 
 
It has been stated in a majority of cases that the party which receives a 
notice for appointment of an arbitrat or does not send any reply for months 
altogether.  If it is government departme nt or public sector undertaking or a 
statutory corporation, no one wants to  take any responsibility.  The other 
party is thus put in a fix as to whet her and when to approach the court under 
section 11. In fact, after the first party goes to court under section 11 then the 
above authorities claim that they have  right to appoint their own employee 
as arbitrator. This type of conduct does not appear to be fair.   
 
So far as sec. 11(4) and sec. 11( 5) are concerned, the Commission is 
of the view that the period should be  60 days and should be treated as 
mandatory.  It is, therefore, considered that a provision be made that if, after 
a request, arbitrators are not appointed within the prescribed time, the right 
to appointment, if any, conferred on the party to whom notice is issued, shall 
stand forfeited. 
 
2.8.13  Section 11 (6): 
 
Coming to sec. 11(6), the relevant provision is in three clauses and 
reads as follows:- 
 
“Sec.11(6): Where under an appointment procedure agreed upon by 
the parties – 
 
(a) a party fails as required under that procedure; or  
 
(b) the parties, or the two appoint ed arbitrators, fail to reach an 
agreement expected of them under that procedure; or 
 
(c) a person, including an instituti on, fails to perform any function 
entrusted to him, or it under that procedure, 
 
a party may request the Chief Justice or any person or institution designated 
by him to take the necessary meas ure, unless the agreement on the 
appointment procedure provides other means for securing the appointment.” 
 
 But in Dattar Switchgear, the Supreme Court while dealing with 
section 11 (6) refuse to hold that th ere are any time limitation so far as 

 84 
section 11 (6) is concerned.  However,  the party could take the measures 
referred to in section 11 (6) as long as the other party has not approached to 
the court under section 11.   In re gard to section 11 (6), Commission 
proposes that if the appointment pro cedure as agreed to, but no measures 
have been take under that procedure, are right to the said measures shall be 
deemed to have been waived.  Co mmission is not proposing any other time 
limits.   
  
A suggestion was also made at the Bombay seminar based on sec.17 
of the English Act, 1996 to make a provision for treating an arbitrator 
appointed by one party as the sole ar bitrator if the other party does not 
appoint its arbitrator.  The Commissi on is not inclined to recommend any 
such provision.  This situation is amply covered by sec.11(4)(a). 
 
The proposed amendments to section 11 are stated below in para 2.8.15 
 
2.8.14  Section 42 and Section 11: 
 
 In as much as the application under Section 11 is to the Supreme 
Court or the High Court on the judicial  side, it is necessary to make a 
provision in Section 42 as to where the subsequent applications are to be 
filed.  This is provided in proposed sub-section (5) of Section 42.  Under that 
sub section, if the arbitration is in India and the property is in India, the 
subsequent applications are to be filed in the courts specified in proposed 
Section 2 (1) (e), 
i.e., the Prinicipal court in the District or in the city or on 
the original side of the High Court, depending on the pecuniary limits of the 
courts (see para 2.30.5 and 2.30.6). 
 
2.8.15     Recommendations for recasting section 11: 
 
 
In the light of the above, sec.11 is proposed to be recast as follows:  
 
In section 11 of the principal Act,-  
 
 
(a) in sub-section (4),- 
 

 85 
(i) in clauses (a) and (b), for th e words “thirty days”, the words 
“sixty days’ shall be substituted; 
 
(ii) for the words, “the appointment shall be made, upon request 
of a party by the Chief Justice or any person or institution 
designated by him.”, the follo wing shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
 
“the right to make such appointment shall be 
deemed to have been waived, if such appointment is not 
made within the said period and the appointment shall be 
made, upon request of a party or any person or institution 
designated by the High Court or any person or institution 
designated by it.”  
 
 
 
(b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an 
arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the parties fail to agree on the 
arbitrator within sixty days from th e receipt of a request by one party 
from the other party to so agree,  then the right to make such 
appointment shall be deemed to have been waived, if such 
appointment is not made within the said period and the appointment 
shall be made by the High Cour t or any person or institution 
designated by it.”  
 
 
(5A) Where the appointment proce dure contained in the arbitration 
agreement  becomes void under sub-section (1) of section 10A, the 
parties may agree to appoint an ar bitrator within sixty days of a 
request from one of the  parties: 
 
Provided that where the parties fail to agree on an 
arbitrator within the said period of sixty days, the appointment 
shall be made, upon request of a party, by the High Court or 
any person or institution designated by it.” 

 86 
 
 
 
(c)  in sub-section (6)- 
 
for the words, “ a party may re quest the Chief Justice or any 
person or institution designated by him to take  the necessary 
measure, unless the agreement on the appointment procedure 
provides other means for securing the appointment.”, the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-  
 
“and where such measures are not  taken in accordance with the 
appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties, the right to 
take such measures shall be deem ed to have been waived and a 
party may request the High Cour t or any person or institution 
designated by it to take  the necessary measure, unless the 
agreement on the appointment procedure provides other means 
for securing the appointment.”  
 
 
 
 
 
(d)  in sub-section (7)- 
 
a.  for the words, “ the Ch ief Justice or any person or 
institution designated by him”, the words “ the High Court 
or any person or institution designated by it” shall be 
substituted; 
b. after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (5)”, the 
words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (5A)”, 
shall be inserted. 
    
 
(e) in sub-section (8) for the word s “ The Chief Justice or any person 
or       institution designated by him”, the words “ The High Court or 
any person or institution designated by it”, shall be substituted. 
 
 
 

 87 
 
(f) for sub-section (9), the following s ub-section shall be substituted,   
namely:- 
 
“(9) In the case of appointment of a sole or third arbitrator in an 
international arbitration (whether  commercial or not),the Supreme 
Court or the person or instituti on designated by it may appoint an 
arbitrator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the parties 
where the parties belong  to different nationalities.” 
 
(g)   in sub-section (10)- 
 
c. for the words “The Chief Justice may make such scheme as 
he may deem appropriate ” the words “The High Court may 
make such scheme as it may deem appropriate,” shall be 
substituted; 
d. after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (5)”, the 
words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (5A)”, 
shall be inserted. 
 
 
(h) for sub-section (11), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
 
“(11) Where more than one re quest has been made under sub-
section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub- section (5A) or sub-section (6) to  
different High courts or their de signates, the High Court or its 
designate to whom a request has b een first made under the relevant 
sub-section shall alone be competent to decide on the request.” 
 
 
 
(i) for sub-section (12) the following subsections shall be  substituted, 
namely.- 
 
“(a) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), 
(6), (7), (8) and (10), arise in  an international arbitration 
(whether commercial or not), the reference to “High Court” 
wherever it occurs in those sub-s ections, shall be construed as a 
reference to the “Supreme Court”; 

 88 
 
(b) Where the matters referred to  in sub-sections (4), (5), 
(5A) (6), (7), (8) and sub-s ection (10) arise in any other 
arbitration,  the reference to the “High Court” in those sub-
sections shall be construed as a reference to the High Court 
within whose territorial limits  th e principal  civil court or the 
court of the  principal judge of city civil court referred to in 
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2, as the case may be, is 
situated and where the High Court itself is the Court within the 
meaning of  that clause, to that High Court.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) Where an application is made  to the Supreme Court or the High 
Court ,as the case may be, under this section  by a party raising any 
question - 
 
(a) that there is no dispute in existence; 
  (b) that the arbitration agreemen t or any clause thereof, is null 
and void or inoperative; 
(c) that the arbitration agr eement is incapable of being 
performed; 
 
 (d) that the arbitration agreement is not in existence ; 
 

 89 
then the Supreme Court or th e High Court ,as the case may 
be, may, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (14), 
decide the same. 
 
(14) If the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case may be, 
considers that the questions raised  under sub-section (13), cannot be 
decided  because, 
i. the relevant facts or documents are in dispute; or  
ii. oral evidence is necessary to be adduced; or 
iii. the inquiry into these questi ons  is likely to  delay the 
reference to arbitration; or 
iv. the request  for deciding the question was unduly 
delayed; or 
v. the decision on the question is not likely to produce 
substantial savings in costs of arbitration; or 
vi. there is no good reason as to why these questions should 
be decided at that stage, 
 
it shall refuse to decide the said  questions and  shall refer  the 
said questions also to the arbitral tribunal .” 

 90 
 
2.9.1 Grounds of challenge to the a ppointment of arbitrators – more 
details to be disclosed by proposed arbitrators: Section 12 
Section 12 deals with grounds of cha llenge to the appointment of an 
arbitrator while sec. 13 deals with the challenge procedure.  
Section 12(1) states that a person who is approached in connection 
with his possible appointment as an ar bitrator shall disclose in writing “any 
circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence 
or impartiality”. Sub-section (2) of sec. 12 lays this responsibility on the 
arbitrator even during the course of arbitration proceedings. Sub section (3) 
of sec. 12 enables a party to challenge the arbitrator only if (a) circumstances 
exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or 
impartiality, or (b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the 
parties. Sub section (4) refers to one’s  own appointed arbitrator and he can 
be challenged only for reasons of which he becomes aware after the 
appointment is made. 
 While dealing with sec. 10A, the que stion of disqualification or rather 
lack of independence of named arbitrat ors, in cases where both parties are 
private parties and also where one of the parties is Government or a public 
sector undertaking or statutory corpora tion, has been considered separately 
in relation to clauses which enable the employee or any person having some 
business connection, to be appointed.  
2.9.2 Now we shall advert to certain other aspects under section 12.  So far 
as sec. 12(1) is concerned, it is sa id that the “circu mstances” which the 
arbitrator is to disclose are those which he considers relevant so as to raise a 
justifiable doubt as to his independe nce or impartiality. After all, the 
circumstances are mostly within his personal knowledge and unless there is 
an obligation to disclose all relevant facts, without limiting them to those 
which, in his view,. can raise justif iable doubts, there is likelihood of an 
unfair adjudication. In other words, sec. 12(1) can be made a little more 
specific as in the ICC Rules. 
 The earlier ICC Rules required the arbitrator to disclose: 
“Whether there exists any past or  present relationship , direct or 
indirect, with any of the parties or any of their counsel, whether 
financial, professional, social or other kind.” 

 91 
Business or professional relationship or connection with subject matter of 
arbitration or its outcome or prior c onnection with some dispute have been 
treated as important matter to be disc losed by the arbitrators.  It would, 
therefore, be appropriate to remove  the vagueness in Section 12 by adding 
some words in section 12(1).  After such addition, the substituted section 12 
(1) will read as follows: 
    
“(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible 
appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any 
circumstances, such as the exis tence of any past or present 
relationship, either direct or indirect , with any of the parties or any of 
their counsel, whether financial, business, professional, social or other 
kind or in relation to the subject ma tter in dispute, which are likely to 
give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality.”
 
 
2.10.1 Section 13 – Rejection of request  for making a provision for 
appeal in section 37(2) against interlocutory orders of the 
arbitral tribunal rejecting a plea  of bias or disqualification: 
proposed Explanation II in section 34(2) 
 
Though there were strong pleas for an interlocutory appeal under Section 37 
(2), we have rejected this plea, as st ated below.  Of course, Explanation II is 
added in Section 34 (2) to clarify existing position.  
The main debate here is that section 13 must be brought into 
conformity with the Model Law and that if a plea of bias or disqualification 
of arbitrators is raised, it should be decided as a preliminary issue by the 
arbitrators and if the plea is not accepte d, there should be an immediate right 
of appeal.  
Where the arbitrator has accepted the plea of bias or disqualification, 
no application to the Court is contemplated and this is rightly so. There is no 
need to provide any appeal in as much as when the arbitrator himself agrees 
with the plea, he has only to withdraw.    
 
Section 13(4) requires the continuati on of arbitration proceedings in 
the event of the arbitral tribunal rej ecting a plea of bias on grounds referred 
to in sec. 12.   The remedy in sec. 13( 5) is that the rejection of the plea by 
the arbitral tribunal can be questioned after the award, and it is said that this 
is not a fair procedure and may ultimately result in waste of money and time, 

 92 
if the plea is upheld by the court ultimately. It is also pointed out that even 
though sec.13(5) contemplates an application to set aside the award after it is 
made to the Court under sec.34 out no such right to question the award on 
these grounds has been included in sec. 34. Sec. 34(2)(v), it is said, does not, 
meet the situation.  Moreover, the word  ‘only’ used in sec. 34 runs counter 
in respect of the provision under sec. 13(5).  Therefore , section 34(2) is, to 
be amended to clarify existing pos ition by adding Explanation II.  A 
provision is proposed to be made in section 34 by way of Explanation to 
clarify that the applicant can question the order of rejection of the plea of 
bias by the arbitral tribunal as pe rmitted by section 13(5).  Though this 
remedy is mentioned in section 13(5), this  is omitted in sec tion 34.  Further, 
the use of the word ‘only’ in section 34(2) has created a doubt.   
 
It is, therefore, proposed to add an  Explanation below section 34(2) as 
follows by way of clarification:- 
 
In sub-section (2), the ‘Explan ation’ shall be numbered as 
‘Explanation 1’ and after the Explanation 1 so renumbered, the following 
Explanation shall be inserted ,namely:- 
 
“Explanation.- II For the rem oval of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that while seeking to set aside an arbitral award under 
sub-section (1), the applicant may include the pleas questioning 
the decision of the arbitral tribunal rejecting –  
 
(i) a challenge  made under  sub-section (2) of section 13;  
 
(ii) the plea made  under sub-sec tion (2) or sub-section (3) of 
section 16.” 
2.10.2  Now the question is whether it is desirable to provide for an 
immediate appeal to the Court under sec. 37 against the decision of arbitral 
tribunal rejecting the plea of bias or disqualification or whether such 
challenge can only be after the award?  In case any challenge to the decision 
rejecting the plea of bias or disqualifi cation is to be provided, should it be 
said in sec. 13(4) that pending the deci sion in the Court, the arbitral tribunal 
‘may’ go ahead with the arbitral proceedings, by replacing the word ‘shall’. 
The English Act, 1996 does not cont ain any provision for challenging  
an arbitral tribunal before the same tr ibunal and a decision thereon.  On the 

 93 
other hand it provides in sec.24 a proce dure before the Court for removal of 
the arbitral tribunal.  The Model Law and  the 1996 Act do not provide any 
direct approach to the Court for removal of arbitrators. 
The Model Law in Art. 13 provides for an immediate appeal against 
an interlocutory order of the arbitral tribunal rejecting a plea of bias or 
disqualification, while the said reme dy is omitted in the 1996 Act in sec. 13 
as well as in sub section (2) of sec. 37. 
2.10.3  A plea that sec.13(4) is ar bitrary or discriminatory in not 
providing for any appeal under sec.34 or sec.37, when the plea of bias or 
disqualification is rejected, has been negatived in M. Mohan Reddy vs. UOI 
(2000(1) Arb L.R. 39 (AP).  A writ petiti on  challenging the appointment of 
an arbitrator was held not maintainable in view of the procedure under the 
Act (See 
Punjab Elect. Board  vs. Indane Ltd. ) (2000(1) Pun L.R.4).  The 
Bombay High Court has held in Kitiku Imports Trade Pvt. Ltd.  vs. Savithri 
Metals Ltd.  (1999(2) Ab. L.R. 405) that the only remedy where the plea of 
bias is rejected is to wait till the award is passed and th en challenge the 
award and that the spirit and scheme  of the Act is not to permit any 
immediate intervention by the Court for that would result in stay of 
proceedings.  Of course, in Anup Tech. Equipment P. Ltd.  vs. Ms. Ganpati 
Coop. Housing Society  (AIR 1999 Bom 219) it was held by the same court 
that the arbitral tribunal’s decision can  be challenged under Art. 226.  It is 
not possible for us to agree with th is decision of Bombay High Court in 
Anup Technical Equipment (P) Ltd. case. 
In various discussions on the Cons ultation Paper with retired Judges 
and lawyers, two extreme views emerged, one view stating that it would be 
waste of money and time if there is no immediate appeal and if the award is 
ultimately set aside.  The other vi ew, equally vehement, was that any 
immediate court interference would be  abused by filing frivolous objections 
against the award.  The first view is  supported by the fact that there is a 
similar provision in the Model Law and there is also no provision for 
removal.  Even sec.15 does not cover such a situation. 
 It is true, the Model Law provides in Art.13(3) an immediate right of 
appeal and  the challenge to the arbitr ator’s decision on bias can be made in 
the Court within 30 days.  It also says that the decision of the Court is not to 
be subject to further appeal.  While th e request in the Court is pending, the 
arbitral tribunal (including the challenged arbitrator) ‘may’ continue the 
arbitral proceedings and make an award.  In the Consultation Paper 

 94 
(Annexure –II), this provision was proposed  to be added in sec.37 and also 
that the word ‘shall’ in sec.13(4) be replaced by the word ‘may’. 
 It has been suggested by the proponents of ‘no immediate appeal’ that 
even if the word shall is replaced by ‘may’ in sec.13(4) that may not solve 
the problem in as much as the arbitral  tribunal may in most cases decide not 
to go ahead when its decision is under challenge.  On the other hand, there 
have been articles in Indian legal jour nals strongly suggesting that ‘bias’ is 
so crucial a matter which cannot be  allowed to re main unchallenged 
immediately. 
 It is true that several countries  have adopted the Model Law providing 
immediate appeal against an order rejec ting a plea of bias and also in using 
the word ‘may’ in relation to continuance of proceedings by the arbitral 
tribunal (See sec.1037(3) of German Arbitration Act, 1998, sec.13(2) of 
Schedule to the Australian Act, Art. 13(3) of the Canadian Act, 1985, Art. 
13(3) of the Schedule to the Irela nd Act, 1998, Art. 1393 of the first 
schedule of the New Zealand Act, 1999). 
 The UN Commission in its Report (1985) on the adoption of the 
Model Law also considered this question elaborately (see paras 121 to 134) 
and finally came to the conclusion that if  the plea of bias is rejected, there 
must be an immediate appeal.  It c onsidered different alternatives.  It 
considered (in para 122) the plea that if Art. 13(3) is deleted, it would 
‘reduce the risk of dilatory tactics’.  It also considered pleas that, at any rate, 
Art. 13(3) may be restricted to cases of a single arbitrator or a majority 
against whom a plea of bias was rais ed.  Another suggestion was that it 
should be left to the tribunal whether to permit immediate Court intervention 
or not, when a plea of bias was refused.  On the other hand, there were 
suggestions (para 123) that pending court decision, the arbitral tribunal 
should not be allowed to go ahead si nce such ‘continuation would cause 
unnecessary waste of time and costs if the court later sustained the challenge 
or that it should not go forward if the court granted a stay’.  After 
considering all these suggestions the UN Commission observed that the 
‘prevailing view, however, was to retain the system adopted in Art. 13 of the 
Model Law since it would stri ke
 an apparent balance  between the need for 
preventing obstruction or dilatory tactic s and the desire of avoiding waste of 
time and money. 

 95 
 Before us reliance was also placed  on the opinion of certain writers 
for providing an immediate appeal.  Mr. Aron Broches, Kluwer in the 
Commentary on UNCITRAL Model Law, 1990 has no doubt said: 
“At the Working Group’s fourth session, a resolution was adopted 
which, on the one hand, permitted immediate recourse to the Court, 
with the attendant risk that such  recourse may be used a delaying 
tactic and, on the other hand, permitted (but did not oblige) the arbitral 
tribunal to continue the arbitral proceedings.  This enables the tribunal 
either to limit the adverse effect s on an unjustified challenge for 
dilatory purposes by continuing the proceedings, or to suspend the 
proceedings where it considers that th e interest of the parties is best 
served by getting the cha llenge question out of the way rather than 
letting them run the risk of waste of time and money on an award 
which may ultimately be set aside under article 34.” 
 
Adverting to the US procedure (which is not UNCITRAL except in 
some states) where immediate intervention in matters where a plea of bias is 
rejected, Redfern and Hunter say that there the procedure is unsatisfactory as 
parties are not allowed to challenge the decision till the award is made.  
They have mentioned this in pa ra 4.65 referring to Florsynth Inc.  vs. 
Rickhote (750 F.2d. 171(1984), Hunt vs. Mobil Oil Corpn.  (583F. 
Suppl.1092(1984) and Morelite Construction Corp.  vs. New York City 
District Carpenters benefit Funds, 748.F 2d.79 (1984), as follows: 
 
“This means that a party with a va lid objection to the composition of 
the tribunal would have to make an objection “on the record” and then 
wait until the end of the case before  challenging the award ( with the 
attendant waste of time and money if the challenge is successful)”. 
 
In this context, they have suggested as follows (para 5.42): 
 
“Usually the appropriate course for an arbitral tribunal is to issue an 
interim award on jurisdiction, if asked to do so.  This enables the 
parties to know where they stand at  an early stage; and it will save 
them spending 
time and money  on arbitral proceedings that prove to 
be  invalid.” 
 
 While the above argument in favour of providing an immediate appeal 
under sub section (2) of sec. 37 agains t an order of the arbitral tribunal 

 96 
refusing a plea of bias or disqualifi cation is strong and it will be rather 
unfortunate if one has to question th e rejection of the plea only after the 
award is passed, the Commission feels that if an immediate appeal is 
provided, the party who wants to delay the arbitral proceedings will, in 
almost every case, file an objection befo re the arbitral tribunal pleading bias 
or other disqualification  even at th e commencement of the proceedings, and 
then file an appeal under sec. 37(2).  There is indeed a lot of scope for abuse.  
Even if we say that pending the app eal, the arbitral proceedings may be 
continued, still the arbitral tribunal, in  most cases, may be inclined to wait 
the result of the appeal.  After due deliberation, the Commission is of the 
opinion that there should not be an immediate right of appeal under sec. 37 
where the plea of bias or disqualifica tion raised under sec. 13 is rejected by 
the arbitral tribunal.  
Hence, no amendment is contemplated  in section 37(2) 
for the above situation arising under sec. 13.  
 
2.11.1  Termination of the mandate of an arbitrator: Sections 14 and 15: 
 
Sections 14 and 15 deal with term ination of the mandate of an 
arbitrator. It was suggested that a pr ovision should  be made for fixing their 
fee.  This suggestion is accepted. 
 
 It has been suggested that in sec. 15(2), a provision regarding 
appointment of a substitute arbitrator  within 30 days from the date of 
termination of the mandate of an arb itrator, may be fixed, unless the rules 
provide otherwise. 
 
 This suggestion is also accepted. 
 
  The proposed amendments in section 14 and 15 are as follows: 
 
2.11.2  In section 14  of the Principal Act, after subsection (3), the 
following subsection shall be inserted, namely : 
 
“(4) Where the mandate of the arbitrator has been terminated, the 
court may decide the quantum of  fee payable to such arbitrator .” 
 
2.11.3   In section 15 of the Principal Act,- 
 

 97 
(a) in subsection (2) for the words “a substitute arbitrator shall be 
appointed”, the words “ a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed 
within a period of thirty days” shall be substituted; 
 
(b) after sub-section (4) the followi ng sub-section shall be inserted 
namely:- 
 
“(5) Where the mandate of an arbitrator has been terminated, the court 
may decide the quantum of fee payable to such arbitrator.” 
 
2.12.1 Section 16 - Request for a ri ght of appeal in section 37(2) 
against an interlocutory order of  the arbitral tribunal rejecting 
the pleas under sub-sections (2 ) and (3) of  section 16 –  
rejected:  
 
 Section 16 of the 1996 Act is base d on Art.16 of the Model Law but 
certain aspects of Art.16 of the Model Law have been omitted in the 1996 
Act.  The debate is on the question of inclusion of those aspects in sec.16 so 
as to bring the section into conformity with Art.16 of the Model Law. 
 
Section 16 of the Indian Act 1996 reads as follows: 
 
 “Section 16: (1) The arbitral tribuna l may rule on its own jurisdiction, 
including ruling on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of 
the arbitration agreement, and for that purpose,- 
 
(a) An arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as 
an agreement independent of the other terms of the contract; and  
(b) A decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void 
shall not entail ipso jure  the invalidity of the arbitration clause. 
 
(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be 
raised not later than the submissi on of the statement of defence; 
however, a party shall not be precluded from raising such a plea 
merely because that he has appoi nted, or participated in the 
appointment of, an arbitrator. 
(3) A plea that the arbitral tri bunal is exceeding the scope of its 
authority shall be raised as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the 
scope of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings. 

 98 
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in subsection 
(2) or subsection (3) and, where th e arbitral tribunal takes a decision 
rejecting a plea continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an 
arbitral award. 
 
(6) A party aggrieved by such an  arbitral award may make an 
application for setting aside such an  arbitral award in accordance with 
section 34.” 
 
The section is in two parts.   
 
2.12.2  The first part relates to the pow er of the arbitral tribunal to rule 
on its own jurisdiction, including on a ny objections with respect to the 
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement.  The second one is that the 
arbitration clause is to be independent of the main contract and even if the 
main contract becomes null and void, th e arbitration clause survives.  The 
arbitrator under the 1940 Act too enj oyed power to decide upon his own 
jurisdiction, but under that Act, this power was implied as being recognized 
by law though there was no specific provision therefor.   
 
2.12.3  So far as the second part of  section 16 is concerned, it deals 
with the autonomy of the arbitration clause.  The princi ple was somewhat 
accepted by the House of Lords in Heyman vs. Darwins 1942 AC 356  but 
the principle, more or less in terms of sec. 16(1) was accepted by the English 
Courts in Harbour Assurance Co. (UK) Ltd.  vs. Kansa General International 
Insurance Co. Ltd.  1993 QB 701 as affirmed by the Court of Appeal in 
A…………… Assurance Co.  (……..)  Ltd. vs. K……….. Geneal 
International Assurance Co. Ltd. 1993(3) All E.R. 897. 
  
In the Model law, Art.16 contains onl y three clauses.  Clauses (1) and 
(2) thereof correspond to clauses (1) to (4) of sec. 16 of the Indian Act of 
1996 but the Model law contains a furt her sub-clause (3) which reads as 
follows and which is absent in Sec.16 of   the Indian Act of 1996.  Clause (3) 
of Article 16 of the Model law reads as follows to the extent relevant to the 
present discussion :- 
 
“16(3) The arbitral tribunal may rule on a plea referred to in paragraph 
(2) of this article either as a pr eliminary question or in award on the 
merits.  If the arbitral tribunal rules as a preliminary question that it 
has jurisdiction, any party may request, within thirty days after having 

 99 
received notice of that ruling, the cour t specified in article 6 to decide 
the matter, which decision shall be subject to no appeal; while such  
request is pending, the arbitral tr ibunal may continue the arbitral 
proceedings and make an award.” 
  
The Indian Act of 1996 does not contain a similar provision.   In 
section 16 enabling the arbitrators to d ecide the above issues as preliminary 
issues or for an immediate Court intervention if the plea is rejected, as in the 
Model Law.   Under Sec.37( 2)(a) of the Act, an appeal is provided to the 
Court only against an Order of the ar bitrators accepting the pleas referred in 
Sec.16(2) or (3) but not where the said pleas are rejected, though the Model 
Law provides an immediate remedy even in cases where such pleas are 
rejected.   
 
2.12.4  Further, in Sec. 16(5) of th e Indian Act 1996, it appears that the 
word ‘shall’ governs the word ‘decide’ as well as the word ‘continue’ which 
means that even if an app eal is to be filed under Sec.16(6), i.e.,  (in case of 
rejection of the plea of jurisdiction), th ere will be no discretion left with the 
arbitrators to proceed or not to proceed with the arbitration. This, it is said, 
again goes contrary to the corresponding provision in the Model Law in 
Art.16(3). It is, therefore, suggested that it is necessary to further amend 
Sec.16(5) by using the words “it may”  after the words “rejecting the plea” 
and before the words “continue with…” 
 
 It is, no doubt, true that the need for an immediate appeal was 
elaborately considered by the UN Co mmission in its Report on the adoption 
of the UNCITRAL Model (paras 157 to 163).  It stated that the Commission 
adopted the principle that the competence of the arbitral tribunal to decide its 
own jurisdiction should be controlled by the Court.  But there were divergent 
views as to the extent of control and the stage at which control was to be 
imposed (para 157).  One view was that  the remedy should be only after the 
award as this ‘would prevent abuse by a party for purposes of delay or 
obstruction of proceedings’ (para 158).  The other view was that there 
should be instant appeal, by requiring leav e of the Court initially or to adopt 
the method in sec.13(3), namely, “short time-period, finality of decision (of 
court),  discretion to continue the ar bitral proceedings and to render an 
award” (para 159).  Yet another view was that, it was necessary to allow 
parties to instantly resort to the C ourt in order to obtain certainty on the 
important question of the arbitral tr ibunal’s jurisdiction” (para 160).  The 

 100
UN Commission, “after deliberation”, deci ded to provide for instant control 
in Art. 16(3) along the lines of the solution provided in Art. 13(3). 
 
 One other interesting aspect ma y be noted here.  The UN Commission 
felt that in case the arbitrators felt that  they had no jurisdiction, there should 
be no further intervention by the Court a nd that Art. 5 would operate.  But, 
the Indian Act of 1996 has provided an appeal under sec. 37(2) against an 
order of the arbitrators accepting the plea that they have no jurisdiction.  In 
contrast,  it  omitted to provide an appeal as done under the Model law in 
cases where the plea of absence of jurisdiction was rejected. 
 
Reliance is placed on the arbitration statutes of some other countries 
which provide an immediate appeal agai nst an order rejecting a plea of want 
of jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal under section 16. It is pointed out that, 
in  fact,  Sec.1040 of the German Ac t 1998 provides in Sub-Clause (3) for a 
preliminary ruling by the arbitrators and for an appeal to the Court; similarly 
article 16(3) of the Zimbabwe Act, 1996, Article 16(5) of the Korean Act 
1999, Article 16(3) of the Irish Act 1998,  Article 16(3) of the Canadian Act 
1985 and Article 16 of the first sc hedule to the New Zealand Act 1996 
permit the arbitrators to decide the jurisdictional issues as preliminary issues, 
with a right of appeal to the Court.   The Model law and all these various 
Acts further provide that pending the decision by the Court, it will be open 
to the arbitrators either to proceed with the arbitration or not.  All the statutes 
use the word ‘may’ in this context.   
 
 It has been pointed out by Alan Redfern & Martin Henry in their ‘Law 
& Practice of International Commercial Arbitration’ (1999) that the extent of 
court intervention permitted by various national laws varies in a large 
measure.  The authors have expressed (para 9.36) as follows: 
 
“The extent of Court intervention permitted by different states may be 
viewed as a spectrum.  At one end of the spectrum are the states such 
as France, which exercise minimum control over international arbitral 
awards, and Switzerland, which allo ws non-Swiss parties to ‘contract 
out’ of controls altogether.  In the middle of the scale, are grouped a 
considerable number of states that ha ve adopted (either in full or with 
some modifications) the 
grounds of recourse laid down in the Model 
Law.  At the other end of the spectru m are countries such as England, 
which operate a range of controls….” 
 

 101
They have referred (para 5.02), to the requirement of ‘public policy’ 
for such intervention which is as follows: 
 
“On one view, it might be said th at arbitrators should be given 
virtually unlimited powers, in order to encourage speed and 
effectiveness in the arbitral process ; but the requirements of  public 
policy, whether national or international, make some control 
necessary so as to ensure that the parties are not without recourse  if 
there is wrongful conduct on the part of  an  arbitral tribunal.  A single 
judge sitting in a court of first inst ance is usually subject to control by 
an appellate procedure. Although the modern trend is to allow 
decisions of arbitral tribunals to go unchallenged, so that they are 
effectively final and binding upon th e parties, the need for some 
control over the way in which these decisions are reached is 
recognized by most, if not quite all, systems of law.  In particular, it is 
considered important to ensure th at an arbitral tribunal gives the 
parties a fair hearing and that it decides only matters within its 
competence or jurisdiction).” 
 
The same authors further say that if an issue of jurisdiction is raised before 
the arbitral tribunal, it may pass an interim award (para 5.40): 
 
“In many jurisdictions (England, Swit zerland etc.), this interim award 
may be challenged immediately in the local courts. In some 
jurisdictions, a reluctant responde nt can challenge the arbitral 
tribunal’s jurisdiction in the courts before any award has been issued 
(sec.32 of English Act).  By these means a final decision on the issue 
of jurisdiction may be obtained at an early stage  in the arbitral 
proceedings. 
  
The system under which a nationa l court is involved in the 
question of jurisdiction before the arbitral tribunal has issued a final 
award on the merits is known as ‘c oncurrent control’. The advantage 
of this system is that it enables the parties to know relatively quickly  
where they stand; and (unless the ar bitral tribunal decides to continue 
with the proceedings pending a decisi on from the relevant court) they 
will save time and money if the arbitration proceedings prove to be 
groundless.” 
 

 102
It is true, as stated above, that if  there is an imme diate appeal  as 
permitted by Model Law, such a proce dure has its own advantages. The 
above authors point out that there are ‘broadly two arguments against 
concurrent control’.  First, it is argued that recourse to the courts during the 
course of arbitral proceedings sha ll not be encouraged, since arbitral 
proceedings shall, so far as possi ble, be conducted without outside 
‘interference’.  Secondly, and more pr agmatically, it is argued that to allow 
recourse to the courts during the cour se of an arbitration is likely to 
encourage delaying tactics on the part of a reluctant respondent.  The authors 
say (5.40): 
 
“This question was so much debated during  the preparation  of the 
Model Law.  Finally, however, the so lution of concurrent control was 
adopted” (Art.16) 
 
 
Thus, the Model Law ultimately provi ded for an appeal against the 
interlocutory order of the arbitral tribunal rejecting a plea of want of 
jurisdiction. 
 
2.12.5  The question then is as to whether sec.16 is to be amended in 
view of reliance on the above opinion of leading authors and hardship 
referred to. 
 
After serious deliberation, the Commi ssion has taken the view that if 
an immediate appeal is provided in section 37(2) as under the Model law 
against orders of the arbitral tribunal under section 16, rejecting an objection 
as to the tribunal’s jurisdiction, th e provision is likely to be abused  and even 
if it is said that pending an appeal befo re the court, the arbitral proceedings 
may go on, it is more likely that th e arbitral tribunal may suspend its 
proceedings during that period.  In view  of the possibility of the abuse, if a 
right of appeal is provided against interlocutory orders, the Commission has 
decided not to give importance to the weighty arguments in favour of a right 
of appeal set out above.  The remedy is only to make an application for 
setting aside the award after the award as provided under section 16(6). 
 
It is, therefore, felt not proper to provide for any appeal against an 
order refusing a plea of want of jurisd iction.    Sections 16 and 37(2) will 
remain unamended.   
 

 103
2.12.6  But in section 34, it is to be  clarified by way of an explanation 
that the applicant, while seeking to set aside the award,  can attack the 
interlocutory order of the arbitral tribunal rejecting a plea of want of 
jurisdiction, as permitted by section 16(6). 
 
 The proposed ‘Explanation II’ in sec tion 34 is by way of clarification 
of what is provided in section 16(6).  We have already referred to this 
Explanation in our discussion under section 13 in para 2.10.1.  
 
2.13.1 Section 17: Interim measures and powers of arbitral 
tribunal to be further amplified. 
 
 Section 17(1) states that unless ot herwise agreed by the parties, the 
arbitral tribunal may, at the request of  a party, order a party to take any 
interim measures of “ protection” as the arbitral tribunal may consider 
necessary in respect of the subject matter  of the dispute.  Sub-section  (2) 
states that the arbitral tribunal may require a party to provide “appropriate 
security” in connection with a measure ordered under sub section (1). 
 
 It will be seen that section 17(1) permits interim measures for 
‘protection of the 
subject matter of the dispute  and sec.17(2) deals with 
‘appropriate security’, to be directed. 
 
 It has been suggested that an arbitr al tribunal shall be  vested with all 
the powers of a Civil Court and that a ny infraction of its orders must be 
allowed to be treated as ‘contempt’ of  the arbitral tribunal liable to be 
punished straightway.  It was suggested  that powers to require a witness to 
attend and powers of injunction or appoint ment of receiver or attachment of 
third party’s property should be also  granted with a condition that the 
tribunal could impose various penalties for violation of its directions. 
 
 This request appears to be clearly not permissible in law.  As stated by 
Redfern and Hunter (1999) in para 1.40: 
 
“…power to require the attendance of  witnesses under penalty of fine 
or imprisonment or to enforce awards by attachment of bank accounts 
or the sequestration of assets, are powers which form part of the 
prerogative of the state.  They are not powers that any state is likely to 
delegate to a private arbitral tribunal, however eminent or well-
intentioned that arbitral tribunal ma y be.  In practice, if it becomes 

 104
necessary for an arbitral tribunal to  take coercive action in order to 
deal properly with the case before it, such action must usually be 
taken indirectly, through the machinery of the local  courts, rather 
than directly, as a judge himself can do.” 
 
The authors further elaborate (see para 5.07): 
 
“The powers conferred upon an arb itral tribunal by the parties, 
whether directly or indirectly, fa ll short of the powers which may be 
exercised by a national court.  A C ourt, which derives its authority 
from the state,  has formidable coercive powers at its disposal to 
ensure obedience to its orders.  An  arbitral tribunal does not possess 
such powers.  The parties cannot confer upon a private tribunal the 
coercive powers over property and pe rsons that are conferred by the 
state upon a national court.  In rec ognition of this fact, many systems 
of law supplement the powers of the arbitral tribunals”. 
 
 Hence, powers to impose punishme nt etc. cannot be conferred on 
arbitral tribunal. 
 
Section 38 of the English Act, 1996 c onfers powers on the arbitral tribunal 
to (i) direct security for costs, (ii) issue directions with regard to subject 
matter of dispute in possession or under ownership of parties, (iii) as also for 
inspection, photographing, preservation, custody or detention of property- by 
the tribunal or by an expert or by a party (iv) ordering samples to be taken or 
observations be made of or experime nt conducted on the property (v) direct 
party or witness to be examined on oath or affirmation and to administer the 
same (vi) issue directives to a part y for preservation for purposes of any 
evidence in his custody or control.  Th ere can be no difficulty in enlarging 
sec.17 by adopting the various clauses of sec.38 of the English Act. 
 
 It may, however, be noted that under sec.9, the parties can approach 
the ‘Court’, even while the arbitr ation proceedings are going on, for 
necessary interim orders.  So far as C ourt assistance is concerned, sec. 27 of 
the Act states that the arbitral tribunal or a party with the previous approval 
of the tribunal, may apply for assist ance in taking evidence.  Sec.27(5) 
permits penalties and punishments to be imposed by the court. 
 
2.13.2  A suggestion has been made that the heading of this section 
may be changed, in as much as on a comparison with section 9, contentions 

 105
are being raised before the arbitral tribunals that it has all the powers to grant 
‘interim measures’ which the court can grant under section 9.  It has also 
been suggested that the powers of the arbitral tribunal to grant interim orders 
may be listed out in section 17. 
 
 These suggestions are accepted and section 17 is enlarged by adding 
certain extra powers similar to those listed in section 38 of the English 
Arbitration Act, 1996.  The heading to the section is also altered. 
 
2.13.3  Therefore sec. 17 can be  amended on the following lines, by 
modifying its heading also: 
Interim directions by arbitral tribunal and other powers 
 
“17. The arbitral tribunal may, pending arbitral proceedings, direct- 
 
(a)  at the request of a party to th e arbitral proceedings, the other party 
to take steps for the protection of the subject matter of the dispute in 
the manner considered necessary by the arbitral tribunal; or 
 
(b) a party, to furnish appropriate security  in connection with the 
directions issued under clause (a);or  
 
(c )a party making any claim, to furnish security for the costs of 
arbitration; or 
 
(d) in relation to any pr operty which is the subject matter of arbitral 
proceedings and which is owned by or  is in the possession of a party 
to the proceedings –  
 
(i) the taking of photographs, in spection, preservation, custody 
or detention of the property by the ar bitral tribunal, by an expert or by 
a party for the purposes of inspection; or 
 
(ii) the taking of samples from,  or making of any observation, 
or conducting any experiment upon the said property; or  
 

 106
(e) a party or witness to be examin ed on oath or affirmation, and for 
that purpose administer, any necessary oath or direct the taking of any 
necessary affirmation, or 
 
(f) a party to take steps for the pr eservation of any evidence in his 
custody or control which may be necessary for the purpose of the 
proceedings.” 
 
2.14.1  Place of arbitration: Amendments proposed in Section 20: 
  
Section 2(2) of the 1996 Act states that  Part 1 of the Act shall apply 
“where the place of arbitration is in India”. 
 
 Section 2(6) of the 1996 Act is also relevant in this context and reads 
as follows: -  
“Sec. 2(6):  Where this part, except Section 28, 
leaves the parties free to determine a certain issue, 
that freedom shall include the right of the parties to 
authorise any person including an institution to 
determine that issue”. 
  
Under Section 2(6), which corresponds  to Article 2(d) of the Model 
Law, the parties may request an institution to fix the place of arbitration. The 
place of arbitration has to be fixed on th e basis of Section 20  of the Act. But 
the point is whether, in arbitration between two Indian companies where the 
contract is to be executed in India, the parties or the institution can nominate 
a place outside India as the place of arbitration? This depends upon an 
interpretation of the provisions of Sec tion 20 of the Act read with Section 
2(2).  
 
Section 20 of the Act as it now stands reads as follows:  
“Sec. 20:  (1) The partie s are free to agree on the 
place of arbitration:  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in 
Sub-section (1), the place of arbitration 
shall be determined by the arbitral 
tribunal having regard to the 
circumstances of the case including the 
convenience of the parties.  

 107
(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) the arbitral tribunal 
may, unless otherwise agreed by the 
parties, meet at any place it considers 
appropriate for consultation among its 
members, for hearing witnesses, 
experts or the parties or for inspection 
of documents, goods or other 
property”.  
 Section 20 is in Part 1 of the 1996 Act and as stated in Section 2(2), 
Part 1 of the Act applies to all arbitra tions in India, whether the arbitrations 
are international in nature or are pur ely domestic in nature, i.e., between 
Indian nationals. 
  
On a literal construction of Section 20(1), it may appear that the 
parties to a contract, such as the one  mentioned earlier, could agree for a 
place of arbitration  outside India.  But, as explained below, this is not 
permissible in as much as Section 2(2) controls Section 20(1).  The 
combined effect of Section 2(2) and Section 20(1), has been explained in 
Dr.P.C.Rao’s commentary on the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 as follows at Page 83:  
 
“Sub-Section (1) permits pa rties to select the place 
of arbitration. On the face of it, this sub-section may 
give an impression that this place could even be 
outside India. However Section 2(2) clearly states  
that Part 1 itself applies where the place of 
arbitration is in India, whether such arbitration is 
“international commercial arbitration or domestic 
arbitration”. 
  
In other words, the legal position is as follows. Whether the arbitration 
is international in nature or is a pur ely domestic arbitration between Indian 
nationals, where Part I applies, the place of arbitration must be in India and 
there is no question of the parties or  the institution to which they have 
referred the issue of the place of arbitration under Section 2(6), taking a 
decision that the place of arbitration will be outside India. 
  
  

 108
The confusion appears to have obviously arisen because of an 
unintended omission in Section 20(1) which does not contain the additional 
words “in India”, which have  to be  implied from section 2(2) and parties 
are misled into thinking  that they ar e free to select a place of arbitration 
outside India.  In the light of what is stated in the commentary by 
Dr.P.C.Rao in this regard (at page  83) with which the Commission fully 
agrees, the words “in India” are proposed to be added in section 20(1). 
  
We therefore propose to remove the confusion or ambiguity and 
amend sub-section (1) of Section 20.  
 
Sub sections (2) and (3) are convert ed into provisos so that, in case 
parties do not agree on the venue, the ar bitral tribunal may not fix a place of 
arbitration outside India. 
 
  Under sec. 32 of the Amending Act, we propose to make this 
retrospective, provided the arbitral tribunal has not been appointed by the 
date of the commencement of this Act. 
 
Section 20 is proposed to be amended as follows: 
 
Place of arbitration 
 
“20. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) ,the  parties are 
free to agree on the place of arbitration: 
 
Provided that where the parties fail to agree, the place of 
arbitration  shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal having 
regard to the circumstances of the case, including the 
convenience of the parties. 
 
Provided further that the arbitral tribunal may, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties, meet at any place it considers 
appropriate for consultation among its members, for hearing 
witnesses, experts or the parties, or for inspection of 
documents, goods or other property. 
 
(2) The place of arbitration shall be within India.” 
 
 

 109
2.15.1 Amendment to section 23:    Statement of claim, defence 
and rejoinder.  
 
 It has been pointed out by seve ral retired Judges who are conducting 
arbitrations that unless the arbitrators have control in speeding up the arbitral 
process, it is not possible to achieve the object of speedy arbitration and that, 
more often than not, the parties or thos e who represent them agree to have a 
series of adjournments and, once they agree, the arbitrators are not able to go 
contrary to such an ag reement.  This, it is said, is one of the main 
bottlenecks in the arbitral process toda y.  They have, therefore, requested 
that in sub-section (1) of section 23, the words “agreed upon by the parties 
or” may be deleted as also the words “unless the parties have otherwise 
agreed as to the required elements of their statements”. 
 
 After careful consideration and k eeping in mind the ground realities in 
our country and keeping in mind the expense to the parties on account of 
every adjournment where they have to pay their lawyers and also the 
arbitrators, the Commission has agreed to the above suggestion.  It has also 
added that ‘parties shall abide by the time schedule so fixed by the arbitral 
tribunal, unless the tribunal extends the time’.  The Commission thought fit 
to permit the claimant to file a rejo inder in respect of defence statement 
under section 23 (IA), the High Court has to prescribe rules in this behalf. 
  
2.15.2 The Commission recommends that in section 23 for sub-section (1), 
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: 
 
“(1) Within a period of time to be determined by the arbitral tribunal, 
the claimant shall state the facts in support of his claim, the points at 
issue and the relief or remedy sought, the respondent shall state his 
defence in respect of these particulars and the claimant may file his 
rejoinder, if any, and the parties shall abide by the time schedule so 
fixed by the arbitral tribunal, unless the tribunal extends the same. 
 
(1A) The arbitral tribunal shall endeavour to expedite the arbitral 
process subject to such rules as may be made by the High Court in this 
behalf.” 
 
2.16.1 Amendments to section 24 :  Hearings and written 
proceedings:  
 

 110
 It has again been suggested by several retired Judges acting as 
arbitrators that in almost every arbitra tion in our country, at least, one party 
is interested in delayi ng the conduct of arbitral proceedings and for that 
purpose, number of adjournments ar e sought at the stage of adducing 
evidence.  It has been pointed out that parties and their counsel in India, still 
think that an arbitral tribunal is like a court and raise all sorts of objections 
during the proceedings when oral eviden ce is being adduced.  There is, it is 
suggested, no reason as to why the examination-in-chief of a witness should 
not be allowed to be completed by wa y of “evidence through affidavit” so 
that the oral evidence may be restricted to cross-examination and re-
examination.  Further, on some occas ions, the counsel insist that the 
evidence be recorded in a ‘question and answer’ form leading to a lot of 
waste of time.  The arbitrat or is, in such a situation, helpless.  It has been, 
therefore, suggested that more control is to be given to the arbitrators over 
the proceedings and provision be made  enabling examination-in-chief by 
evidence through affidavit.   More over, the time schedule fixed by the 
arbitrators, is never observed by the parties strictly. 
 
 The Commission, after careful consid eration, has felt that, because of 
ground realities in India and the mindset of parties and counsel in thinking 
that the arbitral tribunal is like any other court, an amendment of sec. 24 is 
necessary omitting the words relating to agreement of parties in fixing the 
time schedule.  The Commission has agr eed to amend section 24 so as to 
incorporate these valuable suggestions.  Sub-section (1) is amended and sub-
section (1A) is added.  It is also  provided that parties will be bound by the 
time schedule fixed by the arbitral tr ibunal, unless it is extended.  The 
procedure in this behalf is to be pr escribed by the High Court as stated in 
sub-section (1) of section 24.  In fact  Redfern and Martin  has pointed out  
(para 1.12.5): 
 
“The large American Law fi rms continue to consider 
international arbitration as but one kind of litigation ……….. 
among others.  As a partner in a leading New York Law firm 
observed: “ Arbitration is considered by us to be an adjunct to 
‘litigation’ – litigation in courts.  It is simply a different forum” 
 
2.16.2  The Commission recommends that, in section 24 of the 
principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, and sub-section (1A0, (1B) and (1C) shall be inserted: 
 

 111
“(1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the High Court in this 
behalf, the arbitral tribunal shall decide whether to hold oral hearings 
for  presentation of  evidence or for oral arguments or whether the 
proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of documents and other 
materials or to  receive affidavit in lieu of oral evidence subject to the 
witness being questioned orally: 
  
Provided that the arbitral tribunal may, at any appropriate 
stage of the proceedings, hold oral hearings for the purpose of 
presentation of oral evidence. 
 
(1A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the arbitral tribunal 
shall, pass orders regarding various aspects of the procedure before it. 
 
(1B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1A), the 
power of the arbitral tribunal to pass orders include- 
a. the fixing of the time schedule for the parties to adduce 
oral evidence, if any;  
b. the fixing of  the time schedule for oral arguments;  
c.  the manner in which oral evidence is to be recorded; 
 
 
d. the power to  decide whether the proceedings shall be 
conducted only on the basis of documents and other 
materials or  the other manner in which the proceedings 
may be conducted . 
 
(1C)  The procedure determined under sub-section (1A) and the  time 
schedule fixed under sub-section (1B) by the arbitral tribunal, shall be 
binding on the parties.”  
 
2.17.1  Powers to be granted to th e arbitral tribunal to enforce its 
orders: Proposed Section 24A:  
 
  It has been brought to the notice of the Commission that some ;parties 
are not prompt in carrying out the various   directions  that are issued by the 
arbitral tribunal during the conduct of  the arbitration proceedings under 
section 17, 23 and 24.  It is pointed out that the types of default 
contemplated by sec.  25 of the Act are not exhaustive and, therefore, 
provision must be made to cover c onsequences for non compliance with 

 112
other types of default.  It is also poi nted out that unless powers to strike out 
pleadings or to exclude the irrelevant evidence or to award costs etc.  are 
conferred on the arbitral tribunal, it is  becoming difficult to deal with some 
recalcitrant parties.  It has been suggest ed that the provisions of sub-sections 
(5), (6) and (7) of  sec. 41 of the E nglish Act, 1996, should be brought in so 
as to enable the arbitral tribunal to keep effective control and speed up the 
arbitral process. Such provisions will en able the arbitral tribunal in dealing 
effectively with some troublesome parties. 
 
 The Commission agrees that sec. 25, as it stands, provides only for 
situations where the claim statement is not filed or the defence statement is 
not filed in time or when the party fails to appear at the oral hearing or fails 
to produce documentary evidence.  Th ese situations may lead to the 
dismissal of the claim or the passing of an award on the basis of evidence 
before it.  But it is necessary, in th e opinion of the Commission, to provide 
for a procedure in case of non-complia nce with other directions of the 
arbitral tribunal.  The Commission, therefore, proposes to lay down the 
procedure in this behalf separately and these powers are to be exercised 
without prejudice to the procedure under the proposed sec. 25. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to grant special powers to the arbitral 
tribunal to first pass peremptory orde rs for compliance with the ‘interim 
measures’ ordered under section 17 or the various directions or time 
schedules fixed under section 23 for f iling pleadings or under section 24 for 
adducing evidence.  If such preempting orders as proposed, are still not 
complied with, the arbitral tribunal may pass orders imposing costs, or direct 
the striking out of pleadings or exclusion of some material relied upon or 
draw adverse inference. 
 
 It is expected that these additiona l powers, if given to the arbitral 
tribunal, will speed up the arbitral pr ocess and result in strict compliance 
with the orders of the arbitral tribunal. 
 
 The powers of the arbitral tribunal to enforce its orders are proposed 
to be brought under the new section 24A as stated below:   
 
2.17.2 After section 24 of the principal Act , the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 

 113
Powers of arbitral tribunal to enforce its orders passed under 
sections 17, 23 and 24 
 
“24 A (1) If without showing sufficient cause, a party fails to 
comply with any orders of the arbitral tribunal passed under Sections 
17, 23 or 24, as the case may be, the arbitral  tribunal may make a 
peremptory order to the same effect, prescribing such time for 
compliance as it considers appropriate. 
 
     (2) If a claimant fails to comply with a peremptory order passed 
under sub-section (1) in relation to a direction under clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of Section 17 for furnishing security for costs of 
arbitration, the arbitral tribunal may make an award dismissing his 
claim. 
 
     (3) If a party fails to comply with any other peremptory order 
passed by the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (1), then the said 
tribunal may- 
 
(a) make such order as it thinks fit as to payment of costs of the 
arbitral proceedings incurred in consequence of the non-
compliance;  
 
(b)direct that the party in default shall not be entitled to rely 
upon any allegations in his pleadings or upon any material 
which was the subject matter of the order; 
 
(c ) draw such adverse inference from the act of non-
compliance as the circumstances justify; 
 
(d) proceed to make an award on the basis of such materials as 
have been provided to it, without prejudice to any action that 
may be taken under Section 25.”
  
  
 

 114
 
 
 
 
2.18.1 Procedure for enforcement of peremptory orders passed by the 
arbitral tribunal under sec. 17, 23 and 24 by the court:    
Provision proposed to prevent dilatory tactics: Sec.24B 
 
 Several retired Judges w ho have been dealing with arbitration matters 
have pointed that the absence of a pro cedure for enforcement of the ‘interim 
measures’ granted by the arbitral tribuna l through the court and that this is 
creating serious problems and prejudice to parties in whose favour such 
orders are passed.  The arbitrators feel helplessness sometimes.  As at 
present, the only effective remedy is for the parties to move the court under 
sec.9 for interim measures pending arb itration. This may, no doubt, include 
seeking orders for enforcement of the interim measures granted by the 
arbitral tribunal.  But the Commission was requested to make some special 
provision in this behalf as is provided in sec.  42 of the English Act, 1996.  
 
The Commission  has noticed that the Model Law does not contain 
any separate procedure to deal with this problem while the English Act, 
1996, effectively deals with it in sec.  42 of that Act.  But Indian conditions 
certainly require a special provision. 
 
After due consideration of the lacuna, the Commission is of the view 
that it is appropriate to adopt the pro cedure as indicated in sec. 42 of the 
English Act 1996 with some modifications. We propose to omit clause (c) of 
sub-section (2) of sec. 42 inasmuch as the provisions proposed are to be 
always applicable.   It is proposed to  confer powers on the court to enforce 
the pre-emptive orders passed by the ar bitral tribunal under section 24A (1) 
in respect of its earlier order under section 17A, 23 and 24.  These powers of 
the court can be invoked by any of th e parties to arbitration with the 
permission of the arbitral tribunal afte r notice to the other party/parties or 
even by the arbitral tribunal upon notice to the parties.   These powers are 
obviously independent of any order that the court may pass under section 9.   
However, the orders pa ssed under proposed sec. 34B for implementing the 
orders of the arbitral tribunal will obviously be subject to the orders that may 
be passed by the Court in appeal under cl ause (b) of sub section (2) of sec. 
37.   
 

 115
2.18.2  We propose to insert Sec. 24B as follows: 
 
Powers of the Court for enforcement of the peremptory orders of the 
arbitral tribunal: 
 
“24 B (1) Without prejudice to the powers of the Court under Section 
9, the Court may, on an application made by a party, make an order 
requiring the party to whom the order of the arbitral tribunal was 
directed, to comply with the peremptory orders of the arbitral tribunal 
passed under sub-section (1) of Section 24 A. 
 
(2)  An application under sub-section (1) may be made by- 
 
(a) the arbitral tribunal, after giving notice to the parties, or  
 
(b) a party to the arbitral proceedings with the permission of the 
arbitral tribunal, after giving notice to other parties.   
 
 
(3) No order shall be passed under sub-section (1) by the Court, unless 
it is satisfied that the person to whom the order of the arbitral tribunal 
was directed, has failed to comply with it within the time fixed in the 
order of the arbitral tribunal or, if no time was fixed, within 
reasonable time. 
 
(4) Any order passed by the Court under sub-section (1), shall 
be subject to such orders, if any, as may be passed by the Court 
on appeal, under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 37.” 
 
 
2.19  Law applicable to substance of  dispute: Amendments to Section 28 
proposed: 
  
 The questions under section 28, are (i ) whether, when all the parties   
agree that the law applicable to the substance of the dispute would be foreign 
law, (ii) whether, in case the parties could refer the said question to an 
institution, it could have said that the law applicable to the dispute would be 
a foreign law? 

 116
  
Under Section 2(6) of the 1996 Ac t, which corresponds to Section 
2(d) of the Model law, (already set out  in our discussion under sec. 20(1)), 
the parties cannot ask the institution to  decide the issue relating to the 
matters covered by section 28.  This  is clear from Section 2(6) which 
excludes section 28 from its scope and, therefore, th e parties could not have 
referred to the institution any issue re garding the law applicable to the 
substance of the dispute. Obviously, ev en if the parties had made such a 
reference to the institution for decidi ng the applicable law, it would have 
refused to do so having regard to Artic le 2(d) of the Model law as well as 
Section 2(6) of the 1996 Act. In fact  in Dr.P.C.Rao’s commentary on the 
1996 Act (see Page 47), it is clearly stated that such a question relating to the 
law applicable to the substance of the dispute could not be referred to a third 
party or to an institution for decision. This disposes of the second issue.  
   
Coming to the first issue, we shall assume on the above facts, that the 
parties had agreed that a  foreign law would apply to the contract. On that 
basis, we shall go into the question whether such an agreement could be 
made by the parties under the 1996 Act?  
 
We can approach this problem from ge neral principles of law and also 
on the basis of the conclusions arrived at in our discussion under sec. 20(1).   
 
On the basis of general principles , the following appears to be the 
legal position.  Leading writers have sa id that, as between citizens of the 
same country who enter into a contract for the purpose of executing works in 
that country, it is not permissible for th em to agree that a law other than the 
law of that country would be applicable to the contract.  
  
Russell on arbitration states (see Para 2.090) as follows:  
 
“General: In arbitration between  parties in England 
and Wales, the issue of the choice of law to be 
applied does not usually aris e; unless there is some 
other provision, the arbitration will be subject 
in all 
respects to English law. However, the issue thus 
arises in every internati onal arbitration and can be 
of fundamental importance……………..”  
 

 117
The word “in all respects” is signi ficant and has reference to the law 
applicable to the agreement of arbitr ation, to the substance of the main 
contract and also to the procedure before arbitral tribunal and the Court. 
  
Redfern and Hunter state as follows, (see para 2.03); 
 
“International Arbitration, unlike its domestic 
counterpart, will usually involve more than one 
system of law or legal rules”.  
 
Therefore, if it is not an ‘international arbitration’, there is no question 
of choice of the law by agreement of pa rties. The word ‘choice’ implies that 
more than one system of law or legal rules are attracted. 
 
Thus, on the fact stated above and upon general principles of law, if 
the arbitration is between Indian nati onals with reference to a contract 
entered into in India for works to be executed in India, the Indian law alone 
can apply and not the foreign law. 
 
Alternatively, we shall examin e the position on the basis of the 
conclusions arrived at under sec. 20(1), in relation to the place of arbitration 
under sec.20.  We shall try to find out  if there is anything basically wrong 
with the words in sec. 28(1), namely , “where the place of arbitration is 
situated in India” used at the beginning of the said section. The use of the 
said words has indeed given an impression that there is an option, in the case 
of such purely domestic arbitrations be tween Indian nationals enabling them 
to select a place of arbitration outside India.   
 
Section 28 of the Act reads as follows:  
“Sec.28: The rules appli cable to substance of 
dispute: 
(1) Where the plea of arbitration is situate in India – 
(a) In an arbitration other than an 
international commercial arbitration, the 
arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute 
submitted to arbitration in accordance 
with the substantive law for the time 
being in force in India’;  
(b) In international commercial arbitration –  

 118
(i) the arbitral tribunal shall decide the 
dispute in accordance w ith the rule of law 
designated by the partie s as assailable to 
the substance of the dispute;  
(ii) any designation by the ranks of the law or 
legal system of a given country shall be 
construed, unless otherwise agreed, as 
directly referring to the substantive law of 
other country and not  its conflict laws 
rules;  
(iii) failing any  desi gnation of the law under 
sub-clause (a) by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal shall apply the rules of law it 
considers to be appropriate, given all the 
circumstances surrounding the dispute.  
(2) …  …  …  …  …  ….  …  … …  …  
… …  
(3)…  …  …  …  …  ….  …  …. …. …. …. 
 
 In Dr.P.C.Rao’s commentary on section 28, it is stated as 
follows:  
“Section 28 lays down the rules applicable to the 
substance of the dispute. It  is applicable only when 
the place of arbitration  is in India, be it domestic 
arbitration or internationa l commercial arbitration. 
Freedom given to the partie s under rule 2(6) is not 
available to the parties under Section 28”.  
 
We have already referred to Dr.P.C.Rao’s Commentary on sec.20(1)  
(page 83) in our discussion under sec. 20(1) . It was stated therein that, in the 
case of a purely domestic arbitration be tween Indian nationals, the place of 
arbitration cannot be outside India.  However, in the passage extracted above 
(at page.96-97) the words: “ it is possible only when the place of arbitration 
is in India, be it domestic”, gives an impression that in the case of a purely 
domestic arbitration between Indian nationals, the place of arbitration can, in 
the alternative, be outside India. Bu t, once it is clear from our discussion 
under sec. 20(1), relying on the commentar y of Dr.P.C.Rao (at page.83), that 
in the case of purely domestic arbitra tion between Indian nationals, the place 
of arbitration under sec.20(1) cannot be outside India, it is  obvious that the 
observations at  page.96-97 of the book,  as extracted above, require to be 

 119
properly understood in that light. Clau se (1)(a) of sec.28 cannot,  in our 
opinion, be governed by the opening words “Where the place of arbitration 
is in India”, in as much as these words give an impression that in respect of 
purely domestic arbitrations between I ndian nationals, there can also be 
another alternative, viz., place of arbitration outside India. In this context, we 
may also refer to another passage from Dr. P.C.Rao’s commentary with 
regard to sec.28 (1)(a), (at page 97) where the author says that the Model 
Law does not have a clause like sec.  28(1)(a). Obviously, the Model Law 
which deals with international arbitr ation could not have a clause like 
Clause(1)(a) of sec. 28which deals w ith purely domestic arbitration. That 
passage (at page 97) of the commentary, is as follows: 
 
“clause (a)  (of sub secti on (1))  provides that in 
domestic arbitration, the ar bitral tribunal is required 
to decide the dispute in accordance with the 
substantive law of India. The parties and the tribunal 
have no choice in this regard. Since the Model Law 
deals with international commercial arbitration, 
there is no provision therein corresponding to sub 
section(1) of section 28” .  
 
Thus, whether on general principles  of law or on the basis of our 
conclusions while dealing with s ection 20(1),  the words ‘where 
the place of arbitration is in Indi a’ cannot be allowed to stand at 
the beginning of sec. 28(1)(a) so as to apply to purely domestic 
arbitration between Indian nationals. 
   
 It is, therefore, proposed to omit the words “Where the place of 
arbitration is situate in India,” from th e opening part of sec.28 so that they 
will not govern sub section (1)(a) and so that , for the purpose of the said sub 
section (1)(a) dealing with purely dom estic arbitration between Indian 
nationals, they do not give an impre ssion that parties could alternatively 
agree for a place of arbitration outside India. It is proposed to confine the 
words “Where the place of arbitration is situate in India” to sub section 
28(1)(b) which deals with “international arbitration” in India.  
 
2.19.1It is also necessary to make a fo rmal amendment in sub-section (1) of 
section 28 in view of the proposed de finitions of the terms “international 
arbitration” and “international comme rcial arbitration” in the proposed 
clauses (eb) and (f) respectively of sub-section (1) of section 2.  

 120
Accordingly, in section 28 of the principa l Act, in sub-section (1), in clauses 
(a) and (b) for the words “internationa l commercial arbitration”, the words 
“‘international arbitration (whether commercial or not)” shall be substituted. 
 
2.19.1(A)   In as much as this section treats an arbitration as an 
‘internationbal arbitration’ where a co mpany incorporated in India may be 
under management and control exercise d from outside India and such cases 
are now proposed to be covered by sections 28A, 28B and 28C which are on 
the lines of section 202 of Title 9 of the US Statute.  We proposed to add 
sub-section (1B) in section 28.  This aspect can be better understood on a 
reading of para 2.19.3 which deals with sections 28A, 28B and 28C. 
               
 In this context, we do not think it necessary to amend section 45 and 
54 of Part II in as much as those secti ons refer to an agreement in sections 
44 and 53, respectively.  In secti on 28A, 28B and 28C, we have provided 
that the agreements between parties re ferred to in section 28A will not be 
covered by the New York and Geneva Conventions. 
            
2.19.2.It is, therefore, proposed to subs titute sub-section (1), and (1A)   for 
the existing sub section (1) of section 28 as follows. 
 
Section 28:  “The rules applicable to the substance of dispute 
 
 
“(1) In an arbitration other than an  international arbitration (whether 
commercial or not), the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute 
submitted to arbitration in accordance with the substantive law for the 
time being in force in India;  
 
(1A) In an international arbitration (whether commercial or not), 
where the place of arbitration is situate in India,  
 
(i) the arbitral tribunal sh all decide the dispute in 
accordance with the rules of law designated by the 
parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute; 
 
(ii) any designation by the pa rties of the law or legal 
system of a given country shall be construed, unless 
otherwise expressed, as directly referring to the 

 121
substantive law of that country and not to its conflict 
of laws rules; 
 
(iii) failing any designation of  the law under clause (i) by 
the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the rules of 
law it considers to be appropriate given all the 
circumstances surrounding the dispute.” 
 
We are proposing that the amended section be, to some extent, 
retrospective as stated in section 32 of  the Amending Act, where an arbitral 
tribunal has not been appointed in pending proceedings. 
 
2.20.1  Minority view to be appended to award: Section 29: 
  
(1) Sub-section of section 29 refers to the ‘decision’ of the arbitral 
tribunal, where it has more than one ar bitrator.  The decision is to be by a 
majority. 
 
 As pointed out in the Consultation Paper ( Annexure –II ), the law is 
that a decision of the minority is not to be treated as part of the award.  But it 
was suggested that the minority view may be appended to the award passed 
by the majority.  This would enable pa rties or a court of law to know the 
reasons for the dissent.  There was c onsensus that such a provision can be 
added.  
  
 In order that the minority member may not unduly delay his opinion, a 
time limit of 30 days is proposed to be provided in section 29. 
  
 In a situation where there are more than two members in an arbitral 
tribunal and all of them differ in their opinion from one anot her and it is not 
possible to spell out the majority opinion of the arbitral tribunal.  Then, the 
opinion of the presiding arbitrator of the arbitral tribunal is to be treated as 
the award of the arbitral tribunal.   Such a provision is contained in ICC 
rules and we propose to add such a provision in section 29.  
 
2.20.2  Thus in section 29 of the Principal Act, after sub-section (2) the 
following sub-section shall be inserted : 
 

 122
“(3) The minority decision shall, if  made available within thirty 
days of the receipt of the deci sion of the other members, be 
appended to the award.” 
 
2.21.1 Time limits for completion of  arbitral proceedings in India 
(both international and purely domestic) laid down:  
 
Pending application for extension in Court, arbitration shall go 
on: Proposed section 29A: 
 
 
This subject has gained utmost importance in view of the long delays 
and expense attached to arbitral awards in India.  Under the 1940 Act, there 
was a provision of four months from date of entering on the reference, for 
passing of the award, (First Schedule, para 3) subject to parties seeking time 
from the court for extension.  It applied to purely domestic arbitrations  but it 
has been omitted in the present Act for purely domestic as well as 
international arbitration.  The only reason for omission appears to be that 
frequent applications for extension in the Court added to long delays.  But at 
the same time, it was not the policy of the new Act that awards can be 
delayed without any time limit. 
 
 But the omission of the provision for extension of time and therefore 
the absence of any time limit has given rise to another problem, namely, that 
awards are getting delayed before the arbitral tribunal even under the 1996 
Act.  One view is that this is on account of the absence of a provision as to 
time limit for passing an award. 
 
Under clause 3 of Schedule I of th e old Act of 1940, the award was to 
be passed within 4 months after the arb itrators ‘entered on the reference’ or 
after having been called upon to act by notice in writing from any party to  
the arbitration agreement or within such extended time as the court may 
allow. 
 
Section 28(1) of the old Act enab led the court to extend the period 
from time to time.  Sub-section (2) of section 28 stated that any provision in 
an arbitration agreement whereby the arbitrator (or umpire) may, except with 
consent of all the parties to the agr eement, enlarge the time for making the 
award, shall be void and of no effect.  
 

 123
In other words, parties, by cons ent, could extend time but not the 
arbitrators.  This was the position under the old Act. 
 
2.21.2  The Law Commission recommended in its 76 th Report on 
Arbitration Act, 1940, inter alia,  that a proviso should be inserted below 
section 28 so as to provide that no ex tension should be granted, allowing the 
making of the award for more than one year after the arbitrator’s entering on 
the reference unless the court, for sp ecial and adequate reasons, to be 
recorded in writing, is satisfied that  such an extension is necessary.  
Accordingly, it recommended the inser tion of the following proviso below 
section 28: 
 
“Provided that no extension shall be granted so as to allow the making 
of the award more than one year after entering on the reference, unless 
the court, for special and adequate reasons to be recorded in writing, is 
satisfied that such extension is necessary.” 
 
The 76th Report also recommended in para 11.24, that in order to 
resolve the conflict in judgments as to  what is the meaning of the words 
‘entering on the reference’, an ‘Explanation’ be added as follows: 
 
“Explanation: For the purposes of this paragraph, the arbitrators shall 
be deemed ‘to enter on the referen ce’ on the first date fixed by the 
arbitrators for the appearance of the parties before them for the 
purposes of arbitration.” 
 
 But, it is not necessary to adopt the above method of computation in 
view of the provision in sec. 21 of the 1996 Act defining the meaning of the 
words ‘commencement’ of arbitration proceedings as “the date on which a 
request for that dispute to be referred is received by the respondent”. 
2.21.3  Question is whether any time lim it is to be fixed.  Of course, 
under ICC Rules, time limit of six months  is prescribed for international 
arbitration but the Model law does not prescribe any time limit. 
 
 Art.24(1) of the ICC Rules, 1998 replacing Art. 18(1) of the old 
Rules, fixed a period of six months from the date of signature or approval by 
the International Court of Arbitration of  the terms of reference.  However, 
the International Court of Arbitrati on may “pursuant to a reasoned request 
from the arbitrator or if need be on its own initiative, extend the time limit if 
it decides, it is necessary to do so (Art . 24(2).  Where an excessive delay is 

 124
attributable to the arbitrators, the International Court of Arbitration may 
resort to the provisions of the Rules concerning the replacement of 
arbitrators, which apply where the ar bitrators fail to perform their duties 
within the stipulated time limits (S ee Art. 12(2) of the 1998 ICC Rules 
replacing Art. 2(11) of the previous Rules). 
 
 For international arbitration, laws  of several countries, like France, 
Dutch, Sweden and Swiss do not fix any periods.  (No doubt, prior to 1999, 
the Swedish and Belgium laws provided six months for international 
arbitration). 
 
  Section 14(2) of the English Act, 1996 permits the Court to 
extend the time for making the award if the ‘Court is satisfied that 
substantial injustice’ would otherwise be done. 
 
It was even suggested  that certain  modes of fee stipulations for each 
sitting, both for the lawyers and the ar bitrators have also contributed to 
abnormal delays.  It is high time that there should be a check at least at the 
end of two years by a Court of law.  The 76 th report of the Law Commission 
recommended for fixing maxim period for the court to extend time.  But we 
do not want to fix any such limit.  Powe r to grant extension can be given to 
the court and can be made strict so that awards can be passed faster.  In fact, 
the provision in several countries is to grant such a residuary power to the 
Court without fixing any further upper limit. 
 
The Commission is of the view th at a time limit is necessary for 
international arbitration in India as  also for purely domestic arbitration 
between Indian nationals in India, ha ving regard to the long delays and huge 
expense involved in arbitration nowad ays.  The time limit can be more 
realistic subject to extension only by the court.  Delays ranging from five 
years to even fourteen years in a single arbitration have come to the 
Commission’s notice.  The Supreme Court of India has also referred to these 
delays of the arbitral tribunal.  The point here is that  these delays are 
occurring even in cases where there is no court intervention during the 
arbitral process.  The removal of the time limit is having its own adverse 
consequences.  There can be a pr ovision for early disposal of the 
applications for extension, if that is one of the reasons for omitting a 
provision prescribing a time limit, say one  month.  Parties can be permitted 
to extend time by one year.  
Pending the application for extension, we 
propose to allow the arbitration proceedings to continue. 

 125
 
 In fact sec. 29A(4) reads as follows: 
 
“(4) Pending consideration of the application for extension of time 
before the Court under sub section (3), the arbitration proceedings 
shall continue before the arbitral tribunal and the Court shall not grant 
any stay of the arbitral proceedings.” 
 
2.21.4  It is, therefore, proposed  to implement the recommendation 
made in the 76 th Report of the Law Commission with the modification that 
an award must be passed at least within one year of the arbitrators entering 
on the reference.  The initial period will be one year.  Thereafter, parties can, 
by consent, extend the period upto a ma ximum of another one year.  Beyond 
the one year plus the period agreed to by mutual consent, the court will have 
to grant extension.  Applications for ex tension are to be disposed of within 
one month.  While granting extension,  the court may impose costs and also 
indicate the future procedure to be followed by the tribunal .  There will, 
therefore,  be  a further proviso, that further extension beyond the period 
stated above should be granted by the Cour t.  We are not inclined to suggest 
a cap on the power of extension as recommended by the Law Commission 
earlier.  There may be cases  where the court feels that more than 24 months  
is necessary.  It can be left to the c ourt to fix an upper limit.  It must be 
provided that beyond 24 months, neither  the parties by consent, nor the 
arbitral tribunal could extend the period.  The court’s order will be necessary 
in this regard.  But in order to see that delay in disposal of extension 
applications does not hamper arbitration, we propose to allow arbitration to 
continue pending disposal of the application. 
 
2.21.5  One other important aspect he re is that if there is a delay 
beyond the initial one year a nd the period agreed to by the parties (with an 
upper of another one year) and also a ny period of extension granted by the 
Court, there is no point in termina ting the arbitration proceedings.  We 
propose it as they should be conti nued till award is passed.  Such a 
termination may indeed result in wast e of time and money for the parties 
after lot of evidence is led.   In fact, if the proceedi ngs were to terminate and 
the claimant is to file a separate suit, it will even become necessary to 
exclude the period spent in arbitration pr oceedings, if he was not at fault, by 
amending sec. 43(5) to cover such a s ituation.  But the Commission is of the 
view that there is a better solution to the problem.   
 

 126
 The Commission, therefore, proposes to  see that an arbitral award is 
ultimately passed even if the above said  delays have taken place.  In order 
that there is no further delay, the Commission proposes that after the period 
of initial one year and the further period agreed to by the parties (subject to a 
maximum of one year) is over, the arb itration proceedings will nearly stand 
suspended and will get revi ved as soon as any party to the proceedings files 
an application in the Court for extension of time.  In case none of the parties 
files an application, even  then the arbitral tribunal may seek an extension 
from the Court.  From the moment the application is filed, the arbitration 
proceedings can be continued. When the Court takes up the application for 
extension, it shall grant extension subject to any order as to  costs and it shall 
fix up the time schedule for the future pro cedure before the arbitral tribunal.  
It will initially pass an order granting extension of time and fixing the time 
frame before the arbitral tribunal and will continue to pass further orders till 
time the award is passed.  This pro cedure will ensure that ultimately an 
award is passed.   
 
2.21.6  The Commission, therefore, propos es to prescribe such a procedure 
in a new section – Section 29A – which is stated as follows: 
 
After section 29 of the principal Ac t, the following section shall be 
inserted: 
 
Speeding up of proceedings and time limit for making awards 
“ 29A (1)  The arbitral tribunal shall make its award within a period of 
one year after the commencement of arbitral proceedings,  or within 
such extended period as specified in sub-sections (2) to (4): 
 
(2)  The parties may, by consent, enlarge the period specified in sub-
section (1) for a further period not exceeding one year. 
 
(3)  If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section 
(1) and the period agreed to by the parties under sub-section (2), the 
arbitral proceedings shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4) 
to (6), stand suspended until an application for extension is made to 
the Court by any party to the arbitration, or where none of the parties 
makes an application as foresaid, until such an application is made by 
the arbitral tribunal.  
 

 127
(4)  Upon filing of the application for extension of time under 
subsection (3),suspension of the arbitral proceedings shall stand 
revoked  and pending consideration of the application for extension of 
time before the court under sub-section (3), the arbitral proceedings 
shall continue before the arbitral tribunal and the court shall not grant 
any stay of the arbitral proceedings. 
 
(5) The Court shall, upon such application for extension of time being 
made under sub section (3),  whether the time for making the award as 
aforesaid has expired or not and whether the award has been made or 
not, extend the time for the making of the award beyond the period 
referred to in sub-section (1) and the period agreed to by the parties 
under sub-section (2).  
 
(6) The Court shall, while extending time under sub-section (5), pass 
such orders as to costs or as to the future procedure to be followed by 
the arbitral tribunal, after taking into account- 
(a) the extent of work already done; 
(b)  the reasons for delay; 
(c)  the conduct of the parties or of any person 
representing the parties; 
(d)  the manner in which proceedings were 
conducted by the arbitral tribunal; 
(e)  the further work involved; 
(f) the amount of money already spent by the 
parties towards fee and expenses of arbitration; 
(g) any  other relevant circumstances,  
and the Court shall pass such orders from time to time with a view to 
speed up the arbitral process, till the award is passed: 
 
Provided that any order as to future 
proceedings passed by the Court shall be subject to such rules 
as may be made by the High Court in this behalf for expediting 
the arbitral proceedings. 
 
 
(7) Parties cannot by consent, enlarge the period beyond the period 
specified in sub-section (1) and the maximum period referred to in 
sub-section (2) and save as otherwise provided in the said sub-
sections, any provision in an arbitration agreement whereby the 

 128
arbitral tribunal may further enlarge the time for making the award, 
shall be void and of no effect. 
 
(8) The first of the orders of extension under subsection (5) together 
with directions, if any, under subsection (6), shall be passed by the 
court, within a period of one month from the date of service on the 
opposite party.”
 
 
 This procedure is proposed to be applied not only in future 
arbitrations under the 1996 Act but also with reference to pending 
arbitrations under the 1996 Act and also in respect of pending arbitrations 
under the 1940 Act and also under the Fast Track Arbitration.  Provisions of 
sub sections (4) to (8) of the proposed sec. 29A are proposed to be applied to 
pending arbitrations under the 1996 Act (v ide sec. 33 of the amending Act) 
and also to pending arbitrations unde r the 1940 Act (vide sec. 34 of the 
amending Act). 
 
2.22 Section 30: Settlement of di sputes – Registration and Stamp 
duty   
 
This section deals with ‘settlement’ of disputes.  The arbitral tribunal 
may use mediation, conciliation and othe r procedures at any time during the 
arbitral proceedings to encourage settlement.  
 
 Some amendments were suggested to  deal with cases of violation of 
Stamp and Registration laws which may be violated indirectly by entering 
into settlements in arbitration proceed ings.  But the Co mmission feels that 
the Court enforcing the awards under sec. 36 can deal with such questions. 
 
2.23 Interest under sec. 31(7)(b):  18% to be the upper limit - proposal 
rejected   
 
 Under sec. 31(7)(b) of the Act, it is  stated that a su m directed to be 
paid by an arbitral award shall, unle ss the award otherwise directs, carry 
interest at the rate of eighteen per cen t per annum after the date of the award 
till date of payment. 
 
 It has been pointed out that this  provision is creating great hardships 
in cases where the award is silent as to th e rate of  interest in as much as, in 

 129
all such cases, 18% interest becomes pa yable.  It has been suggested that 
sec. 31(7)(b) be amended as to prescribe 18% as the upper limit. 
 
The provision in section 31(7)(b) reads as follows: 
 
"Section 31(7)(b) : A sum directed to be pa id by an arbitral award 
shall, unless the award otherwise direct s, carry interest at such rate as 
may be fixed by the Court but not exceeding 18%” 
 
 Therefore, unless the award fixes a lesser rate, where the award is 
silent, 18% would apply.  This is a special provision and is the reverse of 
section 34(2) of the Code of Civil Proce dure, which says that if a decree is 
silent, interest from the date of decree is to be deemed as refused. 
 
 The provision in section 31(7)(b) is salutary and if this provision is 
not there, in the case of an award which is silent in regard to interest from 
the date of award till payment, the pa rty who is to pay under the award can 
merrily use dilatory tactics and escape paying of interest. 
 
 Having regard to the very nature of the provision, deeming a rate of 
interest, it is not possible to say that 18% is to be the maximum.  After due 
consideration, the Commission has felt that there is no justification for 
reducing the rate below 18%.  Hence no amendment is necessary in section 
31(7)(b).  
 
2.24.1 Copy of the award to be file d in the ‘Court’ for purposes of 
record along with original arb itral records and courts to 
maintain register of awards: Proposed section 31A: 
 
 A new section 31A is proposed for the formal filing of copies of 
purely domestic awards in a Court of law for purposes of record.  It is also 
proposed that the Principal Court of origin al jurisdiction in the district or the 
Court of the Principal Judge in a city, alone should be the Courts for purpose 
of filing of a copy of the award and of the arbitral record.  These Courts 
alone are to maintain a register of awards.  Even though under sec. 2(1)(e) 
the High Court in its original jurisdic tion is also included, we do not think 
that the High Court should receive the c opies of the award or the arbitral 
record nor need it maintain the register .  In cases where the award is passed 
pursuant to a reference under sec. 11 by the High Court its original 
jurisdiction, because of the pecuniary value of the claim, the award passed in 

 130
such a case can be filed in the Principal Courts mentioned above based 
purely on territorial jurisdiction a nd not on the basis of pecuniary 
jurisdiction.  In fact, an ‘Explanation’ is proposed to added in sec. 31A to 
say that when an award is passed whether pursuant to a reference by a 
judicial authority under sec. 8, or by any of the Courts referred in sec. 8A or 
by the parties or by the High Court or by the Supreme Court under sec. 11 or 
pursuant to a Fast Track Arbitration, c opy of all such awards should be filed 
in the Principal Courts mentioned above in a district or a city as the case 
may be. 
 
 The reasons for the proposed sec. 31A are as follows.  Under the 1940 
Act, the award had to be filed by the arbitrators in the ‘Court’ and the court 
would scrutinize the award before making it a rule of court.  Further, once 
the award is filed in the court, there is little scope for tinke ring with the date 
of the award or with the body of the award. 
 
 Under the 1996 Act, it is stated in sec. 36 that after the expiration of 
time for making an application to set as ide the arbitral award under sec. 34, 
or such application having been made, it has been refused, the award shall be 
enforced under the Code of Civil procedure 1908, in the same manner as if it 
were a decree of the court.  It need not be filed in any court at all. 
 
2.24.2  It has been pointed out that there must be some record of the 
award as originally passed and ther efore photocopy of the award signed by 
the parties should be filed before the ‘C ourt’ as defined in section 2(1)(e), 
(except the High Court in its original jurisdiction) with the arbitrator’s 
initials or signatures on each page.  A register of the awards received from 
arbitrators is to be maintained by the court with a serial number and it must 
be ensured that all the pages of the award are duly stamped and initialed  by 
the presiding officer of the court or a mi nisterial officer of the court.  This 
would ensure the authenticity of awards and avoid any dispute as to the date 
or contents of the award as passed.  The Central Government may make 
rules as to other aspects to be noted in  the register to be maintained by the 
court.  We have proposed provisions in section 42 as also in chapter XI 
relating to ‘Fast Track Arbitration’, that  invariably the copies of the award 
shall be filed in the principal courts referred to in section 2 (1) (e).  The 
awards passed pursuant to reference under section 8 or section 8A or section 
11 are under Fast Track Arbitration are a ll to be filed in the Principal Court 
under section 2 (1) (e), i.e., even wh ere the reference is made by the High 

 131
Court under section 11 or by the Supr eme Court/High Court under section 
8A or by the High Court in Fast Track Arbitration. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to add s ec. 31A stating that once the  award 
is made, a copy thereof signed and dul y authenticated on each page by each 
of the arbitrators shall be filed in the Court. Here, four types of awards have 
to be kept in mind:- 
 
(i) Awards may be passed pur suant to references under 
section 8 made by judicial authorities. 
 
(ii) Awards may be passed pur suant to references under 
section 11 by the Supreme Court or High Court. 
 
(ii) Awards may be passed by ar bitrators appointed by parties 
under section 16 without intervention of court. 
 
(iv) Awards may be passed pursu ant to references made by 
any court under the proposed section 8A. 
(v) Fast Tack Awards made under section 43A 
 
All these awards are to be file d before the ‘Court’ defined under 
section 2(1)(e) except the High Court in its original jurisdiction. 
 
2.24.3  It is also proposed that the arbitral record is also to be filed in 
the court, together with a list of the records.  The provisions applicable to the 
court record in respect of preservation of records will be applicable to the 
arbitral record so filed.   The expression ‘arbitral’ record is proposed to be 
explained by way of ‘Explanation II’ proposed to be introduced below 
section 31A(1):- 
 
“Explanation II: An arbitral record shall include the pleadings in the 
claim filed by the parties, the documentary and oral evidence, if any  
recorded,  pleadings in interlocutor y applications and orders thereon, 
the proceedings of the arbitral tribuna l and all other papers relating to  
arbitral proceedings.” 
 
Therefore, it would be advantageous if all the awards are filed, for 
purposes of record in the Court under sec.2(1)(e) i.e.  the Principal District 
Court or the court of the Principal J udge, City Civil Court (but not the High 

 132
Court in its original jurisdiction) with in territorial whose jurisdiction a suit 
would have been filed, if the subject ma tter were a suit.  This applies to all 
awards passed pursuant to an agreement or after appointment of arbitrators 
by the High Court or the Supreme Court under Section 11 or under Section 8 
or under Section 8A. 
 
2.24.4 After section 31 of the principal Act, the proposed section 31A 
shall be inserted as follows:  
 
Filing of a copy of the award and original arbitral records in the 
court for purposes of  record a nd maintenance of register of 
awards 
 
“31A (1) A photocopy  of the arbitral award duly signed on each page 
by the members of the arbitral tri bunal together with the original 
arbitral records,  shall be filed by the arbitral tribunal in the court 
within thirty days of the making of  the award along with  a list of the 
papers comprising the arbitral record.    
 
 Provided that where the High C ourt is the proper court within 
the meaning of clause (e) of sub-s ection (1) of section 2, then the 
award shall be filed in the principal Civil Court of Original 
Jurisdiction in a district or in the court of the principal judge of the 
city civil court of original jurisdiction in a city within whose territorial 
jurisdiction the subject matter of arbitration is situated (hereinafter 
referred to in this section as the said court). 
 
Explanation.-1 For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
“arbitral award” in this section means the arbitral award whether 
passed pursuant to a reference ma de by a judicial authority under 
section 8, or by any of the courts re ferred to in section 8A, or by the  
parties or by the High Court or by the Supreme Court under section 
11, or by the parties to a Fast Track Arbitration under section 43A.   
 
Explanation.-2 For the purposes of this section, “arbitral records” 
shall include the pleadings in the claim filed by the parties, the 
documentary and oral evidence if any recorded, the pleadings in 
interlocutory applications, the orders  thereon, the proceedings of the 
arbitral tribunal and all other pa pers relating to the arbitral 
proceedings. 

 133
 
(2) Where the arbitral tribunal fa ils to file the photocopy of the 
arbitral  award and the arbitral r ecords under sub-section (1), any of 
the parties may give notice to the ar bitral tribunal to do so within a 
period of thirty days of the receipt of the notice, failing which, the 
party may request the said court to di rect the arbitral tribunal to file 
the  photocopy of the arbitral award and the arbitral records in the said 
court.  
 
(3)  Upon the filing of the photocopy of the arbitral 
award and the arbitral record s under sub-section (2), the 
presiding officer of the said c ourt or a  ministerial officer 
of the said court designated by the said presiding officer, 
shall affix  his signature with  date and seal of the said 
court  on each page of the photocopy of the arbitral 
award aforesaid and shall af ter verification, acknowledge 
receipt of the photocopy of the arbitral award and the 
arbitral records as per the list referred to in sub-section 
(1). 
 
 
(4)The said court shall maintain a register containing ,- 
(a) the names and addresses of the parties to the awards; 
(b)the date of the award; 
(c ) the names and addresses of the arbitrators; 
(d )the relief granted; 
(e ) the date of the filing of the award into the said court; 
and 
(f)such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
 
(5) If any party makes an applicati on, the court may grant a certified 
copy of the  photocopy of the arbitr al  award or of the arbitral 
record or of the arbitral pro ceedings, as the case may be, in 
accordance with the rules of the court. 
 
(6)The court may transmit the arbitral records for use in 
any proceedings for the setting aside of the arbitral award 
or for enforcement thereof. 
 

 134
(7) The procedure for return of  original documents or for 
preservation of the arbitral  records so filed shall be 
subject to such rules as may be  applicable to the said 
court from time to time.  
 
(8) The filing of the photocopy of the award under this 
section is only for purposes of  record. 
” 
 
 
2.25.1 Section 34: Proposal to amend sub-section (1) and insertion of 
new sub-section (1A) regarding procedural modifications and  
further procedure after remission to arbitral tribunal under sec. 
34(4)) – proposal accepted by adding clauses (5) and (6) to Sec. 
34 and the procedure to apply for grounds in sec. 34 and 
proposed sec. 34A. 
 
 We have seen that section 33 of the Act refers to correction of the 
award at the instance of the party or by the arbitral tribunal suo motu. 
 
 A question has been raised whethe r a separate provision is necessary 
for court to remit the award only after setting aside the same.  This is not 
necessary, because section 34(4) cont ains an inbuilt procedure for such 
remission.  But the procedure which is  to be followed after the arbitral 
tribunal passes orders on such remission, has not been specified in sec. 34.  
Now we are proposing in sub-section (5 ) and (6), the remaining procedure 
after receipt of the response from the ar bitral tribunal, as stated in detail 
below. 
 
In Madan Mohan Agarwal vs. Suresh Agarwal AIR 1998 (MP) 212 = 
1998(2) Arb. LR 166, a Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court held that 
if the arbitrator, on such request unde r sec.34(4) passed a fresh award, it 
must be taken that both awards have  merged.  Otherwise the award cannot 
be executed.  The court felt once an order was passed under sec.34(4) by the 
court, the first award must be d eemed to have remain suspended.  No doubt, 
the Court tried to make some thing good in spite of an anomalous procedure 
in sec. 34(4). 
 
 Under section 34(4) of the Act, there is a provision for remission and 
the procedure is that the application under section 34(1) will be kept pending 

 135
till the arbitral tribunal sends its respons e to the Court. Section 34(4) states 
that the Court may, when it is appropria te and it is so re quested by a party, 
adjourn the proceedings for a period of time determined by its  order to give 
the arbitral tribunal an opportunity to re sume the arbitral proceedings or to 
take such other action as in the opinion of the arbitral tribunal will eliminate 
the grounds for setting aside the arbitr al award.  The objective of this 
provision is explained in Dr. P.C. Rao's commentary (page 117) as follows: 
 
"The remission procedure was known even to the 1940 Act. The main 
difference between the remission procedure under sub section (4) of 
section 16 of the 1940 Act is that, whereas the 1940 Act conceived the 
remission  procedure as an integral  part of the procedure for setting 
aside the award.  Prior to the invocation of the remedial procedure, the 
court will have to identify the remedi al defects in the award  and refer 
them to the arbitral tribunal. The tribunal has an option to resume the 
arbitral proceedings which get ot herwise terminated under section 32 
or, without such resumption, to take such other action as in its opinion 
will eliminate the grounds for setting as ide the award.  The tribunal is 
given 'an opportunity' to cure the de fects. The court may extend this 
period of time. If nothing happens  during the period given by the 
court or the action taken by the tri bunal does not cure the defects, the 
court will have to set aside the award." 
 
Even under the 1940 Act, the provisi on regarding remission was that 
under sub-section (2) of section 16, 'the arbitrator or the empire shall submit 
his decision to the Court.' 
 
In other words, the application unde r section 34(1) to set aside the 
award is to be kept pending so that, in  the mean time, the arbitral tribunal 
could send its decision to the Court. The position here is akin to the one 
under order 41 rule 25 CPC rather than one under order 41 rule 23 CPC. 
 
2.25.2  However, there is a small procedural gap as to what should 
happen after section 34(4) is over. It is here that the Commission proposes to 
add to sub-section (5)and (6) as to what  the arbitral tribunal is to do and for 
the aggrieved party to file objections and for the Court to dispose of the 
application filed under section 34(1) in  the light of the response of the 
arbitral tribunal and the objections, if any, filed thereto. 
 

 136
 Where such rectification procedure is retained in Section 34 (4) is 
applied to Section 34A grounds in cases of purely domestic arbitration also, 
same procedure as under Section 34 (5) and (6) will apply. 
 
 But, after the receipt of the orde r from the arbitral tribunal we propose 
that the Court may, while dealing with  the application under sub section (1) 
of sec. 34, take action to consider the said order and any objections that are 
filed thereto, in the light of the grounds permissible under sec. 34 and the 
proposed sec. 34A.  This will not, however, preclude the Court from 
exercising the powers under sub section (2) of the proposed sec. 37A and the 
procedure in sub section (3) of sec. 37A is also to be followed. 
 
 The Commission further recommends that the parties may be 
permitted to include, in their appli cation to set aside the award, the 
additional grounds proposed in section 34A in the case of purely domestic 
arbitration awards relating to Indian nationals and while filing an application 
to set aside the award, the parties should annex a photocopy of the award in 
case the original award has not been s upplied to the applicant.  In this 
context, the Commission proposes to amend sub-section (1) of section 34 
and insert a new sub-section (1A) below the proposed sub-section on the 
following lines to give effect to these recommendations:- 
 
(a) for sub-section (1), the followi ng sub-sections shall be substituted 
namely:- 
 
“ (1) Recourse to a court against an  arbitral award may be made only 
by an application for setting aside such award- 
 
(a) in accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) 
; and 
 
    (b) in the case of an award made in an arbitration other 
than an international arbitr ation (whether commercial or 
not), in accordance with sub-s ection (2) and (3) and  the 
additional grounds mentioned in  section 34A:
 
 
(1A) An application for setting as ide an award under sub-section (1) 
shall be   accompanied by the original award: 
 

 137
Provided that where the parties have not been given the 
original award, they may file in the court, a photocopy of 
the award  signed by the arbitrators.” 
 
 
  After sub-section (4) of section 34, the proposed sub-sections 
(5) and (6) shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(5) Where the court  adjourns the proceedings under sub-section (4) 
granting the  arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume its proceedings 
or take such other action and elimin ate the grounds referred to in this 
section or in section 34A for setti ng aside the award, the arbitral 
tribunal  shall pass appropriate or ders within sixty days from the 
receipt of the request made under sub-section (4) by the Court and 
send the same to the court for its consideration.  
 
(6) Any party aggrieved by the orde rs of the arbitral tribunal under 
sub-section (5), shall be entitled to file its objections thereto within 
thirty days of the receipt of the said order from the arbitral tribunal 
and the application made under sub-section (1) to set aside the award 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and (3) of section 
37A,  be disposed of by the  court,  after taking into account the orders 
of the arbitral tribunal made under sub-section (5) and  the objections 
filed under this sub-section.” 
 
2.26.1 Two Additional grounds for setting aside the award only in case 
of purely domestic arbitrati on between Indian nationals: 
Proposed section 34A 
 
The provision is proposed to be confined to “purely domestic 
arbitration” between Indian nati onals.  The two grounds, as per our 
proposals, are (i) substantial error of la w apparent on the face of award, (ii) 
absence of reasons.  These two grounds ar e to be included in the application 
under Section 34 (1).  For ground (i) a furt her separate application seeking is 
proposed, rigid conditions are laid for the grant of leave as is in the English 
Act of 1996.  
 
  Now, in the context of our propos als, the present applications for 
setting aside arbitral awards are to be filed, under sec. 34 only if (i) a party 
was under some incapacity or (ii) the ar bitration agreement is not valid (iii) 

 138
absence of notice at time of appointme nt of arbitrators or of arbitral 
proceedings or was otherwise unable to  present his case or (iv) if award 
deals with a dispute not contemplated or not falling within the terms of the 
submission, or it contains decisions  on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitrators and (v) if com position of the arbitral tribunal or the 
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of parties, or 
was not in accordance with Part I. 
 
 Clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 34 refers to other aspects, 
viz., (i) the subject matter of dispute being not capable of settlement by 
arbitrator under the law for the time be ing in force and the arbitral award 
being in conflict with  ‘ public policy’ of India.  ‘Explanation’ below sub-
section (2) of section 34 states that an award will be in breach of ‘public 
policy’ if it is induced by fraud or bribery. 
  
 These are the grounds of attack permitted by section 34. 
 
 We have already stated that more supervision is necessary in case of 
purely domestic arbitration.  Lord  Mustill stated in Coppee – Lavalin  
SA/N.V  vs Ken Ren Chemicals and Fertilisers Ltd.  (In liquidation) 1994(2)  
All ER 449 at 466 (HC) as follows: 
 
“Whatever view is taken regard ing the correct balance of the 
relationship between international arbitration and national courts, it is 
impossible to doubt that at least in some instances the intervention of 
the Court may be not only permissible but highly beneficial.” 
 
Redfern & Hunter (3 rd edn.) (para 1.18), speaking about purely domestic 
arbitration, pointed out: 
 
“…some control (and even “supervis ion”) of the arbitral process by 
the local courts was considered desi rable.  By contrast, one of the 
major features of the Model Law (which was designed to provide for 
international commercial arbitration) is that it imposes strict limits on 
the extent to which a national cour t may intervene in the arbitration 
proceedings.” 
 
 (See also the views of the Law Commission of South Africa (set out 
in para 1.4 of this report) 
 

 139
During the discussions which took place after the release of the 
Consultation Paper (Annexure –II), it was therefore suggested that under the 
arbitration law grounds for attacking a purely domestic award could be 
slightly wider than those in interna tional arbitration.  It was, however, 
agreed that there should be no appeal on merits of the award as under the 
Code of Civil Procedure.  But some juri sts opined that, after all, arbitration 
was a matter of choice of the pa rties and there must be least court 
intervention and it was not necessary to make any changes to expand the 
provisions relating to recourse to th e award, even in regard to purely 
domestic arbitration. 
 
 In the 2 nd edition, while adverting to the need for stricter control in the 
matter of purely domestic arbitration, Redfern and Hunter stated (paras 14 
and 15) as follows: 
 
“Amongst states which have a de veloped arbitration law, it is 
generally recognized that more freedom may be allowed in an 
international arbitration than is commonly allowed in a domestic 
arbitration.  The reason is ev ident.  Domestic arbitration usually takes 
place between the citizens or reside nts of the same state, as an 
alternative to proceedings before the Courts of that state…..it is 
natural that a state should wish (a nd even need) to exercise firmer 
control over such arbitrations, involving its own residents or citizens 
than it would wish (or need) to exer cise in relation to international 
arbitrations which may only take place within the state’s territory 
because of geographical convenience” 
 
 We shall take up these two gr ounds separately and examine if 
they can be added as additional grounds to set aside awards which are purely 
domestic between Indian nationals: 
 
2.26.2 (i) Substantial error of law apparent on the face of the award –  
proposed  
 
Mere error of law was not a ground in purely domestic arbitration even 
under the old Act of 1940 unless it was appa rent on the face of the award.  It 
is not a ground in international arbitration and it is limited to ‘public policy’.  
The elaborate discussion in Renusagar Power Co. Ltd.   Vs. General Electric 
/Co. AIR 1994 S.C. 860 explains why error of law cannot be included within 
the meaning of the words ‘public policy’ .  While treating  ‘error of law’ as 

 140
being distinct from ‘public policy’, the New York Convention, 1958 referred 
only to ‘public policy’ as a ground of challenge and not error of law.  The 
only exception was that under the head of ‘public policy’, the violation of 
certain fundamental policies was brought in.  In 
Renu Sagar case, the 
Supreme Court therefore, refused to include ‘erro r of law’ as part of ‘public 
policy’.   Exceptions were made in cases  of violation of such laws like the 
FERA (see p 888) which were treated as part of ‘fundamental policy of 
India’ or ‘interest of India’. Chargi ng interest on intere st or damages on 
damages was not  treated  as violation of public policy of India. The ‘items’  
permitted by Renusagar are restricted to -  
 
(i) Fundamental Policy of India 
(ii) Interest of India 
(iii) Justice or morality. 
 
These alone are included in the meani ng of the words ‘public policy’, apart 
from what is contained in the Explanation. 
 
Suggestion has been made that the wo rd ‘public policy of India’ must 
be defined and that the present Explana tion in sec. 34(2) is not sufficient.  
Our attention is drawn to certain judgm ents of the High Courts, particularly 
one from Bombay, where a learned single Judge, after an elaborate 
judgment, has held that the above word s are to be construed very liberally 
and would take within their fold, not only errors of law but all the grounds 
available under the 1940 Act.  This decision has not accepted Renusagar and  
it says that questions of law and even questions of fact, can be reviewed by 
the Court.  Concepts of public polic y as including violation of article 14 
were also relied upon to hold that a ny arbitrary decision of the tribunal 
would amount to violation of ‘public policy.’  The Commission finds it 
difficult to accept this view of the Bo mbay High Court but leaves it to be 
corrected by the judicial process.    This aspect is proposed to be clarified by 
an Explanation  in the proposed clause  relating to error of law apparent on 
the face of the award, it is clearly stat ed that the question of law must arise 
after accepting the findings of fact as they are.  This aspect is proposed to be 
clarified by an Explanation. 
 
According to Redfern and Hunter, (see para 9.32) there is justification 
for not including errors of law as a gr ound of attack so far as international 
arbitration is concerned.  They said: 
 

 141
“There is a belief that, so far as  international arbitrations are 
concerned, the parties should be prepared  to accept the decision of the 
arbitral tribunal even if it is wrong , so long the correct procedures are 
observed.  If a court is allowed to review this decision on the law or 
on the merits, the speed and above a ll, the finality of the arbitral 
process is lost.” 
 
Russell (1999) says (7.0001) that it is easier to justify some role for the court 
in cases where the parties are from England and the arbitration is to follow 
the normal English rules of procedure. 
 
 Justice V.A. Mohta, in his recent commentary on the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 (see pp.250, 251) ha s referred to the divergent views 
on the question of court interference, in extenso.  Reference is made to the 
view of Lord Mustill (quoted in an article by Shri Milon Benerjee in the 
book ‘Alternative Dispute Resolution’, by Dr. P.C. Rao) to the effect that 
error of law should be retained.  Ref erence is made to another article by 
noted Jurist Sri F.S. Nariman in the same book that error of law should not 
be brought into the grounds of attack of the award in the new Act.   
 
So far as ‘error of law’  apparent on the face of the award in respect of 
purely domestic awards between Indian nationals, the Commission is 
inclined to include this ground provide d the error relates to a ‘substantial 
question of law’.  This view is based to a large extent on section 28 of the 
Act and considerations for upholding the rule of law and public interest but 
at the same time restricting the time of  appeal to ‘substantial question of 
law’.  
 
Under section 28, the arbitral tribuna l is not expected to deviate from 
the “substantive” law.  If that be so, is there any justification for not 
including this ground in section 34?  In the opinion of the Commission, there 
is none.  The courts in India, incl uding the High Courts and the Supreme 
Court, are to decide disputes in accord ance with law.  There is, therefore, no 
justification in placing the arbitral tribunal on a higher pedestal and allowing 
it to decide according to its own wh ims and fancies.  Awards involving 
crores of rupees are passed against th e State, the public sector undertakings 
and statutory corporations.  For example, if the period of limitation for an 
action is three years and a claim is barred by ten years and still allowed by 
the arbitral tribunal, should the award be left alone?  If huge damages are 
awarded in violation of section 73 of the Contract Act or there is violation of 

 142
other provisions of that Act or the Sale  of Goods Act or Interest Act, should 
there be no remedy at all?  If it does not follow a decision of the Supreme 
Court or wrongly ignores the decisions of the Supreme Court, can it not be 
corrected?   In the opinion of the Co mmission, it is not possible to  follow 
the Model Law by omitting this important ground of attack. However, this 
ground   should be made available only for purely domestic arbitration 
between Indian nationals.  (Of cour se, where a pure question of law is 
referred to the arbitral tribunal, this ground will not be available). 
 
However, if error of law is to be added, it should be subject to rigid 
conditions as under section 69 of the English Act.  While permitting this 
ground of ‘error of law apparent on th e face of the award’, the Commission 
proposes to include very rigid standards as in section 69 of the English Act, 
1996 such as (i) the error must be appa rent on the face of the award and give 
use to a substantial question of law, ( ii) its determination must necessarily 
affect the rights of one or more partie s, (iii) the substantial question of law 
must have been raised before the ar bitral tribunal, (iv) the party must 
identify the question of law clearly in the grounds, (vi) separate leave must 
be obtained for raising the plea.  These stringent conditions are among the 
various conditions fixed under Englis h Law, following the decision of the 
House of Lords in the Nema Case  (1982 AC 724) and the Antaios case , 
(1985 AC 191).  At the stage of Section 34A to raise the above plea of error 
apparent on face of record, the court is to prima facie satisfy itself if these 
conditions are fulfilled. 
 
As stated earlier, States impose and can impose greater supervision 
over purely domestic award in which all the parties are Indian nationals.  We 
can give one more reason as to why different treatment is needed.  In 
international arbitration, the par ties generally approach recognized 
international institutions like the I CC which have a panel of expert 
arbitrators of international repute.  The arbitrators by virtue of their selection 
to such an august panel are regarded  very high and parties repose great 
confidence in them.  It is not the same with purely domestic arbitration.  It is 
not as if in all cases retired Judges of  the Supreme Court or High Courts or 
other experts are appointed.  In purely domestic arbitrations, even lay people 
are appointed.  Again, in  cases where Government or Public sector  
undertakings or statutory corporations are parties, there is provision for 
appointment of their employees as arb itrators.  During the discussion on the 
Consultation Paper ( Annexure-II), it was revealed that, in case where 
departmental officers are appointed as arbitrators, there was a feeling that 

 143
they mostly favour the private contractor s.  In some situations, they were 
unduly biased in favour of their em ployers.  Therefore, purely domestic  
arbitration awards cannot always be placed on the same high pedestal as 
international arbitration awards.  
 
2.26.3 The Commission is conscious that any provision granting an 
additional ground of review, even it be for purposes of purely domestic 
arbitral award, can be abused leading to delay in courts.  That is why the 
Commission is imposing several 
rigid conditions in this behalf as stated 
earlier.  At the same time, the Commission cannot ignore that a substantial 
number of arbitration cases involve 
Government, public sector undertakings  
and statutory corporations against which huge claims are made and awards 
passed.  The monies involved here are all public monies.  The Commission 
has kept in view that some awards  against these bodies today are running 
into hundreds of crores.  Therefore, so me more supervision is definitely 
necessary so far as 
purely domestic awards  between Indian nationals are 
concerned and we cannot re st content with the limited  range of attack 
permitted in respect of international awards.  At the same time, as stated 
above, we propose to take extreme care to see that the additional grounds are 
not abused.  Therefore, we propose to insert section 34A after section 34 as 
follows: 
 
Additional grounds of challenge  in case of certain awards 
 
“34A. (1) In the case of an arbitral aw ard made in an arbitration other 
than an international arbitration (whether commercial or not), recourse 
to the following additional grounds can  be had in an application for 
setting aside an award referred to in  sub-section (1) of section 34, 
namely:- 
 
(a) that there is an error which is apparent on the face of the arbitral 
award giving rise to a substantial question of law; 
 
(b) that the arbitral award is an award in respect of which reasons 
have to be given under sub-sec tion (3) of section 31 but the 
arbitral award does  not state the  reasons. 
  
 (2)   Where the ground referred to in  clause (a) of sub-section (1) is 
invoked in the application filed unde r sub-section (1) of section 34, 

 144
the applicant shall file a separate  application seeking leave of the 
court to raise the said ground: 
 
Provided that the court sha ll not grant leave unless it 
is prima facie  of the opi nion that all the following 
conditions are satisfied, namely:- 
 
(a) that the determination of the question will 
substantially affect the rights of one or more parties; 
 
(b) that the substantial ques tion of law was one which the 
arbitral tribunal was asked to decide; and 
 
(c) that the application made for leave identifies the 
substantial question of law to  be decided  and states 
relevant grounds on which leave is to be granted. 
 
 
 
(3) Where a specific question of law has been referred to the arbitral 
tribunal, an award shall not be se t aside on the ground referred to in 
clause (a) of sub-section (1).”. 
 
 
2.26.4 Ground of absence of reasons – proposed: (purely domestic awards 
between Indian nationals. 
 
The second additional ground which we propose to recommend, in the 
case of purely domestic arbitrations be tween Indian nationals is the one 
relating to domestic ‘absence of reasons’ in the award.  While Section 31 (3) 
requires reasons to be given in the award (except in cases where parties 
otherwise agree that reasons need not  be given or the award is one by 
settlement), no adequate pr ovision is made in Section 34 in this behalf, if 
reasons are not given in the award.  There is considerable divergence of 
opinion in the courts in different countri es as to whether error of law would 
fall within the word ‘public policy’. 
 
There has been lot of litigation under the old Act of 1940 which 
permitted unreasoned awards.  But once the 1996 Act requires reasons to be 
given under Section 31 (3), there must be a provision for referring the matter 

 145
back to the arbitral tribunal under Section 31 (4) and for reasons to be given 
and then for objections to be filed unde r the proposed section 31 (5) and (6).  
Hence, this additional ground is also included in Section 34A.  The ground is 
to be included in Section 34A applications.   
 
These two additional grounds for pur ely domestic arbitration between 
Indian nationals are contained in the proposed Section 34A.  To enable these 
grounds to be raised and to be rectifie d by the arbitral tribunal, Section 34A 
is also amended to cover these grounds.   
 
2.26.5  It is proposed that Section 34A may be inserted after section 34 
of the principal Act as follows: 
 
Additional grounds of challenge  in the case of certain awards 
 
“34A. (1) In the case of an arbitral aw ard made in an arbitration other 
than an international arbitration (whe ther commercial or not), recourse to 
the following additional grounds can be had in an application for setting 
aside an award referred to in sub-section (1) of section 34, namely:- 
 
(c) that there is an error which is apparent on the face of the arbitral 
award giving rise to a substantial question of law; 
 
(d) that the arbitral award is an award in respect of which reasons have 
to be given under sub-section (3) of section 31 but the arbitral 
award does  not state the  reasons. 
  
 (2)   Where the ground referred to in  clause (a) of sub-section (1) is 
invoked in the application filed under sub-section (1) of section 34, the 
applicant shall file a separate appli cation seeking leave of the court to 
raise the said ground: 
 
Provided that the court shall not grant leave unless it is 
prima facie  of the opinion that all the following 
conditions are satisfied, namely:- 
 
(d) that the determination of the question will substantially 
affect the rights of one or more parties; 
 

 146
(e) that the substantial ques tion of law was one which the 
arbitral tribunal was asked to decide; 
 
(f) that the application ma de for leave identifies the 
substantial question of law to  be decided  and states 
relevant grounds on which leave is to be granted. 
 
(3) Where a specific question of law has been referred to the arbitral 
tribunal, an award shall not be se t aside on the ground referred to in 
clause (a) of sub-section (1).” 
 
(3) Where a specific question of law has been referred to the arbitral 
tribunal, an award shall not be set as ide on the ground referred to in clause 
(i) of sub-section (1). 
 
2.26.6  Section 34:  As stated earlier in para 2.25A, having dealt with 
the introduction of sec. 34A, we sha ll now deal with the consequential 
amendment in section 34 and also in  regard to the insertion of the 
Explanation to cover the right of filing an application to set aside the award 
for rejection of a challenge under sub section (2) of section 13 and a plea 
under sub section (2) or (3) of sec. 16.   
 
For sub-section (1) of section 34, the following sub-section shall be 
substituted namely:- 
 
“ (1) Recourse to a court against an  arbitral award may be made only 
by an application for setting aside such award- 
 
(a) in accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) 
; and 
 
    (b)   in the case of an aw ard made in an arbitration other 
than an international arbitr ation (whether commercial or 
not), in accordance with sub-s ection (2) and (3) and  the 
additional grounds mentioned in  section 34A: 
 
2.26.7  We also propose to add a formal  clause as clause  (1A) in sec. 
34 enabling an application under sec. 34( 1) to be filed on the basis of a 
photocopy signed by the arbitrators, if the original has not been given to the 
party, as follows: 

 147
 
(1A) An application for se tting aside an award under sub-
section (1) shall be   accompanied by an original award: 
 
Provided that where the parties have not been given the original 
award, they may file in the court, a photocopy of the award  
signed by the arbitrators.” 
 
2.26.8  Explanation 2 below sec. 34(2):  
 
There appears to be an omission, as stated in our discussion under 
section 13 and 16 above in omitting in s ection 34 any reference to a right to 
file an application to set aside an aw ard passed after rejecting the challenge 
under sub section (2) of section 13 and under sub section (2) or sub section 
(3) of section 16.  As stated earlie r the following Explanation 2 is added 
below sub section (2) of section 34: 
 
“Explanation II:  For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
while seeking to set aside an arbitral award under sub section (1), the 
applicant may include the pleas questioning the decision of the arbitral 
tribunal rejecting:- 
(i) a challenge made under sub section (2) of section 13; 
(ii) a plea made under sub section (2) or sub section (3) of section 16” 
 
2.27 Proposal for inclusion of  the ground of misconduct –  
Rejected.  
 
 The ground of misconduct was used  under the old Act of 1940 in 
sec.30 (a) – ‘the arbitrator must  have misconducted himself or the 
proceedings’.  These words have been construed by the Courts in India in a 
variety of ways.  As pointed in 
State of Kerala  vs. K. Kurian P. Paul  (AIR 
1992 Ker 180), the words include (i) defect  in the procedure followed, (ii) 
committing breach and neglect of dut y and responsibility (iii) acting 
contrary to equity and good conscience (iv) acting beyond the reference, (v) 
acting without jurisdiction, (vi) proceeding on an extraneous circumstances, 
(vii) ignoring material documents, (viii) bases the award on no evidence.  Of 
course, corruption and bribery would also be included. 
 
 It would be seen that some of these grounds are indeed covered by 
section 34  of the 1996 Act – e.g. (i) party was under some incapacity (ii) 

 148
arbitration agreement was not valid unde r law (iii) applicant was not given 
proper notice of appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or 
was otherwise unable to present his case (iv) award deals with a dispute not 
contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission to 
arbitration, or it contains decisi ons on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration (v) compositi on of the tribunal and the arbitral 
procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties (vi) 
subject matter of dispute was not capab le of settlement by arbitration under 
the law for the time-being in force or (vii) the award is in conflict with 
‘public policy’ of India – which include s fraud or corruption or violation of 
sections  75 or 81.   
 
These grounds appear to the Commission to be sufficient and need not 
be further enlarged by the addition of the ground of ‘misconduct’.   
 
It is not, therefore, desirable to introduce a general ground of 
‘misconduct’ for that would indeed open fl ood gates of litigation.  After 
careful consideration of the matter,  the Commission is not inclined to 
include ‘misconduct’ as a ground of ch allenge even in cases of purely 
domestic arbitration between Indian nationals. 
 
2.28  Section 34A (continued) 
 
Proposal for additional grounds in case of non correction of mistakes and  
non consideration of an issue referred to the arbitral tribunal, rejected on the 
ground that existing provisions provide adequate remedies: 
 
The plea before us is that failure to deal with all the issues submitted 
for arbitration has not been made a ground.  Section 33(4) permits parties to 
move the arbitral tribunal in this behalf and for the tribunal to pass an 
additional award. Such a provision is in Article 33(3) of the Model 
Law, Article 1708 of the Belgium Code, Artilce 106 of the Netherlands Act, 
1986, Article 826 of the Italian Code and section 57(3)(b0 of the English 
Act, 1990, Article 1058(1)(3) of the German Act and section 32 of th 
Swedish Act, 1999. Further failure to decide the issues submitted for 
decision, under the English Act, 1990 amounts to an 'irregularity' and 
section 68(2)(d) and permit an appeal, if the court considers it necessary to 
remedy the situation in the context of substantial justice.  No doubt, there 
may be cases where the decision is implied in another finding or the award, 
looked at as whole, shows that the tribunal had not overlooked the issue.  Or 

 149
the evidence may have been insufficient.  It was suggested before us that in 
cases where the tribunal has not decided an issue submitted to it and refuses 
to deal with it in an application under section 33(4), the court must have to 
be given a discretion to call for a supplemental award containing reasons 
regarding the omitted issue, depending upon the circumstances of the case. 
 
(b) The second suggestion is that under section 33(1), the party can 
request that arbitral tribunal to correct typographical errors  or provide an 
interpretation and in case the arbitral tri bunal does not properly respond, 
there must be a provision for appeal under section 34. 
 
The suggestion for including these two extra items in section 34, 
referred to in (a) and (b) above, is not being accepted inasmuch as in 1996 
Act does contain a provision to cover these two contingencies . A look at 
section 34(3) shows that the application to set aside the award is to be filed 
normally in 90 days and where the Tribunal has been requested under 
section 33 (i.e., under sub-section  (4) of  section 33 to decide an issue not 
decided or under sub-section (1) of section 33 to make corrections or give an 
interpretation), the 90 days time gets  extended till the response is given by 
the arbitral tribunal to the request.  In other words, after the tribunal gives its 
response, the objections for the said response can also be stated in the 
application filed under section 34(1).  We, however, propose addition of the 
new sub-sections (5) and (6) of secti on 34, so that these objections can be 
considered by the Court, in the light of the grounds available under the Act.   
 
That would mean that the aggrieve d party can challenge the response 
of the arbitral tribunal to the reque sts under section 33(1) and (4), while 
moving the Court under section 34(1). Th ese two contingencies are clearly 
covered by the existing provisions. Hence the request to include these two 
grounds relating to various types of mistakes is rejected as unnecessary. 
 
2.29.1  Section 36:  Enforcement of award by the court – bottlenecks 
removed and provision made to impose conditions: 
 
Enforcement of award is now not po ssible if any application to set 
aside the award is filed in time and is pending.  This has created some 
problems. 
. 
 Section 36 states that where the tim e for making an application to set 
aside the arbitral award under sec. 34 has expired, or ‘ such application 

 150
having been made, it has been refused’,  the award shall be enforced under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the same manner as if it were a decree 
of the court. 
 
 The procedure under the 1940 Act of filing the award into court and 
for making it a rule of court is dispen sed with under the new Act.  Now the 
award need not be made a rule of Court.  It can be straightaway enforced 
subject to some conditions.  One is that  if the period prescribed for filing an 
application to set aside the award has expired, the award can be enforced.  
But where such an application to set aside the award is pending, the 
enforcement of the award comes to a st andstill, till the application is refused 
by the court, because of the language in section 3, set out above. 
 
 This provision in sec. 36 has come for certain abuse by persons 
against whom an award is passed.  By filing an application to set aside the 
award, even in cases wher e there is no substance in the application, there is, 
so to say, an automatic stay of th e award till such time the application is 
rejected. Thus, an application can be simply filed and the proceedings can be 
dragged on. 
 
2.29.2  It has been suggested at the Bombay seminar and also by the 
Director General of Supplies & Disposals (DGS&D) that a party against 
whom an award is passed must be compelled to deposit award amount or 
furnish Bank guarantee therefore, as a condition for filing the application to 
set aside the award under section 34(1).  This suggestion is not acceptable. 
The suggestion of the DGS&D obviously assumes that every award is in 
favour of the Government.  When a dras tic provision is to be made, one has 
to take care of the repercussions on parties other than the Government. In the 
opinion of the Commission, it will be fa ir to confer power upon the Court 
dealing with section 34(1) applications , to grant stay of operation of award 
subject to such conditions as the Court may deem fit  in the circumstances of 
the case. 
 
2.29.3  Another suggestion of the DGS &D that contractors should give 
a list of assets and undertake not to tr ansfer their assets during the pendency 
of arbitration or enforcement proceedings  is also not a fair provision.  There 
are enough provisions in the Act like section 9 and section 17 to enable 
parties to obtain interim orders for s ecuring the interests of either party. 
Hence this suggestion is also rejected. 
 

 151
2.29.4  Instead a proposal is to be made that the award is to remain 
enforceable but that the Court could impose conditions while granting stay 
of operation of the award. Conditions could mean deposit of the full amount 
or part thereof or Bank guarantee or attachment of assets, etc. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to drop the words “or such application 
having been made, it has been refused” , and add a 
second clause in sec. 36 
to the effect that the filing of an app lication to set aside an award, does not 
ipso facto amount to stay of operation of the award and that pending the said 
application, the court can pass such inte rim orders as it thinks fit, including 
orders in relation to the property which is the subject matter of the award or 
other property or  orders for deposit of th e monies, either in whole or in part, 
payable under the award, to protect the interest of the party in whose favour 
the award is passed. 
 
2.29.5  The proposal is therefore to renumber the existing provision as 
sub-section (1) and drop the following words from sec. 36 
 
“or such application having been made, it has been refused”. 
 
2.29.6  It has been pointed out that  award should not be allowed to be 
enforced unless they conform to the laws in force relating to stamp duty and 
Registration; unless of course part of th e award is severable.  Under the Act, 
the award becomes enforceable after 90 days. Pleas may be raised that once 
it has the force of a decree for purpos es of Order 21, Code of Civil 
Procedure, it need not conform to the above laws.  It will be for the 
execution Court under Order 21 CPC to deal  with these objections.   In the 
1940 Act, there was no provision in respect  of registration or stamp duty.  
The Commission is of the view that th e Registration Act and the Stamp Act 
can take care of these problems as was the position under the old Act and the 
execution Court could take care of these objections. 
 
2.29.7  For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted namely :- 
 
Substitution of section 36 
 
23. For section 36 of the principal Ac t, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely :- 
  

 152
Stay of operation of award or its enforcement    
 
“36.(1) Where the time for making an application to set aside the 
arbitral award under sub-section (1 ) of section 34 has expired then, 
subject to the provisions of sub-secti ons (2) to (4), the award shall be 
enforced under the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (5 of 1908) in the 
same manner as if it were a decree of the court. 
 
(2) Where an application is filed in  the Court under sub section (1) of 
section 34 to set aside an arbitral award, the filing of such an 
application shall not by itself operate  as a stay of the award unless, 
upon a further application made for that purpose, the Court grants stay 
of the operation of the award in acco rdance with the provisions of sub 
section (3). 
 
 
   (3) On the filing of the applica tion referred to in sub section (2) for 
stay of   the operation of the award, the Court may, without prejudice 
to any action it may take under sub section (1) of section 37A and 
subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose, grant stay of 
the operation of the arbitral award for reasons in brief to be recorded 
in writing,  
 
Provided that the Court, while considering the grant of stay, 
shall keep the grounds for setting aside the award in mind. 
 
 
(4) The power to impose conditions referred to in sub-section (3) 
includes the power to grant ad inte rim measures not only against the 
parties to the award or in respect of the property which is the subject 
matter of the award but also to issu e ad interim measures against third 
parties or in respect of property which is not the subject matter of the 
award, in so far as it is necessary to  protect the interests of the party in 
whose favour the award is passed. 
 
 
(5) The ad interim measures gran ted under sub-section (4) may be 
confirmed, modified or vacated, as the case may be, by the court subject 

 153
to such conditions, if any, as it may deem fit, after hearing the affected 
persons.” 
 
2.29.8  Proposed section 37A: Scope of  Courts’s powers of 
intervention in matters under sections  34 and 37A – Court can dismiss in 
limini or dismiss if substantial prejudice is not shown and matters to be 
disposed of within 6 months:  
 
 This is one of the most important amendments proposed. 
 
 The Commission wants to strengthen the appeal procedure by 
permitting dismissals in limini if there are no merits.  Even after notice, 
substantial prejudice is to be shown for Court interference. 
 
2.29.9 A general discretion is to be vested in the court to reject applications 
or appeals in limini.  The proposal is that’s the court will not interfere in 
appeals before the award (under sec tion 37 (2)) or after the award (under 
section 34)  and can reject them in limini.   
 
2.29.10  Proposal is also to requi re substantial prejudice to be 
shown for interferences.  This provision is to apply both to purely domestic 
or international arbitrations.  A provisi on for disposal of all applications and 
appeals under sections 34 and 37 within  six months is also proposed, to 
expedite the Court proceedings.  Of course, brief reasons have to be 
recorded, if the applications or appeals are dismissed in limini. 
 
 Where applications are filed challenging all awards coming under 
section 34 or appeals filed in respect of all orders of the arbitral tribunal 
referred to in section 37(2) or appeals f iled in respect of orders of the Court 
in section 37(1), the following procedure will be adopted by the Court. 
 
2.29.11 After section 37 of the princi pal Act, the section 37A shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
Insertion of new section 37A 
 
37A Substantial prejudice to be  shown for intervention under 
34 and 37 and appeals, applications etc  to be disposed of 
within six months  
 

 154
 
“37A (1) The court referred to in sub-section (1) of section 34, 
while dealing with an applicati on under that sub-section or the 
court referred to in sub-section (1 ) or sub-section (2) of section 37 
while dealing with an appeal unde r any of those sub-sections, may 
, if it thinks fit so to do, and after fixing a day for hearing the 
applicant or appellant or his c ounsel and hearing him accordingly 
if he appears on that day, dismiss the application or appeal, as the 
case may be, without giving notice to the respondent ,for reasons 
in brief to be recorded in writi ng ,if there are no merits in the 
application or the appeal, as the case may be. 
 
(2) No award passed by the arbitral tribunal shall be set aside on an 
application under sub-section (1 ) of section 34 and no order 
passed by the arbitral tribunal or by the court shall be set aside 
in an appeal under sub-section (1 ) or sub-section (2) of section 
37, as the case may be, unless substantial prejudice is shown. 
 
(3) Every application or appeal refe rred to in sub-section (1), shall 
be disposed of within six months from the date of service of 
notice on the opposite party: 
 
Provided that, while dealing with an  application under sub section (1) 
of section 34, if the court adjourns the proceedings under sub-section 
(5) of section 34, the period of si x months shall be reckoned from the 
date of receipt of the order from the arbitral tribunal under that sub-
section”
 
 
2.30.1  Section 42:  Filing of subsequent applications and jurisdiction 
of courts and sections 8, 8A and 11 – proposed Section 42 (1) to (4)  
 
 This is one of the most important provision of the Act.  But it has been 
left vague so far as a pplications filed under section 8 before a judicial 
authority or regarding applications f iled under section 11.  We proposed to 
clarify the sections so as to avoid doubts. 
 
Section 42 requires that all subsequent  applications in respect of any 
arbitration are to be filed in the sa me Court in which the first of such 
application was filed.  There was a similar provision under the old Act of 

 155
1940.  That did not present much difficu lty because the definition of ‘Court’ 
in sec. © of that Act was very wide.  But, in the present Act of 1996, the 
definition of ‘Court’ is very much re stricted.  Courts subordinate to the 
Principal Civil Court in a district or to  the Court of the Principal Judge, City 
Civil Court in a city are excluded in s ection 2(1)(e). The word  ‘Court’ does 
not also include courts of co-equal ju risdiction in the district or city 
concerned to which any matter might  have been transferred from the 
Principal courts aforesaid.  Further we have to provide for application before 
judicial authorities under Section 8 c ourts refer to in Section 8A and 
application under Section 11 clearly. 
 
To cover these categories, Section 42 is to be amended suitably.   
 
2.30.2  (i)  General provision: Section 42 (1) 
 
Section 42 (1) is a general provi sion stating that subsequent 
application will be filed as per sub-secti on (2) to (5).  ‘Court’ is defined to 
mean the courts and judicial authorities in sub-section (2) to (5).  Sub-
section (2) deals with courts under Section 2 (1) (e). 
 
2.30.3  (ii) Application under section 8 and section 42 (3) 
 
We shall next deal with Section 8.  Where an action is filed before a 
judicial authority and the respondent successfully pleads are arbitration 
clause and an arbitral tribunal is a ppointed.  The ‘judicial authority’ is a 
court of original jurisdiction, i.e., the Section 2 (1) (e) courts.  These 
situation present no difficulties.  If an application seeking reference is filed 
in these courts, all subsequent app lications including these under Section 34 
will be filed in the court which entertained the first application.   
 
So far as other courts of original jurisdiction under section 8 are 
concerned, they are the courts inferior to the Principal Courts in the district 
or city.  If the said courts have appoint ed an arbitrator at  the instance of the 
defendant, the subsequent  application including those under section 34 have 
to be filed in the Principal Courts to which such courts is subordinate.  
 
 If the action is one in a quasi-judicial tribunal under section 8 where 
at the respondent instance, a reference is  made to arbitrator, the subsequent 
applications (including the one under Section 34 is to be made to the 
Principal District Court in the dist rict or city, in whose territorial 

 156
jurisdiction, the judicial authority is  located. These provisions are contained 
in the proposed Section 42 (3). 
 
2.30.4  (iii) Application under section 8A and section 42 (4) 
 
So far as Section 8A is concerned,  the procedure is contained in the 
proposed Section 42 (4) with two Explanation. 
 
Now under Section 8A, the reference to arbitrators is made in a 
pending suit, appeal or revision in the courts which may make reference are 
the trial courts or even appellate courts.  Trial courts which exercise original 
jurisdiction may be (a) courts jurisdic tion to the Princiapl Court of Civil 
Jurisdiction in a district or court in a city subordinate to the courts of the 
Principal Judge, City Civil Courts; (b) the co-equal courts to the Principal 
Courts to which the above proceedings might have been transferred; (c) the 
above said Principal Courts in their original or appellate jurisdiction; (d) the 
High courts in original jurisdiction; (e ) High courts in a ppellate or revision 
jurisdiction, (f) Supreme Court in appellate jurisdiction.  Here the definition 
of ‘legal proceedings’ under Section 8A is to be kept in view. 
 
The position under Section 42 will then  be that where reference is 
made by the courts subordinate to the Princ ipal courts in the district or city, 
or by courts of co-equal jurisdiction like the Principal Courts (i.e. on transfer 
of the matter) or where reference is ma de by the said Principal courts – in 
original/appellate jurisdiction, the subsequent applica tions under part I 
(including Section 34) are to be filed in the said Principal Courts.   
 
However, if the reference is ma de by the Supreme Court or a High 
Court in original or appellate jurisdicti on, subsequent applications are to be 
filed only in the High court or S upreme court, as the case may be.   These 
aspects are set out in Section 42 (4) and the two Explanation.      
 
2.30.5  (iv) Application under section 11 and section 42 (5): 
 
 So far as Section 11 is concerned,  if the Supreme Court or the High 
Court have appointed arbitrators, then  the subsequent applications including 
under Section 34 will have to be filed in accordance with section 2 (1) e) – 
i.e., based on the location of the subj ect matter in the jurisdiction of the 
Principal District Court in the district or the Principal Chief Judge, City 

 157
Civil Court or in the High Court original jurisdiction and depending on 
pecuniary jurisdiction.  This is covered by Section 42 (5). 
 
 We have thus provided for all the contingencies in sub-section (1) to 
(5) of section 42.  The existing secti on with same modifications has been 
renumbered as sub-section (1). 
  
2.30.6  For section 42 of the princi pal Act the following section shall 
be substituted namely :- 
 
Proper court for filing subsequent applications 
 
“42. (1) Notwithstanding anything containe d elsewhere in this Part or 
in any other law for the time being in  force, where with respect to any 
arbitration agreement any application under this Part has been made to 
a court in accordance with sub-sections (2) to (5), then all subsequent 
applications (other than the applica tions referred to in sub-section (2) 
of section 31A) arising out of that agreement and the arbitral 
proceedings (hereinafter referred to in this section as the subsequent 
applications) shall be made in accord ance with sub-sections (2) to (5) 
and in no other court. 
 
(2) Where an application is made to a court within the meaning of 
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of s ection 2,the subsequent applications 
shall be made in that court  and in no other court. 
 
 
(3) If in a pending action under secti on 8 before a Judicial authority, 
an application is made, seeking refere nce to arbitration with respect to 
an agreement, then  the subsequent applications shall be made in the 
following manner, namely:- 
 
(i) where the Judicial author ity is a  court within the 
meaning of clause (e) of sub- section (1) of section 2, the 
subsequent application shall be  made in the said court in 
which the application is made and in no other court; 
 
(ii) where the Judicial authority  is a Court which is inferior 
in grade to the principal Civil Court of original 

 158
jurisdiction in a  district or the court of the principal 
Judge of the City Civil Court exercising original 
jurisdiction in a city (herei nafter called the principal 
courts), as the case may be, the subsequent application 
shall be made in the said principal Court to which the 
court where the application is made is subordinate and  in 
no other court; 
 
 
(iii) where the Judicial authority  is a quasi-judicial statutory 
authority, the subsequent application shall be made in the 
principal Court mentioned in clause (ii) within whose 
territorial limits the said authority is situated  and in no 
other court. 
 
 
 (4) If in a legal proceeding under sec tion 8A before any of the courts 
referred to in that section, an app lication is made seeking reference to 
arbitration with respect to an agreement, then the subsequent 
applications shall be made  in the following manner, namely:- 
 
(i) where the application is made  in the Supreme Court or in 
the High Court or in the principal Civil  Courts 
mentioned in clause (ii) of sub-section (3), as the case 
may be, the subsequent appli cation shall be made in the 
Court which made the reference and in no other Court; 
 
(ii) where the application is ma de in a Court of coordinate 
jurisdiction or inferior in grade to the Principal Civil 
courts mentioned in clause (ii)  of sub-section (3), as the 
case may be ,  the subsequent  application shall be made 
in the Principal Court from where the legal proceeding 
was transferred to such court of coordinate jurisdiction or 
to which the said court is subordinate, as the case may be,  
and in no other court. 
 
Explanation 1.- In this sub-s ection, the expression “legal 
proceeding” shall have the same  meaning assigned to it in the 
Explanation to section 8A. 
 

 159
Explanation 2.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that in the case of arbitral pro ceedings which have commenced   
pursuant to a reference made by the Supreme Court or the High 
Court under section 8A and awards  passed pursuant thereto, the 
references to “court” wherever it is used in this Part shall, 
except in section 27 and sec tion  31A, be construed as 
references to the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case 
may be. 
 
      (5)  If an application seeking reference to arbitration with respect to 
an agreement is made  under section 11, in the Supreme Court or in the 
High Court, as the case may be, then the  subsequent applications shall be 
made in the Court within the meaning of clause (e) of sub-section (1) of 
section 2 and in no other court. 
   
2.31.1  Proposal for panel of arbitrat ors by the Chief Justice of India:  
Section 42A – accepted  
 
 It has been suggested that a sche me for empanelling arbitrators must 
be prepared by the Chief Justice of Indi a.  It has been suggested that under 
the scheme all retired judges of the Supreme Court shall be included and that 
a list will be prepared from among some of the retired judges of the High 
Court.  The scheme may provide that they be paid such remuneration and 
allowances or prerequisites as the Chie f Justice of India will determine for a 
contract period of (say) two years or so.  The Chief Justice of India may 
decide the fixed remuneration is to be paid.  During the period, those in the 
panel are available for being nominated as arbitrators.  It will be for the 
Chief Justice of India to work and other details of the scheme.  One 
suggestion is that parties need not pa y fee to these empanelled arbitrators 
during the contract period.   
 
 The Commission recommends the insertion of the following new 
section 42A after section 42 of the principal Act: 
 
2.31.2  After section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely: 
 
“42A Scheme for panel of arbitrators: 
 

 160
The Chief Justice of India,  may prepare a scheme, for 
constituting a panel of arbitrators to enable either the parties or 
the Supreme Court or the High Court under section 11 or the 
judicial authority under section 8 or the courts referred to in 
section 8A or the parties under section 43A ,as the case may be, 
to appoint arbitrators from su ch a panel subject to such 
conditions as may be specified  by the Chief Justice of India in 
that scheme.”  
 
2.32.1  Partnership Act :  Maharashtra Amendment Act (29/84) –  
amendment to 1996 Act proposed by adding section 42B – accepted. 
 
 It was brought to the notice of the Commission that though several 
partnership agreements contain arbitr ation clauses, certain difficulties are 
being faced in Bombay because of sub clause (2A) introduced in the 
Partnership Act, 1932 by the Mahara shtra Amendment by Act 29/84, in 
proceedings for dissolution of a firm or for accounts of a dissolved firm or 
for realization of its property, where the firms were not registered. 
 
Section 69 of the Partnership Act, in so far as relevant, reads as 
follows: 
 
 “Section 69: Effect of non-registration: 
 
(1) No suit to enforce a right arisi ng from a contract or  conferred  by 
this Act shall be initiated in a ny Court by or on behalf of any 
person suing as a partner in a firm  against the firm or any person 
alleged to be or to have been a partner in the firm unless the firm is 
registered and the person suing is or has been shown in the 
Register of Firms as a partner in the firm. 
 
(2) No suit to enforce a right arisi ng from a contract shall be initiated 
in any Court by or on behalf of a firm against any third party 
unless the firm is registered a nd the persons suing are or have 
been shown in the Register of  Firm as partners in the firm. 
 
(3) The provisions of sub sections (1) and (2) shall apply also to a 
claim off or other proceeding  to enforce a right arising from a 
contract, but shall not affect.- 
 

 161
(a) the enforcement of any right to sue for the 
dissolution of a firm or for accounts of a 
dissolved firm or any right or power to realize the 
property of a dissolved firm. 
 
(b) "……………" 
 
Section 29 of the Maharashtra Amendm ent Act, 1984  prohibited any suit as 
is contemplated in sec. 69(3)(a) unless it be one filed by the legal 
representatives of a deceased partner.   The said amendm ent also amended 
sec. 69(3) and substituted “sub sec tion (1) and (2)” by the words “sub 
section (1), 2 and (2A)”. 
  
 Now, section 69(2) creates a bar to suits to enforce a right arising  
from a contract or a right conferred by the Act, if it is instituted by an 
unregistered firm against third parties.  Sub section (3) of sec. 69 applies the 
bar in sec. 69(2) to claims for set-off or “other legal proceedings” but it says 
that this shall not affect (a) suits for dissolution and accounts of dissolved 
firm or power to realize the property of a dissolved firm etc. 
 
 The word ‘other legal proceedi ng’ was constructed by the Supreme 
Court in Jagdish Chandra  vs. Kajaria Traders  AIR 1964 SC 1882 as 
including ‘application for appointment of  arbitrators’ under section 8 (2) of 
the 1940 Act. 
 
 That means, normally, a pro ceeding, including one under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 is not barred if it relates to dissolution of the firm or 
for accounts or for realization of its property, even if the firm is unregistered. 
 
2.32.2  But, the difficulty is created  by sub clause (2A) introduced in 
sec. 69 in Maharashtra.  We  have noticed that sec. 69(2) itself says that the 
bar does not apply to suits or proceed ings for dissolution and accounts or to 
realize assets of dissolved firm.  But sec. 69(2A) says that no suit for 
dissolution or accounts of a dissolved firm or any right or power to realize 
property of a dissolved firm can be cl aimed by a partner of an unregistered 
firm.  The Maharashtra Am endment also amends sec.  69(3) stating that the 
provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) and 2(A) of section 69 shall apply to 
suits for dissolution or for accounts or to the power of realizing property of 
such firms. 
 

 162
 The effect of sec.69(2A) and the amended sec. 69(3) in Bombay is 
that the exception in the latter part of sec. 69(3) created under the Central 
Act in favour of permitting suits or ot her proceedings for dissolution of a 
firm, or for accounts or for realizing  its   property, has become nullified.  In 
other words neither a suit nor even an application for arbitration under sec. 
11 (nor an application in an action under section 8) can be filed if the 
purpose is to have the unregistered firm dissolved or its accounts finalized or 
for recovery from its propert y.  Thus, in the state of Maharashtra alone such 
a disability has arisen.  The 1996 Act ha s therefore become inapplicable in 
such cases. 
 
 This difficulty was placed before  the Commission during the Bombay 
seminar and upon a consideration of th e problem, the Commission is of the 
view that this disability has to be r ectified, particularly when today the 
emphasis is on ADR procedures.  The Commission is of the view that so far 
as partners of an unregistered firm are concerned, they must have the benefit 
of the 1996 set, for the limited purposes of obtaining dissolution of the firm 
for settlement of accounts of the unregiste red firm or for realization of the 
property of the dissolved firm. In other respects, that is to say, except for 
purposes of the 1996 Act, section 69(2A) and 3 can remain. It appears to the 
Commission that these limited class of disputes inter-se partners should be 
allowed to be resolved under the 1996 Act notwithstanding the Maharashtra 
Amendment Act of 1984.  This w ould obviate the need for passing a 
preliminary decree for accounts and then a final decree for accounts. 
 
 It is true that the provision of section 69 are intended to put pressure 
on partners to register that firm so that third parties could be put on notice 
about the partners and their shares in  the firm and of facts concerning the 
firm. The Maharashtra Am endment was intended to put more pressure on 
parties to register their firm, or else they would not be able to get even, as 
amongst them, any dissolution of the firm or settlement of accounts nor 
could they release the property of the dissolved firm.  In the opinion of the 
Commission, these provisions as ame nded in Maharashtra shall remain 
except for the limited extent of enabling arbitration and if that benefit is 
given, partners can go to arbitration for dissolution of an unregistered firm, 
or for settlement of accounts of a dissolved firm or for realization of the 
property of a dissolved firm. 
 

 163
 It is therefore proposed to rectify this effect by adding section 42B.  If 
Parliament makes a law in this field, the State Amendment shall 
automatically get superseded under the principle of repugnance. 
 
2.32.3  The Commission recommends th e insertion of a new section 
42B after the proposed section 42A as stated above, to be inserted on the 
following lines: 
 
“42B  Special provision  relating to unregistered partnerships 
under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 as amended by the 
Maharashtra Amendment Act 1984  
 
The provisions of the Indian Partnership (Maharashtra 
Amendment) Act 1984, (Maharashtra Act 29 of 1984) amending 
section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 in its application to 
the State of Maharashtra, shall not affect the initiation of  any 
proceedings under the Arbitrati on and Conciliation Act, 1996 for 
the purpose of enforcement of any right to seek- 
 
(a) the dissolution of the firm; 
 
(b) the settlement of the accounts of the dissolved firm; or 
 
(c )  the realization of   the property of the dissolved firm.” 
 
2.34.1  Atlantic Clause: Explanati on to be introduced under sec. 43(3) 
in view of the provisions of sec. 28 of the Contract Act 1872, as amended by 
Contract (Amendment) Act, 1996 making “time barring clauses” void. 
 
 A “time barring” clause is a fam iliar clause in several arbitration 
agreements.  We shall give an example of  such a clause – it says that a party 
must take some steps (such as issui ng a notice for arbitration) to commence 
arbitration proceedings within a pe riod of time fixed by the agreement 
failing which the claim itself would get barred or get extinguished.  Such a 
clause was upheld in Atlantic Shipping Case,  1922(2) AC 250 and by our 
Supreme Court in Vulcan Insurance Co. Ltd . Vs. Maharaj Singh AIR 1976 
SC 287.  The Supreme Court upheld such a clause on the basis of sec. 28 of 
the Contract Act, 1872 as it stood then. 
 

 164
 As long as such a clause was valid , the legislature tried to relieve 
against hardship.  The English legislature in sec. 27 of the English Act, 1950 
and sec. 12 of the recent English Act, 1996 and sec. 37(3) of the Indian 1940 
Act and in sec. 43(3) of the 1996 Act, felt that such a premature 
extinguishment of the claim itself might cause hardship and should therefore 
be relieved against in cases of hard ship by extending the period for filing 
actions in the court.  To relieve ha rdship, the 1996 Act made a provision for 
extension of period of limitation by the Court as follows:  
 
Sec. 43(3) reads as follows: 
 
“Where an arbitration agreement to submit future disputes to 
arbitration provides that any claim to which the agreement 
applies shall be barre d unless some step to commence arbitral 
proceedings is taken within a time fixed by the agreement, and 
a dispute arises to which the agr eement applies, the Court, if it 
is of opinion that in the ci rcumstances of the case undue 
hardship would otherwise be cau sed, and notwithstanding that 
the time so fixed has expired, may on such terms, if any, as the 
justice of the case may require, extend the time for such period 
as it thinks proper.” 
 
2.34.2  We shall refer to the s ubsequent development w.e.f. 8.1.99 
pursuant to the 91 st Report of the Law Commission, sec. 28 of the Contract 
Act, 1872 has  been amended.  The am endment to sec. 28 of the Contract 
Act, 1872 was made by the Contract (Amendment) Act, 1996, and came into 
force on 8.1.97, and a new sec. 28 was substituted.  The statement of objects 
and reasons of the Amendment Bill reads as follows: 
 
“The Law Commission of India ha s recommended in its 97th Report 
that Section 28 of the Indian Contr act Act, may be amended so that 
the anomalous situation created by the existing Section may be 
rectified: 
It has been held by the Courts that  the said Section 28 shall invalidate 
only a clause in any agreement whic h restricts any party thereto from 
enforcing his rights absolutely or which limits the time within which 
he may enforce his rights.  The Cour ts, have, however, held that this 
Section shall not come into operation when the contractual term spells 
out an extinction of the right of a party to sue or spells out the 
discharge of a party from all liability in  respect of the claim.  What is 

 165
thus hit by Section 28 is an agreement relinquishing the remedy only, 
i.e. where the time-limit specified by Law.  A distinction is assumed 
to exist between remedy and right and this distinction is the basis of 
the present position under which a cl ause barring a remedy is void, 
but a clause extinguishing the right is valid.  This approach may be 
sound in theory but in practice it caused serious hardship and might 
even be abused.  It is felt that Section 28 of the Indian Contract Act of 
1872 should amended as it harms the interest of the consumer dealing 
with big Corporations and causes se rious hardship to those who are 
economically disadvantaged.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above 
objects.” 
 
Under clause (b) of the new sec. 28, it was d eclared that a clause in a 
contract which provides for an extinguish ment of a right will also be void.  
The new sec. 28 reads as follows: 
 “Sec. 28: Agreement in restraint of legal proceedings void, 
Every agreement -  
(a) By which any party theret o is restricted absolutely 
from enforcing his rights under or in respect of any 
contract, by the usual legal proceedings in the 
ordinary tribunals or which limits the time within 
which he may enforce his rights, or 
(b) Which extinguishes the right of any party thereto, or 
discharge any party ther eto from any liability, under 
or in respect of any contract on the expiry of a 
specified period so as to restrict any party from 
enforcing his rights, is void to that extent.” 
 
(The Explanations to the new sec.  28 however permit arbitration of 
future as well as present disputes and are not relevant in the present 
contract.) 
 
In view of the new sec. 28(b) of the Contract Act, if there is a 
provision in an arbitration clause whic h requires a party to take some steps 
to commence arbitral proceedings within a time fi xed in the arbitration 
agreement, failing which the claim gets barred, such a clause will be void.  
 
(See p.112 of the Commentary on the 1996 Act by Justice S.K. 
Chawla and p.113 of the commentary by Justice V.A. Mohta, that such 

 166
“time- bar clauses ” have become void after the new sec 28 of the Contract 
Act was introduced w.e.f. 8.1.97.) 
 
Consequently, if such a clause is void, then the question of seeking 
extension of time on the ground of hard ship is no longer necessary.  Thus, 
the provision in sec. 43(3) that a party can seek extens ion of time from a 
court of law to relieve hardship becomes redundant w.e.f. 8.1.97. 
 
The Commission, while reviewing th e position in the year 2001, if it 
does not take note of this change in th e law in sec. 28 and if it allows sec. 
43(3) to remain without amendments, it may lead to some doubts and given 
an impression that sec. 43(3) still surviv es even after the amended sec. 28 of 
the Contract Act, i..e. after 8.1.97.   
 
2.34.3  It has therefore been decided to clarify the position by adding 
the following proviso below in sec. 43(3): 
 
“ Provided that after the comme ncement of Indian Contract 
(Amendment) Act 1996, any provision in the arbitration 
agreement which provides that a ny such claim shall be barred 
unless some step to commence ar bitration proceedings is taken 
within a time fixed by the agreement, shall be void: 
 
Provided further that the provisions of this sub-section 
shall be deemed to have no effect from the date of such 
commencement”. 
 
 
2.35.1  Section 43: Regarding application of the Limitation Act, 1963:  
Proposed sub-section (5) and (6) in section 43 
 
A lacuna under sec. 43 was pointed out in the Bombay seminar.  For  
purposes of the Limitation Act, 1963, sec. 43(4) now excludes the period 
spent in arbitration proceedings where the award is ultimately set aside. 
  
2.35.2  But there are other situations where the arbitral agreement 
might be held to be not in existence or that it is null and void or invalid.  
Such issues can arise, before the stage of the arbitral awar d, at the stage of 
applications under sec. 11 of the Act before the Supreme Court or the High 
Court, in view of the flexible provisi on now proposed.  If either of these two 

 167
courts hold that there is no agreement for arbitration or that it is null and 
void or inoperative or not capable of enforcement, there can be no 
arbitration.  (The position is similar to sec. 33 of the old Act of 1940 in 
respect of  which the Law Commission proposed in the 76 th Report,  a 
separate provision for excluding the pe riod for purposes of the 1996 Act of 
Limitation).   
 
2.35.3 Such a situation can also ar ise under sec. 16(2) and (3) of 1996 
Act where the pleas of want of jurisdiction or the matter being 
beyond the scope of the arbitra tion clause, are accepted by the 
arbitral tribunal or affirmed on appeal by the Court.  (If the 
pleas are refused, the matter can  arise only after the award, 
which situation is covered by s ec. 43(4).  Hence we propose to 
add clauses (5) & (6) to cover such cases arising under sec. 11 
and sec. 16(2) and 16(3).  Under sec. 8 such a question does not 
arise because if the arbitration does not go on, the action under 
sec. 8 gets revived.  It is not  necessary to intervene in cases 
where no dispute is in existence.  
 
2.35.4 The proposed amendments are as follows:   
  
 
In section 43 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4) the following 
sub-section shall be inserted namely:- 
 
“(5) In computing the time prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 
of 1963) for the commencement of proceedings in relation to any 
dispute, the period between the co mmencement of the arbitration and 
the date of the orders mentioned below, shall be excluded ,namely:- 
(a) an order of the arbitral tribunal accepting a plea referred to 
in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16  
(b) an order under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 37 by 
the court affirming an order unde r clause (a) or an order of 

 168
the Supreme Court on further a ppeal, if any, affirming the 
last mentioned  order.  
(c) an order declaring an arbitr ation agreement as null and void 
or inoperative or incapable of being performed or as not in 
existence, passed by - 
(i) the High Court under sub-section (13) of 
section 11 in the case of an  arbitration other than 
an international arbitration (whether commercial or 
not) or by the Supreme Court on further appeal. 
(ii)  the Supreme Court under sub-section 
(13) of section 11 in the case of an international 
arbitration (whether commercial or not) where the 
place of arbitration is in India; 
 
The discussion regarding insertion of provisos in sub-section (3) of 
section 43 of the principal Act, has already been done under para 2.7.1 
(supra) of the report. 
 
2.36 Supersession of arbitration agreement – plea for provision rejected 
 
 It was proposed in the Consultation Paper that a provision like sec.19 
of the 1940 Act to supercede the arbitr ation agreement may be included.  
There was also a provision in proviso  to section 25 of the 1940 Act. The 
English Act, 1950 contained similar provision in sections 24(2) and 
25(2)(b).  The court could declare that the arbitration agreement was to have 
no effect.  This related to cases of  fraud or where the arbitrators were 
removed by the court.  Russel says (par a 7.086) that this remedy was rarely 

 169
used ( Property Investments (Development) Ltd . vs. Byfield Building 
Services Ltd.  (1985) 31 Build LR 47 and that the remedy is not available 
under the 1996 Act.  The court may fill a vacancy but it is for the parties to 
agree to terminate the arbitration agreement (sec. 23 of the English Act). 
 
 It appears that the procedure for challenging of an arbitrator (sec.13) 
or his failure or impossibility to act (sec.14) and the power of termination 
and substitution (sec.15) are sufficient reme dies.  Therefore, there is no need 
to have a provision for supersession of the arbitral agreement. 
 
 
2.37 Provision to enable arbitrators to refer question of la w to the court –  
rejected  
 
 A proposal was made in the Consu ltation Paper based on sec. 14(3) of 
the 1940 Act.  Section 45 of the Eng lish Act enables the parties, with 
consent among themselves or with permission of the arbitral tribunal, to seek 
opinion of court on a question of la w, if it is likely to save costs 
substantially. 
 
 It was suggested in the debate on the Consultation Paper that this may 
delay the arbitral process.  The Co mmission is not in favour of any such 
provision being included. 
 
2.38.1 Fast track arbitration: proposed 43A to 43D (chapter XI) in  
 
Part I: 
 
 In modern day arbitration system, there are various types of Fast 
Track Arbitration.  Some are called ‘Fast Track Arbitration’, some others are 
called ‘accelerated arbitration’ and ye t some others are called ‘expedited 
arbitration’ (see Vol. 10, (1993) Journa l of International Arbitration p.69,  
“When Doctrines Meet – Fast Track Arbitration and the ICC experience”  by 
Benjamin Davis and Others).  What we  have proposed in Chapter XI in 
sections 43A to 43D and Schedule IV  is not a fully time bound Fast Track 
Arbitration but is one where initially a period of six months is provided by 
statute for the passing of award, whic h can be extended by the parties for 
another period of three months and thereaf ter, if the award is not passed, the 
procedure envisaged under sub sections (4) to (8) of sec. 29A, namely the 
High Court fixing the time schedule, is to be followed, till the award is 

 170
passed.  Further we have  provided that application to set aside the award 
should be filed in the High Court and not  the Principal Courts mentioned in 
sec. 2(1)(e).  Thus, one  level of litigation in the Principal Courts is 
eliminated, as stated below. 
 
 Various arbitral institutions also provide for fast track arbitration in 
the rules framed by those institutions.  U nder this procedure, the parties may 
opt for fast track arbitration and reque st the arbitral tribunal, before the 
commencement of the arbitr ation proceedings to decide the reference in a 
fixed time-frame as agreed between the parties, according to the fast track 
arbitration procedure.  For exampl e, rules 43 to 57 of the Rules of 
Arbitration of the Indian Council of Ar bitration; the International Centre for 
Alternative Dispute Resolution, New Delhi (ICADR) Fast Track Arbitration 
Rules, 1996; in London Court of International Arbitration Rules, article 9 
deals with expedited formation; the Ch artered Institute of Arbitrators Short 
Form Arbitration Rules, 1991; Chap ter III of the China International 
Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission CIETAC Arbitration Rules 
deals with summary procedure, amply lay down the governing of fast track 
arbitration by various institutions in the world. (see V.A. Mohta, 
The 
Arbitration and Conc iliation Act, 1996, 1 st Edn. 2001 ) Similarly, there is 
necessity to make a provision for fast tr ack arbitration, details of which are 
set out in the Schedule to the Act.  It is, therefore, proposed to insert a new 
section 19A after section 19, to enable  the parties to opt for fast track 
procedure, as follows: 
 
 The provisions in the new proposed  Section 43A are firstly that 
parties to a legal proceeding in a court or parties to an arbitration agreement 
have to agree to go to the Fast Track  procedure for arbitration by a single 
named arbitration chosen by them.  If th ey so agree, then the procedure in 
the schedule shall apply.  The procedure in the arbitration agreement, if any, 
shall cease to apply and the procedure in the schedule will apply.   If there is 
any aspect on which the scheduled is s ilent, then the provisions of the Act, 
so far as may be, will apply.   
 
 One other aspect in the schedule is that normally, arbitration should to 
completed in six months and application to set aside the award is to be filed 
in the High Court and not in the court under S ection 2 (1) (e) and the High 
Court is to dispose of the matter within three months of service of notices on 
the opposite parties. 
 

 171
2.38.2  Insertion of new Chapter XI in Part I 
 
28. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be 
inserted, namely: 
 
“ CHAPTER XI 
 
 Single Member Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal and Fast Track 
Arbitration 
 
“43A. (1) The parties to an action befo re a judicial authority referred 
to in section 8 or a legal proceedi ng before any of the courts referred 
to in section 8A or to an arbitra tion agreement or to an application 
before the Supreme Court or the High Court under section 11, as the 
case  may be,  may,  at any stage either before or at the time of 
appointment of the arbitral tribuna l, agree in writing to have their 
disputes resolved by arbitration in accordance with the provisions of 
this section, sections 43B to 43D and the procedure specified in the 
Fourth Schedule (hereinafter referred to as the Fast Track Arbitration). 
 
(2) If the parties referred to in sub-sec tion (1) agree to  have the disputes 
resolved through Fast Track Arbitration under that sub-section , then 
the  arbitral tribunal agreed to between the said parties shall be 
called Fast Track Arbitration Tribunal.   
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the arbitration agreement- 
 
(i)      the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of  a sole 
arbitrator; 
(ii)      the sole arbitrator shall be  chosen by parties unanimously; 
(iii)    the  fee payable to the arb itrator and  the manner of payment of 
the       such fee sh all be such as may be agreed between the sole 
arbitrator and the parties; 
(iv)    the procedure laid down in  the Fourth Schedule (hereinafter 
referred to as the Fast Track Procedure) shall apply. 
 
“43B Other provisions of the Act to apply subject to modifications 
 
The other provisions of this Part, in  so far as they are matters not 
provided in the Fourth Schedule, shall apply to the Fast Track 

 172
Arbitration as they apply to other arbitrations subject to the following 
modifications, namely:- 
 
(a) references to , 
(i) “arbitral tribunal” sh all, unless the context 
otherwise requires, be deemed to include 
references to the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal; 
and  
(ii) “court” shall be deemed  to be references to the 
High Court , except in section 27 and section 
31A; 
(b) in sub-sections (1) to (4) of section 33, for the words 
“thirty days” wherever they occur, the words fifteen days 
shall be substituted; 
  
(c ) in section 34, 
 
(i) in sub-section (3), for the words “three 
months” the words “thirty days” and for 
the words “ thirty days” the words 
“fifteen days” shall be substituted 
respectively; 
(ii) in sub-section (5), for the words “sixty 
days” the words “thirty days” shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (6) for the words, “thirty 
days” , the words “fifteen days shall be 
substituted; 
 
(d) in section 37A, for the word s “six months” the words “three 
months” shall be substituted. 
 
(e)  in sub-section (1) of s ection 37,the provision for appeal 
shall not apply to orders referre d to in clauses (a) and (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 37. 
 
 
“43C  Proper court for filing subsequent applications 
  

 173
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part  or in any other law 
for the time being in force but subject to sub clause (ii) of clause (a) of 
section 43B, where with respect to  an arbitration agreement, any 
application is made or is  required to be made before a ‘Court’ in the 
manner mentioned in this Part, such an application shall be made to 
the ‘High Court’ and all subsequent applications arising out of that 
agreement and the arbitral proceedi ngs shall be made in that High 
Court and in no other High Court. 
 
 
High Court for purposes of this Chapter 
 
43 D. The references to ‘High Court’ in sections 43B and 43C shall be 
construed as a reference to the  High Court within whose territorial 
limits, the principal civil court or the court of the principal Judge of 
the City Civil Court referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of 
section 2 ,as the case may be, is situated.” 
 
 The Commission recommends the insertion of the following Fourth 
Schedule ( referred to as the Fast Track Arbitration) after the Third Schedule 
to the principal Act: 
 
After the Third Schedule to the pr incipal Act, the following Schedule 
shall be inserted namely:- 
 
“The Fourth Schedule  
Fast Track Arbitration 
   [See Part I, Chapter XI ] 
 
Constitution of Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal 
 
1. (1) For the purposes of  Fast Track Arbitrations under sub-section (1) 
of section 43 A, the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall be deemed to 
be constituted with effect from the date on which the parties after 
obtaining the consent of the sole arbitrator , agree in writing that the 
sole arbitrator shall be the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal under 
subsection (1) of section 43A. 
 
(2) Parties shall communicate the said agreement  to the sole arbitrator 
on the same day.  

 174
 
Procedure to apply from date of constitution of Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal 
 
2. The procedure specified  in this Schedule shall, with effect from the 
date of the constitution of the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal, apply to 
all Fast Track Arbitrations under sub-section (1) of section 43 A. 
 
Procedure 
 
3. (1) Within fifteen days of the constitution of the Fast Track Arbitral 
Tribunal, the person who has raised the dispute (hereinafter referred to 
as the claimant) shall send simulta neously to the tribunal and the 
opposite parties (hereinafter referred to as the respondents)- 
(a) a claim statement containing the facts, the points in issue 
and the relief claimed; 
(b) documentary evidence, if any, in support of his case; 
(c) where reliance is placed on the testimony of any witness 
(including that of a party) a copy of the witness’s affidavit in 
writing; 
(d) where reliance is placed on the opinion of an expert, the 
particulars relating to that expert, his qualifications and 
experience, and a copy of his opinion; 
(e) list of interrogatories, if any; 
(f) application for discovery or production of documents, if any, 
mentioning their relevancy; 
(g) full address, including e-mail or fax, telephone numbers, if 
any, of all claimants and of a ll the parties, for the purpose of 
expediting communication and correspondence; 
(h) any other material considered relevant by the applicant; 
 
(2) The respondent shall, within fi fteen days after receipt of the 
claim statement and the documents referred to in sub-paragraph 
(1), simultaneously send to the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal as 
well as to the claimant, his defe nce statement, together with 
documentary evidence, witn ess testimony by affidavit 
(including that of a party) and e xpert opinion, if any, in support 
thereof, together with counter  claims, if any, supported by 
documents.  
 

 175
(3) The  procedure specified in th is Schedule shall apply to such 
counter claims as they apply to a claim. 
(4) Within fifteen days of the recei pt of the defence statement or of 
the counter claims, the claimant  shall send to the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal and to the respondents his rejoinder and 
statement of defence to the counter claim. 
(5) Within fifteen days of the r eceipt of the defence statement to 
the counter claim, the respondent shall simultaneously send his 
rejoinder to the said statement,  to the Fast Track Arbitral 
Tribunal as well as to the claimant. 
(6) In case discovery or production of documents is allowed, the 
parties shall be permitted to  submit their supplementary 
statements, if any, to the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal within a 
specified period and to simultane ously send copies thereof to 
each other. 
(7) The Fast Track Arbitral Tri bunal shall decide the disputes on 
the basis of the pleadings and documents, affidavits of 
evidence, expert opinion, if any, and the written submission 
filed by the parties. 
(8)  The Fast Track Arbitral Tri bunal may permit any witness to be 
orally questioned and lay down the manner in which evidence 
shall be recorded or for receivi ng affidavits in lieu of oral 
evidence. 
(9) The Fast Track Arbitral Tr ibunal may otherwise permit oral 
evidence to be adduced, if it cons iders that any request for oral 
evidence by any party is justif ied or where the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal itself considers that such oral evidence is 
necessary. 
(10) The Fast Track Arbitral Tri bunal may, in addition, call for any 
further information or clarification from the parties in addition 
to the pleadings, documents and evidence placed before it. 
 
Representation by Counsel 
 
4. The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal sh all permit the parties to appear 
and conduct the case personally or through their counsel or by any 
person duly authorized by the parties to represent them. 
 

 176
 
Written notes of arguments or oral arguments 
 
5. After the conclusion of the evid ence, the Fast Track Arbitral 
Tribunal may direct all the partie s to file their written notes of 
argument or may, at its discretion, in addition permit oral arguments 
and shall fix a time schedule therefor  and may also restrict the length 
of oral arguments. 
 . 
 
Conduct of proceedings 
 
6. (1) The Fast Track Arbitral Tri bunal shall conduct its proceedings 
in such a manner that the arbitra tion proceedings are, as far as 
possible, taken up day after day, at least continuously for three days 
on each occasion. 
 
(2) The Fast Track Arbitral Tri bunal shall ordinarily fix the time 
schedule in such a manner, so that  the proceedings may be conducted 
continuously from 10.30 A.M. to 1 P.M. and 2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. every 
day 
 
 
 
Parties to be  bound by the procedure and time schedule 
 
7. The  time schedule fixed under  paragraphs (3) and (5)  and the procedure 
specified under paragraph (6) by Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal , shall be 
binding on the parties.  
 
Consultation of experts 
 
8. (1) At any time during the course of arbitration and before the 
passing of the award, the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may, at its 
discretion, if need be, consult any expert or technically qualified 
person or a qualified accountant for assistance in relation to the 
subject matter in dispute, at the expense of the parties, and shall 
communicate the report of the above said person to the parties to 
enable them to file their response. 
 

 177
(2) If the Fast Track Arbitral Tri bunal thereafter considers on its own 
or on the   request  of parties that  any clarification or examination of 
the above said persons referred to in sub-paragraph (1) or examination 
of any other person is necessary, it may call upon the said person to 
clarify in writing or to call him or such other person as a witness for 
necessary examination. 
 
Procedure in cases of default by parties 
  
9. (1) In case there is default on the pa rt of any party to adhere to the 
time limits specified in this Schedul e or are fixed by the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal or there is violation of any interim orders or 
directions of the Fast Track Arb itral Tribunal issued under section 17 
or under this Schedule, the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may pass 
peremptory orders against the defaulting party giving further time for 
compliance including peremptory or ders to provide appropriate 
security in connection with an interim order or direction.  
 
(2)  In case the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that a party to 
the    arbitration is  unduly or deliberately delaying the arbitral 
proceedings, or  the implementation of the peremptory orders, the Fast 
Track Arbitral Tribunal may impose such costs as it may deem fit on 
the defaulting party or may pass an order striking out the pleadings of 
the party concerned or excluding mate rial or draw adverse inference 
against the said party and in case secu rity for costs of arbitration  is 
not furnished as required under sub paragraph (1), the claim may be 
dismissed. 
 
 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of  sub-paragraph (2), the Fast 
Track Arbitral Tribunal may dismiss the claim if the claimant does not 
effectively prosecute the arbitrati on proceedings or file the papers 
within the time granted or neglects or refuses to obey the peremptory 
orders of the tribunal or to pay th e dues or deposits as ordered by the 
Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal: 
 
Provided that failure to file a statement of defence to the 
claim statement or to the counter claim shall not by itself be treated 
as an admission of the allegations in the claim statement or in the 
counter claim, as the case may be. 

 178
 
(4)  If the opposite party does not f ile   its defence or does not 
effectively prosecute its defence or  file the papers within the time 
granted or refuses to obey the peremp tory orders of the tribunal, the 
Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may make an ex parte award. 
 
Fast Track Award to be passed in six months 
 
10. (1) The Fast Track Arbitral Tr ibunal shall pass an award within 
six months from the date of the cons titution of the Fast Track Arbitral 
Tribunal or within such extended period as specified in sub 
paragraphs (2) to (4). 
 
(2) The parties may, by consent, extend the period in subparagraph 
(1), by a further period not exceeding three months. 
 
 
(3)  If the Fast Track Arbitration Award is not  made within the period 
specified under subparagraph (1) a nd the period agreed to by the 
parties under subparagraph (2), th e arbitration proceeding shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub-pa ragraph (4), stand suspended until 
an application for extension is made to the High Court by any party to 
the Fast Track Arbitration or wh ere none of the parties makes an 
application as foresaid, until such  an application is made by the 
arbitral tribunal. 
 
(4) The provisions of subsections (4) to (8) of section 29A shall, so far 
as may be, apply to the High Court for the disposal of application 
referred to in sub paragraph (3), till the award is passed. 
 
Fast Track Award to contain reasons 
 
11. The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall pass an award and give 
reasons for its award keeping in mind the time limit referred to in 
paragraph 10 unless it is agreed be tween the parties that no reason 
need be given or the award is based on settlement of disputes. 
 
   
2.39.1  Section 82 : High Court Rules 
 

 179
        It has come to notice of the Co mmission that most arbitrations are 
conducted in India in a casual fashion only for an hour or two and the matter 
simply adjourned.  Further adjournmen ts are request by lawyers or made by 
arbitrators on each occasion, for long pe riod.  Lawyers are busy with other 
work and arbitrators have also have other cases listed before them.  The 
attitude of lawyers and arbitrators, has not changed very much even after the 
new Act of 1996. 
 
        It is proposed to enable the High Courts to make rules to compel 
arbitration to go on continuously from day to day at least for three or more 
days on each occasion and that on each day the proceedings go on from 
10.30 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. with a break of one hour or carry on proceedings at 
least for 5 hours of each day. 
 
In order that High Court may frame uni form rules, we proposed in section 
82 that the Chief Justice of India may issue guidelines to all the High Courts 
in this behalf. 
 
 
2.39.3 Section 84:  Provision proposed permitting rules to be made 
under section 84 in respect of f ee to be fixed for arbitrators 
(purely domestic arbitration between Indian nationals). 
 
Number of suggestions have been ma de with regard to the fixation of 
fee, at any rate in respect of purel y domestic arbitrations between Indian 
nationals. 
 
2.39.4  It has been pointed out that in  several cases fixation of fee in 
domestic arbitration, on daily basis or  the basis of each session on a day or 
on hourly basis is resulting in cons iderable prejudice to the parties 
particularly when the arbitrations get prolonged over years.  The Bombay 
seminar has brought about some suggestions.  The provision suggested at the 
Bombay Seminar has been considered  by us and we propose a modified 
version thereof.  One method is to allow arbitrators to fix a lump sum.  The 
other is to allow them daily fee ba sis provided they fix the maximum fee 
receivable.  In either case, any furthe r increase of the fee is to be by the 
Court only.  We recommend  the rules to be made on the basis of the 
following guidelines under  section 84:  
 

 180
“(a) At the first hearing of the arbitration proceedings or soon 
thereafter, the Arbitral Tribuna l shall stipulate fees to be 
charged by the members of the arbitral tribunal.  
 
(b) The fee may be charged by each arbitrator on a lump sum basis 
covering the entire period up to the passing of the award.  
 
(c) The fee may be charged by th e arbitrator on per day or per 
session on each day or the per hour basis subject to the arbitral 
arbitrator fixing an upper limit for the total fee payable to him. 
 
(d) Such lump sum as in cl.(a) or upper limit of fee as in cl.(b) shall 
not be liable to increase by any arbitrator except with the 
consent of the parties or upon or ders to be passed by Courts 
upon application by all the members of the arbitral tribunal to 
the Court. 
 
(e) The Court while passing orders under clause (d) will keep in 
mind the work involved, the tim e taken, the manner in which 
the arbitration proceedings have been conducted, the conduct of 
the parties, the further work  involved and the further time 
required, and other relevant factors. 
 
We hope that as and when such rules are made, these will help in regulating 
the fee and will result in speedy disposal of arbitrations. 
 
2.39.5  Rules are also to be made in re spect of particulars to be stated 
in the Register under Section 31A.  It is therefore suggested that a provision 
for the same may be incorporated in the Act by inserting a new sub section 
(1A) in section 84 as follows: 
 
“(1A) Without prejudice to the generality of provisions of sub 
section (1), rules may be made in respect of the following: 
 
(a )  the manner in which the fee of the me mbers of the 
arbitral tribunal may be fixe d and the procedure relating 
thereto; 
 

 181
(b) the other particulars requi red to be entered in the 
register under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section 
31A.”   
 
2.40  Miscellaneous items 
 
2.40.1  Section 36:  A suggestion to enforce the award straight away at 
the place where the property of the respondent is situated – rejected  
 
 It has been suggested that ther e should be a provision enabling the 
award to be executed straightaway at  places where the “judgment debtor’s”  
property is available. 
 
This suggestion appears prima facie to  be attractive if one keeps in mind 
the delay in the disposal of applications for transmission of execution 
applications.  But, there can be serious  practical difficulties.  For example, 
let us assume that the award is passe d in Bombay and the property against 
which execution is sought is in Calcutta.  If the award is to be straightaway 
allowed to be executed at Calcutta what will happen if, within the time 
prescribed for filing an application to set aside the award, such an 
application is filed in Bombay?  This will lead to parallel proceedings in two 
courts and to considerable confus ion and may even result in serious 
prejudice to one party.   
 
There was a view expressed during the discussion on the Consultation 
Paper that such execution may be pe rmitted after the period for filing an 
application to set aside an award has e xpired.  But, even then, in as much 
applications for setting aside awar ds can be after delay along with 
applications under sec. 5 of Limitation Act, 1964, there can still be the same 
problem.   
 
 Hence this proposal is not accepted. 
 
2.40.2  A query: 
  
 It is pointed out that if there are three arbitrators, and one grants Rs. 
One crore, another Rs. 1.50 crores a nd third Rs.1.25 crores, what is to 
happen and that some provision is to be made to resolve similar issues. 
 

 182
This aspect does not present any difficulty.  In the example given 
above, the majority decision would be Rs .1.25 crores (i.e. in view of the 
awards of Rs.1.5 crores and Rs.1.25 crores).  We cannot provide legislation 
to cover all such possible eventualities. 
 
2.40.3  Removal of arbitrators:  Suggestion rejected.  
 
It has been suggested that the Act does not contain a provision for  
‘removal’ of an arbitrator.  Such a pow er it is said is necessary in case of 
purely domestic and  ad hoc internationa l arbitrations (i.e. non-institutional). 
A separate provision, it is suggest ed, is necessary for institutional 
arbitrations. We consider these pro cedures are suitable only  for purely 
domestic arbitrations. 
 
Section 24(1) of the English Act deals with removal of the arbitrator 
by the Court on the following grounds: 
 
“(a) that circumstances exist that gi ve rise to justifiable doubts as to 
his impartiality. 
 
(b) that he does not possess th e qualifications required by the 
arbitration agreement 
© that he is physically or me ntally incapable of conducting 
proceedings or there are justifiable doubts as to his capacity to do so; 
 
(d) that he has refused or failed: 
 
(i) properly to conduct the proceedings, or  
 
(ii) to use all reasonable dispatch in conducting the 
proceedings or making the award, 
 
and that substantial injustice ha s been or will be caused to the 
applicant, if he is not removed.” 
 
 A separate procedure, it is suggested, is necessary so far as 
institutional arbitration (domestic) is concerned.  In these types of cases, 
unless the remedy  before the concer ned institution as per its rules are 
exhausted, remedy by Court cannot be permitted.   S ec. 24(2) of the English 
Act covers such cases and reads as follows: 

 183
 
“Sec. 24:  If there is an arbitral or ot her institution or person vested by 
the parties with power to remove the arbitrator, the Court shall not 
exercise its powers of removal unle ss satisfied that the applicant has 
first exhausted any available recourse to that institution or person.” 
 
Again  Sec. 24(3) of the Eng lish Act enables the arbitration 
proceedings to go on pending an applica tion. Sec. 24(4) deals with the fee 
payable to the arbitrator in case of such removal.    
 
 The ICC Rules, 1998 too  make a provision for ‘removal’ by the ICC 
Court (which provision is not there in  the Model Law), apart from removal 
upon challenge by the parties.  While rule 12(i) deals with challenge by 
parties, Rule 12(ii) deals with the ICC Courts’ power of removal.  These 
provisions read as follows: 
 
Rule 12: (i) An arbitrator shall be  replaced upon his death, upon the 
acceptance by the Court by the arbitrator’s resignation, upon 
acceptance by the Court of a challenge  or upon the request of all the 
parties. 
 
(ii) An arbitrator shall also  be replaced on the Court’s own 
initiative when it decides that he is prevented by de jure  or  de facto  
from fulfilling his functions, or that he  is not fulfilling his functions in 
accordance with the rules or within prescribed time limit”. 
 
It may be noted that clause (i) of  the ICC Rules above mentioned also 
refers also to a situation where all th e parties request for a change of the 
arbitrators.                                     
 
 Fouchard etc. (1999), support a pr ovision for removal  strongly in 
para 998 as follows: 
 
“Although it is rarely applied, this  provision is a powerful deterrent, 
and is perfectly justified.  Although in their capacity as private Judges, 
arbitrators may enjoy a form of imm unity vis-à-vis the parties, they 
remain contractually reliable for the proper performance of their 
functions to the institution which a ppointed them or confirmed their 
appointment.  That institution could incur liability towards the parties 

 184
if it were established that it had been at fault or negligent in 
organizing and supervising the arbitration.” 
 
We do not think any special provisi on for removal of arbitrators is 
necessary.  Where a provision for challe nge before the arbitral tribunal and 
then before the court is not there, such a provision may be necessary.  But 
where, as in the 1996 Act, there is a provision of challenge before the 
Tribunal and then before the Court,  there is no need  to duplicate the 
procedure by including another procedure for removal.   
 
2.40.4  Interim Award: Suggestion to delete words rejected. 
 
 It has been suggested that the Act uses the words “interim award” in 
sec.2(1)(c), 31(6) and interim measure in sec.17 and 37(2)(d) etc. and this is 
confusing.  It is said that the word “i nterim award”, it is said, was treated as 
confusing in the D.A.C. Report in England and was dropped. 
 
We do not think it necessary to drop the word “interim award” from 
sec. 2(1)(c).  For example, there may be cases where, an “interim award” can 
be straightaway be passed, having re gard to the pleadings where is an 
admission of liability up to a particular am ount of the claim.  Then in such a 
case, an interim award can be passed st raightaway in respect of the admitted 
amount instead of asking parties wait till all the issues are decided. The 
word 
“interim award” in sec. 2(1) (c) is, therefore, to be retained.   
 
Again, decisions on preliminary i ssues under sec.13 and sec.16 by the 
arbitral tribunal (as proposed) can only be an ‘interim order’ of the tribunal.  
They are appealable only subject to in view of sec.5.  Hence it is not likely 
that there will be any confusion by retention of the words ‘interim awards’ in 
sec. 2(1)(c).  
   
In fact, different statutes use diffe rent expressions. For example, prior 
to 1998, Art. 21 of the ICC Rules of Ar bitration drew a distinction between 
‘partial’ and ‘definitive’ awards.  The 1998 ICC rules similarly refer to them 
as ‘interim, partial and final’ awards  (Act 2(iii)( see Fouchard para 1359). A 
final award would be one which terminates the proceedings and makes the 
arbitrators ‘functus officio’. The Dutch Court of Civil Procedure, Art. 1049 
provides for a final award, a partial final award or an interim award.  
 
 

 185
2.40.5  Trade usages:  suggestion to delete - rejected. 
 
 It has been suggested that the sec.  28(3) Act permits “trade usages” to 
be taken into account and that this provi sion is vague and has to be omitted.  
We do not think that this provision is vague.  The ordinary Courts in our 
country do take into account trade usages while deciding commercial causes. 
In fact, in  ‘commercial contracts’, tr ade usages do have great significance.  
These principles arising from ‘trade usages’ are part of the ‘lex mercatoria’. 
 
See in this connection Art.7 of the European Convention, Art. 28(4) of 
the Model Law, Art. 1496 of French Ne w Code of Civil Procedure, Art. 
17(2) of ICC Rules, 1998 (Fouchard para 378, 1447, 1448) which all permit 
‘trade usages’ to be taken into account.  This proposal is rejected. 
2.40.6  Whether there should be no two stages for deciding 
enforceability and execution under section 49 for enforcement of foreign 
awards: question is covered by Supreme Court judgement 
This aspect is covered by the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in 
M/s Fuerst Day Lawson Ltd.  v.  Jindal Export Ltd.,  2001 (3) SCALE p.708.  
Therefore, no fresh amendment is necessary.  In the same application, both  
enforceability and execution, can now be decided. 
A problem under section 49 has been raised. Section 49 which refers 
to enforcement of 'foreign awards'  says: 
"where the Court is satisfied that  the foreign award is enforceable 
under the chapter, the award shall be  deemed to be a decree of that 
Court". 
 First we shall refer to the change  in the statutory provisions on this 
question.  We shall then state why, in  spite of the change, the suggestion is 
not feasible. 
 Under section 6 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and 
Enforcement) Act, 1961, the Court had to first pass an order directing the 
filing of the award and the Court had,  therefore, to pronounce judgment in 
accordance with the award and then draw a decree.  There were different 
stages under the 1961 Act.  Section 6 of 1961 Act reads as follows: 

 186
"Section 6(1): Where the court is sa tisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Act, the Court shall order the award to be filed 
and shall proceed to pronounce judgment according to the award." 
(1) Upon the judgment so pronounced , a decree shall follow and no 
appeal shall be on such  decree except in so fa r as the decree is in 
excess of it not in accordance with the award." 
(Section 7 referred to the conditions for enforcement of foreign award) 
 There is no doubt a clear departure under section 49 of the Act from 
that procedure. According to Justi ce Mohta's Commentary (see p. 332), the 
present section 49 is a departure from section 6 of the 1961 Act. 
2.40.7  On the question whether procedure under section 49 of the new 
Act is to be altered, the answer can only be in the negative. 
 In Western Shipbreaking Corpn . Vs. Clare Haven  1997(3) Guj. LR 
1985, it was held by the Gujarat High Court that there was no difference 
between 'enforcement' and 'execution' . It was said that once the Court 
declared that the award was enforceable , separate proceedings were to be 
taken under the CPC for execution. This must obviously be so. 
It is well settled that jurisdiction of Indian Court in regard to foreign 
decrees is to first to find out if the foreign decrees ar e enforceable.  Sub-
clause (3) of section 44A of the C.P.C. requires the Court to be satisfied that 
the decree conforms to clauses (a) to  (f) of section 13.  Foreign awards 
cannot be placed on a higher footing and they must also pass the test of 
enforceability as specified in secti on 48 before they are sought to be 
enforced or executed. 
2.40.8  However, enforceability and execution can be dealt with by the 
court in the same application and two applications are not necessary.  ( M/s 
Fuerst Day Lawson Ltd. v. Jindal Exports Ltd.,2001(3) SCALE p.708. 
2.40.9  Interest at the stage of execution of award: suggestion rejected. 
 The Bombay High Court in Tueplas International Aria Pvt. Ltd . vs. 
Thaper Ispat Ltd.  (AIR 1999 Bom 417) (2000(1) Ar b. L.R. 230) held that 
there is a lacuna in the Act inasmuch as if the award does not provide for 
interest 'after the date of award', the Court cannot grant interest and that this 

 187
'lacuna has to be cured by th e legislature' or that otherwise rules have to be 
framed by the High Court under section 82 of the Act. 
 This aspect has already been cons idered while dealing with section 
31(7)(b). The Bombay view is not co rrect. In the case of ordinary suits, 
section 34 CPC enables the court to pr ovide for interest from the date of 
judgment till payment. In a case where the C ourt  is silent as to the grant of 
interest from the date of judgment till date  of realization, it is deemed to be 
refused and the 'commercial contracts', trade usages do have great 
significance. These principles  arising from 'trade usages ' are part of the 'lex 
mercatoria'.  We leave it to the judi cial process to correct the Bombay 
decision.   
 See in this connection Article 7 of  the European Convention, Article 
28(4) of the Model Law, Article 1496 of French new Code of Civil 
Procedure, Article 17(2) of ICC Ru les, 1998 (Fouchard para 378, 1447, 
1448) which all permit 'trade usages' to be taken into account.  
2.40.10 State immunity: To be dealt with under separate law. 
 A  question of state immunity was rais ed.  It is stated that sec. 86, 87A 
C.P.C. deal with  state immunity. 
Justice V.A. Mohta, in his Commentary on the Act (see pp 46 to p 53) 
has dealt with State immunity and also immunity of the  instrumentalities of 
the State.  The author has referred to the UK Act of 1978 (i.e. the State 
Immunity Act, 1978), the US Foreign Immunities Act 1976 and  to the Draft 
Articles on State Immunity prepared by the International Law Commission. 
Reference is also made to  the principl es of  waiver contained in Art.14 of 
the New York Convention and to the judgments of the High Courts in Far 
East Steamship USSR vs. Union of India:  AIR 1973 Mad. 169: UOI vs. 
Owners of Vessel Hoegh Orchid and Their Agents  of 1983 Guj. 34;  and to 
sections 86, 87A CPC and to the J udgment of the Supreme Court in Veb 
Deutracht Seevederei Rostok (D.S.R. Lines), a Dept. of German Democratic 
Republic vs. New Central Jute Mills Ltd.  1994(1) SCC  282  and to Kenya 
Airways vs. Junibai B. Kheshwole AIR 1998 Bom 287.  The author says that 
it is necessary to declare as  to when and to what extent an arbitration clause 
to which a State or its instrumentality is a party, can give rise to an inference 
of waiver of State immunity in international commerce.  Question is whether 
is there an arbitration clau se in a contract by the State or its instrumentality; 

 188
it is to be deemed that it has waived  its immunity.  The author pleads for 
separate statutory provisions in this behalf. The author concludes: 
 
“India needs an independent and exhaustive Act on State immunity 
specially in the context of acta jure gestionis, not only in the interests 
of certainty of law but also its expanding horizons of  international 
trade and commerce.  Even the Ci vil Procedure Code can be suitably 
amended.  In fact, as far as inte rnational commercial arbitration is 
concerned, necessary provisions coul d have been made even in the 
new Arbitration Act.  It is better late than never.” 
 
Having regard to the importance of the topic and the fact that other countries 
have enacted separate statutes, the Commission is of the view that a separate 
statute has to be made on State immunity  in all its aspects rather than one 
relating only to the subject of arbitration. 
 
2.41.1 Transitory provisions – limited retrospectivity given: 
Section 32 of the Amending Act 
 
The amending Act of 2001 being a pr ocedural enactment, it will be 
retrospective under the general principl es applicable to interpretation of 
statutes.  But, it is not the intention of the Commission to give retrospective 
effect to all the provisions of the Ame nding Act.  In fact, several provisions 
of the Amending Act, cannot be given retrospective effect.  Hence it is stated 
in sec. 32 of the Amending Act that the Amending Act will be prospective 
except to the limited extent it is made retrospective. 
 
Sub section (1) of 32 enforce says th at the Act will be prospective and 
shall not apply to past requests or  applications for appointment or 
appointments of arbitrators or awards already made before the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
So far as “arbitration agreements” already entered into by the date of 
the Amending Act, it is stated that in sub section (2) of the Act that the Act 
will not apply if requests, applications for appointment or appointments have 
been made before the commencement of the Amending Act. 
 
Sub sections (3) to (17) refer to  the limited circum stances and the 
limited extent to which the Amending Ac t applies.  Some provisions apply 
to different types of “applications” which are pending at the commencement 

 189
of this Act; some provisions are applied to “arbitration proceedings” pending 
at the commencement of this Act but where no awards have been passed by 
that date.  Some provisions are made application to “awa rds” passed after 
the commencement of this Act and wh ere arbitration proceedings were 
pending at the commencement of the Act.   Some provisions apply to orders 
passed after the Amending Act in pending arbitration proceedings. 
 
2.41.2  Section 32: The proposed section 32 of the amending Act is as 
follows 
 
Transitory provisions 
  
32. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (17), the 
provisions of the principal Act as  amended by this Act shall be 
prospective in operation and shall not  in particular apply to - 
 
(i) any application made by a party to the arbitration 
agreement before the Judicial authority referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 8 of the principal Act or to any 
appointment made by a judicial authority under that section 
before the commencement of this Act;  
 
 
(ii) any request made to a part y or to  the Chief Justice of 
India or to the Chief Justice of a High Court under  section 
11 of the principal Act before  the commencement of this 
Act; 
 
(iii) any appointment of arbitr al tribunal  made before the 
commencement of this Act under section 11 of the principal 
Act by the parties to the ar bitration agreement or any 
appointment made under the said section  before the 
commencement of this Act by a party who is authorized 
under the arbitration agreement to make such appointment 
without the consent of the ot her party or parties to the 
arbitration agreement or any appointment made by the Chief 
justice of India or his designa te or the Chief Justice of a 

 190
High Court or his designate before the commencement of 
this Act; 
 
(iv)  any award passed under th e principal Act, before the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
 
 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (17), the provisions 
of this Act shall apply to arbitra tion agreements entered into before 
the commencement of this Act, where no- 
(i)  request for appointment of arbitral tribunal; or 
 
(ii)  application for appointment of arbitral 
tribunal; or 
          
(iii) appointment of arbitral tribunal,  
 
has been made under the principal Act, before the commencement of 
this Act.  
 
 
 
(3) The provisions of clause (b) of  sub-section (2) of section 2 as 
inserted in the principal Act, by clau se (ii) of section 2 of this Act, 
shall apply to- 
 
(i) applications made, before a judicial authority in a legal 
proceeding under section 8 of th e principal Act or before a 
court under section 9 of the principal Act, which are pending 
at the commencement of this Act in connection with the 
arbitrations of the nature specified in sub-section (2) of 
section 2 of the principal Act; 
 
(ii) awards arising out of arbitr ations of the nature specified 
in sub-section (2) of section 2 of the principal Act passed 
before the commencement of this Act ,for the purposes of 
their finality under section 35 of the principal Act  and 
enforcement under section 36 of the principal Act.  
 

 191
 (4)  The provisions of sub-section (10)  of section 2, as inserted in the 
principal Act by clause (iii) of sec tion 2 of this Act shall apply to 
arbitral  proceedings under the pr incipal Act, pending before the 
principal courts referred to in that  sub-section, at  the commencement 
of this Act. 
 
(5)  The provisions of section 6 of the principal Act, as amended by 
section 4 of this Act, shall apply to arbitral proceedings under the 
principal Act, pending before an  arbitral tribunal, at the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
 (6) The provisions of sub-sections (4),(5) and (6) of section 9, as 
inserted in the principal Act, by section 8 of this Act, shall apply to all 
applications under section 9,  pending in the court at the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
 
(7) The provisions of section 10A as inserted in the principal Act, by 
section 9 of this Act, shall apply to  arbitration agreements in relation 
to which, the requests for appointme nt of arbitral tribunal are pending 
decision at the date of the commencement of this Act, if the arbitral 
tribunal has not been appointed at the date of such commencement. 
 
 
(8) The provisions of sections 17 of the principal Act, as substituted  
by section 14 of this Act shall apply to arbitral proceedings under the 
principal Act, before an arb itral tribunal, pending at the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
(9) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 20 of the principal 
Act, as substituted by section 15 of th is Act, shall apply to arbitration 
agreements in relation to which,  requests for appointment of arbitral 
tribunal  and applications for appoi ntment of arbitral tribunal, are 
pending decision at the date of the commencement of this Act, if the 
arbitral tribunal has not been appointed by the date of such 
commencement . 
  
(10) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 23 of the principal 
Act, as amended by section 16 of th is Act, shall apply to arbitral 
proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an arbitral 

 192
tribunal at the commencement of this  Act, where the claim,defence or 
rejoinder statements have not been filed before   the arbitral tribunal at 
the date of such commencement. 
 
(11)  The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 24 of the principal 
Act, as amended by section 17 of th is Act and of sub-section(1A) of 
section 24 of the principal Act, as in serted by that section, shall apply 
to arbitral proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an 
arbitral tribunal at the commencement of this Act where oral evidence 
or oral arguments as the case may be, have not been completed at the 
date of such commencement. 
 
(12) The provisions of section 24A, as inserted in the principal Act, by 
section 18 of this Act , shall apply to the orders of the arbitral tribunal, 
if any ,passed under sections 17,23 a nd 24 of the principal Act before 
the commencement of this Act, wh ere such orders have not been 
complied with at the date of su ch commencement by the party to 
whom they were directed. 
 
(13) The provisions of section 28 of  the principal Act, as amended by 
section 19 of this Act, shall apply to arbitration agreements in relation 
to which, requests for appointme nt of arbitral tribunal  and 
applications for appointment of ar bitral tribunal are pending decision 
at the date of the commencement of this Act, if the arbitral tribunal 
has not been appointed by the date of such commencement . 
 
 
 
(14)  The provisions of- 
   
(i) sub-section (3) of section 29 ,as inserted in the 
principal Act by section 20 of this Act ; 
(ii) section 31A , as insert ed in the principal Act by 
section 22 of this Act ; 
(iii) section 34, as amended by section 23 of this Act; 
(iv)section 34A , as inserted in the principal Act by 
section 24 of this Act, 
shall apply to arbitral proceedi ngs under the principal Act pending 
before the arbitral tribunal at th e commencement of this Act, if  
awards have not been  passed at the date of such commencement. 

 193
 
(15) The provisions of section 36 of  the principal Act as amended by 
section 25 of this Act shall appl y to all awards made under the 
principal Act pending enforcement at the commencement of this Act. 
 
 
(16) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 37A, as 
inserted in  the principal Act, by section 26 of this Act shall apply to 
applications under sub-section (1) of   section 34 of the principal Act 
and appeals under section 37 of th e principal Act  pending at the 
commencement of this Act if no notice has been issued by the court 
under sub-section (1) of section 34 of the principal Act or under 
section 37 of the principal Ac t before the date of such 
commencement: 
 
   Provided that where no tice has been issued by the 
court in such application or appeal, the provisions of sub-section (1) 
of section 37A of the principal Act shall not apply.   
 
(17) The provisions of sub-section (5) of section 43, as inserted 
in the principal Act, by clause (b) of section 28 of this Act, shall 
apply to the orders referred to in that sub-section  if such orders 
are passed after the commencement of this Act, in arbitral 
proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an arbitral 
tribunal at such commencement.  
 
2.42 Section 33 of the amending Act: Time limit for disposal of pending 
arbitrations, applications and appeals under the 1996 Act: 
 
It has been brought to the noti ce of the Commission that several 
arbitrations which have started afte r 25.1.1996, when the ordinance which 
preceded the new Act was first passed by Parliament, are also not moving 
fast as expected.  This was because th e provisions of sec. 23 of the new Act 
which referred to the procedure for filing the pleadings and the provisions of 
sec. 24 which referred to the procedur e for leading evidence, allowed the 
parties also to agree with regard to th e time schedule.  The arbitral tribunal, 
under the new Act, has not been able  to assert itself and fix the time 
schedules both under sections 23 and 24 which could bind the parties or their 
representatives.  The result is that a large number of arbitrations are pending 
before various arbitral tribunals.  U nder the 1996 Act, the statutes had not 

 194
provided any upper time limit for the completion of the arbitral proceedings 
and for the passing of the award.  We  have already mentioned why the time 
limit which was in existence under the old Act was not included in the 1996 
Act, vide the discussion under sec. 29A of this Report.  The provision of sec. 
29A is now introduced are applicable to future references to arbitration after 
the commencement of the amending Act. 
 
 It will be noticed from sub section (7) and sub section (8) of sec. 30 
that amendments to sections 23 and 24 (which have removed the clauses 
relating to consent of parties for fixi ng the time schedule for filing pleadings 
and for leading evidence), and the new provisions to sec. 24A and 24B are 
proposed to be made applicable to pending arbitrations under the 1996 Act.  
But this by itself may not be sufficient to speed up the pending arbitrations 
under the new Act. 
 
 The  Commission, therefore, felt that  the provisions of sec. 29A have 
also to be applied to pending arbitr ation proceedings under the new Act of 
1996, in case they have been pending fo r than three years by the date of 
commencement of this Act.  Under the proposed sec. 33 of the Amending 
Act, the Commission feels that a further period of one year is to be granted 
for completion of pending arbitrations under the 1996 Act.  This will be fair 
enough.  In case the arbitrations unde r the new Act which are pending for 
more than three years as aforesaid a nd which will not be completed within 
the additional one year now granted,  it would be a fit case where such 
arbitrations should be monitored a nd speeded up by the Court in accordance 
with the provisions of sec. 29A.   
 
 As already noticed, when an application for extension is filed in Court 
under sec. 29A, the arbitration proceed ings shall continue and the Court 
shall not grant any stay of the arbitral proceedings. 
 
There are also cases where afte r commencement of arbitration 
proceedings under the 1996 Act, the peri od of three years has not expired by 
the date of commencement of the propos ed amending Act.  In such a case, 
the Commission is of the opinion that after the expiry of three years from the 
date of commencement of the arbitra tion under the 1996 Act, there could be 
a further period of one year within which the arbitration is to be completed.  
Thereafter, the parties have to seek extension of time from the Court which 
will monitor the proceedings, by fixi ng time schedules till the award is 
passed, as provided in sub sections (4) to (8) of section 29A 

 195
 
With these objects in view we ha ve proposed in section 33 of the 
Amending Act, fixing time limits for disposal of pending arbitrations, 
applications, and appeals under the 1996 Act.   
 
 
2.42.1  The proposed sec. 33 of the Amending Act reads as follows:  
 
“33 Speeding up of all proceedings and time limit for passing 
awards under the Principal Act  
  
(1). All arbitral proceedings pendi ng  at the commencement  of this 
Act, before an arbitral tribunal a ppointed under the principal Act, for 
more than three years from the date of  co mmencement  of such 
proceedings, shall be completed within a further period of one year 
from the date of commen cement of this Act, or within such extended 
period as specified in sub sections (2) and (3): 
 
   Provided that where a period of three years has not 
elapsed from the date of  commencement of such proceedings at  the 
date of commencement of this Act, the proceedings shall be 
completed within a further period of six months reckoned from the 
date of expiry of three years of the commencement of the arbitral 
proceedings or within such extended period as specified in sub 
sections (2) and (3).   
 
 
(2) If the award is not made within the further period of one year or 
six months as the case may be, specified in sub section (1), the arbitral 
proceedings shall, subject to the pr ovisions of sub section (3), stand 
suspended until an application for ex tension is made to the Court by 
any party to the arbitration or wher e none of the parties has made an 
application as aforesaid, until such  an application is made by the 
arbitral tribunal.  
 
(3)  The provisions of sub sections (4) to (8) of section 29A, as 
inserted in the principal Act, by sec tion 21 of this Act shall, so far as 
may be, apply for the disposal of a pplication referred to in sub section 

 196
(2), with a view to speed up the ar bitral proceedings, till the award is 
passed.  
 
(4) Where applications under sub section (1) of section 34 of the 
principal Act as amended by secti on 23 of this Act and appeals under 
sub section (1) of section 37 of the principal Act, as the case may be, 
are pending before any of the Courts referred to in those sub sections, 
on the date of commencement of this Act, they shall be disposed of 
within six months from the date of such commencement.  
 
Provided that while dealing with an application under sub 
section (1) of section 34 of th e principal Act, if the Court 
adjourns the proceedings under sub section (5) of that section, 
the period of six months shall be reckoned from the date of 
receipt of the order from the ar bitral tribunal under that sub 
section. 
 
(5) Where appeals under sub section (2) of section 37 of the 
principal Act are pending before  any Court, on the date of 
commencement of this Act, they sh all be disposed of within three 
moths from the date of such commencement. 
 
2.43.1 Section 34 of the amending Act:   Time limit for disposal of 
arbitrations, applications and appeals pending under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 
 
It has been brought to the noti ce of the Commission that several 
arbitrations which were commenced under the 1940 Act are still pending at 
the stage of arbitration or at the stage of application to make the award a rule 
of Court/objections to the award, or at  the stage of appeals under sec. 39 of 
that Act or at the stage of appeals or revision applications under the 1940 
Act or under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
 
 The Commission has felt that if  arbitrations commenced under 
the 1940 Act have not been complete d even after the commencement of 
1996 Act from 25.1.1996, it will be necessary to speed up such arbitrations 
by the application of the provisions of  sec. 23 and 24 of the 1996 Act, as 
proposed to be amended,  and also by the application of sec. 24A and 24B 
which give powers to the arbitral tri bunal and the Courts to see that their 
orders are obeyed by the parties promp tly.  It has therefore been proposed, 

 197
that notwithstanding anything inconsiste nt with the above provisions, in the 
1940 Act, the above provisions should be applicable to arbitrations under the 
1940 Act which will be pending on the da te of the commencement of the 
proposed amending Act.   
 
So far the time limit for completing the pending arbitrations under the 
1940 Act is concerned, the Commission proposed that they should be 
completed within one year from the date of the commencement of the 
proposed amending Act or within such further time as may be granted by the 
Court in clause © of sec. 2 or sec. 21 of the 1940 Act, by the application of 
the provisions of sub section (4) to (8) of sec. 29A, as proposed to be 
inserted in the 1996 Act.  In other words all pending arbitrations under the 
1940 Act, if they are not complete d in one year from the date of 
commencement of the proposed amending Act, it will be necessary for the 
parties or the arbitrators, to file applications in the above Court for extension 
of time, extension is to be granted in every case and the Court will fix the 
time schedule for completion of the pr oceedings and shall pass orders from 
time to time till the award is passed. 
 
This is so far the pending arbitration proceedings under the 1940 Act 
are concerned. 
 
 Similarly, it has been noticed th at several applications to make 
the awards passed under the 1940 Act a rule of Court/objections to the award 
are pending in the Court as defined under clause © of sec. 2 or under sec. 21 
of the 1940 Act.  Several appeals unde r sec. 39 of the 1940 Act are also 
pending in the Courts.  It has been decided to see that they  are disposed of 
within one year from the date of commencement of the proposed 
amendment. 
 
So far as appeals or revision applica tions arising out of interim orders 
passed by the Courts which may be pending at the comme ncement of the 
amending Act, the Commission is of opinion that they should be disposed of 
in six months from the date of co mmencement of the proposed amending 
Act. 
 
2.43.2  With these objectives in view, the Commission has proposed 
the following sec. 34 in the amending Act.   
 
The section reads as follows: 

 198
 
“34 Time limit for disposal and speeding up of arbitrations, 
applications and appeals under Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)  
 
(1) The provisions of sections 6, 23 and 24 of the Principal Act as 
amended respectively by sections 4, 16 and 17 of this Act, shall so far 
as may be, apply to arbitral pro ceedings under the Arbitration Act, 
1940 (10 of 1940) (hereinafter called the “repealed Act”), pending at 
the commencement of this Act, a nd shall override any provisions of 
the repealed Act, which are inconsistent with the said sections. 
 
(2) In the case of non-compliance with any order passed by the sole 
arbitrator or arbitrators under the provisions of the repealed Act or 
orders passed under sub sec tion (1), the sole arbitrator or arbitrators, 
as the case may be, appointed under the repealed Act, may pass orders 
under section 24A of the Principal Ac t, as inserted by section 18 of 
this Act. 
 
(3) In the case of non-compliance with any peremptory order 
passed by the sole arbitrator or arbitrators under sub section (2), the 
Court, within the meaning of clause (c ) of section 2 or section 21 of 
the repealed Act, as the case may be, may pass orders under section 
24B of the Principal Act, as inserted by section 18 of this Act. 
 
(4) Where arbitral proceedings  are pending before the sole 
arbitrator or arbitrators appointed  under the repealed Act, at the 
commencement of this Act, the proceedings shall be completed within 
a further period of one year from th e date of commen cement of this 
Act, or within such extended period as specified in sub sections (5) 
and (6).  
 
Provided that where the arbitr al proceedings are stayed 
by order of a court the period during which the proceedings are 
so  stayed, shall be excluded  while computing the said period 
of one year. 
 
(5) If the award is not made within the further period of one year 
specified in sub section (4), the arbitral proceedings shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub section (6), stand suspended until an application 
for extension is made to the Court referred to in sub section (3), by 

 199
any party to the arbitration, or wh ere none of the parties has made an 
application as aforesaid, until such an application is made by the sole 
arbitrator or the arbitrators, as the case may be. 
 
(6)  The provisions of sub sections (4) to (8) of section 29A as 
inserted in the Principal Act, by secti on 21 of this Act, shall, so far as 
may be, apply to the Court referred to in sub section (3), for the 
disposal of the application referred to  in sub section (5), with a view 
to speed up the arbitral proceedings, till the award is passed.  
 
(7)  Where applications to make  the award a rule of court or 
objections are filed to set aside the award, under the repealed Act, or 
any other application or any app eal filed under section 39 of the 
repealed act, are pending before any Court referred to in sub section 
(3), on the date of commencement of this Act, they shall be disposed 
of within a period of one year from the date of su ch commencement, 
in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act. 
 
(8)  Where any appeals or revision applications arising out of 
interim orders passed by the Courts referred to in sub section (3) are 
pending at the commencement of this Act, under the Code of Civil 
Procedure (5 of 1908) or under the repealed Act, in connection with 
arbitral proceedings arising under the repealed Act,  or where the 
arbitral proceedings are under orders of  stay, they shall be disposed of 
within a period of six months from the date of such commencement, 
in accordance with the provisions of  the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908) or the repealed Act, as the case may be. 
 
(9)  The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in sub-section (2) of section 
85 of the principal Act. 
 
 
2.43.3    Insertion of Fourth Schedule:  
 
By section 35 of the Amending Act, Fourth Schedule has been 
inserted which deals with “fast track arbitration” which has already been 
extracted in para 2.38.2 immediately af ter sections 43A to 43D in Chapter 
11 as newly inserted.   
 

 200
2.44. We have prepared “The Arb itration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Bill, 2001” ( Annexure-I) which brings out the amendments recommended 
in the existing Arbitration and Conc iliation Act, 1996. A brief summary of 
the recommendations with amendments and with explanatory notes, is given 
in the next Chapter. 
 
 In this report, the Commission has kept in mind the broad principles 
of speedy arbitration and least court in tervention. It has rejected a large 
number of suggestions in respect of furt her judicial intervention made at the 
time of the Consultation Paper and thereaf ter.  It has made several special 
provisions for speedy disposal of the arbitration proceedings as well as Court 
proceedings.  Only two additional grounds  of attack are added so far as 
'purely domestic arbitrations between Indian nationals’ are concerned. The 
Part dealing with international arbitra tion has been left intact.  It is hoped 
that the amendments will improve the st ate of arbitration in India and will 
remove the blot of delays.   
     

 201
    
CHAPTER III 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES 
 
 The recommendations made in th e previous Chapter regarding 
additions, modifications and substitutions in the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 are being summarized as follows: -  
 
(1) Section 2(1)(e):  In the definition of the word “Court”, the ‘Court of 
the Principal Judge, City Civil Cour t in a city exercising original 
jurisdiction’, is also proposed to be included. 
(paragraph 2.1.2) 
 
(2) Section 2(1)(ea):  This clause is proposed to be added and it defines 
‘domestic arbitration’ on the same lin es as the existing sub-section (7) 
of Section 2 which defines ‘domestic  award’. ‘Domestic arbitration’ 
will mean (i) where all parties are I ndian nationals or (ii) where at 
least one party is not an Indian nati onal, (i.e. where the arbitration is 
international in nature) whether th e arbitration is commercial or not 
and the arbitration is in India.  In ternational arbitration in India shall 
be deemed to be ‘domes tic arbitration’.  In sub-clause (3) a company 
incorporated in a country other than India has not been included. 
(paragraph 2.1.3A) 
 
(3) Section 2(1)(eb):  This clause is proposed to be added and it defines 
‘international arbitration’ as arbitra tion where at least one party is not 
an Indian national. This arbitr ation need not necessarily be 

 202
commercial.  In this definition al so, in sub-clause (iii), a company 
incorporated in a country other th an India has not been included.  
Reference to a company  in corporated in a country other than India in 
this clause  will fall within the meaning of the word “body corporate 
incorporated in  any country other than India”. 
(paragraph 2.1.3A) 
 
(4) Section 2(1)(f): This clause is proposed to be modified by defining 
‘international commercial arbitration’  as ‘international arbitration’, 
which is commercial in nature. 
(paragraph 2.1.3A) 
 
(5) Section 2(1)(fa):  This clause is proposed to be introduced. Under 
Section 8, when an action is filed before a ‘judicial authority’, the said 
authority has to refer the dispute to arbitration, if the respondent relies 
upon an arbitration clause. A definition of ‘judicial authority’ is 
therefore proposed to be included stating that ‘judicial authority’ 
includes any ‘quasi-judicial statutory authority’. This word occurs in 
Section 8 and also in the amendm ents proposed in Section 5 and 
Section 42.  
(paragraph 2.1.4) 
 
(6) Section 2(2):  Section 2(2) is proposed to be amended by adding 
clauses (a) and (b). Section 2(2) stat es that Part - I of the Act applies 
to arbitration in India. That would mean that in the case of arbitration 
between Indian nationals and also where one party is not an Indian 
national, and where the place of the arbitration is in India, Part I of the 

 203
Act will apply. While the UNCIT RAL Model Law permits certain 
Articles like 8, 9, 35 and 36 to a pply to arbitrations outside the 
Country, there is an omission in this behalf in the 1996 Act. 
Consequently, for example in the ab sence of availability of Section 9 
in the case of an arbitration outside India, the Indian party is unable to 
obtain interim measures from Indian Courts, before arbitration starts 
outside India. The absence of an express provision as stated above has 
led to conflicting judgments in the Delhi and Calcutta High Courts. It 
is proposed to allow Section 9 to the invoked whenever arbitration is 
outside India. Similarly, the provisions of Section 8, 27, 35 and 36 are 
proposed to be made available whenev er arbitration is outside India. 
Almost all countries which have adopted the Model Law allow views 
of these provisions to arbitrations outside the country.  
The proposed clause (a) of Section 2(2)  states that Part – I of the Act 
applies to domestic arbitration in Indi a and the proposed clause (b) states 
that Sections 8, 9, 27, 35 and 36 will be available for international 
arbitrations outside India.  
   (paragraphs 2.1.5 & 2.1.7) 
 
(7) Section 2(10):  This clause is proposed to be introduced to allow the 
Principal Courts referred to in S ection 2(1)(e) to transfer matters 
before them to Courts of coordina te jurisdiction. This clause is 
proposed to get over some judgment of the High Courts which have 
stated that the Principal Court in Section 2(1)(e) cannot transfer 
matters to other Courts. This pr oposal will reduce congestion in the 
Principal Courts.  
(paragraph 2.1.2A) 

 204
 
(8) Section 5:   An Explanation is proposed to be added in Section 5 
explaining the meaning of the words ‘any other law for the time being 
in force’, which occur in the non-obstante clause. The proposed 
Explanation states that the above words would include any 
intervention under 
(a) Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908);  
(b) Any law providing for internal appeals within the High Court; 
(c) Any law, which provides for intervention by a judicial authority 
in respect of orders passed by any other judicial authority. 
In view of the proposed Explanati on, all remedies of appeal or 
revision under the Code of Civil Pro cedure or appeals under the Letters 
Patent or under High Court Acts a nd all other remedies under special 
statutes against orders of a judicial authorities, get excluded.  
     (paragraph 2.2.1) 
 
(9)           Section 6 :  Section 6, as it stands, states that, in order to 
facilitate the conduct of arbitral proceedings, the parties, or the arbitral 
tribunal with the consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative 
assistance by a suitable arbitrator or person. 
 
It is proposed to drop the words “or the arbitral tribunal with 
the consent of the parties”, for the detailed reasons given in Chapter II 
      (paragraph 2.2.5) 
 
(10) Section 7(4)(b):   This section is proposed to be amended by 
adding some words in clause (b) of sub-section (4), to include within 

 205
the definition of ‘arbitration agreem ent’ an agreement by implication 
such as where one party sends a communication to another party by 
the addition of including an arb itration clause in the proposed 
contract. Even though the party w ho receives the communication does 
not send a reply, his silence w ill be treated as amounting to 
acceptance of the arbitration clau se. Which is accepted by the other 
party without demur. This clause  is proposed to cover cases like 
‘brokers – notes’, which contain arbitration clauses.  
(paragraph 2.3.2) 
 
(11)  Section 8: Several amendments are proposed in Section 8 as follows:  
(i) Section 8(1): This sub-section is proposed to be amended by 
permitting, as under the UNCITRAL Model Law, judicial 
authority to decide certain preliminary questions which are raised 
by the respondent before filing the defense statement, so that the 
said issues can be decided before making a reference to 
arbitration.  
 
(Paragraph 2.4.9) 
 
(ii) Section 8(1A): This sub-section is proposed to be added to require 
the judicial authority to stay the action pending a decision on the 
preliminary issues of jurisdiction and subject to the outcome of a 
decision on those preliminary issues.  
        (Paragraph 2.4.9) 
(iii) Section 8(3):  Section 8(3) is proposed to be amended. As it 
stands now, the arbitral tribuna l, if already appointed by the 

 206
respondent, the arbitral tribunal can proceed with the arbitral 
proceedings, while the court is  still dealing with the earlier 
application of the respondent seeking reference. The proposed 
amendment states that the conti nuance of such an arbitration 
proceeding will depend upon the decision of the judicial authority 
on the preliminary issues. In cas e it is decided by the judicial 
authority to reject the preliminary issues of jurisdiction and make 
a reference to another arbitral tribunal, the mandate of the earlier 
arbitral tribunal appointed by the respondent, shall cease.  
 
        (Paragraph 2.4.9) 
(iv) Section 8(4): This sub-section is proposed to be added enabling 
the judicial authority to decide, subject to the proposed sub-section 
(5), the preliminary issues as to whether (a) there is no dispute in 
existence (b) the arbitration agreement is null and void or 
inoperative (c) the arbitration ag reement is incapable of being 
performed (d) the arbitration agreement is not an existence.  
 
        (Paragraph 2.4.9) 
(v) Section 8(5): This sub-section is proposed  to be added to say that 
the judicial authority may not deci de the above issues referred to 
in the proposed sub-section (4), if (a) the relevant facts or 
documents are in dispute or (b) or al evidence is necessary to be 
adduced or (c) enquiry into the pr eliminary questions is likely to 
delay reference to arbitration or (d) the request for a decision is 
unduly delayed or (e) the decision on the questions is not likely to 
produce substantial savings in costs of arbitration or (f) there is no 

 207
good reason as to why these questions should be decided at that 
stage. Depending upon the above factors, the judicial authority 
shall either decide the issues or make reference to arbitration. The 
above conditions are imposed to see that frivolous jurisdictional 
issues are not raised at the pre liminary stage so as to delay the 
reference. At the same time, if the said issues can be decided 
easily and without oral eviden ce being adduced, they can be 
decided and will certainly save costs of arbitration.  
 
(Paragraph 2.4.9) 
(vi) Section 8 (6): This sub-section is proposed to be added to deal 
with situations arising out of, what is known as, a Scott v Avery  
clause. Under such a clause, a pa rty cannot ignore an arbitration 
clause and file an action before a judicial authority and the clause 
requires the party to first obtain an arbitration award as a condition 
precedent for filing an action before the judicial authority. But 
there may be cases where the judicial authority decides that the 
arbitration agreement is null and void, inoperative or 
unenforceable or not in existence and in such a case, it is obvious 
that no award can be obtain as  required by the clause. The 
proposed sub-section (6) states that in such situations referred to 
above, the condition preceden t in the 
Scott v Avery  clause need 
not be complied with.  
        (paragraph 2.4.9) 
 
(12)  Section 8A and Explanation:  This section is proposed to be 
introduced in view of the difficulty  faced by the Supreme Court in the 

 208
interpretation of Section 8 to cover arbitration agreements entered into 
during the course of a pending litigation. The Supreme Court, no doubt, held 
that the language of Section 8 could, with some difficulty, be extended to 
include such a situation. But the Supr eme Court stated, in that case, that 
even if a reference is ma de at an appellate stage, such as by the High Court 
or Supreme Court, the objections to th e award have to be filed only in the 
Principal District Court as defined in Section 2(1)(e). Such a procedure will 
obviously lead to a further litigation  starting from the District Court, and is 
wholly undesirable. It has, therefore,  become necessary to get over these 
problems by permitting objections to the aw ard to be filed in the same Court 
which has made the reference.  
 
An Explanation is proposed to be added to the new Section 8A to 
cover a situation which arose in a case before the Supreme Court. In 
that case the writ court referred parties to arbitration, in accordance 
with the agreement entered into by them, pending the writ 
proceedings. It is proposed therefore to provide for such a situation, 
enabling parties to go to arbitrati on in writ jurisdiction also, where 
they have disputes about their rights under the civil law. The proposed 
Explanation states that the word ‘legal proceeding’ in Section 8A will 
cover Writ Petitions also where civ il disputes between parties are 
involved.  
         ( p a r a g r a p h  2 . 5 . 2 )  
 
(13) Section 9  
(i) This Section is proposed to be amended by restructuring it and 
bringing the latter part of the s ection which deals with the wider 

 209
powers of the Court to the fo refront and for relegating the 
enumerated powers of the Court to th e latter part of the section. As 
the section now stands, it gives an  impression that the powers of 
the Court which are referred to in the latter part of the section are 
as limited as those in the earlier part  of the section. This position is 
being clarified by dividing the existing section into sub-sections 
(1) to (3).  
 
        (Paragraph 2.6.2) 
(ii) Sub-Sections (4) to (6) are proposed to be added to see that a party 
who obtains an interim order from the Court, does not refrain from 
taking steps to have an arbitral tribunal appointed. Otherwise, he 
would be reaping the benefits of  the interim order without time 
limit. The proposed sub-sections (4) to (6) require the Court, while 
granting interim orders under Section 9 to further direct that the 
party must take steps within 30 da ys to have an arbitral tribunal 
appointed under Section 11, and th at otherwise the interim order 
will stand vacated, unless the time is  extended by the Court. It is 
also provided that if the party doe s not take such steps and if the 
interim order is vacated, the Cour t may pass such orders as to 
restitution as may be necessary, in the circumstances of the case.  
     (paragraph 2.6.2) 
 
(14)  Section 10 A:  This section is proposed to be introduced to see that a 
party (not being the Government or a public sector undertaking or a statutory 
authority), will not appoint its own em ployee, consultant or other person 
having common business interest, etc as  an arbitrator. Such clauses in 

 210
arbitration agreements shall be void to that extent. Further, it is provided that 
this provision does not apply to intern ational arbitration agreements where 
the place of arbitration is in India.  
      (paragraph 2.7.2) 
 
(15)  Section 11:  Several amendments are proposed in Section 11. At the 
same time care is taken to see that reference to arbitration is not delayed. 
  
(i) Section 11 (4) to (12): In these sub-sections, the proposal is to 
replace the words “Chief Justice of India” and the word “Chief 
Justice” by the words, “Supreme Cour t” and “High Court”, so that 
the appointment of the arbitral tribunal is made on the judicial side. 
The advantages of such an amendment and certain mis-conceptions 
in regard to advantages unde r the existing Section 11, are 
discussed at great length in the report of the Commission and also 
by way of pointing out that unde r the UNCITRAL Model as well 
as in the new arbitration laws of various countries, the appointment 
is on the judicial side. Reference is also made the recent Act in 
Ireland which allows the High Cour t to make the appointment and 
defines the “High Court” as the President of the Court, meaning 
thereby that the appointment of the arbitral tribunal is made by the 
President of the High Court on the judicial side.  
        (paragraph 2.8.15) 
 
(ii) Section 11(5A): This sub-section is proposed to be introduced as 
a consequence of the proposed S ection 10A dealing with Scott v 
Avery clauses where a party is not able to fulfill the condition 

 211
precedent of obtaining an award be fore an action is filed under 
section 8 before a judicial aut hority. The reason is that if the 
arbitration agreement is found to be null and void etc., it is not 
possible to obtain an award. In such cases, the parties are permitted 
under the proposed sub-section (5A) , to avail of the procedure 
under Section 11 for appointment of  arbitral tribunal because the 
arbitral agreement has been held to be null and void etc.   
        (paragraph 2.8.15) 
(iii) Section 11 (4),(5) & (6 ) proposed to be amended: These sub-
sections are proposed to be amended are added as stated above, by 
stating that if a party to whom a request is made for appointment of 
an arbitral tribunal, does not choos e to take any action to make an 
appointment, the said party must be deemed to have waived the 
right make the appointment. This provision has become necessary 
because several parties who recei ve notices for appointment of 
arbitral tribunal do not send any reply nor appoint an arbitrator and 
when the other party goes to Court under Section 11 seeking 
appointment, they rely on their prerogative to make the 
appointment. We also propose to increase the period from 30 days 
to 60 days to make the appointment  in sub-sections (4) and (5).  
We have also proposed that if th e appointment procedure as stated 
in sub-section (6) is not followed, the right to make the 
appointment under the procedure sh all be deemed to have been 
waived.   
        (paragraph 2.8.15) 
 

 212
(iv) Section 11 (13), (14): These two sub-sections are proposed to be 
introduced on the same lines as sub-sections (4) and (5) of Section 
8, already referred to, thereby re quiring the Supreme Court or the 
High Court, as the case may be, (in the case of an application 
under Section 11 in an interna tional arbitration or a purely 
domestic arbitration between Indian nationals, in India), to decide 
preliminary issues as to whether (a) there is no dispute in 
existence, or (b) the arbitrati on agreement is null and void or 
inoperative, or (c) the arbitration agreement is incapable of being 
performed, or (d) the arbitration agreement is not an existence. 
However the above Courts need not decide these questions if: (a) 
relevant facts or documents are in dispute, or (b) oral evidence is 
necessary to be adduced, or (c) th e enquiry into these questions is 
likely to delay the reference to ar bitration, or (d) the requests for 
deciding the question was unduly delayed or (e) the decision on the 
question is not likely to produce substantial savings in cause of 
arbitration, or (f) there is no good reason as to why these questions 
should be decided at that stage. If the above Courts find that the 
preliminary questions are simple enough they may decide the 
same. Otherwise they shall refer thes e questions also to the arbitral 
tribunal. Thus sufficient care is  taken to see that nobody takes 
undue advantage of the right to raise preliminary jurisdictional 
issues or to cause delay in the appointment of arbitrators. At the 
same time care is taken to see that parties do not incur unnecessary 
costs by being referred to arbitration.  
        (paragraph 2.8.15) 
 

 213
(16)  Section 12: This section is proposed to be amended to direct the 
proposed arbitrators to disclose in wr iting particular circumstances, within 
there peculiar knowledge, such as the existence of any past or present 
relationship, either direct or indirect, with any of the parties or their Counsel, 
or facts as to any relationship, finaci al business, professional, or other kind 
which can give rise to justifiabl e doubts as to their independents or 
impartiality.  
      (paragraph 2.9.2) 
(17)  Section 14: This section is proposed to be  amended to say that where 
the mandate of an arbitrator is te rminated, the Court may decide the 
quantum of fee payable to him.  
      (paragraph 2.11.2) 
 
(18)  Section 15: This section is proposed to be amended to say that the 
substitute arbitrator is to be appointed within 30 days and also that the Court 
will decide the fee payable to the arbitrator whose mandate has been 
terminated.  
      (paragraph 2.11.3) 
 
(19)  Section 17: This section is proposed to be amended by adding some 
more powers to the list of powers that  can be exercised by the arbitral 
tribunal, as contained in the English Act, 1996.  
        (paragraph 2.13.3) 
 
(20) section 20: Section 20(1) as it stands now states: “The parties are free 
to agree on the place of arb itration”.  Section 20 is in Part I of the Act and 
concerns arbitrations in India.  Obviously , sec. 20(1) is subject to sec. 2(2)  

 214
and for the reasons given in Chapter  II,  in the case of arbitrations to which 
Part I applies, the place can only be in India.  In order to clear the 
misunderstanding and for the detailed reasons given in Chapter II, we 
propose adding the word ‘within India’ at  the end of sec. 20(1) so that the 
place selected is restricted to India, and the other sub sections are converted 
into provisos, so that even in case pa rties disagree, the arbitral tribunal can 
select a place within India only. 
        (paragraph 2.14.1) 
(21)  Section 23 (1): This sub-section is proposed to be amended by 
deleting the words which permit the pa rties to lay down the procedure or 
time schedule for filing the pleadings  before the arbitral tribunal. 
Consequently it will now be for the ar bitral tribunal to fix same. This 
amendment is proposed to expedite ar bitration proceedings and to avoid 
parties or those who represent th em agreeing and seeking unnecessary 
adjournments. It is further proposed to be provided that the procedure and 
time schedule as fixed by the arbitral  tribunal for the purpose of filing 
pleadings, should be binding on the par ties. This amendment has become 
necessary in view of the complaints by several arbitrators that in India 
parties or those who represent them  agree for adjournments for no good 
reason, taking undue advantage of the ex isting provisions of Section 23 (1). 
Further, under section 23(1A), the High Court may prescribe rules for 
expediting the arbitration process unde r section 82.  This amendment has 
become necessary in view of the peculiar conditions in India.  
      (paragraph 2.15.2) 
 
(22)  Section 24(1): This sub-section is proposed to be amended by deleting 
the words which permit the parties or those who represent them from 

 215
agreeing to get the proceedings adj ourned before the arbitral tribunal 
during the course of the evidence, w ithout good reason. It is proposed to 
grant powers to the arbitral tribunal to fix the procedure as well as the 
time schedule for the evidence. It will be open to the tribunal to receive 
affidavit evidence also, subject to any right of the parties to examine the 
deponent. The procedure and time sche dule fixed by the arbitral tribunal 
shall be binding on the parties or those who represent them. This will also 
be subject to such rules as may be  made by the High Court under section 
82.  This amendment has become n ecessary in view of the peculiar 
conditions in India.       (Paragraph 2.16.2) 
 
(23)  Section 24A: This section is proposed to be introduced to enable the 
arbitral tribunal, which has passed interim orders under section 17, 23, or 24, 
to have the said orders obeyed by the parties and in case of failure to obey, 
the tribunal can pass orders striking out pleadings or imposing costs or 
omitting material documents or by way of  drawing adverse inference. There 
are similar provisions in the English Act 1996.  
      (paragraph 2.17.2) 
 
(24)  Section 24B: T his section is proposed to be introduced to enable the 
parties or the arbitral tribunal, (if n eed be), to approach the Court for the 
purpose of implementation of the interim orders passed by the arbitral 
tribunal under Sections 17, 23 and 24. But before the Court is 
approached, the arbitral tribunal is  to pass a peremptory order on the 
same lines as the interim order. This provision has become necessary 
because several arbitrators have comp lained that they are helpless when 

 216
parties do not obey their interim orders . There is such a provision in the 
English Act of 1996. 
        (paragraph 2.18.2) 
 
(25) Section 28(1), (1A), :  Section 28(1) as it now stands, opens with 
the words “where the place of arbitr ation is situated in India” and 
clause (a) deals with purely domestic arbitration and not 
international arbitration.  As it now stands, it gives an impression 
that in the case of such a pur ely domestic arbitration between 
Indian nationals or Indian compan ies, a foreign law can be applied 
to the dispute under the contract. For the reasons given in Chapter 
II relating to sec. 20(1), there is  no question of having a place of 
arbitration outside India in such cases.   We have already proposed 
adding ‘within India’ at the end of  sec. 20(1).  With a view to 
remove the impression arising from the opening words in sec. 
28(1), “where the place of arbitration is situated in India”, namely, 
that there can be a place of arb itration outside India also, we 
propose to exclude the applicability of the said words from clause 
(a) of sub section (1).  We accordi ngly, designate clause (a) as sub 
section (1) without the said words,  and designate clause (b) as sub 
section (1A) and shift the above words to that sub section which 
deals with international arbitration.   
(paragraph 2.19.2) 
 
 
(26)  Section 29: Section 29 is proposed to be amended to say that the 
minority of opinion shall be appended to the arbitral award if made 

 217
available within 30 days of the deci sion of the other arbitrators.  If 
there is no majority view, the deci sion of the presiding arbitrator 
shall become the award. 
(paragraph 2.20.1) 
 
(27) Section 29A: This section is proposed to be introduced fix time limits 
for passing of the award and also fo r speeding up the arbitral process. 
No provision was made in the 1996 Act fixing time limit for the 
passing of the award, on the ground that extension applications in the 
Court were not being disposed of  early enough and that there were 
long delays. It is proposed to initially grant a period of one year, after 
commencement of the arbitration and also to permit parties to agree 
for extension upto a maximum of another one year. Thereafter, if 
there is further delay, the pro ceedings will stand suspended 
until an 
application is made in the Court, either by the parties or if the parties 
do not do so, 
until an application for extension is filed by the arbitral 
tribunal. The moment an applica tion, is filed the arbitration 
proceedings can re-start. It is propos ed to be provided that there will 
be no stay of the arbitration pro ceedings pending consideration of the 
application for extension of time and that, pending the application, the 
arbitral tribunal shall proceed with  the arbitration proceedings. The 
Court shall extent the time for passing the award and shall fix the time 
schedule  and further procedure, by taking into consideration the 
reasons for the delay, the conduct of  the parties, the manner in which 
proceedings were conducted by the ar bitral tribunal, the amount of 
money spent already towards fee and expenses, the extent of work that 
is already done and the extent of work that remains to be done. The 

 218
Court will passed orders from time to time till the award this passed. 
This provision has become necessa ry in view of the peculiar 
conditions prevailing in India even  after the 1996 Act. Sub-section 8 
of the proposed Section 29A requires that the first order on the 
extension application shall be passe d within one month from the date 
of service on the opposite party.  The ‘future procedure’ can be 
prescribed by the High Court by making rules under section 82. 
        (paragraph 2.21.6) 
 
(28)  Section 31A: This section is proposed to be introduced requiring a 
photocopy of the arbitral award to be  filed by the arbitral tribunal, 
along with the ‘arbitral records’ in  the Principal Courts referred to 
Section 2(1)(e). The award is to be  filed only for purposes of record. 
Parties can obtain certified copies of the photocopy of the award or 
other documents or of the arbitral proceedings. In cas e the records are 
called by any other Court,  provision is made for sending the record to 
that Court. The preservation of records shall be governed by the 
prevailing rules applicable to othe r records preserved in the Court. 
The Court is to maintain a regist er of awards with the details 
mentioned in the section and other details has may be required by the 
rule making authority. 
        (paragraph 2.24.4) 
 
(29)  Section 34:  This Section deals with applications to set aside the 
award. The section is proposed to  be amended to fill up certain 
omissions and also to provide fo r some consequential amendments 

 219
arising out of the proposed section 34A, regarding which details are 
given  under serial No.30.   
      (paragraph 2.25.1) 
 
(i) Sub-Section (1) of Section 34:  This sub-section is proposed to be 
amended by permitting the parties to include, in their application 
to set aside the award, the add itional grounds proposed in Section 
34 A in the case of purely domestic arbitration awards relating to 
Indian nationals.  
        (paragraph 2.25.2) 
 
(ii) Explanation 2 below Section 34:  Section 34 does not enable the 
parties to question the decision of  the arbitral tribunal made under 
Section 13 (2) rejecting a plea of bias or to question the decision of 
the said tribunal made under Section 16 (2) or (3) rejecting a plea 
of want of jurisdiction on the part  of the arbitral tribunal. Though 
the existence of these remedies wa s referred to in Sections 13 and 
16, these remedies were not incl uded in Section 34 and further the 
use of the word ‘only’ in sec tion 34 (1) contradicted what was 
stated in sections 13 and 16.  This is being rectified by adding 
Explanation – 2 below sub-section 2 of Section 34, making it clear 
that the above decisions can be ch allenged before the court in the 
application under section 34(1).  
        (paragraph 2.10.1) 
 
(iii) Sub-Section (1A): We proposed to introduce sub-section (1A) in 
section 34 so that while filing an application to set aside the award,  

 220
the parties could annex a photoc opy of the award in case the 
original award has not been supplied to the applicant.  
 
        (Paragraph 2.25.2) 
(iv) Sub-Section (5) and (6):  These sub-sections are proposed to be 
introduced to refer to the furthe r procedure subsequent to sub-
section (4), namely, after receipt of the order of the arbitral tribunal 
to which the award is remitted fo r rectification of the defects 
pointed out in the application filed under sub-section (1) of Section 
34. The further procedure that is proposed is that parties can filed 
objections to the order of the tribunal passed upon such remission, 
and it is further provided that th e Court can deal with the said 
objections also in the light of the grounds permissible under 
Section 34 and under the proposed Section 34A.  
            
       (Paragraph 2.25.2)  
   
(30)  Section 34A:  In the case of purely domes tic arbitrations, where an 
award is passed between Indian nati onals, the parties are proposed to 
be given two more additional grounds of attack to be included in the 
application under sub-Section (1) of  Section 34. These two additional 
grounds are (i) that there is an erro r which is apparent on the face of 
the arbitral award giving rise to a substantial question of law, and (ii) 
that the award has not given r easons though it was an award which 
was required to contain reasons, not being one by way of settlement or 
one where the agreement provided that reasons need not be given.  

 221
In the case of additional ground (i) referred to above, special 
conditions are imposed, namely, that the party must file an application 
seeking leave to raise the said ground and satisfy the Court prima 
facie that such a point was raised be fore the arbitral tribunal, that the 
point affects the rights of the parties substantially, and that it is proper 
to decide the question. The app lication under Section 34 (1) must 
specifically indicate the substantial question raised. Sub-section (3) of 
the proposed Section 34 A states th at additional ground (i) will not be 
available where a specific question of  law was referred to the arbitral 
tribunal.  
      (paragraph 2.26.3) 
  
(31)  Section 36(1):  (i) Section 36 as its stands now provides that the 
enforcement of the award will come to a stop upon the filing of an 
application under sub-section (1) of Section 34 to set aside the award. 
Parties are now filing such applications even though there is no 
substance whatsoever in such app lications. Section 36 is therefore 
proposed to amended by designating the existing section as sub-
section (1) and omitting the words which say that the award will not 
be enforced once an application is filed under sub-section (1) of 
Section 34.  
 
(ii) Sub-section (2):  This sub-section is being introduced to say that 
the mere filing of an application under sub-section (1) of Section 34 
to set aside an award shall not am ount to stay of the award unless 
the Court passes an order under the proposed sub-section (3).  
 

 222
(iii) Sub-section (3) to (5): These sub-sections are proposed to be 
introduced to enable the Court to  stay the operation of the award 
subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, in the light of the 
limited grounds available under Section 34 and 34A. Under these 
sub-sections, the Court can pass or ders against third parties or 
against property which is not the s ubject matter of arbitration, for 
the purpose of protecting the intere sts of the party in whose favour 
the award is passed.  
        (paragraph 2.29.7) 
 
(32)  Section 37A: This section is proposed to be introduced to enable the 
Court to dismiss in limini, an a pplication under sub-section (1) of 
Section 34 (application to set aside th e award) or any appeal (whether 
a regular appeal or an appeal agains t an interim order of the tribunal), 
even before notice is issued to the opposite party. It is further 
proposed to provide that even in a case where notice is  issued to the 
opposite party, the Court, at the tim e of the disposal of the above 
matters, will not interfere unless “substantial prejudice” is shown by 
the applicant or the appellant, as  the case may be. It is further 
provided that all applications and app eals are to be disposed of within 
6 months of service on the opposite party. These provisions are 
introduced to avoid applications and appeals being automatically 
registered and kept pending by th e Registry and being kept pending 
for years together, in the Courts.  
      (paragraph 2.29.11) 
 

 223
(33) Section 42:  This section is proposed to be amended to refer to the 
forum for filing subsequent applications in all situations where the 
first of the applications is file d before a judicial authority under 
Section 8 or before any of the Cour ts referred to in Section 8 A or 
before the Supreme Court or the High Court under Section 11 seeking 
reference to arbitration. The various  proposed sub-sections of section 
42 refer separately to the Cour t before which the subsequent 
applications, such as applications under sub-section (1) of Section 34 
for setting aside the award etc, have to be filed. Sub-section (1) of 
Section 42 is general, sub-section (2 ) refers to situations where the 
first application is filed before the Court in Section 2(1)(e), Sub-
section (3) deals with the situations where the first application is filed 
before a judicial authority under Sec tion 8, sub-section (4) deals with 
situations where the first application is filed before any of the Courts 
referred to in Section 8A  and Sub-section (5) refers to the situations 
where the first application is file d before the Supreme Court or the 
High Court under Section 11, seeking reference to arbitration. 
        (paragraph 2.30.6) 
 
(34) Section 42A:  This section is proposed to  be introduced to enable 
empanelment of arbitrators by the Chief Justice of India under a 
scheme to be framed by him subject  to such conditions as he may 
specify.      (paragraph 2.31.2) 
 
(35)  Section 42B: This section is proposed to be introduced to neutralise 
the effect of the Maharastra ame ndment of 1984 to Section 69 of the 
Indian Partnership Act which ame ndment disabled partners of an 

 224
unregistered firm to seek dissolution of the firm, settlement of 
accounts of the firm or realise the assets of the firm. Section 42B 
removes the disability in so far as it relates to the partners’ right to 
seek the aforesaid relief’s through arbitration proceedings.  
        (paragraph 2.32.3) 
 
(36)  Section 43: Two amendments are proposed in Section 43.  
(i)  Section 43(3):  This sub-section is proposed to be amended to 
declare the effect of the Cont ract (Amendment) Act 1996 which 
amended Section 28 of the Indian Contract Act. By that amendment to 
the Contract Act, the effect of  what is known as the Atlantic clause, 
was neutralised by the Parliament. The amendment stated that if a 
clause in a contract had the eff ect of extinguishing a right if a 
particular step (e.g. giving of a no tice of 30 days soon after the cause 
of action) is not taken by the party,  such a clause will be void. Now 
sub-section (3) is proposed to be am ended and it is stated that such 
clauses will be void and that furthe r there will be no necessity for the 
parties to seek extension of time in  a Court in respect of the period 
prescribed under the Limitation Act 1963, as is now provided in sub-
section (3).   
        (paragraph 2.34.3) 
 
(ii) Section 43(5): This sub-section is proposed to be added to exclude 
the period covered by infructuous arbitration proceedings where 
the arbitral tribunal holds under section 16(2) or 16(3) that it has 
no jurisdiction or where such an order is affirmed on further 
appeals, or where in an application under Section 11 (13), the 

 225
Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case may be, holds that 
there is no arbitration agreement or  that it is null and void etc. In 
such cases, if the party has to file a regular suit, under the proposed 
amendment, he will now be able to exclude the period covered by 
the arbitration proceedings.  
      (paragraph 2.35.4) 
(37) Section 30 of the Amending Act – amendment of section 82 of 
the principal Act:  The High Courts are to make rules fixing the 
manner in which arbitral proceed ings have to be conducted, 
proceedings to be held on con tinuous days and on each day from 
10.30 AM to 4.00 PM or at least for five hours. 
(paragraph 2.39.1) 
(38) Section 31 of the Amending Act- amendment of section 84 by 
insertion of a new sub-section (1A)  : In this proposed  sub-section 
(1A), the Central Government is em powered to make rules regarding 
the manner in which the fee of the members of the arbitral tribunal 
may be fixed and the procedure re lating thereto, and regarding the 
other particulars required to be entered under clause (f) of sub-section 
(4) of section 31A. The guidelines regarding the fixation of fee in 
respect of purely domestic arbitrati ons between Indian nationals are 
also laid down.  
(paragraphs 2.39.3 and 2.39.4) 
(39)  CHAPTER XI  (Sections 43A to 43D and Schedule IV ) in Part I: 
This chapter along with Schedule IV is proposed to be introduced in 
Part I of the Act, to deal with Fast Track Arbitration.  The parties, if 
they agree unanimously that they opt for this type of arbitration, then, 
notwithstanding any provision in the contract, the arbitration will be 

 226
by a single arbitrator, and the proce dure to be followed by him will be 
the procedure indicated in Chapter XI  and Schedule IV of the Act. To 
the extent the procedure is not covered by the aforesaid provisions, the 
other provisions of Part I of the Ac t shall apply. The award is to be 
passed in six months from the da te of constitution of the single 
member arbitral tribunal. In case it is not so passed, parties by consent 
can extend the period upto a maximum of three more months. In case 
the award is not passed within the period of six months and the further 
period agreed  to by the parties, as  stated above, the proceedings will 
stand suspended until either party applies for extension in the High 
Court or if the parties do not so apply, until the sole arbitrator applies 
for extension and thereafter the provisions of sub-sections (4) to (8) of 
Section 29A shall apply to enable the High Court to monitor the time 
schedule of the adjournments and other procedure, till the award is 
passed.  
 
In so far as the filing of th e pleadings and producing evidence 
before the arbitral tribunal, short pe riods of fifteen days for each step 
is provided. Other periods mentioned in the Act are reduced, so far as 
this chapter is concerned.  
 
All subsequent applications like an application under sub-
section (1) of Section 34 to set aside an award, have to be filed in the 
same High Court.  
 

 227
Provisions enabling the arbitral tr ibunal to implement its orders 
and provisions enabling the High Court to implement the orders of the 
arbitral tribunal, have been included in the proposed amendment.  
 
Provision is also made to enable  the arbitral tribunal to pass 
orders upon the default of the parties to comply with the time schedule 
or the procedure indicated by the arbitral tribunal.  
 
This Chapter and the Schedule ar e a modified form of a normal 
Fast Track Procedure prescribed by ot her arbitral institutions  with 
this difference, namely, that the uppe r time limit is not as rigid as in 
those procedures. The procedure unde r this chapter can be called an 
expedited arbitration procedure w ith a flexible upper limit controlled 
by the High Court.  
 
By bringing in the High Court even  at the first level, the initial 
approach to the District Court is eliminated. After the High Court, the 
further appeal, if any, will only be  to the Supreme Court under Article 
136 of the Constitution of India.  
         (paragraph 2.38.2) 
 
(39) Sections 32, 33 a nd 34 of the Amending Act:  Section 32 is 
proposed to deal with “Transitory Provisions”, Section 33 with “Time 
limits and speeding up the arbitral process” for pending arbitration 
proceedings under the 1996 Act, and Section 34 to deal with “Time 
limits and speeding up the arbitral  process” in connection with 
pending arbitration proceedings under the 1940 Act.  

 228
  
(i) Section 32 of the Amending Act:  The proposed amending Act 
being procedural in nature, it will apply to pending arbitration 
proceedings also, unless the said Act is made prospective. To 
achieve this, it is being provided in  sub-section (1) of Section 32, 
that the amendments will, subject to the provisions of sub-sections 
(2) to (17), be prospective. In sub-sections (2) to (17), certain 
specific provisions of the pr oposed amending Act are made 
applicable to pending arbitrations, pending applications and awards 
already passed under the 1996 Act. 
(paragraph 2.41.2) 
Sufficient care has been taken to see that only those provisions will 
apply which will speed up the entir e arbitral process before the 
arbitral tribunal and before the Courts under Section 2(1)(e) or before 
the Appellate Courts upto the High Court.  
 
The proposed section 37A is also  made applicable to pending 
arbitration proceedings to enable th e Courts to dismiss applications 
and appeals in limini or to dispose them of only if substantial 
prejudice is shown.  
 
(ii)(a) Section 33 of the Amending Act:  The proposed section 34 
states that the arbitration proceed ings pending before an arbitral 
tribunal appointed under the 1996 Act for more than three years 
should be completed within a nother year, failing which, the 
procedure enables the Court to fi x the time schedule as stated in 
sub-sections (4) to (8) of Section 29A, till the award is passed. 

 229
(Even the proposed provisions in Section 23(1) and 24(1), and 24A 
are applied under Section 33 to  pending proceedings under the 
1996 Act). 
 All pending applications and appeals in the Courts arising out 
of the 1996 Act are to be disposed of in six months and all appeals 
against interim orders in th ree months, from the date of 
commencement of the amending Act.  
Section 37A is also made app licable to pending arbitration 
proceedings to enable the Courts  to dismiss applications and 
appeals in limini or to dispose th em of only if substantial prejudice 
is shown.  
 
  (b) In the case of pending arb itration under the 1996 Act where three 
years have not expired by the date of commencement of the 
proposed amending Act, it is proposed that, on completion of that 
period, a further period of six mont hs is to be granted for passing 
of the award, failing which the time schedule and procedure under 
sub-sections (4) to (8) of Secti on 29A as stated above will apply, 
till the award is passed.   
       (Paragraph 2.42.1) 
 
(iii) Section 34 of the Amending Act:  This section proposes that all 
arbitration proceedings which we re started under the 1940 Act, if 
they have not been completed (unl ess there is a stay order) by the 
date of commencement of the amending Act, have to be completed 
within one year from such co mmencement failing which the time 
schedule and the procedure will be monitored by the relevant Court 

 230
under Section 2(c) or Section 21 of the 1940 Act, as the case may 
be by applying the provisions of sub- sections (4) to (8) of Section 
29A till the award is passed.  
If matters are pending before the arbitrators, the provisions of 
Section 23(1) and 24(1) and 24A and 24B shall apply to strengthen 
the hands of the arbitrators to fi x the time schedules and to have 
their orders implemented or to get them implemented by the 
relevant Court mentioned above.  
Pending applications in Court to make the award a rule of Court 
or pending objections to set asid e the award and, pending appeals 
under Section 39, under the 1940 Act,  have to be disposed of 
within one year of the commencement of the Act.  
Appeals and revisions agains t interim orders and other 
applications where stay of arb itration proceedings is granted by 
Courts, have to be disposed of w ithin six months from the date of 
commencement of amending Act.  
Section 37A is also made app licable to pending arbitration 
proceedings to enable the Courts  to dismiss applications and 
appeals in limini or to dispose th em of only if substantial prejudice 
is shown.  
      (Paragraph 2.43.2) 
 
(40) Section 36 :  This deals with insertion of Schedule IV in the 
main Act where Chapter XI is introduced in Part I to deal with Fast 
Track Arbitration. 
 
(Paragraph 2.38.2) 

 231
 
 
 
We recommend accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
      
       (Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
         C h a i r m a n  
 
 
 
       (Justice M.JagannadhaRao) 
         V i c e - C h a i r m a n  
 
 
         
          ( D r . N . M . G h a t a t e )  
         M e m b e r  
 
 
            
            
        ` ( M r . T . K . V i s w a n a t h a n )  
         Member-Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 232
Law Commission of India 176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act 1996  
 
ANNEXURE-I  
 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001  
Arrangement of Clauses  
     Clause No  
 
1.                                    Short title and 
commencement  
 
2.                                       Amendment of 
section 2  
 
3.            Amendment of section 5  
 
4.                                       Amendment of 
section 6  
 
5.                                       Amendment of 
section 7  
 
6.           Amendment of section 8  
 
7.                                         Insertion of new 
section 8 A  
`      8.            Substitution of section 9  
              
9.                                       Insertion of new 
section 10A  
 
10.                                     Amendment of 
section 11  
11.                                       Amendment of 
section 12 
 
12.                                    Amendment of section 
14  
 
13            Amendment of section 15  
14                                       Substitution of 
section 17  
15.                                      Substitution of 
section 20  
16.                                      Amendment of 
section 23 
 

 233
17                                       Amendment of 
section 24  
18.                                   Insertion of new 
sections 24A and 24B  
19.                                      Amendment of 
section 28  
20.                                     Amendment of 
section 29  
21.                                     Insertion of 
new section 29A  
  
 
Law Commission of India 176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act 1996  
 
22.     Insertion of new section 31A  
23.     Amendment of section 34  
24.     Insertion of new section 34A  
25     Substitution of section 36  
26.     Insertion of new section 37A  
27.     Substitution of section new sections 
for section 42  
28.     Amendment of section 43  
29.     Insertion new Chapter XI in Part I  
30.     Amendment of section 82  
31.     Amendment of section 84  
32.     Transitory provisions  
33.  Speeding up of proceedings and time 
limits for passing awards under the 
principal Act.  
34. Speeding up of proceedings and time limits for 
passing awards under the Arbitration Act 1940.  

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2001 
 
A   BILL 
 
to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
  
Be it enacted by  the Parliam ent in the Fift y-second Y ear of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 
 
Short title 
 
1. This Act m ay be called the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 
2001. 
 
 
Amendment of Section 2 
 
2. In section 2 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act),- 
 
(i) in sub-section (1), for clauses (e ) and (f), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“(e) ‘court’ m eans the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a 
district, the Court of principal judge of  the City  Civil court  of original 
jurisdiction in a city  and includes the H igh Court in exercise of its ordinary  
original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming 
the subject matter of an arbitration if th e same had been the subject m atter of a 
suit, but does not include any civil court of a grade inferior to such principal 
Civil Court or to such Court of the pr incipal judge City  Civil Court, or any  
Court of Small Causes; 
 
(ea) ‘domestic arbitration’  means an arbitration relating to disputes arising 
out of legal relationships, w hether contractual or not, w here none of the parties 
is- 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any 
country other than India; or 
(ii) a body  corporate w hich is in corporated in any  country  other 
than India; or 
(iii) an association or a body  of individuals whose central 
management and control is exercised in any country other than 
India; or 
(iv) the Government of a foreign country, 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
and shall be deem ed to include international arbitration and international 
commercial arbitration where the place of arbitration is in India; 
 
(eb) ‘international arbitration’  m eans an arbitration relating to disputes 
arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, and where at least 
one of the parties is,- 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any 
country other than India; or 
(ii) a body  corporate w hich is in corporated in any  country  other 
than India; or 
(iii)  an association or a body  of individuals whose central 
management and control is exercised in any country other than 
India; or 
(iv) the Government of a foreign country: 
 
(f) ‘international commercial arbitration’ m eans international arbitration 
considered as commercial under the law in force in India; 
 
(fa) ‘judicial authority’ includes any quasi-judicial statutory authority;”. 
 
(ii) for sub-section (2),  the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“(2) (a)   This Part shall apply to domestic arbitration; 
 
(b)  Sections 8, 9, 27, 35 and 36 of this Part shall apply   to 
international arbitration (whether com mercial or not) where the 
place of arbitration is outside I ndia or is not specified in the 
arbitration agreement.”  
 
(iii)  after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(10) The principal Civil Court of original ju risdiction in a district or the Court of the 
principal judge, City  Civil Court exercising original jurisdiction in a city , as the case 
may be, m ay transfer any  m atter relating to any  proceedings under the Act pending 
before it to any court of coordinate jurisdiction, in the district or the city, as the case may 
be, for decision from time to time.”. 
 
Amendment of section 5 
 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, the following Explanation shall be inserted at the 
end, namely :- 
 
“Explanation.-  For the rem oval of doubts, it is hereby  declared that the 
expression ‘any other law for the time being in force’ shall always be deemed to 
include- 
(a) the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908); 
(b) any law providing for internal appeals within the High Court; 
(c) any enactment which provides for intervention by a judicial authority in 
respect of orders passed by any other judicial authority.”. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 6 
 
4.  In section 6 of the principal Act, the words”, or the arbitral tribunal with 
the consent of the parties,” shall be omitted. 
 
Amendment of section 7 
 
5. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in clause (b), for the words 
“an exchange of letters”, the  words “any written communication by one party to another 
and accepted expressly or by implication by the other party, an exchange of letters” shall 
be substituted. 
 
 
Amendment of section 8 
 
6.        In section 8 of the principal Act,-  
 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely,- 
 
“(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), a judicial authority 
before w hich an action is brought in a m atter w hich is the subject of an 
arbitration agreement shall, if a party  so applies not later than when submitting 
his first statem ent on the substance of the dispute, unless it has to decide any 
questions referred to in sub-section (4 ) as prelim inary issues under that sub-
section, refer the parties to arbitration. 
. 
 
(1A) The judicial authority before w hich an action is brought shall stay  the 
action before it for the purpose of decidi ng the questions set out in sub-section 
(4) and the stay  so granted shall be subject to the outcom e of the  orders that 
may be passed under the said sub-section and sub-section (5).”; 
 
 
(b) in sub-section (3),the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:- 
 
“Provided that the arbitration proceeding so com menced shall 
stand terminated if the judicial authority, after hearing all the 
parties, passes an order under sub-section (4) to the effect that- 
 
(a)  a reference to arbitration cannot be m ade because 
of its decision on any  question referred to in 
clauses (a) to (e) of that sub-section; or 
 
(b)  though a reference to arbitration has to be made  
,the proceedings have to be conducted by  a 
different arbitral tribunal.”; 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
 
    (c )  after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall  be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(4)  Where an application is m ade to the judicial authority  by a party  raising 
any question - 
 
(a) that  there is no dispute in existence; 
(b) that the arbitration agreement or any clause thereof is null and void 
or  inoperative; 
(c)  that the arbitration agreement is incapable of being performed; 
                        (d)  that the arbitration agreement is not in existence , 
, 
 
the judicial authority m ay, subject to th e provisions of sub-section (5), decide 
the same. 
 
 
(5) Where the judicial authority  finds that the questions mentioned in sub-
section (4) cannot be decided because- 
 
(a) the relevant facts or documents are in dispute; or 
(b) there is a need for adducing oral evidence; or 
(c)  the inquiry into these questions is likely  to delay  reference to 
arbitration; or 
(d)  the request for deciding the question was unduly delayed; or 
(e) the decision on the question is not likely to produce substantial 
savings in costs of arbitration; or 
(f)  there is no good reason w hy these questions should be decided at 
that stage,  
it shall refuse to decide the said questions and shall refer the  sam e to the 
arbitral tribunal for decision. 
 
(6) If the judicial authority  holds that though the arbitration agreem ent is in 
existence but it is null and void or inoperative or incapable of being performed 
and refuses to stay the legal proceedings, any provision in the arbitration 
agreement that the award is a conditi on precedent for the initiation of legal 
proceedings in respect of any m atter, will be of no effect in relation to the 
proceedings.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 8 A 
 
7. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
Parties in pending legal proceedings may agree to seek arbitration  
 
“8A.  Where at any stage of a legal proceeding in the Supreme Court or the High Court 
or in the  principal Civil Court of original ju risdiction in a district or in the court of the 
principal judge of the City  Civil Court of orig inal jurisdiction in a city  or any Court of 
coordinate jurisdiction or inferior in  grade to such Principal courts, as the case m ay be, 
all the parties enter into an arbitration agreement to resolve their disputes, then the Court 
in which the said legal proceeding is pending shall, on an application m ade by any party 
to the arbitration agreem ent, refer the disput es in relation to the subject m atter of the 
legal proceeding, to arbitration. 
  
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, “ legal proceeding” means any proceeding 
involving civil rights of parties pending in the courts m entioned in this section, w hether 
at the stage of institution or at the stage of appeal  or revision and includes proceedings 
involving civil rights instituted in the High Courts under article 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution of India or on further appeal, if any, to the Supreme Court.” 
 
Substitution  of  new section for section 9 
 
8. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
 Interim measures, etc., by  court 
 
“9. (1) A party m ay, before or during arbitral proceedings or at any tim e after 
the m aking of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with 
section 36, apply to a court for interim measures.  
 
(2) The Court shall have the sam e pow ers for m aking orders under sub-
section (1) as it has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any proceedings 
before it. 
 
 (3) In particular and without prejudice to sub-section (2), a party may apply 
to the court for any of the following, namely:-  
 
(a) appointment of a guardian for a m inor or a person of unsound m ind 
for the purposes of arbitral proceedings;   
 
(b) interim  m easure of protection in respect of any  of the following 
matters, namely:- 
 
(i) the preservation, interim  custody  or sale of any goods 
which are the subject-m atter of the arbitration 
agreement; 
 
 
5 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(ii)  securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration; 
 
(iii) the detention, preservation or inspection of any  property 
or thing w hich is the subject m atter of the dispute in 
arbitration, or as to which any question may arise therein and 
authorizing for any  of the af oresaid purposes any person to 
enter upon any  land or building in the possession of any 
party, or authorizing any  sam ples to be taken or any 
observation to be m ade, or experim ent to be tried, w hich 
may be necessary  or expedient for the purpose of obtaining 
full information or evidence; 
 
(iv)interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver. 
 
(c) other interim measure of protection as may appear to the court to be 
just and convenient. 
 
(4) Where a party  makes an application under sub-section(1) for the grant of 
interim measures before the commencement of arbitration, the court shall direct 
the party in whose favour the interim measure is granted, to take effective steps 
for the appointm ent of the arbitral tribunal in accordance with the procedure 
specified in section 11, within a period of thirty  days from the date of the said 
order. 
 
(5)The court m ay direct that if the  st eps referred to in sub-section (1) are not 
taken within the said period of thirty  days  specified under sub-section (4), the 
interim measure granted under sub-sections (2) and (3), shall stand vacated on 
the expiry of the said period: 
 
Provided that the court m ay on sufficient cause being shown for the delay 
in  taking such steps, extend the said period. 
 
(6) Where an order granting an interim  m easure stands vacated under sub-
section (5), the court m ay pass such further orders as to restitution as it m ay 
deem fit against the party  in w hose favour the interim  m easure w as granted 
under this section.” 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 10A 
 
 
9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
Employees, etc., not to be appointed as arbitrators in certain cases 
  
“ 10A . (1) Subject to the provisions of s ub-section (2), where any arbitration 
agreement contains a clause enabling one of such parties to appoint his or its 
own em ployee or consultant or advisor or other person having business 
 
 
6 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
relationship with  him  or it, as an arbitrator, such a clause shall be void to that 
extent. 
 
 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not-  
 
(a) apply to an agreem ent in international arbitration (whether 
commercial or not);. 
             
(b) render any clause, in an arbitrati on agreement  which enables the     
Central or a State G overnment or a Public Sector U ndertaking or a 
statutory body  or a statutory  corpor ation or other public authority , as 
the case m ay be, to appoint its ow n employee or consultant or advisor 
or any  other person having business relationship, as an arbitrator, 
void;” 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 11 
 
10.  In section 11 of the principal Act,-  
 
 
(a) in sub-section (4),- 
 
(i) in clauses (a) and (b), for the wo rds “thirty days”, the words “sixty 
days’ shall be substituted; 
 
(ii) for the w ords, “the appointment shall be made, upon request of a 
party by  the Chief Justice or any  person or institution designated by 
him.”, the words “the right to m ake such appointm ent shall be 
deemed to have been waived, if such appointment is not made 
within the said period and the appointm ent shall be m ade, upon 
request of a party or any person or institution designated by the High 
Court or any  person or institution designated by  it .”, shall be 
substituted  
 
 
 
(b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
 
“(5) Failing any agreem ent referred to in sub-section (2), in an 
arbitration with a sole arbitrator if the parties f ail to agree on the 
arbitrator within sixty days from  the receipt of a request by one party 
from the other party to so agree, then the right to m ake such 
appointment shall be deem ed to have been waived, if such 
appointment is not m ade within th e said period and the appointm ent 
 
 
7 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
shall be made by the High Court or any person or institution designated 
by it.  
 
 
(5A) Where the appointment procedure contained in the arbitration 
agreement  becomes void under sub-section (1) of section 10A , the parties may 
agree to appoint an arbitrator w ithin sixty  day s of a request from  one of the  
parties: 
 
Provided that where the parties fail to  agree on an arbitrator within the 
said period of sixty days, the appointment shall be m ade, upon request 
of a party, by the High Court or any person or institution designated by  
it.” 
 
 
 
(c)  in sub-section (6) for the words, “ a party m ay request the Chief  
Justice or any person or institution designated by him  to take  the 
necessary m easure, unless the agreem ent on the appointm ent 
procedure provides other m eans fo r securing the appointm ent.”, the 
words “and where such measures are not taken in accordance with the 
appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties, the right to take 
such measures shall be deem ed to have been waived and a party m ay 
request the High Court or any pers on or institution designated by it to 
take  the necessary measure, unless the agreement on the appointment 
procedure provides other m eans for securing the appointm ent.”shall 
be substituted;  
 
 
 
 
(d)  in sub-section (7)- 
 
(i) after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (5)”, 
the w ords, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section 
(5A)”, shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words, “  the Chief Justice or any person or 
institution designated by  him”, the words “  the High 
Court or any person or institution designated by  it” 
shall be substituted; 
 
    
 
(e) in sub-section (8) for the words “ The Chief Justice or any person or       
institution designated by him”, the words “  The High Court or any  person or 
institution designated by it” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
(f) for sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be substituted,   namely:- 
 
“(9) In the case of appointm ent of a sole or third arbitrator in an 
international arbitration (whether com mercial or not),the Suprem e Court or the 
person or institution designated by  it may appoint an arbitrator of a nationality  
other than the nationalities of the parties where the parties belong  to different 
nationalities.”; 
 
(g)   in sub-section (10)- 
 
(i)for the words “The Chief Jus tice may make such scheme as 
he m ay deem  appropriate ” the w ords “The High Court may 
make such scheme as it m ay deem  appropriate,” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii)after the word, brackets and figure “ sub-section (5)”, the 
words, brackets, figure and letter “ or sub-section (5A )”, shall 
be inserted; 
 
 
(h) for sub-section (11), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
“(11) Where m ore than one request has been m ade under sub-section 
(4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (5A ) or sub-section (6) to  different H igh 
courts or their designates, the High Court or its designate to whom a request has 
been first m ade under the relevant sub-section shall alone be competent to 
decide on the request.”; 
 
 
 
(i) for sub-section (12), the following sub-sections shall be  substituted, 
namely.- 
 
“(12)    (a) Where the m atters referred to in  sub-sections (4), (5), (6), 
(7), (8) and (10), arise in an international arbitration (whether 
commercial or not), the reference to “High Court” wherever it occurs in 
those sub-sections, shall be constr ued as a reference to the “ Supreme 
Court”; 
 
(b) Where the m atters referred to in sub- sections (4), (5), (5A) (6), (7), 
(8) and  (10) arise in any  other arbitration,  the reference to the “ High 
Court” wherever it occurs in those s ub-sections shall be construed as a 
reference to the High Court, within whose territorial lim its  the 
principal  civil court or the court of  the  principal judge of city  civil 
court referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2, as the case 
may be, is situated and where the Hi gh Court itself is the Court within 
the meaning of  that clause, to that High Court. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) Where an application is m ade to the Supreme Court or the H igh Court ,as 
the case may be, under this section  by a party raising any question - 
 
(a) that there is no dispute in existence; 
  (b) that the arbitration agreement or any clause thereof, is null and void 
or inoperative; 
(c) that the arbitration agreement is incapable of being performed; 
 
 (d) that the arbitration agreement is not in existence , 
 
 the Supreme Court or the H igh Court ,a s the case m ay be, m ay, subject to the 
provisions of sub-sections (14), decide the same. 
 
(14) If the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case may be, considers that 
the questions raised under sub-section (13), cannot be decided  because, 
(a) the relevant facts or documents are in dispute; or  
(b) oral evidence is necessary to be adduced; or 
(c) the inquiry  into these questions  is likely to  delay the 
reference to arbitration; or 
(d) the request  for deciding the question was unduly delayed; or 
(e) the decision on the question is not likely  to produce 
substantial savings in costs of arbitration; or 
(f) there is no good reason as to why these questions should be 
decided at that stage, 
 
it shall refuse to decide the said questions and  shall refer  the sam e to 
the arbitral tribunal .” 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 12 
 
11.  In section 12 of the principal A ct, fo r sub-section (1), the follow ing sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
 
“(1) When a person is approached in connection w ith his possible appointm ent 
as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any circum stances, such as the 
existence of any past or present relationshi p, either direct or indirect, with any 
of the parties or any  of their counsel, whether financial, business, professional, 
social or other kind or in relation to the subject-matter in dispute, which are 
likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality.” 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
Amendment of section 14 
 
12. In section 14 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the follow ing sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely :- 
 
“(4) Where the m andate of the arbitrat or has been term inated, the court m ay 
decide the quantum of  fee payable to such arbitrator .” 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 15 
 
13.  In section 15 of the principal Act,- 
 
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “ a substitute arbitrator shall be 
appointed”, the words “  a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed 
within a period of thirty days”shall be substituted; 
 
 
(b) after sub-section (4), the follow ing sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
“(5) Where the mandate of an arbitrator has been term inated, 
the court may decide the quantum of  fee payable to such arbitrator.”  
 
 
 
Substitution  of new section for section 17 
 
14.  For section 17 of the principal Act the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
 
 
Interim directions by arbitral tribunal and other powers 
 
“17. The arbitral tribunal may, pending arbitral proceedings, direct,- 
 
(a)  at the request of a party to the arbitral proceedings, the other party to take 
steps for the protection of the subject matter of the dispute in the manner 
considered necessary by the arbitral tribunal; or 
 
(b) a party, to furnish appropriate security  in connection with the directions 
issued under clause (a);or  
 
(c )a party making any claim, to furnish security for the costs of arbitration; 
or 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
(d) in relation to any property which is the subject matter of arbitral 
proceedings and which is owned by or is in the possession of a party to the 
proceedings –  
 
(i) the taking of photographs, inspection, preservation, custody or 
detention of the property by the arbitral tribunal, by an expert or by a party 
for the purposes of inspection; or 
 
(ii) the taking of samples from, or making of any observation, or 
conducting any experiment upon the said property; or  
 
(e) a party or witness to be examined on oath or affirmation, and for that 
purpose administer, any necessary oath or direct the taking of any necessary 
affirmation, or 
 
(f) a party to take steps for the preservation of any evidence in his custody or 
control which may be necessary for the purpose of the proceedings.” 
 
Substitution of new section for section 20 
 
15.   For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
 
             Place of arbitration 
 
“20. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) ,the  parties are 
free to agree on the place of arbitration: 
 
Provided that where the parties fail to agree, the place 
of arbitration  shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal 
having regard to the circumstances of the case, including the 
convenience of the parties: 
 
Provided further that the arbitral tribunal may, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties, meet at any place it considers 
appropriate for consultation among its members, for hearing 
witnesses, experts or the parties, or for inspection of 
documents, goods or other property. 
 
(2) The place of arbitration shall be within India.” 
 
 
12 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
Amendment of section 23 
 
16.  In section 23 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
“(1) Within a period of time to be determined by the arbitral tribunal, the 
claimant shall state the facts in support of his claim, the points at issue and 
the relief or remedy sought, the respondent shall state his defence in respect 
of these particulars and the claimant may file his rejoinder, if any, and the 
parties shall abide by the time schedule so fixed by the arbitral tribunal, 
unless the tribunal extends the same. 
 
(1A) The arbitral tribunal shall endeavour to expedite the arbitral process 
subject to such rules as may be made by the High Court in this behalf.” 
 
Amendment of section 24 
 
 
17. In section 24 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
“(1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the High Court in this behalf, 
the arbitral tribunal shall decide whether to hold oral hearings for  
presentation of  evidence or for oral arguments or whether the proceedings 
shall be conducted on the basis of documents and other materials or to  
receive affidavit in lieu of oral evidence subject to the witness being 
questioned orally: 
  
Provided that the arbitral tribunal may, at any appropriate 
stage of the proceedings, hold oral hearings for the purpose of 
presentation of oral evidence. 
 
(1A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the arbitral tribunal shall, 
pass orders regarding various aspects of the procedure before it. 
 
(1B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1A), the power of 
the arbitral tribunal to pass orders shall include- 
(a) the fixing of the time schedule for the parties to adduce 
oral evidence, if any;  
(b) the fixing of  the time schedule for oral arguments;  
(c)  the manner in which oral evidence is to be recorded; 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(d) the power to  decide whether the proceedings shall be 
conducted only on the basis of documents and other 
materials or  the other manner in which the proceedings 
may be conducted . 
 
(1C)  The procedure determined under sub-section (1A) and the  time 
schedule fixed under sub-section (1B) by the arbitral tribunal, shall be 
binding on the parties.” . 
 
 
Insertion of new sections 24A and 24B 
 
 
18. After section 24 of the principal Act , the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
Powers of arbitral tribunal to enforce its orders passed under sections 
17, 23 and 24 
 
“24 A (1)If without showing sufficient cause, a party fails to comply with any 
orders of the arbitral tribunal passed under section 17,section 23 or section 
24, as the case may be, the arbitral  tribunal may make a peremptory order to 
the same effect, prescribing such time for compliance as it considers 
appropriate. 
 
     (2) If a claimant fails to comply with a peremptory order passed under 
sub-section (1) in relation to a direction under clause (c)  of section 17 for 
furnishing security for costs of arbitration, the arbitral tribunal may dismiss 
his claim and make an award accordingly. 
 
     (3) If a party fails to comply with any other peremptory order passed by 
the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (1), then the said tribunal may- 
 
(a) make such order as it thinks fit as to payment of costs of the 
arbitral proceedings incurred in consequence of the non-compliance;  
 
(b)direct that the party in default shall not be entitled to rely upon any 
allegations in his pleadings or upon any material which was the 
subject-matter of the order; 
 
(c ) draw such adverse inference from the act of non-compliance as 
the circumstances justify; 
 
 
14 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(d) proceed to make an award on the basis of such materials as have 
been provided to it, without prejudice to any action that may be taken 
under section 25.”  
 
 
Powers of the Court for enforcement of the peremptory orders of the 
arbitral tribunal: 
 
24 B (1) Without prejudice to the powers of the Court under section 9, the 
Court may, on an application made by a party, make an order requiring the 
party to whom the order of the arbitral tribunal was directed, to comply with 
the peremptory orders of the arbitral tribunal passed under sub-section (1) of 
Section 24 A. 
 
(2)  An application under sub-section (1) may be made by- 
 
(a) the arbitral tribunal, after giving notice to the parties, or  
 
(b) a party to the arbitral proceedings with the permission of the 
arbitral tribunal, after giving notice to other parties.   
 
 
(3) No order shall be passed under sub-section (1), by the Court, unless it is 
satisfied that the person to whom the order of the arbitral tribunal was 
directed, has failed to comply with it within the time fixed in the order of the 
arbitral tribunal or, if no time was fixed, within reasonable time. 
 
(4) Any order passed by the Court under sub-section (1), shall be subject to 
such orders, if any, as may be passed by the Court on appeal, under clause (b) 
of sub-section (2) of section 37.” 
   
Amendment of section 28 
 
19.  In section 28 of the principal A ct, for sub-section (1), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
“(1) In an arbitration, other than an international arbitration (whether 
commercial or not), the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute submitted 
to arbitration in accordance with the substantive law for the time being in 
force in India.  
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
(1A) In an international arbitration (whether commercial or not), where 
the place of arbitration is situate in India,  
 
(i) the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in 
accordance with the rules of law designated by the 
parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute; 
 
(ii) any designation by the parties of the law or legal 
system of a given country shall be construed, unless 
otherwise expressed, as directly referring to the 
substantive law of that country and not to its conflict of 
laws rules; 
 
(iii) failing any designation of the law under clause (i) by 
the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the rules of 
law it considers to be appropriate given all the 
circumstances surrounding the dispute.”. 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 29 
 
20. In section 29 of the principal Act,- 
 
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:- 
 
“  Provided that where there is no majority, the award shall be made by 
the Presiding arbitrator of the arbitral tribunal.” ; 
 
(b)  after sub-section (2), the follow ing sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely :- 
 
“(3) The minority decision shall, if made available within thirty days of 
the receipt of the decision of the other members, be appended to the award.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
Insertion  of new section 29A 
 
21.  After section 29 of  the principal Act, the f ollowing section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
 
Speeding up of proceedings and time limit for making awards 
 
“ 29A (1)  The arbitral tribunal shall make its award within a period of one 
year after the commencement of arbitral proceedings,  or within such 
extended period as specified in sub-sections (2) to (4). 
 
(2)  The parties may, by consent, extend  the period specified in sub-section 
(1) for a further period not exceeding one year. 
 
(3)  If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section (1) 
and the period agreed to by the parties under sub-section (2), the arbitral 
proceedings shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4) to (6), stand 
suspended until an application for extension is made to the Court by any 
party to the arbitration, or where none of the parties makes an application as 
foresaid, until such an application is made by the arbitral tribunal.  
 
(4)  Upon filing of the application for extension of time under sub-section 
(3),suspension of the arbitral proceedings shall stand revoked  and pending 
consideration of the application for extension of time before the court under 
that  sub-section, the arbitral proceedings shall continue before the arbitral 
tribunal and the court shall not grant any stay of the arbitral proceedings. 
 
(5) The Court shall, upon such application for extension of time being made 
under sub section (3),  whether the time for making the award as aforesaid 
has expired or not and whether the award has been made or not, extend the 
time for  making of the award beyond the period referred to in sub-section (1) 
and the period agreed to by the parties under sub-section (2).  
 
(6) The Court shall, while extending the time under sub-section (5), pass such 
orders as to costs or as to the future procedure to be followed by the arbitral 
tribunal, after taking into account- 
(a) the extent of work already done; 
(b)  the reasons for delay; 
(c)  the conduct of the parties or of any person 
representing the parties; 
(d)  the manner in which proceedings were conducted 
by the arbitral tribunal; 
(e)  the further work involved; 
 
 
17 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
(f) the amount of money already spent by the parties 
towards fee and expenses of arbitration; 
(g) any  other relevant circumstances,  
and the Court shall pass such orders from time to time with a view to speed 
up the arbitral process, till the award is passed: 
 
Provided that any order as to future 
proceedings passed by the Court shall be subject to such rules as may 
be made by the High Court in this behalf for expediting the arbitral 
proceedings. 
 
 
(7) The parties cannot by consent, extend the period beyond the period 
specified in sub-section (1) and the maximum period referred to in sub-
section (2) and save as otherwise provided in the said sub-sections, any 
provision in an arbitration agreement whereby the arbitral tribunal may 
further extend the time for making the award, shall be void and of no effect. 
 
(8) The first of the orders of extension under sub-section (5) together with 
directions, if any, under sub-section (6), shall be passed by the court, within a 
period of one month from the date of service on the opposite party.” 
  
 
 
 
Insertion  of  new section 31A 
 
22. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-  
 
 
Filing of a copy of the award and original arbitral records in the court for purposes 
of  record and maintenance of register of awards 
 
“31A (1) A photocopy  of the arbitral award duly  signed on each page by  the 
members of the arbitral tribunal together with the original arbitral records,  shall 
be filed by the arbitral tribunal in the c ourt within thirty days of the m aking of 
the award along with  a list of the papers comprising the arbitral record.    
 
   Provided that where the High Court is the proper court 
within the meaning of clause (e) of sub- section (1) of section 2, then the award 
shall be filed in the principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction in a district or 
in the court of the principal judge of the city civil court of original jurisdiction 
in a city within whose territorial jurisd iction the subject m atter of arbitration is 
situated (hereinafter referred to in this section as the said court). 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
Explanation.-1 For the rem oval of doubts, it is hereby  declared that `arbitral 
award’ in this section m eans the arb itral award whether passed pursuant to a 
reference made by a judicial authority  under section 8, or by  any of the courts 
referred to in section 8A, or by  the  parties or by  the H igh Court or by  the 
Supreme Court under section 11, or by  the parties to a Fast Track A rbitration 
under section 43A.   
 
Explanation.-2 For the purposes of this s ection, `arbitral records’ shall include 
the pleadings in the claim  filed by  the parties, the docum entary and oral 
evidence if any recorded, the pleadings in  interlocutory applications, the orders 
thereon, the proceedings of the arbitral tribunal and all other papers relating to 
the arbitral proceedings. 
 
(2) Where the arbitral tribunal fails to file the photocopy  of the arbitral  
award and the arbitral records under sub-section (1), any of the parties may give 
notice to the arbitral tribunal to do so within a period of thirty  day s of the 
receipt of the notice, failing which, the party may request the said court to direct 
the arbitral tribunal to file the  photocopy  of the arbitral aw ard and the arbitral 
records in the said court.  
 
(3)  Upon the filing of the photocopy  of the arbitral award and the arbitral 
records under sub-section (2), the presid ing officer of the said court or a  
ministerial officer of the said court designated by  the said presiding officer, 
shall affix  his signature with  date and seal of the said court  on each page of 
the photocopy  of the arbitral award aforesaid and shall after verification, 
acknowledge receipt of the photocopy  of the arbitral award and the arbitral 
records as per the list referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
 
(4)The said court shall maintain a register containing - 
(a) the names and addresses of the parties to the awards; 
(b)the date of the award; 
(c ) the names and addresses of the arbitrators; 
(d )the relief granted; 
(e ) the date of the filing of the award into the said court; and 
(f)such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
 
(5) If any party makes an application, the court may grant a certified copy of 
the  photocopy  of the arbitral  aw ard or  of the arbitral record or of the 
arbitral proceedings, as the case may be, in accordance with the rules of the 
court. 
 
(6)The court m ay transm it the arbitral r ecords for use in any proceedings for  
setting aside of the arbitral award or for enforcement thereof. 
 
(7) The procedure for return of original docum ents or for preservation of the 
arbitral  records so filed shall be subject to such rules as m ay be  applicable to 
the said court from time to time.  
 
 
 
19 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
(8) The filing of the photocopy  of the award under this section is only  for the 
purposes of  record. 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 34 
 
23.  In section 34 of the principal Act,- 
 
 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted namely:- 
 
“ (1) Recourse to a court against an ar bitral aw ard m ay be m ade only  by  an 
application for setting aside such award- 
 
(a) in accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3) ; and 
 
    (b) in the case of an award made in an arbitration other than an 
international arbitration (whether com mercial or not), in 
accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3) and  the additional 
grounds mentioned in  section 34A. 
 
(1A) An application for setting aside an aw ard under sub-section (1) shall be   
accompanied by the original award: 
 
Provided that w here the parties have not been given the 
original award, they may file in the court, a photocopy  of the 
award  signed by the arbitrators.”; 
 
 
 
(b) in sub-section (2), the Explanation shall be renum bered as Explanation 1 and after 
the Explanation 1 as so renum bered, the follow ing Explanation shall be inserted 
,namely:- 
 
“Explanation.-2 For the rem oval of doubts, it is hereby  declared that w hile 
seeking to set aside an arbitral aw ard under sub-section (1) ,the applicant m ay 
include the pleas questioning the decision of the arbitral tribunal rejecting- 
 
(i) a challenge  made under  sub-section (2) of section 13;  
 
(ii) a plea made under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16.”; 
 
 
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(5) Where the court  adjourns the pr oceedings under sub-section (4) granting 
the  arbitral tribunal an opportunity  to resume its proceedings or take such other 
action and eliminate the grounds referred to in this section or in section 34A for 
setting aside the award, the arbitral tribunal  shall pass appropriate orders within 
 
 
20 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
sixty days of the receipt of the request  made under sub-section (4) by  the Court 
and send the same to the court for its consideration.  
 
(6) Any party aggrieved by the orders of  the arbitral tribunal under sub-section 
(5), shall be entitled to file its objections thereto within thirty days of the receipt 
of the said order from  the arbitral tribunal and the application m ade under sub-
section (1) to set aside the award shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(2) and (3) of section 37A ,  be disposed of by  the  court, after taking into 
account the orders of the arbitral tri bunal made under sub-section (5) and  the 
objections filed under this sub-section.”. 
  
 
 
Insertion of new section 34A 
   
24. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
Additional grounds of challenge  in case of certain awards 
 
“34A. (1) In the case of an arbitral award made in an arbitration other than an 
international arbitration (whether com mercial or not), recourse to the following 
additional grounds can be had in an application for setting aside an award referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 34, namely:- 
 
(a) that there is an error which is appare nt on the face of the arbitral award giving 
rise to a substantial question of law; 
 
(b) that the arbitral award is  an award in respect of w hich reasons have to be given 
under sub-section (3) of section 31 but the arbitral aw ard does  not state the  
reasons. 
  
 (2)   Where the ground referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) is invoked in the 
application filed under sub-section (1) of sec tion 34, the applicant shall file a separate 
application seeking leave of the court to raise the said ground: 
 
Provided that the court shall not grant leave unless it is prim a facie  
of the opinion that all the follow ing conditions are satisfied, 
namely:- 
 
(a) that the determ ination of the question will substantially affect the 
rights of one or more parties; 
 
(b) that the substantial question of law was one which the arbitral 
tribunal was asked to decide; and 
 
(c) that the application m ade for leave identifies the substantial 
question of law to be decided  and states relevant grounds on which 
leave is to be granted. 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
(3) Where a specific question of law  has been referred to the arbitral tribunal, an aw ard 
shall not be set aside on the ground referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1).”. 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section for  section 36 
 
25. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely 
:- 
  
Stay of operation of award or its enforcement    
 
“36.(1) Where the tim e for m aking an application to set aside the arbitral award 
under sub-section (1) of section 34 has expi red, then, subject to the provisions of 
sub-sections (2) to (4), the aw ard shall be enforced under the Code of Civil 
Procedure 1908 (5 of 1908) in the same manner as if it were a decree of the court. 
 
(2) Where an application is filed in the Court under sub section (1) of section 34 
to set aside an arbitral award, the filing of such an application shall not by  itself 
operate as a stay  of the aw ard unless, upon a further application made for that 
purpose, the Court grants stay of the operation of the award in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (3). 
 
 
   (3) On the filing of the application referred to in sub section (2) for stay  of   the 
operation of the award, the Court may, without prejudice to any action it may take 
under sub-section (1) of section 37A and subject to such conditions as it m ay 
deem fit to impose, grant stay of the operation of the arbitral award for reasons in 
brief to be recorded in writing: 
 
Provided that the Court shall, w hile considering the grant of stay,  keep 
the grounds for setting aside the award in mind.   
 
 
(4) The power to impose conditions referred to in sub-section (3) includes the 
power to grant ad interim  measures not onl y against the parties to the award or in 
respect of the property which is the subject matter of the award but also to issue ad 
interim m easures against third parties or in respect of property  w hich is not the 
subject matter of the award, in so far as it is necessary to protect the interests of the 
party in whose favour the award is passed. 
 
 
(5) The ad interim  measures granted under sub-section (4) m ay be confirm ed, 
modified or vacated, as the case m ay be, by the court subject to such conditions, if 
any, as it may deem fit, after hearing the affected persons.”. 
  
 
 
 
 
22 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 37A 
 
26.  After section 37 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
Substantial prejudice to be shown for intervention under sections 34 and 37 
and time limits 
 
“37A (1) The court referred to in sub-section (1) of section 34, w hile dealing with 
an application under that sub-section or th e court referred to in sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) of section 37 w hile dealing with an appeal under any  of those sub-
sections, m ay , if it thinks fit so to do, and after fixing a day  for hearing the 
applicant or appellant or his counsel and hearing him  accordingly if he appears on 
that day, dismiss the application or appeal, as the case may be, without giving notice 
to the respondent ,for reasons in brief to be recorded in writing ,if there are no merits 
in the application or the appeal, as the case may be. 
 
(2) No aw ard passed by  the arbitral tribunal shall be set aside on an application 
under sub-section (1) of section 34 and no order passed by  the arbitral tribunal 
or by  the court shall be set aside in an appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) of section 37, as the case may be, unless substantial prejudice is 
shown. 
 
(3) Every application or appeal, referred to in sub-section (1), shall be disposed of 
within six months from the date of service of notice on the opposite party: 
 
Provided that, while dealing with an application under sub section (1) 
of section 34, if the court adjourns the proceedings under sub-section 
(5) of that section, the period of six m onths shall be reckoned from the 
date of receipt of the order from the arbitral tribunal under that sub-
section” 
 
Substitution of new section for section 42 
 
27. For section 42 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, 
namely :- 
 
Proper court for filing subsequent applications 
 
“42. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsew here in this Part or in any  other 
law for the time being in force, where with  respect to any arbitration agreem ent any 
application under this Part has been made to a court in accordance with  sub-sections 
(2) to (5), then all subsequent applications (other than the applications referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 31A ) arising out  of that agreem ent and the arbitral 
proceedings (hereafter in this section refe rred to as the subsequent applications) 
shall be made  to the same court and in no other court. 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
(2) Where an application is made to a court within the meaning of clause (e) of sub-
section (1) of section 2,the subsequent applications shall be m ade in that court  and 
in no other court. 
 
 
(3) If in a pending action under section 8 before a Judicial authority, an application 
is made, seeking reference to arbitration with respect to an agreem ent, then  the 
subsequent applications shall be made in the following manner, namely:- 
 
(i) where the Judicial authority is  a  court within the m eaning of 
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2, the subsequent 
application shall be made in the said court in which the application 
is made and in no other court; 
 
(ii) where the Judicial authority is a Court which is inferior in grade to 
the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a  district or the 
court of the principal Judge of the City  Civil Court exercising 
original jurisdiction in a city  (hereinafter called the principal 
courts), as the case m ay be, the subsequent application shall be 
made in the said principal Court to which the court where the 
application is made is subordinate and  in no other court; 
 
 
(iii) where the Judicial authority  is a quasi-judicial statutory  authority, 
the subsequent application shall be m ade in the principal Court 
mentioned in clause (ii) within whose territorial lim its the said 
authority is situated  and in no other court. 
 
 
 (4) If in a legal proceeding under section 8A before any of the courts referred to in 
that section, an application is m ade seeking reference to arbitration with respect to 
an agreement, then the subsequent applications shall be m ade  in the following 
manner, namely:- 
 
(i) where the application is m ade in the Supreme Court or in the High 
Court or in the principal Civil  C ourts mentioned in clause (ii) of 
sub-section (3), as the case m ay be, the subsequent application 
shall be m ade in the Court w hich m ade the reference and in no 
other Court; 
 
(ii) where the application is m ade in a Court of coordinate jurisdiction 
or inferior in grade to the Principal Civil courts mentioned in 
clause (ii) of sub-section (3), as  the case m ay be ,  the subsequent 
application shall be m ade in the Principal Court from where the 
legal proceeding was transferred to such court of coordinate 
jurisdiction or to w hich the said court is subordinate, as the case 
may be,  and in no other court. 
 
Explanation 1.- In this sub-section, the expression “ legal proceeding” shall 
have the same meaning as  assigned to it in the Explanation to section 8A. 
 
 
24 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
Explanation 2.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby  declared that in the 
case of arbitral proceedings which have com menced   pursuant to a 
reference made by the Supreme Court or the H igh Court under section 8A  
and awards passed pursuant thereto, the references to “court” wherever it is 
used in this Part shall, except in section 27 and section  31A, be construed 
as references to the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case may be. 
 
      (5)  Where an application seeking reference to arbitration with respect to an 
agreement is made  under section 11, in the Supreme Court or in the H igh Court, as the 
case may be, the  subsequent applications shall be m ade in the Court within the meaning 
of clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 and in no other court. 
   
 
Scheme for panel of arbitrators: 
 
42A. The Chief Justice of India m ay prepare a schem e, for constituting a panel of 
arbitrators to enable either the parties or the Supreme Court or the H igh Court under 
section 11 or the judicial authority under section 8 or the courts referred to in section 8A  
or the parties under section 43A ,as the case m ay be, to appoint arbitrators from  such 
panel and subject to such conditions as may be specified  by the Chief Justice of India in 
that scheme.  
 
 
Special provision  relating to unregis tered partnerships under the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932 as amended by the Maharashtra Amendment Act 1984  
 
42B The provisions of the Indian Partners hip (Maharashtra A mendment) Act 1984, 
(Maharashtra Act 29 of 1984) am ending section 69 of the Indian Partnership A ct, 1932 
in its application to the State of Maharashtra, shall not affect the initiation of  any 
proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 for the purpose of 
enforcement of any right to seek- 
 
(a) the dissolution of a firm; 
 
(b) the settlement of the accounts of a dissolved firm; or 
 
(c )  the realization of   the property of a dissolved firm.” 
 
 
Amendment of section 43 
 
28. In section 43 of the principal Act, 
 
(a) in sub-section (3), the follow ing Explanation shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:- 
 
“Explanation.- For removal of doubts, it is hereby  declared that any  
provision in the arbitration agreem ent w hich provides that any such 
claim shall be barred unless som e step to com mence arbitral 
 
 
25 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
proceedings is taken within a tim e fixed by the agreem ent, shall be 
deemed to be  void from  the date of com mencement of the Indian 
Contract (Amendment) Act 1996.”. 
 
 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(5) In computing the time prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) 
for the commencement of proceedings in relation to any dispute, the period 
between the com mencement of the arbitration and the date of the orders 
mentioned below, shall be excluded ,namely:- 
 
(a) an order of the arbitral tribunal accepting a plea referred to in sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16; 
 
(b) an order under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 37 by the 
court affirm ing an order under clause (a) or an order of the 
Supreme Court on further appeal, if any, affirming the last 
mentioned  order; 
 
(c) an order declaring an arbitra tion agreem ent as null and void or 
inoperative or incapable of being perform ed or as not in existence, 
passed by - 
 
 
(i) the High Court under sub-section (13) of 
section 11 in the case of an arbitration other than an 
international arbitration (whether com mercial or not) 
or by the Supreme Court on further appeal; 
 
(ii)  the Supreme Court under sub-section 
(13) of section 11 in the case of an international 
arbitration (whether commercial or not).” 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
Insertion of new Chapter XI in Part I 
 
29. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
“ CHAPTER XI 
 SINGLE MEMBER FAST TRACK ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL AND FAST TRACK 
ARBITRATION 
 
Resolution of disputes through Fast Track Arbitration 
“43A. (1) The parties to an action, before a judicial authority referred to in section 
8, or a legal proceeding before any of the courts referred to in section 8A, or to an 
arbitration agreement or to an application before the Supreme Court or the High 
Court under section 11, as the case  may be,  may,  at any stage either before or at 
the time of appointment of the arbitral tribunal, agree in writing to have their 
disputes resolved by arbitration in accordance with the provisions of this section, 
sections 43B to 43D and the procedure specified in the Fourth Schedule (hereinafter 
referred to as the Fast Track Arbitration). 
 
(2) If the parties referred to in sub-section (1) agree to  have the disputes 
resolved through Fast Track Arbitration under that sub-section , then the  
arbitral tribunal agreed to between the said parties shall be called  the Fast 
Track Arbitration Tribunal. 
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the arbitration agreement- 
 
 
(i )  the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of  a sole 
arbitrator; 
(ii)  the sole arbitrator shall be  chosen by parties unanimously; 
(iii) the  fee pay able to the arbitrator and  the manner of payment of   
the fee shall be such as m ay be agreed between the sole arbitrator 
and the parties; 
(iv) the procedure laid down in the Fourth Schedule (hereinafter 
referred to as the Fast Track Procedure) shall apply. 
 
 
Other provisions of the Act to apply subject to modifications 
 
43B.  The other provisions of this Part, in so far as they are matters not provided in the 
Fourth Schedule, shall apply  to the Fast Track A rbitration as they  apply to other 
arbitrations subject to the following modifications, namely:- 
 
 
27 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(a) the references to , 
(i) “arbitral tribunal” shall, unless the context 
otherwise requires, be deem ed to include 
references to the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal; and  
(ii) “court” shall be deem ed to be references to the 
High Court , except in sections 27 and 31A; 
(b) in section 33,in sub-sections (1) to (4), for the wo rds “thirty days” 
wherever they occur, the words fifteen days shall be substituted; 
  
(c ) in section 34, 
 
(i) in sub-section (3), for the words “three 
months” the w ords “thirty days” and for 
the words “  thirty  day s” the words 
“fifteen days” shall respectively be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (5), for the words “sixty 
days” the w ords “ thirty day s” shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (6), for the words, “thirty 
days” , the words “ fifteen days shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
(d) in section 37, in sub-section (1), the provision for appeal shall not 
apply to orders referred to in clau ses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 37. 
 
(e) in section 37A, for the w ords “ six m onths”, the w ords “ three 
months” shall be substituted.”. 
 
 
 
Proper court for filing subsequent applications 
  
 43C. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part  or in any  other law  for the tim e 
being in force but subject to sub clause (ii) of clause (a) of section 43B, w here w ith 
respect to an arbitration agreement, any application is m ade or is  required to be m ade 
before a ‘Court’ in the m anner mentioned in this Part, such an application shall be made 
to the ‘High Court’ and all subsequent applications arising out of that agreement and the 
arbitral proceedings shall be made in that High Court and in no other High Court. 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High Court for purposes of this Chapter 
 
43 D. The references to ‘High Court’ in sections 43B and 43C shall be construed as a 
reference to the  High Court within whose te rritorial limits, the principal civil court or 
the court of the principal Judge of the City  Civil Court referred to in clause (e) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 ,as the case may be, is situated.”. 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 82 
 
 
30. Section 82 of the principal A ct shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and 
after sub-section (1) as so renum bered, th e follow ing sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
“(2) Without prejudice to the generality  of the provisions of sub-section (1), rules m ay 
be made in respect of the following, namely:- 
 
(a)   the manner in which the arbitral proceeding shall be conducted; 
(b)  the number of days for which the arbitral proceedings have to be conducted 
continuously on each occasion when the tribunal meets; 
(c) the time schedule and the num ber of hours for which the proceedings have 
to be conducted on each day; 
 (d) the time schedule for the filing of the pleadings for purposes of sub-section 
(1A) of section 23; 
 (e) the time schedule in regard to the recording of evidence and subm ission of 
arguments for purposes of sub-section (1) of section 24; 
(f) the tim e schedule as to the future procedure to be followed by the arbitral 
tribunal, referred to in sub-section (6) of section 29A; 
 
 
(3) The Chief Justice of India m ay issue guidelines to the High Courts in relation to the 
items referred in sub-section (2) and other procedure to be follow ed by  the arbitral 
tribunal so that uniform rules may be made by all the High Courts.” 
 
 
Amendment of section 84 
 
31. In section 84 of the principal A ct, afte r sub-section (1) the follow ing sub section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
 “(1A) Without prejudice to the generality  of the provisions of sub-section (1), 
rules may be made in respect of the following, namely:- 
 
 
29 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(a )  the manner in which the fee of the members of the arbitral tribunal m ay be 
fixed and the procedure relating thereto; 
 
(b) the other particulars required to be entered in the register under clause (f) of 
sub-section (4) of section 31A.”   
 
Transitory provisions 
  
32. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sec tions (2) to (17), the provisions of the 
principal Act as amended by this Act shall be prospective in operation and shall not  in 
particular apply to - 
 
(i) any application m ade by a party to the arbitration agreem ent before the 
Judicial authority referred to in sub-s ection (1) of section 8 of the principal 
Act or to any  appointment made by a judicial authority  under that section 
before the commencement of this Act;  
 
 
(ii) any request m ade to a party or to  the Chief Justice of India or to the 
Chief Justice of a H igh Court under  section 11 of the principal Act before 
the commencement of this Act; 
 
(iii) any appointment of arbitral tr ibunal  m ade before the com mencement 
of this Act under section 11 of the principal A ct by  the parties to the 
arbitration agreement or any  appointm ent m ade under the said section  
before the commencement of this A ct by a party  who is authorized under 
the arbitration agreement to make such appointment without the consent of 
the other party  or parties to the arbitration agreem ent or any appointment 
made by the Chief justice of India or his designate or the Chief Justice of a 
High Court or his designate before the commencement of this Act; 
 
(iv)  any award passed under the principal A ct, before the com mencement 
of this Act. 
 
 
 
(2) Subject to the provisions of  sub-sections (3) to (17), th e provisions of this A ct shall 
apply to arbitration agreements entered into before the com mencement of this Act, 
where no- 
(i)  request for appointment of arbitral tribunal; or 
 
(ii)  application for appointment of arbitral tribunal; or 
          
(iii) appointment of arbitral tribunal,  
 
has been made under the principal Act, before the commencement of this Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
(3) The provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 2 as inserted in the principal 
Act, by clause (ii) of section 2 of this Act, shall apply to- 
 
(i) applications made, before a judicial authority in a legal proceeding under 
section 8 of the principal A ct or be fore a court under section 9 of the 
principal Act, which are pending at the com mencement of this Act in 
connection with the arbitrations of the nature specified in sub-section (2) of 
section 2 of the principal Act; 
 
(ii) awards arising out of arbitrations of the nature specified in sub-section 
(2) of section 2 of the principal A ct passed before the com mencement of 
this Act ,for the purposes of their fi nality under section 35 of the principal 
Act  and enforcement under section 36 of the principal Act.  
 
 (4)  The provisions of sub-sec tion (10) of section 2, as inserted in the principal A ct by 
clause (iii) of section 2 of this Act shall apply to arbitral  proceedings under the principal 
Act, pending before the principal courts referred to in that sub-section, at the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
(5)  The provisions of section 6 of the principal Act, as amended by section 4 of this Act, 
shall apply  to arbitral proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an arbitral 
tribunal, at the commencement of this Act. 
 
 (6) The provisions of sub-sections (4),(5) and (6) of section 9, as inserted in the 
principal Act, by section 8 of this A ct, shall apply to all applications under section 9,  
pending in the court at the commencement of this Act. 
 
 
(7) The provisions of section 10A as inserted in the principal Act, by  section 9 of this 
Act, shall apply to arbitration agreements in relation to which, the requests for 
appointment of arbitral tribunal are pending decision at the date of the commencement 
of this A ct, if the arbitral tribunal has not been appointed at the date of such 
commencement. 
 
 
(8) The provisions of sections 17 of the prin cipal Act, as substituted  by  section 14 of 
this Act shall apply  to arbitral proceedings under the principal Act, before an arbitral 
tribunal, pending at the commencement of this Act. 
 
(9) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 20 of the principal Act, as substituted by  
section 15 of this Act, shall apply  to arb itration agreem ents in relation to which,  
requests for appointment of arbitral tribunal  and applications for appointment of arbitral 
tribunal, are pending decision at the date of the commencement of this Act, if the arbitral 
tribunal has not been appointed by the date of such commencement . 
  
(10) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 23 of th e principal Act, as amended by 
section 16 of this Act, shall apply  to ar bitral proceedings under the principal Act, 
pending before an arbitral tribunal at th e com mencement of this A ct, w here the 
claim,defence or rejoinder statements have not been filed before   the arbitral tribunal at 
the date of such commencement. 
 
 
31 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(11)  The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 24 of the principal A ct, as amended by 
section 17 of this A ct and of  sub-section(1A ) of section 24 of the principal A ct, as 
inserted by that section, shall apply  to arbitral proceedings under the principal Act, 
pending before an arbitral tribunal at the commencement of this Act where oral evidence 
or oral argum ents as the case m ay be, have not been com pleted at the date of such 
commencement. 
 
(12) The provisions of section 24A, as inserted in the principal Act, by section 18 of this 
Act , shall apply to the orders of the arbitral tribunal, if any ,passed under sections 17,23 
and 24 of the principal A ct before the com mencement of this Act, where such orders 
have not been com plied with at the date of such com mencement by the party  to w hom 
they were directed. 
 
(13) The provisions of section 28 of the principal A ct, as amended by section 19 of this 
Act, shall apply to arbitration agreements in relation to w hich, requests for appointm ent 
of arbitral tribunal  and applications for appointment of arbitral tribunal are pending 
decision at the date of the commencement of this Act, if the arbitral tribunal has not been 
appointed by the date of such commencement . 
 
 
 
(14)  The provisions of- 
   
(i) sub-section (3) of section 29 ,as inserted in the principal A ct by  
section 20 of this Act ; 
(ii) section 31A , as inserted in th e principal A ct by section 22 of this 
Act ; 
(iii) section 34, as amended by section 23 of this Act; 
(iv)section 34A , as inserted in the principal Act by section 24 of this 
Act, 
shall apply  to arbitral proceedings under the principal Act pending before the arbitral 
tribunal at the commencement of this Act, if  awards have not been  passed at the date of 
such commencement. 
 
(15) The provisions of section 36 of the principal Act as amended by section 25 of this 
Act shall apply to all aw ards made under the principal A ct pending enforcem ent at the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
 
(16) The provisions of sub-s ections (1) and (2) of section 37A , as inserted in  the 
principal Act, by section 26 of this A ct shall apply to applications under sub-section (1) 
of  section 34 of the principal A ct and a ppeals under section 37 of the principal Act  
pending at the commencement of this Act if no notice has been issued by the court under 
sub-section (1) of section 34 of the principal Act or under section 37 of the principal Act 
before the date of such commencement: 
 
   Provided that where notice has been issued by the court in such 
application or appeal, the provisions of sub- section (1) of section 37A  of the principal 
Act shall not apply.   
 
 
32 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(17) The provisions of s ub-section (5) of section 43, as inserted in the principal Act, by 
clause (b) of section 28 of this A ct, shall apply  to the orders referred to in that sub-
section  if such orders are passed after the com mencement of this Act, in arbitral 
proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an arbitral tribunal at such 
commencement. 
   
Speeding up of all proceedings and time limit for passing awards  
33. (1). All arbitral proceedings pending  at the commencement  of this Act, before 
an arbitral tribunal appointed under the principal Act, for more than three years from 
the date of  commencement  of such proceedings, shall be completed within a further 
period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act, or within such 
extended period as specified in sub sections (2) and (3): 
 
   Provided that where a period of three years has not elapsed 
from the date of commencement of such proceedings at  the date of commencement 
of this Act, the proceedings shall be completed within a further period of six months 
reckoned from the date of expiry of three years of the commencement of the arbitral 
proceedings or within such extended period as specified in sub sections (2) and (3).   
 
 
(2) If the award is not made within the further period of one year or six 
months as the case may be, specified in sub section (1), the arbitral 
proceedings shall, subject to the provisions of sub section (3), stand 
suspended until an application for extension is made to the Court by any 
party to the arbitration or where none of the parties has made an application 
as aforesaid, until such an application is made by the arbitral tribunal.  
 
(3)  The provisions of sub sections (4) to (8) of section 29A, as inserted in 
the principal Act, by section 21 of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply for 
the disposal of application referred to in sub section (2), with a view to speed 
up the arbitral proceedings, till the award is passed.  
 
(4) Where applications under sub section (1) of section 34 of the principal 
Act as amended by section 23 of this Act and appeals under sub section (1) of 
section 37 of the principal Act, as the case may be, are pending before any of 
the Courts referred to in those sub-sections, on the date of commencement of 
this Act, they shall be disposed of within six months from the date of such 
commencement.  
 
Provided that while dealing with an application under sub 
section (1) of section 34 of the principal Act, if the Court adjourns the 
proceedings under sub section (5) of that section, the period of six 
months shall be reckoned from the date of receipt of the order from 
the arbitral tribunal under that sub section. 
 
 
33 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(5) Where appeals under sub section (2) of section 37 of the principal Act 
are pending before any Court, on the date  of commencement of this Act, they 
shall be disposed of within three m onths from  the date of such 
commencement. 
 
Speeding up of all proceedings and ti me limit for passing aw ards under 
the  Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)  
 
34. (1) The provisions of sections 6,23 and 24 of the principal Act as 
amended respectively by sections 4, 16 and 17 of this Act, shall so far as m ay 
be, apply to arbitral proceedings under the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940) 
(hereinafter called the “repealed Act”),  pending at the commencement of this 
Act, and shall override any provisions  of the repealed Act, which are 
inconsistent with the said sections. 
 
(2) In the case of non-com pliance w ith any order passed by the sole 
arbitrator or arbitrators under the provi sions of the repealed Act or orders 
passed under sub section (1), the sole arbitrator or arbitrators, as the case m ay 
be, appointed under the repealed Act, m ay pass orders under section 24A of 
the principal Act, as inserted by section 18 of this Act. 
 
(3) In the case of non-com pliance with any perem ptory order passed by 
the sole arbitrator or arbitrators under sub section (2), the Court, within the 
meaning of clause (c ) of section 2 or section 21 of the repealed Act, as the 
case m ay be, m ay pass orders under sec tion 24B of the principal Act, as 
inserted by section 18 of this Act. 
 
(4) Where arbitral proceedings are pe nding before the sole arbitrator or 
arbitrators appointed under the repealed  Act, at the com mencement of this 
Act, the proceedings shall be com pleted within a further period of one year 
from the date of  commencement of this Act, or within such extended period 
as specified in sub sections (5) and (6):  
 
Provided that where the arbitral proceedings are stayed 
by order of a court, the period during which the proceedings 
are so stayed shall be excluded while com puting the said 
period of one year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
(5) If the award is not m ade with in the further period of one year 
specified in sub section (4), the arbitr al proceedings shall, subject to the 
provisions of  sub section (6), stand suspended until an application f or 
extension is made to the Court referred to in sub section (3), by any party to 
the arbitration, or where none of the parties has m ade an application as 
aforesaid, until such an application is made by the sole arbitrator or the 
arbitrators, as the case may be. 
 
(6)  The provisions of sub sections (4) to (8) of section 29A as inserted in 
the principal Act, by section 21 of this Ac t, shall, so far as m ay be, apply to 
the Court referred to in sub section (3), for the disposal of the application 
referred to in sub section (5), with  a view to speed up the arbitral 
proceedings, till the award is passed.  
 
(7)  Where applications to make the award a rule of court or objections are 
filed to set aside the award, under the repealed Act, or any other application 
or any appeal filed under section 39 of the repealed Act, are pending before 
any Court referred to in sub section (3),  on the date of commencement of this 
Act, they shall be disposed of  within a period of one year from  the date of 
such commencement, in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act. 
 
(8)  Where any appeals or revision applications arising out of interim  
orders passed by the Courts referred to in sub section (3) are pending at the 
commencement of this Act, under the Code  of Civil Procedure (5 of 1908) or 
under the repealed Act, in connection with arbitral proceedings arising under 
the repealed Act, or where the arbitral  proceedings are under orders of stay, 
they shall be disposed of within a peri od of six months from the date of such 
commencement, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the repealed Act, as the case may be. 
 
(9)  The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith containe d in sub-section (2) of section 85 of 
the principal Act. 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
Insertion of new Schedule 
35. After the Third Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be 
inserted namely:- 
“The Fourth Schedule  
Fast Track Arbitration 
   [See Part I, Chapter XI ] 
 
Constitution of Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal 
 
 1. (1) For the purposes of  Fast Track Arbitrations under sub-section (1) of section 43 A, 
the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall be deemed to be constituted with effect from the 
date on which the parties after obtaining the consent of the sole arbitrator , agree in 
writing that the sole arbitrator shall be the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal under sub-
section (1) of section 43A. 
 
(2) Parties shall communicate the said agreement  to the sole arbitrator on the same day.  
 
Procedure to apply from date of constitution of Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal 
 
2. The procedure specified  in this Schedule shall, with effect from the date of the 
constitution of the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal, apply to all Fast Track Arbitrations 
under sub-section (1) of section 43 A. 
 
 
Procedure 
 
3. (1) Within fifteen day s of the constitution of the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal, the 
person w ho has raised the dispute (hereinafter referred to as the claim ant) shall send 
simultaneously to the tribunal and the opposite parties (hereinafter referred to as the 
respondents)- 
(a) a claim statement containing the facts, the points in issue and the 
relief claimed; 
(b) documentary evidence, if any, in support of his case; 
(c) where reliance is placed on the testimony of any witness (including 
that of a party) a copy of the witness’s affidavit in writing; 
(d) where reliance is placed on the opinion of an expert, the particulars 
relating to that expert, his qualifications and experience, and a copy 
of his opinion; 
(e) list of interrogatories, if any; 
(f) application for discovery or production of docum ents, if any , 
mentioning their relevancy; 
(g) full address, including e-mail or fax, telephone num bers, if any, of 
all claim ants and of all the parties, for the purpose of expediting 
communication and correspondence; 
 
 
 
36 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(h) any other material considered relevant by the applicant; 
 
(2) The respondent shall, within fifteen days after receipt of the claim statement 
and the documents referred to in sub-paragraph (1), sim ultaneously send to 
the Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal as w ell as to the claimant, his defence 
statement, together with docum entary evidence, witness testim ony by  
affidavit (including that of a party) and expert opinion, if any , in support 
thereof, together with counter claims, if any, supported by documents.  
 
(3) The  procedure specified in this Schedule shall apply to such counter claims 
as they apply to a claim. 
(4) Within fifteen days of the receipt of the defence statement or of the counter 
claims, the claim ant shall send to the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal and to 
the respondents his rejoinder and statement of defence to the counter claim. 
(5) Within fifteen day s of the receipt of the defence statem ent to the counter 
claim, the respondent shall sim ultaneously send his rejoinder to the said 
statement, to the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal as well as to the claimant. 
(6) In case discovery or production of documents is allow ed, the parties shall 
be permitted to submit their supplem entary statements, if any , to the Fast 
Track A rbitral Tribunal w ithin a specified period and to simultaneously 
send copies thereof to each other. 
(7) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall decide the disputes on the basis of 
the pleadings and documents, affidavits of evidence, expert opinion, if any , 
and the written submission filed by the parties. 
(8)  The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal m ay perm it any  w itness to be orally  
questioned and lay  down the m anner in w hich evidence shall be recorded  
or for receiving affidavits in lieu of oral evidence. 
(9) The Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal may otherwise permit oral evidence to be 
adduced, if it considers that any request for oral evidence by any party is 
justified or where the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal itself considers that such 
oral evidence is necessary. 
(10) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may, in addition, call for any  further 
information or clarification from the parties in addition to the pleadings, 
documents and evidence placed before it. 
 
 
Representation by Counsel 
 
4. The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall perm it the parties to appear and conduct the 
case personally or through their counsel or by  any person duly authorized by the parties 
to represent them. 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
Written notes of arguments or oral arguments 
 
 5. After the conclusion of the evidence, the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may direct all 
the parties to file their written notes of argum ent or may, at its discretion, in addition 
permit oral argum ents and shall fix a tim e schedule therefor and may also restrict the 
length of oral arguments. 
 . 
 
Conduct of proceedings 
 
6. (1) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall conduct its proceedings in such a m anner 
that the arbitral proceedings are, as far as  possible, taken up day after day, at least 
continuously for three days on each occasion. 
 
(2) The Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal shall ordinarily  fix the tim e schedule in such a 
manner so that the proceedings m ay be conducted continuously  from 10.30 A.M. to 1 
P.M. and 2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. every day  
 
Parties to be  bound by the procedure and time schedule 
 
7. The  time schedule fixed under  paragraphs 3 and 5  and the procedure 
specified under paragraph 6 by Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal , shall be binding on 
the parties.  
 
 
Consultation of experts 
 
8. (1) At any time during the course of arbitr ation and before the passing of the award, 
the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may, at its discretion, if need be, consult any expert or 
technically qualified person or a qualified accountant for assistance in relation to the 
subject matter in dispute, at the expense of the parties, and shall communicate the report 
of the above said person to the parties to enable them to file their response. 
 
(2) If the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal thereafter considers on its own or on the   request  
of parties that any  clarification or exam ination of the above said persons referred to in 
sub-paragraph (1) or examination of any other person is necessary , it may call upon the 
said person to clarify in w riting or to call him  or such other person as a w itness for 
necessary examination. 
 
Procedure in cases of default by parties 
  
9. (1) In case there is default on the part of any  party  to adhere to the tim e lim its 
specified in this Schedule or are fixed by  th e Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal or there is 
violation of any  interim orders or directions of the Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal issued 
under section 17 or under this Schedule, the Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal m ay pass 
peremptory orders against the defaulting party  giving further tim e for com pliance 
 
 
38 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
including perem ptory orders to provide appr opriate security  in connection with an 
interim order or direction.  
 
(2)  In case the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that a party to the    arbitration is  
unduly or deliberately  delaying the arbitral proceedings, or  the im plementation of the 
peremptory orders, the Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal m ay impose such costs as it may 
deem fit on the defaulting party  or m ay pass an order striking out the pleadings of the 
party concerned or excluding m aterial or draw  adverse inference against the said party 
and in case security  for costs of arbitra tion  is not furnished as required under sub 
paragraph (1), the claim may be dismissed. 
 
 
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of  sub-paragraph (2), the Fast Track A rbitral 
Tribunal may dismiss the claim if the claimant does not effectively prosecute the arbitral 
proceedings or file the papers within the tim e granted or neglects or refuses to obey the 
peremptory orders of the tribunal or to pay  the dues or deposits as ordered by  the Fast 
Track Arbitral Tribunal: 
 
Provided that failure to file a statem ent of defence to the claim 
statement or to the counter claim  shall not by  itself be treated as an 
admission of the allegations in the claim  statement or in the counter claim , 
as the case may be. 
 
(4)  If the opposite party  does not file   its defence or does not effectively  prosecute its 
defence or file the papers within the tim e granted or refuses to obey  the perem ptory 
orders of the tribunal, the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may make an ex parte award. 
 
 
 
Fast Track Award to be passed in six months 
 
10. (1) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall pass an award within six months from the 
date of the constitution of the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal or within such extended 
period as specified in sub paragraphs (2) to (4). 
 
 (2) The parties m ay, by consent, extend the period in sub-paragraph (1), by a further 
period not exceeding three months. 
 
 
   (3)  If the Fast Track A rbitration Award is not  made within the period specified under 
sub-paragraph (1) and the period agreed to by the parties under sub-paragraph (2), the 
arbitration proceeding shall, subject to th e provisions of sub-paragraph (4), stand 
suspended until an application for extension is m ade to the High Court by any party to 
the Fast Track Arbitration  or where none of the partie s makes an application as 
foresaid, until such an application is made by the arbitral tribunal. 
 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (4) to (8) of section 29A shall, so far as 
may be, apply to the High Court for the disposal of application referred to in 
sub paragraph (3), till the award is passed. 
 
 
39 
 
 
 

 
Law Commission of India;  176th Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996:Annexure-I 
 
 
 
Fast Track Award to contain reasons 
 
11. The Fast Track A rbitral Tribunal shall pass an award and give reasons for its award 
keeping in mind the time limit referred to in paragraph 10 unless it is agreed between 
parties that no reasons need be given or the award is based on settlement of disputes.” 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 

 234
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consultation paper on review of working of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 
 
Arbitration & Conciliation Act , 1996 
CHAPTER I 
1.1 Broad framework of the Act of 1996 and certain drawbacks experienced in its 
working:- 
The Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 which came into force on 22.8.96 is an Act to 
consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, international 
commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards (as also define the 
law relating to conciliation) and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 The Act is based on the Model Law (a set of 36 Articles) which was drafted by a 
working group of the UN and was finally adopted by the U.N. Commission on 
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) on June 21, 1985.  The Resolution of the UN 
General Assembly  

 235
__________________________________________________ 
See at the end summary of proposals 
 
recommended that all countries give due consideration to the Model Law, in view of 
the desirability of uniformity of the law of arbitral procedures and the specific needs of 
international commercial practice. 
 While the Model Law was thus drafted to govern all international arbitration, the 
Act of 1996 stated in its preamble that 
 “It is expedient to make law respecting arbitration and conciliation taking into 
account the aforesaid Model Law and Rules.” 
And by sec.85 of the new Act, the old Arbitration Act, 1940 (relating to domestic 
arbitration) and also the Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937 and the 
Foreign Award (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961, (relating to international 
arbitration) were repealed, thus enabling the Act of 1996 to govern both domestic and 
international arbitration. 
 Part I  of the Act entitled ‘Arbitration’ is general (and contains chapters I to X)  
while Part II deals with ‘Enforcement of Certain Foreign Awards  (and Chapter I thereof 
deals with New York Convention Awards and Chapter II deals with Geneva 
Convention Awards). 
 Part III of the Act of 1996 deals with Conciliation with which we are not concerned 
in this Paper.  Part IV deals with supplemental provisions.  
 The Act of 1996 contains three Schedules.  The First Schedule refers to 
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitration Awards (see 
sec.44); the Second Schedule refers to the Protocol on Arbitration Clause (see sec.53) 

 236
and the Third Schedule to the Convention on the execution of foreign Arbitration 
Awards. 
 Although the Model Law does not take t he form of a treaty, legislators who 
decided to review their arbitration laws since 1985 have all given ‘due consideration’ to 
the UNCITRAL Model Law. 
 Some countries adopted certain provisions of the Model Law, but considered that 
they could extend, simplify or liberalise the Model Law.  Examples include the 
Netherlands in 1986 and Switzerland in 1987.  Because of the specificity of their legal 
systems,  Italy and England decided not to follow the Model Law closely.  By March 
31, 1999, a total of 29 countries (including Australia, Bahrain, Bermuda, Bulgaria, 
Canada, Cypres, Egypt, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iran, Ireland, 
Kenya, Lithunia, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman, Peru, the Russian 
Federation, Scotland, Sweden, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Ukraine, Zimbabwe along with 
Hong Kong, 8 American States and all 12  Canadian provinces and territories) adopted 
legislation based to some extent on the UNCITRAL Model Law. (see website for 
updating:  http//www.un.or.at/uncitral) (International Commercial Arbitration by 
Fouchasrd, Gaillard, Goldman, 1999, page 109, para 2.5) 
 The importance of  this gradual process of harmonization is that court decisions 
applying Model Law, from all the countries that have adopted or adapted it, have been 
published since 1992.  There is thus a growing body of case law concerning the 
interpretation of the Model Law (see CLOUT. Available on Website  
http://www.ur.or 
at/uncitral and CLOUT. XXII Y.B.Com. Arb. 297-300 (1997)(ibid p.109, para 2.5). 
 
 

 237
1.2 Representations for amendment of the Act 
 Ever since the Act of 1996 came into force on  22.8.96, demands have been 
voiced requesting  amendments to the provisions of the 1996 Act, in so far as they 
related to Arbitration.  It was considered by the Law Commission in 1998, that it would 
not be appropriate to take up amendments of the Act of 1996 in haste and that it would 
be desirable to wait and see how the courts would grapple with the situations that 
might arise. 
 Quite recently, representations have come before the Commission pointing out 
that in certain areas, the courts have found great difficulty in the interpretation or 
implementation of the some of the provisions of the Act.  It has been stated that in 
several cases, parties have been deprived of a right to seek prompt interim relief 
pending proceedings  in international arbitration agreements,  where the seat of 
arbitration is outside India.  This, it is said, has resulted in the Indian parties not being 
able to obtain any interim orders before commencement of international arbitration or 
during or after conclusion of the proceedings, from Indian courts.  In several cases the 
awards might ultimately remain only on paper, at the end of the day.  This has led to 
conflicting judgments in the High Courts.  Likewise divergent views have been 
expressed as to the stage at which jurisdictional issues could be decided and also as 
to whether orders of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee or that of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court or his nominee, as the case may be, appointing arbitrators – 
should be treated as administrative orders or as judicial orders.  It has also been 
pointed out that where the arbitrator rejects objections relating to jurisdiction or rejects 
pleas of bias, by way of interim decision, no immediate right of appeal is provided and 
parties have to go ahead with the arbitration proceedings till the award is made.  Even 

 238
thereafter, the objection relating to bias is not included in the list of grounds specified 
in Sec. 34 or under Sec. 37 (2).   It has again been pointed out that while an appeal is 
permitted where the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling 
within the terms of the submission or matters beyond the scope of the submission for 
arbitration, no appeal is provided in a case where the arbitrator omits or refuses, in 
spite of  an application under sec.33(4) to decide an issue which definitely arises out of 
the pleadings of the parties.  Several other drawbacks have been pointed out in 
various representations.  The Commission felt that the Bar, the litigants and other 
arbitral institutions might have experienced other difficulties and might be waiting for 
an opportune time to seek appropriate amendments. 
 In the light of the above, the Commission felt that now , five years after the 
enactment of the legislation, it was appropriate to review its working by obtaining 
further views from all concerned and propose the requisite amendments to the Act. 
 
1.3 Objectives of the 1996 Act – speedy arbitration and least court intervention:- 
 The 1996 Act was the result of recommendations for reform, particularly in the 
matter of speeding up the arbitration process and reducing intervention by the court.  
In 
Guru Nanak Foundation Vs. Rattan Singh (AIR 1981 SC 2075)(at 2076-77), the 
Supreme Court while referring to the 1940 Act observed that “the way in which the 
proceedings under the Act are conducted and without an exception challenged in 
courts, has made lawyers laugh and legal philosophers weep” in view of “unending 
prolixity, at every stage providing a legal trap to the unwary.”  The Public Accounts 
Committee of the Lok Sabha had also commented adversely about arbitration in India 
(9
th Rep. 1977-78  pp  201-202).  The matter came up before the Law Commission in 

 239
its 76th Report, which recommended certain amendments, e.g., a proviso should be 
inserted in section 28 of the Act of 1940 forbidding in respect of the time for making 
the award an extension beyond one year, except for special and adequate reasons to 
be recorded. 
  
In Food Corporation of India Vs. Joginderpal (AIR 1981 SC 2075)(at 2076-77),  the 
Supreme Court observed that the law of arbitration must be ‘simple, less technical and 
more responsible to the actual reality of the situations’, ‘responsive to the canons of 
justice and fair play.” 
 A reading of the 1996 Act shows that speedy arbitration and least court 
intervention are its main objectives.  In fact sec.5 of the Act declares: 
“Sec.5: Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
in matters covered by this Part (i.e. Part I), no judicial authority shall intervene except 
where so provided in this Part.” 
This basic provision is found globally in the laws of  all the countries which have 
adopted the UNCITRAL Model 
The provisions as to waiving objections etc. contained in Sections  4, 12, 13(4), 16(5),  
19(1)  and 25 amply demonstrate that the objective is to see that the disputes are not 
unduly prolonged.  In fact, the UNICTRAL Model, wherever it permitted intervention by 
court, by way of appeal, before the passing of the award, left it to the arbitrator, to 
proceed or not to proceed further.  This was intended to see that the appeal 
proceedings are not allowed to be unreasonably delayed. 
 1.4  Necessity to adhere to the objectives of speedy disposal  and  least 
court intervention. 

 240
It is, therefore, necessary to bear in mind that the proposed amendments do not 
result in permitting parties to prolong the arbitration proceedings unnecessarily.  While 
considering the need for amendments, the Commission has therefore not deviated 
from this main objective of the Act except to the extent that the UNCITRAL Model has 
itself permitted intervention, such as where issues going to the root of the arbitration 
proceedings are decided.  While dealing with such exceptional issues, the Commission 
has also kept in mind the manner in which the new statutes in other countries,  which 
have adopted the UNCITRAL Model either wholly or partly,  tackled the issues and the 
manner in which they have balanced the objectives of least court intervention and the 
final disposal of preliminary questions which go to the root of the arbitration 
proceedings, by way of appeal to the court. 
  
 
CHAPTER II 
 
2. Proposals on which views are invited 
 
2.1 Does Section 5 of 1996 Act require any amendment ? 
It has been pointed out that in Sec.5 of the Act which prevents intervention 
by the Court during the pendency of arbitration, the opening clause, 
“notwithstanding anything contained in other law for the time being in 
force” is not contained in the Mode l Law. We have already extracted 
Sec.5 in Chapter I  under point 1.3. 
Art.5  of the Model law reads thus: 
“Art.5. In matters governed by this  law, no court shall intervene 
except where so provided in the law” 

 241
We find that arbitration statutes in several countries are 
similar to Art.5 of the Model law and do not contain the words, “not 
withstanding anything contained in other law for the time being in force”. See 
for example Art.5 of the Canadian Act 1986, Section 5 of the German Act 
1998, Art. 6 of the Korean Act 1999, Art .5 of the Irish Act1998 and Art.5 of 
the Zimbabwe Act 1996 etc., 
While it is true that the non-obsta nte clause in Section 5 of the 
1996 Act do not find place in Art.5 of  the Model law and statutes 
in other countries, perhaps the same result is achieved by the words 
“except where so provided in the law”  
The object of the “non-obstante” clause  in Section 5 of the Indian Act 
appears to be by way of abundant cauti on and the addition of these words in 
Section 5 does not appear to make any difference.  
 
2.2. Whether section 8 should be confined to ‘courts’ by omitting the 
word ‘judicial authority’, and issues of jurisdiction arising under 
section 8 in suits and other proceedings where 
defendant/respondent relies upon an arbitration agreement. 
2.2.1  Section 8 of the 1996 Act reads as follows:- 
“Sec.8(1) A judicial authority befo re which an action is brought in a 
matter which is the subject of an arb itration agreement shall, if a party 

 242
so applies not later than when submitting his first statement on the 
substance of the dispute, refer the parties to arbitration.  
(2) The application referred to in  sub-section (1) shall not be 
entertained unless it is accompanie d by the original arbitration 
agreement or a duly certified copy thereof. 
(3) Notwithstanding that an app lication has been made under sub-
section.(1) and that the issue is pe nding before the judicial authority, 
an arbitration may be commenced or  continued and an arbitral award 
made” 
 
Section 8(1) of the Act uses the word ‘judicial authority’. In Skypack 
Couriers Ltd.  Vs. N.K.Modi, [2000] (5) SCC 294: 2000(3)Arb. Law 
Reporter 160, the Supreme Court of I ndia assumed without finally deciding 
the question, that the consumer fora  created under the Consumer 
(Protection) Act, are competent to refer disputes to arbitration.  The court 
held that, even so, the consumer for a could not refer disputes for decision of 
third parties or experts and make such decisions, decrees  nor could the fora 
deny the right to file objections. 
 Earlier, in M/s Fair Air Engineers Private Limited v. N.K. Modi,  AIR 
1997 SC 533 the  Supreme Court dealt with sec. 34 of the 1940 Act and as to 

 243
whether the word ‘judicial authority’ in  the said section could entertain a 
plea that the subject matter of dis pute is covered by the arbitration 
agreement. 
 In case the words ‘judicial author ity’ in sec.8 are to include the 
consumer fora or Debt Recovery Tri bunals dealing with debts due to Bank 
or other quasi judicial tribunals and if they are to decide whether the disputes 
are to be referred to arbitration (or as proposed below, that  they can decide 
disputes about whether the arbitra tion agreement is ‘null and void, 
inoperative or not enforceable) then, it may indeed be necessary to decide 
which authority will decide the corr ectness of the decision or whether  
parties should resort to Art.227 of the Constitution of India or an appeal is to 
be provided under this Act.  It is likely that if the word ‘judicial authority’ is 
to include quasi judicial tribunals, se veral other problems arise.  It is 
therefore considered that  instead, the word ‘judici al authority’ be replaced 
by the word ‘court as in the Model Law and provide and Explanation under 
sec.8 that the word ‘court’ in this s ection shall mean the court in which the 
suit is filed. 
 
 It will also be noticed that in as much as Sec.8(3) of the Indian Act 
uses the word ‘may’ enabling arbitration proceedings to go on, it will be 

 244
open to the arbitrators either to go on or await the decision of the Civil 
Court. If in Sec.8(1) of the Indian  Act the words “unless it finds the 
agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.” 
are introduced, it will be open to the ar bitrators either to proceed with 
arbitration or not to proceed with arbitration pending the decision of the 
Civil Court on the question as to whethe r the arbitration agreement is “null 
and void or inoperative or not enforceable.”  
 
 In cases where suits are filed on th e original side of the High Court 
normally a single Judge of the High C ourt can decide the question whether 
the arbitration agreement is null and void etc. But this may result in an 
appeal to a Division Bench and a fu rther S.L.P. under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India. It would theref ore be advisable if, whenever such 
issues arise under Sec.8 on the original  side of the High Court they are 
decided by a Division Bench of the Hi gh Court both in the case of domestic 
and international arbitrations. 
 
 Where suits are filed in courts subordinate to the High Court, the 
issues as to whether the arbitration agreement is null and void etc can first be 

 245
allowed to be decided by the same Cour t and an appeal could be provided to 
the High Court to be decided by a Division Bench of the High Court. 
  
 
 
2.2.2 The next question is whether S ec.8(1) of the 1996 Act should contain 
the words, “unless it finds that the ag reement is null and void, inoperative or 
incapable of being performed”  
Art.8(1) of the Model law reads as follows: 
“Art.8(1) A Court before which an action is brought in a matter 
which is the subject of an arbitr ation agreement shall, if a party 
so requests not later than when submitting his first statement on 
the substance of the dispute, re fer the parties to arbitration 
unless it finds that the agreement is null an void, inoperative or 
incapable of being performed. 
 
2) Where an action referred to in Para.1 of this article has been 
brought, arbitral proceedings may nevertheless be commenced 
or continued and award may be made, while the issue is 
pending before the Court.”  

 246
  
The words “unless it finds that the agreement is null and void, 
inoperative or incapable of being performed” are found not only in Art.8(1) 
of the Model law but in corresponding artic les of the arbitration statutes in 
various countries which have  adopted the Model law. See in this connection 
Sec.1032 of the German Act 1998, Article  9 of the Korean Act 1999, Art.8 
of the Canadian Act 1986, Article 8 of  the Zimbabwe Act 1996, and  Sec.15 
of the British Columbia Act 1996 on whic h the Indian Act 1996 is said to 
have been modelled. (See Dr.P.C.Rao’s Commentary on the Act at Page.9).  
Further almost all the above statut es do not contain any provision for 
stay of the proceedings in the Civil Court pending a decision by the Court on 
the question whether the arbitrati on agreement is null and void or 
inoperative or not enforceable. Howeve r, the English Arbitration Act 1996 
continues to have a provision similar to Sec.34 of the Old Indian Act of 
1940. Sec.9 of the English Act 1996 reads as follows: 
“Sec.9: A party to an arbitration agreement against whom legal 
proceedings are brought (whether  by way of claim or counter-
claim) in respect of a matter wh ich under the agreement is to be 
referred to arbitration may (upon notice to the other parties to 
the proceedings) apply to the C ourt in which the proceedings 

 247
have been brought to stay the proceedings so far as they 
concern that matter. 
(2) An application may be made notwithstanding that the matter 
is to be referred to arbitration only after the exhaustion of other 
dispute resolution proceedings. 
(3) An application may not be made by a person before taking 
the appropriate procedural stay  (if any) to acknowledge the 
legal proceedings against him or after he has take n any step in 
those proceedings to answer the substantive claim.  
(4) On an application under this Section, the Court shall grant a 
stay unless satisfied that the arbitration agreement is null and 
void, inoperative,  or incapable of being performed. 
(5) If the Court refuses to stay the legal proceedings, any 
provision that an award is a condition precedent to the bringing 
of legal proceedings in respect of  any matter is of no effect in 
relation to those proceedings”. 
The above Sec.9 of the English Act is applicable to an international as 
well as domestic arbitration. However,  we may mention that Part II of UK 
Act which provides for certain modificati ons to the provisions in Part I in 

 248
their application to domestic arbitrations has not yet been brought into force.  
Even so, we may refer to Sec.86 in Part – II, which reads as follows: 
“S.86. (1) In section 9 (Stay of legal proceedings), sub-Section 
(4) (Stay unless the arbitrati on agreement is null and void, 
inoperative, or incapable of be ing performed) does not apply to 
a domestic arbitration agreement. 
(2) On an application under the Section in relation to a domestic 
arbitration agreement the Cour t shall grant a stay unless 
satisfied- 
(a) that the arbitration agreement is null and void, 
inoperative, or incapable of being performed, or 
(b) that there are other sufficient grounds for not 
requiring the parties to abide by the arbitration 
agreement. 
(3) The Court may treat as a sufficient ground under Sub-
Section 2(b) the fact that th e applicant is or was at any 
material time not ready and willing to do all things and 
necessary for the proper conduct of  the arbitration or of any 
other dispute resolution procedur es required to be exhausted 
before resorting to arbitration  

 249
(4) For the purposes of this section the question whether an 
arbitration agreement is a dom estic  arbitration agreement 
shall be determined by referen ce to the facts at the time the 
legal proceedings are commenced”. 
In the light of the above provisions of Sec.8 of the Indian Act 
and Article 8 of the Model law a nd Sections 9 and 86 of the U.K.Act 
1996, the following important issues arise for consideration.  
(A) The Supreme Court has decide d in P.Anandagajapati Raju Vs. 
P.V.G.Raju 2000(4) SCC 539 = AIR 2000 SC 1086 that under Section 
8(1) of the 1996 Act if a defendant in  a suit pleads the existence of an 
arbitration agreement, it is mandatory for the Civil Court to refer the 
parties to arbitration inasmuch as the discretionary power vested in the 
Court under Section 34 of the Old Act of 1940 is no longer under the 
Act of 1996.  Of course, in this cas e, the Supreme Court did not have 
the occasion to go into the question whether the expression 
“arbitration agreement” in Section 8 means a valid and enforceable 
agreement? 
So far as English Act of 1996 is  concerned, Sec.86 retains the 
discretionary power for domestic arbitration.  It appears that otherwise 
under Sec.9 there is no discretion vested in the Court.  

 250
The first question therefore is whether the discretionary power 
of the Court which was available under section 34 of the Old Act of 
1940 could be restored only so far as domestic arbitration cases are 
concerned as in England. In other words in a domestic arbitration the 
Court will not entertain the plea base d on an arbitration clause raised 
by the defendant if he had not been ready and willing earlier for 
arbitration or if questions of fraud aris e or if serious issues of fact or 
law arise etc. However so far as inte rnational arbitration is concerned, 
all countries which have followed the Model law  make it mandatory 
for the Court to refer the disputes to  arbitration if a plea is raised by 
the defendant on the basis of an ar bitration agreement which is not 
null and void, inoperative or not enfo rceable. We can also retain the 
mandatory provision so far as international arbitration is concerned.  
(B) The next question is with rega rd to the denial of the power 
under Section 8 (1) of the Indian Act to go into the questions as 
to whether the arbitration clause  is “void or inoperative or not 
enforceable”. When such a power  is granted to the Court under 
the Model law and when such  a power is found in the 
arbitration statutes of almost all countries following the Model 

 251
law, there appears to be no good reason why such a power 
should be denied to the judicial authorities in India. 
 
C) It will also be noticed that in as mu ch as Sec.8(3) of the Indian Act uses 
the word ‘may’ enabling arbitration pr oceedings to go on, it will be open to 
the arbitrators either to go on or await the decision of the Civil Court. If in 
Sec.8(1) of the Indian Act the words “unless it finds the agreement is null 
and void, inoperative or incapable of  being performed.” are introduced, it 
will be open to the arbitrators either to  proceed with arbitration or not to 
proceed with arbitration pending the decision of the Civil Court on the 
question as to whether the arbitration agreement is “null and void or 
inoperative or not enforceable.”  
D) In cases where suits are filed on the original side of the High Court 
normally a single Judge of the High C ourt can decide the question whether 
the arbitration agreement is null and void etc. But this may result in an 
appeal to a Division Bench and a fu rther S.L.P. under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India. It would theref ore be advisable if, whenever such 
issues arise under Sec.8 on the original  side of the High Court they are 
decided by a Division Bench of the Hi gh Court both in the case of domestic 
and international arbitrations. 

 252
E) Where suits are filed in courts subordinate to the High Court, the issues as 
to whether the arbitration agreement is  null and void etc can first be allowed 
to be decided by the same Court and an appeal could be provided to the High 
Court to be decided by a Division Bench of the High Court. 
 
 
2.3  Jurisdictional issues arising be fore the High Court and the Supreme 
Court in applications filed under Section 11 of the 1996 Act – question 
whether the Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justice of the High Court or 
their nominees act in an administrativ e capacity or a judicial capacity and 
whether issues of jurisdiction should be allowed to be decided at that stage 
or should be left to the arbitrators:- 
 
Section 11 of the 1996 Act corresponds to section 8 of the 1940 Act.  
Under that section, the Supreme Cour t has held that the court has to 
refuse appointment of an arbitrator, if there is no arbitration clause in 
existence (M. Dayanand Reddy v. A ndhra Pradesh High Court, 1993 (3) 
SCC 137), or if it is an excepted ma tter where the opinion of an officer 
or architect is to be final on th e question (Bharat Bhushal Bansal v. 
UPSIC Limited, 1999 (2) SCC 168), or if no dispute is in existence 

 253
[Major (Retd.) India Singh Rekhi v. DDA AIR 1088 SC 1007).  The 
position is also the same under section 20 of the 1940 Act.  The question 
is whether under section 11, the cour t or the judge cannot decide the 
question merely because under section 16, the arbitrators are also 
conferred with the power of decidi ng these disputes.  The question is 
whether section 16 is intended to appl y to a situation where one party or 
both parties have themselves referred the matter to arbitration.   
 
   Section 11 of the 1996 Act requires the Chief Justice of India or the 
Chief Justice of the High Court or thei r nominees to deal with applications 
under Section 11 for appointment of ar bitrators in situations where the 
parties are not able to agree upon such appointment. However the Model law 
in Art.11(4) contemplates the appointment of arbitrators by  
“Court or other authority specified in Art.6”  
Article 6 of the Model law reads as follows: 
“Article 6. The functions referred to in Art.11 (3), 11(4), 13(3), 14, 
16(3) and 34(2) shall be performed by ….. (Each state enacting this 
Model law specifies the Court, Cour ts or where referred to therein, 
other authority competent to perform these functions)” 

 254
  A three Judge Bench of the Supr eme Court of India has held,  in 
Konkan Railway case-I (2000 (7) SCC 201) that the order under Sec.11 is an 
administrative order and further that the Chief Justice of India or the Chief 
Justice of the High Court or their nominees cannot decide any jurisdictional 
questions at that stage, because (i) Sec.16 has now conferred power  on the 
arbitrator to decide questions of juri sdiction and (ii) the Model law requires 
speedy disposal of arbitration proceedi ngs and therefore these jurisdictional 
issues should be decided only by the arbitrators. 
Almost all countries which have adopted the Model law have stated in  
provisions corresponding to Sec.11 of the Indian Act 1996, that the power of 
appointment of arbitrators will be exercised by the ‘Court’. See in this behalf 
Art.11 of the Canadian Act 1985, Art.11 of the Korean Act 1999, section 14 
of the Swedish Act 1999 (which refers to  the District Court) and Art.11 in 
schedule 1 of the New Zealand Act of 1996 etc., 
 According to Dr.P.C.Rao’s Commentary on the new Act (See Page 9) 
the Indian Act is based upon the Britis h Columbia Act of 1996. Even the 
said Act uses the word ‘Court’ so far as the power of appointment of 
arbitrators is concerned.   
 It may also be pointed out that apart from the above statutes, the 
Arbitration Act in Ireland which is  called Arbitration (International 

 255
Commercial) Act 1998 and which is also  based on the Model law contains a 
provision similar to the one in Sec.11 of the Indian Act 1996, which can be 
said to indicate that the power of appoi ntment of arbitrators is a judicial 
power. Section 6 of the Irish Act reads thus: 
“Sec.6: (1) The High Court is specified for the purposes of 
Article 6 and is the Court for th e purposes of Article 9 and the 
Court of competent jurisdiction for the purposes of Articles 27, 
35 and 36. 
(2) The functions of the High C ourt under an article referred to 
subsection (1) and its functions under Sections 7, 11(7) and (9) 
and 14(1) shall be performed by- 
a) The President of the High Court, or  
b) Such judge of the High Cour t as may be nominated by the 
President, subject to rules made in that behalf.” 
The question arises whether the Sec.11 of the Indian Act 1996 
should be appropriately amended on the model of the Irish Arbitration 
Act so as to clarify that the power of appointment of arbitrator, in the 
event of  a difference between the parties, is a judicial power. 
 

 256
The question then arises whethe r whenever disputes as to 
jurisdiction are raised in answer to an application under Section 11, 
such disputes should be decided by the High Court and listed before a  
single Judge, be it the Chief Justice of  India or the Chief Justice of the 
High Court or their nominees? The di fficulty here is that a similar 
question may arise in an appeal unde r Article 136, wherein  an order  
passed by the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee, is in 
question. Such an application woul d come before a Bench of two or 
more the judges in the Supreme Court.  It is possible that an identical 
question of jurisdiction raised at S ec.11 stage in the Supreme Court in 
another case may be decided by the Chief Justice of India or his 
nominee. In other words, similar issues of jurisdiction may arise in  
 
international or domestic arbitrations , if the words in the arbitration 
clauses are similar, and lead to c onflicting judgments.  Another aspect 
is whether the decision of the Chie f Justice of India or his nominee 
would be entitled to the same weight  as that of a Bench of two or 
more learned judges of the Supreme Court for pur poses of Article 141 of the Constitution of 
India?  
In view of the above aspects, it is for consideration whether the issues of jurisdiction 
arising in an international arbitration should be referred by the Chief Justice of India or his 

 257
nominee, as and when such issues are raised by a respondent, to a Bench of two learned judges or 
more, initially, to decide the jurisdictional issues and whether they could also appoint an arbitrator, 
if no jurisdiction problem arises or if the issue is decided in favour of the applicant.   
 Similarly, in the High Court, the same question of jurisdiction may come before different 
nominees of the Chief Justice of the High Court in different cases and it is possible that divergent 
views may be expressed. Question therefore is whether the application under Section 11 could be 
listed before a Bench of more than one judge in the High Court and they could decide not only the 
question of jurisdiction but also as to who should be appointed as arbitrators.  
It is possible in some cases that some oral  evidence may be necessa ry to be adduced in 
the Supreme Court/High Court in section 11  applications  where a party contends 
that there is no arbitration agreement or other disputed questions of 
facts are raised.  In such an event, a provision can be made under 
section 11 that the court may have the evidence recorded before an 
Advocate Commissioner appointed by it. 
The Irish Model, if it is adopted , then Section 11 applications 
will be decided in the High Court or  the Supreme Court, as the case 
may be, by a Bench of more than one learned Judge. It would then 
mean that the Court is exercising judicial power and that it will also 
decide jurisdictional issues at th at stage itself. Section 11 (6) is 
therefore to be amended and othe r relevant amendments, should be 
made in other subsections of Section 11. 
 So far as speedy disposal of Sec.11 applications is concerned, one view is that if the order 
under section 11 is treated as an administrative order, it , (whether it be order of the Chief Justice 

 258
of India or his nominee in an interna tional arbitration or that of the 
Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee in a domestic 
arbitration), would be amenable to  judicial review under Article 226 
before a single Judge of the Hi gh Court.  In fact such a contention  was 
raised in Konkan Railway Case No.II (2000 (8) SCC 159). There could  then be an appeal to a 
Division Bench and then a further SLP under Article  
 
136. One view is that  this situation can be avoided if the order under 
Section 11, is allowed to be ma de by the ‘Supreme Court’ or the 
‘High Court’ ( and providing that  the matter will be decided by a 
Bench of more than one learned Judge ). It will then be clear that the 
order is a judicial order whether ju risdiction questions are decided or 
not and whenever any appointment  is made by the Bench of the 
Supreme Court or the High Court. 
  Any question of jurisdiction decided by the Supreme Court will 
be binding under Article 141, and will be a final order,  without giving 
scope for further litigation on jurisd ictional issues. If the jurisdiction 
question is decided by a Bench in the High Court, in domestic 
arbitration cases, then only one appeal would lie to the Supreme Court 
under Article 136. This would al so shorten further litigation on 
jurisdictional issues and save time a nd expense before the arbitrators. 

 259
It may also be provided that Sec.11 applications may be placed before 
the concerned Bench of the Supreme Court or the High Court, as 
original applications under Sec.11, without mixing them up with other 
arbitration cases, so that they may get top priority for disposal.  
 It may therefore have to be  considered whether the above 
procedure would solve the ques tion as to whether power under 
Section 11 is judicial, whether at that stage jurisdictional issues can be 
decided and also whether such a procedure would save more time than 
if the order were to be treated as  an administrative order, allowing a 
challenge under Article 226.   
 It is true that section 16 of the Arbitration Act of 1996 confers 
power on the arbitrators to decide various jurisdictional issues. One 
view is that even jurisdictional issues raised at Sec.11 stage should be 
decided only by arbitrators and not by th e Court. It is true that for the 
first time such a specific power is given to the arbitrator  under the 
new Act. It appears that the intention behind Section 16(1) is that such 
a power to decide jurisdictional issues should be exercised by the 
arbitrators whenever disputes go be fore them on being referred by the 
parties.   If the matter straight away  goes before the arbitrators, i.e.,  
not by reference  under Sec.11, the ar bitrators can certainly decide the 

 260
jurisdictional issues and the decision on the said issues would always  
be amenable to correction Sec.34(2) (a) (ii) or (iv) of the Act.   If the 
present position continues under sec tion 11, what would happen is 
that the arbitrators would decide the question of jurisdiction; and if 
they accept the plea of lack of ju risdiction, their order would be 
amenable to appeal under section 37(2)  (a).  If, however, they reject 
the said plea, there is no provision fo r appeal and the party has to wait 
till the award is passed. 
  
2.5  Jurisdictional issues arising before the arbitrators  under Section 16 of the Act in 
cases where disputes are referred to arbitrators by one party to the dispute or/by both the 
parties, (without reference to the court). 
 
 As stated in Chapter-I the objective the 1996 Act is the same as that of 
the Model law in enabling the arbitration to move faster keeping intervention 
by the Court at the minimum.  
It must, however, be noted that the Model law contains a balance 
between such an objective and also immediate Court supervision. The Model 
law recognises the need  to have juri sdictional issues finally decided as 
preliminary issues and with a right of a ppeal then and there. It also provides 
that when the jurisdictional issues are raised before the Court there should be 

 261
no stay but that it should be left to the arbitrators whether to stay the 
proceedings or to go on with the arbitration. This procedure does not enable  
parties to file a frivolous appeals and it will not enable the appellant to 
unduly  delay the disposal of the appeal . The arbitrators will have sufficient 
control to see that the appeal process is not used for dilatory purposes. That 
is how the Model law achieves a balance between speedy disposal of 
arbitration and prompt supervision and control by the Court. 
 In the Indian Act, 1996 the difficulties have arisen because undue emphasis has 
been  laid on speedy disposal than even what the Model law intends and no provision is 
made for decision on preliminary issues which go  to the root of the matter resulting in a 
quick and prompt decision on those issues before the arbitrator as well as in the Appellate 
Court. 
  
Question for consideration is whethe r the Arbitration Act 1996 should be 
appropriately amended in regard to Sec.16 (and al so in regard to Sec.13) so as to bring it 
on par with the Model law in all its respects.  In fact almost all countries which have 
followed the Model law have allowed, in  provisions corresponding to Sec.13 and 16, 
jurisdictional issues to be decided as preliminary issues with an immediate right of appeal 
and so far as stay is concerned they leave it to the arbitrators e ither to go on with the 
arbitration or not, depending upon the manner in which the unsuccessful party is pursuing 
the appeal.  
 

 262
Under Section 16, arbitrators have been conferred with power to decide their 
own jurisdiction which includes the power  to rule on any objection as to the 
existence or validity of the arbitrati on agreement. Such a power was not  
specifically conferred on the arbitrat ors under the 1940 Act. Sec.16 of the 
Indian Act 1996 corresponds to Art.16 of the Model law. Every country 
which has adopted the  Model law has conferred such powers on the 
arbitrators. This principle is calle d the principle of Competence, i.e., 
competence to decide one’s own competence.  
Section 16 of the Indian Act 1996 reads as follows: 
“Section 16: (1) The arbitral tribunal ma y rule on its own jurisdiction, including 
ruling on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration 
agreement, and for that purpose,- 
(a) An arbitration clause which forms part  of a contract shall be treated as an 
agreement independent of the other terms of the contract; and  
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that  the contract is null and void shall not 
entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.  
(2)……  ……………………   …………. 
(3)…….  ……………………   …………. 
(4)…….  ……………………   ………….. 
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in subsection 
(2) or subsection (3) and, where th e arbitral tribunal takes a decision 

 263
rejecting the plea, it may, continue with the arbitral proceedings and 
make an arbitral award. 
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitr al award may make an application for 
setting aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34.” 
When we come to the Model law, its Art.16 contains only three clauses. Clauses 1 
and 2 thereof correspond to clauses 1 to 4 of sec. 16 of the Indian Act of 1996 but the 
Model law contains a further sub-clause (3 ) in Article 16 which reads as follows and 
which is absent in Sec.16 of the Indian Act of 1996. Clause (3) of Article 16 of the Model 
law reads as follows: 
 
“16(3) The arbitral tribunal ma y rule on a plea referred to in 
paragraph (2) of this ar ticle either as a preliminary question or in an 
award on the merits.  If the arbitral  tribunal rules as a preliminary 
question that it has jurisdiction, a ny party may request, within thirty 
days after having received notice of th at ruling, the court specified in 
article 6 to decide the matter, wh ich decision shall be subject to no 
appeal; while such a request is pending, the arbitral tribunal may 
continue the arbitral proceedings and make an award.” 
As stated earlier, the Indian Act of 1996 does not contain a provision in Section 
16 enabling the arbitrators to decide the above issues as preliminary issues as in the 
Model Law. Further though the sub-clause (6) of Sec16 of the Indian Act enables the 
aggrieved party to make an application to se t aside the final award, which is passed after 

 264
rejecting the jurisdictional points, no specifi c provision is made in Sec.34, or Sec.37 of 
the Act providing an appeal immediately, in cas e the objection as to the jurisdiction  is 
rejected.  Under Sec.37 (2) (a) of the Act, an appeal is provided to the Court ,only against 
an  Order of the arbitrators  accepting the pleas referred in  Sec.16(2) or (3) but not where 
the said pleas are rejected. 
  
In Sec.16(5) of the Indian Act 1996, it app ears that the  word ‘shall’ governs the 
word ‘decide’ as well as the word ‘continue’ which means that even if an appeal is filed 
under Sec.16(6), there is no discretion left with  the arbitrators not to proceed with the 
arbitration. This goes contrary to the corresponding provision in  the Model Law in 
Art.16(3). It is therefore necessary to ame nd Sec.16(5) by using the words “it may” after 
the words “rejecting the plea” and before the words “continue with….” 
   In fact Sec.1040 of the German Act 1998 provides in Sub-Clause (3) for a 
preliminary ruling by the arbitrators and for an  appeal to the Court; similarly article 16 
(3) of the Zimbabwe Act, 1996, Article 16(5)  of the Korean Act 1999, Article 16 (3) of 
the Irish Act 1998, Article 16(3) of the Cana dian Act 1985 and  Article 16 of the first 
schedule to the New Zealand Act 1996 permit the arbitrators to decide the jurisdictional 
issues as preliminary issues, with a right of  appeal to the Court. The Model law and all 
these various Acts further provide that pe nding the decision by the Court, it will be open 
to the arbitrators either to proceed with the arbitration or not. All the statutes use the word 
‘may’ in this context. That would ensure that  frivolous appeals are not filed and also that 
the appeals are not unnecessarily allowed to be prolonged. Such a provision will take care 
to see that there is no undue delay in the arbitration process and that the arbitrators have 

 265
control over the parties who have filed the appeal so as to ensure that the appellants do 
not unreasonably prolong the appeals.In th is context the following observations by 
Mr.Aron Broches, Kluwer in the Commentary on UNCITRAL Model Law are useful: 
“At the Working Group’s fourth session, a resolution was adopted which, on the 
one hand, permitted immediate recourse to th e Court, with the attendant risk that 
such recourse may be used as a dela ying tactic and, on the other hand, permitted 
(but did not oblige) the arbitral tribunal to  continue the arbitral proceedings. This 
enables the tribunal either to limit the a dverse effects of an unjustified challenge 
for dilatory purposes by continuing the proceedings, or to suspend the 
proceedings where it considers that the inte rest of the parties is best served by 
getting the challenge question out of the way rather than letting them run the risk 
of waste of time and money on an award which may ultimately be set aside under 
article 34.”  
The U.K.Act of 1996, however, deals w ith the problem in a different 
manner. When jurisdictional issues aris e before the arbitrators, the parties 
have the choice to have the matters decided by the arbitrators and allow 
them  to pass the award also and then to  file an appeal, or the parties may by 
mutual consent approach the court for a decision on the question of 
jurisdiction.  It is also permissible for the parties to approach the court with 
the permission of the tribunal, i.e., in a situation when all the parties do not 
agree for such reference. Section 32 of  the English Act, 1996, deals with the 

 266
question of ‘Determination of preliminar y point of jurisdiction’ and says in 
sub-section (2) as follows: 
 
“Sec.32(2): An application under this section shall not be entertained 
unless-  
a) it is made with the agreement in writing of all the other parties to the 
proceedings, or 
b) it is made with the permission of the tribunal and the court is satisfied- 
i) that the determination of the question is likely to produce 
substantial savings in costs, 
ii) that the application was made without delay and  
iii) that there is good reason w hy the matter should be decided 
by the Court.” 
It is therefore to be decided whether the Indian Act 1996 is to be amended  
enabling the arbitrators to decide jurisdiction issues as preliminary issues as in the Model 
law with an immediate right of appeal and also with a discretion vested in the arbitrators 
either to proceed with the arbitration or not. Alternatively, it is to be considered whether 
the provisions of Sec 32 (2) of the U.K.Act of 1996 are to be followed? 
 
    
 
 

 267
2.6.  Sections 12 and 13 and questions re lating to Bias and Qualifications of 
arbitrators – whether the decision of the arbitrator rejecting the plea of Bias 
and lack of qualifications  should be decided as preliminary issues with a 
right of appeal or whether they can be challenged only after the award? 
As stated earlier in para 1.3, it becomes necessary to balance speedy 
disposal of  arbitration and the final disposal of issues which go to the root 
of the matter. This principle requires th at issues of bias and disqualification 
of the arbitrators are decided as prelim inary issues with a right of appeal 
immediately and again leaving it to the discretion of the arbitrators whether 
to grant stay or not. The provisions  of Sec.13 have to be brought in 
conformity with the Model law wh ich maintains a reasonable balance 
between speedy disposal of arbitrati on proceedings and immediate decision 
on issues of bias and disqualificati on, so that time and money could be 
saved. The arbitrators are to be gi ven discretion to go ahead with the 
arbitration proceedings pending appeal so that they will have  control as to 
the manner in which the appellant is  conducting his case in the appeal 
preferred by him against the order rejecting the plea of bias or 
disqualification.  
 In fact, in the absence of a pr ovision for immediate appeal against 
rejection of a plea of bias of the arb itrator, parties have resorted to Art.226 

 268
of the Constitution of India and it appear s that a learned Single judge of the 
Bombay High Court has held in Anuptech Equipments Pvt Ltd. Vs. 
Ganapathi Co-operative society Ltd (AIR 1999 Bombay 219) that a writ 
would lie to quash the decision or order of the arbitrator inasmuch as it 
cannot be equated with an award. If an appeal is provided in Sec.34 or 
Sec.37 of the Act to the Court, there will then be no question of moving the 
High Court in writ jurisdiction.  
Sections 12 and 13 of the 1996 Act read as follows:- 
“Section 12 Grounds for challenge: 
(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible 
appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any 
circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality. 
(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout the 
arbitral proceedings, shall without  delay, disclose to the parties in 
writing any circumstances referred to  in sub-section (1) unless they 
have already been informed of them by him. 
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if –  
a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to 
his independence or impartiality, or  

 269
b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the 
parties, 
(4) A party may challenge an arbitr ator appointed by him or in whose 
appointment he has participated , only for reasons of which he 
becomes aware after the appointment has been made. 
Section 13 Challenge procedure 
(1) Subject to sub-section (4), the parties are free to agree on a 
procedure for challenging an arbitrator. 
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), a party who 
intends to challenge an arbitrator shall, within fifteen days after 
becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after 
becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in sub-section 
(3) of Section 12, send a written st atement of the reasons for the 
challenge to the arbitral tribunal. 
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section (2) withdraws 
from his office or the other part y agrees to the challenge, the 
arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge. 
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or 
under the procedure under sub-section (2) is not successful, the 

 270
arbitral tribunal shall continue th e arbitral proceedings and make 
an arbitral award. 
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub-section (4), the party 
challenging the arbitrator may ma ke an  application for setting 
aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34.”  
As stated earlier, Section 13 of th e Indian Act provides that issues 
relating to bias and qualification  of th e arbitrator be decided as preliminary 
issues by the arbitrator. But there is no provision for filing an appeal 
immediately in the Court, and side by si de enabling the arbitrator to proceed 
with the arbitration as in Section 16( 5).  On the other hand the aggrieved 
party has to wait till the award is passe d and he can challenge the decision 
only after the award. This is one problem. The second problem is that though 
Section 13(5) permits the decision to be  challenged in the Court, there is no 
specific provision in Section 34 or 37 of the Act enabling an objection or 
appeal to be filed challenging the decisi on of the arbitrator rejecting the plea 
of bias or disqualification.  The def ect  here is sim ilar to the one under 
Section 16(6). 
The Model law provides in Art.13(4) for an immediate right of appeal 
and also says that pending appeal arb itration proceedings ‘may’ go on.  On 
the other hand the word “shall” is used as in Sec13(4) of the Indian Act. 

 271
 Section 1037 (3) of the German Arbitration Act, 1998 also provides 
for an immediate right of appeal to the Court and says that in the meantime 
the arbitrators ‘may’ continue the proceedings and make an award. Art.13(3) 
of the Zimbabwe Arbitration Act, 1996 also provides for a right of appeal 
and says that meantime the arbitrat ors ‘may’ go on with the proceedings. 
Similarly article 13(2) of schedule 2 to  the Australian Act,  Article 13 (3) of 
the Canadian Act 1985, Article 13(3) of the Schedule to the Ireland Act 
1998, Article 13(3) and the first sche dule of the New Zealand Act 1999 also 
use the word ‘may’ and give discretion to the arbitrators to go ahead with the 
arbitration pending decision of the Court on the question of bias or 
disqualification.  
It is therefore necessary to provide  an appeal under Section 37 against 
the decision made by the arbitrators under section 13 (4). It is also  necessary 
to provide an immediate appeal to the Court rather than ask the parties to 
wait till the award is passed. For that purpose the word ‘shall’ in section 
13(4) has to be substituted by the word  ‘may’ so that pending a decision by 
the Court  an appeal against the prelim inary decision of the arbitrator on the 
question of bias and disqualification, it would be within the discretion of the 
arbitrators whether to proceed further with the arbitration proceeding or not. 
 

 272
2.7.  Interim measures under Section 9 in international arbitration where the 
place of arbitration is outside Indi a and also allowing civil court under 
section 8 to deal with such arbitrations by amendment of Section 2(2). 
 Under Section 2(2) of the 1996 Act, it is stated that Part I applies 
where the place of arbitration is in Indi a. Section 9 of the Act which is in 
Chapter II of Part I, therefore, got  excluded thereby precluding the Court 
from granting any interim orders in case of international arbitration where 
the seat of arbitration is outside India. 
 Section 9 would otherwise permit a party either before or during arbitral 
proceedings or at any time after making of the award  (but before it is enforced under 
Section 30)– to apply to the Court for various interim orders. 
 Section 2(2) has led to considerable litigation in courts in cases of international 
arbitration where the seat of arbitration is outside India. For example, before the 
arbitrators are appointed, it may indeed  beco me necessary to obtain interim orders in 
India. But the absence of a provision  has re quired parties to move the Courts in the 
country in which the seat of arbitration is lo cated. This may involve considerable delay if 
one of the parties to the contract is in Indi a. Similarly, at the stage of execution of an 
international award rendered at a seat outside India, the Indian Courts are not able to 
grant any relief by way of  interim orders in India. A provision enabling Indian Courts to 
grant interim orders in international arbitrations where the seat of arbitration is outside 
India is therefore necessary.  

 273
 Delhi High Court has rendered conflic ting judgments.  In FAO (O.S.3/2000) a 
Division Bench in Olex Focas Pty Ltd Vs. Skodaexport Co. Ltd (AIR 2000 Delhi 161) 
held on the basis of section 2(5) and other pr ovisions that interim orders could be granted 
in such cases but in Marriott International Inc   (2000 (3) Arb. Law Reports 369), a 
Division Bench took the opposite view that no interim orders could be granted in the case 
of international arbitration outside India. In the Calcutta High Court it was held in East 
Coast Shipping Limited Vs. M.J.Scrap Ltd.  1997(1) C.H.N.444 that interim relief could 
be granted but a Division Bench in Kaventers Agro Limited Vs. Seagram Co Ltd (APO 
449, 498/97 dated 27-1-98) took an opposite vi ew and SLP was dismissed. It has 
therefore become necessary to remedy the law in this respect. 
 In all arbitration statutes passed by va rious countries covering both international 
and domestic arbitrations, care has been taken to make not only Article 9 of the Model 
law (relating to interim measures) to be applied to international arbitrations held outside 
the country in question but care has also been  taken to apply Sections 8, 35 and 36 of the 
Model law to international arbitrations outside  that country. In section 2(2) of the Act 
even section 9 has not been excepted.  
 In fact section 8 of the Model law relate s to suits being filed in India in which a 
defendant may take plea that there is an  arbitration agreement which has provided that 
the arbitration is to take place outside India. In such a case, it will be necessary to allow 
the Indian Court to decide the questions arising under section 8. 
This is necessary  inasmuch as there may be international arbitrations which 
contemplate the seat outside India but not covered by Part – II of the Indian Act 1996. 
Part II is confined to New York Convention and Geneva Convention Awards.  For 

 274
example, if it is not a  case of commercial arbitration or where the agreement is not in 
writing or where one of the parties belongs to  a country which is not a signatory to the 
said Conventions, it  will be necessary to sa y in Sec.2 (2) that not only section 9 but 
Section 8 of Part I shall apply whenever a su it is filed in a Civil Court in India and the 
defendant pleads an international arbitration agreement where the seat of arbitration is 
outside India and the case is not covered by Part-II of the 1996 Act, the Civil Court could 
deal with the matter under Sec.8. 
 In the Zimbabwe Arbitration Act 1996 para 2of the  preamble and, 
Sub-Para 3(2) state that sections 8, 9, 35 and 36 of the Model Law will apply 
to international arbitrations held outside Zimbabwe. The Korean Act 1999 
provides in Article 2 that Section 9 and 10 of the Act a nd also Articles 37 
and 39 of the Act (corresponding to Articles 8,9 35 and 36 of the Model law) 
apply to international arbitrations held outside Korea. Section 7 of 
Newzealand Act 1996 also makes Sec 8,9, 35,36 of the first schedule 
(corresponding to Articles 8,9,35,36 of the Model law) to international 
arbitrations held outside New Zeala nd. In Article 1 of the Canadian Act 
1986 Sub-clause (2) provides that Ar ticles 8,9,35 and 36 of the Code 
(corresponding to Article s 8,9,35,36 of the Model law) will apply to 
international arbitrations held outside  Canada. Similarly section 7 of the 
Arbitration (international commercial) Act 1998 Ireland permits the grant of 
interim measures in relation to international arbitration agreements. 

 275
 We shall deal with Art.35 and 36 of the Model law and Sec.2(2) of the Indian Act 
in the succeeding paras. 
 It is, therefore, obvious that Sec 2(2) of  the Act which makes Part I of the Indian 
Act to apply only to arbitrations within India should be modified by permitting resort to 
Sections 8,9 (also 35, 36 ) to international Arb itrations outside India not covered by Part 
II. 
  
2.8.  Whether Sections 35 and 36 of the Indian Act should also be made 
applicable to international arbitrati ons outside India (other than those 
covered the New York convention 1958 and the Geneva convention 1924 in 
Part – II )?  
International arbitrations are cove red under the 1996 Act in Part –II. 
So far as “enforcement” is concerned, Chapter – I of Part –II deals with New 
York Convention 1958 awards. Section 44 in Part-II refers to New York 
convention award and de fines ‘foreign award’ as an award made on 
differences arising out of legal  relationships, whether contractual or not, 
considered as commercial under the law in force in India, made on or after 
11-10-1960, in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to which 
the Convention set forth in the First Schedule applies. Similarly Section 53 
which applies to Geneva convention awar ds defines a ‘foreign award’ as an 
arbitral award in regard to differen ces relating to matters considered as 

 276
commercial under the law in force in Indi a made after the 28-7-1924, in 
pursuance of an agreement for arbitrati on to which the Protocol set forth in 
the Second schedule applies. 
The First schedule refers to New York convention on the recognition 
and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. The Second schedule refers to 
the Geneva Convention and the Protoco l. The Third schedule refers to 
Geneva Convention.on the execution of foreign arbitral awards.  
If the recognition and the execution of the New York convention 
awards and Geneva conven tion awards is covered by Part –II of the Indian 
Act of 1996 and would cover such international awards passed outside India, 
what is the position of other internati onal awards passed outside India which 
are not covered by the New York conven tion or the Geneva Convention, in 
regard to their recognition and enforcement?  
As stated earlier in para 2.6 while dealing with Sec.2(2) and Sec.8, 
there may be arbitrations with a seat outside India and not covered by  Part – 
II of the 1996 Act such as where the in ternational arbitration agreement is 
not a commercial agreement or where the agreement is not in writing or 
where one of the parties belongs to a c ountry which is not a signatory to the 
New York and Geneva Conventions. 

 277
Would it not then be necessary to apply Sec.35 and 36 of Part –I Of 
the Indian Act which deal respectivel y with binding nature and enforcement 
of awards if such  international awards are made outside India and not 
covered by the New York and Geneva conventions? Is it not for this reason 
that several countries apply not only S ec.8 and 9 of the Model law but also 
Art.35 and 36 of the Model law to intern ational arbitration with seat outside 
the country, to such arbitration agreem ents. Should it therefore be clarified 
in Sec.2(2) of the Indian Act that Sec.8 and 9 and also  Sections 35 and 36 
shall apply to international arbitrations outside India?  
 Most of the statutes of the c ountries stated earlier also apply 
Art.8,9,35 and 36 of the Model law to ar bitrations with seat outside their 
country as also where the s eat of arbitration is not yet determined or agreed 
to. It is therefore necessary to amend Sec.2(2) to cover such situations also. 
The English Act 1996 makes provisions in a more detailed fashion not 
only applying provision corresponding to  Art.8,9,35 and 36 of the Model 
law (i.e., Sec.9 to 11 and 66) but also  Secs.43 and 44 of the English Act 
which respectively deal with ‘secu ring the attendance of witnesses’ 
(corresponding to Sec.27 of the Indi an Act) and ‘the courts power 
exercisable in support of arbitrati on proceedings’.) It contains other 

 278
important provisions. For convenience we shall set out sub-clauses 1 to 4 of 
sec.2 of the English Act     
“Sec.2(1) The provisions of this part apply where the seat of the 
arbitration is in England and Wales or Northern Ireland.   
(2) The following sections apply even if the seat of the arbitration  is  
outside, England and Wales or Nort hern Ireland or no seat has been 
designated or determined -  
a) Sections 9 to 11 (stay of legal proceedings etc) and  
b) Section 66 (enforcement of aribtral awards) 
(3) The powers conferred by the follo wing sections apply even if the 
seat of the arbitration is outside  England and Wales or Northern 
Ireland or no seat has been designated or determined –  
a) Section 43 (securing the attendance of witnesses), and 
b) Section 44 (Court powers exercisable in support of arbitral 
proceedings) 
but the court may refuse to exercise  any such power if, in the opinion 
of the court, the fact th at the seat of the arbitration is outside England 
and Wales or Northern Ireland or that when designated or determined, 
the seat is likely to be outside E ngland and Wales or Northern Ireland 
makes it inappropriate to do so. 

 279
(4) The court may exercise the pow er conferred by any provision of 
this part not mentioned in Subsection (2) or (3) for the purpose of 
supporting the arbitral process where - 
a) no seat of the arbitration has been designated or determined, and  
b) by reason of a connection with England and Wales or Northern 
Ireland, the court is satisfied, it is appropriate to do so.  
(5) Section 7 (Separability of arb itration agreement) and section 8 
(Death of a party) apply where the law applicable to the arbitration 
agreement is the law of England a nd Wales or Northern Ireland even 
if  the seat of the arbitration is outside England and Wales or Northern 
Ireland or has not been designated or determined.” 
Question is whether the above provision should also be brought into 
Sec.2(2). 
The English Act further contains a provision defining  the ‘seat of 
arbitration’. Question is whether such a provision should be introduced in 
the Indian Act so as to avoid disputes as  to the seat of arbitration? Section 3 
of the English Act reads as follows: 
“ Section 3 In this part the ‘seat of  the arbitration’ means the juridical 
seat of the arbitration designated –  
a) by the parties to the arbitration agreement or  

 280
b) by any arbitral or other instituti on or  person vested by the parties 
with powers in that regard or 
c) by the arbitral tribunal if so authorised by the parties, 
or determined, in the absence of any such designati on, having regard 
to the parties agreement and all the relevant circumstances.  
 
2.9.  Should not the Act contain a pr ovision enabling a Court before which a 
suit or other proceeding is pending, to refer the disputes to arbitration by 
subsequent agreement of parties or should such arbitration agreement always 
precede the commencement of action before the Court ? 
 Under Section 21 of the Act of 1940 there was specific provision 
enabling a court to refer disputes to arbitration, pending suits or proceedings. 
In fact in several cases the trial courts or after long years of litigation, the 
High Court or the Supreme Court have been referring matters to arbitration 
because of agreement of parties  with  a view to shorten further litigation. 
The absence of such a provision has given rise to serious difficulties. 
 The Supreme Court had occasion to deal with a civil proceeding 
which came up from the High Court in appeal in P.Anandagjapathi Raju Vs. 
P.V.G.Raju (2000 (4) SCC 539 = AIR 2000 SC 1086). In another case, the 
High Court had appointed an arbitrat or in a writ petition where damages 

 281
were claimed against the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board on account of death 
by electrocution.  Reference to arbitra tion was made by the court after the 
1996 Act and award was passed which became a decree.  It was sought to be 
attacked in appeal to the Supreme C ourt.  The Board contended that the 
High Court could not have appointed an  arbitrator by relying upon article 21 
and 226 of the Constitution.  This contention was rejected following the 
judgment in P.Anandgajapthy Raju’s case ( Tamil Nadu Electricity Board  v. 
Sumathy (2000) (4) SCC 543=AIR 2000 SC 1603).   The Supreme Court 
held that Section 8 of the Act applie d not only to arbitration agreements 
entered into before the commencement of the suit or proceeding but also 
those entered into pending suit or other proceedings. 
 To the above extent the problem was solved but the Supreme Court 
still held that under section 2(1) (e) of the 1996 Act the award decree could 
be questioned only before the Court  in  which a suit for the relief could have 
been filed. The result was that litigati on would start afresh, from the ‘Court’ 
as defined in Sec. 2(1)(e) and then move on to the High Court and Supreme 
Court.   
  In the above case decided by the Supreme Court, the aforementioned 
above procedure became necessary in view of the definition of Court section 
2 (e) of the Act. In fact under the 1940 Act,  in Sec 21  there was specific 

 282
provision for reference to arbitration in pending suits and Sec.2(c) of the said 
Act excepted Sec.21 from the definition of  the “Court” so that the challenge 
to the award could be made in the sa me Court which had referred the matter 
to arbitration. 
 Therefore it appears that for purpos es of domestic arbitration, it is 
necessary to enact Sections 21 to  25 of the 1940 Act with suitable 
modification and also to except the sa id provision from Section 2 (e) of the 
new Act of 1996 which defines the “Court”.   
 In fact Sec.36 of the British Columbia Arbitration Act, 1996 (which 
Dr.P.C.Rao says in his commentary on Page 9 was followed while preparing 
the Indian Act) makes a provision for reference by Court to arbitrators on the 
basis of a subsequent arbitration agreem ent. Section 36 of that Act reads as 
follows: 
 “Section 36 Reference by Court order,  
(1) The Court may order at any time that the whole matter, or a 
question of fact arising in a pr oceeding, other than a criminal 
proceeding, be tried before an arbitrator agreed by the parties if 
(a) all parties interested, and not under disability, consent, 
(b) the proceeding requires a prolonged examination of documents or 
a scientific or local investigation that cannot, in the opinion of the 

 283
court, conveniently be made be fore a jury or conducted by the 
court through its other ordinary officers, or  
(c) the question in dispute consists wholly or partly of matters of 
account.  
Sections 37 to 43 make ancillary provisions in connection with Section 36 of 
the said Act.  
  
2.10  Whether Sec 34 (or Section 37) of the Act is to be amended by 
providing a right of appeal (not only in respect of interim orders under 
Section 13 and 16) but also in other cases and if so whether such fresh 
grounds should cover both domestic and international arbitrations.  
In the previous paragraphs  while referring to the decisions of the arbitrator 
under section 13 and 16 it has already been  pointed out that Section 34(2) or 
sec.37 should be amended suitably providing a right of appeal in those 
situations. The said amendment  w ould apply to both International and 
domestic arbitrations.  
It has been pointed out that supe rvision by the Court in the case of 
international arbitrations should be kept at the minimum as in the Model law 
but that so far as domestic arbitrati on is concerned, s upervision could be 
more intense having regard to the lack of qualification as also experience of 

 284
arbitrators in India who are not nece ssarily always judges or lawyers or 
experienced businessmen. Reference in this connection can be made to 
Redfern  and Hunter (Law and Prac tice of International Arbitration 2 nd 
Edition pages 14, 15) as follows: 
“Amongst states which have a de veloped arbitration law, it is 
generally recognised that more freedom may be allowed in an 
international arbitration than is  commonly allowed in a domestic 
arbitration. The reason is evident. Domestic arbitration usually takes 
place between the citizens or reside nts of the same state, as an 
alternative to proceedings before the courts of law of that state…..it is 
natural that a State should wish (a nd even need) to exercise firmer 
control over such arbitrations, involvi ng its own residents or citizens 
than it would wish (or need) to exer cise in relation to international 
arbitrations which may only take place within the state’s territory 
because of geographical convenience.”  
It is, therefore, necessary to provide  additional supervision by the Court by 
way of appeal in case of domestic ar bitration but at the same time limiting 
the supervision of international arbitration awards to the minimum. It is 
permissible to have “firmer control”  on domestic arbitration awards, as 
pointed out in the above passage. 

 285
We shall now refer to certain additi onal grounds of appeal which may have 
to be provided in Sec.34 or 37. 
 
2.10.1 Sec.34 (2) (iv) provides for filing objecti ons only in case the award deals with a 
dispute not contemplated by  or not falli ng within the terms of the submission to 
arbitration, or it contains decisions on ma tters beyond the scope of the submission to 
arbitration. It is however to be noticed that in case a dispute is referred or arising between 
the parties is not decided by the arbitrator, there is no provision therefor in Sec.34. No 
doubt Sec.33 (4) provides that within 30 days of  the receipt of the award , the aggrieved 
party can ask the arbitrator to make an a dditional award as to claims presented but 
omitted from the award.  But this may not be a sufficient remedy. In case the arbitrator 
refuses to accept the contention in his d ecision under Sec.33(4), no remedy is provided 
under Sec.34. Therefore, there is need to make a specific provision for filing objections in 
this behalf.  
 
It is true that the Model law as well as several other statutes of other countries do 
not deal with this aspect. Nonetheless  we can make a provision in our Act. 
The above provision in Sec.34 should obviously apply to both domestic and 
international arbitrations.  
2.10.2 Though Sec.34(2) (iv) provides a ground of objection in regard to an 
award on a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission or if it contains decisi ons on matter beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration, it does not  specifically cover all the aspects 

 286
referred  to in   Sec.16 of the Act whic h enable the arbitrator to decide his 
own jurisdiction, including objections as to the existence or validity of the 
agreements.  
It is therefore necessary, as already stated in the earlier chapters to provide a 
specific appeal in respect of decisions of the arbitrator under Section 16 of the Act. 
This amendment should apply to international awards also. 
 
2.10.3.  Though Sec.31(3) of the Act requires r easons to be given,( unless otherwise 
agreed or there is a settlement), Sec.34 does not specifically cover a case where no 
reasons are given in regard to each dispute. Among the various clauses in  Sec.34 (2) (a), 
sub clause (iv) alone deals with a challenge to the award by the party but does not cover 
this aspect. It is therefore necessary to provide such a ground for setting aside the award 
under section 34.   
This objection should apply to international awards also.  
2.10.4  “Misconduct” of arbitrators whether fact ual or legal has not been made a specific 
ground. Sec.34(2) (a) (iii) covers only few facets of violation of natural justice.  Section 
34(2) (a) (iv) deals with a situation where the arbitrator decides disputes which do not 
arise or are beyond the scope of his authorit y. Under Section 34 (2) (b) (ii) fraud and 
corruption are no doubt included within the scope  of violation of public policy of India 
and that could be a ground for a Court to se t aside the award.  The Supreme Court of 
India has held that non application of mind  by the arbitrator such as his not considering 
the relevant evidence, would amount to mi sconduct [ Dandasi Sahu Vs . State of Orissa 
(AIR 1990 SC 1128)]. There may be others kinds of misconduct also as interpreted by the 

 287
courts in India.It is said that Indian arbitrators excluding ,judges and  lawyers and 
experienced businessman --  , cannot be treated  at par with arbitrators in international 
arbitrations. 
Hence “misconduct” is to be included as  a ground of Appeal in Sec.34 or 37, so 
far as domestic arbitrations are concerned.    
The English Act 1996, instead of using the word ‘misconduct’ uses the word 
‘serious irregularity’ as a ground for setting as ide the award. The irregularities are set out 
in Section 68 (2) which are as follows (a pplicable to domestic and international 
arbitrations).  
a) failure by the tribunal to comply with Sec.33(General duty of tribunal) 
b) the tribunal exceeding its powers (o therwise than by the exceeding its 
substantive jurisdiction (See Sec.67)  
c) failure by the tribunal to conduct th e proceedings in accordance with the 
procedure agreed by the parties 
d) failure by the tribunal to deal with all the issues that were put to it. 
e) Any arbitral or other institution or person vested by the parties with powers in 
relation to the proceedings or the award exceeding its powers 
f) Uncertainty or ambiguity as to the effect of the award 
g) The award being obtained by  fraud or the award or the way in which it was 
procured being contrary to public policy 
h) Failure to comply with requirements as to the form of the award or  

 288
i) Any irregularity in the conduct of the proceedings or in the award which is 
admitted by the tribunal or by any arbitral or other institution or person vested 
by the parties with powers in relation to the proceedings or the award. 
In Sec.68(3) provision is made either to remit the award in whole or in 
part or set aside the award in whole or part or declare the award of no effect, 
in whole or in part. 
 
Question is whether ‘misconduct’ should be defined to include some or all the above 
features.  
It is however suggested that “misconduct” may be included as a specific ground 
in Sec.34, both in respect of domestic as well as  international.  arbitration is concerned.  
In England, ‘serious irregularity’ in Sec .68 covers both domestic and international 
arbitrations.  
2.10.5 Under Section 16 (1) (c) of the 1940 Act, an award could be set aside 
and the matter remitted to the arbitrator s if “an objection to the legality of 
the award is apparent upon the face of it”. So far as Sec.34 of the present Act 
is concerned, error of la w apparent on the face of the award is not a made a 
ground for setting aside the award.  
Even though under section 16(1)© of the Act of 1940, an award could 
be set aside and remitted where an objec tion to the legality of the award is 
apparent upon the face of it but under section 30 of the Act of 1940, an 

 289
explicit ground for setting aside of award,  namely, “error of law apparent on 
the face of the award” was not statutorily  inducted, yet it has been judicially 
recognized as a ground for setting aside the award.   
 
Again an exception has been engraf ted by the judge-made law to the 
above principle.  The Calcutta High Court ( B.K. Dhar(P) Ltd vs UOI, AIR 
1965 Cal 424  ) while relying upon Hodgkinson & Absalom cases (1857) 2 
CB (NS) 189 and (1933 AC 592) respectively,  held: “It is essential to keep 
the case where disputes are referred to an  arbitrator in the decision of which 
a question of law becomes material distinct from the case in which a specific 
question of law has been referred to him for decision… in the former case, 
the court can interfere if and when a ny error of law appears on the face of 
the award, but in the latter case, no such  interference is possible....  when the 
submission is on a specific question of la w and is such that it can be fairly 
construed to show that the parties intende d to give up their rights to resort to 
the courts, and in lieu thereof to subm it that question to the decision of a 
tribunal of their own, such decision cannot be questioned.”    
In the Upper Ganges Valley Electri city Supply Company Limited 
v. UP Electricity Board,  AIR 1973 SC 683,  while referring to AIR 1971 
SC 696, the court held that “it is, th erefore, plain that the appellant’s 

 290
application for setting aside the award can succeed only if there is an error of 
law on the face of the award.”  Similarly, in Coimbatore District P.T. 
Sangam v. Balasubramania Foundary AIR 1987 SC 2045, it was held that 
an award can only be set aside where there is an error on its face and not 
mistake of fact committed by the arbitrator. 
 
 In M/s Allen Berry & Company v. Union of India,  AIR 1971 SC 
696, the Supreme Court referred to  Hodgkinson Vs. Fernie, 1857 (3) CB 
(NS) 189  observations to the following effect: 
 
“Where a cause or matters in differe nce are referred to an arbitrator, 
whether a lawyer or a layman, he is constituted the sole and final 
judge of all questions both of law and fact….  The only exceptions to 
that rule are, cases where the award is the result of corruption or fraud 
and one other, which though it is to be regretted, is now, I think, 
firmly established, viz., where the question of law necessarily arises 
on the face of the award, or upon some paper accompanying and 
forming part of the award.” 
 

 291
 The court was empowered to rem it the award where an objection to 
the legality of the award is apparent upon the face of it.  Accordingly, there 
is necessity to explicitly incorporate a ground for setting aside the arbitral 
award under section 34(2)(a) of Act of 1996, to the following effect: 
 
“(vii)  that unless agreed to by the parties to refer the question of law to be decided by the 
arbitrator, in so far as domestic arbitration is concerned, where there is an error of law 
apparent on the face of award or upon some paper accompanying and forming part of the 
award in respect of disputes which are referred to an arbitrator in the decision of which a 
question of law becomes material.” 
It may be necessary therefore to include th is ground so far as domestic arbitration is 
concerned. 
 A further question is whether error of law will come within the meaning of the 
words “ public policy of India referred to in Sec.34(2)(b)(ii)? 
 So far as Sec.34 (2) (b) (ii) is concer ned, it refers to public policy of India. 
According to the Judgment of the Supr eme Court in Renu Sagar Power Company 
Limited Vs. General Electric Company (AIR 1994 SC 860 at Page 888) it is stated that an 
award would not be contrary to the public polic y of India merely because it is contrary to 
law. This conclusion is arrived at on a comp arison with Art.1(e) of Geneva convention 
and Section 7(1) of the Protocol and Conve ntion Act 1937 which use the words ‘law of 
the country’  in addition to public policy of the country. Such words are not found in the 
New York Convention which came up for consideration in the Renusagar. The Model 
law and Sec.34 (2) (b) (ii) use only the word ‘public policy of India’ and do not refer in 

 292
addition to violation of ‘law of the country’. Hence the Supreme Court decided that 
public policy of India would  not include errors of law but would only include  
1. Fundamental Policy of India 
2. interest of India 
3. justice or morality. 
In  the facts of  that case, violation of FERA and violations of orders of the Delhi High 
Court were treated as violations of “public po licy of India”. Charge of interest on interest 
and damages on damages were not treated as violation of “public policy of India”. 
 It is therefore necessary to consider whether an error of law apparent on 
the face of the award is to be treated as ground of objection under section 34 (2) so far as 
domestic arbitration is concerned.   
 
2.11  Power of the court to give opinion on question of law 
 Section 14(3) of the 1940 Act provide d that ‘where the arbitrators or 
umpire state a special case under clause (b) of sec.13, the court, after giving 
notice to the parties, and hearing them, shall pronounce its opinion thereon 
and such opinion shall be a dded to, and shall form part of, the award.  Here 
the arbitrators make the application to the court. 
 There is no corresponding provision in  the 1996 Act.  It is desirable 
that a similar provision is made in the present Act.  
 
2.12  Modification and Remission 

 293
 Under sec.15 of the 1940 Act there was a provision for modification 
of award – if a part of the award appeared to be upon a matter not referred or 
where the award was improper in form or contained an obvious error or a 
clerical or an accidental slip or omission.  
 
 Under Section 33(1)(a) of the 1996 Act, a provision is made for 
correction of errors of clerical and computational errors or errors of a similar 
nature, but no such power is given to the court, as was done by Section 15 of 
the Act of 1940. 
 
 The question is whether a right to appear or a right to file objection 
should be given against an order under section 33. 
 
2.13.  Power to supersede arbitration: 
 Under the old Act, sec.19 perm itted the court to supercede the 
arbitration agreement itself in certain situations – such as, where an award 
has become void under sec.16(3) or has b een set aside.  Under sec.16(3) an 
award remitted under sub-section (1) of  section 16 becomes void on failure 
of the arbitrator or umpire to reconsider it and submit his decision within the 
time fixed.  Sometimes, if the named arbitrators are guilty of serious 

 294
misconduct, the court have decided that it would not be desirable to remit 
the case for arbitration.  In such cases , under the old Act, the reference itself 
could be superseded  leaving it open to the parties to go for a suit.   
 The 1996 Act does not contain a ny provision for superseding the 
arbitration clause.  The English Act does not also contain any provision.  
Question is whether it is necessary to  have a provision for supersession of 
the reference. 
2.14  Minority dissenting view of arbitrator 
 Under sec.31(2) of the 1996 Act, it is stated that the signatures of the 
majority of the members shall be su fficient “so long as the reason for any 
omitted signature is stated.”  Sec.29(1)  states that, unless otherwise agreed, 
any decision of the arbitral tribunal with more than one member, shall be 
made by a majority of all its members. 
 This raises the question whether an  arbitrator who is in a minority 
could avoid signing the award.  It appears appropriate that section 31 9(2) 
may be amended providing that the di ssenting member shall be entitled to 
submit his dissenting opinion and the same shall be treated as an annexure to 
the award.  If the dissenting opinion is  annexed to the award, the court 
before whom the may be questioned, will have the benefit of the dissenting 
opinion as well. 

 295
 It appears to be settled law, at any ra te in international arbitration, that 
a dissenting opinion is not part of th e award and, if given, it remains on 
record only as a part of informati on, (see Fouchard etc. 1999 page 1403) 
unless the arbitration rules provide othe rwise.  In ICC. arbitration, the 
dissenting opinion is not examined by by the International Court of 
Arbitration under Art. 27 of the Rules,  as the court takes the dissenting 
opinion only a piece of information. 
 
 Thus, the existing provisions appear to be sufficient and no 
amendment appears to be necessary. 
 
2.15 Filing of awards before a court for purposes of record (section 31 
to be appropriately amended) and the court while enforcing the award – 
decree under section 36, to scrutinize  if the award had complied with 
the relevant laws relating to stamp duty and registration. 
 
Under the 1940 Act, the award had to be filed by the arbitrators 
in the ‘Court’ and the court w ould scrutinize the award before 
making it a rule of court, to ensure that the award complied 
with provisions relating  to stamp and registration.  Further, 

 296
once the award was in the cour t, there was little scope for 
tinkering with the date of the award or the body of the award. 
 Under the 1996 Act, it is stat ed in sec.36 that after the 
expiration of  time for making an application to set aside the 
arbitral award under sec.34 has e xpired, or such application 
having been made, it has been refused, the award shall be 
enforced under the Code of Ci vil Procedure 1908, in the same 
manner as if it were a decree of the court.  It need not be filed in 
any court at all. 
 It has been pointed out that there must be some record of 
the award is originally passed be fore a court or other authority 
and a registration of the awards received from arbitrators is to 
be maintained with a serial num ber and that it must be ensured 
that all the pages of the aw ard shall be duly stampedk and 
initialed by the presiding officer of the court or a ministerial 
officer of the court.  This would ensure the authenticity of 
awards and avoid any dispute as to the date or contents of the 
award as passed.  Hence sec.31 may be amended appropriately. 
 So far as the enforcement of the award under sec. 36 of 
the Act, a point has been raised  that unless it conforms to the 

 297
relevant provisions of the stamp laws and registration, the court 
should not enforce the same.  It has also been pointed out that if 
the award has to comply with the stamp and registration laws 
then, merely because the statute a llows it to be enforced as if it 
were a decree of the court, that  does not mean that it need not 
comply with the stamp and registra tion laws applicable to or at 
the stage of the award.   
 Here, it may be seen that in itially the arbitrators pass an 
award.  It is only after the tim e limits mentioned in sec.36 are 
over or the application for setti ng aside the award is referred 
that it becomes enforceable as decree.  Hence in sec.36 it may 
be clarified by way of amendment that for purposes of 
enforcement of the award as decree, the court will scrutinize 
whether, as an award it conforms  to the stamp and registration 
laws and compliance to those laws will be a condition 
precedent for enforcement of the decree.  
2.16  Independence or Bias or Disqua lification of named arbitrator: 
relationship with one of the parties to the contract and revocation of 
authority 
 

 298
 It is today a very common feature of cont ract in Government/Public Sector that in 
the event of differences arising between a contractor and the  Department, the 
Department can appoint one of its officers as  an arbitrator.  Such a provision has been 
held to be valid by the Supreme Court, Secretary Vs. Muniswamy 1988 Suppl SCC 651 
and (Nandyal Corp. Spinning Mills  Vs. K.V. Mohan) 1993 (2) SCC 654.  That was also 
the earlier English law. 
 
 But in sec. 24 of the UK Act, 1950 ther e was a power granted to the Court to 
grant relief where the arbitrator was not impartial.  Sec. 24(1) stated as follows: 
 
“Sec.24(1): Where an agreement between any parties provides that disputes which 
may arise in the future between them sha ll be referred to an arbitrator named or 
designated in the agreement, and after a dispute has arisen any party applies, on 
the ground that the arbitrator as named or designated 
is not  or  may not  be 
impartial, for leave to revoke the authority of the arbitrator or for an injunction to 
restrain any other party or the arbitrator  from proceeding with the arbitration, it 
shall not be a ground for refusing the appli cation that the said party at the time 
when he made the agreement knew or ought to have known, that the arbitrator, by 
reason of his relation  towards any other party to the agreement or of his 
connection with the subject referred, might not be capable of impartiality.” 
 
The ICC Rules require prospective arbitrator to disclose: 
 
“whether there exists any past or present relationship, direct or indirect, with any 
of the parties or any of their counsel, wh ether financial, professional, social or 
other kind and whether the nature of such relationship is such that disclosure is 
called for pursuant to ….. criteria ….. (of such a nature as to call into question the 
individual’s independence in the eyes of the parties.” 
 

 299
 Some statutes refer only to impartiality  such as the 1996 UK Act while the Model 
Law in Art.12 (2) refers to impartiality and independence.  Section 12(1) of the Indian 
Act also refers to both of them. 
 
 Fouchard and others (1999) (see para 1028) point out that ‘impartiality’ is a state 
of mind while ‘independence’ is a situation of f act or law.  Bias might, in some cases be 
a factor which affects an independent decision.  To some extent they overlap each other.  
Sec. 8 of the Swedish Arbitration Act refers to three aspects of ‘impartiality’: 
 
1) when the arbitrator or a person clos ely associated to him is a party, or 
otherwise may expect significant bene fit or detriment, as a result of 
the outcome of the dispute. 
 
2) where the arbitrator is a person closely associated to him is the 
director of a company or any other association which is a party, or 
otherwise represents a party or any other person who may expect 
significant benefit or detriment as  a result of the outcome of the 
dispute. 
 
3) where the arbitrator has taken a position in the dispute , as an expert or otherwise, 
or has associated a party in the preparation or conduct of his case in the dispute. 
 
French courts describe independence as follows: (ibid para 1029) 
 
“The independence of any arbitrator is esse ntial to his judicial role, in that from 
the time of his appointment he assumes the status of a Judge, which excludes any 
relationship of dependence , particularly with the parties.  Further, the 
circumstances relied on to challenge that independence must constitute, through 
the existence of mutual or intellectual links, a situation which is liable to affect 

 300
the judgment of the arbitration by creating a definite risk of bias in favour of a 
party to arbitration.” 
 
  In para 1030, the Fouchard and others say that, in the following 
situations, the arbitrators have been held not independent in several cases. 
 
(1) where, at the same time as the arbitral proceedings , an arbitrator was 
personally paid to provide  advice or  technical assistance to one of the parties 
to the arbitration. 
 
(2) Where, at the time of signature of a submission agreement in which he was 
appointed as a replacement arbitrator, an arbitrator was acting as a paid 
consultant to a company of the same group as that of the parties to arbitration.  
 
(3) where  the arbitrator was employed by a party on the day after he had made is 
award. 
 
The principle is based on a party’s ‘reasonable doubt’ as to the arbitrator’s independence 
or impartiality.  The Model law uses the word  ‘justifiable doubts’ (Art. 12(ii).  It is the 
justifiable doubt of the ‘reasonable man’. 
 
 In the domestic arbitration in US (and as accepted by AAA Commercial 
Arbitration  Rules), if each party is to appoint an arbitrator, they are not treated  as neutral 
and principle of independence is applied onl y to non-neutral arbitrators.  In other 
countries, this view as well as an opposite view  are prevalent.  However, in international 
arbitration, even if each party appoints an arbitrator, they must remain neutral and 
independent (ibid. paras 1043, 1044). 
 
 The above principles are parts of the ethical rules in various countries 
 

 301
“… commentators point to the pressure placed on party – appointed arbitrators 
nominated by governments , and advocate removing the requirement of 
independence and impartiality, so that th e parties should be free to appoint 
partisan arbitrators if they wish.” 
 
 We shall confine ourselves to dom estic arbitration.  A view is 
expressed that in Government or P ublic sector undertaking or government 
company or statutory corporations, one  may permit the existing system of 
departmental officer conducting the arbitration.  
 
 So far as other parties (not being Gove rnment or public sector corporation), the 
question is whether,  as in the case of the a bove bodies,  same procedure is to be applied 
or whether private parties should be totally debarred  from appointing their officers or 
those having business connections with them.  In the latter case, such a differentiation 
where both are private parties may be permissible in law, inasmuch as the employees of 
private corporations or bodies 
do not have the same security of tenure and statutory protection as is available to the 
employees of the Government and the public sector corporations.  
 Suggestion is that the challenge  procedure in sec. 13 will apply 
subject to the above procedure. 
 
2.17 Time limits for completion of domestic arbitration and guidelines in respect of 
fee stipulations 
 
 Under the 1940 Act, there was a pr ovision of four months from date 
of extending a reference, for passing of the award, (First Schedule, para 3) 
subject to parties seeking time from the court for extension.  The court could 
extend time under sec. 28.  This applied to domestic arbitrations. 
 

 302
 The Commission  recommended in its 76 th Report on Arbitration Act, 1940 inter 
alia that the proviso should be inserted be low section 28 so as to provide that no 
extension should be granted so as to allow the making of the award more than one year 
after the arbitrator’s entering on the referen ce unless the court, for special and adequate 
reasons, to be recorded in writing, is satis fied that such extension is necessary.  
Accordingly, it recommended the insertion of the following proviso below section 28:- 
 
“Provided that no extension shall be granted so as to allow the making 
of the award more than one year after entering on the reference, unless 
the court, for special and adequate reasons to be recorded in writing, is 
satisfied that such extension is necessary.” 
 
In the 1996 Act, there is no time limit fixed for the passing of the award either for 
domestic or international arbitration. 
 
 Question is whether, so far as domestic  arbitrations are concerned, any time limit 
is to be imposed.  (Of course under ICC Rules, time limits are prescribed even for 
international arbitration but the Model law does not prescribe any time limit.) 
 
 From the point of view of the parties, in any type of arbitration, the question of 
time is important.  Parties expect arbitrations to be completed early enough and that they 
do not suffer the same delays as in courts.  But experience shows that there are, by and 
large, more cases of delayed arbitrations in  our country.  The fixation of sitting fee for 
each day (or different sessions on same day) for the arbitrators has to some extent come 
under serious public criticism.  So far as the counsel appearing before the arbitrators are 
concerned, their conduct does not fall for dir ect consideration under the Arbitration Act 
but may be governed by other laws.  But, once th e arbitrators’ fee structure is allowed to 
pass through certain broad guidelines, it is hoped the arbitrators will be able to control the 
adjournments that may be sought by the lawyers appearing before them. 
 

 303
 Section 31(8) of the 1996 Act which refers to the matters to be specified in an 
award, reference is made  to ‘costs’ of an arb itration “to be fixed by the arbitral tribunal.  
The Explanation below that provision refers to the following:- 
 
(i) ‘fee and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses’ 
(ii) legal fees and expenses  
(iii) any administrative fees or 
(iv) other expenses. 
 
 Sec. 39(2) of the 1996 Act (corresponding to old sec.38(1) refers to ‘lien on 
arbitral award and deposit as to costs’.  Section 39(1) provides a lien for unpaid ‘costs’.  
Under sec. 39(2), the courts can have the ‘demanded costs’ deposited into court by the 
party, and pay the said amount of costs to th e arbitral tribunal.  The payment to the 
arbitral tribunal can be restricted to the am ount ‘the court may consider reasonable’ and 
balance can be refunded to the party.  Sub clau se (4) of sec. 39 permits the court to make 
such orders as it thinks fit respecting the co sts of arbitration where any question arises 
respecting such costs and the arbitral awar d contains no sufficien t provision concerning 
them. 
 
 The ICC and LCIA have fixed rules in regard to payment of fee for arbitrators.  
The ICC rules are based on time spent, the complexity of the dispute and relevant 
circumstances and percentages of the value of  the subject matter as fixed in Appendix 3 
of ICC Rules.  LCIA rules are based on time spent. 
 
 Russell suggests (1999) (para 4.094) a met hod for the arbitrators to fix fee as 
follows: 
“… to agree to a lump sum for the w hole arbitration, but if a case does not 
proceed to an award, disputes could arise over the arbitrator’s right to payment: 
or, if 
the case goes on much longer than expected, the arbitrator’s rate of 
renumeration can decline considerably.”  

 304
In para 4.097, Russell says, ‘excessive fee’ charge has been held to be 
‘misconduct; 
 
 Suggestions could therefore be made as to how the scale or rate of fee 
for the arbitrators can be fixed de pending upon the extent of reasonable 
progress of the case and as to how paym ent of fee can be reduced if the case 
does not progress fast and where the parties are not responsible for the 
adjournments. 
 
 We also recommend that the Code  of Ethics for the arbitrators 
and the lawyers appearing before the arb itral tribunals, be evolved, so far as 
the domestic arbitrations are concerne d.  Such a Code will help reduce 
unreasonable delays in concluding arbitral proceedings and would help 
expedite the proceedings.  Such a Code  should be made an appendix to the 
Act.  Suggestions are invited in this behalf. 

 305
 
Summary of Proposals 
1. While proposing amendments to the Arbitration & 
Conciliation Act, 1996 it is felt necessary to adhere to the 
objectives of speedy disposal and least court intervention, 
which were the crucial aspects of the Act.  However, 
where the Act has omitted to incorporate certain 
provisions of the Model Law, it is proposed to bring the 
Act in conformity with the M odel Law.  On that basis,   
so far as international arb itration is concerned, the 
provisions of Model Law are more or less adopted.  
However, in regard to domestic supervision, the 
proposals include a stricter supervision by court.  The 
following are the proposals: 
2. Section 5 of the Act does not   need any amendment (para 
2.1). 
3. In section 8, the word ‘judicial authority’ should be 
replaced by the word ‘court’.  The words “unless it finds 
the agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable 
of being performed” to be included so as to bring sec.8(1) 

 306
in conformity with Art.8 of Model Law.  In sec. 8, ‘court’ 
means  the ‘court’ in which suit is filed.  Appeals to lie to 
Division Bench of High Court from the decision of the 
court. 
4. In sec.11, the words ‘Chi ef Justice of India or his 
nominee’ should be replaced by the words ‘Supreme 
Court’ thereby meaning ‘Bench of two or more learned 
Judges of the court’.  The wo rds ‘Chief Justice of High 
Court or his nominee’ should be replaced by the words 
‘High Court’ thereby meaning a ‘Bench of two more 
more learned  Judges of the court’.  This will bring sec.11 
in conformity with Model Law which uses the word 
‘court’.  This will clarify that power that is exercised 
under section 11 is a judicial power.  The Supreme Court 
and High Court to clear off jurisdictional issues if raised 
at the stage of section 11 its elf.  If oral evidence is 
necessary, before the said courts, evidence is to be 
obtained by appointing Advocate Commissioners. 
5. In sec.16, the Act permits arbitral tribunal to decide 
questions of their own jurisdiction, including objections 

 307
as to the existence or validity of the arbitration 
agreement.  Arbitral tri bunal’s decision on preliminary 
issues to be allowed to be questioned before court, within 
30 days, even where the arbitr ators have   “rejected” the 
plea.  The right to object to th e decision      “rejecting” 
the preliminary jurisdictional issues to be included in 
section 34 or section 37.  In section 16(5), the word 
‘shall’ should be replaced by the word ‘may’.   
6. In sections 12 and 13, decision of the arbitrators on 
preliminary issue of bias or disqualification “rejecting” 
the plea to be also subject to objections to court under 
section 34 or 37.  In sec tion 13(4), the word ‘shall’ 
should be replaced by the word ‘may’. 
7. Provision under section 9 (interim measures) in Part I 
should be made applicable even to  foreign arbitration 
when the seat of arbitration is outside India.  This will 
bring the Act in conformity with laws elsewhere kwhich 
are  based on Model law. 
8. Provision under sections 8, 38 and 39 also to apply to 
foreign arbitration where seat of arbitration is outside 

 308
India and where such arbitra tions are not covered by Part 
II (New York or Geneva C onvention Awards).  Whether 
other provisions in English Act 1996 to support foreign 
award are to be introduced?  Should there be a definition 
of ‘seat of arbitration’? 
9. A provision similar to sec.21 of the 1940 Act, enabling 
any court (before which a su it or other proceeding is 
pending) to refer the parties to arbitration even if such an 
agreement is subsequent to the commencement of the suit 
or proceeding, should be introduced.  Provision to be 
made for challenging the award passed on such reference, 
in the same court.  This will enable all courts, including 
High Court/Supreme Court to refe r issues to arbitration, 
if parties so agree during th e proceedings and deal with 
the correctness of the awar d in the same court (on 
grounds mentioned in sec. 34 and sec. 37) rather than 
give a fresh lease of life to the litigation. 
10. S.34 (Sec.37) should be am ended by providing (1) a right 
to object to the preliminar y decision of the arbitral 
tribunal under sec.16 whether the tribunal accepts or 

 309
rejects the jurisdictional pleas; (2) a right to object to the 
preliminary decision of the arbitrator under sec.13 
whether the tribunal accepts or rejects the plea. 
11. Sec.34 (or sec.37) to provide for objections to be filed 
where the arbitral tribunal omits to decide certain 
questions referred and confe rring a power to remit the 
matter to the arbitral tribunal. 
12. Sec.34 (or sec.37) should pr ovide for objections to be 
filed if award does not contai n reasons in regard to any 
dispute and seek a supplement award containing  reasons. 
13. ‘Misconduct’ should be in cluded as a specific ground of 
attack in sec.34 (or sec.37).  Whether it should apply to 
domestic as well international arbitration? 
14. ‘Error of law apparent on the face of the award’ should 
be included as a specific ground in sec.34 (or sec. 37) 
(except where a specific question of law is referred to the 
arbitrators) but only in cases of domestic arbitration. 
15. Provision enabling arbitrator s to refer a question of law 
to the court should be included. 

 310
16. Provision for modification or remission of award should 
be included. 
17. Power should be granted to court to supersede arbitration 
(in cases of domestic arbitration only). 
18. Minority view should be appended to the award for 
information. 
19. All awards should be filed in the ‘court’ for purposes of 
record by amending sec.31, so that authenticity of awards 
is taken care of. 
20. Awards to be executable by court under section 36 only 
if they conform to laws relating to stamp 
duty/registration. 
21. Employees of one of the par ties should not be arbitrators, 
except in cases wher e they are  employees of Govt. or 
Public Sector undertakings or corporations. 
22. Whether upper time limit should be provided for 
completing arbitration proceedings, subject to extension 
by court only  for special reasons, so far as domestic 
arbitrations are concerned? 

 311
23. Whether and what guidelines should be prescribed for 
fixation of fee of arbitrator s and what special Code of 
Ethics is to be introduced to govern the arbitrators and 
lawyers appearing before arbitrators?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 312
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 313
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 314
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 