 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
ON 
 
 
 
 
LAW RELATING TO ARREST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2 
 
December 2001 
 
 
D.O. No. 6(3)(63)/99-L.C.(LS) 
 
December 14, 2001 
 
 
Dear Shri Jaitley, 
 
 I am herewith forwarding the 177 th Report on Law Relating to Arrest.  
This subject w as taken up by the Law  Commission suo motu w ith a view  to 
clearly delineate and regulate the pow er of arrest w ithout warrant vested in 
the Police by section 41 and other provisi ons of the Criminal Procedure Code.  
The said provisions w ere enacted befo re the judgment of the Supreme Court 
in Maneka Gandhi (1978).  The law laid down in the said decision casts a cloud 
upon the validity of some of the provisions in section 41 and allied provisions. 
 
With a view  to ascertain the exact situation obtaining today, w e had 
requested the National Human Rights Co mmission (NHRC) to collect the data 
from all the States w ith respect to th e number of arrests in a given year, the 
number of arrests for bailable offe nces, the number of arrests under 
preventive provisions and other rele vant particulars.  Accordingly, NHRC 
wrote to Director Generals of Police of all the States, who were good enough to 
send the material as required by us.   On  the basis of material so forw arded, 
we had prepared an extract, which is now annexed to this Report as Annexure 
II.  They establish that, overall, the arrests under the preventive provisions 
were more in number than the arrests fo r substantive offences and further 
that a large number of arrests w ere in respect of bailable offences which more 
often happen to be non-cogniz able offe nces (w herein no arrest can be made 
without a w arrant or order from a magistrate).   The Law  Commission 
accordingly prepared a Consultation Pa per setting out its provisional view s 
and issued a questionnaire to all concern ed.  Three seminars w ere held by the 
Law Commission at Delhi, Calcutta and Hyderabad respectively.  A large 
volume of responses w ere also received from the concerned members of the 
public, organiz ations and associations.  After duly considering all the said 
material, the Law Commission has prepared the accompanying Report. 
 
 We have suggested amendment of  section 41 and in particular 
substitution of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of section 41.  We have also 
recommended deletion of the present sub-section (2) of section 41 and 
substitution of another provision in its place.  Besides the amendment of 
section 41, amendments are recommended to  several other provisions in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure. 
 
 2 

 3 
 The theme of our Report is to maintain a balance between the liberty of 
the citiz ens (the most precious of all fundamental rights) and the societal 
interest in maintenance of peace and la w and order.   This is no doubt a 
difficult balance but it has to be attempted, and achieved to the extent possible.   
We have also taken note of certain im portant decisions of the Supreme Court 
including the decisions in Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P. (1994) and D.K. 
Basu (1997).  I am sure the Government will take these recommendations into 
consideration and take steps for implementing them. 
 
 With warm regards, 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
 
(B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
 
 
Shri Arun Jaitley, 
Union Minister for Law, Justice 
And Company Affairs, 
Government of India, 
Shastri Bhawan, 
NEW DELHI. 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
S.No.                    Contents       Page 
Nos. 
 
1. Chapter One           1-7 
 Introduction 
 
2. Chapter Two            8-16 
 The relevant provisions of the Constitution of India,         
 International Declarations/Covenants on Human Rights 
 and their interpretation by the Supreme Court of India 
 
3. Chapter Three               
 Relevant provisions of the Cr.PC and their interpretation      17-50 
 by the courts 
 
4. Chapter Four 
 3 

 4 
 Previous recommendations on the subject by Law Commission      51-75 
 of India and other bodies 
 
5. Chapter Five 
 The need for this study and the approach underlying it        76-
88 
 
6. Chapter Six 
 Proposals contained in the Consultation Paper and the  
 responses received thereto             89-
111 
 
7. Chapter Seven 
 Section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973          112-
138 
 
8. Chapter Eight 
 Implementing the decision in D.K. Basu           139-
141 
 
9. Chapter Nine 
 Plea bargaining and compounding of offences           
142-148 
 
10. Chapter Ten 
 Bail reform                149-157 
 
11. Chapter Eleven 
Certain recommendations for safety and well-being of Detainee           
158-166 
 amending section 172, separate investigating and prosecuting  
 agency and the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)  
 Bill, 2002                   
 
12. Annexure I 
 The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2002            
167-185 
 
13. Annexure II 
 Abstract of information furnished by the DGPs of various States           
186-187 
 
14.    Annexure III 
 Consultation Paper on the Law of Arrest      188 (1-86)  
 
 4 

 5 
Chapter One 
 
Introduction 
 
 Liberty is the m ost precious of all the hum an rights.  It has been the 
founding faith of the hum an race for m ore than 200 years.  Both the Am erican 
Declaration of Independence, 1776 and the French Declaration of the Rights of 
Man and the Citizen, 1789, spoke of liberty being one of the natural and inalienable 
rights of man.  The Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations on Decem ber 10, 1948, contains several articles 
designed to protect and promote the liberty of individual.   So does the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966.    Above all, Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India proclaims that no one shall be deprived of his liberty except in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.   Even Article 20 and clauses (1) 
and (2) of Article 22 are born out of a c oncern for hum an liberty.  As it is often 
said, one realizes the value of liberty only when he is deprived of it.   Verily, liberty 
along with equality is the m ost fundamental of hum an rights and the fundam ental 
freedoms guaranteed by our Constitution. 
 
 Of equal im portance is the m aintenance of peace and law and order in the 
society.  Unless there is peace, no real progr ess is possible.   Societal peace lends 
stability and security to the polity.  It provides  the necessary conditions for growth, 
whether it is in the economic sphere or in scientific and technological spheres.  Just 
as liberty is precious to an individual, so is the society interested in peace and 
maintenance of law and order in the society.  Both are equally important.  This fact 
was recognized about 2500 years ago by Herac litus of Ephesus.   He had observed 
“a m ajor problem  of hum an society is to combine that degree of liberty without 
which law is tyranny with that degree of law without which liberty becom es 
license”. (Quoted by Arthur T. Vanderbilt in his article “United W e Stand”.   
A.B.A.J. (Aug 1938) page 639) 
 
 5 

 6 
 Whether it is for securing the liberty of  an individual or for m aintaining the 
peace and law and order in the society, law is  essential.  Not only should there be a 
proper law, there should also be proper im plementation of law.   In short, the 
society should be governed by the rule of la w and not by the rule of an individual, 
however benevolent he m ay be.   Failure of rule of law is a sure indication of  the 
liberty of the individual coming into peril and so does the peace of the society.  It is 
therefore required of law that it should try to prom ote both these contending 
concepts and to m aintain a balance betw een them , viz., the balance between the 
necessity to protect and prom ote the liberty  of the individual and the necessity to 
maintain peace and law and order in the society. 
 
 This aspect has been repeatedly emphasized by the Suprem e Court in its 
various decisions to which a ref erence will be m ade at the appropriate stage.   
Indeed, the Court has enunciated several rules and guidelines which the executive 
should follow before interfering with th e liberty of a citizen.   Not only the 
Supreme Court, all the High Courts too ha ve been emphasizing the inalienable and 
invaluable nature of liberty as also the soci etal interest in peace and law and order.   
Even so, a large number of complaints persist, complaining of unlawful deprivation 
of liberty of the citizens at the hands of Police and other enforcement authorities, of 
their resort to unlawful methods of investigation and of cruel and unusual treatment 
of the accused while in their custody.   In view of these persisting and innum erable 
complaints appearing in the m edia a nd com ing before the courts, the Law 
Commission of India thought it appropriate to examine the law relating to arrest in 
all its facets, to find out whether any improvements can be suggested in the relevant 
legal provisions.  Accordingly, the Law Commission addressed the letter dated July 
20, 1999 to the then Chairman of National Human Rights Commission, Shri Justice 
M.N. Venkatachaliah, pointing out the provi sions in the Crim inal Procedure Code 
relating to arrest, the awesom e power vested by those provisions in one of the civil 
services of the State, nam ely, the Police - which indeed is the only arm ed civil 
service in our polity – the persisting com plaints of police excesses and requesting 
the NHRC’s help in the matter.   The relevant portion of the letter reads as follows: 
 6 

 7 
 
“To enable us to arrive at a proper conclusion on the aforesaid question, we 
must have em pirical data collected by an expert body.  In the course of 
discussions which I had with you on Sunday, you had suggested that it 
would be possible f or the Hum an Rights Com mission to constitute a 
committee of high police officials (retired or working), who shall select four 
districts in the country as case studi es and find out the num ber of arrests 
made by the police in that district in a given year without warrant, the 
number of arrests which were m ade without registering the crim e, the 
number of cases in which the person a rrested was released without filing a 
charge-sheet and the length of his de tention, the num ber of cases in which 
charge-sheets were filed and the num ber of cases in which the prosecution 
resulted in conviction.  It would also be necessary to categorize the offences 
in connection with which the persons  were arrested, the period of the 
detention in police and in judicial custody, the time taken for concluding the 
prosecution against them and if a person is kept in detention, the num ber of 
occasions on which he was not produced before the court on the dates of 
hearing.  It would also help us if a ny other relevant and incidental details 
and data, which the committee may think relevant, is also made available to 
us. 
The Law Com mission of India would be  grateful if you can appoint an 
expert committee and make data collected by them and findings recorded by 
them available to us.  W e would also welcom e any suggestions, ideas and 
recommendations which such expert body may record on the above subject 
keeping in view the recom mendations contained in the Police Com mission 
Reports.” 
 
 Accordingly, the NHRC wrote to all th e Director Generals of Police of 
various States in the country to provide the required inform ation.  The inform ation 
so gathered was m ade available to the Law Com mission.   The inform ation 
furnished by the DGPs of various States is reflected in an abstract prepared by the 
 7 

 8 
Law Com mission (which was appended to the W orking Paper) and which is 
appended to this Report as Annexure II.    The abstract contains 08 colum ns 
showing (1) Nam e of the State, (2) Th e total num ber of persons arrested under 
substantive offences, (3) The total num ber of persons arrested under preventive 
provisions, (4) The total num ber of persons chargesheeted in a year, (5) The total 
number of cases dropped without filing a chargesheet, (6) The total num ber of 
persons convicted in a year, (7) The percentage of persons arrested for bailable 
offences and (8) The percentage of persons arrested under preventive provisions 
and of the persons dropped without filing ch argesheets.  W hile we do not wish to 
repeat all the particulars in the said abst ract – also because the abstract itself is 
annexed to this Report as stated above – it m aybe necessary to point out a few 
revealing aspects.  In Delhi, while the total num ber of  persons arrested f or 
substantive offence is 57,163, the total number of persons arrested under preventive 
provisions is 39,824.   50% of the persons arrested were arrested for bailable 
offences.   If we take U.P., the num ber of arrests under the preventive provisions is 
far above the total num ber of arrests for substantive offences.  W hile preventive 
arrests are 4,79,404, the num ber of arrests for substantive offences are 1,73,634.  
The percentage of persons arrested in ba ilable offences is 45.13.   In Haryana, the 
percentage of arrests under bailable provi sions is 94%, in Kerala it is 71%, in 
Assam it is 90%, in Karnataka it is 84.8%, in M.P. it is 89% and in Andhra Pradesh 
it is 36.59%.   Indeed a perusal of the sa id abstract/Annexure II would disclose the 
unduly large num ber of arrests under preventive provisions as well as for bailable 
offences.  It is dif ficult to believe that in all these arrests for bailable offences, 
warrants were issued by the m agistrates.  Indeed an overwhelm ing percentage of 
those arrests were by the Police without a wa rrant.  This is equally disturbing even 
if some of them  are preventive arrests, as was suggested by som e police officers 
during one of the sem inars.  It is a m atter of common knowledge that it is the poor 
who are at the receiving end of the exce sses by law enforcem ent authorities.  A 
man without property and without a regular incom e is always under  suspicion of 
being a thief or a person out to com mit so me offence.  In this sense, “poverty 
(itself) is crime” – a truism echoed by George Bernard Shaw. 
 8 

 9 
 
The unnecessary incarceration of undertrials in jails is another disturbing 
feature of our crim inal judicial system .  The decisions of the Suprem e Court and 
High Courts and the reports of the Nati onal Police Commission say that a m ajority 
of the inmates of jail are undertrials.  Ma ny of them languish in jails because they 
are not able to either m ove for bail or to  furnish the bail prescribed by the court – 
again a consequence of poverty.   Num ber of instances have been pointed out by 
courts where undertrials have been kept in jails for periods longer than the 
maximum period for which they could have been sentenced had they been found 
guilty of the offence with which they were charged. 
 
 In the light of the facts and figures fu rnished to us by the Director Generals 
of Police and in the light of the decisions  of the courts and the Reports of the 
National Police Com mission, the Law Com mission prepared a Consultation Paper 
on the Law of Arrest.   The said Consulta tion Paper  is appended to this Report as 
Annexure II I.    Several proposals were put forward in the Consultation Paper 
which were meant to evoke a debate in the concerned sections of the society and to 
bring to their notice the facts and figures c ontained in Annexure II.    Copies of the 
Consultation Paper were sent to a ll the Bar associations, Hum an Rights 
organizations, Director Generals of Police,  State Governm ents, Union Ministry of 
Home Affairs and to all other persons in terested in public af fairs.  The Law 
Commission conducted three sem inars on the subject, at Delhi, Calcutta (in 
association with the West Bengal University for Juridical Sciences) and Hyderabad 
(in association with the National Academ y for Legal Services and Research), 
whereat a large num ber of very high Police officials, Secretaries to Governm ent, 
representatives of Human Rights organizations, leading members of the Bar and the 
society participated and offered their inva luable suggestions and criticism .   W e 
have also received a large number of responses from various sections of society and 
organizations, all of which have been co llated and duly considered while preparing 
this Report. 
 9 

 10 
Chapter Two 
 
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of India, International 
Declarations/Covenants on Human Rights and their interpretation by the Supreme 
Court of India 
 
 
 Article 21 of  the constitution of  India declares that “no person shall be 
deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by 
law”.   The heading of  the said Article is “Protection of  life and personal liberty”.  
Article 20 contains three guarantees, nam ely, (a) not to be convicted of an offence 
which was not in force or punishable at the time of the commission of the offence, 
(b) not to be prosecuted or punished for the same offence m ore than once and (c) 
not to be com pelled to be a witness agains t himself.      These are all the rights 
guaranteed to a person accused of an offence.  Clause (1) of Article 22 declares that 
“No person who is arrested shall be detain ed in custody without being informed, as 
soon as m ay be, of the grounds for such arre st nor shall he be denied the right to 
consult, and to be defended by, a legal prac titioner of his choice”.    Clause (2) of 
Article 22 is indeed m ore fundamental.  It  says “Every person who is arrested and 
detained in custody shall be produced before  the nearest magistrate within a period 
of 24 hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from  the 
place of arrest to court of the m agistrate and no such person shall be detained in 
custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate”. 
 
Though Article 21 is worded in negativ e terms, it is well-established now 
that it has both a negative and an affirm ative dimension.   A Constitution Bench of 
the Suprem e Court exam ined the content of the expression ‘personal liberty’ in 
Article 21 in Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. (1964 1 SCR 332 = AIR 1963 SC 
1295).     Rajagopala Ayyangar J., speaking for the majority, said: 
 
“We shall now proceed with the ex amination of the width, scope and 
content of the expression  ‘personal liberty’ in Article 21….  We feel unable 
 10 

 11 
to hold that the term was intended to bear only this narrow interpretation but 
on the other hand consider that ‘personal liberty’ is used in the article as a 
compendious term to include within itself  all the varieties of  rights which 
go to make up the ‘personal liberties’ of  man other than those dealt with in 
the several clauses of Article 19(1).   In other words, while Article 19(1) 
deals with particular species or attributes of that freedom , ‘personal liberty’ 
in Article 21 takes in and comprises the residue.” 
 
The learned Judge quoted the dissenting opinion of Field, J. (one of those 
dissenting opinions which have outlived the m ajority pronouncements) in Munn v. 
Illinois ((1877) 94 US 113, 142) attributing a broa der meaning to the word “life” in 
the fifth and fourteenth am endments to the US constitution, which correspond inter 
alia to Article 21 of our Constitution.  The learned Judge held that the word 
‘personal liberty’ would include the priv acy and sanctity of  a m an’s home as well 
as the dignity of the individual. 
 
The m inority opinion in the said decision, however, placed a m ore 
expansive interpretation on Article 21.   They said: 
 
“No doubt the expression ‘personal liber ty’ is a comprehensive one and the 
right to m ove freely is an attribute of personal liberty.  It is said that the 
freedom to move freely is carved out of  personal liberty and, therefore, the 
expression ‘personal liberty’ in Article 21 excludes that attribute.  In our 
view, this is not a correct approac h.  Both are independent fundam ental 
rights, though there is overlapping.  There is no question of one being 
carved out of another.  The fundam ental right of life and personal liberty 
have m any attributes and som e of them  are found in Article 19.   If a 
person’s fundamental right under Article 21 is infringed, the State can rely 
upon a law to sustain the action; but that cannot be a com plete answer 
unless the said law satisf ies the test la id down in Article 19(2) so f ar as the 
attributes covered by Article 19(1) are concerned.” 
 11 

 12 
 
In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (1978 (1) SCC 248 = AIR 1978 SC 
597), Bhagwati J. held that the judgm ent in R.C. Cooper v. Union of India (AIR 
1970 SC 564) has the effect of overruling the majority opinion and of approving 
the minority opinion in Kharak Singh. 
 
In Bolling v. Sharpe, W arren, C.J. speaking for the U.S. Suprem e Court 
observed: 
 
“Although the court has not assum ed to define ‘liberty’ with any great 
precision, that term  is not confined to mere freedom from bodily restraint.   
Liberty under law extends to the full range of conduct which the individual 
is free to pursue, and it cannot be  restricted except for a proper 
governmental objective.” 
 
 These words, though spoken in the cont ext of the US Bill of Rights, have 
yet been relied upon in various decisions of the Supreme Court of India. 
 
 In Maneka Gandhi v. UOI, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court went 
into the m eaning of the expression “procedur e established by law” in Article 21.    
The Court held that the procedure estab lished by law does not m ean any procedure 
but a procedure which is reasonable, just and fair.   In fact Article 19 and Article 14 
were both read into Article 21 f or this purpose.   The following dicta from  the said 
decision bears reproduction: 
 
“the law must therefore now be taken to be well-settled that Article 21 does 
not exclude Article 19 and that even if there is a law prescribing a procedure 
for depriving a person of ‘personal liberty’ and there is consequently no 
infringement of the fundam ental right  conferred by Article 21, such law, 
insofar as it abridges or takes away any fundamental right under Article 19 
would have to m eet the challenge of  that Article….   Now, if  a law 
 12 

 13 
depriving a person of ‘personal liberty’ and prescribing a procedure for that 
purpose within the m eaning of  Article 21 has to stand the test of one or 
more of the fundam ental rights conf erred under Article 19 which m ay be 
applicable in a given situation, ex-hypot hesi it m ust also be liable to be 
tested with reference to Article 14….   There can be no doubt that it (Article 
14) is a founding faith of the Constituti on.  It is indeed the pillar on which 
rests securely the foundation of our democratic republic….    In fact 
equality and arbitrariness are sworn enem ies; one belongs to the rule of law 
in a republic, while the other, to th e whim  and caprice of an absolute 
monarch.  Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both 
according to political logic and constituti onal law and is therefore violative 
of Article 14.   Article 14 strikes at ar bitrariness in State action and ensures 
fairness and equality of  treatment.  The principle of  reasonableness, which 
legally as well as philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-
arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding om nipresence and the 
procedure contem plated by Article 21 m ust answer the test of 
reasonableness in order to be in conf ormity with Article 14.  It m ust be 
“right and just and fair” and not arbitr ary, fanciful or oppressive; otherwise, 
it would be no procedure at all and th e requirement of Article 21 would not 
be satisfied.” 
       (em phasis added) 
 
 Several jurists have opined, not without  justification, that the effect of 
Maneka Gandhi is to practically im port the concep t of ‘due process of law’ from  
the Am erican Constitution into our jurisprude nce.     Be that as it m ay, the f act 
remains that the procedure established by law which af fects the liberty of  a citizen 
must be right, just and fair  and should not be arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive and 
that a procedure which does not satisfy the said test would be violative of Article 
21.  W e have to exam ine the relevant pr ovisions in the Crim inal Procedure Code, 
1973 (relating to arrest) from the above standpoint. 
 
 13 

 14 
 The concept of ‘hum an rights’ is not of recent origin. The  expression was 
first employed in the Declaration of United Nations signed by the Allied Powers on 
January 1, 1942.  The concept owes its origin, in western thought, to the Bill of 
Rights, 1689 which declared for the first tim e that “excessive bail ought not to be 
required nor excessive fine im posed, nor cruel and unusual punishm ent inflicted”.  
The French Declaration on the Rights of  Man and the Citizen also spoke of 
“freedom from arrest except in conform ity with the law”, in addition to “liberty, 
property, security and resistance to oppre ssion” which were declared to be the 
natural and inalienable rights of m an.   The f irst ten am endments to U.S. 
Constitution effected in 1791, speak of all the above concepts and m ore.   The 
Declaration of United nations dated Janua ry 1, 1942 stated, inter alia, “com plete 
victory over their enem ies is essential to defend life, liberty, independence and 
religious freedom and to preserve human rights  and justice in their own lands as 
well as in other lands”.   The several artic les of the UN Charter speak of respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex or 
religion.   The Universal Declaration of Hum an Rights adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations on Decem ber 10, 1948 declared that no one shall 
be subject to arbitrary arrest, detention or  exile (Article 9).   Article 12  provided 
that the privacy, reputation and honour of every individual shall be protected by the 
State.   Article 9(1) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966 
declares, inter alia, that “every one has th e right to liberty and security of person 
(and that) no one shall be subject to arbitrar y arrest or detention”.   Clause (3) of 
Article 9 declares further that “any one arrested or detained on a crim inal charge 
shall be brought prom ptly before a judge or other officer authorized by law to 
exercise judicial power and shall be entitle d to trial within a reasonable tim e or to 
release.  It shall not be the general rule  that the persons awaiting trial shall be 
detained in custody but release m ay be subj ect to guarantees to appear for trial at 
any stage of the judicial proceedings a nd, should occasion arise, for execution of 
the judgment”.     Article 10(1) of the C ovenant declares that “all persons deprived 
of their liberty shall be treated with hum anity and with respect f or the inherent 
dignity of the hum an person”.   Artic le 17 says that the privacy, honour and 
 14 

 15 
reputation of an individual shall not be inte rfered with unlawfully.   Article 2(2) of 
the Covenant creates an obligation upon the ratifying States to enact dom estic 
legislation to give effect to the rights guaranteed by the Covenant.  Article 3 creates 
a further obligation upon such States to ensure that the rights guaranteed by the 
Covenant are made available to all their citizens. 
 
 India ratified the 1966 Covenant on April 10, 1979. 
 
A question m ay arise - what is the eff ect of the international covenants or 
agreements signed and ratified by India.  Ar e they enforceable in Indian courts?  
Can the citizens of this country seek to  found any rights on the provisions of, say, 
the ICCPR, 1966 and have them  enforced  through courts?  The position in this 
behalf is this:  Treaties, agreem ents and covenants signed and ratified by the 
Government of India do not autom atically becom e a part of our dom estic law.  
Unless and until the Parliam ent or the Stat e Legislature undertakes legislation in 
terms of such agreem ents or covenants, no one can rely upon the provisions of the 
agreement/covenant to claim  or found any rights thereon.   But so far as hum an 
rights are concerned, the courts have b een adopting a m ore progressive line and 
have declared that insofar as the rights d eclared in such international instrum ents 
are consistent with the fundam ental rights guaranteed by Part Three of the 
Constitution, they can be read as facets of  and to elucidate the content of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution vide PUCL v. UOI (1997 SC 
1203) and Vishakha v. State of Rajasthan (1997 (6) SCC 241).   In the first 
mentioned case, it is held: “For the pres ent, it would suffice to state that the 
provisions of the covenant, which elucidat e and go to effectuate the fundam ental 
rights guaranteed by our Constitution, can certainly be relied upon by Courts as 
facets of those fundam ental rights and hence,  enforceable as such”.  To the sam e 
effect is the holding in the second case, where it is held: “Any international 
convention not inconsistent with the Fundam ental Rights and in harm ony with its 
spirit must be read into these provisions to enlarge the meaning and content thereof, 
to promote the object of the constitutional guarantee”. 
 15 

 16 
 16 

 17 
Chapter Three 
 
Relevant provisions of the Cr.P.C. and their interpretation 
by the courts 
 
 
 Chapter five of the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1973 deals with the arrest 
of persons.  Section 41 is the m ain sec tion providing for situations when Police 
may arrest without warrant.  It reads as follows: 
 
“41. When police m ay arrest without warrant.-  (1) Any police officer 
may without an order from  a Magistra te and without a warrant, arrest any 
person- 
a) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence , or against whom  a 
reasonable com plaint has been m ade or credible inform ation has been 
received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been so 
concerned; or 
b) who has in his possession without lawful excuse, the burden of proving 
which excuse shall lie on such person, any im plement of house-
breaking; or 
c) who has been proclaim ed as an offender either under this Code or by 
order of the State Government; or 
d) in whose possession anything is found which m ay reasonably be 
suspected to be stolen property and who may reasonably be suspected of 
having committed an offence with reference to such thing; or 
e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who 
has escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or 
f) who is reasonably suspected of bei ng a deserter from  any of the Arm ed 
Forces of the Union; or 
g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has 
been made, or credible inform ation has been received, or a reasonable 
suspicion exists, of  his having been concerned in, any act com mitted at 
 17 

 18 
any place out of India which, if com mitted in India, would have been 
punishable as an offence, and for wh ich he is, under any law relating to 
extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in 
custody in India; or 
h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under 
sub-section (5) of section 356; or 
i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been 
received from  another police offi cer, provided that the requisition 
specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for 
which the arrest is to be m ade and it appears theref rom that the person 
might lawfully be arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued 
the requisition. 
 (2) Any officer in charge of a poli ce station may, in like m anner, arrest 
or cause to be arrested any pers on, belonging to one or m ore of the 
categories of persons specified in section 109 or section 110.” 
 
 Section 42 specifies yet another situa tion where a police officer can arrest a 
person.  According to this section if a pe rson commits an offence in the presence of 
a police officer  or where he has been accused of com mitting a non-cognizable 
offence and refuses, on dem and being m ade by a police officer to give his nam e 
and residence or gives false nam e or residence, such person m ay be arrested but 
such arrest shall be only f or the lim ited purpose of ascertaining his nam e and 
residence.    After such ascertaining, he  shall be released on executing a bond with 
or without sureties, to appear before a m agistrate if so required. In case the nam e 
and residence of such person cannot be ascertained within 24 hours from the date of 
arrest or if such person fails to execute a bond as required, he shall be forwarded to 
the nearest magistrate having jurisdiction.   
 
 Section 43 speaks of a situation where an arrest can be m ade by a private 
person and the procedure to be followed on such arrest.  Section 44 deals with 
arrest by a m agistrate – whether judici al or executive – of a person who has 
 18 

 19 
committed an of fence in his presence; the magistrate can either arrest the person 
himself or direct another person to do s o.  Section 45 protects the m embers of the 
Armed Forces from  being arrested under sections 41 to 44, except after obtaining 
the consent of the Central Governm ent.  Sub-section (2) of this section em powers 
the State Governments to apply the provision in sub-section (1) to such members of 
the Force charged with m aintenance of law and order, as m ay be specified in the 
Notification.   Section 46 sets out the m anner in which the arrest should be m ade.  
It says that the arresting officer “sha ll actually touch or confine the body of the 
person to be arrested, unless there be a subm ission to the custody by word or 
action”.  The section further says that if su ch person resists the arrest or attempts to 
evade the arrest, the police officer “m ay use all m eans necessary to effect the 
arrest”.   Section 47 enables the police officer to enter a place if he has reason to 
believe that the person to be arrested has entered into that place or is within that 
place.   The owner/occupier of such pl ace is placed under an obligation to provide 
all reasonable facilities for search.   If necessary, the police officer can break open 
doors/windows etc. for obtaining entry ev en without a warrant.  Section 48 
empowers the police officers to pursue a person, whom they are authorized to arrest 
without warrant, into any place in Indi a beyond their jurisdiction.  Section 49 
however provides that “the person arrested shall not be subjected to m ore restraint 
than is necessary to prevent his escape”.   Section 50 (which corresponds to clause 
(1) of Article 22 of the Constitution) creates an obligation upon the police officer to 
communicate to the person arrested full par ticulars of the offence for which he is 
arrested or other grounds for such arrest forthwith.  It also provides that where a 
person is arrested for a bailable offence, without a warrant, the police officer shall 
inform the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he m ay 
arrange for sureties on his behalf.   This section (and section 436) recognize the 
power of the police to arrest  a person without a warrant in case of bailable offence.  
Of course, it follows from  the definition of “cognizable offence” and of “non-
cognizable offence” in clauses (c) and (l ) respectively of section 2 that such 
bailable offence has to be a cognizable offence.  In other words, no arrest (without 
warrant) can be made by the police of a person accused of a bailable offence unless 
 19 

 20 
it is a cognizable offence.  Section 51 provides for search of arrested person, 
whether arrested under a warrant or otherw ise, preparing a list of articles found on 
such person and giving a receipt to him  therefor.  Section 52 em powers the police 
officer to seize offensive weapons from  the arrested person.  The weapons seized 
shall be produced along with the person befo re the m agistrate or other com petent 
officer.  Section 53 empowers the police officer to direct medical examination of an 
arrested person if he has reasonable grounds to believe that such exam ination will 
afford evidence as to com mission of an offence.  Such m edical examination shall 
have to be m ade only by a   “registered m edical practioner”; in case of a wom an, 
such examination has to be done only by a fe male registered m edical practitioner.   
Section 54 gives a corresponding right to the arrested person to request the 
magistrate before whom  he is produced to  direct his m edical examination, if such 
examination “will af ford evidence which will disprove the com mission by him  of 
any of fence or which will establish th e com mission by any other person of  any 
offence against his body”.  (Evidently, this includes a request for m edical 
examination of his body, by the accused, where he alleges ill-treatment at the hands 
of the police.) If such a request is m ade, the m agistrate is bound to order such 
examination.  Section 55 prescribes the procedure to be followed when a police 
officer deputes his subordinate to arrest a person without warrant.  Sections 56 and 
57 (which correspond to clause (2) of Article 22 of the Constitution),   provides that 
the person arrested shall not be kept in the custody of a police officer for a longer 
period than is reasonable and that in any event such period shall not exceed 24 
hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the 
magistrate’s court.  Of course if the m agistrate permits the police of ficer to keep 
such person in his custody, he can do so beyond the period of 24 hours.  Section 58 
casts an obligation upon the officers in char ge of police station to report to the 
District Magistrate of arrests m ade without warrant within their jurisdiction and of 
the fact whether such persons have been adm itted to bail or not.  Section 59 says 
that no person arrested by a police officer shall be discharged except on his own 
bond or bail or under the special order of a magistrate.  Section 60, which is the last 
 20 

 21 
section in the chapter, em powers the pe rson having the lawful custody to pursue 
and retake the arrested person if he escapes or is rescued from his custody. 
 
 The other relevant and im portant provisions in this behalf are contained in 
Chapter Eleven – Preventive Action of the Police.   Section 149 says that “every 
police officer m ay interpose for the purpose of preventing and shall to the best of 
his ability prevent the com mission of any cognizable offence” .   Section 150 says 
that every police officer receiving inform ation of a design to com mit any 
cognizable offence shall com municate such information to the police officer to 
whom he is subordinate and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or to 
take cognizance of the com mission of any such offence.  Section 151 is an 
important provision and confers a very va st power upon the police officers.  Sub-
section (1) of section 151 says that “A  police officer knowing of a design to 
commit any cognizable offence m ay arrest, without orders from  a m agistrate and 
without a warrant, the person so designing if  it appears to such officer that the 
commission of the offence cannot be otherwis e prevented”.   Sub-section (2) says 
that “no person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained in custody for a 
period exceeding 24 hours from the time of his arrest unless his further detention is 
required or authorized under any other provisi ons of this Code or of any other law 
for the tim e being in force”.   Sec tion 152 is another im portant provision, 
particularly in the present-day context, wh ere on the slightest pretext, people attack 
and dam age public property like buses, railway property and other public 
properties.  The section em powers a poli ce officer to interpose, of his own 
authority, to prevent any injury attempted to be committed in his view to any public 
property, movable or im movable, or the re moval or injury of any public landm ark 
or buoy or other m ark used for navigati on.    Section 153 confers power upon the 
police officers to inspect weights  and m easures and to take proper action in that 
behalf. 
 
 Chapter Twelve of the Code also contai ns certain provisions relevant in this 
behalf.  Section 154 creates an obligati on upon an officer in charge of a police 
 21 

 22 
station to record every information received by him relating to the commission of a 
cognizable offence.  If he refuses to so  record, the person giving the inform ation 
can send the same by post to the Suprintendent  of Police who shall, if satisfied that 
such inform ation discloses the com mission of a cognizable offence, either 
investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer 
subordinate to him .  Section 155 deals with information regarding non-cognizable 
cases and the further steps to be taken by th e police officer in that behalf.   Section 
156 deals with the police officer’s power to investigate cognizable cases.    Sub-
section (1) says that “Any officer in ch arge of a police station m ay without the 
order of a m agistrate, investigate a ny cognizable case which a court having 
jurisdiction over the local area within the limits of such station, would have power 
to inquire into or try under the provisions of chapter 13”.     Sub-section (2) says at 
the same time that “No proceeding of a poli ce officer in any such case shall at any 
stage be called in question on the ground that  the case was one which such officer 
was not empowered under this section to i nvestigate”.   Sub-section (3) em powers 
the m agistrate  em powered under secti on 190 to order investigation into a 
cognizable offence.    Section 157 – ‘Proce dure for investigation’ - prescribes the 
procedure which should be followed during the course of investigation.  It says that 
if the officer  in charge of a police station receives inform ation of the com mission 
of an offence which he is empowered to investigate under section 156 and if he has 
reason to believe the said inform ation, he  shall send a report of the sam e to the 
concerned m agistrate and shall proceed to  the spot to investigate the facts and 
circumstances of the case and “if necessary to take m easures for the discovery and 
arrest of the offender”.   He is also em powered to depute one of his subordinate 
officers for the purpose instead of going himself. 
 
 Two other provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure which require to 
be noticed, in view of the f act that they are referred to in sub-section (2) of section 
41, are sections 109 and 110.   Section 109 provides for an Executive Magistrate 
calling upon a person to show cause why he should not be directed to execute a 
bond with or without sureties for his good behaviour for a period not exceeding one 
 22 

 23 
year, if he believes on the basis of inform ation received by him , that the person is 
“taking precautions to conceal his presence…. with a view to com mitting a 
cognizable offence”.   Section 110 empowers the Executive Magistrate to call upon 
a person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond with 
sureties, for his good behaviour for a period not exceeding three years if he receives 
information that the person is a habitual  offender.   (Section 110 m entions the 
nature of offences as well.)   After due  inquiry, orders have to be passed under 
section 117. 
 
In a number of sections referred to hereinabove, the expression “cognizable 
offence” occurs frequently.  W hat is a “cognizable offence”? one m ay ask.   The 
expression is defined in clause (c) of  section 2 in the f ollowing words: “ 
“Cognizable offence” means an offence for which, and “cognizable case” m eans a 
case in which, a police officer m ay, in accordance with the First Schedule or under 
any other law for the tim e being in force, arrest without warrant”.   A few m ore 
definitions m ay also be noted.  “Baila ble offence” and “non-cognizable offence” 
are defined in clauses (a) and (l), respectively as follows:  “Bailable offence” means 
an offence which is shown as bailable in  the First Schedule, or which is m ade 
bailable by any other law for the tim e being in force; and “non-bailable offence” 
means any other offence”.   ““Non-cogni zable offence” m eans an offence for 
which, and “non-cognizable case” m eans a case in which, a police officer has no 
authority to arrest without warrant””.   The Schedule to the Code contains a table 
indicating which of the several offences in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, are 
cognizable or non-cognizable and which of them are bailable or non-bailable. 
 
Pausing here for a moment, we may notice the basis/criteria upon which the 
offences in IPC have been categorized  into cognizable and non-cognizable.   
Cognizability in the Code is not prem ised upon the quantum  of punishm ent 
prescribed or the gravity of the crim e but upon the need to arrest the person 
immediately for one or the other relevant purposes viz., to prevent the person from  
committing further offences, the need to r eassure the public that they can feel 
 23 

 24 
reassured about the effectiveness of th e law and order m achinery, the need of 
investigation and may be, in som e instances, the need to protect the offender from  
the wrath of public and so on.  It is for this  reason that a close nexus is m aintained  
between cognizability and arrestability.  So far as the other categorization viz., 
between bailable and non-bailable offences, is concerned, it appears by and large to 
be based upon the gravity of the offence (w hich necessarily means the quantum of 
punishment prescribed therefor) and the need to keep the offender incarcerated 
pending investigation and trial.  This aspect has to be kept in m ind in view of the 
oft-repeated criticism  that the distinction between cognizable and non-cognizable 
offences as also the categorization betw een bailable and non-bailable offences is 
illogical and is not based upon any consistent or acceptable logic. 
 
It may be m entioned at this stage th at the CrPC is not the only enactm ent 
providing for arrest of an individual.   There are other enactm ents too.   But the 
main enactment is the CrPC and the prin ciples underlying are applicable to other 
statutes as well, subject to such m odifications or special rules as m ay be provided 
in that behalf by such other enactment. 
 
The aforementioned review of the releva nt provisions of the Code discloses 
conferment of a vast, som etimes absolute and on som e other occasions, an 
unguided and arbitrary power of arrest upon police officers.   Significantly, 
however, none of the provisions in the Code confers the power “to stop and search” 
a person (without arresting him  first), which power is conferred upon them  by 
enactments of som e countries.    Section 51 says that a police officer m ay search 
the person, after he is arrested and make a list of articles found upon him.    
 
Arrest of a person without warrant and without an order from  a m agistrate 
seriously invades the liberty of a citizen and is indeed a grave m atter. The norm al 
protection which is available to a person wh en he is arrested under a warrant is not 
available in case of arrest without warra nt.  In case of arrest under a warrant, a 
judicial authority has applied his m ind to the facts and circum stances of the case 
 24 

 25 
and has thought it fit to direct that the pers on be arrested, whereas in the case of an 
arrest without warrant by the Police, the matter rests more in the realm of the police 
officer’s subjective satisfaction.   As far back as 1952, a Constitution Bench of the 
Supreme Court referred to this aspect in State of Punjab v. Ajaib Singh (AIR 1953 
SC page 10).   The following observations of the Suprem e Court are relevant.   
(The reference in the judgm ent is to th e provisions of the Code of Crim inal 
Procedure, 1898, then in force.): 
 
“Broadly speaking, arrests m ay be cla ssified into two categories, nam ely, 
arrests under warrants issued by a Cour t and arrests otherwise than under 
such warrants. As to the first category of arrest, Ss.75 to 86 collected under 
sub-heading “B-W arrant of Arrest” in  chap.5, Crim inal P.C., deal with 
arrests in execution of warrants issued by a Court under that Code.  Section 
75 prescribes that such a warrant m ust be in writing signed by the presiding 
officer….    Form  No.2 of sch.5 to the Code is a form  of warrant for the 
arrest of an accused person. The warrant quite clearly has to state that the 
person to be arrested stands charged with a certain offence. Form  No.7 of 
that Schedule is used to bring up a w itness. The warrant itself  recites that 
the Court issuing it has good and sufficient reason to believe that the 
witness will not attend as a witness unl ess compelled to do so. The point to 
be noted is that in either case the warrant ex facie sets out the reason for the 
arrest, namely, that the person to be arrested has committed or is suspected 
to have committed or is likely to commit some offence. In short, the warrant 
contains a clear accusation against the person to be arrested.” 
 
 The Court then referred to the provisions under sub-heading ‘B-Arrest 
Without Warrant’ in chapter five of the provisions of Code of 1898 and then m ade 
the following observations: 
 
“There can be no manner of doubt that arrests without warrants issued by a 
Court call for greater protection th an do arrests under such warrants.  The 
 25 

 26 
provision that the arrested person should within 24 hours be produced 
before the nearest Magistrate is particul arly desirable in the case of arrest 
otherwise than under a warrant issued  by the Court, for it ensures the 
immediate application of a judicial m ind to the legal authority of the person 
making the arrest and the regularity of the procedure adopted by him.  In the 
case of arrest under a warrant issued  by a Court, the judicial m ind had 
already been applied to the case when the warrant was issued and, therefore, 
there is less reason for m aking such production in that case a m atter of a 
substantive fundamental right. It is also  perfectly plain that the language of 
Art.22 (2) has been practically copi ed from  ss.60 and 61, Crim inal P.C. 
which admittedly prescribe the procedure to be f ollowed after a person has 
been arrested without warrant.  The re quirement of Art.22(1) that no person 
who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon 
as m ay be, of the grounds for such arrest indicates that the clause really 
contemplates an arrest without a warrant  of Court, for, as already noted, a 
person arrested under a Court’s warrant  is m ade acquainted  with the 
grounds of his arrest before the arrest is actually effected.”    (em phasis 
added) 
 
 As a matter of fact, the wide and extensive power conferred upon the police 
officers to arrest a person without warrant by the provisions contained in the 
present Code and its predecessor has been  troubling the courts for m ore than 100 
years.    The courts have been saying that before arresting a person without warrant, 
the police officer must form an opinion that the facts or information before him call 
for the exercise of the power under secti on 41(1)(a).    They have been holding 
repeatedly that arrests under chapter five are not to be m ade capriciously and that 
the power must be governed by and m ust be exercised in accordance with the rules 
and principles of the Code and that ther e m ust be proper justification for every 
arrest.   (It m ust be remembered that the expression “police officer” in chapter five 
includes even a police constable.)     While saying that every arrest under this 
chapter must be justified and m ust be based upon a reasonable belief of the police 
 26 

 27 
officer that in the light of the facts and information before him  the arrest of the 
person is called for, the courts have said, at the sam e tim e,  that it is the police 
officer who has to make this judgment. 
 
 The question is, whether any rem edy is available to a person who has been 
subjected to an unjustified or unlawful arrest? 
 
 The answer is:  Theoretically yes, but practically none.   We may proceed to 
explain: 
 
 If a person is illegally arrested or is arrested without any justification 
whatsoever or where the arrest is proved to  be mala fide or actuated by extraneous 
considerations, the police officer con cerned can be prosecuted for wrongful 
confinement of that person which is an  offence under section 342 of the Indian 
Penal Code; if the wrongful c onfinement is for three or m ore days it is section 343 
and in case it is for ten days or m ore, it would be section 344.   Sections 343 and 
344 are aggravated forms of the offence specified in section 342.   Here again if the 
police officer who arrested the person is an  officer who is “not  removable from his 
office save by or with the sanction of th e government”, he cannot be prosecuted for 
such act except with the previous sancti on of the concerned governm ent.  The said 
protection is provided by section 197 of the Crim inal Procedure Code.   The 
protection no doubt applies where the offence is “alleged to have been com mitted 
by him (public servant) while acting or purpor ting to act in discharge of his official 
duty”.    The m eaning and interpretation of these words have led to a good am ount 
of controversy.    On one hand the argum ent is that since com mitting an offence is 
no part of official duty of any public servan t, previous sanction is not necessary for 
prosecuting a public servant, say a police officer, for the offence under sections 
342/343/344.   The contrary reasoning is that  if the aforesaid interpretation is 
placed, the very protection provided by s ection 197 becomes meaningless and that 
therefore so long as the alleged offen ce is com mitted by the public servant while 
purporting to act in discharge of his offici al duty, the protection avails.   Leaving 
 27 

 28 
aside this legal controversy, the fact of the matter is that the government very rarely 
grants the previous sanction for prosecuti on of a police officer for the offence of 
wrongful confinement.   In any event, the arrest is effected in a large majority of the 
cases by the police officers of lower ranks , who are rem ovable from  their office 
without the sanction of the governm ent.    In  the case of such lower level officers,  
the protection of section 197 is not available and they can be prosecuted for 
wrongful confinement in case of an illegal or unwarranted arrest, as stated above, 
but such a prosecution is an im practicable proposition.   If a police officer is so 
prosecuted, whether he is a police consta ble or sub-inspector or inspector, the 
whole police force, barring rare exceptions, would not only try to protect the officer 
but would also harass the com plainant in several ways so as to com pel him  to 
withdraw it.   It is this fear and apprehension, which cannot be said to be 
unfounded, which constitutes the reason for alm ost a total absence of such 
prosecutions of police officers.   Notw ithstanding the fact that a good num ber of 
arrests made are not lawful, no person ordinarily dares to challenge the might of the 
police department. 
 
 It is true that in case a police of ficer exercises his powers illegally or f or 
oblique reasons he can be proceeded against departmentally (by way of disciplinary 
proceedings) and appropriate punishm ent can be im posed upon him .   But such 
proceedings too are few and far in between.   Only where the num ber of arrests are 
large, and totally arbitrary and illegal, and the hum an rights groups or political 
parties take up the cause of the victim s, such a course would be adopted; otherwise 
the probability of  such action is very little.   In any event, the victim  will not be a 
party to such disciplinary proceedings; he can only be a witness.   The conduct of 
the disciplinary case will be in hands of  the departm ent.   The com plainant/victim 
has no control over the course of proceedings.   It is said that in the 1990s, a good 
number of police officers were dism issed from service in Punjab, invoking proviso 
(c) to clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India but those dism issals 
were not for m ere wrongful arrests but fo r much greater crim es, e.g., m urders in 
police custody, fake encounters, cold-blooded murders and so on. 
 28 

 29 
 
 It is true that section 7 of the Po lice Act, 1861 (which Act is continuing in 
force by virtue of Article 372 of the Constitution) provides for dism issal, 
suspension or reduction in rank “of any po lice officer of the subordinate ranks 
whom they (the higher officials) shall thi nk remiss or negligent in the discharge of 
his duties or unfit for the same”.   (Subordinate ranks of police force means officers 
below the rank of Deputy Superi ntendent of Police).     Section 7 also provides for 
imposition of fine not exceeding one m onth’s pay, confinem ent to quarters for a 
term not exceeding 15 days in case of a police officer of the subordinate rank 
performing the duties “in a careless or ne gligent manner or who by any act of his 
own shall render himself unfit for the discharge thereof (discharge of his duty) ….”     
But it is a matter of common knowledge that action under this section is very rarely 
taken. 
 
 So far as the civil rem edy of dam ages in torts for a wrongful arrest is 
concerned, the position is lot m ore gloom y.   The law concerning claim s for 
damages for tortious acts of governm ent and its officers in India has been vitiated 
by the dual character of the East India Company which once ruled this country, i.e., 
of being both a ruler and a trader.    The Governm ent of India Act, 1858, the 
Government of India Act, 1919 and the G overnment of India Act, 1935, continued 
this dual character.   These Acts provided that the liability of  the Governm ent of 
India in such matters shall be the sam e as was obtaining immediately prior to these 
Acts, which really m eans the dual character of the East India Com pany.    
Unfortunately, even Article 300 of our Constitution too has continued the sam e 
position.   Article 300 reads as follows: 
 
“300. Suits and proceedings- (1) The G overnment of India m ay sue or be 
sued by the name of the Union of India and the Governm ent of a State m ay 
sue or be sued by the nam e of the St ate and may, subject to any provisions 
which may be made by Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State 
enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution, sue or be sued in 
 29 

 30 
relation to their respective af fairs in the like cases as the Dom inion of India 
and the corresponding Provinces or th e corresponding Indian States m ight 
have sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted. 
(2) If at the commencement of this Constitution- 
(a) any legal proceedings are pe nding to which the Dom inion of 
India is a party, the Union of India shall be deem ed to be 
substituted for the Dominion in those proceedings; and 
(b) any legal proceedings are pe nding to which a Province or an 
Indian State is a party, the corresponding State shall be deem ed 
to be substituted f or the Province or the Indian State in those 
proceedings.” 
 
While we do not propose to expatiate  upon the m eaning and im plications 
flowing f rom the said article, it m ay be  necessary to exam ine the position with 
reference to police officials.  The duties of the police of ficers are to m aintain law 
and order and public order.  This function is  relatable to sovereign functions of the 
State; if so there is a total im munity in favour of the State against any action for 
damages for wrongful confinement.    (We are proceeding on the assum ption that a 
civil suit will be f iled against the State for damages and not against the individual 
police of ficer; this assum ption is m ade f or the reason that a suit f or dam ages 
against an individual police officer would not  give satisfaction to the claimant even 
if he succeeds because of the difficulties in execution; it is for this reason that such 
suits are filed against the State as such, whether Central or State, inasm uch as State 
is the m aster of such police officers and is  vicariously liable f or the acts of  their 
servants.)    W e may refer to the decision of the Suprem e Court in Kasturi Lal v. 
State of U.P.  (AIR 1965 SC 1039).   The facts of  the case are interesting.   The 
plantiff was arrested by the police officers in UP on suspicion of possessing stolen 
property.  On search of his person, a la rge quantity of gold was seized under the 
provisions of the Code of Crim inal Procedure.  Ultim ately he was found not guilty 
but the seized gold was not returned to him inasm uch as the head-constable in 
charge of the ‘m alkhana’ (property room ) had absconded with valuable properties 
 30 

 31 
stored therein including the gold seized from the plantiff.  W hen the plantiff 
brought a suit for the return of  the gold or in the alternative for its value, the State 
set up the defence of sovereign im munity.  It contended that inasm uch as the 
seizure of the gold from  the plantiff was in  discharge of their official duties by the 
police officers conferred upon them  by the Code of Criminal Procedure, the acts of 
the police officers pertain to the sovereign pow ers of the State.   On the basis of the 
evidence adduced before the court, it was found even by the Supreme Court that the 
manner in which the gold seized from  the plantiff was dealt with at the ‘m alkhana’ 
showed gross negligence on the part of th e police officers and that the loss suffered 
by the plantiff was due to the negligence of police officers of the State.  Yet, it was 
held that since the act of  negligence was com mitted by the police of ficers while 
dealing with the property of the plantiff whic h they had seized in exercise of their 
statutory powers and since the power to arre st a person, to search him  and to seize 
property found with him  are powers conf erred upon the specified officers by the 
statute, their powers must be properly categorized as sovereign powers.    If so, the 
Supreme Court held, the suit for damages against the State must  fail because of the 
position flowing from Article 300 of the C onstitution of India which continues the 
pre-constitutional position in the m atter of liability of the Governm ent of India or 
the government of a State in relation to th eir respective affairs.   Accordingly, the 
suit was dismissed.  The Suprem e Court however recognized the inequity inherent 
in the said position and accordingly m ade observations recommending to the State 
to make a law (as contem plated by article 300 itself – underlined portion) defining 
the liability of the State in such matters.   Unfortunately, the State has not moved in 
the matter so far though more than 36 years have passed by since then.  
 
In a later decision rendered by a two-judge Bench of the Suprem e Court in 
N. Nagendra Rao  v. State of A.P. (AIR 1994 SC 2663), observations have been 
made as to the inequity inherent in the situation now obtaining under Article 300 
and also upon the inaction of the State (Par liament/State Legislatures) to enact a 
law in that behalf.   Yet it being a tw o-judge Bench, it has not purported to, nor 
 31 

 32 
could it, overrule the decision in Kasturi Lal, which is a decision rendered by a 
Constitution Bench of five-judges. 
 
In this context, we m ust refer to a recent innovative trend being adopted by 
courts.  (a) In Challa Ramakrishna Reddy v. State of A.P. (1989 AP 235), the A.P. 
High Court held that where the fundam ental right of a citizen is violated, the plea 
of sovereign im munity would not be ava ilable.   This decision has since been 
affirmed by the Suprem e Court in AIR 2000 SC 2083 (State of A.P. v. Challa 
Ramakrishna Reddy).    (b) In cases of fake en counters and custodial deaths, the 
Supreme Court and the High courts have  been awarding token, ad hoc am ounts 
towards  damages in proceedings under ar ticle 32/226 of the Constitution of India, 
leaving the aggrieved parties to a su it for dam ages where the proper dam ages 
awardable would be determ ined.   This  is undoubtedly a heartening trend but in 
present-day Indian conditions, a suit fo r dam ages against the State for police 
excesses is still a rarity. 
 
It is for all the above reasons that we  had mentioned earlier that the remedy 
available to a citizen for a wrongful or unj ustified arrest is practically nil, though 
theoretically it is available in law. 
 
The everyday situation  is that wherever the arre st is found to be illegal, 
unwarranted or unjustified, the m an is set free, may be sometimes unconditionally.   
But that is all that happens.   Nothing happens to the police officer who has 
unlawfully or unjustif iably interf ered with the liberty of  a citizen and/or has 
wrongfully confined the person, whether in police custody or  elsewhere.    This 
position has indeed em boldened som e police officers to abuse their position and 
harass citizens for various oblique reasons.    They feel secure in their knowledge 
that any wrongful or illegal act on their beha lf would not affect them , their careers 
or their prospects in service; all that w ould happen is, the person arrested would be 
let off by the courts.  It is this situation which has also got to be rem edied.  (Some 
sanction, some liability, som e punishment has to be provided for a police officer 
 32 

 33 
who deprives a person of his liberty m ala fide or for oblique reasons.  Of course, 
merely because a person arrested is not prosecuted or is not convicted, it does not 
necessarily mean that the arrest was illegal or m ala fide.  But where the court f inds 
the arrest to be wholly unjustified or an instance of abuse of power, the court m ust 
have the power to m ake appropriate orders against such police officer, either suo 
motu or on the application of the pers on so arrested unlawfully.  Indeed, an 
obligation should be placed upon the court to make such orders wherever the arrest 
is found to be illegal, wholly unjustified or an instance of abuse of power.) 
 
It appears that the National Com mission for Reviewing the W orking of the 
Constitution has issued a Consultation Paper on the subject of  State liability in tort 
– which is, of course, only a m inor aspect  of the problem .   Even so, it m ay be 
hoped that som e concrete suggestions would em anate from  that Com mission to 
redress and rectify the unhappy and who lly inequitable position now obtaining by 
virtue of Article 300 of the Constitution a nd would persuade the Parliam ent/State 
Legislatures to enact a law clarifying the legal position in this behalf  as indeed 
contemplated by Article 300 itself. 
 
Important decisions of the Supreme Court concerning 
Law relating to Arrest 
 
The effort of the courts, and in partic ular of the Supreme Court over the last 
more than two decades has been to circ umscribe the vast discretionary power 
vested by law in Police by im posing several safeguards and to regulate it by laying 
down num erous guidelines and by subjecting the said power to several 
conditionalities.  The effort throughout has b een to prevent its abuse while leaving 
the police free to discharge the functions entrusted to it by law.  W hile it is not 
necessary to ref er to all of  them  f or the purpose of this Report, it would be 
sufficient if we ref er to a f ew of them (which indeed reaffirm  and recapitulate the 
directions and guidelines contained in earlier decisions).  In Joginder Kumar v. 
State of U.P.  (AIR 1994 SC 1349), the power of a rrest and its exercise has been 
 33 

 34 
dealt with at length.  It would be appropriate to ref er to certain perceptive 
observations in the judgment: 
 
“The horizon of hum an rights is expanding.  At the sam e time, the crim e 
rate is also increasing.  Of late, th is court has been receiving com plaints 
about violation of hum an rights because of indiscriminate arrests.  How are 
we to strike a balance between the two? 
A realistic approach should be m ade in this direction.  The law of 
arrest is one of balancing individual rights, liberties and privileges, on the 
one hand, and individual duties, obligations and responsibilities on the 
other; of weighing and balancing the rights, liberties and privileges of  the 
single individual and those of individua ls collectively; of sim ply deciding 
what is wanted and where to put the weight and the em phasis; of deciding 
which com es f irst – the crim inal or society, the law violator or the law 
abider; of m eeting the challenge which Mr. Justice Cardozo so forthrightly 
met when he wrestled with a sim ilar task of balancing individual rights 
against society’s rights and wisely held that the exclusion rule was bad law, 
that society came first, and that the criminal should not go free because the 
constable blundered. 
“The quality of  a nation’s civilisation can be largely m easured by 
the methods it uses in the enforcement of criminal law.” 
This court in Smt. Nandini Satpathy v. P.L. Dani AIR 1978 SC 1025 
at page 1032, quoting Lewis Mayers, stated: 
 
 “To strike the balance between the needs of law enforcem ent on the one 
hand and the protection of the citizen from oppression and injustice at the 
hands of the law-enforcement machinery on the other is a perennial problem 
of statecraft.”  The pendulum over the years has swung to the right. 
Again in para 21, at page 1033, it has been observed: 
“We have earlier spoken of the conflic ting claims requiring reconciliation.  
Speaking pragm atically, there exists a ri valry between societal interest in 
 34 

 35 
effecting crim e detection and constitutional rights which accused 
individuals possess.  Em phasis may sh ift, depending on circum stances, in 
balancing these interests as has been  happening in Am erica. Since Miranda 
((1966) 334 US 436) there has been retr eat from stress on protection of the 
accused and gravitation towards society’s interest in convicting law-
breakers.  Currently, the trend in th e Am erican jurisdiction according to 
legal journals is that ‘respect f or (constitutional) principles is eroded when 
they leap their proper bounds to interf ere with the legitim ate interests of 
society in enforcem ent of its la ws…. (Couch v. United States (1972) 409 
US 322, 336).  Our constitutional perspectiv e has, therefore, to be relative 
and cannot afford to be absolutist, especially when torture technology, 
crime escalation and other social va riables affect the application of 
principles in producing humane justice….” 
 
 The decision also refers to the recom mendations of the National Police 
Commission, which are set out elsewhere in this Report. 
 
The decision in Joginder Kumar proceeded to observe: 
 
“The Royal Com mission suggested restrictions on the power of 
arrest on the basis of the ‘necessity of  principle’.  The two m ain objectives 
of this principle are that police can exercise powers only in those cases in 
which it was genuinely necessary to enable them  to execute their duty to 
prevent the Com mission of offences, to investigate crim e. The Royal 
Commission was of the view that such restrictions would dim inish the use 
of arrest and produce more uniform use of powers.  The Royal Com mission 
Report on Criminal Procedure – Sir  Cyril Philips, at page 45 said: 
“…. W e recom mend that detention upon arrest for an offence should 
continue only on one or more of the following criteria; 
a) the person’s unwillingness to identify him self so that a sum mons 
may be served upon him; 
 35 

 36 
b) the need to prevent the continuation or repetition of that offence; 
c) the need to protect the arrested person him self or other persons or 
property; 
d) the need to secure or preserve ev idence of or relating to that of fence 
or to obtain such evidence from the suspect by questioning him; and 
e) the likelihood of the person failing to  appear at court to answer any 
charge made against him.”* 
 
The Royal Com mission in the above-said Report at page 46 also 
suggested: 
“To help to reduce the use of arrest  we would also propose the introduction 
here of a schem e that is used in On tario enabling a police officer to issue 
what is called an ‘appearance notice’.  That procedure can be used to obtain 
attendance at the police station without resorting to arrest provided a power 
to arrest exists, f or exam ple to be f inger-printed or to participate in an 
identification parade. It could also be extended to attendance for interview 
at a tim e convenient both to the su spect and to the police officer 
investigating the case….” 
*     Many of  the recom mendations of  the Philips Com mittee, it m ay be 
mentioned, find place in the Police a nd Criminal Evidence Act, 1984 and 
the Codes of Practice issued thereunder, in U.K. Broadly speaking, the 
recommendations of  the Philips Report can be sum marized as saying that 
any new law governing police powers should m eet the standards of 
“fairness”, “openness”  and “workability”. Inter alia, the Report 
recommended a power of detention after arrest for the purpose of 
                                                           
• Many of the recommendations of the Philips Committee, it may be mentioned, find place in 
the Police and Criminal Evidence Act, 1984 and the Codes of Practice issued thereunder, in 
U.K.   Broadly speaking, the recommendations of the Philips Report can be summarized as 
saying that any new law governing police powers should meet the standards of “fairness”, 
“openness” and “workability”.   Inter alia, the Report recommended a power of detention 
after arrest for the purpose of questioning; at the same time, it recognized the right of the 
accused to remain silent during such questioning. 
 
 36 

 37 
questioning; at the sam e tim e, it r ecognized the right of the accused to 
remain silent during such questioning. 
 
 It would equally be relevant to quote para 24 of the said judgm ent, which 
reads as follows: 
 
“The above guidelines are m erely the incidents of personal liberty 
guaranteed under the Constitution of India.  No arrest can be m ade because 
it is lawf ul for the Police Of ficer to do so. The existence of the power to 
arrest is one thing.  The justification fo r the exercise of it is quite another.  
The Police Officer must be able to justify the arrest apart from  his power to 
do so.  Arrest and detention in police lock-up of a person can cause 
incalculable harm to the reputation and self-esteem of a person.  No arrest 
can be made in a routine m anner on a mere allegation of com mission of an 
offence made against a person.   It w ould be prudent for a Police Officer in 
the interest of protection of the constitutional rights of a citizen and perhaps 
in his own interest that no arrest should be m ade without a reasonable 
satisfaction reached after some investigation as to the genuineness and bona 
fides of a com plaint and a reasonable belief both as to the person’s 
complicity and even so as to the need to effect arrest.  Denying a person of 
his liberty is a serious m atter.  The recom mendations of the Police 
Commission m erely ref lect the constitutional concom itants of  the 
fundamental right to personal liberty a nd freedom.  A person is not liable to 
arrest merely on the suspicion of  complicity in an of fence.  There m ust be 
some reasonable justif ication in the opinion of the officer effecting the 
arrest that such arrest is necessary and justified.  Except in heinous 
offences, an arrest must be avoided if a police officer issues notice to person 
to attend the Station House and not to leave Station without perm ission 
would do.” 
 
 The ultimate directions given, contained in paras 26 to 29, read as follows: 
 37 

 38 
 
“These rights are inherent in Article s 21 and 22(1) of  the Constitution and 
require to be recognized and scrupulously protected.  For effective 
enforcement of these fundam ental rights, we issue the following 
requirements: 
1. An arrested person being held in custody is entitled, if he so requests 
to have one friend relative or othe r person who is known to him  or  
likely to take an interest in his welf are told as f ar as is practicable 
that he has been arrested and where he is being detained. 
2. The Police Officer shall inform  the arrested person when he is 
brought to the police station of this right. 
3. An entry shall be required to be made in the Diary as to who was 
informed of the arrest.  These protections from  power m ust be held 
to flow from Articles 21 and 22(1) and enforced strictly. 
It shall be the duty of the Magist rate, before whom  the arrested 
person is produced, to satisfy him self that these requirem ents have been 
complied with. 
The above requirem ents shall be followed in all cases of arrest till 
legal provisions are m ade in this behalf.   These requirem ents shall be in 
addition to the rights of the arrested  persons found in the various Police 
Manuals. 
These requirem ents are not exhaustiv e.  The Directors General of 
Police of all the States in India sha ll issue necessary instructions requiring 
due observance of these requirem ents.   In addition, departm ental 
instruction shall also be issued that a police officer making an arrest should 
also record in the case diary, the reasons for making the arrest.” 
 
The next decision which may be usefully referred to is D.K. Basu v. State of 
West Bengal  (AIR 1997 SC 610). The decision e xhaustively referred to the law 
relating to arrest with ref erence to earlier decisions of the courts and finally issued 
the following directions (contained in paras 36 to 40).  They read as follows: 
 38 

 39 
 
“We, therefore, consider it appropriate to issue the f ollowing requirements 
to be followed in all cases of arrest or detention, till legal provisions are 
made in that behalf, as preventive measures: 
1. The police personnel carrying out the arrest and handling the 
interrogation of the arrestee should bear accurate, visible and clear 
identification and name tags with their designations.  The particulars 
of all such police personnel who ha ndle interrogation of the arrestee 
must be recorded in a register. 
2. That the police officer carrying out  the arrest of the arrestee shall 
prepare a m emo of arrest at the tim e of arrest and such m emo shall 
be attested by at least one witness,  who may be either a m ember of 
the family of the arrestee or a respectable person of the locality from 
where the arrest is m ade.  It shall also be countersigned by the 
arrestee and shall contain the time and date of arrest. 
3. A person who has been arrested or  detained and is being held in 
custody in a police station or inte rrogation center or other lock-up, 
shall be entitled to have one friend or relative or other person known 
to him or having interest in his welfare being inform ed, as soon as 
practicable, that he has been arrest ed and is being detained at the 
particular place unless the attesting w itness of the m emo of arrest is 
himself such a friend or a relative of the arrestee. 
4. The time, place of arrest and venue of custody of an arrestee must be 
notified by the police where the next friend or relative of the arrestee 
lives outside the district or town through the Legal Aid Organisation 
in the District and the police station of the area concerned 
telegraphically within a period of 8 to 12 hours after the arrest. 
5. The person arrested m ust be m ade aware of this right to have 
someone inform ed of his arrest or  detention as soon as he is put 
under arrest or is detained. 
 39 

 40 
6. An entry m ust be m ade in the diary at the place of detention 
regarding the arrest of the person wh ich shall also disclose the nam e 
of the next friend of the person who has been informed of the arrest 
and the nam es and particulars of  the police officials in whose 
custody the arrestee is. 
7. The arrestee should, where he so requests, be also exam ined at the 
time of his arrest and m ajor and minor injuries, if any, present on 
his/her body, must be recorded at that tim e. The “Inspection Memo” 
must be signed both by the arrestee and the police officer effecting 
the arrest and its copy provided to the arrestee. 
8. The arrestee should be subjected  to m edical exam ination by a 
trained doctor every 48 hours duri ng his detention in custody by a 
doctor on the panel of approved doctors appointed by Director, 
Health Services of the concerned State or Union Territory, Director, 
Health Services should prepare such a panel for all Tehsils and 
Districts as well. 
9. Copies of all the docum ents including the m emo of arrest, referred 
to above, should be sent to the Ilaqa Magistrate for his record. 
10. The arrestee m ay be perm itted to m eet his lawyer during 
interrogation, though not throughout the interrogation. 
11. A police control room  should be pr ovided at all district and State 
headquarters, where inform ation re garding the arrest and the place 
of custody of the arrestee shall be com municated by the officer 
causing the arrest, within 12 hours of effecting the arrest and at the 
police control room  it should be displayed on a conspicuous police 
board. 
Failure to com ply with the requirem ents hereinabove  m entioned 
shall apart from  rendering the concerne d official liable for departm ental 
action, also render him liable to be  punished for contem pt of Court and the 
proceedings for contem pt of Court m ay be instituted in any High Court of 
the country, having territorial jurisdiction over the matter. 
 40 

 41 
The requirements, referred to above flow from Articles 21 and 22(1) 
of the Constitution and need to be st rictly f ollowed.  These would apply 
with equal force to the other govern mental agencies also to which a 
reference has been made earlier. 
These requirements are in addition to the constitutional and statutory 
safeguards and do not detract from  va rious other directions given by the 
Courts from time to tim e in connecti on with the safeguarding of the rights 
and dignity of the arrestee. 
The requirem ents m entioned above shall be forwarded to the 
Director General of Police and the Ho me Secretary of every State/Union 
Territory and it shall be their obligation to circulate the same to every police 
station under their charge and get the same notified at every police station at 
a conspicuous place. It would also be useful and serve larger interest to 
broadcast the requirem ents on the All India Radio besides being shown on 
the National Network of Doordarsha n and by publishing and distributing 
pamphlets in the local language containing these requirem ents for 
information of the general public.  Cr eating awareness about the rights of 
the arrestee would in our opinion be a st ep in the right direction to com bat 
the evil of custodial crim e and bring in transparency and accountability.   It 
is hoped that these requirements would help to curb, if not totally eliminate, 
the use of questionable m ethods dur ing interrogation and investigation 
leading to custodial commission of crimes.” 
 
 It is a m atter of debate, whether all these directions and guidelines have 
improved the situation, particularly in rural India and where the citizens concerned 
are poor, illiterate and helpless. 
 41 

 42 
Chapter Four 
 
Previous recommendations on the subject by Law Commission 
of India and other bodies 
 
 
 The power to arrest without warrant vested in police by the Code has been 
engaging the attention of the Law Com mission and the National Police 
Commission over the last several years.  It w ould be appropriate to refer to them  at 
this stage. 
 
In its 152 nd Report on Custodial Crim es (1994), the Law Com mission 
examined this issue in the context of cu stodial crimes  and recom mended insertion 
of a few pertinent new provisions in th e Code.  It recom mended that after sub-
section (1) of section 41, a new sub-section, (1A),  m ay be introduced to the 
following effect: 
 
“41(1A) A police officer arresting a pe rson under clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) of this section m ust be reasonabl y  satisfied, and m ust record such 
satisfaction, relating to the following matters: 
(a) the complaint, information or suspicion referred to in that clause, is 
not only in respect of a cognizab le offence having been com mitted, 
but also in respect of  the complicity of the person to be arrested, in 
that offence; 
(b) arrest is necessary in order to bring the m ovements of the person to 
be arrested under restraint, so as to  inspire a sense of security in the 
public or to prevent the person to  be arrested from  evading the 
process of  the law or to prevent him  f rom com mitting sim ilar 
offences or from indulging in violent behaviour in general.” 
 
 42 

 43 
The second suggestion was to insert a new section, 41A, in the light of the 
decision of the Supreme Court in Joginder Kumar.  The new section suggested was 
to the following effect: 
 
“41A. Notice of appearance – Where the case falls under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of section 41, the police officer m ay, instead of arresting 
the person concerned, issue to him  a notice of appearance requiring 
him to appear before the police offi cer issuing the notice or at such 
other place as m ay be specified in the notice and to cooperate with 
the police of ficer in the investigation of  the of fence ref erred to in 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 41. 
(2) Where such a notice is issued to  any person, it shall be the duty of 
that person to comply with the terms of that notice. 
(3) Where such person com plied and continues to com ply with the 
notice, he shall not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in 
the notice unless, for reasons to be  recorded, the police is of the 
opinion that he ought to be arrested. 
(4) Where such person, at any tim e, fails to com ply with the term s of 
the notice, it shall be lawf ul for the police of ficer to arrest him  for 
the offence m entioned in the notice, subject to such orders as m ay 
have been passed in this behalf by a competent court.” 
 
The third suggestion in the 152 nd Report of the Law Com mission was to 
insert a new section, 50A, to the following effect: 
 
“50A. (1) whenever a person is arrest ed by a police officer, intim ation of 
the arrest shall be im mediately se nt by the police officer (along with 
intimation about the place of detention) to the following person: 
(a) a relative or friend or other pe rson known to the arrested person, as 
may be nominated by the arrested person; 
(b) failing (a) above, the local legal aid committee. 
 43 

 44 
(2) Such intimation shall be sent by telegram  or telephone, as m ay be 
convenient, and the fact that such intimation has been sent shall be recorded 
by the police officer under the signature of the arrested person. 
(3) The police officer shall prepare a custody memo and body receipt of 
the person arrested, duly signed by him  and by two witnesses of the locality 
where the arrest has been m ade, and de liver the sam e to a relative of  the 
person arrested, if he is present at the time of arrest or, in his absence, send 
the same along with the intim ation of a rrest to the person m entioned in (1) 
above. 
(4) The custody m emo referred to in (3) above shall contain the 
following particulars: 
(i) name of the person arrested and father’s name or husband’s name; 
(ii)address of the person arrested; 
(iii)date, time and place of arrest; 
(iv)offence for which the arrest has been made; 
(v) property, if any, recovered from  the person arrested and taken into 
charge at the time of the arrest; and 
(vi)any bodily injury which may be apparent at the time of arrest. 
(5) During the interrogation of an arrested person, his legal practitioner 
shall be allowed to remain present. 
(6) The police officer shall inform  the person arrested, as soon as he is 
brought to the police station, of the contents of this section and shall m ake 
an entry in the police diary about the following facts: 
(a) the person who was informed of the arrest; 
(b) the fact that the person arrested has been inform ed of the 
contents of this section; and 
(c) the fact that a custody m emo has been prepared, as required by 
this section.” 
 
The fourth recom mendation pertained to introduction of a new section, 
section 57A, in the following terms: 
 44 

 45 
 
“57A. Duty of Magistrate to verify certain facts. 
When a person arrested without warrant is produced before the Magistrate, 
the Magistrate shall, by inquiries to be m ade from  the arrested person, 
satisfy himself that the provisions of sections… have been com plied with 
(sections relating to saf eguards in c onnection with arrest, rights on arrest, 
etc. to be entered) and also inquire about, and record, the date and tim e of 
arrest.” 
 
 In their 135th Report on W omen in Custody, the Law Com mission had 
recommended a new section 450B with respect to arrest of women.   The suggested 
new section was to the following effect: 
 
“450B. Arrest of wom en.- (i) W here a wom an is to be arrested under this 
Code, then unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her submission 
to custody on an oral intim ation of arrest shall be presum ed, and unless the 
circumstances otherwise require or unl ess the police officer arresting is a 
female, the police officer shall not actually touch the person of the wom an 
for making her arrest. 
(ii) Except in unavoidable circum stances, no wom an shall be arrested 
after sunset and before sunrise, and where such unavoidable circum stances 
exist, the police of ficer shall, by m aking a written report, obtain the prior 
permission of the im mediate superior  officer not below the rank of an 
Inspector for effecting such arrest or, if the case is one of extrem e urgency, 
he shall, after making the arrest, forthwith report the matter in writing to his 
such immediate superior officer, with the reasons for arrest and the reasons 
for not taking prior perm ission as afor esaid and shall also m ake a sim ilar 
report to the Magistrate within whose legal jurisdiction the arrest has been 
made.” 
 
 45 

 46 
 It appears that on the basis of the above recommendation sub-section (4) of 
section 46 was indeed included in the Code  of Crim inal Procedure  (Am endment) 
Bill, 1994, which unfortunately has not yet become  law.  Sub-section (4) of section 
46 which the Bill proposed to insert  in the Code was to the following effect: 
 
“(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after 
sunset and before sunrise and where such exceptional circum stances exist, 
the police of ficer shall, by m aking a written report, obtain the prior 
permission of his im mediate superior offi cer for effecting such arrest or, if 
the case is one of extrem e urgency and such prior perm ission cannot be 
obtained before m aking such arrest, he shall, after m aking the arrest, 
forthwith report the m atter in writing to his im mediate superior officer 
explaining the urgency and the reasons  for not taking prior perm ission as 
aforesaid and shall also m ake a report to the Magistrate within whose local 
jurisdiction the arrest had been made.” 
 
 In their 154 th Report on the Code of Crim inal Procedure, the Law 
Commission exam ined this issue as we ll along with several others.  After 
considering the earlier Reports of  the Law Commission on the subject, the decision 
of the Suprem e Court in Joginder Kumar and the Third Report of the National 
Police Commission, the Commission made the following recommendations: 
 
1) Addition of a proviso to section 46(1) in the following terms: 
 
“Provided that where a wom an is to be arrested, then, unless the 
circumstances indicate the contrary, her submission to custody on an oral 
intimation, arrest shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances otherwise 
require or unless the police officer arre sting is a f emale, the police of ficer 
shall not actually touch the person of the woman for making her arrest.” 
 
 46 

 47 
2) Addition of a new sub-section (2) in section 46, as is indeed proposed to be 
done by the 1994 (Amendment) Bill. 
 
3) Insertion of a new sub-section, (3), in section 41 to the following effect: 
 
“41(3). A police officer arresting a pe rson under clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) of this section m ust be reasonably satisfied that arrest is necessary and 
must record such satisfaction in respect of m atters covered by every clause 
of sub-section (1).” 
 
4) Addition of a new section, section 41A, to be inserted in the following 
terms: 
 
“41A(1) The police officer m ay, if sa tisfied that im mediate arrest of 
the person concerned is not necessary, issue to him a notice requiring him to 
appear before the police officer at  specified tim e and place for further 
investigation and it shall be the duty of that person to comply with the terms 
of the notice. 
(2) If such person fails to comply with the terms of the notice, it shall be 
lawful for the police officer to arrest him  for the offence m entioned 
therein.” 
 
 In their 172 nd Report on the Review of Ra pe Laws, the Law Com mission 
recommended  insertion of several provisi ons designed m ainly  to protect the 
women and children.  It m ay not be necessary to refer to the recom mendations 
contained in this Report because most of them deal with post-arrest stages, that too, 
in the case of women and children alone. 
 
 
The recommendations in the Third Report of the 
National Police Commission (January 1980) 
 47 

 48 
 
 The law concerning arrest has been  considered by the National Police 
Commission (NPC) in Chapter 22 – ‘Corruption in Police’.  It would be appropriate 
to briefly notice the contents of this chapter: 
 
Corruption in Police departm ent is qualitatively different “because of the 
pre-dominance of extortion and hara ssment as com pared to collusive 
corruption that prevails in several other departm ents….”    As a law 
enforcement agency,  the Police system  even from ancient times has always  
carried with it  scope for m ala fide exercise of powers and consequent 
corruption, which was em phasized by the Police Com mission of 1902-03.   
In the period of  British rule, corrupti on was generally conf ined to lower 
ranks of all governm ent agencies including Police, which generally 
alienated the adm inistration from  the people.    In a sense it suited the 
British to have a lower level bureaucracy so alienated f rom the people but 
completely loyal to the rulers.    The scope f or corruption increased 
enormously during  W orld W ar II because of the enorm ous spurt in 
government expenditure on war effort including supplies and contracts.    
 
Several Police Com missions appointed  by the State Governm ents after 
independence have also referred to the increasing corruption in the Police 
department. 
 
The scope for corruption and connected malpractices arises at several stages 
in the day-to-day working of  the Poli ce, starting from  the registering of a 
case, for arresting or for not arresting, for extortion, for interfering in civil 
disputes, for fabricating false evid ence, for collecting ‘hafta’ from  
businessmen and so on. 
 
The power of arrest is the most important source of corruption and extortion 
by the police officers.   From  the moment a case is registered by the Police 
 48 

 49 
on a cognizable complaint, they get the power to arrest any person who may 
be ‘concerned in that offence’, either on the basis of  the complaint itself or 
on credible inform ation otherwise recei ved.   It is under section 41(1)(a), 
that the Police are m aking large number of arrests everyday throughout the 
country.   Of course, the arrests are not  only for the offences under the IPC 
but also for offences under the local a nd State laws.     The local laws 
mostly relate to excise, prohibition, arms, gambling, suppression of immoral 
traffic and Motor Vehicles Act, etc.  Most of these arrests are m ade on the 
basis of information and intelligence ava ilable to Police in their f ield work 
or on the basis of com plaints.    A sam ple study (conducted by the NPC) 
with respect to the quality of arrests effected in one State during three years’ 
period 1974-76 disclosed the following position: 
    
    1974       %age       1975       %age     1976   %age 
1. Total number 150,448  155,954  143,940 
of persons arrested 
 
2. Number involved   2,950 2.0    3,492 2.2    2,856   1.8 
in IPC offences 
 
3. Number against   40,887      27.2   46,063       29.6   45,698 31.8 
whom security 
proceedings were 
launched 
 
4.  Number     94,346      62.9   96,078      61.6   86,248 60.0 
prosecuted under 
minor section of 
City Police Act 
 
5.  Number against     5,026 3.3    6,367 4.1    6,450  4.5 
 49 

 50 
whom action was 
dropped 
 
6.  Number against    7,039 4.6    3,954 2.5    2,958  1.5 
whom cases were 
under investigation 
(These figures are very significant and go to substantiate the facts and 
figures set out in Annexure II thereto, prepared on the basis of reports of 
DPGs of various States.  Though these figures in NPC Report pertain to the 
years 1974 to 1976, there does not appear to be any m arked or qualitative 
change over the years.  62 to 63 per cen t of arrests are for m inor offences 
under the City Police Acts and about 27 to 29 per cent arrests are in 
“security proceedings” i.e., under sec tions 109 and 110 read with section 
41(2) or m ay even be of persons involved in proceedings under section 
107/108 CrPC.  Only a sm all percentage, about 2 per cent, were arrests for 
offences under IPC.) 
 
The said material shows “that a major portion of the arrests were connected 
with very m inor prosecutions and cannot , therefore, be regarded as quite 
necessary from the point of view of crime prevention.   Continued detention 
in jail of  the persons so arrested ha s also m eant avoidable expenditure on 
their maintenance.   In the above period, it was estimated that 43.2 per cent 
of the expenditure in the connected jails was over such prisoners only who 
in the ultim ate analysis need not have been arrested at all .    The fear of 
police essentially stem s from  the fear of an arrest by the police in som e 
connection or other.  It is generally known that false crim inal cases are 
sometimes engineered m erely f or the sake of  m aking arrests to hum iliate 
and embarrass some specified enem ies of the com plainant, in league with 
the police for corrupt reasons”. 
 
 50 

 51 
The definition of cognizable offence in Crim inal Procedure Code is 
inadequate.   “Whether an offence s hould be deemed cognizable or not has 
to be determ ined on consideration whether or not it is desirable to m ake it 
investigable by the police without orde rs from a Magistrate.  The em phasis 
should really be on police com petence for investigation and not on the 
power of arrest.  The question of arrest arises only after an investigation has 
been taken up, and it is only an incident al task in the entire exercise of 
investigation.  Before the Cr.P.C. was am ended in 1973, the First Schedule 
did not specifically m ention whethe r an offence was cognizable or non-
cognizable but m erely referred to the fact whether or not the police m ay 
arrest without warrant.  This irrationality was set right when the Cr.P.C. was 
amended in 1973 and the cognizable or non-cognizable nature of each 
offence was specifically m entioned as such in colum n 4 of the First 
Schedule.   This amendment in the First Schedule was apparently omitted to 
be reflected in the definition of cogni zable offence in section 2(c) which 
continues to refer to the power of arre st without warrant, while in fact the 
First Schedule m akes no such refere nce at all now.  W e, therefore, 
recommend that section 2(c) of Cr.P.C. be amended to read as under: 
 
“(c) “cognizable offence” m eans an offence which is specified as 
such in the First Schedule and “cognizable case” m eans a case 
arising from such an offence or a case in which a police officer m ay 
under any other law for the tim e bei ng in force,  arrest without 
warrant.” 
 
Likewise section 2(1) of Cr.P.C. maybe amended to read as under: 
 
“(1) “non-cognizable offence” m eans an offence which is specified 
as such in the First Schedule and “non-cognizable case” m eans a 
case arising from such an offence. 
  
 51 

 52 
The amendments proposed above would not in any way abridge the power 
of arrest presently available to police officers under sections 41 and 157 
Cr.P.C. but would underline the fact th at a case is deem ed cognizable not 
because of the power of arrest but  because of police com petency to 
investigate it”. 
 
Section 170 of Code of Criminal Procedure also requires to be amended.  At 
present Police and som e of the m agistrates  are under the im pression that 
when a chargesheet is filed by the Police in court, the accused m ust be 
necessarily produced.  This understanding is incorrect.  The production of 
the accused on such occasion is not necessary.  Sub-section (1) of section 
170 must therefore be amended as follows: 
 
Bond for appearance of 
accused and witnesses, when 
evidence is sufficient. 
170(1).  If, upon an investigation under 
this chapter, it appears to the of ficer-in-
charge of the police station that there is 
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground 
to f orward a report to a Magistrate f or 
taking cognizance under clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 190 of an 
offence alleged to have been com mitted 
by a person, such officer shall, if the 
aforesaid person is not in custody, take 
security from  him  for his appearance 
before the officer or Magistrate on a day 
fixed and for his attendance on further 
days as may be directed by the officer or 
Magistrate. 
 
Apart from a legal perception on the part of  the Police of  the necessity to 
make arrests on cognizable cases, the Po lice are also frequently pressed by 
 52 

 53 
the force and expectation of public opinion in certain situations to m ake 
arrests merely to create an im pression of effectiveness.   It is necessary that 
the Press and the Legislators should realize that they should not so 
pressurize the Police since such pre ssure leads on som e occasions to 
unjustified arrests. 
 
Guidelines for making arrests (laid down in the Report of N.P.C.) 
“22.28 While the existing powers of arrest  may continue to be available to 
the police to enable their effective handling of law and order and crim e 
problems, we feel it would be useful to lay down some broad guidelines for 
making arrests.  An arrest during the investigation of a cognizable case may 
be considered justified in one or other of the following circumstances: 
(i) The case involves a grave offence like m urder, dacoity, robbery, rape 
etc., and it is necessary to arrest the accused and bring his movements under 
restraint to infuse confidence among the terror stricken victims. 
(ii) The accused is likely to abscond and evade the processes of law. 
(iii) The accused is given to violen t behaviour and is likely to com mit 
further offences unless his movements are brought under restraint. 
(iv) The accused is a habitual offende r and unless kept in custody he is 
likely to commit similar offences again. 
 
It would be desirable to insist through departm ental instructions that a 
police officer m aking an arrest should also record in the case diary the 
reasons for m aking the arrest, there by clarifying his conform ity to the 
specified guidelines.   There m ay be quite many cases in which it would be 
adequate either during or at the end of the investigation to take a bond from  
the accused on the lines indicated in the am ended form  of section 170 
Cr.P.C. as proposed in para 22.26 above, without having to m ake a form al 
arrest.   This arrangem ent in law would, in our view, considerably reduce 
the scope for malpractices and harassment arising from arrests”. 
 
 53 

 54 
The bail provisions were also required to be m odified in the interest of 
reducing the scope for m alpractices.    Section 437 of the Code was 
suggested to be amended by adding the following proviso under sub-section 
(3) of section 437: 
 
“Provided that before ordering the release on bail of such person, the Court 
shall have due regard to- 
(a) the likely effect on public orde r and public peace by the release of 
such person, and 
(b) his conduct after release on bail on a previous occasion, if any, 
as m ay be brought to the notice of the Court by the police officer 
investigating the case in connection with which the aforesaid person was 
taken into custody.” 
 
Relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) 
Bill, 1994, being Bill No.35 of 1994 
(introduced in Rajya Sabha on 9th May, 1994) 
  
In the year 1994, the Governm ent of India (Ministry of Hom e Affairs) 
introduced a Bill to am end the Crim inal Procedure Code.  As m any as 46 
provisions in the Code were sought to be am ended in addition to certain entries in 
the First and Second Schedules.   A few pr ovisions of the Indian Penal code were 
also sought to be am ended.  The Law Commission understands that the Bill was 
referred to the Parliam entary Com mittee on Hom e Affairs, which has indeed 
submitted its Report thereon on February 19, 1996.  It has offered its com ments on 
the several proposals contained in the Bill which will be referred, insofar as they 
are relevant, hereinafter. The Bill has not  been passed either by Rajya Sabha or by 
Lok Sabha so far. 
 
Among other provisions, the Bill propos es to am end sections 45 and 46 
besides inserting a new section 50A.  It also seeks to amend section 53 and seeks to 
insert a new section 53A.  Section 54 is al so sought to be am ended in addition to 
 54 

 55 
inserting a new section 54A.  (These am endments are proposed in chapter V of the 
Code which deals with arrest of  persons.)   The Bill also seeks to am end certain 
provisions in chapter XII which deals w ith “inf ormation to the police and their 
powers to investigate”.   Only two s ections, nam ely sections 173 and 176 are 
proposed to be am ended.  The First Schedule is also sought to be am ended as 
mentioned earlier. 
 
 Section 45 says that m embers of the ar med forces of the Union shall not be 
arrested under sections 41 to 44 except after obtaining the consent of the Central 
Government.  Sub-section (2) of section 45 em powers the State governm ent to 
extend the provisions of sub-section (1) “t o such class or category of the m embers 
of the force charged with the m aintenance of public order” as m ay be specified in 
the notification.   Section 6 of the Am endment Bill seeks to add the words “or to 
such other public servants” after the wo rds “m embers of the force”.   (The 
Parliamentary Com mittee has disapproved th is proposal.  W e are in respectful 
agreement with the opinion of the Parliamentary Committee.) 
 
 Section 46 prescribes the m anner in wh ich an arrest shall be m ade.  Sub-
section (3) is sought to be am ended by addi ng certain words.   W e shall refer to 
sub-section (3) at a later stage.  A new s ub-section, sub-section (4) is also sought to 
be inserted in section 46 to the following effect: 
 
“(4) Save in exceptional circum stances, no wom an shall be arrested after 
sunset and before sunrise, and where such exceptional circum stances exist, 
the police of ficer shall by m aking a written report, obtain the prior 
permission of his im mediate superior offi cer for effecting such arrest or, if 
the case is one of extrem e urgency and such prior perm ission cannot be 
obtained before m aking such arrest, he shall, after m aking the arrest, 
forthwith report the m atter in writing to his im mediate superior officer 
explaining the urgency and the reasons  for not taking prior perm ission as 
aforesaid and shall also m ake a report to the Magistrate within whose local 
 55 

 56 
jurisdiction the arrest had been m ade.”   (The Parliamentary Committee has 
opined that the arrest of a wom an can be m ade only by a wom an police 
officer, if the arrest is m ade after s un-set and before sun-rise and that in 
every case, perm ission of the F.C.J. Magistrate should be obtained before 
arresting a woman.  We respectfully commend the amendment, as modified 
by the Parliamentary Committee.) 
 
 After section 50, a new section 50A in the following term s is sought to be 
inserted: 
 
“50A. Every police officer or other person m aking any arrest under this 
Code shall f orthwith give the inf ormation regarding such arrest and the 
place where the arrested person is bei ng held to such person as m ay be 
nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such 
information.”   (The Parliam entary Committee has recom mended addition 
of few more clauses to the effect: the right of an accused to have his friend 
or relative inf ormed of his arrest; the obligation of the police to inf orm the 
accused of the said right available to him; making of an entry in the police 
diary of the above facts and the duty of the Magistrate, before whom  the 
accused is produced, to satisfy him self that the aforesaid requirem ents are 
complied with.  We commend the proposed amendment, as modified by the 
Parliamentary Committee.) 
 
 By section 9 of the Bill, the existing explanation to section 53 is sought to 
be substituted.   The proposed explanation reads as follows: 
  
“Explanation – In this section and in sections 53A and 54,- 
(a) “examination shall include the ex amination of blood, swabs in case of 
sexual assault, sputum and sweat, hair sam ples and finger nail clippings 
and such other tests which the regi stered m edical practitioner thinks 
necessary in a particular case; 
 56 

 57 
(b) “registered m edical practitioner” m eans a m edical practitioner who 
possesses any medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2 
of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and whose nam e has been 
entered in a State Medical Register .”  (The Parliam entary Com mittee 
has pointed out that the expression “sexual assault” used in the proposed 
provisions is not defined anywhere  and therefore it would be m ore 
appropriate to use the expression “sexual offence”.) 
 
We agree with the proposed am endment.  Our 172 nd Report deals 
elaborately with sexual assault, its various forms and other incidental matters. 
 
A new section, section 53A is sought to  be inserted by section 10 of the 
Amendment Bill.  The proposed new section reads as follows: 
 
“53A. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of  committing an offence 
of rape or an attem pt to com mit rape and there are reasonable grounds for 
believing that an exam ination of his pe rson will af ford evidence as to the 
commission of such offence, it shall be  lawful for a registered m edical 
practitioner em ployed in a hospital run by the Governm ent or by a local 
authority and in the absence of  such a practitioner, by any other registered 
medical practitioner, acting at the reque st of a police of ficer not below the 
rank of a sub-inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid 
and under his direction, to m ake such an examination of the arrested person 
and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose. 
(2) The registered m edical practitioner conducting such exam ination shall, 
without delay, examine such person and prepare a report of his examination 
giving the following particulars, namely: 
(i) the name and address of the accu sed and of the person by whom  he 
was brought, 
(ii) the age of the accused, 
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused, and 
 57 

 58 
(iv) other material particulars in reasonable detail. 
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion 
arrived at. 
(4) The exact tim e of com mencement and com pletion of the 
examination shall also be noted in the report. 
(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the 
report to the investigating of ficer, w ho shall f orward it to the Magistrate 
referred to in section 173 as part of the docum ents referred to in clause (a) 
of sub-section (5)of that section.”   (The Parliam entary Com mittee has 
opined that exam ination of the accuse d by a private-registered m edical 
practitioner should be valid only if no hospital run by governm ent for a 
local authority is available.) 
 
 Section 11 of the Am endment Bill proposes to renum ber the existing 
section 54 as sub-section (1) thereof a nd to introduce a new sub-section to the 
following effect: 
 
“(2) W here an exam ination is m ade under sub-section (1), a copy of the 
report of such exam ination shall, on a request being m ade by the arrested 
person or by any person nom inated by hi m in this behalf, be furnished by 
the registered m edical practitioner to the arrested person or the person so 
nominated.”   (The Parliam entary Committee has supported this proposal.  
It has indeed suggested that the requirem ent in this sub-section be m ade 
mandatory.) 
 
 Section 12 of the Bill seeks to introduce a new section, section 54A which 
runs thus: 
 
“54A. Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence and 
his identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for 
the purpose of investigation of such o ffence, the Court, having jurisdiction, 
 58 

 59 
may, on the request of the officer in charge of a police station, direct the 
person so arrested to subject him self to identification by any person or 
persons in such m anner as the Court m ay deem fit.”    (The Parliam entary 
Committee has not made any comment on this proposal.) 
 
 Section 173 which occurs in chapter 12 as mentioned above, is sought to be 
amended by inserting a new sub-section, sub-section (3A), between the existing 
sub-sections (3) and (4), to the following effect: 
 
“(3A) Where in respect of any offence com poundable under section 320, 
the person by whom the offence may be compounded under the said section 
gives in the course of investigation a report in writing to the of ficer in 
charge of the police station expressing his desire to com pound the offence 
as provided for in the said section, such officer shall m ention this fact in the 
police report under sub-section (2) and forward it to the Magistrate who 
shall thereupon deal with the case under section 320 as though the 
prosecution for the offence concerne d had been launched “before that 
Magistrate.”   (The Parliam entary Committee has disapproved this proposal 
on the ground that it m ay be m isused by forcing the parties to agree to a 
compromise.) 
 
 Sub-section (1) of section 176 is sought to be am ended by deleting the 
words “where any person dies while in the custody of the police or”.    After sub-
section (1), a new sub-section (1A), is sought to be introduced which runs thus: 
  
“(1A) W here,- 
(a) any person dies or disappears, or 
(b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman, 
while such person or wom an is in the custody of the police, in addition to 
the inquiry or investigation held by th e police, an inquiry shall be held by 
 59 

 60 
the Judicial Magistrate or the Metropo litan Magistrate, as the case m ay be, 
within whose local jurisdiction the offence has been committed.” 
 
 After sub-section (4) and before th e explanation, a new sub-section, sub-
section (5) is proposed to be inserted to the following effect: 
 
“(5) The Judicial Magistrate or th e Metropolitan Magistrate or Executive 
Magistrate or police officer holding an inquiry or investigation, as the case 
maybe, under sub-section (1A) shall, w ithin twenty-four hours of the death 
of a person, forward the body with a vi ew to its being exam ined to the 
nearest Civil Surgeon or other qualified m edical m an appointed in this 
behalf by the State Government, unless it is not possible to do so for reasons 
to be recorded in writing.”     (The Parliam entary Committee has suggested 
that the incidence of death, disappearance and rape occurring in judicial 
custody m ust also be brought with in the purview of the proposed 
provisions.  It has further suggested providing for compensation in the form 
of either em ployment to eligible fam ily m embers or a pension of, say, 
Rs.1500/- p.m. to the bereaved fam ily in the case of death in police/judicial 
custody.) 
 60 

 61 
Chapter Five 
 
The need for this study and the approach underlying it 
 
 The law concerning the power of the po lice to arrest without warrant and/or 
without an order from  the m agistrate is  a fundam ental aspect of the Crim inal 
Procedure Code.   It is true, as has been  suggested by a num ber of participants in 
the sem inar and other persons/organizations who have responded to our 
questionnaire that the law relating to arrest ought not to be exam ined in isolation 
but that it m ust be a part of a larger st udy of the entire procedural law (crim inal) 
obtaining in the country but the said r easoning has no application herein for the 
reason that Law Com mission has already exam ined in depth not only the Code of 
Criminal Procedure but also the I ndian Penal Code very recently – 154 th and 156th 
Reports subm itted in 1996 and 1997, respectivel y.   Earlier, several aspects of 
Criminal Procedure were examined in several Reports.   The 154 th Report on CrPC 
deals inter alia with Law of arrest as well and has recommended certain changes, as 
pointed out earlier in a preceding chapter.   Since this particular aspect did not 
receive the attention it deserved in earlier Reports and also because, the 
Commission did not have before it the data  concerning the arrests under preventive 
provisions, arrests for bailable offences and other particulars contained in Annexure 
II, the Commission thought it fit to undertake this separate study.     The 41st Report 
of the Law Com mission on the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1898 is an extensive 
one and it form ed the basis for the 1973 Code.   The other Reports dealing with 
various aspects of crim inal procedure are the 25 th Report (concerning the evidence 
of officers about forged stam ps, cu rrency notes, etc. and suggesting and 
introduction of a new section, section 50A), 32 nd Report (section 9 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898), 33 rd Report (section 44 of the 1898 Code), 35 th Report 
(on capital punishment), 36th Report (on sections 497, 498 and 499 of 1898 Code – 
subject of bail), 37th Report (sections 1 to 176 of 1898 Code), 41 st Report (Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898), 47 th Report (the trial and punishm ent of social and 
economic offences), 48 th Report (som e questions under the Code of Crim inal 
 61 

 62 
Procedure Bill, 1970), 73 rd Report (crim inal liability of the husband upon his 
failure to pay m aintenance or perm anent alim ony to the wife), 78 th Report 
(congestion of undertrial prisoners in jails), 132 nd Report (suggestion for am ending 
chapter 9 of the 1973 Code), 135 th Report (women in custody), 141 st Report (upon 
the need for am ending the law to em power the courts to restore crim inal appeals 
and revisions dismissed for default of non-appearance), 142nd Report (concessional 
treatment of offenders who on their own initiative choose to plead guilty without 
any bargaining) and 152nd Report (on custodial crimes).     Indeed, recently the Law 
Commission has also submitted its 172nd Report on (Review of Rape Laws)  which 
suggests certain am endments to Crim inal Procedure Code along with Indian Penal 
Code and Evidence Act.   W e do not theref ore think that we should hold back this 
study of the law relating to arrest on th e ground that it should be taken up only as 
part of an overall study of the Crim inal Procedure Code as has been suggested by 
certain individuals and organizations. 
 
 Another critical approach adopted by certain police officers (who 
participated in our sem inars and also sent their written responses to the W orking 
Paper) is that the m aterial/data collected by the Com mission is not adequate and 
that some more data ought to be collected before such an im portant law reform  is 
thought of.   We are unable to accede to this plea either.   The material collected by 
us and which is presented in a capsule fo rm in Annexure II cannot be said to be 
inadequate.  It is the data supplied by the Directors General and Inspectors General 
of the several States, based upon the preci se data collected by them  through their 
officers and records.  Except saying that  m ore data should be collected, the 
proponents of this view could not point out in  which particular, the data is lacking.  
It may also be noticed that the data  collected by the National Police Com mission 
from three districts in the country, referred to in chapter XXII of their Report 
(referred to in an earlier chapter), fully corroborates the basic premises of Annexure 
II.  It m ay be m entioned that the par ticulars supplied by the AGPs/IGPs is quite 
extensive, all of which could not naturally  be set out in the W orking Paper.   
Annexure II is only an abstract prepared  by the Com mission on the basis of their 
 62 

 63 
Reports.  Som e of these Reports have al so put forward several suggestions and 
comments with respect to the proposals c ontained in the W orking Paper.   The 
several reported decisions of the Supr eme Court and High Courts are eloquent 
testimony to the several abuses afflicting the Police adm inistration in the area 
concerned herein.    Even the NPC Repor ts speak of m isuse of this power, the 
corruption accom panying this power and the frequent harassm ent of citizens by 
uncalled for, unjustified and m otivated exercise of this power.    Several decisions 
of the Supreme Court/High Courts, Repor ts of Law Commission and the Report of 
NPC have suggested m easures to str eamline and regulate this power by laying 
down several guidelines for the police officers.   In this state of affairs, the plea that 
a reform of this branch of law should be  put off till m ore data is collected, cannot 
be countenanced. 
 
 Another idea put forward by som e participants/respondents is that present 
time is not the proper tim e to change the law.  Except saying so, they have not 
given any reasons in support of this plea.  W hen the phenom enon of m isuse of 
power of arrest is ram pant – the NHRC is  flooded with such com plaints – it is 
difficult to agree that the tim e is not propiti ous for effecting changes in it.   At the 
same tim e, we m ust m ake it clear that we are not unaware of the m enace of 
terrorism afflicting our country. India is one  of the worst victim s of terrorism, both 
home-grown as well as im ported.  Foreign mercenaries in J&K have been taking a 
toll of our security and police forces a nd we are obliged to divert our m eagre 
resources to fight this evil.  W e are also aware that existing crim inal law is not 
adequate to m eet this m enace and that our anti-terrorism  law is the need of the 
hour.  Taking note of this fact and taking note of the further fact that both UK and 
USA have perm anent anti-terrorism  laws, we in the Law Com mission had 
recommended the enactment of a law called ‘P revention of Terrorism Act’.  In our 
173rd Report, we had pointed out the necessity of such a law and had also enclosed 
a Bill containing provisions which were less rigorous than the provisions of the UK 
and USA Act.  W e may also mention that after the tragic events of Septem ber 11, 
2001 (bombing of World Trade Centre and Pentagon) in USA, both the Federal and 
 63 

 64 
State Governments in USA are toughening th eir anti-terrorism  laws.  W e are not 
saying that the Bill subm itted by us in the year 2000 should be toughened.  W hat 
we are suggesting is that an anti-terrorism  law is called for in the present security 
situation in the country.  At the sam e tim e, we wish to em phasise that just as a 
special law is required to fight terrorism  effectively, the ordinary law of the land 
should be adequate to safeguard the rights of the citizens while m aintaining and 
preserving the law and order and societal peace.  There is no contradiction between 
having an ef fective anti-terrorism  law and a balanced crim inal law applicable to 
ordinary citizens and situations not governed by the anti-terrorism  law.  
Suppression of terrorism  indeed contribut es to a situation where the ordinary 
citizens can peacefully enjoy their civil, political and economic rights. 
 
 Yet another idea put forward is that any curtailment of the powers of the 
police in this behalf  would take away th e fear of the police from  the public m ind 
and would not be conducive to a proper m aintenance of law and order.   W e find it 
difficult to agree that there should be fear of police in public mind or that such fear 
is necessary for m aintaining law and order in the society.  In a dem ocracy, where 
the people are the m asters, and the public servants their agents appointed to do a 
particular job, the very idea of fear is in admissible and unacceptable.  Fear m ust be 
of doing a wrong thing.  The British society is an example where a friendly police 
yet maintains the law and order in a f ar more effective manner.  In any event, what 
does this fear of police m ean?  Mere arrest  cannot be such a fear as to hold back a 
person from committing a crime.  Or is it f ear of harsh or third-degree treatm ent at 
the hands of the police?   If it is the latte r, it is unacceptable.  Indeed, the only fear 
that can be countenanced is the fear of punishment by court. 
 
 But then it is said that since the convic tion rate is very low, the very fact of 
arrest is a sort of punishm ent that can be  meted out to the guilty.  This argum ent is 
again misleading and unacceptable.  Guilt or innocence has to be determ ined by the 
courts and not by the police.  Police m erely prosecutes on being satisfied that a 
person is guilty of an offence; it doesn’t punis h.   It is also suggested that there is a 
 64 

 65 
distinct increase in crim e because of enorm ous increase in population, 
unemployment and lack of adequate res ources.  May be so. But how does this 
phenomenon militate against the proposed change s in law.  In fact, the attention of 
the police m ust be m ore on serious offe nces and econom ic offences and not so 
much on m inor offences.  The undesirable practice of arresting persons for m inor 
offences and keeping them in jail for long periods (either because they cannot move 
for bail or because they cannot furnish bail to the satisfaction of the court – all 
because of their poverty) m ust com e to an  end.  In fact, this aspect has already 
engaged the attention of the Suprem e Court, which has given several directions for 
release/discharge of accused in case of m inor offences and offences punishable up 
to seven years excepting therefrom the econom ic offences.  These directions were 
given keeping in view Article 21, the way in which trials for m inor offences are 
dragging on for years and years together with  the result that the crim inal judicial 
system is operating as an engine of oppression against them .  See Common Cause 
decisions reported in AIR 1996 SC 1619 and in AIR 1997 SC 1539.   The Court 
took note of the fact that in som e cases, the accused have been in jail for periods 
longer than the period to which they would have been sentenced, even if found 
guilty – and that all this was happening even before their guilt or innocence is 
determined.  The Court said: “The very pendency of criminal proceedings for long 
periods by itself operates as an engine of oppression….   It appears essential to 
issue appropriate directions to protect and effectuate the right to lif e and liberty of  
the citizens guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution”. 
 
 So far as the plea for reclassi fication of offences (cognizable/non-
cognizable) in IPC is concerned, we do not think it necessary to do so except 
making a distinction (elaborated hereinafter) between offences which are 
committed in the presence of  the police of ficer and offences which are reported to 
him after they are com mitted.    (This distin ction is relevant only in the context of  
power of arrest and is an im portant and relevant distinction as will be pointed out 
hereinafter.)    Regarding the dem and for reclassification, we m ay say that we are 
not convinced by the reasons behind the said dem and.  W e have explained 
 65 

 66 
hereinbefore the criteria/basis upon which the said distinction is based.  W e are of 
the opinion that the said basis is a reas onable and cogent one and need not be 
meddled with. 
 
 The crim inal procedure devised by any country should aim  at resolving 
State-citizens’ disputes in a m anner th at com mands the society’s respect for 
fairness of its processes as well as reliability  of its outcomes.   It’s function should 
be to reaffirm  the fundam ental values  of the nation and devise a procedure 
consistent with such values and the substantive criminal law.   This is referred to as 
the principle of restraint.    The principle of ‘restraint’  means that the liberty of  an 
individual and his freedom  should be interf ered with by resorti ng to the power of 
arrest without warrant only where the circum stances necessitate the sam e.   Not 
only the procedure should be consistent with the fundam ental constitutional values 
of our nation but they m ust also be expr essed in language which is sim ple, certain 
and coherent and at the sam e tim e com prehensive.   It m ust provide clear and 
unambiguous guidance both to the law enforcem ent agencies as well as to the 
citizens. 
 
 We m ay now refer to a valid critic ism of the proposals (in the W orking 
Paper) to introduce the concept and practice of issuing sum mons and appearance 
notices instead of arrest in bailable and non-cognizable and bailable and 
cognizable, respectively.   The criticism  runs as follows: riot (s.147) and riot with 
dangerous weapons (s.148) are both cognizab le but bailable offences according to 
the Schedule to CrPC.   W hen a riot with deadly weapons is going on in the 
presence of the police officers and if you sa y that the police officers cannot arrest 
the rioters and the only power they have is  to serve summons or appearance notice 
upon them  – the situation would be ridicu lous; the police would becom e totally 
ineffective, and a laughing stock, and the public confidence in the police as an 
agency to maintain law and order would be totally shaken.  Such an absurd scenario 
cannot and should not even be im agined, it is suggested.   W e have taken due note 
of this criticism and accordingly devise here with a classification of offences –(this 
 66 

 67 
classification is relevant to and is m ade only in the context of the power of the 
police to arrest without a warrant) - into  those committed in the presence of police 
officer(s) and those which he com es to know after they are com mitted – a 
distinction recognized in some criminal judicial systems.   The basic distinction that 
has to be kept in m ind vis-à-vis the power of arrest is a situation where the offence 
is com mitted or is being com mitted in the presence of  a police of ficer and a 
situation where the police officer com es to know of the offence after it is 
committed.   Let us elaborate by ref erring to various possible situations and the 
powers of police in those respective situations as per the recom mendations made in 
this Report: 
 
(a) Where a police officer com es to know  of a design to com mit a cognizable 
offence and the only way of stopping the co mmission of offence is by arresting the 
person (so designing to com mit a cognizable offence), he can arrest him  under 
section 151 CrPC. 
 
(b)(i) Where a cognizable offence is com mitted or is being com mitted in the 
presence of a police officer (as in th e case of a riot with or without 
dangerous weapons), he would be, and m ust be, em powered to arrest the 
person who has com mitted or is com mitting the of fence, if that is the only 
way of stopping the com mission or furt her com mission of that or other 
cognizable offence.   Indeed, this is what section 149 of the Code says.  It 
places a duty upon the police officer to “interpose for the purpose of 
preventing, and shall to the best of his ability, prevent, the com mission of 
any cognizable offence”.  However, if the offence is bailable, he would 
immediately release the person afte r obtaining a personal bond to appear 
whenever called by the police or the court, as the case may be. 
 
(ii) Similarly, if the police officer finds that any person is attempting to commit 
or is com mitting an act causing injury  to any public property (see section 
152), it is his duty to take necessary step s to prevent it.  Indeed, this power 
 67 

 68 
is all the m ore necessary today, wh en on the slightest provocation – or 
without any provocation, som etimes – people attack and dam age public 
property like buses, railway property, gove rnment vehicles and so on.  In 
such a case, his power extends to arresting the person and to hot-pursuit, 
where necessary.  This is so irrespectiv e of the fact whether the offence is 
cognizable or not.    
 
(c) Where the police officer comes to know of the offence after it is committed, 
his power to arrest the alleged offender shoul d be different.   This is the m ost usual 
case.  Most of the tim e, the police officer  comes to know of the offence after it is 
committed, either on som e one’s inform ation or through intelligence.   In such a 
case, the police officer has to follow the following courses of action: 
 
(i) if the offence is a non-cognizable one, he should take no action in the matter 
except recording the inf ormation and ref er the inf ormant to the Magistrate, 
as contemplated by section 155 of the Code; 
 
(ii) if the offence is a cognizable one  and is punishable with sentence of 
imprisonment not exceeding seven year s the police officer m ay commence 
investigation into the offence, but his power to arrest is governed by the 
provisions of section 41 (as recommended in this Report).    If the offence is 
bailable, it is obvious that he sha ll release him on bail or on personal bond, 
in case he arrests him; 
 
(iii) if the offence is a cognizable one  punishable with im prisonment for m ore 
than seven years or with lif e im prisonment or death, he m ay arrest the 
person as provided in Chapter V of the Code. 
  
 The point to be emphasised is that arrest must be resorted to only where it is 
necessary.    This is the principle of restraint,  referred to hereinabove.    It m ust be 
remembered that arrest is not meant to be a punishment but is merely a detention of 
 68 

 69 
the person in police custody/jail for a particular purpose or purposes, as the case 
may be.  The purpose m ay be to ensure  his presence during the course of 
investigation or whenever his presence is  required or called for by the court or 
where the arrest is called for for one or more of the reasons mentioned hereinabove.   
Of course, in the case of serious offen ces like m urder, dacoity, arson, offences 
against the State and offences against wo men – indeed in the case of offences 
punishable with im prisonment exceeding seve n years, arrest m ay be called for for 
instilling a sense of confidence am ong the members of the public. To put it in 
different words, the arrests can be both ‘preventive’ as well as ‘repressive’ – 
expressions coined by the jurists.  Preventive purpose includes protective purpose.  
This power will be exercised in cases wher e it is necessary to arrest the person to 
prevent the commission of an offence, term inating a breach of the peace, to detain 
the person who m ay be a danger to him self or to others, to prevent him  from  
tampering with the witnesses or evidence of crime and so on.   Repressive purposes 
are those where the object of arrest or detention is to compel his attendance in court 
whenever necessary or to gather eviden ce in relation to an of fence with his 
assistance. 
 
Let us look at the problem  from  a di fferent angle:  Inasm uch as an 
overwhelming majority of the alleged offenders are not likely to abscond (except in 
serious offences like m urder, dacoity, robbery and offences against the State, etc.), 
the question is whether a person should be arrested m erely because he is 
“concerned in any cognizable offence”,  where the offence has already been 
committed, i.e., where the of fence is not committed in the presence of  the police 
officer?   In such a case, unless it is necessary to arrest a person for preventive 
purposes, no arrest should be m ade except in serious offences like m urder and 
dacoity etc., as m entioned above.   In cas e of m ost of the lesser offences, i.e., 
offences punishable up to seven years, the likelihood of the person absconding or 
evading arrest or running away from  his norm al place of abode, is very little.    A 
mere appearance notice or a sum mons, as the case m ay be, should be sufficient in 
such cases.   Only where it is appreh ended that the person will not obey an 
 69 

 70 
appearance notice/sum mons and where it is  believed that rearresting him  would 
involve unnecessary and avoidable effort and expense, that the person should be 
arrested for repressive purposes.   W e may conclude this chapter saying that while 
the tradition of common law has been to confer broad powers of investigation upon 
police officers, it has always tended to lim it strictly the power and authority to 
interfere with an individual’s liberty or property. 
 70 

 71 
Chapter Six 
 
Proposals contained in the Consultation Paper 
and the responses received thereto 
 
 
 The proposals put forward for debate in the Consultation Paper issued by 
the Law Commission are contained in part th ree thereof.  The proposals briefly are 
to the following effect: 
 
1) No warrant shall be issued and no one  shall be arrested for offences which 
are now categorized by the Code as bailable and non-cognizable.  The very 
expression “bailable” may have to be changed.  In such cases only a sum mons may 
be sent to the accused to be served not by a police officer but by a civilian officer 
(3.1.1). 
 
2) In case of offences specified as bailable and cognizable by the Code, no 
arrest shall be m ade for those offences (e xcept certain of fences so specif ied in  
Annexure IV to the Consultation Paper), unless of course there are grounds to 
believe that the accused is likely to disapp ear and that it would be very difficult to 
apprehend him or where he is a habitual offender.   The expression “bailable” m ay 
be omitted even in respect of this category (3.1.2). 
 
3) The offences, punishable with seven years imprisonment or less, mentioned 
in Annexure V to the Consultation Pape r (excluding offences punishable under 
sections 124, 152, 216A, 231, 233, 234, 237, 256, 257, 258, 260, 295, 298, 403, 
408, 420, 466, 468, 477A and 489C), which are cat egorized now as cognizable and 
non-bailable should be treated as bailable cognizable offences and be dealt with 
accordingly (3.1.3). 
 
4) No arrest may be made merely on the basis of suspicion of  complicity in an 
offence (3.2.1). 
 71 

 72 
 
5) The guidelines issued in the decisi on of the Supreme Court in D.K. Basu v. 
State of West Bengal should be incorporated in the Code  (3.3). 
 
6) Representatives of registered NGOs should be entitled to visit police 
stations to check against unlawful arrests and unlawful treatment (3.4). 
 
7) The com poundability of offences shoul d be increased and the concept of 
plea bargaining should be incorporated in the Code (3.5). 
 
8) No arrests should be m ade under sections 107 to 110 CrPC read with 
section 41(2).   (No change is suggested in section 151 CrPC) (3.6). 
 
9) In respect of offences (except in case of serious offences like m urder, 
dacoity, robbery, rape and offences against the State), the bail m ust be granted as a 
matter of course except where it is apprehended that the accused may disappear and 
evade arrest or where it is necessary to prevent him  f rom com mitting f urther 
offences (3.7). 
 
10) No arrest shall be m ade and no person should be detained for m ere 
questioning (3.8). 
 
11) Ensuring the safety and well-being of  the detainee is the responsibility of 
the detaining authority and action can be taken for negligence in that behalf (3.9). 
 
12) Custody record should be m aintained at every police station containing the 
specified particulars which shall be open to inspection by m embers of the Bar and 
representatives of the registered NGOs interested in human rights (3.10). 
 
13) The law relating to tortious liability of  the State requires to be changed 
(3.11). 
 72 

 73 
 
14) Strict compliance with section 172 CrPC should be insisted upon (3.12). 
 
Response to the questions raised in the Consultation Paper: 
 
Delhi Seminar: Three Seminars were conducted by the Law Com mission at Delhi, 
Calcutta and Hyderabad. At the Sem inar held in Delhi, two divergent and sharply 
opposing viewpoints em erged.  One was the view espoused by the police officers 
(barring certain exceptions which we shall ref er to later) and the other by the 
members of the Bar and the representatives  of the Hum an Rights’ organizations.   
The first view was forcefully articulated by Shri Padm anabahiah, form er Hom e 
Secretary, Government of India.   He s ubmitted that in f act the num ber of arrests 
vis-à-vis the num ber of crim es is decreasing and that this is not the right tim e to 
change the law relating to arrest.   He submitted that there is no clear data which 
establishes the m isuse or abuse of the pow er of arrest by the police.  The reported 
misuse is really on account of increase in  crim e and of explos ive growth of the 
population.  He also opined that arrest is  one of the m ost im mediate preventive 
actions that can be taken by police and th is power should not be curtailed.  Today 
only the fear of arrest is there am ong the criminals but not the fear of conviction 
because of the undue delays in the courts.  W hile welcom ing the idea that the 
guidelines in D.K. Basu should be incorporated in the statute, he opposed the idea 
of NGOs being permitted to visit police stations.    His suggestion was that legal aid 
cells, not involved in the particular case, be  given the right to visit police stations.  
He was supported in this view by Shri Ashok Vijaywargiya, Home Secretary, State 
of Chattisgarh, Shri Ganeshwar Jha of Border Security Force (who suggested 
additionally that the status and salaries  of the police personnel be upgraded and 
they should be asked to undergo proper and effective training), Shri M.L. Sharm a, 
IGP, Rajasthan (who was also of the opini on that the law relating to arrest cannot 
be exam ined in isolation but should be studied as a part of the entire crim inal 
judicial system), Shri Masud Choudhary, IGP of J&K State, Shri Hira Lal, form er 
 73 

 74 
IGP Gujarat, Shri Arun Gupta, DIG, CBI and  Shri S.K. Sharm a, Legal Adviser, 
CBI.   
 
 Shri Jagdish Singh, IGP, UP, however, agreed with all the 
recommendations of the Law Com mission except the one contained in para 3.4 of 
the Consultation Paper (permitting the registered NGOs to visit police stations).    
 
Shri Dalpat Singh Dinkar, Deputy Direct or, Bureau of Police Research and 
Development while generally supporting the views of Shri Padm anabahiah, 
welcomed  any m easures to check the abus e of power of arrest.   Sim ilarly, Shri 
G.S. Tiwari, Director, Ministry of Defen ce opined that the root cause of abuse of 
this power lies in the f act that  the po lice officers who exercise vast police powers 
are not properly educated nor properly trai ned in the relevant provisions of law, 
much less in the human rights principles.    
 
The opposite view was articulated with equal force by Shri P.P. Rao,  
Senior Advocate, Suprem e Court of Indi a and form er President of the Suprem e 
Court Bar Association.  He suggested that measures should be adopted to check the 
irregularities committed by police during arrest in the matter of date of actual arrest 
and the treatm ent of the detainees.   He  suggested that the law relating to bail 
should also be revised because it is here that trem endous corruption takes place.   
Safeguards must also be provided to the accused during investigation; the tim e for 
interrogation be fixed, say, between 10.00 am  to 5.00 pm  and the m agistrates 
should satisfy them selves that there is no delay in producing the accused after 
arrest.  He supported the suggestion of compulsory medical examination at the time 
of production of the accused before the m agistrate by a doctor of the accused’s 
choice.  He supported the idea of approve d NGOs being allowed to visit the police 
stations and prisons.  He was supported in this behalf by Justice Rajinder Sachhar, 
former Chief Justice of  Delhi High Cour t and a renowned Hum an Rights’ activist, 
who added that m ost of the arrests ta ke place under the preventive provisions like 
sections 107 to 109 and 151, which requires to be checked; he opined that the 
 74 

 75 
concept of  f ear of  arrest is ill-suited and inconsistent with a dem ocratic system .    
Shri K.T.S. Tulsi, Senior Advocate and former Addl. Solicitor General was of  the 
opinion that arresting a person without pr oper basis and then dropping the case for 
lack of evidence is a violation of fundamental rights and human rights of the person 
concerned.   Shri Gopal Subram anium, Senior Advocate em phasized the 
importance of im plementation aspect of  law and upon the necessity of proper 
training of the police officers.  Shri Ra vi Nair from  South Asian Hum an Rights 
Initiative generally supported the proposal s while Shri Sushil Kum ar, Senior 
Advocate opined that the corruption begins from the stage of recruitm ent itself and 
that the kind of training which is im parted to the police of ficers is wholly 
inadequate to the m odern day policing.  Shri P.N. Lekhi, Senior Advocate, Shri 
Prashant Bhushan, Advocate, Sm t. S.K. Verma, Director, ILI, Shri Manm ohan 
Bara, Advocate, Orissa, Shri Krishnamany, Senior Advocate, Shri Dholakia, Senior 
Advocate and Shri Pundhir, Advocate generally supported the proposals of the Law 
Commission.  Shri D.N. Srivastava, Advo cate (former DGP) opined that it is tim e 
that the confessions m ade before the S uperintendent of Police and higher police 
authorities are made admissible in evidence. 
 
Calcutta Sem inar: At the Sem inar held at Calcutta  in association with the W est 
Bengal National University f or Juridical  Sciences, again two divergent views 
emerged as had happened at Delhi Sem inar.   However, the following further 
suggestions were put forward at this Sem inar.   Justice Ganguly of Calcutta High 
Court suggested that the provision contained in sub-section (3) of section 46 (which 
recognizes by necessary implication, the power of a police officer to cause death of 
the person, in the course of arrest, if  such person is accused of an offence 
punishable with death or im prisonment for life and resists or evades the arrest) 
requires to be m odified.   Justice Talukdar, a Judge of the Calcutta High Court 
supported the proposals of the Law Com mission and em phasized the provisions 
concerning the arrest of  a wom an.  He criticized the exclusion of  Arm ed Forces 
from arrest provided by section 45 and referred in this connection to the decision of 
the Privy Council in Cristie’s case where it was held that a police constable was 
 75 

 76 
liable for prosecution for wrongful arrest.   He suggested incorporation of a sim ilar 
provision in the Code.  He pointed out the anom aly of the statem ents recorded by 
customs officers during their investiga tion being m ade adm issible while the 
statements recorded under section 161 CrPC are not admissible. 
 
Shri N.C. Sil, Principal Secretary, Law Department, Government of W est 
Bengal pointed out the total silence of the Consultation Paper with respect to 
economic offences.   Otherwise he supported the proposals contained therein.  Mr. 
Mukherjee, a retired District Judge sugge sted that in section 157(1) the words 
“reason to suspect” should be substituted by the words “reason to believe”.   He 
suggested that the law should provide that  before a person is arrested, the police 
officer must be satisfied prima facie about the guilt of the accused.  Justice A.V. 
Gupta (retired) suggested that once a person is arrested and produced before a 
magistrate, he should be sent to judicial  custody and should not be sent back to 
police custody.  Shri J. Bagchi, Advocat e pointed out the difficulties faced by 
accused persons in West Bengal in the m atter of obtaining bail.   He stated that the 
registered sureties do not come forward without receiving adequate money therefor; 
and because the relatives of the accused cannot act as sureties, m any accused are 
facing serious harassm ent.   Other speakers, Shri Sen J., W est Bengal 
Administrative Tribunal, Shri Tapan Bha ttacharya, ASO, Hum an Rights, Ms. J. 
Sen, Shri Kirit Roy from  MASUM, Shri Gupte, Dr. Nilanjan Dutta, APDR, Shri 
Brojo Roy, Centre for Care of Torture Vic tims, Shri Basu J. (retired), generally 
supported the proposals contained in th e Consultation Paper, em phasizing the 
human rights’ aspect. 
 
On the other hand, Shri Arun Mukherjee,  former Director, CBI, Shri A.M. 
Jordha, ARG Training, Shri Baugh from  Police Training School, W est Bengal, Dr. 
Sharad, Departm ent of Forensic Scien ces and Dr. Arun Mukherjee, form er CBI 
officer, were of the opinion that no m ajor changes should be effected in the law 
relating to arrest and that it would be m ore appropriate to undertake a study of the 
entire criminal judicial system in the country. 
 76 

 77 
 
Hyderabad Sem inar: At the Hyderabad Sem inar, Shri C. Padm anabha Reddy, a 
leading criminal lawyer of A.P. High Court for the last more than 25 years, was the 
first speaker.  After emphasizing the value of liberty and the necessity of regulating 
the power of arrest, he m ade the following suggestions: (1) All the offences except 
certain serious offences should be m ade bailable, (2) Every arrest should be 
notified in writing and it should be served  upon the accused before he is arrested, 
(3) The norm al rule should be judicial custody and not police custody;  the prison 
rules also require to be am ended and im proved, (4) A m echanism should be 
evolved to screen the arrests m ade by th e police.  Even where a writ of habeas 
corpus is filed for the production of the a rrest of a person the police officers very 
often deny the arrest or shift the person from  place to place.   He however, opposed 
the idea of perm itting the NGOs to visit police stations or prisons.  He also opined 
that even after the decision of the Supreme Court in D.K. Basu, complaints of non-
compliance with those directions persist and such com plaints are not generally 
considered sympathetically by the higher officials. 
 
Shri Bharat Chandra, Hom e Secretary, Governm ent of AP em phasized the 
difficulty of finding a satisfactory solution to the problem  of abuse of power of 
arrest by the police.  He opined that the Consultation Paper suffers from  a lacuna 
inasmuch as it does not m ention or say anything about victim s on whose 
grievances, arrests are m ade.  According to  him, the police is a “social institution” 
and hence suf fers f rom abuse.  Accord ing to him  f urther the politicians and 
bureaucrats have com e to believe that the society needs to be policed m ore 
inasmuch other institutions of the State have virtually collapsed.  He suggested that 
all offences should be made non-cognizable so as to eliminate any kind of abuse of 
discretion by the police in the m atter of arrest.  He concluded by saying if we are 
trying to put hum an rights above societal gains, what about the hum an rights of 
police? 
 
 77 

 78 
 Prof. Hargopal of University of H yderabad, who is a renowned activist on 
the civil liberties’ front, opined that the working of the police department requires a 
lot of improvement.  He gave the exam ple of France where both public and police 
cooperate with each other and the com plaints of abuse of powers by the police are 
very rare.  He pointed out that 80 to 90% of the custodial deaths in India are of 
those involved in theft, robbery and daco ity.   He questioned why it is so and 
answered the question himself by saying, it must be because of the deep respect for 
property that the police have.    He regretted that police officers are not punished 
for abuse of power and that m ore often than not, the policem en protect each other 
on the plea of dem oralization of the force.   A person with power or a person with 
property, he said, is generally immune from arrest and it is only the poor who are at 
the receiving end.  He bem oaned the deterioration of dem ocratic values and 
structures in our society. 
 
 Dr. Amita Dhanda, Registrar of NALSAR suggested that the law relating to 
arrest should be so am ended that the pers ons arrested are im mediately released on 
personal bond.  She was of the opinion that it is the m arginalized sections of the 
society that face harassm ent at the hands  of the police.  Prof. Nageswar Rao 
examined the power of arrest in the cont ext of the presum ption of innocence.  He 
submitted that this power should be exercised only in exceptional cases and that the 
police force m ust be sensitized about the nature of this power and its im pact upon 
human rights.  He supported the idea of pl ea bargaining and  suggested the creation 
of a body to m onitor the exercise of power by the police.    He also suggested that 
confessions made before police officers of the rank of DSP and above should be 
made admissible in evidence. 
 
Shri Jaspal Singh, Addl. Director, CBI espoused the other point of view. He 
said that arrest becom es necessary in seve ral situations.  For exam ple, in case of 
rape or other offences against wom en and in the case of com munal riots and 
offences affecting public tranquility arrest  becomes a necessity and a tim ely arrest 
very often saves the situation.   He opined that so far as white-collar crim es are 
 78 

 79 
concerned, there may be no reason for im mediate arrest.  He felt that the 24 hours’ 
time given by the Constitution and the la w for producing the accused before a 
magistrate needs to be extended and th e provisions regarding grant of police 
remand should be liberalized. 
 
Shri Bhawani Prasad, Law Secretary to  the Government of AP em phasized 
the necessity of a reclassification of the o ffences in the IPC.  He pointed out that 
the offence under section 304A, IPC is still being treated as bailable, which is no 
longer consistent with the present day r ealities.  He em phasized that unless the 
mind-set of the police personnel is changed a nd they are m ade to realize that they 
are performing a public service, m ere change in law would not help.  One of the 
speakers, Shri Jaipal Reddy suggested reorganization of the police organization into 
two wings, one for investigation and the othe r for maintaining law and order.   Shri 
Krishna Dev Rao, a teacher at NALSAR m ade a com parative study of the subject 
and raised the f ollowing issues:  W ho m akes a decision to arrest; what is the 
mechanism to review arrests and what stru ctural changes have been m ade in the 
police department to implement the guidelines in D.K. Basu.  He favoured the idea 
of reclassification of offences and desi red the introduction of alternate dispute 
resolution techniques in the crim inal justice system.   He pleaded for liberalization 
of the bail provisions and m aintenance of  records concerning the health of the 
persons arrested.  A number of other speakers participated in the Seminar.  Some of 
them supported the proposals in the Consultation Paper while som e others opined 
that time is not ripe for making any substantial changes in the law of arrest. 
 
Written Responses: 
 A number of written responses have  been received by the Law Com mission 
dealing with the several proposals in the C onsultation Paper.   Prof. B.B. Pande of 
Delhi University suggested reclassification of the offences in the IPC into ‘petty 
offences’ and ‘serious offences’ inasmuch as the present classification into bailable 
and non-bailable, cognizable and non-cognizable is an inadequate classification.  
He pointed out several offences in th e IPC, which according to him  could be 
 79 

 80 
categorized as petty offences.  Illegal arre sts, according to him , can be classified 
into two broad categories, those which violate hum an rights and constitutional 
guarantees and those which violate the statutory provisions.  He supported the 
provisions of the CrPC (Am endment) Bill, 1994 proposing to am end inter- alia the 
provisions of the Code relating to arre st.   Com menting upon the proposals in the 
Consultation Paper, he submitted that the object of the proposals contained in paras 
3.1 to 3.3 can be achieved by directly am ending section 41 instead of seeking to 
convert the cognizable into non-cognizable or non-bailable into bailable.  He 
supported the other proposals in the consultation paper including the idea of 
decriminalizing some of the offences in the IPC. 
 
Dr. G.S. Tiwari, Director in the Ministry of Defence em phasized the 
necessity of providing statutory safeguard s to guard against abuse of power of 
arrest under the police.  He opined that the vast discretion vested in the police 
under section 41 should be curbed.  He referred to  several undesirable practices 
being indulged in by the police, very ofte n for oblique reasons.  He however m ade 
it clear that the views expressed by him  are his personal views and not that of his 
Ministry. 
 
 Dr. K.K. Paul, Joint Com missioner of  Police (Crim e), Delhi Police 
submitted that the proposals of the Law Co mmission do not appear to be practical 
and do not also take into account the gr ound realities. He subm itted that several 
offences which the Law Com mission has s uggested be converted from  cognizable 
to non-cognizable or from  non-bailable to ba ilable, are serious offences and that 
any such change would prove counterproduc tive and would not help the police in 
maintaining law and order. 
 
Maj. Gen. K.N. Mishra, AVSM (Retd) , form er Judge Advocate General 
(Army) supported the recom mendations of  the Law Com mission in general and 
pointed out that very often the m agistrates do not duly and properly perform  their 
statutory duties and obligations thereby depriving the accused persons of their 
 80 

 81 
constitutional and legal protections. He s upported the idea of am ending section 41 
of the Code.   
 
Shri M.L. Sharm a, IPS, IGP(CID) (C rime Branch), Rajasthan suggested 
that several offences like adulteration of  foods and drugs, fouling the atm osphere 
and forgery etc. be m ade cognizable and ba ilable.  Som e other offences which are 
non-cognizable, he suggested, should be m ade cognizable.  In particular he 
suggested that section 498A which is  now a cognizable offence should be 
converted into a non-cognizable one. 
 
Justice (Dr.) R.R. Mishra, a retired  Judge of the Allahabad High Court 
supported the proposals in the Consulta tion Paper generally.  However, he 
emphasized the apathy of  general public even where of fences are com mitted in 
their presence.  He pointed out that the political pressures and inf luence are also 
responsible for some of the abuses by the police officers. 
 
Shri Manmohan Prahviah, IGP (Intelligen ce), Orissa justif ied the power of  
arrest saying that the aggrieved public have come to see the arrest of culprits by the 
police as a first step in their yearning for ju stice.  Any curtailment of this power, he 
said, will result in loss of public faith in the criminal justice system.  He pointed out 
that the importance of custodial interrogation to elicit evidence has been recognized 
by the Suprem e Court in State V. Anil Sharma AIR 1997 SC 3806 .  He also 
justified the power vested in the police by section 151 CrPC.  According to him , in 
Orissa, arrests do not routinely take pl ace under sections 107 to 110 of the Code 
and that where group clashes are apprehe nded or during the tim e of elections or 
VIP visits, som e anti-social elem ents are arrested as a part of bandobast duty and 
released later.  He subm itted that in the matter of exercise of  power of  arrest, the 
guidelines indicated in Report Nos. 2, 5 & 8 of National Police Com mission be 
kept in mind.  He pointed out that Indian society is generally perceived to be m eek 
and relies considerably upon the  arm ed police to keep order and hence police 
should not be weakened.  He suggested that the problem  m ust be solved by 
 81 

 82 
strengthening the in-house m echanisms within the police organization  and by 
insisting upon effective supervision by judi ciary - and not by am ending the law.  
He stressed the necessity of transparency in the working of the police departm ent 
and greater access of the public to police procedures and actions. He opined that the 
guidelines enunciated in D.K. Basu, if strictly observed, would rem ove any scope 
for  abuse by the police. 
 
 The Inspector General of UP, Shri Jagat Singh has, in his com ments on the 
Consultation Paper, agreed with the pr oposals contained in paras 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 of 
the Consultation Paper.  So far as the proposals contained in para 3.1.3 is 
concerned, he has stated that no change is  needed in the existing law and that the 
only m odification needed is to provide that arrest should be m ade only before 
submitting the chargesheet in the court and that the arrested person should be sent 
to the court along with the chargesheet .  He has agreed with the proposals 
contained in paras 3.2.1 and 3.3.   He ha s however opposed the proposal contained 
in para 3.4 of the Consultation Paper on the ground that sufficient legal and 
departmental safeguards are already availa ble to the accused.     So far as the 
proposals contained in paras 3.5  and 3.6 of the Consultation Paper is concerned, he 
has expressed his agreement thereto.  With respect to the proposal contained in para 
3.7 of the Consultation Paper, the IGP of  UP has responded by saying that since no 
specific recommendations have been m ade in the said para, he is not offering any 
comments.   He has agreed with the proposal contained in para 3.8 of the 
Consultation Paper but opposed the proposal contained in para 3.10.    With respect 
to proposal contained in para 3.12 of the Consultation Paper, his response was that 
since the proposal does not contain a ny specific recom mendations, he is not 
offering comments in that behalf. 
 
 Shri N. Kum ar, Senior Advocate opined that the provisions under sections 
108, 109 and 110 CrPC m erely add to the wo rk-load of the m agistrates and are 
unnecessary.  If there is any definite alle gation against any person it is always open 
to the police to file a chargesheet against him without arresting the accused.   W ith 
 82 

 83 
respect to section 151 CrPC he opined that  it gives a draconian power to the police 
to arrest any person on m ere suspicion and that this weapon is m ainly used against 
the poor and helps to keep  a vast segment of population under perpetual bondage. 
 
Shri Param jit Singh Roy, Director (Prosecution & Litigation) and 
Additional Secretary to the Punjab Govern ment has agreed with and welcom ed all 
the proposals of the Law Com mission excep t the one contained in  para 3.4 
(permitting the registered NGOs to vis it police stations and other places of 
custody). 
 
Shri A.K. Ganguly, Senior Advocate opine d that instead of approaching the 
problem of arrest in isolation, the Law Com mission may suggest a com prehensive 
reform touching all aspects of the problem  such as recruitm ent and training of 
police officials, judicial officials and prosecutors, providing checks and balances on 
the exercise of powers by the authorities, mechanism by which they could be m ade 
accountable for their actions and restricting the power of arrest only to those cases 
where it is absolutely necessary.  He stated that the moment a police officer is made 
accountable for his actions, a sea- change  occurs in his attitude.  Once he knows 
that he cannot go scot free for his illegal actions, he becomes conscientious and is 
likely to perform  his duties in accordance with  law.  All actions of police officers 
should be subject to scrutiny by an exte rnal agency.  He suggested that the 
recommendations m ade in the Consultation Paper should be given effect to in a 
phased manner as suggested by him. 
 
 The Government of Rajasthan through its Principal Secretary, Home Affairs 
and Justice Departm ent has welcom ed the proposals of the Law Com mission 
contained in paras 3.1.1 and 3.1.2, subject to certain exceptions.   They subm itted 
that in respect of  bailable offences the formality of arrest and release on f urnishing 
bail bonds is unnecessary and that the accused m ay be required to furnish surety 
bonds or a personal bond.    A personal bond s hould also be insisted upon to ensure 
the presence of witnesses.  W ith respect to the proposal contained in para 3.1.3 of 
 83 

 84 
the Consultation Paper, the Governm ent of Rajasthan has welcom ed it subject to 
the qualification that offences like th eft, robbery, dacoity, house breaking and 
receiving stolen property should not be made bailable.   They suggested that som e 
other offences in the IPC should be treat ed as non-cognizable and some others may 
be made non-bailable.    Two other offe nces, namely, those under sections 476 and 
505 IPC, they submitted, be made cognizable. 
 
The Amnesty International suggested th at the provisions in sections 107 to 
110 of the Code be reviewed to ensure that  they are not used to deny hum an rights’ 
defenders their right to peaceful assem bly, freedom of expression and freedom  to 
protest peacefully.   With respect to section 151, they suggested that it must also be 
reviewed to ensure against its m isuse and that in case a hum an rights’ defender is 
arrested thereunder, he m ust be produced before a judicial m agistrate within 24 
hours.  So far as the other am endments are concerned, they have invited our 
attention to the Brochure enclosed to the le tter.  On a perusal of the Brochure, we 
find that it mainly deals with prevention of  torture and not so m uch with the power 
of arrest though the power of the police to  arrest without warrant has also been 
discussed incidentally.   For this reason it m ay not be necessary to deal with the 
contents of the Brochure at any length.  The Am nesty International have also 
requested us to evolve a legal system  minimizing the harassm ent and violation of 
the human rights of the citizens. 
 
The IGP, Itanagar (Arunachal Prades h) has sent a com munication agreeing 
with all the proposals of the Law Commission. 
 
The Bar Council of Maharashtra and Goa have suggested that the powers of 
the police be regulated keeping in view  the guidelines laid down by the Suprem e 
Court in D.K. Basu.  They have suggested that offences under sections 498 and 
498A be made bailable, but offences agai nst property be m ade non-bailable.  They 
suggested that the offences against the St ate, coins and weights be also m ade non-
bailable.  They supported the proposal fo r NGOs visiting the police stations and 
 84 

 85 
other places of detention and have suggest ed further that after the arrest, grounds 
for arrest shall be conveyed not only to the accused but be also to their relatives.   
Another suggestion is to m ake the offences under sections 307 and 498A 
compoundable. 
 
 Shri A. Palanivel, IGP (Law and Order), UP has expressed his views 
separately which are identical to thos e expressed by the IG, UP referred to 
hereinbefore. 
 
The IGP, CID, Meghalaya has expressed the opinion that the proposed 
measures are likely to cause m ore harm than good in the m ilitancy-affected areas 
like Meghalaya.   He subm itted that the acts of the police are, as it is, under 
tremendous public scrutiny and any further curtailment of the powers of the police 
would disable them from fighting the militancy effectively. 
 
 Dr. John V. George, IPS, IGP (Crim e and Law and Order), Haryana stated 
in his written response that there is no statis tical data or any definite basis for the 
impression that police are widely m isusing their power of arrest without warrant.  
He submitted that the data collected by the Com mission is of  no signif icance and 
that overall, and on average, one person is arrested in every crim inal case.  He 
submitted further that “in a country where the citizens have no identity cards, where 
floating population of a town is larger th an the residential population, where large 
percentage of population are m igrants and a person m ay live anywhere under any 
assumed nam e, arrest is an unavoidable exercise even in bailable offences.   
Additionally, Indian public do not expect  the police to release an offender 
immediately after arrest.  They would accu se the police of collusion in m ost such 
cases”.  He also stated that courts in Punjab and Haryana and CBI special courts 
insist upon the accused being produced along w ith chargesheet in every case, even 
where the accused is on bail.   He expre ssed the opinion that the categorization of 
the offences in IPC into cognizable and non-cognizable was m ade by the “British 
Colonialists” to cut down expenditure on la w enforcement.  This distinction should 
 85 

 86 
go, he said.  He suggested that several offences in the IPC which are non-
cognizable now should be m ade cognizable.  He also opined that the proposal to 
limit the power to arrest an accused in th e bailable offences, if implemented, would 
cause trem endous dam age to m aintenance of public order in the society.  He 
suggested that several offences in the IP C may be made non-baliable, also because 
the public is not prepared to accept m any of those offences being treated as non-
bailable.  He opposed the proposal to re -designate the offences punishable upto 
seven years as bailable.   He opined that inasmuch as the directions in D.K. Basu 
are being im plemented by the police and the courts properly, there is no need for 
incorporating them in the Code.  He opposed the proposal to perm it the registered 
NGOs to visit police stations and other places of detention.   W ith respect to arrest 
on the basis of suspicion, he stated “arrest s are made on suspicion in investigation 
of offences against property.  Technically all arrested persons are suspects till the 
case is proved in courts”.  W ith resp ect to the apprehensions of the Law 
Commission regarding clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 41, he opined that 
the apprehension is unfounded.  He stated that not a single person has been arrested 
for “carrying an agricultural im plement during day tim e”.  He  expressed an 
apprehension that “if section 41 of CrPC is  amended to curtail the power of arrest 
of constable on patrol, it would be better to withdraw all policem en from  patrol 
duty”.   W ith respect to introducing and widening the com poundability of the 
offences and the concept of plea bargaini ng, the IG expressed the opinion that in 
the present scenario where the conviction rate is low, no one would com e forward 
to make use of plea bargain facility and th at compounding of offences is very rare 
in India – hence, he says, no am endment is needed.   W ith respect to sections 109 
and 110 of the Code, the IGP subm itted that no arrests are m ade under this section 
and that the arrests are made only under section 151 read with any of the preventive 
provisions including sections 107, 109 and 110.   He also subm itted that since the 
police do not arrest any one on m ere su spicion or m erely for questioning, no 
amendment of law is required in that behalf .  He also subm itted that the safety and 
well being of the arrested persons can be ensured by m aking appropriate provisions 
in the Police Manual and that the law need not be am ended for the purpose.  W ith 
 86 

 87 
respect to proposal regarding m aintenance of a Custody Record, he stated that 
Police Manuals already provide for m aintaining the m inute to m inute record 
regarding arrest and interrogation and that a case diary is also m aintained besides 
the police station general diary.  In this view of the m atter it is not necessary to 
introduce another record with respect to to rtious liability of  the State.  The IGP 
stated, “the State may compensate individuals if it is proved that they were wrongly 
arrested and prosecuted.    However, it woul d be disastrous to presume that all who 
were acquitted by the courts were wrongly a rrested and prosecuted”.   With respect 
to m aintenance of the uniform  case di ary under section 172 CrPC, he suggested 
that the suggestion may be implemented. 
 
 The Hum an Rights Council, Vishakhapatnam , have, in their response, 
supported the proposals of the Law Com mission.  They have also suggested that 
the categorization of the offences in to cognizable and non–cognizable m ay be 
substituted by the classification ‘grave offences’ and ‘minor offences’. 
 87 

 88 
Chapter Seven 
 
Section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
 
Bearing the principles adumbrated in Chapter Five and the material referred 
to in Chapter Six, let us now proceed to fi rst examine section 41 of the Code.   Our 
main concern is with clauses (a) and (b ) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) 
thereof.   With a view to clear the ground we may first deal with sub-section (2). 
 
Sub-section (2) says that “any officer in charge of a police station m ay, in 
like manner, arrest or cause to be arrested any person, belonging to one or m ore of 
the categories of persons specified in section 109 or section 110”, i.e., to arrest 
without a warrant and without an order fr om a Magistrate. W e have set out the 
purport of sections 109 and 110 hereinbefore. Section 109 provides for the 
Executive Magistrate calling upon a pers on, who, in his opinion (form ed on the 
basis of inform ation placed before him ), is taking precautions to conceal his 
presence and there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to 
committing a cognizable offence, to execute a bond for good behaviour for a period 
not exceeding one year.     After appropriate  inquiry, final orders have to be passed 
under section 117.   Under section 109, no person can be sentenced to 
imprisonment or fine.  Even if the pro ceeding ends against the person, it does not 
result in a conviction.   Section 109 is in  truth a preventive m easure and section 
41(2) provides that if a person belongs to the category mentioned in section 109, he 
can be arrested, without a warrant and w ithout an order from  a m agistrate, by an 
officer in charge of a police station.   It is evident that the real purpose of section 
41(2) is to clothe the police officer in ch arge of a police station to arrest a person, 
who is taking precautions to conceal hi s presence with a view to com mit a 
cognizable offence, to prevent such person from  committing a cognizable offence.   
Similarly, section 110 provides for an Executive Magistrate calling upon a habitual 
offender (of the kind m entioned in the sa id section) to execute a bond for his good 
behaviour for a period not exceeding three years.   This is again a preventive 
 88 

 89 
measure aim ed at habitual robbers, house- breakers, thieves and other types of 
habitual offenders specified in the section.   It means that a habitual offender of the 
kind mentioned in section 110 can be arrested  any time by an officer in charge of a 
police station since neither section 110 nor section 41(2) prescribe any other 
condition for such arrest.    Even so, it is obvious that section 41(2) read with 
section 110 is again a preventive m easure.  It cannot be presum ed that the law 
provides for picking up such a person at any tim e, at the pleasure of a Station 
House Officer, even if there is no apprehensi on that he is about to com mit a crime.   
Again, under section 110, in case the allegations against the person are established, 
it does not result in a conviction nor can a sentence of fine or im prisonment be 
imposed upon that person.    Of course, s ection 110 takes in, inter alia, habitual 
offenders under Drugs and Cosm etics Ac t, 1940, Foreign Exchange Regulation 
Act, 1973 (now replaced by FEMA), Em ployees Provident Fund and Fam ily 
Pension Fund Act, 1952, Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955, the Custom s 
Act, 1962 and any other law preventing the hoarding, adulterating or profiteering in 
food or drugs or of corruption.  It is however a matter of common knowledge that 
this power is hardly ever used against these econom ic offenders.  It is m ainly and 
generally used only against habitual offenders against property like thieves, robbers 
and house-breakers.  W e do not m ean to s uggest that such persons should not be 
arrested.  All that we are pointing out is the in-built bias against the “non-
respectable” criminals while taking no action against the econom ic offenders who 
are the real and m ore dangerous offenders.  Be that as it m ay, this kind of carte 
blanche power to arrest “habitual offenders” of the specified kind at any time of his 
choosing, by an officer in charge of a poli ce station – if the section is construed 
literally - is intrinsically capable of  abus e and is liable to be characterized as 
discriminatory.   And if the section is construed as a preventive m easure, it is 
unnecessary and superfluous as indicated hereinafter. 
 
In our considered opinion, sub-section (2) of section 41 is  unnecessary and 
superfluous in view of section 151 of the Code.   As has been pointed out 
 89 

 90 
hereinbefore, section 151 occurs in chapter XI - ‘Preventive Action of the Police’.   
Sections 149 to 153 contained in the said chapter provide for preventive arrests.   In 
particular, section 151 provides that a police officer “knowing of a design to 
commit any cognizable offence may arrest, without orders from  a m agistrate and 
without a warrant, the person so desi gning, if it appears to such officer that the 
commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented”.  It is true that section 
151 permits arrest only in case of a design to commit a cognizable offence, but so 
do sections 109 and 110.   (Indeed, while section 41(2) empowers only an officer in 
charge of a police station to m ake a rrest thereunder, section 151 em powers each 
and every police officer to do so.)   S ection 109 speaks of a person concealing his 
presence with a view to com mit a cognizable offence; it does not speak of a person 
seeking to com mit a non-cognizable offence.  If so, such person can be arrested 
under section 151 and resort to section 41(2)  read with section 109 is unnecessary.  
Clause (a) of section 110, theft (379 a nd its aggravated form s in succeeding 
sections), dacoity (397 with its aggrav ated form s in the succeeding sections), 
house-breaking (453 and its aggravated form  in the succeeding sections) and 
forgery (465 and its aggravated form  in the succeeding sections) are all cognizable 
offences.  The offence of receiving stolen  property knowing it to be stolen (under 
section 411, IPC) m entioned under clause (b ) of section 110 is again a cognizable 
offence.  Similarly, the offences mentioned in clauses (c) and (d) of section 110 are 
all cognizable offences.  Clause (e) speaks of  offences involving  breach of peace.   
Evidently the ref erence is to chapter VIII of  the IPC which carries the title 
“Offences Against the Public Tranquility”.  All the of fences m entioned in this 
chapter are cognizable offences except three offences of a m inor nature.  So far as 
clause (f) is concerned, the reference is to offences under several special 
enactments – m ostly dealing with econom ic activity - som e of which m ay be 
cognizable and some not.   So far as the offences under these special enactments are 
cognizable, section 151 can take care of them and so far as non-cognizable offences 
under the said special enactm ents are c oncerned, there is no reason why such a 
wide and absolute power of arrest is conferred upon the Station House Officers 
even in case of such non-cognizable offences.   The last clause in section 110 is 
 90 

 91 
clause (g) (desperate and dangerous character, whose being at large is hazardous to 
the community).    A person falling under clause (g) can certainly be arrested under 
section 151. 
 
We are of the opinion for the above reas ons that sub-section (2) of section 
41 is superfluous and unnecessary – apar t from  the inherent discrim inatory 
character of the provision.   The power unde r section 151 CrPC is sufficient to take 
care of situations contem plated by the said sub-section.   Indeed, it is m ore 
effective than section 41(2) inasm uch as section 151 clothes every police officer 
with the power to arrest a person who is designing to com mit a cognizable offence 
if the com mission of such offence cannot  be prevented otherwise whereas under 
section 41(2), only the officer in charge of  a police station can m ake the arrest.   
We are therefore of the opinion that sub-section (2) of section 41 deserves to be 
deleted from the Code.     O f course, this recommendation does not in any m anner 
affect the power of the Magistrate under sub-section (3) of section 116 CrPC. 
 
Now we shall take up clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of section 41. 
 
 Clause (a) of sub-section of secti on 41 empowers a police officer to arrest, 
without an order from a Magistrate and without warrant, any person “who has been 
concerned in any cognizable offence or against whom  a reasonable com plaint has 
been m ade or credible inform ation has been received or a reasonable suspicion 
exists of his having been so concerned”.     Similarly, under clause (b), any person 
“who has in his possession without lawful  excuse, the burden  of proving which 
excuse shall lie on such person, any im plement of house-breaking” can also be so 
arrested.   
 
 Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 41 speaks of arrests of four 
categories of persons, viz.: 
 
(i)  A person who has been concerned in any cognizable offence; 
 91 

 92 
(ii)  A person against whom  a reasona ble complaint has been m ade of his 
having been concerned in any cognizable offence; 
(iii) A person against whom  credible inf ormation has been received of  his 
having been concerned in any cognizable offence; and 
(iv) A person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been 
concerned in any cognizable offence. 
 
It would be appropriate to deal with each of these four categories separately.   
Let us take the first category: “(i) person who has been concerned in any cognizable 
offence”.  W hat is the m eaning of the wo rds “concerned in”?    The expression is 
ambiguous and vague - and vagueness or am biguity is not perm itted when we are 
dealing with the liberty of  a citizen, as woul d be explained hereinafter.   It is not 
even a case of vesting the police with the power to arrest on their subjective 
satisfaction.   For it is well-known that wh ere a subjective power is sought to be 
conferred, the Legislature uses the expre ssions “if there are grounds”, “has reason 
to believe”, “is satisfied” or “there are circum stances suggesting … (a particular 
inference)” (vide the celebrated decisi on of the Suprem e Court in Barium 
Chemicals Limited v. Company Law Board, AIR 1967 SC 295).     It has been held 
in the said decision that where such expressions are used, the entire process is not 
subjective but that while the existence of relevant material/information is objective, 
drawing of inference therefrom alone is a subjective process.   It has also been held 
that the only check upon the subjective power is the existence of 
circumstances/material/information; in cas e it is established that there was no 
material/information or f actual basis, the exercise of  power becom es illegal.   But 
then look at the first category contemplated by section 41(1)(a).   You will find that 
even these protective words are not there.   The matter is left entirely to the sole and 
absolute discretion of the police officer.   It  is true that the courts have tried to 
reduce the rigour of this provision by saying that there must be some information or 
material before the police officer on the ba sis of which he m ust be satisfied prim a 
facie that the person appears to be guilty of  offence and that he should be arrested.  
At the same time, the courts have said that since he is the officer to make a decision 
 92 

 93 
on the spot, the m atter must be left to hi m to decide whether there are reasonable 
grounds for him  to arrest the person.   The question is - why should not the Act 
itself contain the requisite safeguards.  In Chapter Four we have pointed out that the 
Law Com mission has been repeatedly suggesting introduction of provisions 
precisely designed to regulate this power by saying that before the arrest is m ade, 
the officer must have with him some material or information on the basis of which 
he is fairly and honestly satisfied that the person must be arrested. 
 
Now com ing to the second, third and f ourth situations contem plated by 
clause (a) of section 41(1), the position is slightly better or worse – depending upon 
the way you look at them .  Firstly,  here again there are no words which speak of 
formation of a reasonable belief or a r easonable satisfaction by the police officer 
before arresting the person.   It is true that when clause (a) speaks of a ‘reasonable 
complaint’ or ‘credible inform ation’ or ‘reasonable suspicion’, it undoubtedly 
means reasonable or credible in the opinion of the police officer but opinion about 
what?  It is undoubtedly again about the person being ‘concerned’ in a cognizable 
offence.  The said phrases therefore do not  advance the cause of liberty, m uch of 
they revolve around the expression “hav ing been concerned in a cognizable 
offence”.  The conclusion appears inescap able that the language actually em ployed 
falls short of the standard which m ust be observed while dealing with the liberty of  
the citizen. One course to redress this situation m ay be to introduce a provision in 
terms of sub-section (1A), which was suggested by the 152 nd Report of the Law 
Commission on Custodial Crim es (1994).    W e however think that instead of 
retaining clause (a) in sub-section (1) as  it stands and inserting a new sub-section, 
sub-section (1A), as suggested by the said Report, the m ore appropriate course 
would be to substitute clause (a) with a new clause containing the requisite 
safeguards. 
 
But bef ore we actually seek to se t out the provision which is to be 
substituted in the place of existing clause (a), it would be appropriate to exam ine 
the question whether clause (a) of section 41(1), as it stands, can be said to be a 
 93 

 94 
reasonable law or a law laying down reasona ble procedure within the m eaning of 
Article 21 as construed in Maneka Gandhi*.   Since Article 21 m ust be read as 
taking in Articles 14 and 19 as well, as per the said decision, can it be said that the 
procedure prescribed by section 41(1)(a) is “right and just and fair and not 
arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive”.    Libert y is the m ost precious right of a citizen.  
Only a person who is deprived of the liberty can understand the significance and 
value of liberty.  In any society includi ng ours the very fact of arrest places a 
person’s reputation under a cloud.  Arrest  by police is by itself hum iliating and 
demeaning.  It reduces the individual’s se lf-respect.   His im age in the society 
suffers.    Is it reasonable and fair and just  to vest such enormous power in any and 
every police officer – indeed in every police constable in this country - to deprive a 
citizen of his freedom  and liberty m erely because he thinks that the person is 
concerned in a cognizable offence, without   being prima facie satisfied on the basis 
of some relevant m aterial or inform ation that the person concerned appears to be 
prima facie guilty  
* It is true, the decision in Maneka Gandhi was rendered long after the enactm ent 
of the present CrPC and that the inter action of Articles 21, 19 and 14 was not and 
could not have been in the contem plation of Parliament when it enacted the Code, 
yet that circum stance is no excuse nor a ground for not testing the said provisions 
on the touchstone of Article 21 as interpreted and adumbrated in Maneka Gandhi.  
 
of a cognizable offence?     It is interesting to note the am ount of faith the 
Parliament has reposed in the good faith and fairness of the police 
constables of this country.  A police consta ble, who is hardly a m atriculate (School 
higher secondary exam ination pass), whose training is alm ost nil, who is hardly 
aware of  the constitutional, statutory a nd hum an rights of  the accused, who is 
financially in a bad shape all the tim e and who is so badly treated by his superiors 
that he  
                                                           
* It is true, the decision in Maneka Gandhi was rendered long after the enactment of the present 
CrPC and that the interaction of Articles 21, 19 and 14 was not and could not have been in the 
contemplation of Parliament when it enacted the Code, yet that circumstance is no excuse nor a 
ground for not testing the said provisions on the touchstone of Article 21 as interpreted and 
adumbrated in Maneka Gandhi. 
 94 

 95 
passes on that bad language and bad treatment to the people whom he comes across 
in course of his duties.  In this connecti on, it is well to rem ember that even if the 
arrest is made unlawfully and unjustifiably, the remedies available to an individual 
in our legal system  are alm ost nil, prac tically speaking – an aspect dealt with 
hereinbefore.  
 
Even assuming that section 41(1)(a) – a tleast in part - provides for arrest on 
the subjective satisfaction of the police o fficer, would it be reasonable to predicate 
the liberty of a citizen on the subjective sa tisfaction of a police officer – indeed any 
and every police officer.  In this conn ection, it is well to rem ember that the 
Supreme Court has held repeatedly that predicating the fundam ental right of a 
citizen on the subjective satisfaction of an  executive official is impermissible under 
our Constitution and it would be a clear cas e of placing an unreasonable restriction 
upon the fundam ental right of the citizen.  In State of Madras v. V.G. Row (1952 
SC 196) the court said:  “The form ula of subjective satisfaction of the governm ent 
or its officers, with an Advisory Board th rown in to review the m aterials on which 
the government seeks to override a basic fr eedom guaranteed to the citizen, may be 
viewed as reasonable only in very ex ceptional circum stances and within the 
narrowest lim its, and cannot receive judici al approval as a general pattern of 
reasonable restrictions on fundam ental rights”.  [Peoples Education Society, 
banning case]   This was so said in case where the act of the executive official was 
indeed subject to review by an Advisory Board.   In R.M. Seshadri v. D.M. Tanjore 
(1954 SC 747), a condition in Licence requiri ng the Exhibitor to exhibit one or 
more approved films, as may be specified by the governm ent, was struck down on 
the reasoning that “a condition couched in such wide language is bound to operate 
harshly upon the cinem a business and ca nnot be regarded as a reasonable 
restriction”.   In Maneklal Chotelal v. Makwana (1967 SC 1373) it was held that 
under Articles 14 and 19 “if an uncontro lled and unguided power is conferred, 
without any reasonable and proper standa rds or lim its being laid down in the 
enactment, the statute m ay be challenged as discrim inatory”.   Sim ilarly, in 
Harichand v. Mizo Dist. Council (1967 SC 829) it was held  that a provision of a 
 95 

 96 
Regulation vesting unrestricted power in the licensing authority in the m atter of  
grant or refusal of licence, without layi ng down any standards or criteria, was  
unreasonable and bad.  In State of Maharashtra v. Kamal  (1985 SC 119), the 
Maharashtra Vacant Lands (Prohibition of  Unauthorised Occupation and Sum mary 
Eviction) Act, 1975 was struck down by th e Supreme court on the ground that the 
Act did not provide any guidelines for exercising the power under section 2(f) 
(power to declare a land as ‘vacant land’) nor were any safeguards against arbitrary 
exercise of discretion provided by the Act. 
 
 The above principles enunciated with respect to fundam ental rights in 
Article 19 are equally applicable under Artic le 21 inasm uch as it is now declared 
(Maneka Gandhi) that a law within the meaning of Article 21 has to be a reasonable 
and non-discrim inatory law tested on th e touchstones of Articles 19 and 14.  
Indeed, the liberty guaranteed by Article 21 is m ore valuable and precious than the 
freedoms guaranteed by Article 19.   Deprivation of liberty, i.e., incarceration in the 
police custody even for 24 hours is worse than deprivation of property for one year.  
It may also be recalled in this connec tion that a  eleven-judge Constitution Bench 
decision in R.C. Cooper v. UOI (1970 SC 564) has established that any restriction 
placed upon a particular fundam ental right need not necessarily be exam ined only 
with reference to that right but m ust have to answer the other fundamental rights as 
well if it impinges on such other rights. 
 
 The courts, it is true, have been saying over the last several decades that the 
power of arrest cannot be exercised wit hout any justification and that the police 
officers must exercise this power fairly a nd honestly.   At the sam e time, the courts 
have also said that reasonableness or jus tification of  an arrest is a m atter f or the 
police officer to determine in the given circumstances of each case and that it is not 
possible to lay down exhaustively what do the expressions “credible inform ation” 
or “reasonable com plaint” or “reasonable su spicion” in section 41(1)(a) m ean.   
The result is that the police officer’s powers under section 41 rem ain unchecked.   
It would be interesting to see in how many cases, have the courts punished the 
 96 

 97 
police officer for m aking a wrongful or unjus tified arrest.   It would not even be 
one per cent. 
 
 We must say emphatically at this stage that the argum ent that there must be 
fear of police in the public (for an effici ent discharge of the functions of the police 
to maintain law and order) does not appeal to us.  This is really a hangover of the 
colonial past, where it suited the colonial  power to have a (lower) bureaucracy 
alienated  from  people but loyal to its m asters – a truism  em phasized by the 
National Police Com mission.  In a dem ocratic society, the police should  also be 
imbued with the dem ocratic spirit and a spirit of  service towards the people – not 
an attitude of contem pt or superciliousne ss.  In U.K., a policem an is looked upon 
with trust, as a friendly creature. 
 
 It is true that the  population explos ion and the shrinking material resources 
in the country is giving rise to an all -round sense of dis-satisfaction and that the 
daily tales of corruption of very high orde r is making the people disenchanted with 
the very system we are living in.  But th is is no answer to police high-handedness.  
If anything, police should not add to the se nse of frustration and to a feeling of 
brooding injustice.   On the contrary, it s hould try to curb these unlawful activities.  
It would not do if the police looks upon th e mass of people, most of them no doubt 
poor, as potential crim inals who, given a chance, are bound to com mit som e or 
other cognizable crime.  We do not think that bulk of our population, poor that they 
are, are all potential crim inals.  Ther e are undoubtedly som e such elem ents, but 
those are hardly kept off their activity for “fear of police”.  
 
 One of the police officers (DGP (C rime and Law & Order) Haryana) has 
stated in his response that if the power of  arrest of constable on patrol is to be 
curtailed, it would  be better to withdraw all policemen from patrol duty.  W e are 
unable to appreciate this argum ent.  We are not suggesting that the power of arrest  
inhering in the police constable should be taken away. What we are suggesting is to 
regulate that power, to m ake it reasonable so  as to ensure that that power is not 
 97 

 98 
exercised whimsically or for oblique purpos es and for extortion and harassm ent, a 
fact situation recognized by the National Police Commission too.   He can certainly 
arrest while on patrol but only when he ha s reasonable grounds to believe that such 
person, has or is about to com mit a cognizable offence and that it is necessary to 
arrest him – and not to arrest persons in a casual manner. If this apprehension were 
to be well-founded, the Directors Genera l of U.P., Rajasthan and Arunachal 
Pradesh would not have agreed with our  proposals in the W orking Paper, as 
indicated hereinbefore.  W e m ay reiterate at this stage our classification of the 
offences, in the context of power of arre st, into (a) those offences  which are 
committed in the presence of  a police of ficer and (b) those of fences which are 
reported to the police officer after they are committed.  Once this distinction is kept 
in m ind, as explained by us hereinbefore , m any of the apprehensions of the law 
enforcement authorities would be allayed. 
 
Now let us take up clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 41.  This clause is 
not only vague but is highly objectionable because it constitutes the police officer 
the sole judge of the fact m entioned ther ein.  Firstly, what is an “im plement of 
house-breaking”?   A screw-driver can also  be such an im plement.  Many tools 
used by m echanics and agriculturists can also be used as im plements of house-
breaking.  There are hardly any im plements meant exclusively for house-breaking.  
Secondly, the person m ust establish the “l awful excuse” for possession of such an 
implement to the satisf action of  the police of ficer/police constable.  If  he is not 
satisfied, he will arrest him  and put him  up in the lock-up.  This power is not 
confined to dark hours – say, between 10.00 pm  to 3.00 am  – but extends to all 
twenty-four hours.  In our opinion, this is an extraordinary and unusual provision 
totally at variance with a civilized society and must go.   It is exclusively used to 
harass poor and indigent persons and is a source of harassm ent.  W e suggest that 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 41 be deleted. 
 
Before we suggest the replacem ent of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 41, it 
is necessary to advert to yet another circum stance, viz., the definitions of 
 98 

 99 
“cognizable offence/cognizable case” and “non-cognizable offence/non-cognizable 
case”.    On this aspect, we m ay refer to the recommendation of the National Police 
Commission referred to in Chapter Four  of this Report.   The NPC has 
recommended a change in the definition of the said expressions.  In short, their 
reasoning is that the cognizability of an o ffence and the power of police to arrest 
without warrant should be delinked:  cognizability should now be linked to power 
of the police to investigate into that offe nce without orders from  a m agistrate; in 
other words, the issue of arrest should be  determined on grounds different from the 
ground that the offence is a cognizable one; m erely because an offence is 
cognizable one, it does not m ean that arre st should or can be m ade; whether to 
arrest a person/accused m ust depend upon ot her factors;   cognizability of the 
offence shall only be one of the factors in determ ining whether arrest should be 
made – says the NPC. 
 
 Though this recom mendation appears to be attractive at first look, it does 
not appear to be advisable to adopt.  W e may explain: the m eaning and scope of a 
“cognizable offence” cannot be fully gather ed from  looking at its definition in 
clause (c) of section 2 (which speaks only of arrestability without a warrant or order 
from a m agistrate); it would be necessary to refer to sections 155 and 156 also in 
chapter XII of the Code. 
 
Section 155(2) says that “no poli ce officer shall investigate a non-
cognizable case without the order of a m agistrate having power to try such case or 
commit the case for trial”.   Sub-secti on (1) of section 155 em powers the police 
merely to enter the substance of such in formation in the prescribed book and refer 
the inform ant to the m agistrate.  Section 156, on the other hand, em powers an 
officer in charge of a police station to investigate any cognizable case without the 
order of a m agistrate.   In other words,  a cognizable offence m eans an offence in 
which (a) the Police can arrest the pers on without a warrant or order from  a 
magistrate and (b) the Police can investigat e without an order from  the magistrate.  
Correspondingly, in case of a non-cognizable o ffence, the Police can neither arrest 
 99 

 100
without a warrant or order from a magistrate nor can they investigate into it without 
an order from  a magistrate.  If a cognizable offence is m ade only investigable – if 
we can use that expression – without an or der of a m agistrate but not “arrestable” 
without a warrant or order from  a m agistrate, the power to arrest would depend 
upon the provisions in chapter V and secti on 157 alone.  But here again, the close 
nexus between cognizability and arrestability cannot be denied.  W e may reiterate 
that the categorization into cognizable/ non-cognizable in the Code is based upon a 
reasonable and cogent basis viz., the need to  arrest the m an for one or the other of 
the relevant reasons.  (See Chapter Three of this Report).  There appears no good 
reason for changing the said categorization or the criteria upon which it is based. 
 In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the existing clauses 
(a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of secti on 41, be substituted by the following clauses:
     
 
“(a)  who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a 
cognizable offence; 
 
(b) against whom credible information has been received 
that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which  may extend  to seven  years, 
(whether  with or without fine), if the following conditions are 
satisfied, namely:- 
 
(I) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that 
information that such person has committed the said offence; 
 
(II) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary-  
 
(a) to prevent such person from committing any  
further    offence; or 
 
(b) for proper investigation of the offence or for the 
reason that detention of such person  in custody is 
in  the interest of his safety; or 
 
(c) to prevent such person from, causing the  evidence 
of the offence  to disappear or tampering with such  
evidence in any manner; or 
 
 100

 101
(d) to prevent such person from making any 
inducement, threat or promise to  any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case  so  as to 
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the court 
or to the police officer; or 
 
(e) that unless  such person is arrested,  his presence in 
the court whenever required cannot be ensured; 
and 
the police officer records his reasons in writing. 
 
(ba) against whom credible information has been 
received that he has committed a cognizable offence 
punishable with,  imprisonment for a term which may 
extend  more than seven years (whether with or without 
fine) or with death and the police officer has reason to 
believe on the basis of that information that such person 
has committed the said offence;”. 
 
We are of the opinion that if the am endments mentioned above are carried out, it 
may not be necessary to change or am end the definition of the expression “bailable 
offence”.  In any event, the bailability  or  non-bailability  is relevant m ore for the 
purpose of and on the question of bail.  S ection 41(1)(a) and (b) as suggested by us 
empowers the police officer to arrest a person if he has com mitted a cognizable 
offence; it does not ref er to bailability or otherwise of  the of fence.  The relevance 
of bailability of  the of fence is dealt with by us hereinaf ter  while discussing the 
provisions relating to bail.  In such a situation, all that would be necessary to 
provide is to say, by way of a separate sec tion, section 60A, that “no arrest shall be 
made except in accordance with the provisions of this Code or any other law for the 
time being in force providing for such arrest”.   This is for the reason that according 
to Annexure II a large num ber of arrests ar e being made in bailable offences, m ost 
of which offences are bound to be non- cognizable offences.  W e accordingly 
recommend that the following new section, section 60A, be inserted in the Code: 
 
“60A.  No arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions 
of this Code or any other law  for the time being in force providing for 
arrest.” 
 
 101

 102
Proposals in the Consultation Paper: 
 We may next take up the proposals cont ained in Part Three of the W orking 
Paper.  The first proposal is contained in para 3.1.1.   The proposal is that in respect 
of bailable and non-cognizable offences, no court shall i ssue an arrest warrant and 
that only summons shall be served through a court process server or by other means 
but not through a policem an.   It was al so proposed that the very expression 
“bailable” m ay have to be changed inasm uch as the said expression im plied an 
arrest and an automatic bail by the police/court.   While there was a good amount of 
support to this proposal there have also been dissenting voices.   Before we proceed 
to discuss this proposal we m ust make it clear that our im mediate concern is with 
the arrestability of the person who is accused of com mitting a bailable/non-
cognizable offence.  We are not concerned with nor  are we suggesting any change 
in the punishment provided for the relevant offences.   If the person is guilty of any 
of the said offences he can be proceed ed with according to law and punished if 
found guilty.   The lim ited question is whethe r there should be an arrest of such 
person either under the warrant of a magistrate or by the police.  So far as the arrest 
by police, without warrant, of a pers on accused of bailable and non-cognizable 
offence is concerned, the Code itself does not em power the police to do so sim ply 
because the Code, as it now stands, does not permit arrest without warrant in a non-
cognizable case (except for the lim ited purpose mentioned in section 42).   But the 
fact remains that, as a m atter of fact, in num ber of such cases arrests are m ade by 
the police.  This is in fact adm itted in so many words by Dr. John V. George, IPS, 
IGP (Crim e and Law & Order), Haryana, which we have extracted in an earlier 
chapter.  He has stated in his written re sponse that “in a country where the citizens 
have no identity cards, where floating popula tion of a town is larger than the 
residential population, where large percen tage of population are m igrants and a 
person m ay live anywhere under any assum ed nam e, arrest is an unavoidable 
exercise even in bailable offences”.  He  also opposed the proposal in the W orking 
Paper to curtail the power of the police to arrest an accused in bailable offences on 
the ground that if the said proposal is im plemented, it would cause trem endous 
damage to maintenance of public order in the society. 
 102

 103
 
After giving our due consideration to the pros and cons of the proposal 
contained in para 3.1.1 of the W orking Paper in the light of the several responses 
received and opinions expressed at the Se minars, we are of the opinion that the 
police should be specifically barred from  arresting any person accused of a non-
cognizable offence – whether bailable or ot herwise - without a warrant or an order 
of the Magistrate.     W e have in fact suggested insertion of a new section, section 
60A, providing that no arrest shall be made except in accordance with the 
provisions of this Code.   There s hould be no question of the police being 
empowered to arrest, without warrant or  an order of a Magistrate, any person 
accused of or against whom  inform ation has been received that he m ay have 
committed a non-cognizable offence.   (Of c ourse, the power of the court to issue a 
warrant even in a non-cognizable shall remain undisturbed.) [Accordingly, we 
recommend substitution/insertion of sub-section (2) of  section 41  providing that 
police shall not arrest without a warrant or an order of a Magistrate, any person 
who is accused of having, or believe d to have, com mitted a non-cognizable 
offence.    [It would mean that there shall be no arrest in any case of non-cognizable 
offence (except under the warrant/orders of th e magistrate), irrespective of the fact 
whether such offence is bailable or non- bailable].  Such course would go a long 
way in saving the people from  harassment at the hands of unscrupulous elem ents 
among the police force and would also go a long way in reducing the num ber of 
undertrial prisoners in jails, circum stances commented upon both by the Suprem e 
Court and the National Police Com mission.  It may be remembered that according 
to Annexure-II, bulk of arrests are in ba ilable offences and since m ost of the 
bailable offences are non-cognizable, these kind of arrests would be drastically 
curtailed.    Section 436, as it now stands, speaks of enlarging a person on bail, who 
has been arrested in connection with a bailable offence.  The section evidently 
contemplates arrest of a person in a bailable offence, which is cognizable, inasmuch 
as no arrest can be m ade without a warrant  in a non-cognizable case.  In this view 
of the m atter, no am endment is necessary  in section 436.  Of course, where a 
person is arrested in a non-cognizable case in  pursuance of a warrant/order of a 
 103

 104
magistrate, and is produced before a m agistrate, he can deal with him  as provided 
in section 436. 
 
 The next proposal in the W orking Paper is contained in para 3.1.2.   The 
proposal is that in respect of the o ffences now categorized as bailable and 
cognizable by the First Schedule to the Code , no arrest should be m ade by the 
police without warrant and that in such cases only an appearance notice m ay be 
served upon the person directing him  to appear at the police station or before the 
magistrate as and when called upon to do so, unless there are strong grounds to 
believe, which should be reduced into writing and com municated to the higher 
police officers as well as to the concerned m agistrates, that the accused is likely to 
disappear and that it would be very diffi cult to apprehend him  or where the person 
concerned is a habitual offender.   In re spect of this proposal also there were both 
supporting and dissenting voices.  The oppone nts of this proposal who are by and 
large police officials have subm itted that the said proposal, if im plemented, would 
seriously disable the police from  perform ing their functions, inter alia, the 
maintenance of law and order and a pr oper and ef fective investigation into 
offences. 
 
This aspect is covered by our discussion and conclusion in respect of the 
proposal in para 3.1.1 where we have pointed out that there shall be no arrests in a 
non-cognizable case, whether bailable or not, except under the warrant/order of a 
magistrate.  It may also be noted that according to clauses (a) and (b) recommended 
by us hereinabove, in the place of the existi ng clauses (a) and (b) in sub-section (1) 
of section 41, the police is entitled to arrest  a person only in the situations specified 
therein.  In such a situation, it would be appropriate  to suggest that in cases of 
cognizable/bailable offences punishable with seven years or less im prisonment, 
with or without fine, where the arrest of  the accused is found not necessary but his 
cooperation or presence is called for the pur poses of investigation,  the police can 
serve a notice calling upon him  to appear be fore the police during the course of 
investigation,  or before the Court, as the case may be,  whenever called upon to do 
 104

 105
so.  The proposal in the Consultation Pa per is affirm ed, subject to the above 
discussion. 
 
It m ay be necessary to clarify at this stage that by m aking the 
aforementioned recommendations, we are in no way interfering with the power of 
the Magistrate to issue warrants of arrest nor are we interfering with the definitions 
of or distinction between a sum mons cas e and a warrant case, in the m atter of 
procedure, prescribed by chapters XIX and XX.   Our limited concern, to repeat, is 
the power of police to arrest without warrant and/or without an order of a 
magistrate. 
 
We have already stated hereinabove that in the light of the proposals we are 
making in this Report, it is not necessary to change the existing classification of 
offences into bailable and non-bailable and cognizable and non-cognizable. We are 
taking the said two classif ications as th ey stand and are defining the powers of 
arrest and other incidental matters on that bases. 
 
 The next proposal of the Law Com mission is contained in para 3.1.3 of the 
Working Paper.  The proposal is that the offences punishable with seven years 
imprisonment or less at present (except the offences punishable under sections 124, 
152, 216A, 231, 233, 234, 237, 256, 257, 258, 260, 295 to 298, 403 to 408, 420, 
466, 468, 477A and 489C) - and which are tr eated at present by the court as 
cognizable and non-bailable offences - s hould be treated as bailable/cognizable 
offences and be dealt with accordingly.   It was clarified that insofar as excluded 
offences are concerned, i.e., offences whic h are mentioned within the brackets, the 
present position will rem ain unchanged.   This proposal was seriously opposed by 
almost all the police officers while it wa s appreciated by the proponents of hum an 
rights and the members of the Bar in genera l.  This proposal  in the W orking Paper 
however has to be exam ined in the li ght of the recom mendations m ade by us 
hereinabove, nam ely, not to change the pr esent classification of offences into 
bailable and non-bailable and cognizable and non-cognizable  and to make a further 
 105

 106
classification, in the context of power of  arrest without warrant, of offences 
committed in the presence of  the police officers and offences which are reported to 
the police officer after they are com mitted.  We have also suggested that in case of 
offences punishable up to seven years a nd which are treated as cognizable and  
non-bailable by the Code, arrest can be m ade only where the circum stances 
mentioned in sub-section (1) of sec tion 41 (recom mended in this report) are 
satisfied.  In the light of the said proposals, it is not necessary to pursue the 
proposals contained in para 3.1.3 of the Working Paper. 
 
In para 3.2.1 of the Consultation Pape r, a proposal was put forward to 
amend section 41 so as to provide that no person shall be arrested m erely on the 
suspicion of com plicity in an offence.  It was suggested that an arrest should be 
made only where the police officer is satisfied prim a facie on the basis of the 
material/information with him  that the pe rson is involved in a crim e/offence for 
which he ought to be arrested without a wa rrant.  Reference was also m ade in that 
connection to the decision of the Eur opean Court of Hum an Rights in Fox, 
Campbell and Hartley v. U.K. delivered on 30th August, 1990 declaring that section 
11 of Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1978 is violative of article 5(1) 
of the European Convention on Hum an Rights.    The section em powered a police 
officer to arrest a person if he is “suspect ed of being a terrorist”.  The court held by 
a m ajority that m ere suspicion, however  bona fide held, cannot be a ground for 
arrest.  It was also pointed out in the C onsultation Paper that pursuant to the said 
decision, section 11 was am ended and the aforesaid words were substituted by the 
words “has been concerned in the com mission, preparation or instigation of acts of 
terrorism”.  It m ay be rem embered in this connection that section 41(1)(a), as it 
stood, provided for arrest without warrant of a person against whom  “a reasonable 
suspicion exists” of his having been con cerned in any cognizable offence.   The 
IGP, Haryana has stated in his written response that “arrests are m ade on suspicion 
in investigation of offences against propert y.   Technically all arrested persons are 
suspects till the case is provided in courts”.    Frankly, we are unable to appreciate 
the mind-set and the approach of the certa in police officers evidenced by the said 
 106

 107
statement. It is difficult to countenance th e argument that a man can be deprived of 
his liberty merely on suspicion;  indeed, Section 41 even as it stands now, speaks of 
reasonable suspicion and not m ere suspici on.  W e  have already pointed out the 
fall-out of the arrest of a person and how  his im age and reputation suffers in the 
eyes of the society by such arrest.  We are therefore of the opinion that  unless there 
is som e specif ic inf ormation on the basis of  which the police of ficer believes it  
reasonably probable that the person is i nvolved in an offence, that it  is a 
cognizable offence, and for which it is necessary to arrest him  i.e., in the 
circumstances set out in section 41 as proposed to be am ended herein, there can be 
no question of an arrest. W ith a view to  drive hom e the point, let us im agine a 
situation where  there is a provision  saying that an order of censure can be passed 
against a public servant by his superior without notice to him ; how would such 
public servant feel?   Sim ilarly, suppose if there is a provision which says that a 
public servant can be suspended from  service pending inquiry on the basis of 
suspicion or on the basis of reasonable suspicion, how would it sound?    One can 
always say that suspension pending inquiry is no punishm ent, that it is only a 
temporary m easure and that if the pers on is not found guilty ultim ately, he can 
always be restored  all the antecedent be nefits with retrospective effect. Let us 
repeat that liberty is no less im portant than the service career of a public servant.  
Indeed, the decision of the European C ourt of Hum an Rights and the consequent 
amendment of the Northern Ireland (Em ergency Provisions) Act, 1978 - which is 
indeed an anti-terrorist enactm ent - indicates the unacceptability of the proposition 
that a person can be arrested m erely on suspicion or m erely on a reasonable 
suspicion of his being concerned in a cognizable offence.  The question then arises 
whether there should be a specific provision in the Code providing that no person 
shall be arrested on m ere suspicion or on reasonable suspicion of his having been 
concerned in a cognizable offence.  W e do not think that any such specific 
provision is called for in view  of the fact that section 41(1)(a), as recom mended by 
us in this chapter, perm its arrest onl y in certain specif ied situations which 
necessarily means and implies that no arrest can be made on mere suspicion. 
 107

 108
Chapter Eight 
 
Implementing the decision in D.K. Basu 
 
In para 3.3 of the Consultation Pape r, it was proposed that the several 
directions/safeguards enunciated in the decision of the Supreme Court in D.K. Basu 
should be incorporated in the Code by appropriate am endments.  There was in fact 
no opposition to this proposal at all.  Ind eed, there can’t be any for the sim ple 
reason that the decision itself  directs that the said decisions will be ef fective “till 
legal provisions are made in that behalf”.    More important, the decision also states 
that the directions/safeguards issued in the said decision “flow from articles 21 and 
22(1) of the Constitution and need to be stri ctly followed”.   It was also m ade clear 
that the said requirements do not detract from the existing constitutional safeguards 
nor do they detract from  various other di rections given by the court from  time to 
time in connection with the safeguarding of  the rights and dignity of the arrested 
person.  The eleven directions/safeguards issued in the said decision have already 
been set out in Chapter Three of  this Report. 
 
It may be m entioned that sim ilar provisions have also been recom mended 
by the Law Com mission on previous occasions  referred to in Chapter Four of this 
Report.    We may refer in this connection to the recommendations contained in the 
152nd Report on Custodial Crim es (1994) (four recommendations in all) and to the 
recommendations contained in 154 th Report on Code of Crim inal Procedure for 
insertion of a new sub-section, sub-section (3) in section 41 and for insertion of a 
new section, section 41A.   Reference m ay also be m ade to the “Guidelines for 
making arrests” contained in the Report of the National Police Com mission (para 
22.28).    Indeed, the Crim inal Procedure Code (Am endment) Bill, 1994 proposed 
to insert section 50A providing for giving in formation of the arrest of such persons 
as m ay be nom inated by the arrested persons.   The Parliam entary Com mittee 
which exam ined the said provision in the Am endment Bill has f urther 
recommended for m aking it m ore comprehensive and m ore effective as has been 
 108

 109
stated in Chapter Four   The proposals contained in the said Am endment Bill for 
insertion of a new sub-section, sub-section (2) in section 54, and the insertion of a 
new section, section 54A, are equally relevant  in this behalf.    Accordingly, it is 
recommended that the aforesaid directions in D.K. Basu be incorporated in Chapter 
V of the Code of Crim inal Procedure, along with the consequences for not 
complying with such directions/provisions.   It is obvious that by incorporating the 
said directions into the Code, the sanction now operating (contempt of Court) under 
and by virtue of the directions contained in  the said decision, would not  disappear.  
Evidently, the violation of the proposed pr ovisions in sections 41A to 41D would 
constitute an offence within the m eaning of section 166 IPC, which not being a 
provision relating to contem pt of subordinate  courts would not also attract proviso 
to section 10 of the Contem pt of Cour ts Act, 1971 (see Bathina Ram akrishna 
Reddy v. State of Madras, AIR 1952 SC 149 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Reva 
Shankar, AIR 1959 SC 102).  It would be a case of contempt under and by virtue of 
the directions aforesaid.  Be that as it may, any violation of the provisions being 
made in term s of the decision in D.K. Basu would clearly constitute an of fence 
within the m eaning of and as defined by section 166 of IPC apart from  and in 
addition to constituting a contem pt of court as laid down in D.K. Basu.  It shall be 
open to a person affected by such viol ation or non-observance of the proposed 
provisions to lodge a com plaint according to law.  Section 166 IPC m ay also be 
suitably amended to clarify that violation of the provisions in sections 41 to 41D of 
CrPC shall constitute an offence thereunder.   
 109

 110
Chapter Nine 
 
Plea bargaining and compounding of offences 
 
It was suggested in the Consultation Paper, para 3.4, that the representatives 
of the registered Non-governm ental Orga nizations (NGOs) should be allowed to 
visit the police stations at any tim e of their choice to check and ensure that no 
person is illegally detained there or that no person is being ill-treated or otherwise 
subjected to inhuman treatment.   This suggestion has been strongly opposed by all 
the police officials.  It did not find favour with some of the m embers of the Bar as 
well though the human rights organizations lent strong support to the said proposal.  
On a consideration of the entire m atter and keeping in view the recom mendations 
already m ade in the preceding chapters, we are not inclined to pursue this 
suggestion; at the sam e time we are of the opinion that there should be a provision 
clearly entitling an advocate engaged by or on behalf of the arrested person to visit 
the police station at any tim e of his choice to ensure against any violations of 
constitutional or statutory safeguards.  This safeguard coupled with the other 
safeguards mentioned in the preceding chap ters would, in our opinion, be adequate 
to safeguard the constitutional and legal rights of the accused while in police 
custody.    Accordingly, a new section in  the above term s m ay be inserted in 
Chapter V.     We may refer, in this connection to one of the directions contained in 
the decision D.K. Basu viz., that “the arrestee m ay be permitted to meet his lawyer 
during interrogation, though not throughout the interrogation”.   The said safeguard 
is actuated by the sam e concern which lie s behind our proposal.   In addition to 
allowing the lawyer to be present during interrogation, we think it would be m ore 
appropriate if the lawyer is perm itted to visit the police station at any tim e of his 
choice with a view to ensure that his c lient’s constitutional and legal rights are not 
being infringed while he is in custody.  In view of our recom mendation to perm it 
the presence of the lawyer at the tim e of interrogation, no specific provision to the 
above effect is included in the Bill. 
 
 110

 111
 The next proposal in the Consultation Paper, para 3.5, is to increase the 
compoundability of offences and to incorpor ate the concept of plea bargaining.  It 
was suggested that the recom mendations of the 14 th Law Commission contained in 
their 154 th Report on Crim inal Procedure Code , Chapters 12 and 13, relating to 
compounding of offences and plea bargaining, respectively, should be implemented 
at an early date.    There has practically been no opposition to this proposal except a 
police officer saying that in view of the low rate of conviction in our country,  there 
is no inducem ent for any accused to go in for plea bargaining and that any such 
scheme would not be successful or effective in  our country.    It is difficult to agree 
with this assessm ent.   The rate of conviction m ay be low but the harassm ent 
involved in defending him self in a crim inal court including attending the crim inal 
court on every date of hearing over severa l years – which is the norm al span of  a 
criminal case in this country – should be  a sufficient inducement for the accused to 
resort to plea-bargaining and thereby avoid the inquiry and trial and all the hassles 
that go along with it  from  the very first da te of hearing.   He would be rid of the 
botheration.    He can devote himself to his normal pursuits. 
 
 With respect to com pounding of offences (section 320), the 154 th Report 
sets out the various reasons for which it has recom mended the enlargem ent of the 
compoundable offences.    In particular, it is recom mended that a large num ber of 
offences be deleted from  sub-section (2) of section 320 (offences com poundable 
with the permission of the court) and  pl ace them in sub-section (1) of section 320 
(offences com poundable without the perm ission of the court).   The offences so 
recommended to be shifted from  sub-section (2) to sub-section (1) of section 320 
are the offences punishable unde r sections 324, 325, 335, 343, 344, 346, 379, 403, 
406, 407, 411, 414, 417, 419, 421, 422, 423, 424, 428, 429, 430, 451, 482, 483 and 
486.    The Report also supported the suggestions m ade by certain senior police 
officers and the National Police Com mission in its Fourth Report that the 
investigating officers should be em powered to com pound an offence which is 
compoundable at the investigation stage its elf and m ake a report thereof to the 
magistrate who shall give effect to the composition of such effect.   Accordingly, 
 111

 112
the Report commended clause 20 of 1994 Amendment Bill which sought to insert a 
new sub-section, sub-section (3A) in s ection 173 to the above effect.   W e 
commend the above recommendations. 
 
 Another recommendation made in the 154 th Report is to m ake the of fence 
under section 498A com poundable and place it in sub-section (2) of section 320 
which m eans that it shall be com poundable with the perm ission of the court.  
Though there has been som e opposition to  this recom mendation from  certain 
women’s organizations, today there is an overall realization that the said provision 
is being utilized quite of ten to harass the relatives of the husband and is being used 
as a lever of pressure.   W e m ay also mention that over the last several years a 
number of representations have been received by the Law Com mission from  
individuals and organizations to m ake the said offence com poundable.  W e are 
inclined to agree with the same and accordingly reiterate the recommendation in the 
154th Report that the offence should be m ade compoundable with the permission of 
the court. 
 
On the issue of plea-bargaining, the 154 th Report recom mended a new 
chapter, chapter XXIA to be incorporated  in the Code as recom mended therein.  
The said Report indeed referred to the earlier Report of the Law Commission, 142nd 
Report, which set out in extenso the rationale behind the said concept, its successful 
functioning in the USA and the m anner in which it should be given a statutory 
shape.   The Report recom mended that the sa id concept be m ade applicable as an 
experimental measure to offences which are punishable with im prisonment of less 
than seven years and/or fine including th e offences covered by section 320 of the 
Code.   It was also recom mended that pl ea-bargaining can also be in respect of 
nature and gravity of the offences a nd the quantum  of punishm ent.   It was 
observed that the said facility should not be  available to habitual offenders and to 
those who are accused of socio-econom ic o ffences of a grave nature and those 
accused of offences against wom en and children.  The procedure to be followed in 
the matter has also been indicated in para s 9.1 to 9.9 of the said Report.  W e do not 
 112

 113
think it necessary to reproduce the sam e.   Suffice it to say that we support and 
reiterate the said recommendations. 
 
 On the issue of com pounding we may refer as well to the Code of Crim inal 
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994.   By sec tion 33 of the said Bill, section 320 of 
the Crim inal Procedure Code, which deals with com pounding of offences, was 
sought to be am ended.   The am endments proposed in the Bill are however very 
minor in nature.  One of the offences, rath er the first of the offences m entioned in 
the table under sub-section (2), viz., “voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous 
weapons or m eans” (section 324 IPC) wa s sought to be om itted along with the 
words in columns 2 and 3 of the said table against the said entry.  The result of  the 
said amendment, if given effect to, woul d be to rem ove the offence under section 
324 IPC from the list of offences which can be com pounded with the permission of 
the court and also to raise the m onetary limit placed in the several entries in the 
said table.   The Parliam entary Com mittee on Hom e Affairs has not m ade any 
comment on this provision of  the Am endment Bill.   W e see no reason to exclude 
the offence under section 324 from the Table. 
 
Section 320 Code of Crim inal Procedure:  Raising pecuniary lim it of Rs.250/- to 
Rs.25,000/- in respect of certain offences 
 
Another change sought to be effected by the said Bill is to substitute the 
words “two hundred and fifty rupees” wherev er they occur in the said table by the 
words “two thousand rupees”.      
 
 Under sub-section (2) of section 320 of the Code of Crim inal Procedure 
1973, several offences which can be com pounded with permission of the court, are 
listed.  Am ong the offences so listed are those under section 379 (Theft), section 
381  (Theft by clerk or servant of prope rty in possession of m aster), section 406 
(Criminal breach of trust), section 407 (Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, 
warfinger etc.), section 409 (Crim inal breach of a trust by a clerk or servant), 
 113

 114
section 411 (Dishonestly receiving stolen property) and section 414 (Assisting in 
the concealment or disposal of stolen pr operty, known to be stolen).  Under section 
320, the above offences are com poundable provided the pecuniary value of the 
property involved does not exceed Rs.250/-. 
 
 In the 154 th Report of the Law Com mission, it was recom mended that this 
limit be raised to Rs.2000/-. 
 
 With a view to reduce pendency of cases falling under these sections and 
also having regard to the fall in the monetary value of the rupee, and to the fact that 
several of these matters are settled by compromise, it is recommended that the limit 
can be raised up to Rs.25,000/- by suitably amending column 2 of the Table below 
sub-section (2) of section 320 in so far as the above offences under sections 
379, 381, 406, 407, 408, 411 and 414 are concerned.  We recommend accordingly.  
 
So far as the plea bargaining is c oncerned, we have not included any 
provision in the accom panying Bill for the reason that we would like the 
Government to take a policy decision on th e question whether to introduce the said 
concept.  This is because the Supreme Court has criticized this concept in two of its 
judgments namely, Murlidhar Meghraj Loya v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1976 SC 
1929 and Kasam bhai v. State of Gujarat,  AIR 1980 SC 854.  The Suprem e Court 
had expressed an apprehension in the latter case that such a provision is likely to be 
abused.  If, however, the Governm ent yet decides to introduce this concept, the 
relevant provisions can be drafted thereafter.   
 
 In para 3.6 of the Consultation Paper it was suggested that no arrests should 
be permissible under sections 107 to 110 CrPC and under similar provisions, if any, 
in the State enactments.   We do not think we need pursue this proposal in the light 
of what we have said earlier with respect to deletion of sub-section (2) of section 
41.   It is sub-section (2) of section 41 which empowers the police to arrest  persons 
belonging to one or m ore of the categories specified in section 109 or 110.   It is 
 114

 115
obvious that if no arrest can be m ade of the person concerned under section 109 or 
110, there can be no question of arresti ng the person belonging to any of the 
categories mentioned in section 107 or 108 CrPC. 
 115

 116
Chapter Ten 
 
Bail reform 
 
In para 3.7 of the Consultation Paper it was suggested that bail should be 
granted as a m atter of course except in case of serious offences and except in 
certain specified circum stances.   It was suggested that except in case of serious 
offences like murder, dacoity, robbery, rape and offences against the State, the bail 
provisions should be made liberal and that bail should be granted almost as a matter 
of course except where it is apprehended that the accused m ay disappear and evade 
arrest or where it is necessary to preven t him from committing further offences or 
to prevent him from tempering with witnesses or other evidence of crime. 
 
 Though the subject of bail does not stric tly fall within the am bit of the law 
relating to arrest, its close connection with the law of arrest cannot be denied.   We 
are concerned herein with the question of bail pending investigation.    For ensuring 
proper protection of  the constitutional and legal rights of  the accused, it is 
necessary not only to clarify and circum scribe the power of the police to arrest 
without warrant, it is equally necessary to deal with the question – in what 
circumstances a person arrested by the police without warrant is entitled to bail. 
 
The objective of the provisions relating to bail contained in Crim inal 
Procedure Code is a recognition of the fact  that pending  investigation, as well as 
pending trial, the accused should not be kept  in police custody or in jail unless it is 
necessary for the purpose of the case.   In other words, unless it is apprehended that 
the accused, if granted bail, would m ake himself scarce and it would be difficult to 
apprehend him again or where it is necessary to keep him  in the police custody for 
the purpose of investigation or where it is necessary to keep him under confinement 
with a view to prevent him  from  com mitting further offences,  bail ought to be 
granted as a m atter of course.   This ru le is of course subject to the general 
exception that in the case of serious offe nces like m urder, dacoity, robbery, rape, 
 116

 117
offences against the State and so on, the grant of bail should be scrutinized by the 
court as at present.   We may elaborate. 
 
 The question of bail arises not only when the accused is in judicial custody 
but also when he is in police custody.  When the accused is in police custody,  bail 
should be a m atter of course except wh ere his continuing presence in police 
custody is necessary for the purpose of inves tigation.    Even if the offence is a 
serious one, the accused m ust be sent to j udicial custody and not be kept in police 
custody unless required for the purpose of investigation.   Sim ilarly the 
apprehension that the accused, if enlarged on bail, may disappear and evade arrest 
or that it is necessary to keep him  confined to prevent him from committing further 
offences or from  tem pering with witnesses and evidence or to ensure his own 
safety, can be grounds for keeping him  in  judicial custody but certainly not in 
police custody.    W e m ay repeat that police custody should be allowed and is 
justified only in cases where the pres ence of the accused in police custody is 
necessary for the purpose of investigation.   In all other cases he m ust be sent to 
judicial custody.    Then again, bail should be a m atter of course except in the 
situations mentioned above, namely, where he is likely to m ake himself scarce and 
it will be difficult to rearrest him  or where it is necessary to prevent him  from  
committing further offences or from tempering with witnesses or other evidence of  
crime or where it is necessary to keep hi m confined in the interest of his own 
safety. 
 
In this connection, we may refer to certain observations in the preface to the 
publication of the Indian Law Institute, “Right to Bail”.   It is stated therein: 
 
“Bail is a very vital institution in crim inal justice system .  It carries a twin 
objective of enabling an accused to con tinue with his life activities and, at 
the sam e tim e, providing a m echanism to seek to ensure his presence on 
trial.  It is not always just or advisable to confine the accused before 
conviction.   Only the sovereign intere st or threat to social order m ay 
 117

 118
necessitate such an action.  Ordinaril y, detaching an individual from society 
adds to the problem s rather than solvi ng them.  The option of jail is also a 
limited one.  Generally the jails are ove rcrowded and mismanaged which is 
a burden very difficult to shoulder.  The maintenance of the dependents of 
the jailed persons is another problem  with m ultiple dim ensions, including 
the possibility of their developing delinquent tendencies.  Thus, jail does not 
always serve the social interest.  The current problem of undertrials, too, is 
an outcome of a large num ber of indi scriminate arrests and the non-use of 
the option of bail in preference to jail.” 
 
 The following observations too are relevant: 
  
“The existing law on bail is inconsistent and unconvincing.  The subject has 
received only an ad hoc treatment at the hands of the legislature.  The nature 
and extent of the conditions which m ay be im posed by Courts on grant of 
bail have not been defined.  Most a gonizing is one’s failure to trace out 
even a definition of “bail” in the whol e set of provisions of law relating to 
bail.  The practice of bail is highl y characterized by the recurrence of 
extremism on the part of  the law en forcement agencies as well as the 
advocates of liberty.   The reason on th e side of enforcers is a need for 
stringent legal action, frequent bail-ju mping and em ergence of a clan of 
professional sureties.  The opposite stance is supported by practice of 
prolonged investigations, delayed trials  and torture.   An unending debate, 
whether bail in bailable offences is a matter of right or a m ere privilege 
conceded to an accused through the ex ercise of discretionary power, is 
continuing without a visible end in sight.” 
 
 In this connection, it m ay be mentioned that the recom mendations made by 
the Law Com mission on the question of bail in its 41 st Report on the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, are fully in acco rd with what we have recom mended 
hereinabove. 
 118

 119
 
 The 78th Report of the Law Com mission on Congestion of Undertrial 
Prisoners in Jails was concerned with th e plight of large num ber of undertrial 
prisoners in Indian jails and recom mended various m easures to deal with the 
problem.  The Com mission recom mended, inte r alia, to expand the category of 
bailable offences, releasing on bond without  sureties, obligation to appear and 
surrender, violation of which was to be an offence.  It referred to position in 
England where a presumption is drawn in favour of the right to bail for all offences.   
 
The 154 th Report of the Law Com mission on the Code of Crim inal 
Procedure too dealt with this subject in chapters VI and VII.  Chapter VI deals with 
pre-trial detention, anticipatory bail and sureties.  The Report supports the insertion 
of section 436A and am endment of section 437, as proposed by the CrPC 
(Amendment) Bill, 1994 as also the inser tion of section 441A and am endment of 
sub-section (3) of section 446 as proposed by the said Am endment Bill.   (Chapter 
VII recommends insertion of section 437A, but  that section is outside the purview 
of this study.) 
 
 Section 436A, amendments to section 437, section 441A and am endment to 
sub-section (3) of section 446, as proposed by the CrPC (Am endment) Bill, 1994 
may now be referred to.  They read as follows: 
 
“436A. Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or 
trial under this Code of an offence unde r any law (not being an offence for 
which the punishment of death has been specified as one of the punishments 
under that law) undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of 
the maximum period of im prisonment specified for that offence under that 
law, he shall be released by the C ourt on his personal bond with or without 
sureties: 
 Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and 
for reasons to be recorded by it in wr iting, order the continued detention of 
 119

 120
such person for a period longer than one -half of the said period or release 
him on bail instead of the personal bond with or without sureties: 
 Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained 
during the period of investigation, i nquiry or trial for m ore than the 
maximum period of im prisonment provided for the said offence under that 
law: 
 Explanation – In com puting the period of detention under this 
section for granting bail the period of  detention passed due to delay in 
proceeding caused by the accused shall be excluded.” 
 
437. In section 437 of the principal Act,- 
(i) in sub-section (1),- 
 (a) in clause (ii), for the words “a non-bailable and cognizable 
offence”, the words “a cognizable offence punishable with im prisonment 
for three years or more but not less than seven years” shall be substituted; 
 (b) after the third proviso, the fo llowing proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: 
 “Provided also that no person shall,  if the offence alleged to have 
been committed by him  is punishable with death, im prisonment for life or 
imprisonment for seven years or m ore be released on bail by the Court 
under this sub-section without giving an opportunity of hearing to the 
Public Prosecutor.” 
(ii) in sub-section (3), f or the portion beginning with the words “the 
Court may impose”, and ending with the words “the interests of justice”, the 
following shall be substituted, namely: 
 “the Court shall impose the conditions,- 
 (a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of 
the bond executed under this Chapter, 
 (b) that such person shall not commit an of fence sim ilar to the 
offence of which he is accused, or suspected, of the com mission of which 
he is suspected, and 
 120

 121
 (c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly m ake any 
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the 
case so as to dissuade him  from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any 
police officer or tamper with the evidence. 
and may also im pose, in the interests of  justice, such other conditions as it 
considers necessary.” 
 
“441A. Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release-on 
bail, shall m ake a declaration before the Court as to the num ber of persons 
to whom he has stood surety includi ng the accused, giving therein all the 
relevant particulars.” 
 
“446. In section 446 of the principal Act,  in sub-section (3), for the words 
“at its discretion”, the words “after recording its reasons for doing so” shall 
be substituted.” 
 
 The Parliam entary Com mittee, which ex amined this Bill, has not of fered 
any comments on the above proposals. 
 
 We are in agreement with the aforementioned provisions in the Amendment 
Bill. 
 
 In the light of the above discussion, it may be stated as a general proposition 
that in offences punishable up to seven y ears imprisonment, with or without fine, 
the normal rule should be bail and the denial thereof an exception i.e., in any of the 
situations mentioned hereinbefore.   In ot her serious offences, the m atter has to be 
left to the discretion of  the court to be exercised having regard to the totality of  the 
circumstances and keeping in mind the necessity to maintain a balance between the 
interests of the society as a whole in pr oper maintenance of law and order and the 
constitutional, legal and hum an rights of th e accused.    The relevant provisions in 
the CrPC m ay have to be am ended accordingly.   It m ay also be provided that in 
 121

 122
case of offences punishable with seven year s or less, the police officer or the Court 
shall not insist on sureties unless there are special reasons for im posing that 
condition.  The release should be on personal bond – as a general rule. 
 
 In para 3.8 of the Consultation Pape r, a proposal was put forward to the 
effect that no arrest shall be m ade and no person shall be detained m erely for the 
purpose of questioning.  It was pointed out that such arrest or detention am ounts to 
unwarranted and unlawful interference of the personal liberty guaranteed by Article 
21 of the Constitution.   There was no seri ous opposition to this proposal from  any 
quarter.   Indeed, this proposal follows from what we have stated hereinabove, 
namely, that arrest should not be m ade in a casual m anner but only on the basis of 
some material on the basis of which, the po lice officer is reasonably satisfied that 
arrest of such person is necessary.  It cannot be that the police is permitted to detain 
anyone they like and question him  with a view to find out whether he has 
committed any cognizable offence.  Such an absolute power cannot be conceded 
under our constitutional system .    If questioning any person suspected of 
committing a cognizable offence is found necessary for the purposes of 
investigation, he may be questioned by the po lice officer either at the residence of 
the person or at such other place as m ay be indicated by the person and agreed to 
by the police officer. 
 122

 123
Chapter Eleven 
 
Certain recommendations for safety and well-being of detainee, amending section 
172, separate investigating and prosecuting agency And the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Bill. 2001 
 
In para 3.9 of the Consultation Pape r a proposition was put forward that 
ensuring the safety and well-being of the detainee is the responsibility of the 
detaining authority. It would be sufficient to reproduce the reasons in support of the 
said proposal.  It reads thus: 
 
“It should also be provided by law expr essly that once a person is arrested, 
it is the responsibility of the arresting and detaining authority to ensure the 
safety and well being of the deta inee. The recom mendation of National 
Police Com mission regarding m andatory m edical exam ination of the 
arrested person deserves im plementation.  In this connection, the decision 
of A.P. High Court in Challa Ramkrishna Reddy v. State of A.P.(AIR 1989 
AP 235)  – which has recently been affirm ed by the Supreme Court in State 
of A.P. v.Challa Ramkrishna Reddy AIR 2000 SC 2083 - and the exam ples 
given therein, wherein the State would be liable for dam ages for the 
negligent or indifferent conduct of po lice/jail authorities should be kept in 
mind. To put briefly, take a case where a person is arrested for sim ple theft 
or sim ple rioting; he is a heart pa tient; he is not allowed to take his 
medicines with him at the tim e of his arrest and no m edicines are provided 
to him in spite of his asking and he dies.  Or a case, where such a person 
(though carrying his m edicines) suffers  a heart attack and no reasonably 
prompt steps are taken for providing medical aid to him  by the concerned 
authorities and he dies.  It is obvious that had he not been arrested, his 
family and friends would have taken care of him.  Should he die for want of 
medical help, only because he has been  arrested and detained for a m inor 
offence.  It would be t oo big a punishm ent.  In such cases, State would be 
liable for damages.” 
 123

 124
 
 We affirm the said proposal.  It is not necessary to elucidate the sam e since 
the principle has been affirm ed by the Supr eme Court.  This aspect is covered by 
the amendments proposed by us in the accompanying Bill. 
 
 In para 3.10 of the Consultation Paper, a proposal was put forward to the 
effect that a custody record should be m aintained at every police station.   Som e 
police officials opposed this proposal on th e ground that there are already adequate 
provisions providing for m aintaining a reco rd of the persons arrested and the 
progress of investigation and therefore it is unnecessary to introduce yet another 
record under the nam e “custody record”.   In the light of the recom mendations 
made elsewhere in this report, we do not propose to pursue this proposal. 
 In para 3.11 of the Consultation Pape r, the Com mission had dealt with the 
tortious liability of  the State and to the unsatisfactory situation arising f rom the 
decision of the Suprem e Court in Kasturilal v. State of U.P. (AIR 1965 SC 1039).   
The subsequent decisions have not im proved the situation.    On this aspect, the 
National Com mission to Review the W orking of  the Constitution (NCRW C) has 
prepared a Consultation Paper discussing in detail the several aspects of the said 
problem.   It is understood that a Final re port is also being prepared on the topic by 
the said Commission.   We fully agree w ith the approach adopted by NCRW C and 
we are sure that valuable and useful recommendations would be put forward by the 
said Commission on this topic. 
 
 The last proposal contained in para 3.12 of the Consultation Paper speaks of 
strict compliance with section 172 CrPC by the police officers and the duty of the 
court to ensure such compliance.  Besides calling for strict compliance with section 
172, the Consultation Paper also suggested an amendment to section 172.    Since 
this proposal has not been opposed by anyone, we reiterate the same.  The relevant 
proposal in para 3.12 reads thus: 
 
 124

 125
“Sub-section (1) of section 172 of the Code of Crim inal Procedure requires 
that (1) “every police officer m aking an investigation under this chapter 
shall day-by-day enter his proceedings in  the investigation in a diary setting 
forth the tim e at which the inform ation reached him , the tim e at which he 
began and closed his investigation, th e place or places visited by him  and a 
statement of the circum stances ascertained through his investigation”.   
Inasmuch as such diary would also record and reflect the tim e, place and 
circumstances of arrest, it is necessary that the provisions of this sub-section 
should be strictly com plied with.  In  this behalf, however, it would be 
relevant to notice the following observations of the Suprem e Court in 
Shamshul Kanwar v. State (AIR 1995 SC 1748) where the court pointed out 
the vagueness prevailing in the country in the m atter of m aintaining the 
diary under section 172.  The court referred, in the first instance, to the fact 
that in every State there are Poli ce Regulations/Police Standing Orders 
prescribing the m anner in which such diaries are to be m aintained and that 
there is no uniform ity am ong them .   The court pointed out that in som e 
States like Uttar Pradesh, the diary under section 172 is known as ‘special 
diary’ or ‘case diary’ and in som e other States like Andhra Pradesh and 
Tamil Nadu, it is known as ‘case diary’.  The basis for distinction between 
‘special diary’ and ‘case diary’, the c ourt pointed out, may owe its origin to 
the words “police diary or otherwis e” occurring in section 162 CrPC.  The 
court also pointed out that the use of expression “case diary” in A.P. 
Regulations and in the Regulations of som e other States like J&K and 
Kerala may indicate that it is something different than a “general diary”.   In 
some other States there appear to be  Police Standing Orders directing that 
the diary under section 172 be m aintained in two parts, first part relating to 
steps taken during the course of investigation by the police officer with 
particular reference to time at which police received the information and the 
further steps taken during the investig ation and the second part containing 
statement of circum stances ascertain ed during the investigation which 
obviously relate to statem ents recorded by the officer in term s of section 
 125

 126
161 and other relevant m aterial gathered during the investigation.  In view 
of this state of affairs, the Suprem e Court suggested a legislative change to 
rectify this confusion and vagueness in  the m atter of m aintenance of diary 
under section 172.  It is therefore appr opriate that section 172 be am ended 
appropriately indicating the m anner in which the diary under section 172 is 
to be m aintained, its contents and the m anner in which its contents are 
communicated to the court and the superior officers, if any.  The 
significance of the case diary lies in its  relevance as a safeguard against 
unfairness of police investigation.   (The Am endment should also clarify 
whether case diary is different from  General Diary and, if so, how should it 
be m aintained.)    (See the deci sion of the Delhi High Court in Ashok 
Kumar v. State (1979 Cr.L.J. 1477)).  Such an am endment would also go to 
ensure that the time, place and circumstances of the arrest of an accused are 
also properly recorded and reflected by such record, which is indeed a 
statutory record.” 
 
 Keeping in m ind the recom mendation in another Report of the Law 
Commission (178th Report on Misc. Am endments), which, inter alia, recom mends 
amendment of section 162 of CrPC, and consistent with it, we are suggesting 
addition/insertion of certain words in sub-section (1) of section 172. 
 
Lastly, we m ay ref er to the idea, repeatedly put forward by several 
participants in the Sem inar, to separate the investigating and prosecuting agency 
from the law and order agency.   It has been suggested that  investigation of crime is 
a specialized process requiring a good am ount of patience, expertise, training and a 
good understanding of the legal position concerning the subject-m atter of 
investigation.    It is also pointed out that in the m atter of econom ic offences and 
more so on account of technological advan ces, the investigation has becom e a skill 
by itself  requiring knowledge of accountanc y, computer operations, stock-m arket 
and so on, and that the said job ought not to  be entrusted to the police engaged in 
maintenance of law and order.    W e are fully in agreem ent with this proposal but 
 126

 127
we are not going into the said subject ourse lves for the reason that this aspect has 
been elaborately dealt with by this Com mission in its 154 th Report on Crim inal 
Procedure Code.   Chapter II deals with es tablishment of a separate investigating 
agency.  It explains the need for separation of investigating agency from  the police 
staff engaged in the m aintenance of law and order.  It refers to the earlier 
recommendations of the Law Com mission in its 14 th Report, the recom mendations 
of the National Police Com mission, and records its own reasons, as m any as seven 
in num ber, for accepting and im plementing this idea.   Their recom mendation is 
contained in para nine of the said chapter: 
 
“9. We recom mend that the police officials entrusted with the 
investigation of grave offences should be separate and distinct from  those 
entrusted with the enf orcement of  la w and order and other m iscellaneous 
duties.  Separate investigating agency  directly under the supervision of a 
designated Superintendent of  Police be  constituted.   The hierarchy of  the 
officers in the investigating police fo rce should have adequate training and 
incentives for furthering effective inve stigations.  W e suggest that the 
respective Law and Hom e Departments of various State Governm ents may 
work out details for betterment of their conditions of service. 
 
 The officials of the investigati ng police force be m ade responsible 
for helping the courts in the conduct of cases and speedy trial by ensuring 
timely attendance of witnesses, production of accused and proper 
coordination with prosecuting agency.   Other necessary steps should also 
be taken for prom oting efficiency in  investigation.   Accordingly, we 
recommend that necessary changes in the Police Acts, both Central and 
State, Police Regulations, Police Standing Orders, Police Manuals, be made 
by the Home Department in consultation with the Law Departments of State 
Governments.” 
 
 127

 128
 Chapter III (of the 154 th Report) deals with Independent Prosecuting 
Agency.  Here too the Law Commission referred to its earlier Reports, namely, 14th 
and 41st Reports, to the recom mendations of the National Police Com mission and 
the feedback it received in the several workshops it conducted on the subject of 
Criminal Procedure Code.    Relevant observations in certain decisions of the courts 
emphasizing the desirability of  insulating the prosecuting agency f rom the 
investigating agency are also referred to.  The final recom mendation is for 
establishment of a Directorate of Prosecuti on.   The Report deals with the m ode of 
appointment of Public Prosecutors and Assistant Public Prosecutors in the course of 
its discussion.  It also touches upon the desirability of perm itting the private 
complainant to engage his own lawyer to conduct the prosecution where the court 
finds that the public prosecutor is not e ffectively discharging his duties thereby 
subverting the process of law and justice.   We may refer in this connection to the 
practice of police departm ent (in som e States) recruiting lawyers to act as 
prosecuting officers in the courts of Magistrates.  The lawyers so recruited becom e 
employees of the departm ent and theref ore subject to their instructions and 
directions.  This practice too may have to be reviewed. 
 
 We reiterate and com mend the reasoning and recom mendations contained 
in chapters II and III of the 154 th Report of Law Commission and recommend their 
acceptance by the appropriate authorities. 
 
In order to concretize our recommendations in the legislative form, we have 
appended The Code of Crim inal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2001 (Annexure I) 
to this Report.  There are, however, cer tain other recom mendations in this Report 
(e.g. establishment of separate investigating agency and an independent prosecuting 
agency), which have not been concreti zed in the accom panying Bill.  They are 
essentially administrative measures. 
 
We recommend accordingly. 
 
 128

 129
(Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
Chairman 
 
(Justice M.Jagannadha Rao) 
Vice Chairman 
 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Member 
 
 
(Mr. T.K.Viswanathan) 
Member-Secretary 
Dated:   14 .12.2001 
 
 
 
 129

 130
Annexure I 
 
 
 
 
The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill 2002 
 
   A Bill 
  
 further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 
  
   
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of 
India as follows, namely:- 
 
Short title and commencement 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act 
2002. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date the Central Government may by 
notification in the Official Gazette appoint. 
 
Amendment of section 41 
    
2.  In the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act),  in section 41 - 
 
(i) in sub-section (1), for clauses (a) and (b),the following 
clauses shall be substituted, namely:-  
 
“(a)  who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a 
cognizable offence; 
 130

 131
 
 
 
 
 
(b) against whom credible information has been received 
that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which  may extend  to seven  years, 
(whether  with or without fine), if the following conditions are 
satisfied, namely:- 
 
(I) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that 
information that such person has committed the said offence; 
 
(II) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary-  
 
 
(a) to prevent such person from committing any  further    offence; 
or 
 
(b) for proper investigation of the offence or for the reason that 
detention of such person  in custody is in  the interest of his 
safety; or 
 
(c) to prevent such person from, causing the  evidence of the 
offence  to disappear or tampering with such  evidence in any 
manner; or 
 
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or 
promise to  any person acquainted with the facts of the case  so  
as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the court or to 
the police officer; or 
 
(e) that unless  such person is arrested,  his presence in the court 
whenever required cannot be ensured; and 
 
           the police officer records his reasons in writing. 
 
 
 
(ba) against whom credible information has been received 
that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with,  
imprisonment for a term which may extend  more than seven 
years (whether with or without fine) or with death and the 
police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that 
 131

 132
information that such person has committed the said 
offence;”. 
 
 
(ii)   for sub-section (2) the following sub-section shall be 
substituted , namely:- 
 
 
“(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person, 
concerned in a non cognizable offence or against whom, a 
complaint has been made or credible information has been 
received  or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so 
concerned,  shall be arrested except under a warrant or order 
of a magistrate. 
 
 
Insertion of new sections 41A to 41D 
3. After section 41 of the principal Act, the f ollowing sections shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 Appearance Notice 
“ 41A. (1) The police officer may, in all cases where the arrest of a person is 
not required under the provisions of s ection 41, issue a notice directing the 
person against whom  credible inform ation has been received that he has 
committed a cognizable  offence, to app ear before him  or the court, as the 
case may be, whenever called upon to do so.   
 
(2) Whenever a notice is issued under subsection (1), directing any person 
to appear before the police officer or the Court such person shall  appear as 
directed. 
 
 
Procedure of arrest and the duties of the officer making the arrest 
 
41B. (1)     Every police officer while making an arrest shall – 
 
(a)  bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his nam e 
which will facilitate easy identification; 
 
(b) inform the person arrested ,the offence for which he is being 
arrested; 
 132

 133
 
(c) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be – 
(i) attested by at least by one  witness, who is a m ember 
of the fam ily of the person arrested or a respectable 
member of the locality where the arrest is made ; 
(ii) countersigned by the person arrested; 
 
(d) inform the person arrested ,unless the m emorandum is attested 
by a member of his family, that he has a right to have a  relative 
or a friend named by him be informed of his arrest; 
 
(e) inform a relative or a friend of the person arrested, the place 
where he is detained in custody; 
 
 
  
Control Rooms at Districts 
 
41C.(1)    The State Government  shall establish a police control room at- 
(a) every district; 
 (b) the State level. 
 
(2) The State Governm ent shall cause to be displayed on the notice board 
kept outside the Control rooms at every district, the names  and addresses of  
the persons arrested and the  nam es and designation of the police officers 
who made the arrests. 
 
(3) The control room  at the Police H ead quarters at the state level shall 
collect from time to tim e, details about  the persons arrested, nature of the 
offence with they are charged and m aintain a database f or the inf ormation 
of the general public. 
 
 
 
Right of arrested person to have advocate during interrogation 
 
41D.  When any person arrested is interrogated by the police, he shall be 
entitled to have an advocate of his c hoice present during such interrogation 
in order to ensure that his rights are not infringed: 
   Provided that nothing contained in this section shall 
confer any right upon the person arrested to insist that the advocate shall be 
present throughout the interrogation. 
 
 
 
 133

 134
 
Substitution  of section 54 
 
4.  For section 54 of the principal Act, the following section  shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
  
Examination of arrested person by medical practitioner 
 
“54. (1) When any person is arrested he shall be exam ined by a registered 
medical practioner soon   after the arrest is made.   
 
(2) The registered medical practioner so examining the arrested person shall 
prepare the record of such exam ination, mentioning therein any injuries or 
marks of violence upon the person of  the person arrested, and the 
approximate time when such injuries or marks may have been inflicted.   
 
(3) Such exam ination under sub-section (2) shall be repeated every forty-
eight hours of his detention in police custody.” 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 55A 
 
5. After section 55 of  the principal Act the f ollowing section shall be 
inserted namely:- 
   
Health and Safety of arrested person 
 
“55A It shall be the duty of the person having the custody of an accused to 
take reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.” 
 
 134

 135
 
 
Insertion of new section 60 
  
        6. After section 60 of the principal Ac t, the f ollowing section  shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
Arrests to be made strictly according to the Code 
 
“60A.  No arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of 
this Code or any other law for the time being in force providing for arrest.” 
 
 
Amendment of section 172 
 
7. In section 172 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(1A) The statem ents of witnesse s recorded, during the course of 
investigation, under section 161 shall be entered in the case diary.   
(1B) The case diary referred  to in s ub-section (1), shall be a bound volume, 
duly paginated and shall be m aintained in  the ordinary  course of official 
business.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 135

 136
 
 
Amendment of section 320 
 
 
 
 
8. In section 320 of the principal Act ,- 
 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the Ta ble ,the following Table shall be 
substituted, namely :- 
 
TABLE 
  
 
 
Offence 
Section of 
the Indian 
Penal 
Code 
applicable 
 
Person by whom offence may be 
compounded 
1 2 3 
Uttering words, etc., with 
deliberate intent to would the 
religious feelings of any person. 
 
Causing hurt. 
 
Voluntarily causing hurt by 
dangerous weapons or means. 
 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. 
 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt 
on grave and sudden provocation 
 
Causing grievous hurt by doing an 
act so rashly and negligently as to 
endanger hum an life or the 
personal safety of others. 
 
 
Wrongfully restraining or 
confining any person. 
 
Wrongfully confining a person for 
three days or more. 
298 
 
 
 
 
323,334 
 
324 
 
 
325 
 
 
335 
 
 
 
338 
 
 
 
 
 
 
341,342 
The person whose religious feelings 
are intended to be wounded. 
 
 
The person to whom the hurt is caused 
The person to whom hurt is caused 
 
The person to whom hurt is caused. 
 
The person to whom hurt is caused 
 
 
The person to whom hurt is caused 
 
 
 
 
 
The person restrained or confined. 
 
The person confined 
 
 
The person confined 
 
 136

 137
 
Wrongfully confining for ten or 
more days. 
 
 
Wrongfully confining a person in 
secret. 
 
Assault or use of criminal force. 
 
 
Theft by clerk or servant of 
property in possession of m aster, 
where the value of the property 
stolen does not exceed twenty five 
thousand rupees. 
 
Dishonest m isappropriation of 
property. 
 
Criminal breach of trust, where the 
value of the property does not 
exceed twenty five thousand 
rupees. 
 
Criminal breach of trust by a 
carrier, wharfinger, etc., where the 
value of the property does not 
exceed twenty five thousand 
rupees. 
 
Criminal breach of trust by a clerk 
or servant, where the value of the 
property does not exceed twenty 
five thousand rupees. 
 
Dishonestly receiving stolen 
property, knowing it to be stolen, 
when the value of the stolen 
property does not exceed twenty 
five thousand rupees. 
 
Assisting in the concealm ent or 
disposal of stolen property, 
knowing it to be stolen, where the 
value of the stolen property does 
 
 
343 
 
 
344 
 
 
 
346 
 
 
352,355, 
358 
 
 
379 
 
 
 
 
 
 
403 
 
 
406 
 
 
 
 
407 
 
 
 
 
 
408 
 
 
 
 
 
411 
 
 
 
 
The person confined 
 
 
The person assaulted or to whom  
criminal force is used. 
 
 
The owner of the property stolen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The owner of the property 
misappropriated. 
 
The owner of the property in respect 
of which the breach of trust has been 
committed.  
 
 
The owner of the property in respect 
of which the breach of trust has been 
committed.  
 
 
 
The owner of the property in respect 
of which the breach of trust has been 
committed.  
 
 
 
The owner of the property stolen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The owner of the property stolen. 
 
 
 137

 138
not exceed twenty five thousand 
rupees. 
 
Cheating. 
 
Cheating by personation 
 
Fraudulent rem oval or 
concealment of property, etc., to 
prevent distribution am ong 
creditors. 
 
Fraudulently preventing from  
being m ade available for his 
creditors a debt or dem and due to 
the offender. 
 
Fraudulent execution of deed of 
transfer containing false statem ent 
of consideration. 
 
Fraudulent rem oval or 
concealment of  property. 
 
 
Mischief, when the only loss or 
damage caused is loss or dam age 
to a private person. 
 
Mischief by killing or m aiming 
animal of the value of ten rupees 
or upwards. 
 
Mischief by killing or m aiming 
cattle, etc., of  any value or any 
other anim al of the value of fifty 
rupees or upwards. 
 
Mischief by injury to work of 
irrigation by wrongfully diverting 
water when the only loss or 
damage caused is loss or dam age 
to a private person. 
 
 
Criminal trespass. 
 
 
 
 
414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
417 
 
419 
 
421 
 
 
 
 
422 
 
 
 
 
423 
 
 
 
424 
 
 
 
426,427 
 
 
 
428 
 
 
 
429 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The person cheated. 
 
The person cheated 
 
The creditors who are affected 
thereby. 
 
 
 
The creditors who are affected 
thereby. 
 
 
 
The person affected thereby. 
 
 
 
The person affected thereby. 
 
 
 
The person to whom  the loss or 
damage is caused. 
 
 
The owner of the animal. 
 
 
 
The owner of the cattle or animal. 
 
 
 
 
The person to whom  the loss or 
damage is caused. 
 
 
 
 
 
 138

 139
 
 
House trespass 
 
 
House-trespass to com mit an 
offence (other than theft) 
punishable with imprisonment. 
 
Using a false trade or property 
mark. 
 
 
Counterfeiting a trade or property 
mark used by another. 
 
Knowingly selling, or exposing or 
possessing for sale or for 
manufacturing purpose, goods 
marked with a counterfeit property 
mark. 
 
 
Criminal breach of contract of 
service. 
 
 
Adultery. 
 
Enticing or taking away or 
detaining with crim inal intent of  a 
married woman. 
 
Defamation, except such cases as 
are specified against section 500 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
in colum n 1 of the Table under 
sub-section (2). 
 
 
Printing or engraving m atter, 
knowing it to be defamatory. 
 
Sale of printed or engraved 
substance containing defam atory 
matter, knowing it to contain such 
 
430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
447 
 
 
448 
 
 
451 
 
 
 
 
482 
 
 
 
483 
 
 
 
486 
 
 
 
 
 
 
491 
 
 
 
497 
 
498 
 
 
 
500 
 
The person in possession of the 
property trespassed upon 
 
The person in possession of the 
property trespassed upon 
 
The person in possession of the house 
trespassed upon. 
 
 
 
The person to whom  the loss or injury 
is caused by such use. 
 
 
The person whose trade or property 
mark is counterfeited. 
 
 
The person whose trade or property 
mark is counterfeited. 
 
 
 
 
 
The person with whom  the offender 
has contracted. 
 
 
The husband of the woman. 
 
The husband of the woman. 
 
 
 
The person defamed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The person defamed. 
 
 139

 140
matter. 
 
Insult intended to provoke a breach 
of the peace. 
 
Criminal intimidation except when 
the offence is punishable with 
imprisonment for seven years. 
 
Act caused by m aking a person 
believe that he will be an object of  
divine displeasure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
501 
 
 
502 
 
 
 
 
504 
 
 
506 
 
 
 
 
508 
 
 
 
 
The person defamed. 
 
 
 
 
The person insulted. 
 
 
The person intimidated. 
 
 
 
 
The person against whom  the offence 
was committed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the Ta ble, the following Table shall be 
substituted, namely :- 
 
 
TABLE 
 
 
   
 140

 141
 
 
Offence 
Section of 
the Indian 
Penal 
Code 
applicable 
 
Person by whom offence may be 
compounded 
1 2 3 
Causing miscarriage. 
 
 
Causing hurt by doing an act so 
rashly and negligently as to 
endanger hum an life or the 
personal safety of others. 
 
 
Assault or crim inal f orce to 
woman with intent to outrage her 
modesty. 
 
Assault or crim inal f orce in 
attempting wrongfully to confine a 
person. 
 
 
Theft by clerk or servant of 
property in possession of m aster, 
where the value of the property 
stolen does not exceed twenty five 
thousand  rupees. 
 
 
Cheating a person whose interest 
the offender was bound, either by 
law or by legal contract, to protect. 
 
 
Cheating and dishonestly including 
delivery of property or the making, 
alteration or destruction of a 
valuable security. 
 
 
Marrying again during the life-
time of a husband or wife. 
 
312 
 
 
337 
 
 
 
 
 
354 
 
 
 
357 
 
 
 
 
381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
418 
 
 
 
 
 
420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The wom an whose m iscarriage was 
caused. 
 
The person to whom hurt is caused. 
 
 
 
 
The wom an assaulted to whom  the 
criminal force was used. 
 
 
The person assaulted or to whom  the 
force was used. 
 
 
. 
The owner of the property stolen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The person cheated. 
 
 
 
 
 
The person cheated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The husband or wife of the person so 
 141

 142
Husband or relative of a wom an 
subjecting her to cruelty. 
 
 
Defamation against the President 
or the Vice-President or the 
Governor of a State or the 
Administrator of  a Union territory 
or a Minister in respect of his 
conduct in the discharge of his 
public f unctions when instituted 
upon a com plaint m ade by the 
Public Prosecutor. 
 
Uttering words or sounds or 
making gestures or exhibiting any 
object intending to insult the 
modesty of a wom an or intruding 
upon the privacy of a woman. 
494 
 
 
 
498A 
 
 
 
 
500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
509 
 
 
 
 
 
marrying. 
 
 
The woman  subjected to cruelty. 
 
 
 
 
The person defamed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The wom an whom  it was intended to 
insult or whose privacy was intruded 
upon.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 436 
 
 
9.   In section 436 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)   
                               
(a) for the words “such person shall be released on bail”, the 
words “such person shall be re leased on a personal bond without 
sureties” shall be substituted. 
 
 142

 143
(b) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be 
substituted namely:- 
 
“Provided that such officer or court may, if satisfied for reasons to be 
recorded in writing that such pers on should not be released on m ere 
personal bond, release him on bail.” 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 436A 
 
10. After section 436 of the principal Act the following section shall be inserted 
namely:- 
 
 
   
 Release of detained persons on personal bond in certain cases 
 
“436A.    (1) Where a person has, during the period of investigation, 
inquiry or trial under this Code of an  offence under any law (not being an 
offence for which the punishm ent of death has been specified as one of the 
punishments under that law) undergone detention for a period extending up 
to one-half of the m aximum period of  im prisonment specified for that 
offence under that law, he shall be released by the Court on his personal 
bond with or without sureties as it may deem fit. 
 Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and 
for reasons to be recorded by it in wr iting, order the continued detention of 
such person for a period longer than one -half of the said period or release 
him on bail instead of the personal bond with or without sureties as it m ay 
think fit. 
 Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained 
during the period of investigation, i nquiry or trial for m ore than the 
maximum period of im prisonment provided for the said offence under that 
law: 
 143

 144
 Explanation – In com puting the period of detention under this 
section for granting bail the period of  detention passed due to delay in 
proceeding caused by the accused shall be excluded. 
 
 
(2) No person shall be detained in police custody unless such detention is 
required for the purposes of investigation of any offence.   
 
(3) Where  a person is required to be detained in custody, such custody shall 
be judicial custody.” 
 
 
Amendment of section 437 
 
11.  In section 437 of the principal Act,- 
(a) in sub-section (1),- 
 (i) in clause (ii), for the words “a non-bailable and cognizable 
offence”, the words “a cognizable offence punishable with im prisonment 
for three years or more but not less than seven years” shall be substituted; 
 (ii) af ter the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: 
 “Provided also that no person shall,  if the offence alleged to have 
been committed by him is punishable with death or imprisonment for a term 
which m ay extend upto seven years or  m ore, be released on bail by the 
court under this sub-section without gi ving an opportunity of hearing to the 
Public Prosecutor.” 
 
 (b) after sub-section (1), the fo llowing subsection shall be inserted, 
namely:-  
 
“(1A) Notwithstanding any thing c ontained in sub-section (1), a 
person accused of a non-cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend up to seven years (whether with or 
without fine) shall be released on bail unless there are reasons to 
 144

 145
believe, which shall be recorded in writing ,that release of such 
person on bail is not in the public interest.” 
 
(c) in sub-section (3), for the por tion beginning with the words “the 
Court may impose”, and ending with the words “the interests of justice”, the 
following shall be substituted, namely: 
  
“the Court shall impose the conditions,- 
  
(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of 
the bond executed under this Chapter, 
  
(b) that such person shall not co mmit an of fence sim ilar to the 
offence of which he is accused, or suspected, of the com mission of which 
he is suspected, and 
  
(c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly m ake any 
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the 
case so as to dissuade him  from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any 
police officer or tamper with the evidence 
 
and m ay also im pose, in the interests of  justice, such other conditions as it 
considers necessary.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 440A 
 
12. After section 440 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
 145

 146
Sureties to make declaration before court 
 
“440A. Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release-on 
bail, shall m ake a declaration before the Court as to the num ber of persons 
to whom he has stood surety includi ng the accused, giving therein all the 
relevant particulars.” 
 
Amendment of section 446 
 
13. In section 446 of the principal Act, in  sub-section (3), for the words “at its 
discretion”, the words “after recording its reasons for doing so” shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
 
STUDY OF ARRESTS 
 
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the 
State 
Total No. 
of person 
arrested 
under 
substantive 
Persons 
Arrested 
Under 
Preventive 
Provision 
Persons 
Charge-
Sheeted 
Persons 
Dropped 
Without 
Chargesheet 
Persons 
convicted 
% of 
persons 
arrested 
in 
bailable 
Per
arre
und
Pre
Pro
 146

 147
offences offences Per
Dro
Wi
Fili
(In 
per
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
744 185 545 38 06 59.47 20.
2. Uttar 
Pradesh 
173634 479404 
125268 
Surrendered 
in Court 
748440 29124 390507 45.13 4.8
3. Goa 2938 1383 4005 257 319 61.02 18.
4. Haryana 2048 483 1399 13 490 94 2.6
5. Mizoram 3942 246 2491 54 1683 55 21.
6. Pondicherry 3898 7348 3824 31 1457 50.8 .42
7. Nagaland 47 125 146 26 05 193 
(persons) 
20.
8. Delhi 57163 39824 78581 8904 34436 50  22.
9. Manipur 708 1145 15 
cases 
534 2 cases Not 
Furnished 
46.
10. Kerala 164035 5884 157135 4582 35505 71 77.
11. Assam 1351 58 859 427 23 90 - 
12. Karnataka 10368 2262 10353 15 2394 84.8 .66
13. Rajasthan 249084 26109 247469 69 NIL - .26
14. Tripura 6560 25499 6149 5183 4579 9.2 20.
15. Orissa 4616 733 2299 234 34 - 31.
16. Gujarat 297939 189722 480611 1710 117805 99.75 .90
17. West 
Bengal 
49655 207625 32746 16820 1072 - 8.1
18. Sikkim 755 23 510 NIL 296 113 - 
19. Laksha-
Dweep 
06 NIL 06 NIL NIL 66.67 - 
20. Daman & 
Diu 
569 111 350 14 336 89 12.
21. Bihar 238613 - 211188 22158 12546 13.90 - 
22. Chandigarh 
UT 
2215 4286 6032 165 895 53.81 3.8
23. Maharashtra 23675 18366 40583 1469 350 61 7.9
24. Andaman & 
Nicobar  
2579 721 2471 17 1874 95.81 2.3
25. Andhra 
Pradesh 
249328 85850 259881 39205 13246 36.59 45.
26. Madhya 
Pradesh 
476281 354242 518658 12399 139379 89 3.5
 147

 148
27. Himachal 
Pradesh 
20172 6145 26225 417 2127 69 6.7
28. Dadar & 
Nagar 
Haveli 
NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL
 
 
 
 
 148