GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
ON 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AMENDING VARIOUS ENACTMENTS, 
BOTH CIVIL AND CRIMINAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DECEMBER 2001 
 

 2 
 
December 14, 2001 
D.O. No. 6(3)(73)/2001-LC(LS) 
Dear Shri Jaitley, 
 
 I am herewith forwarding the 178 th Report containing 
recommendations for amending various en actments, both civil and criminal.  
Such a course was adopted in the La w Commission for the reason that there 
are quite a few provisions in civil and criminal enactments which require 
urgent attention and amendment.  For example, ame ndment of several 
provisions are called for in Hindu Adop tions and Maintenance Act, Civil 
Procedure Code and Criminal Procedure Code.  If we take each of these 
enactments for a comprehensive study and report, it would have taken a long 
time whereas here are amendments whic h are urgent in nature.  Moreover, 
the Law Commission had prepared a nd sent a full report on Code of 
Criminal Procedure as recently as 1996.  The amendments recommended 
herewith pertain to: 
 
1) Section 35, Stamp Act 
2) Section 58(c), Transfer of Property Act 
3) 0.20 R.12 and 0.20 R.18 of CPC 
4) 0.34, CPC 
5) Section 69(2), Partnership Act 
6) Section 306, Indian Succession Ac t & Section 166, Motor Vehicles 
Act 

 3 
7) 0.38 R.5, CPC 
8) Section 58(f), Transfer of Property Act & other amendments 
9) Insertion of sections 89B, 89C a nd 89D in Transfer of Property Act 
 
10) Section 34, CPC 
11) Section 19, Hindu Marriage Act 
12) Section 125, CrPC 
13) Problem of hostile witnesses 
14) Sections 161, 162 and 173(5), CrPC 
15) Section 174, CrPC 
16) Chapter XIX, CrPC 
17) Section 424A, Indian Penal Code 
18) Section 424B, Indian Penal Code 
19) Revenue Recovery Act, purchase by government 
 
 I am sure the Government would be stow immediate attention to these 
amendments which, if implemented,  would go a long way in meeting the 
interests of justice. 
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
(B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
Shri Arun Jaitley, 
Union Minister for Law, Justice 
And Company Affairs, 
Government of India, 
Shastri Bhawan, 
NEW DELHI. 

 4 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Sl.no   Contents         Page.Nos 
 
1.             Introductory                     1-3 
 
2.             Section 35 of the Stamp Act,1899 & 
                                   ‘Bills of exchange on promissory notes’                                 4-8 
 
3.            Section 58 (c): Mortgage by conditional 
                                  sale                                                                                          9-16 
 
4.           Order 20 Rule 12 and order 20 Rule 18  
                                  of the Code of Civil Procedure                                               17-28 
 
5.                               Revenue Recovery Act, 1890: Purchase 
                                  by Government where bidders are not 
                                  forth coming when immovable property 
                                  is put to public auction.                                                          29-36 
 
6.                               OXXXIV of Code of Civil Procedure- 
                                   dispensing with the age old procedure  
                                   of a preliminary decree                                                         37-44 
 
7.                              Amendment of Sec. 69 (2) of the  
                                  Indian Partnership Act, 1932                                                 45-50 
 
8.           Non disclosure of factum of pending 
                                 civil litigation to purchasers or  
                                 transferees of immovable property to  
                                 be an offence punishable with impri- 
                                 sonment and with fine-Insertion of  
                                 section 424 B, Indian Penal Code,1860                                  51-54 
 
9.                              Right of a person injured in an accident 
                                 to sue for damages to survive to his legal 
                                 representatives in the case the injured  
                                 Person dies thereafter on account of a cause 
                                 not relatable to the accident-Amendment pro- 
                                 posed to sec. 306 Indian Succession Act, 1925 
                                 sec. 110A of Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 and  
                                 sec 166 of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.                                    55-62    
 
10.      O 38 Rule 5 and Rule 6: whether procedure 
                                 Of prior show cause notice to defendant in 
                                 Cases of ‘conditional attachment’ can result 
                                  In the final order becoming infructuous?                              63-74 
     

 5 
 
    11.                                Copies of decrees or orders of Courts affe- 
                                         cting immovable property by Courts under  
                                         Revenue Recovery Act to be notified to  
                                         Registration Officers under the Registration 
                                         Act, 1908 to be entered in Book 1                                    74-78 
 
   12.                                 Proposed section 89B, 89C and 89 D by 
                                         deposit of title deeds: Intimation to regi- 
                                         stering officers by mortgager and mortgagee. 
                                         Separate register to be maintained and  
                                         Provision for making rules. Offence under the  
                                         Registration Act, 1908 Created                                        79-88 
 
13. Section 34 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
Pendente lite and Post-decretal interest to be 
Increased from 6% to 12 % and Sec. 34 (2)                    89-97 
 
 
  14.                                  Section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955                  98-100 
 
15.                                  Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. 101-110  
 
  16.                                 Problem of hostile witnesses and the need to  
                                        ensure a fair investigation                                               111-119 
 
  17.                                Section 161, 162 Sec.173 (5): Code of Criminal  
                                       Procedure, 1973: Need for transmission of  
                                       Statements of persons to Magistrate immediately           120-126 
 
18. Sec. 174: Proposal to requires statements of  
Persons examined at the Inquest to be sent  
Forthwith to the Magistrate along with Report               127-129 
 
19. Amendment of Chapter XIX of the Code of  
Criminal Procedure                                                         130-140 
 
Annexure                  
 
1.The Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions Amendment) Bill 2002              141 (1-26) 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
The attention of the Commission ha s been drawn by several Jurists 
and Organizations to certain specific provisions in various statutes, both civil 
and criminal, which require immedi ate amendment. The Commission gave 
serious consideration to their request s and felt that having regard to the 
urgency for their amendments, it will be  advantageous if these are taken up 
immediately rather than wait for an occasion when a review of the entire 
statute in each of these cases is taken up. That is the reason why the 
Commission has taken up amendments of these specific provisions in 
various enactments and is submitting this Report. The list of the Sections in 
various statutes in regard to which amendments are proposed is given below: 
 
 
 
(1). Section 35 of Stamp Act, 1899:  Bills of Exchange and Promissory notes to be adm- 
issible even if stamp duty is deficient. Payment of Penalty or stamp duty to be made 
 applicable to these instruments also for validating them.   
 
(2). Section 58 ( c ) of the Transfer Of Property Act, 1882: Mortgage by conditional  
sale- conveyance and agreement of reconveya nce in separate deeds- Right to seek 
reconveyance within three years recommended. 
 
(3). Order XX Rule 12 and Order XX Rule 18: Making it mandatory that evidence as 
to mesne profits, rents up to the date of co mmencement of trial should be adduced at the 
trial. 
 
(4). Sec 424 A Indian Penal Code, 1860:  Failure to inform transferee of immovable 
property regarding prior transactions to be punishable. 
 
(5). Sec 424 B Indian Penal Code, 1860:   Failure to inform transferee of immovable 
property about pendency of litigation to be punishable. 
 
(6). Sections 6 and 6 A of th e Revenue Recovery Act, 1890: Enabling Government or 
the public authority to whom moneys are due from the defaulter, to purchase when 
bidders are not forthcoming in regard to public auction of immovable property. 
 
(7). Sec 79 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881:  Interest at contract rate to be payable    
up to date of suit and not after suit.  

 7 
 
(8). Sec 34 of Code of Civil Procedure 1908: Maximum rate of interest pending suit and 
thereafter raised from 6 % to 12 % p.a. 
 
(9). O XXXIV Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:  Procedure for passing Preliminary 
decree deleted (as done by the Kerala Amendment). 
 
 
(10). Order XXXVIII Rules 5 and 6 Co de of Civil Procedure, 1908: Interim 
attachment before judgment to be made w ithout prior notice and attachment before 
Judgment to be made only after prior notice. 
 
(11). Sec 89 A of Registration Act, 1908:  Notice to be sent to Registration Offices 
regarding attachments and decrees related to immovable property- Notice to be 
registered. 
 
(12). Sec 89 B of Registration Act, 1908:  Notice to be sent to Registration Offices 
regarding mortgage by deposit of title deeds- Notice to be registered. 
 
(13). Sec 84 A of Registration Act, 1908:  Failure to send notice under Section 89 B to 
be punishable. 
 
(14). Sec 89 C of Regi stration Act, 1908: Rules to be made for purpose of section 89A, 
89B. 
 
(15). Sec 306 Indian Succession Act, 1925:  Claims for damages for injury not to abate 
on death of injured claimant.   
 
(16). Sec 69 Partnership Act, 1932:  Prohibition from suing in subsection (2) to apply 
only if right to sue has arisen out of a contract entered in the course of business. 
 
(17). Sec 19 Hindu Marriage Act, 1955:  Wife enabled to present petition where she is 
residing. 
 
(18). Sec 18 Hindu Adoption & Maintenance Act, 1956:  Right of woman to 
maintenance where husband’s previous marriage with another woman was not disclosed. 
 
(19). Sec 125 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:  Right to maintenance by wife who 
is divorced and not married or where the marriage is void in certain circumstances. 
 
(20). Sec 164, 162 , 173 (5) of Cr iminal Procedure Code, 1973: Section 161 statements 
–copies to be given to persons who made statement and statements to be sent forthwith to 
the Magistrate. 
 

 8 
(21). Sec 164 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973:  In the case of investigation in to 
offences punishable with more than 10 years imprisonment or death, Magistrate to record 
statement and the statement of witnesses straight away to be treated as evidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
(22). Sec 174 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973:  Statements during inquest to be 
forwarded to Magistrates forthwith. 
 
(23). Sec 207A, 239 (Ch XIX) of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973: Procedure in case of 
complaint by public servants simplified to permit speedier trials in economic offence 
cases, etc. 
 
(24). Sec 166 Motor Vehicles Act, 1988:  Claim for damages by injured persons not to 
abate on death of injured claimant. 
 
(25). Sec 217 Motor Vehicles Act, 1988:  Pending claims by injured persons under 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 not to abate on death of injured claimant. 
 
 
 The afore said 25 subjects are being dealt under the   under mentioned 
19 heads. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.Section 35  of the Stamp Act, 1899 & ‘Bills of exchange on promissory 
notes’: 
 
 The opening part of sec. 35 of  the Stamp Act, 1899 provides as 
follows: ‘No instrument chargeable w ith duty shall be admitted in evidence 
for any purpose by any person having by law or consent of parties 
authorized to receive evidence, or shall be acted upon, registered or 
authenticated by any such person or  by any public officer, unless the 
instrument is duly stamped’. 
 
 Clauses (a) to (e) of the provi so to the above sec. 35 contain 
provisions which permit the instrument to be used as evidence upon payment 
of the stamp duty in full (where it is unstamped) or upon payment of the 
deficient stamp duty (where there is de ficiency in the stamp duty) and the 
proviso permits the collection of pena lty up to a maximum of ten times the 
stamp duty or the deficiency, as the case may be.  Levy of penalty is of 
course discretionary. 
 

 10 
 However, clause (a) of sec. 35 does not permit the validation of the 
instrument as stated above, in the case of ‘a bill of exchange or promissory 
note’.  The result is that while in rega rd to all other instruments there is a 
procedure prescribed for subsequent  validation of the instrument by 
collection of the stamp duty or penalty, such a procedure is  not available in 
the case of “bills of exchange and promi ssory notes”.  Even if the party who 
wants to use it as evidence is prepared  to pay the stamp duty and penalty, he 
is not allowed to do so, so far as th ese instruments are concerned.  The 
document become ‘waste paper’.  On account of this rigid procedure applied 
only to “bills of exchange and prom issory notes”, several debtors are 
allowed to escape liability unjustly. 
 
 The Indian courts have also not b een able to render justice in such 
cases where one party relies upon a “bill of exchange or promissory note” 
which is not stamped or is deficiently stamped.  In addition, the provisions 
of sec. 91 of the Evidence Act also come in the way and preclude oral 
evidence being adduced in such cases.  This is clear from illustration (b) 
below section 91 of the Evidence Act. 
 
 These disabilities have led to a large volume litigation in courts.  The 
Privy Council, the Supreme Court and th e High Court have declared their 
helplessness in getting over these provisi ons of sec. 35 in so far as they 
disable validation of “bills of exchange and promissory notes”.  The result is 
that these instruments are not allowe d to be used as evidence ‘for any 
purpose’. 

 11 
 
 In one novel case in the Andhra Pradesh High Court during the time 
when our currency shifted from the old system of “rupees, annas and paise” 
to the present system of ‘naya-paise’, a promissory note which had to bear a 
stamp duty of 4 annas under the Stamp Act was executed on a document 
bearing stamp duty of ‘twenty four’ na ya-paise on the undertaking that each 
anna was equal to six na ya paise.  But, under the new system, the correct 
equivalent of 4 annas was 25 paise, and the suit was dismissed on the ground 
of deficiency of stamp duty of one naya  paisa.  The law never changed.  In 
fact, a special bench of seven Judges of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in L. 
Sambasivarao vs. Balakotaiah AIR 1973 AP 343 (FB) affirmed an earlier 
judgment of five Judges of the Madras High Court in Perumal Chettiar vs. 
Kamakshi Ammal (AIR 1938 Mad 785 (FB)).  Th e judgment of the Andhra 
Pradesh High Court is exha ustive and refers to the entire cased law on the 
subject.  In fact it refers to 133 decisi ons of various courts.  The question is 
whether this injustice which is the result of the Act of 1899 is to be remedied 
by enabling the deficiency to be paid, with or without penalty, as may be 
decided by the competent authority. 
 
 In some cases, courts invented va rious theories to grant relief, by 
holding that the ‘bill of exchange or promissory note’ was a collateral 
security or that it did not contain all the terms of the contract and therefore 
sec. 91 of the Evidence Act could not ex clude oral evidence.  In some other 
cases, Courts have stated that ther e could be an action on the debt.  
However, whenever such pleas of inadmissibility are raised, there is 

 12 
unending litigation and uncertainty.  A party would not know if any such 
plea would ultimately be accepted for ge tting over the rigid posture of sec. 
35 of the Stamp Act and the equally stri ct rule in sec. 91 of the Evidence 
Act. 
 
 In our view, justice to those who have parted with money under a bill 
of exchange or a promissory note, requires that this provision in sec. 35 be 
deleted and that the procedure for pa ying up the stamp duty or penalty, is 
made applicable to these instruments also.  That will further augment the 
revenues of the State.  Such a pro cedure will also eliminate unnecessary 
disputes as to whether the plaint can be amended by permitting the plaintiff 
to sue on the debt and also eliminate disputes as to admissibility of oral 
evidence.  
 
 The Commission, after due considera tion of various aspects, namely, 
rendering justice to those w ho have parted with mone y, the benefit that will 
accrue to the State by way of collec tion of stamp duty or penalty, and 
elimination of unnecessary disputes, is of the considered view that in the 
proviso (a) of sec. 35 of the Stamp Act, 1899, the words 
 
“any such instrument not being an instrument chargeable with a duty not 
exceeding ten naya paise only, or a b ill of exchange or promissory note, 
shall subject to all just exceptions be  admitted in evidence”, the words “any 
such instrument shall be admitted in evidence”, shall be substituted 
 

 13 
 
 
It is also proposed to give limited re trospective operation to this amendment 
in all cases where proceedings before the courts or authorities referred to 
under sec. 35 have not reached finality. 

 14 
2.  Section 58(c): mortgage by conditional sale : 
 
 It has been brought to the notice of the Commission that in several 
cases, persons entering into a “mortg age by conditional sale” are put to 
serious problems.  Under such a mo rtgage, the person who borrows money 
from another, under a mortgage ,  execute s an  ostensible sale deed and an 
agreement of reconveyance, but the intenti on of the parties is that it is to be 
treated as a mortgage.    
 
Under the proviso to sec. 58(c) in serted by the legislature in 1929, 
only when the agreement of reconveya nce is contained in the deed of 
ostensible sale, is the transaction treated as a mortgage.  Several owners who 
are under financial pressure fall into a trap when the two  documents are 
obtained separately by the purchaser. In that event, because of the proviso to 
Sec.58(c) there is no mort gage in the eye of the Law and hence no right of 
redemption. There is only a right to obtain a reconveyance.  
  
In a mortgage it is obvious that the full consideration is never paid.  
But when, in law, the tran saction when it is covered by two deeds is treated 
not as a mortgage but as a sale, the pur chaser gets the property for half the 
price or even less and the original owner is unable to get back the property 
by way of redemption.  The Commissi on proposes to examine and remedy 
the situation. 
 

 15 
 Under sec. 58(c) of the Transfer of Property Act, it is stated as 
follows: 
 
“Section 58(c): Mortgage by conditional sale : where the mortgager 
ostensibly sells the mortgage property – 
 
on a condition that on default of payment of the mortgage on a 
certain date, the sale shall become absolute, or 
 
on condition that on such payment being made, the sale shall 
become void, or 
 
on condition that on such payment being made, the buyer shall 
transfer the property to the seller, 
 
the transaction is called a mortgage by conditiona l sale and the 
mortgage, a mortgage by conditional sale: 
 
Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed  to be a mortgage, 
unless the condition is embodied in the document  which effects or 
purports to effect the sale.” 
 
As already stated, the proviso was in troduced in 1929 into the statute and 
has been the source of considerable injustice to unwary mortgagors. 
 

 16 
 One would think that the best solu tion could be to straightaway drop 
the proviso.  In fact, the West Bengal legislature incorporated sec. 37A into 
the Bengal Money Lenders Act to say th at “in the case of any loan secured 
by a mortgage and the mortgager ostensibly sells the mortgaged property on 
any of the conditions specified in sub clau se (c) of sec. 58 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to sec. 
58(c),  the transaction shall always be deemed to be a mortgage by 
conditional sale, even if the transacti on is effected by two separate deeds” 
viz., the ostensible sale deed and the agreement of reconveyance. 
 
 But the question is whether there can be any other remedy to enable 
the original owner to get back his property. 
 
 Before going into the question, it is necessary to notice that in law, it 
does not follow that if the stipulati on for reconveyance is embodied in the 
same document, the transfer is nece ssarily a mortgage (see Pandit Chunchun 
Jha vs. Sheik Ebadat Ali AIR 1954 S.C. 345).  The Supreme Court held that 
the party who claims the deed to be a mortgage, must discharge the burden 
by establishing that a mortgage was intended and not a sale.  Thereafter, it 
would be open to the other side to show that it was intended to be a sale and 
not a mortgage. 
 
 But where the sale and reconve yance are embodied in separate 
documents, proviso to sec. 58(c) stat es that the transaction cannot be a 
mortgage by conditional sale .  Further, oral evidence would also remain 

 17 
prohibited under sec. 92 of the Evidence Act to show that the transaction 
was intended to be a mortgage by conditional sale. 
 
 We shall now consider what reme dies can be provided by amendment 
of the Law.  
 
Where the sale and reconveyance are contained in different documents, 
though the plea of mortgage is thus ruled out altogether, the original seller 
can get back the property by seek ing specific performance of the 
reconveyance agreement if he complies with the conditions referred to in 
sec. 58(c) within the time stipulat ed. Such a case does not present any 
difficulty. 
 
 The difficulty arises only in a cas e where the original seller has not 
been able, may be for good reasons, to comply with the said conditions 
within the time stipulated. Does the prin ciple that time is not the essence of 
the contract in the case of contracts relating to immoveable property have 
any bearing on this question? 
 
Section 55 of the Contract Act states that “when a party to a contract 
promises to do a certain thing at or befo re a specified time, or certain things 
at or before specified times, and fails to do any such thing at or before the 
specified time, the contr act, or so much of it as has not been performed, 
becomes voidable at the option of the promisee, if the intention of the parties 
was that time shall be of the essence of the contract.”  

 18 
 
 True, so far as contracts of sale  of immovable property are concerned 
it is settled by the decision of the Privy Council in Jamshedji vs. Burjorji: 
AIR 1915 PC 83 that there is a presump tion that time is not the essence of 
the contract.  But, this is a rebuttable presumption and it is always open to a 
party to say that there were circumst ances in existence at the time  the 
contract which was entered into which ma ke it clear that the intention of the 
parties was that time should be the essence of the contract.  Take a case of a 
contract of sale of immovable prope rty where an owner has fixed up the 
marriage of his daughter and proposes to sell the property and use the 
consideration for the marriage expenditu re and where the purchaser agrees 
to pay the consideration well before the date of marriage.  In such a case, the 
said fact may be prima facie evidence that the date fixed for payment of 
consideration was the essence of the contract. 
 
 But the law, so far as contracts of reconveyance are concerned is 
different.  It has been held by the Fe deral Court, following the English law, 
that in such contracts, the conditions stipulated for getting back the property 
are in the nature of a concession gran ted to the seller by the purchaser and 
that if the conditions are not perform ed within the time stipulated, the 
concession lapses.  In other words, time is always the essence in contracts of 
reconveyance relating to immovabl e property (see
 Shanmugham Pillai  vs. 
Annalakshmi Ammal : AIR 1950 F.C. 38)  and Caltex (India) Ltd.  vs. 
Bhagwan Devi  (AIR 1969 S.C. 405) and Bismilla Begun  vs. Rehnitullah 
Khan (1998(2) SCC 226). 

 19 
 
 Therefore, the legal position is that where the sale and reconveyance 
are in separate documents and the origin al seller is not able to comply with 
the conditions specified in sec. 58( c) for seeking reconveyance, the 
‘concession’ lapses and the right to obtain reconveyance comes to an end .  
The principle that time stipulations ar e not normally the essence in contracts 
relating to immovable property, does not apply. 
 
 In the case of an ordinary agr eement of sale (i.e. other than 
revonveyance agreements), the dates fixe d for payment of consideration etc. 
are, in law, not the essence of the cont ract, the agreement c ontinues to be in 
force, and therefore parties could issue notices making time essence of 
contract.  It is only in cases where ther e is default even by the date so fixed 
under the notice that, the agr eement will come to an end.  But that is not the 
position in the case of agreements of reconveyance where the contract to 
reconvey simply lapses because of the default. 
 
 If, therefore, by default in confor ming to the conditions, the contract 
for reconveyance itself ceases to exis t, there is no question of seeking 
specific performance of such a contract of reconveyance nor any question of  
issuing a notice making time essence of the contract nor of filing a suit for 
specific performance within 3 years from the date of refusal to perform the 
contract or within three years of any stipulated date.  Once the contract of 
reconveyance ceases to be in existence, the question of filing a suit within 
the time prescribed in Art. 54 of the Limitation Act, 1963 for seeking 

 20 
specific performance, does not, theref ore, arise.  (see Pattay Gounder  vs. 
P.L. Bapuswami)(AIR 1961 Mad 276). 
 
 It is these legal principles that  have to be kept in mind before 
proposing  any remedy other than dropping the proviso in sec. 58(c).   
 
 First, we have to make a provi sion that the concession regarding 
reconveyance does not lapse due to non-performance of the conditions 
before the stipulated date or date s by the seller, where the sale and 
reconveyance are covered by separate documents.  Next , we have to make a 
provision giving time to the seller to pay up or deposit in a court, the 
consideration, if need be, with interest  from the date of default, to get back 
the property. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to add a further proviso in section 58(c) that 
where the sale and reconveyance are in  separate documents , the default in 
complying with the conditions stipul ated for reconveyance will not ipso 
facto put an end to the contract of rec onveyance and that the right to seek 
reconveyance can still be exercised.  It is  also proposed to provide that if the 
consideration is paid back within thr ee years from the date stipulated in the 
condition, together with interest on the amount of consideration at 12% per 
annum, computed from the date fixed fo r payment, till the date of payment, 
the seller could seek reconveyance. 
 

 21 
 The Commission is of the view that  a second proviso be added below 
sec. 58(c) as follows: 
“Provided further that where the condition is embodied in a document 
other than the one which effects or  purports to effect the sale, the 
concession granted in favour of the seller by the purchaser for 
obtaining a re-conveyance of the prope rty, shall be deemed to have 
not lapsed on account of non perform ance of the condition by the date 
stipulated, and if the seller pays to the buyer or deposits in a court, the 
consideration referred to in the sale-deed within three years of the date 
stipulated in the condition, together with interest at twelve percent. 
computed from the said date up to the date of payment or deposit, as 
the case may be, he shall be entitled to re-conveyance of the 
property.” 
 
 
 
 

 22 
3. Order 20 Rule 12 and Order 20 Rule 18 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure : 
 
 (a) Order 20 Rule 12: 
 
Order 20 Rule 12 of the Code refers  to the manner in which a decree 
may be passed in a suit for possession of immovable property and for rent/ 
profits.  Sub clauses (a) to (c) of s ub section (1) and sub section (2) of 020 
R12 refer to the procedure as follows: 
 
“R.12 Decree for possession and mesne profits .- (1)  Where a suit is 
for the recovery of possession of i mmoveable property and for rent or 
mesne profits, the Court may pass a decree – 
      
(a) for the possession of the property; 
(b) for the rents which have accrued on the property during the period 
prior to the institution of the suit or  directing an inquiry as to such 
rent; 
(ba) for mesne profits or directing an inquiry as to such mesne profits; 
(c) directing an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits from the institution             
of the suit until - 
 (i) the delivery of possession to the decree-holder, 
(ii) the relinquishment of possession by the judgment-debtor with 
notice to the decree-holder through the Court, or 

 23 
(iii) the expiration of three year s from the date of the decree, 
whichever event first occurs. 
(2) Where an inquiry is directed under Clause (b) or Clause (c), a 
final decree in respect of the re nt or mesne profits shall be 
passed in accordance with the result of such inquiry. 
 
 In practice, in most courts, a d ecree is passed for possession and so far 
as past or future rents or mesne profits are concerned, an inquiry is directed.  
Usually, this inquiry hangs on for y ears in as much the court appoints 
advocate commissioners, they give repor ts after recording evidence, the 
objections are heard by the courts and a final decree is later passed after 
several years.  Experience shows that  once a decree for possession is passed 
and preliminary decree for the rents/ mesne profits is passed, the matter is 
not given importance and final decrees us ually take 5 years or more to be 
passed after the preliminary decree.  The suit might have been pending for 
years earlier and if profits or rents are ascertained long after the preliminary 
decree, the delay leads to serious injustice. 
 
 Now when a suit for possession comes up for trial, if the parties are 
compelled to adduce evidence not only in regard to their right to possession 
but also in regard to the rents or mesn e profits for the period prior to suit (if 
any) up to the date of commencement of the trial, (which normally takes 
place several years after the institution of  the suit) and if the Court of first 
instance is required to record findings on the rents and profits that may be 
payable to the plaintiff for the peri od prior to suit up to the date of 

 24 
commencement of trial, irrespective of whether the Court of first instance is 
passing a decree for possession or not, such evidence and such findings 
which are on record will be for the benefit of the parties, in the event of any 
of the appellate courts subsequently setting aside a dismissal of the suit and 
granting a decree for possession.  In other words, there will be evidence and 
findings on record in regard to the in come or mesne profits payable to the 
plaintiff for the period prior to the su it up to the date of commencement of 
the suit and again up to the date of commencement of trial and these findings 
will be given by the Court of first inst ance even if it is not granting a decree 
for possession.  In case any appellate court grants a decree for possession the 
evidence and the findings in regard to  the income or mesne profits will 
enable the appellate court to pass appropriate orders in regard to such 
income or mesne profits. 
 
 In fact, it is a practice for courts in several States to record evidence of 
rents or mesne profits, at the trial, a nd give findings thereon, irrespective of 
whether a decree for possession is passed or not. 
 
 It is well settled that a decree can be partly preliminary and partly 
final.  Even in the case of suits fo r possession there may be more than one 
decree for possession where for example pa rties agree or there is no contest 
with regard to some items of the propert y.  In such cases there can be more 
than one decree for possession and more  than one preliminary decree in 
regard to inquiry into rents or mesne pr ofits of different items of property.  
Sometimes the inquiry into rents  or mesne profits may be done separately 

 25 
for different periods of time.  That is why it is stated that there can be more 
than one preliminary decree or more than one final decree. 
 We therefore propose to substitute  the following provision for Order 
20 Rule 12: 
 
Decree for possession and mesne profits 
 
“12. (1) Where a suit is for recovery of possession of 
immovable property and for rents or mesne profits, the 
parties shall, in addition to adducing evidence in the 
Court of first instance, as to their right to possession, 
adduce evidence also in rega rd to the rents or mesne 
profits for the period prior to the institution of the suit (if 
any claimed), up to the date of commencement of trial 
and the said Court shall, i rrespective of whether a decree 
for possession is passed or not, record findings as to the 
rent or mesne profits that may be payable to the plaintiff 
for the aforesaid period, in  the event of a decree for 
possession being passed..   
 
(2) The Court may pass a decree –  
 
(a) for possession of the property; 
 
(b) for the rents or mesne pr ofits which have accrued on the 
property during the period prior to the institution of the suit up 
to the date of commencement of trial; 
 
(c) directing an inquiry into the re nts or mesne profits from the date 
of commencement of trial until,   
      
(i)    the delivery of possession to the decree holder; or 
(ii) the relinquishment of possession by the judgment 
debtor with notice to the decree holder through 
the Court or 

 26 
(iii) the expiration of three years from the date of the 
decree whichever event first occurs. 
 
 
(3) Where an inquiry is directed under clause (c) of 
sub-rule (2), a final decree in respect of the rents or mesne 
profits, shall be passed in accord ance with the result of such 
inquiry. 
 
(4) Where an appellate Cour t orders an inquiry as 
stated in clause (c) of sub rule  (2), it may direct the Court of 
first instance to make the inquiry and in every case, the Court of 
first instance may, of its ow n accord and shall, whenever 
moved to do so by the decree hol der, inquire and pass a final 
decree. 
 
(5) A decree may be partly preliminary and partly 
final and there may be more than one preliminary decree and 
more than one final decree.” 
 
(b) Order 20 Rule 18: 
 Similarly in a partition suit, at the stage of pre liminary decree the 
quantum of share and the items of  property which are partable, are 
ascertained initially and under Order 20 Rule 18(2) a preliminary decree is 
passed together with a direction for accounts to be taken. 
Order 20 Rule 18 reads as follows: 
“Rule18. Decree in suit for partition of property or separate 
possession of a share therein .-  Where the Court passes a decree for 

 27 
the partition of property or for th e separate possession of a share 
therein, then,- 
(1) …………. 
(2) If and so far as such decree relates to any other immoveable 
property or to moveable prope rty, the Court may, if the 
partition or separation cannot be  conveniently made without 
further inquiry, pass a preliminary decree declaring the rights of 
the several parties interested in the property and giving such 
further directions as may be required.” 
The words in Order 20 Rule 18(2):  “g iving such further directions as 
may be required” are the source of the power of the Court to direct accounts 
to be taken. 
 In some cases, the plaintiff might have been out of possession of the 
entire joint property or might have been in possession of a small portion 
thereof or of an item which produced no income.  Another party might have 
been possession of the whole property or  an item which yielded income in 
excess of his share. 
 Experience shows that when under Order 20 Rule 18(2) a preliminary 
decree directs accounts to be taken subs equently, the final decree regarding 
the rents/profits collected by other pa rties is normally passed several years 
after the preliminary decree.  This again leads to lot of injustice. 
 When a suit for partition is filed, the parties may seek partition of 
movable as well as immovable property and also in regard to the income 
arising from various items of property prior to the suit, pending the suit until 
the property is divided by metes and bounds and delivered.   

 28 
 The current practice in several courts is to relegate the inquiry into the 
income to a stage after the passing of the preliminary decree for partition.  
Where the preliminary decree is passe d after several years either by the 
Court of first instance or by the appellate  Court, the inquiry into the income 
gets indifferently delaye d.  But if the parties are compelled to adduce 
evidence in regard to inco me, in the Court of first instance, for the period 
prior to the date of filing of the suit and up to the date of commencement of 
the trial, and if the trial Court is comp elled to give findings as the share of 
the various parties in the said income, irrespective of whether a decree for 
partition is passed or not, the said ev idence and the findings can help an 
appellate Court to give appropriate findings on the question of income, in the 
event of the appellate Court granting a preliminary decree for possession. 
 As stated in the discussion under Order 20 Rule 12, similarly in the 
case of partition suits also there can be more than one preliminary decree 
and more than one final decree such  as where a preliminary decree for 
partition is first passed in  regard to admitted or non contested items and a 
separate preliminary decree for partiti on is passed in rega rd to contested 
items.  Similarly in the case of inqui ry into the income from the joint 
property, there can be more than one  inquiry such as where one inquiry 
relates to certain properties while other inquiries relate to other properties, or 
where inquiries deal with income during different periods of time.  Further a 
decree can be partly preliminary and partly final. 
 So far as the inquiry into the in come from the date of commencement 
of trial up to the date of delivery of the property, that can be relegated to a 
separate inquiry. 

 29 
 In fact, in some courts in some States, it is the practice to ascertain 
rents/profits upto the date of the pre liminary decree straightaway when the 
preliminary decree is passed. 
 It is therefore proposed to substitute the following provision for sub 
section (2) of Order 20 Rule 18: 
 “Order 20 Rule 18:  (1) ……………………………………... 
 (2)(a) If and so far as such d ecree relates to any movable or 
immovable property, the parties shall, in addition to adducing 
evidence in the Court of first instan ce as to their right to partition, 
adduce evidence also in regard to the income for the period prior to 
the institution of the suit (if any claimed), upto the date of 
commencement of trial and the said  Court shall, irrespective of 
whether a preliminary decree for partition is passed or not, record 
findings as to the share of income th at may be payable to the plaintiff 
or other parties for the aforesaid pe riod, in the event of a preliminary 
decree for partition being passed. 
(b) The Court may, if the pa rtition or separation cannot be 
conveniently made without further inquiry, pass a preliminary decree 
declaring the rights of the several parties interested in the property and 
giving such further directions as may be required for partition of the 
property by metes and bounds and direct that an inquiry into the 
income from the property from the date of commencement of the trial 
shall be made.     
(c) Where inquiry is directed under sub-clause (b), parties may adduce 
evidence in regard to the division of the property by metes and bounds 

 30 
and also in regard to the income from the property for the period from 
the date of commencement of the tr ial and the Court shall pass a final 
decree in regard to the partition of the property by metes and bounds 
and the allotment thereof and also in regard to the share of the income 
to which each of the parties is  entitled for the period prior to 
institution of the suit, and for th e period during the pendency of the 
proceedings, upto and until the date of delivery of the property. 
 
(d)    Where a preliminary d ecree for partition is passed by an 
appellate Court and an inquiry is directed to be made under sub-
clause (b), the said Court may di rect the Court of first instance 
to make the inquiry and in every case, the Court of first instance 
may of its own accord and shall,  whenever moved to do so by 
any of the parties, inquire and pass a final decree. 
 
(e) A decree may be partly pre liminary and partly final and 
there may be more than one pre liminary decree and more than one 
final decree.” 
 
 

 31 
4. Certain transfers by to be punishable- Insertion of section 424 A 
in the Indian Penal Code( 45 of 1860): 
 In the last three decades, there is a surge in real  estate transactions all 
over the country.  Sale of  land, construction of multi-storied buildings and 
sale of flats has become a common f eature in every city or town.  Along 
with this business, malpractices have  also increased.  Builders purchase land 
or enter into development agreements with owners of land.  They then enter 
into agreements of sale with prospec tive buyers in respect of the land or in 
respect of buildings or flats already constructed or proposed to be 
constructed.  In the process, so me unscrupulous builders enter into 
agreements with more than one purchas er in respect of the same premises 
constructed, or proposed to be constructed.  While entering into such 
transactions, they do not disclose to the prospective purchasers that they 
have already entered into like agreements  with others earlier in regard to the 
same property.  This conduct of builder s is leading to endless litigation in 
courts and the litigation drags on fo r years.  The Skipper Company  case 
(Delhi Development Authority V. Sk ipper Construction Co (p) Ltd and 
Others (2000) 10 SC 130) handled by the Supreme Court is a case in point.  
In that case hundreds of purchasers had to suffer and the litigation regarding 
refund of amounts paid by them or in regard to specific performance is still 
pending. 
 The Commission is of the view that in such cases civil remedies alone 
are not sufficient and that a specific pr ovision in the Indian Penal Code in 
regard to such transactions is necessa ry.  Further the existing provisions in 
sec. 415 of Indian Penal Code, which may cover such cases,are not sufficient 

 32 
in as much as the corresponding provi sion for punishment in sec. 418 does 
not provide any term of minimum imprisonment.  It is proposed that in the 
case of offences like the one di scussed above, the punishment of 
imprisonment can be up to three years but subject to a minimum sentence of 
one year with fine.  
 
 It is also proposed that such transfers should be punishable per se if 
made knowingly and it is not necessary to prove fraud or dishonesty.   
 
 We propose to include a new provision in the Indian Penal Code 
dealing with the offence in the ma nner stated below. The Commission felt 
that  even though by and large, the Pe nal Code consists of offences for 
which mensrea is an important criterion and the offence of the nature 
referred to here does not depend upon proof of a mensrea, yet it was felt that 
the amendment should  be inserted in the Indian Penal Code.  We propose to 
add a new provision 424 A, I.P.C. 
 
It is, therefore, proposed to a dd the following section 424 A in the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860. 
  “ 424A.  Whoever, having en tered into any prior 
transaction or having created any prior encumbrance in relation to 
immovable property or having knowledge of the existence of such 
prior transaction or encumbrance, en ters into a subsequent transaction 
or creates a subsequent encumbran ce in favour of another person in 
relation to or affecting the whole or any part of such property and  -   
(a) knowingly fails to bring the existence of 
such prior transaction or prior encumbrance 
to the notice of such other person;  or  

 33 
 
(b) knowingly fails to incl ude a recital in regard 
to the existence of such  prior transaction or 
prior encumbrance in any subsequent 
instrument executed in relation to the whole 
or part of such property with such other 
person,  
 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than one year but which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
 
Explanation:- sale, agreement of sale, exchange, mortgage, lease, 
charge, or right to possession in rela tion to land or land with buildings 
or flats already in existence or buildings or flats proposed to be 
constructed shall be a “transacti on” or “encumbrance” within the 
meaning of this section.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 34 
5. Revenue Recovery Act, 1890: Purchase by Government  
where bidders are not forth coming when immovable property is 
put to public auction: 
 
 Where there are arrears of land reve nue or a sum recoverable as arrear 
of land revenue is due, the same can be recovered under the Revenue 
Recovery Act, 1890.  The Act is a Centr al enactment.  The Act extends to 
the whole of India. 
 
 The Commission proposes to deal with a peculiar problem which is 
sometimes faced where, when properties belonging to certain individuals are 
brought to sale by the Collectors for collection of money recoverable as 
arrears as land revenue, there are no bi dders forthcoming.  That happens 
sometimes when the person whose pr operties are proceeded against is 
powerful and he is able to  prevent anybody bidding at the public auction. 
 
 In such a situation, can the Govern ment or the public officer or local 
authority or other body to which the amounts are due, itself purchase the 
property?  If so, can they purchase at a nominal price and, if not, what is the 
reasonable procedure that is to be followed by the Collector? 
 
 In Rama Rao  vs. State of Bombay  (AIR 1963 SC 827) arrears of 
revenue payable by an excise contractor to the State Government were 
sought to be recovered under the Bombay Land Revenue Code (Act 5 of 
1879).  Certain items of property of th e defaulter were brought to sale under 

 35 
that Act and the State of Bombay pur chased two items for rupee one each.  
These sales were challenged in a declar atory suit filed by the defaulter.  The 
trial Judge held that the sales were  not in accordance with the procedure 
under the Act.  The High Court set aside the judgment and dismissed the suit 
but the Supreme Court set aside the judgment of the High Court and restored 
the judgment of the trial Court. 
 
 Various sections of the Bombay Land Revenue Code such as sections 
155, 165, 171, 172, 173, 175, 178, 179, 182 governed the procedure for sale.    
The procedure for sale prescribed unde r the Act is one by way of “public 
auction” by the Collector or by an Officer designated by him.  Rule 128 
required the Officer to fix an ‘upset’ price.  The proviso to the said Rule 
stated that ‘where in the opinion of the Collector, 
difficulty is likely to be 
experienced  in effecting speedy recovery  of the arrears or bidders are likely 
to be deterred from offering bids, no such upset price shall be placed’. 
 
 But, the problem arose because of sub Rule (4) of Rule 129.  That 
Rule while permitting the Collector or his nominee to bid in such 
circumstances provided that he may 
 
 “purchase the land or other property for a bid of rupee one.”  
 
In the above case, the Supreme Court did not go into the question whether 
Rule 129(4) was arbitrary (see para 25), but proceeded to examine whether 
the Rule was consistent with the provi sions of sec. 167 of the Code which 

 36 
required that the ‘sale shall be by public auction by such person as the 
Collector may direct’. 
 
 The Supreme Court pointed out th at in Bengal under sec. 58 of the 
Revenue Sale Law of the Bengal (Act 11 of 1859), the statute itself provided 
for a purchase by the Collector or  other officer, on account of the 
Government, for one rupee , where no bids were forthcoming. But in 
Bombay there was no such provisi on in the Code but provision was 
contained only in the Rules.  The Cour t, therefore, confined itself to the 
limited question whether under sec. 167 of  the Bombay Land Revenue Code 
which required sale by public auction, a Rule could be prescribed stating that 
the sale in favour of the officer could be for one rupee, whenever there were 
no bids forthcoming.  The Court  held that the sale for a pre-determined sum 
of one rupee could not be treated as a sale by public auction and declared the 
sale as void.   
 
 In the light of the above judgmen t, we shall examine the Revenue 
Recovery Act, 1890. 
 
 The first question is whethe r the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 
prescribes a sale by public auction.  Section 6 of the Act bears the heading: 
“Property liable to be sold under this Act”.  Sub section (1) of sec. 6 permits 
the Collector to issue a proclamati on prohibiting transfer etc. by the 
defaulter.  Sub section (2 ) permits the proclamation to be withdrawn in case 
the amount is recovered (i.e. otherwise than by sale) or 

 37 
 
 “the property has been sold for the recovery of that amount.” 
 
Sub section (3) makes all private sales after the proclamation void as against 
the State or against “any person who may purchase the property at a sale for 
the recovery of the amount stated in th e certificate.”  Sub section (5) states 
“the proclamation under the section shall be made by beat of drum or other 
customary method and by pasting a copy thereof on a conspicuous place in 
or near the property to which it relates”.   
 
Though there is no express provision th at the sale is to be by public 
auction, a reading of the various sub sections of section 6 in our view 
indicates that the sale is by public auction.  At any rate, the Act does not say 
that the Government or the public offi cer or the local authority or the body 
to which the money is due, can purch ase the property for one rupee if no 
bidders are forthcoming. 
 
 It is, however, necessary to pres cribe, for purposes of the Revenue 
Recovery Act, 1890, a procedure for sa le which will enable the immovable 
property to fetch a reasonable price.  It  is further necessary to provide for 
situations where no bids are forthcomi ng.  Such a situation may arise not 
only under normal conditions but also where bidders are deterred by the 
defaulters whose properties are brought to sale.  In such a situation the 
Government, or the public officer or th e local authority or the body to which 
the money is due, is unable to recove r the money due to it by conducting the 

 38 
public auction contemplated under the provisions of the Revenue Recovery 
Act.  In as much as there are no pr ovisions in the Act to cover such a 
situation it is proposed to make a provision similar to the one contained in 
Schedule 2 of the Indian Income Tax, 1961.   Under the rules contained in 
Schedule 2 of that Act it is provided that the sale officer shall indicate, in the 
sale proclamation, a reserve price below which no bid will be accepted.  In 
case there are no bidders who are prepar ed to offer a bid above the reserve 
price, the sale officer is permitted, under the rules, to give an option  to the 
Assessing Officer to purchase the property subject to such officer obtaining 
the prior sanction of the Chief Co mmissioner or Commissioner of Income 
Tax.  Obviously, the Assessing Officer must take the property by paying the 
amount specified as a reserve price.  It  is normally expected that the reserve 
price will be reasonable minimum price for which the property can be sold. 
 
 We propose however that under pr ovisions of the Revenue Recovery 
Act, the Collector should, after the proclamation for sale, put the immovable 
property to public auction at least on two occasions and if there are no 
bidders on each of the two occasions o ffering a bid equal to or above the 
reserve price, only in those circum stances can the Collector permit the 
concerned Government or public officer, or local authority or body, to which 
the moneys are due to purchase at the reserve price. 
 
 Under sec. 6 of the Revenue Rec overy Act, 1890 various provisions 
are made with regard to the sale of the property of the defaulter.  Sub section 
(1) of sec. 6 refers to the issue of the proclamation prohibiting the defaulter 

 39 
from transferring or charging any propert y.  Sub section (2) thereof permits 
withdrawal of such a proclamation in certain situations.  Sub section (3) 
states that transactions, if any, ente red into by the defau lter after the above 
proclamation will be void as against the Government and also as against any 
subsequent purchaser.  Sub section (4) provides that the sale shall be in 
relation to the interest of the defaulte r alone, in the property proposed to be 
sold.  Sub section (5) of sec. 6 is relevant for the present purpose and it reads 
as follows: 
“Section 6(5):  A proclamation under this section shall be made by 
beat of drum or other customary method or by the pasting of a copy 
thereof on a conspicuous place in or  near the property to which it 
relates”. 
 
 There is no section in the Act which requires the sale officers to fix 
reserve price nor is there any proce dure prescribed enabling the concerned 
Government, public officer or local authority or body, to which the monies 
are due, to purchase the pr operty at the reserve price in the event of there 
being no bidders forthcoming to purch ase the property.  We, therefore, 
propose to prescribe the procedure by in troducing sub sections (7), (8) and 
(9) in sec. 6 of the Act and also by adding sec. 6A as follows: 
 
(a) in section 6, after sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely :- 
 
 
“(7):  The sale proclamation shall specify, as fairly and 
accurately as possible –  

 40 
(a) the property to be sold; 
(b) the revenue or tax levi ed by any local authority 
upon the property or any part thereof; 
(c) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is 
ordered; 
(d) the reserve price belo w which the property may 
not be sold; and  
(e) any other fact which the Collector considers it 
material for a purchaser to know, in order to judge 
the nature and value of the property: 
Provided that where the property is 
divided into lots for the purpose of being 
sold separately, it sha ll not be necessary to 
make a separate proc lamation for each lot, 
unless proper notice of the sale cannot, in 
the opinion of the Collector, otherwise be 
given.   
 
(8) No sale of immovable prope rty shall, without the consent 
in writing of the defaulter, ta ke place until after the expiration 
of at least 30 days calcula ted from the date on which 
proclamation is made under sub-section (5). 
 
Provided that if the sale is adj ourned for want of bidders or for 
any other reason for a period longer than 30 days, a fresh 
proclamation of sale shall be issu ed as specified in this section 
unless the defaulter consents to waive it. 
 
(9) The sale shall be by public auction to the highest bidder 
and shall be subject to confirmation by the Collector:   
Provided that no bid under this 
section shall be accepted if the amount bid 
by the highest bidder is less than the reserve 
price specified in clause (d) of sub-section 
(7).” 
 
(b) after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- 
 

 41 
 
Government, local authority etc to  bid at reserve price in certain 
cases 
 
“6A.  Notwithstanding anything in section 6, where the sale of 
immovable property for which a re serve price has been fixed under 
clause (d) of sub-section (7) of section 6, has been postponed on two 
occasions for want of a bid or due to the fact that the bid was below 
the reserve price, it shall be lawf ul for the Collector to permit the 
concerned Government, public authority, public officer or local 
authority, to which the monies are due from the defaulter, to bid for 
the property at any subsequent sa le, at the reserve price  afore 
mentioned.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 42 
6. O XXXIV of the Code of Ci vil Procedure –dispensing with 
the age old procedure of a preliminary decree:  
 
In the cases of suits based on mo rtgage, O XXXIV of the Code of 
Civil Procedure contains a two stage pr ocedure of a preliminary decree and 
then a final decree.   This has led to lot of delay in the case of disposal of 
mortgage suits. 
 
 Such a two stage procedure is prescr ibed in the case of three types of 
suits based on mortgage: 
 
(I) In the case of suits for fore-closure, O XXXIV Rule 2 requires that the 
court pass a preliminary decree: 
 
(a) Ordering an account of what was due to the plaintiff at the date 
of suit towards the principal and interest, the costs of suit, if 
any, and other costs (with interest on such costs), or 
(b) Declaring the amount due on that day and 
(c) directing:  
(i) that, if the defendant pays into court the amount so found 
(i.e. under cl.(a) after accounts are taken) or declared due – pay 
the amount within six months fro m the date on which the court 
confirms and countersigns the accounts taken under clause (a) 
or from the date of  and on which such amount is declared due 
under clause (b), as the case may be, (and thereafter pay such 

 43 
amount as may be adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, 
charges or expenses as provide d in Rule 10, together with 
subsequent interest on such sums respectively as provided in 
Rule 11), the plaintiff shall deliv er up to the defendant etc., all 
documents in his possession or power and if necessary, 
retransfer the property. 
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found due or declared due 
under or by the preliminary decree is not made on or before the 
date so fixed, or the defendant fails to pay, within such time as 
the court may fix, the amount adjudged due in respect of 
subsequent costs, charges, expe nses and interest, the plaintiff 
shall be entitled to apply for a final decree debarring the 
defendant from all rights to redeem the property.   
O XXXIV Rule 3 then provides for th e passing of a final decree in the 
foreclosure suit. 
 
(II) Likewise, in a suit for sale, O XXXIV.R.4 provides for the passing of 
a preliminary decree and under Rule 5 for the passing of a final 
decree. 
 
(III) Again, in the case of a suit for redemption, O XXXIV Rule 7 provides 
for the passing of a preliminary decree and under Rule 8 for the 
passing of a final decree. 
 

 44 
 In as much as the two stage procedure has been the cause of 
unnecessary and avoidable delays, the Commission is of the view that the 
procedure may be modified and that the court should straightaway pass a 
single decree in each of these three types of mortgage suits. 
 
 The Kerala High Court has got th ese Rules amended in the year 1990 
and in that state, mortgage suits ar e now being disposed of faster than 
before.   
 
 Accordingly, we propose to replace Order XXXIV of the Code of 
Civil Procedure in full by order XXXIV as applicable in the State of Kerala 
as follows: 
 
“ORDER XXXIV- SUITS RELATING TO MORTGAGES 
OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
 
1. Parties to suits for foreclosure, sale and redemption – Subject to the 
provisions of this Code, all persons havi ng an interest either in the mortgage 
security or in the right of redemption shall be joined as parties to any suit 
relating to the mortgage. 
 
Explanation:-   A puisne mortgagee may sue for foreclosure or 
for sale without making the prior mort gagee a party to the suit; and a prior 
mortgagee need not be joined in a suit to redeem a subsequent mortgage. 
 
2. Decree in foreclosure suits.-  (1) In a suit for foreclosure, if the 
plaintiff succeeds, the court shall pass a decree –  
 
(a) declaring the amount due to the pl aintiff on the date of such decree 
for 
 

 45 
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage; 
(ii) the costs of the suit, if any, awarded to him; and 
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him 
up to that date in respect of his mortgage-security, together 
with interest thereon; and 
 
( b )  d i r e c t i n g  t h a t , -          
           
 (i) if the defendant pays into Court the amount so declared due 
with future interest and subsequent  costs as are mentioned in  rule 
7 on a day within six months from the date of the decree to be 
fixed by the Court, the plaintiff shall deliver up to the defendant, or 
to such persons as he appoints, all documents in his possession or 
power relating to the mortgaged prope rty, and shall, if so required, 
re-transfer the property to the defendant at the cost of the 
defendant free from the mortgage and from all encumbrances 
created by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him or, where 
the plaintiff claims by derived title, by those under whom he 
claims, and shall also, if necessary, put the defendant in possession 
of the property; and 
 
(ii)  if such payment is not made on or before the day fixed by 
the Court, the defendant and a ll persons claiming through or under 
him shall be debarred from all right s to redeem the property; and 
also if necessary the defendant shall put the plaintiff in possession 
of the property. 
 
(2) Where, in a suit for foreclosure, subsequent mortgages or 
persons deriving title from, or subrogated to the right of, 
any such mortgages are joined as parties, the Court shall 
adjudicate upon the  respective rights and liabilities of all 
the parties to the suit in the manner and form set forth in 
Form No. 9 or Form No. 10 as the case may be, of 
Appendix D with such variati ons as the circumstances of 
the case may require.    
(3) On the expiry of the date fixed for payment of the 
amount declared due to the mortgagee, all liabilities to 
which the defendant is subject in respect of the mortgage 

 46 
or on account of the suit shall be deemed to have been 
d i s c h a r g e d .         
      
3. Decree in suit for sale.-  (i) In a suit for sale, if the 
plaintiff succeeds, the Court sha ll pass a decree to the effect 
mentioned in clause (a) and sub-cl ause (i) of clause (b)  of sub-
rule (1) of rule 2 and also directing that, in default of the 
defendant paying as therein men tioned, the mortgaged property 
or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and that the proceeds of the 
sale (after deducting the there fro m the expenses of the sale) be 
applied in payment of what is d eclared due to the plaintiff as 
aforesaid, together with subse quent interest and subsequent 
costs, and that the balance, if a ny, be paid to the defendant or 
other persons entitled to receive the same; and that, in case the 
proceeds of such sale be insufficient to pay the amount due to 
the plaintiff, the balance, if  legally recoverable from the 
defendant otherwise than out of the property sold be paid by the 
defendant personally.       
      
(ii) In a suit for foreclosure, if the plaintiff succeeds and the 
mortgage is an anomalous mort gage, the Court may, at the 
instance of the plaintiff or of a ny other person interested either 
in the mortgage money or in the right of redemption, pass a like 
decree (in lieu of a decree for fo reclosure) on such terms as it 
thinks fit, including the deposit in Court of a reasonable sum 
fixed by the Court to meet the expenses of the sale and to 
secure the performance of the terms. 
 
(iii) Where in a suit for sale or  a suit for foreclosure in which 
sale is ordered, subsequent mortgages or persons deriving 
title from, or subrogated to the rights of, any such mortgages 
are joined as parties the Court shall adjudicate upon the 
respective rights and liabilities of all the parties to the suit in 
the manner and form set forth in Form No. 9, Form No.10 or 
Form No. 11, as the case may be, of Appendix D, with such 
variations as the circumstances of the case may require. 
   

 47 
4. Decree in redemption suit. -  In a suit for redemption, if the plaintiff 
succeeds, the Court shall pass a decree  
 
(a) declaring the amount due to the defendant at the date of such 
decree for 
 
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage; 
(ii) the cost of the suit, if any, awarded to him; 
(iii) other costs, charges a nd expenses properly incurred by 
him up to that date in respect of his mortgage – security, 
together with interest thereon: and    
  
( b )  d i r e c t i n g  t h a t ,          
  
 
(i) if the plaintiff pays into Court the amount so declared due 
with subsequent interest and costs as are mentioned in Rule 7, on a 
day within six months of the decr ee to be fixed by the Court, the 
defendant shall deliver up to the plai ntiff, or to such person as he 
appoints, all documents in his po ssession or power relating to the 
mortgaged property, and shall if so  required, re-transfer the property 
to the plaintiff at his costs, free from the mortgage and from all 
encumbrances created by the defe ndant or any person claiming under 
him, or, where the defendant cl aims by derived title, by those under 
whom he claims, and shall, if necessary, put the plaintiff in possession 
of the property; and 
 
(ii)  if such payment is not made on or before the da te so fixed, the 
plaintiff shall in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or an 
anomalous mortgage the terms of which provide for foreclosure 
only and not for sale, be debarre d from all rights to redeem the 
property and also, if necessary, put the defendant in possession 
of the mortgaged property; and th at if desired by the defendant 
in the suit itself, in the case of any mortgage other than a 
usufructuary mortgage, a mortga ge by conditional sale or such 
an anomalous mortgage as afor esaid the mortgaged property or 
a sufficient portion thereof be sold and the proceeds of the sale 
(after deducting therefrom the expe nses of the sale) be applied 

 48 
in payment of what is found due to the defendant, and the 
balance, if any, be paid to the plaintiff or other persons entitled 
to receive the same and that, in case the net proceeds of such 
sale be insufficient to pay the amount due to the defendant, the 
balance be paid by the plaintiff personally if the balance is 
legally recoverable from the plain tiff otherwise than out of the 
property sold.  
 
5.  Date of payment -  The Court may, upon good cause shown and upon 
such terms, if any, as it thinks fit,  postpone the date fixed for payment under 
this Order from time to time. 
 
6. Decree where nothing is found due or where mortgage has been 
overpaid -  Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained if it appears in 
a redemption suit nothing is due to th e defendant or that he has been 
overpaid, the Court shall pass a decree directing the defendant if so required, 
to     retransfer  the property and to  pay to the plaintiff the  amount which 
may be found due to him; and the plaintiff shall, if necessary, be put in 
possession of the mortgaged property. 
 
7. Costs of mortgagee s ubsequent to decree .-  In finally adjusting the 
amount to be paid to a mortgagee in case of a foreclosure, sale or redemption 
the Court shall, unless the conduct of the mortgagee has b een such as to 
disentitle him to costs, add to the mort gage money such costs of the suit and 
other costs, charges and expenses, as  have been properly incurred by him 
since the decree for forecl osure, sale or redemption up to the time of actual 
payment. 
 
8. Sale of property subject to prior mortgage.-  Where any property 
the sale of which is directed under this Order is subject to a prior mortgage 
the Court may, with the consent of th e prior mortgagee, direct that the 
property be sold free from the same givi ng to such prior mortgagee the same 
interest in the proceeds of the sale as he had in the property sold. 
 
9.  Application of proceeds.-  (i) Such proceeds shall be brought into 
Court and applied as follows:-        
    

 49 
First, in payment of all expenses incident to the sale or properly 
incurred in any attempted sale;        
    
Secondly, in payment of whatever is due to the prior mortgagee on 
account of the prior mortgage, and co sts, properly incurred in connection 
therewith; 
 
 Thirdly, in payment of all intere st due on account of the mortgage in 
consequence where of the sale was di rected, and of the suit in which the 
decree directing the sale was made; 
 
 Fourthly, in payment of the prin cipal money due on account of the 
mortgage; and 
 
 Lastly, the residue, if any, shall be  paid to the persons proving himself 
to be interested in the property sold, or  if there are more such persons than 
one, then to such persons according to their respective interests therein or 
upon their joint receipt. 
 
(ii) Nothing in this rule or in Ru le 8 shall be deem ed to affect the 
powers conferred by Section 57 of th e Transfer of Property Act,  
1882.”  
 
10. Suit for sale necessary for brin ging mortgaged property to sale.-  
Where a mortgagee has obtained a d ecree for the payment of money in 
satisfaction of a claim arising under the mortgage, he shall not be entitled to 
bring the mortgaged property to sale otherwise than by instituting a suit for 
sale in enforcement of the mortga ge, and he may institute such suit 
notwithstanding anything contained in Order II, Rule 2. 
 
11. Mortgage by the deposit of title deeds and charges.- All the 
provisions contained in this Order which apply to a       simple mortgage 
shall, so far as may be apply to a mortgage by deposit of title deeds within 
the meaning of section 58 and to a char ge within the meaning of section 100 
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.” 
     
 

 50 
 
7.  Amendment of Sec. 69 (2) of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932: 
 
 Chapter VII of the Indian Pa rtnership Act, 1932 deals with 
‘Registration of Firms’ and sections 56 to 65 deal with the procedure for 
registration.  Sec. 66 refers to inspec tion of register, sec. 67 to grant of 
copies to ‘any person’ and sec. 68 with  ‘rules of evidence’ .  The purpose of 
these provisions is to protect those who deal with partnership firms in 
various commercial transactions.  Third parties who deal with a firm by its 
name or with a partner or managing pa rtner who represent the firm must be 
in a position to know who are the partne rs, what are their respective shares 
in the partnership, the details, if any, as to the capital investment by partners, 
and the details, if any, of the partners hip property.  That would enable them 
to have an idea of the competence, status  and solvency of the partners of the 
firm. 
 
 In order to compel partners to regi ster their partnership firms so that 
all relevant information could be obtai ned by inspection of the register or by 
obtaining a certified copy thereof, legi slation is necessary.  Under the UK 
Registration of Business Names Act, 1916, there was a penal provision and 
also a provision which created certain di sability in respect of enforcement of 
certain rights in Courts.   But under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, there is 
no penal provision as in UK but there is only a provision which creates 
certain disabilities in respect of enforcement of rights in Courts.  
 

 51 
 Under the English Act of 1916, s ection 8  contained  the provision 
which created the disability.  It relate d to the ‘rights of that defaulter under 
or arising out of any contract made or entered into by or on behalf of such 
defaulters in relation to the business  in respect to the carrying on of which 
particulars were required to be furnished’. 
 
 The Indian Act of 1932 was the result of a Report of a Special 
Committee consisting of Shri Brojende r Lal Mitter, Sir Dinshaw Mulla, Sir 
Alladi Krishnaswami Iyer and Sir Art hur Eggar.  The Committee referred to 
the provisions of the UK Act of 1916 and felt that it would not be advisable 
to have any penal provi sion but that there should only be a provision 
creating a disability. This disability is contained in section 69. 
 
 The material part of sec. 69, whic h is relevant for the present purpose 
reads as follows: 
“Sec.69: Effect of non-registration :  (1) No suit to enforce a right 
arising from a contract  or conferred by this Act   shall be instituted in 
any Court by or on behalf of any pe rson suing as a partner in a firm 
against the firm or any person alleged to be or to have been a partner 
in the firm, unless the firm is regist ered and the person suing is or has 
been shown in the Register of Firms as a partner of the firm.  
(2) No suit to enforce a right arising from a contract shall be instituted 
in any court by or on behalf of a firm against any third party unless 
the firm is registered and the persons  suing are or have been shown in 
the Register of Firms as partners in the firm.   

 52 
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply also to a 
claim of set – off or other proceedings to enforce a right arising from a 
contract, but shall not affect - 
(a) …………  …………….. ……………. 
(b) …………  …………….. ……………. 
(4) This sec. shall not apply to -  
(a) …………  …………….. ……………. 
(b) …………  …………….. …………….” 
  
It will be noticed that sub-secti on (1) of section 69 bars suits by 
partners against the unregistered firm or  against any person alleged to be or 
to have been a partner of such a firm.  The bar applies to enforcement of -    
 
(A) right arising out of a contract, or  
(B) right conferred by the Partnership Act 
 
On the other hand, sub-section (2) of section 69 bars suits by or on 
behalf of the unregistered firm against ‘third parties’.  Section 2 (d) defines 
‘third party’ as a person who is not a partner of the firm.  Sub-section (2) 
bars enforcement of a  
 
 “right arising out of a contract” 
 
 Sub-section (3) applies the provisions  of sub-section (1) and (2) to a 
claim for set off or other proceeding to enforce a right arising from a 

 53 
, and, at the same time,    exempts certain rights, namely, right to 
seek dissolution or accounts or realiza tion of property of the firm – which 
are obviously rights created by the Act. 
 
 But the question has arisen whethe r the words ‘enforce a right under a 
contract’ would include rights arising out  of contracts with third parties not 
in connection with the day-to-day business or commercial transactions 
entered into by the unregistered firm.  In Raptakos Brett & Co. Ltd. vs. 
Ganesh Property (AIR 1998 SC 3085), when a landlord which was an 
unregistered firm, sought to evict a tena nt after expiry of the lease period, 
the tenant claimed that the suit was barred by section 69.  The Court held 
that sec. 69 was not applicable as the suit was for enforcement of a right to 
eviction created by the Transfer of Property Act.  In M/s Haldiram 
Bhujiawala vs. M/s Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar, AIR 2000 SC 1287, the 
suit was laid for permanent injunction not  infringe the right to a trade mark 
and for damages, etc.  The suit was filed by an unregistered partnership 
consisting of the heirs of a deceased partner, whose right to the trade mark in 
India (except West Bengal) were declar ed in a deed of dissolution of an 
earlier partnership.  While seeking injunction, the plaintiff firm 
(unregistered) pleaded its title to the trade mark and for that purpose, relied 
upon the dissolution deed.  The defendant  pleaded the bar of sec. 69 on the 
ground that the deed was a ‘contract’ and that no right arising out of a 
contract could be enforced by the unregis tered firm of the plaintiffs.   The 
Supreme Court while interpreting the wo rds ‘arising out of a contract’ in 
section 69 (2) held that, having regard  to the purpose behind section 69 (2) 

 54 
as could be gathered from the Repor t of the Special Committee, the bar 
under that sub-section applied to a suit by an unregistered firm against third 
parties for enforcement of a right arising out of a contract, provided that, as 
under the English Act, 1916, the contract  was one entered into with third 
parties in the course of its commercial transactions .  It was held that the 
dissolution deed on which the plaintiff- unregistered-firm relied upon was 
not such a contract but was a contract which was only evidence of the title of 
the plaintiffs to the trade mark.  In that connection, the court also referred to 
section 4 of the U.K.Business Na mes Act, 1985 which provides for 
dismissal of an action                  
“to enforce a right arising out of  a contract made in the course of 
business” 
and held that the words ‘arising fro m a contract’ must be construed 
accordingly as referring to a  contract made in the course of business .  This,  
it was held, could be gathered from the Report of the Special Committee 
which proceeded the 1932 Act which referred to the English Act of 1916’. 
 
 In as much as such  issues are arising in several cases and in 
acceptance of the view of the Supreme Court and to avoid any uncertainty, 
the Commission has proposed to add an  Explanation below sec. 69 as 
follows: 
“Explanation:  For the purposes of this section, the words ‘a right 
arising from a contract’ shall mean  a right arising from a contract 
made in the course of business” 

 55 
so that the bar is restricted to suits by the unregistered firm (or claims to set 
off or other proceedings) in respect of rights arising out of contracts entered 
into in the course of business and not to any and every contract which is not 
entered into in connection with the business of the unregistered firm.   

 56 
 
8. Non disclosure of factum of pending civil litigation to purchasers 
or transferees of immovable propert y to be an offence punishable 
with imprisonment and with fine-Insertion of section 4 24 B, 
Indian Penal Code, 1860: 
  
 Section 52 of the Transfer of Pr operty Act, 1882 declares that during 
the pendency of a suit or proceeding (which is not collusive) in which any 
right to immovable property is directly or specifically in question, the 
property cannot be transferred or othe rwise dealt with by any party to the 
suit or other proceedings so as to aff ect the rights of any other party thereto 
under any decree or order which may be  made, except when made under the 
authority of the Act and on such te rms as the Court may impose.  The 
section contains an Explanation as to what is meant by ‘pendency’ of a suit 
or proceeding. 
 
 The result of the section is that the rights of a purchaser/transferee of 
any part of such immovable property wh ich is the subject matter of a suit or 
proceeding is dependent upon the ultimate result of the suit.  If the transferor 
loses in the suit, the transferee ge ts nothing.  The provision is no doubt 
salutary as it tries to prevent par ties to litigation from alienating the suit 
properties and keeping them beyond the reach of the party who may 
ultimately succeed in the litigation. But,  as the law stands now, there is no 
provision which ensures that a purchaser will be informed by the seller about 
the pendency of any litigation in C ourt.  Unwary purchasers pay huge 

 57 
amounts of consideration and or are even put in possession whether under an 
agreement or a sale deed and they are never informed if there was any  claim 
with regard to the same property pending in a court of law. Further, in regard 
to transactions pendente lite, the plea of the transferee being a ‘bona fide 
purchaser without notice of the pendency of litigation’ is not available in 
view of the provision of section 52. 
 
 In order to protect such transf erees the Bombay Legislature (vide 
Bombay Act 41/1939) made an amendmen t to section 52, stating that the 
provisions of section 52 shall apply onl y if a general notice regarding the 
pendency of the suit or proceeding is registered under section 18 of the 
Indian Registration Act, 1908 giving the description of the immovable 
property and the court in which the matte r is pending, the date of filing of 
the suit, etc.  If any transfer is made  before registering such a notice, the 
transferee will not suffer the disability created by the section.   
 
 The Law Commission in its 157 th Report recommended that section 
52 of the Transfer of Property Act,  1882 be amended on the model of the 
Bombay Act 14/1939.  The proposal fo r amendment to section 52 is  
awaiting introduction in Parliament. 
 
 The Commission is of the view th at apart from amending section 52 
on the model of Bombay Act 4/1939, it is also necessary to insert a new  
new provision as Section 424 B, Indi an Penal code, 1860 as recommended 
in the 157 th Report to   prevent such action by parties to suits or other 

 58 
proceedings. This, it is felt, can be achieved by providing punishment up to a 
maximum of three years subject to a minimum punishment for a period of 
one year together with fine whenever the non-disclosure of such pendency of 
suits or proceedings in Courts  is ‘dishonest or fraudulent’.  No doubt, such 
cases may fall under section 415 (which  defines ‘cheating’) read with 
section 418.  But under section 418 puni shment by way of imprisonment is 
not mandatory.  Section 418 refers to cheating with knowledge that wrongful 
loss may ensue to person whose interest the offender is bound to protect.  
Again section 423 does not apply as it refers to dishonest or fraudulent 
execution of deed of transfer containi ng a false statement of consideration 
and does not also cover the type of transactions which are under 
consideration, namely, where there is suppression of facts relating to 
pendency of litigation.   
 
 It is proposed that for the purpose of the proposed section, it is 
sufficient if it is done knowingly and not  necessarily with a dishonest or 
fraudulent intention.  It is proposed to include the proposed provision in 
I.P.C.  section 424 B despite that mens rea is not one of the criteria referred 
to in the proposed Section. 
 
It is, therefore, proposed to add section 424 B  in the I.P.C. as follows: 
 
  “ 424B. Whoever knowingly  executes any instrument- 
 
(a) which is or purports to be a transfer of immovable 
property or any interest therein;or 
 

 59 
(b) which is or purports to be an agreement to transfer 
any immovable property or any interest therein; or  
 
(c) which creates   or purports to create a charge over 
immovable property, and      
 
(i) fails to refer to the pendency of 
any suit or proceeding, in which any 
right to such property is in question, 
in the said instrument; and  
 
(ii) executes such instrument 
without the authority of the court in 
which any suit or proceeding in 
relation to or affecting the whole or 
any part of such property is pending,  
 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than one year but which may extend to  three years and shall also be  
liable to fine.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 

 60 
9. Right of a person injured in an accident to sue for damages to 
survive to his legal representatives in  the case the injured person dies 
thereafter on account of a cause no t relatable to the accident –  
Amendment  proposed to sec. 306 Indian Succession Act, 1925, sec. 
110A of Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 a nd sec 166 of Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988. 
 
 In the case of a person injured in an accident, the law of torts provides 
a remedy in case negligence of the tort-feasor is established.  Apart from 
that, the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 and the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
contain different statutory remedies for obtaining damages.  Under the 1988 
Act, section 140 refers to damages payable even if no fault (or negligence) is 
proved and this is in addition to dama ges that could be awarded on the basis 
of negligence of the tort-feasor under sec. 141.  Section 163A was 
introduced in 1994, and it also permits  damages on no fault basis to be 
computed in accordance with a structural formula, and this will be in 
substitution of the right to seek damages, as recently held by the Supreme 
Court.(K.Nandakumar V. Managing Director, Thanthal Periyar Transport 
Corporation (1996) 2 SCC 736) 
  In all the above situations, whethe r the right to claim compensation is 
conferred by the law of torts or by th e statute, question arises whether upon 
the demise of the injured person on a date subsequent to the accident; his 
legal representatives can initiate or continue an action for compensation. 
 
On the basis of the maxim ‘ actio personalis moritur cum persona’ , 
several High Courts have ta ken the view that the right of the injured person 
to seek damages is personal to him and the claim, therefore, cannot be 

 61 
initiated or continued by his legal representatives , after the death of the 
injured person.  A Full Bench of the Karnataka High Court in its judgment in 
Kannamma vs. Dy. General Manager ILR 1990 Karn. 4300 (FB) has held so 
and, in fact, recommended that the pr ovisions of sec. 306 of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 and of sec. 110A of  the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939  be 
amended so as to permit the survival of the right of the injured person to 
seek compensation to his legal repres entatives, irrespective of whether the 
cause of death was relatable to the accident or not.  In a recent judgment in 
Baburao Sataba Manabutaker  Vs. Doreswamy (MFA 4072/1998 dated 
4.9.2001), a learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court while 
dismissing a claim under sec. 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 lamented 
the delay in amending the law in this be half and pointed out that the delay is 
resulting in grave injustice. While recommending legislation, a copy of the 
judgment has been forwarded to the Law Commission.  The learned Judge 
has pointed out that the Kerala legi slature has passed the Kerala Torts 
(Miscellaneous provisions) Act, 1976 to rectify the position.  A reading of 
the Kerala Act, 1976, however, shows that it is based entirely upon the 
provisions of the English Act, name ly, the Law Reforms (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1934 with some additi onal provisions and it covers actions 
for damages in case of all torts (except one or two) and states that the cause 
of action to seek damages shall surviv e to the legal representatives of the 
victim of the tort. 
 
 The Commission has considered whether a law on the model of the 
Kerala Torts (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976 to cover all cases of torts 

 62 
is to be enacted or whether simple amendments to sec. 306 of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 and the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (in respect of which 
some claims may still be pending in courts and which could abate upon the 
death of the injured person) and the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, will suffice. 
 
 As stated above, the Kerala Act of 1976 applies to various torts and is 
based on the English Act of 1934.  We  find that subsequently further 
amendments in this behalf have b een made in England by the Law Reform 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1970 and the Administration of Justice Act, 
1982.  Some of these amendments have  been made to get over or clarify 
judgments of the English courts. 
 
 The Commission is of the view that  a comprehensive study of the law 
relating to abatement of right to compensation in the case of all torts can be 
taken up separately and that having regard to the urgency in remedying 
injustice in respect of claims under th e Motor Vehicles Acts, some simple 
amendments can be proposed in sec. 306 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 
and in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (i n respect of pending claims) and the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, immediately. 
 
 We shall, therefore, deal w ith these amendments seriatum: 
 
(A) Section 306 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 and illustration (i) 
below the section: 
 

 63 
 Section 306 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 states that among 
certain other rights, the right of th e injured person to seek damages is 
personal to him and will not survive to  his legal representatives.  This 
position so far as accident compensa tion is concerned, is no longer 
acceptable in today’s social jurisprudence.  In fact, such a provision has been 
given up in England as far back as in 1934.   Indian courts have also felt that 
this provision in sec. 306 which does not conform to today’s standards of 
justice and has to be deleted.  We are also of the view that this provision is 
too anachronistic to be allowed to continue in the statute book. 
 
  Sec. 306 as it now stands reads as fo llows; in so far as it is relevant for 
the present purpose: 
 
“Section 306:  All demands whatsoever and all rights to 
prosecute…any action or special pro ceedings existing in favour of…a 
person at the time of his decease,  survive to…his executors or 
administrators; except causes of ac tion for defamation, 
assault as 
defined in the Indian Penal Code or other personal injuries not causing 
death of the party.” 
 
There is an illustration below sec. 306 and it reads as follows: 
 
“Illustration (i):  A collusion takes place on a railway in consequence 
of some negligent  or default of an official, and a passenger is severely 

 64 
hurt, but not so as to cause death.  He afterwards dies without having 
brought any action.  The cause of action does not survive.” 
 
We are of the view that the underlined words in sec. 306, namely,  
 
(a) “assault as defined in the Indi an Penal Code, or other personal 
injuries not causing the death of the party” shall be omitted; 
  
(b) illustration (i) shall be omitted 
 
(B) Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988: Amendment to provide 
for initiation/continuation of a proceeding under the Act by the legal 
representatives of an injured person upon his death even if the death 
has no relation or nexus with the accident: 
 
 The existing provisions of sec. 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
are as follows in so far as they are relevant: 
 
“Section 166:  An application for compensation arising out of an 
accident of the nature specified in sub section (1) of sec. 165 may be 
made –  
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or 
(b) by the owner of the property; or 
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the 
legal representatives of the deceased; or 

 65 
(d) by any agent duly authorized by the person injured or all or any 
of the legal representatives of the deceased, as the case may be: 
 
provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have 
not joined in any such application for compensation, the application 
shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal 
representatives of the deceased and the legal representatives who have 
not so joined, shall be impleaded as respondents to the application.” 
 
Sub section (2) and (3) of sec. 166 deal with the form, the time limit for 
filing the application and sub section (4 ) requires the police officer to file a 
copy of the report before the Claim’s Tribunal. The Tribunal may, if it thinks 
necessary so to do, treat the report as if it were an application for 
compensation under the Act. 
 
In the light of what we have said ear lier, we propose insertion of a new sub 
section (5) in sec. 166 as follows: 
 
“(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any law for the time 
being in force, the right of a person to claim compensation for injury 
in an accident shall upon the death of the person injured, survive to his 
legal representatives, irrespective of  whether the cause of death is 
relatable or had any nexus with the injury, or not.  
 

 66 
 Provided that in cases where the cause of death is not relatable 
or has no nexus with the injury, the compensation shall be restricted to 
the period between the date of inju ry and the date of death of the 
person injured. 
 
(C) Section 110A of the Motor Vehicl es Act, 1939 (as a pplied to pending 
proceedings in Tribunal or Courts: Transitory provision to be made to 
provide for initiation/continuation of a proceeding under the Act by 
the legal representative of the injured person upon his death, even if 
the death has no relation or nexus with the accident: 
 
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 has been repealed by the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 but it is possible that several pr oceedings initiated under that Act may 
still be pending either before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal or at the 
appellate stage.  Such proceedings are obviously saved under sec. 217(2) of 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.   
 
By way of abundant caution and with  a view to cover such pending 
cases we recommend the following provision to be made. 
 
“Section 217A– Certain pending proceedings relating to 
compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 not to abate: 
 
“Notwithstanding anything contained in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 
or any law for the time being in fo rce, in respect of claims for 

 67 
compensation under the said Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 which are 
pending at any stage, at the date of commencement of this Act in any 
Tribunal or Court, the right of  an injured person to claim 
compensation shall upon the death of the injured person survive to his 
legal representatives, irrespective of whether the cause of death was 
relatable or had any nexus with the injury or not, 
 
 Provided that in cases where the cause of death is not relatable 
or has no nexus with the injury, th e compensation shall be restricted 
for the period between the date of in jury and the date of death of the 
person injured.” 

 68 
 
10. O 38 Rule 5 and Rule 6:  Whe ther procedure of prior show cause 
notice to defendant in cases of ‘condi tional attachment’ can result in the 
final order becoming infructuous? 
 
 Attachment of the defendant’s  movable or immovable property 
pending decision in the suit is a device by which the Code of Civil 
Procedure 1908 protects the interests of a plaintiff in the event of a decree 
being passed in his favour ultimately.   The attachment prevents the 
defendant from disposing of the whole or part of his property or removing 
the said property from the jurisdiction of the Court.  
 
 The Supreme Court pointed out in Padam Sen vs. State of U.P.  (AIR 
1961. SC 218) that the Court passes such  orders to see that the ultimate 
decree does not become infructuous.  Again in Govindram vs. Devi; (AIR 
1982 SC 989), the Supreme Court observed: 
 
“The sole object behind the order levying attachment before judgment 
is to give an assurance to the plaintiff that his decree if made would be 
satisfied.  It is a sort of a guarantee against decree becoming 
infructuous for want of property available from which the plaintiff can 
satisfy the decree.” 
 
 Attachment before judgment is of two kinds.  One is where the Court 
upon being satisfied that such attachment is necessary,  feels that there is no 

 69 
serious urgency and that the defendant may first be asked to show cause why 
an order should not be passed asking him to furnish adequate security for the 
suit claim, or to produce and place the property before the Court by a certain 
date.  The other is where prior notice may indeed enable the defendant to 
dispose of  or remove the property from the jurisdiction of the Court before 
the Court could receive the defendant’s  reply to the show cause notice and 
before it passes an order of attachment before Judgment.    This can happen 
where the property sought to be attached  is movable property such as cash, 
jewellery, furniture, fabrics, machinery not embedded into the earth or which 
can be easily dismantled.  This may also  happen, in certain situations, in the 
case of immovable property.  In the second type of cases, the Court must 
have the power to pass an immediate order of attachment before judgment 
which is provisional in nature with a simultaneous notice to the defendant as 
to why the interim order of attach ment should not be confirmed unless 
adequate security is furnished. This is what is really meant by the words 
‘conditional attachment’ though the word ‘conditional’ is used to describe an 
interim or provisional attachment which becomes plenary afterwards.  
 
 In Ramanatha Iyer’s Law Lexicon (2 nd Ed. 1997, p. 164) this 
distinction is pointed out and the m eaning of ‘conditional attachment’ is 
explained by referring to a judgment of  the Bombay High Court  (ILR  5 
Bom 643) as follows: 
 
“The expression ‘conditional attachme nt’ might mean an attachment 
to be made conditionally on the security not being furnished nor cause 

 70 
shown by the prescribed day, or it might mean an immediate 
attachment of a provisional kind conditional to become plenary  if 
security should not be furnished,  or cause shown according to the 
terms of the order.  The form at  the end of the Code of Civil 
Procedure Code for a provisional a ttachment show that the latter was 
the intention of the legislature” 
 
 We shall first extract O 38. R 5 and R 6 as they stand today. 
 
R.5. Where defendant may be called upon to furnish security for 
production of property.- 
(1) Where, at any stage of a suit, th e Court is satisfied, by affidavit or 
otherwise, that the defendant, with in tend to obstruct or delay the execution 
of any decree that may be passed against him,- 
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or 
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from 
the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, 
the Court may direct the defendant, within  a time to be fixed by it, either to 
furnish security, in such sum as may be specified in the order, to produce 
and place at the disposal of the Court,  when required, the said property or 
the value of the same, or such portion th ereof as may be sufficient to satisfy 
the decree, or to appear and show cause why he should not furnish security. 
(2) The plaintiff shall, unless the C ourt otherwise directs, specify the 
property required to be attached and the estimated value thereof. 

 71 
(3) The Court may also in the order direct the conditional attachment of 
the whole or any portion of the property so specified. 
(4) If an order of attachment is made without complying with the 
provisions of sub-rule (1) of this rule, such attachment shall be void. 
 
R.6 Attachment where cause not shown or security not furnished.- 
(1) Where the defendant fails to furnis h the security required, within the 
time fixed by the Court, the Court may order that the property specified, or 
such portion thereof as appears sufficient to satisfy any decree which may be 
passed in the suit, be attached. 
(2) Where the defendant shows such  cause or furnishes the required 
security, and the property specified or any portion of it has been attached, 
the Court shall order the attachment to  be withdrawn, or make such other 
order as it thinks fit. 
 
 It will be seen from O 38 R5 that the legislature provided in Sub rule 
(1) of O 38 R 5 for a situation where pr ior notice is issued before making an 
order of attachment before Judgment. Sub-rule (3) of O 38 R5 refers to 
‘conditional attachment’ without mentioning what it actually is.  Its meaning 
can be gathered only from the second pa rt of Form 5 of Appendix F which 
refers to immediate or provisional att achment being made together with a 
show cause notice. 
 
 The word ‘conditional attachment’ us ed in sub rule (3) of Order 38 
Rule 5, has given an impression th at the attachment is conditional upon 

 72 
security being offered.  As pointed  out in Ramanath Aiyar’s Law Lexicon 
referring to the Bombay case that that is  not the true meaning of the word.  
In fact, the proper meaning of the word ‘conditional’ here is ‘interim’.  In 
other words, it was intended by sub rule  (3) of Order 38 Rule 5 that the 
Court must have power, in certain cases , to first pass an order of interim 
attachment so that the property may not  be moved outside the jurisdiction of 
the Court or may not vanish.  In such  a case, the Court can give a notice 
simultaneously requiring the person con cerned to show cause why interim 
attachment should not be vacated. 
 
 In 1976, sub rule (4) was added in  O 38 R 5 to say that any such 
attachment without prior notice as c ontemplated by sub rule (1) will be 
“void”.  This provision was introduced to resolve the conflict in judgments 
as to whether, the attachment would be void or voidable, where notice 
procedure under sub-rule (1) is not followed. 
 
 But, in as much as sub rule (4 ) follows both sub rules (1) and (3), 
some Courts have interpreted that prior notice under sub rule (1) is necessary 
even in cases of ‘conditional attachme nt’ falling under sub rule (3), i.e. 
where immediate provisional attachment is necessary.  (in the  recent 
judgment of the Supreme Court in  Rajinder Singh v. Ramdhan Singh, 2001 
(6) SCC 213, the Court merely referred to sub rule (4) of Order 38 Rule 5 
but did not have any occasion to go in to the question whether even in the 
case of interim attachment (loosely called conditional attachment in sub rule 
(3) of Order 38 Rule 5) a prior notice as contemplated by the said sub rule 

 73 
was necessary.  The Commission is of the view that the Supreme Court, in 
the above case had not laid  down any principle that even in the case of 
interim attachment a prior notice as contemplated by sub rule (1) of Order 38 
Rule 5 is necessary.  On the other ha nd, High Courts have clearly laid down 
the view that sub rule (4) does not a pply to cases of conditional attachment 
under sub rule (3) and that in such cases, a post decisional opportunity is 
provided by sub rule (2) of O 38 R 6 wh ich enables the defendant to show 
cause and permits the Court to wit hdraw the conditional attachment (see 
N.R.Thiruvengadam Vs. Kaliannan AIR 1984 Mad 112). 
 
 The Form 5 of Appendix F to the Code which gives the format for 
‘attachment before judgment’ refers in the first Part to ‘attachment before 
judgment’ and in the second part to ‘conditional attachment’.  The 
combination of both in a single form  has also created considerable 
confusion. 
 
 The Commission is of the view that in cases where immediate 
attachment is felt necessary by the Court,  if it is laid down that prior notice 
to the defendant under sub rule (1) of Order 38 Rule 5 is necessary, there is 
every likelihood that the ultimate order of  attachment that man may be made 
may become infructuous and the ultim ate decree may also be rendered 
useless.  The Commission is of the view  that in such cas es, the Court must 
have powers to pass an order of ‘inter im attachment’ coupled with a notice 
to show cause why the interim attach ment should not be confirmed unless 
security is furnished.  In case sufficient cause is shown as to why the interim 

 74 
attachment should not be confirmed or wh ere adequate security is furnished, 
the interim attachment can be withdraw n by the Court.  As in cases of ex 
parte interim injunction under O 39 R 1, a procedure for ex parte attachment 
before judgment followed by a notice to furnish security or to show cause is 
perfectly consistent with principles of due process and natural justice.  Post-
decisional opportunity is permissible under our natural justice jurisprudence. 
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to recast O 38 R 5 and R 6 and introduce 
Form 5 and Form 5A in Appendix F, the former to cover cases of attachment 
before judgment with prior notice a nd the latter to deal with interim 
attachment first and opportunity thereafter. 
 
For achieving the above object, it is not necessary to amend sub rule 
(1) or (2) of Order 38 Rule 5, but it is  necessary to omit the existing sub rule 
(3) of Order 38 Rule 5 and instead bri ng in the existing sub rules (1) and (2) 
of Order 38 Rule 6 as sub rules (3) a nd (4) of Order 38 Rule 5.  Thereafter 
sub rule (4) of Order 38 Rule 5 can be re-designated as sub-rule 5 of Order 
38, Rule 5.   
We can then have a separate rule 6 of Order 38 which deals 
exclusively with attachment before judgment. 
With the above changes, Order 38 Rule 5 and Rule 6 will read as 
follows:  
“ 5.  Where defendant may be ca lled upon to furnish security for 
production of property –  

 75 
(1) Where, at any stage of a suit, the Court is satisfied, by affidavit 
or otherwise, that the defendant, w ith intent to obstruct or delay the 
execution of any decree that may be passed against him -  
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his 
property, or   
(b) is about to remove the whol e or any part of his property 
from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court,  
the Court may direct the defendant, within  a time to be fixed by it, either to 
furnish security, in such sum as may be  specified in the order, or to produce 
and place at the disposal of the court, when required, the said property or the 
value of the same, or such portion thereo f as may be sufficient to satisfy the 
decree, or to appear and show cause why he should not  furnish security.   
 
(2) The plaintiff shall, unless the c ourt otherwise directs, specify the 
property required to be attached and the estimated value thereof.  
 
(3) Where the defendant fails to show  cause or, as the case may be, fails 
to furnish the security required, within the time fixed by the Court, the Court 
may order that the property specified or such portion thereof as appears 
sufficient to satisfy any decree which may be passed in the suit, be attached. 
 
(4) Where the defendant shows such  cause or furnishes the required 
security, and the properties specified or any portion of it have been attached, 
the Court shall order the attachment to  be withdrawn, or make such other 
order as it thinks fit. 

 76 
 
(5) If an order of attachment is made without complying with the 
provisions of sub rule (1) of this rule, such attachment shall be void.” 
 
 We proposed a separate rule as far as interim attachment is concerned 
as rule 6 of Order 38.  It will read as follows: 
 Interim attachment before judgment  
 
6.  (1) Where the court is satisfied, at any stage of a suit, by affidavit 
or otherwise that the conditions referre d to in sub-clauses (a) or (b) of 
sub-rule (1) of rule 5 are satisfied  and that there is likelihood of the 
property or part thereof being imme diately disposed of or removed 
from the local limits of the jurisd iction of the court in case the 
procedure under sub rule (1) of rule 5 is to be followed, the court may, 
for brief reasons to be recorded, pa ss an order of interim attachment 
without following the said  procedure and shall simultaneously issue a 
notice to the defendant ,to show cause why the order of interim 
attachment should be withdraw n altogether or upon furnishing 
security.. 
 
(2) Where the defendant shows cau se or furnishes the required 
security within time fixed by the Cour t, the Court shall direct that the 
order of interim attachment shall st and withdrawn or make such other 
order as it may think fit. 
 
(3) Where the defendant fails to s how cause or fails to furnish the 
security within the time fixed by th e court, the court may confirm the 
interim attachment of the property sp ecified or such portion thereof as 
appears sufficient to satisfy any decree which may be passed in the 
suit. 
 
(4) The order of interim attachment  shall not be deemed to be void 
on the ground that no prior notice to show cause as contemplated by 
sub rule (1) of Rule 5 has been issu ed before such an order of interim 
attachment was passed.” 

 77 
 
  
 
(D) in  Appendix F, for Form No.5, the following Forms shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
    
 
    
                                                 “No. 5 
ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT AFTER PRIOR NOTICE 
CALLING FOR SECURITY FOR FULFILLMENT OF DECREE 
     (Order XXXVIII r. 5)     
 
To 
 The Baillif of the Court, 
 Whereas …..has proved to the sa tisfaction of the Court that the 
defendant in the above suit……………; 
 These are to command you to call upon the said defendant …… 
on or before the….day of…..200 , e ither to furnish security for the 
sum of Rs…….. or to produce and place at the disposal of this court 
when required……..or the value thereo f, or such portion of the value 
as may be sufficient to satisfy th e decree that may be passed against 
him; or to appear and show cause why he should not furnish security; 
and you are further commanded to return  this warrant on or before the 
………day of …….20…with an endorsement certifying the date on 
which and the manner in which it ha s been executed, or the reason 
why it has not been executed; 

 78 
 Given under my hand and seal of the Court this……day of 
……..20…. 
………. Judge” 
 
No. 5A 
INTERIM ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT WITH 
SIMULTANEOUS NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE. 
        (Order XXXVIII r. 6) 
 
 
“To 
 The defendant 
  
 Whereas …… has proved to the satis faction of the Court that the 
defendant in the above suit ………..; 
 You are hereby commanded, by wa y of interim attachment, until 
further orders of the Court, to produce and handover the following movable 
property referred to in th e Schedule hereto annexed to the Bailiff to enable 
him to keep the property under safe and secure custody   
[and/or 
 You are hereby prohibited and restrained, by way of interim 
attachment until further orders of th e Court, from transferring or charging 
the immovable property referred to in the Schedule hereto annexed by sale, 
gift or otherwise and that all persons be, and that they are prohibited and 
restrained from receiving the same by purchase, gift or otherwise,] 

 79 
And you may show cause on or before ……day of….. 20…..why this 
interim order of attachment should not be withdrawn altogether or upon 
furnishing security for a sum of Rs…… 
 
 Given under my hand and seal of the Court, this …..day of……20….. 
 
          J u d g e ”  
 

 80 
1 1 .      C o p i e s  o f decrees or orders of Co urts affecting immovable 
property and attachments of immovable property by Courts under 
Revenue Recovery Act to be notified to Registration Officers under the 
Registration Act, 1908 to be entered in Book 1. 
 
 Section 89 of Registration Act, 1908 deals with “Copies of certain 
orders, certificates and instruments to be sent to registering officers and 
filed.”  Sub section (1) of sec. 89 re fers to loans granted under the Land 
Improvement Loans Act, 1883 sub secti on (2) deals with Sale Certificates 
issued under CPC, sub section (3) deals with loans granted under the 
Agriculturists Loan Act, 1884.  Sub sec tion (4) deals with sale certificates 
issued by Revenue Officers.  These will be entered in Book I which can be 
inspected under sec. 57 or copies of regist er obtained, in so far as they relate 
to any particular property. 
 
 The State of Kerala has, by Kera la Act 7/1968 deleted sub section (1) 
and sub section (3) and added sub sec tion (5) prescribing that copies of 
decrees of court affecting immovable property and of attachments made by 
courts under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or under the Revenue 
Recovery Acts in force, be communicat ed to registering officers for purpose 
of being filed in Book No.1. 
 
 Other States have made other amendments to sec. 89 to cover 
communication of information relating to loans by co-operative banks or 

 81 
other banks etc.  Several States have al so enacted sec. 89A to enable rules to 
be made for purposes of obtaining copies from the Book I. 
The Commission is of the view that  provisions as introduced in the 
State of Kerala by Kera la Act 7/68 should be introduced in the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908.  Once the above t ype of documents are dealt with as 
above, copies can be obtained under sec. 57 of the Act. 
 The proposed section 89A and 89B are as follows: 
 
Copies of Court decrees, a ttachment orders, written 
demands under Revenue Recov ery Act to be sent to 
Registering Offices and filed in registers: 
 
“89A   (1) Every Court passing – 
 
(a) any decree or order creating, declaring, 
transferring, limiting or extinguishing any right, 
title or interest to or in immovable property in 
favour of any person, or  
 
(b)an order for interim attachment or 
attachment of immovable property or for the 
release of any immovable property from such 
attachment, 
 
shall, in accordance with the rule s made in this behalf, send a 
copy of such decree or order together with a memorandum 
describing the property as far as  may be practicable, in the 
manner required by section 21, to the Registering Officer 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any 
part of the immovable property comprised in such decree or 
order is situate, and such offi cer shall file the copy of the 
memorandum in his Book No. 1: 
 

 82 
Provided that where the immovable 
property is situate within the local limits of 
the jurisdiction of more than one registering 
officer, the procedure i ndicated in clause (b) 
shall be followed in respect of the property 
within the jurisdiction of each of such 
officers .  
                                
(2) Every officer issuing a written demand before the 
attachment of the immovable of a defaulter under the provisions of 
any law relating to Rev enue Recovery for the time being in force, 
including the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890, shall - 
(a) send a copy of such writte n demand together with a 
memorandum describing the prope rty, as far as  may be 
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of section 21;  
 (b)    where such written demand is withdrawn or attachment of 
property is lifted or the property so ld and sale is confirmed, send a 
memorandum indicating that fact and describing that property, as far 
as may be practicable, in accordance with the provisions of section 21,  
to the registering officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the whole or any part of the i mmovable property which the written 
demand relates is situate and such re gistering officer shall file a copy 
of the written demand and the memorandum in his Book No.1 
 
Provided that where the immovable property is situate 
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of more than one 
registering officer, the procedure specified in clauses (a) and (b) 
of sub-section (2) shall be followed in respect of the property 
within the jurisdiction of each of such officers. 
 
 
 
 
 

 83 
Proposed Section 89D :  Power to make rules for filing copies of documents 
referred to in sec. 89A and 89B. 
 
 It is also proposed to introduce sec.  89B for registration of notices in 
respect of mortgage by deposit of title deeds under sec. 58(f) of the Transfer 
of Property Act and also to make any omission in that behalf punishable  
under the proposed sec. 89(c). 
 
 For the purpose of making rules to cover filing of documents referred 
to sec. 89A above and for the purpose of  filing of documents which shall be 
referred in proposed sec. 89B, we propose to introduce a comprehensive 
section 89D.  We shall extract the pr oposed sec. 89D immediately after the 
proposed sections 89B and 89C. 
 
 
 

 84 
12. Proposed sections 89B, 89C and 89D Mortgage by deposit of title  
deeds: Intimation to registering officers by mortgager and mortgagee.  
Separate register to be maintained and provision for making rules.  
Offence under the Registration Act, 1908 created. 
 
Under the provisions of section 58(f) of the Transfer of Property Act a 
mortgage can be created in regard to immovable property by mere deposit of 
the title deeds if the parties so intend,  in the towns speci fied in the said 
section as also in other towns which may be identified by the State 
Government by notification in the official Gazette.   
 
 A mortgage by deposit of title d eeds does not require to be in 
writing.  It is a deposit of title deeds w ith intent to create a mortgage and not 
a mere deposit of title deeds for safe custody or for inspection.  Parties 
usually prepare a memorandum recording the past transaction of deposit 
with intent to create a mortgage a nd the memorandum too does not require 
registration unless it is considered by the parties to be the only repository 
and appropriate evidence of the agreement. If the memorandum describes 
that a deposit of title deeds has been made, that is to say, as a past event and 
not one made under the memorandum, it will require no registration. Of 
course, there has been considerable case law upon the language employed by 
parties while preparing the memorandum . We are here not concerned with 
those aspects.  
 

 85 
 In as much as a mortgage by deposit of title deeds does not 
require to be in writing, it is sometimes not possible for a transferee from the 
same mortgagor to know if there ha s been a mortgage created earlier by 
deposit of title deeds.  It is true that every purchaser is supposed to insist 
upon looking into the original title deeds of his vendor but in some cases, the 
vendor may represent to the purchaser th at the title deeds are lost or are not 
immediately available. There may also be cases of mortgage of ancestral 
property for which sometimes there ar e no title deeds as such and the only 
documents that may be available and may be deposited are the tax receipts 
or plans etc. In law, in such ci rcumstances, a deposit of even such 
documents is treated as sufficient to create a mortgage under sec. 58(f). In 
any event, it is proposed that there must be some public evidence of a 
mortgage for deposit of title deeds to prevent deliberate suppression of facts 
and to prevent fraud and misrepresentation. 
 
Take the case of a vendor who enters  into an agreement of sale or 
executes a sale-deed. He may later come forward with a case of an  anterior 
deposit of title deeds with another pe rson which may be wholly untrue.  
Such a plea may be collusive but the purchaser under the agreement or sale 
deed is put to the trouble of raising an issue as to the genuineness of the so 
called deposit of title deeds and as to whether it has not been made 
subsequent to the date of the agreement or sale-deed.. 
 
 In order to have an authentic reco rd of the factum of deposit of title 
deeds by the owner with an intention to create a mortgage on a particular 

 86 
day, it is necessary to provide a mechanism by which it can be verified 
whether the deposit of the title deeds ha s in fact been made on the date upon 
which it is  alleged to have been made.  The procedure must enable anybody 
proposing to deal with such a person to know the date, description of 
property etc. in relation to such a mortgage by deposit of title deeds.  
A provision for compulsory registration of every memorandum of 
deposit of title deeds may seriously inte rfere with the freedom attached to 
commercial transactions and we do not propose such a course. 
We find that the procedure pres cribed under Section 89 of the 
Registration Act, 1908 can be of immense help.  That section  requires 
copies of certain loans by public au thorities granted under mortgage or 
otherwise or copies of sale-certificates  to be sent to Registering Officers to 
be filed in Book I. Further, section 57 of the Registration Act provides for 
inspection and lays down the procedure fo r obtaining copies of the entries in 
Book I. 
   
 Question is whether it is possible to make a provision on the lines of 
sec. 89 of the Registration Act of intim ation of the deposit to the registering 
officers which can be filed in Book I because Book I is open for public 
inspection and copies of entries can also be obtained. Question also arises 
whether such intimation should be before or after the deposit of title deeds.    
 
 It is important that any procedur e that may be prescribed should not 
have adverse effect on commercial tran sactions which take place every day 
where they involve equitable mortages . Further, there should be little scope 

 87 
for allowing State Governments to levy normal stamp duties which are 
otherwise leviable in the case of a mort gages reduced to writing. In fact, the 
transaction of mortgage by deposit of title  deeds has been invented to keep 
the transaction free from such problems.       
 
 Apart from section 89 of the Regis tration Act, there is another 
provision which can be useful.  There is  a procedure of public notice as to 
the pendency of suit or proceeding,  adopted under Bombay Act 14/1939 for 
purposes of sec. 52 of the Transfer of Property Act. The Bombay Legislature 
realized that sometimes parties purchase properties which are under 
litigation. The seller who is a party to the case does not disclose the 
pendency of the litigation. The legislature, therefore,  devised a procedure of  
registration of a public notice regarding pendency of case before any transfer 
pendente lite is made.  In view of th at amendment, transferees pendente lite 
in Bombay can have knowledge of th e pendency of a suit from registration 
offices by virtue of the registration of  the notice or information sent to 
registering officers by any party to th e suit.  The Bombay Act of 1939, no 
doubt, made the registration of the public notice optional.  If such notice is 
not given and registered, the purchas er pendente life does not suffer the 
disability referred to in sec. 52 that his sale is subject to the result of the suit. 
 
 If we prescribe that notice of a proposed deposit to be registered 
before a registering officer prior to the making of a deposit, there is every 
chance of State legislatures, which are today in great financial need, 
imposing the stamp duties as leviable in case of a mortgage in writing.  That, 

 88 
as already stated,  will seriously impa ir the very purpose of a mortgage by 
mere deposit of title deeds in  commercia l transactions.  It is, therefore,  
necessary that public notice must not be immediately prior to a mortgage 
transaction. It should be after the creation of the mortgage. A time limit of, 
say, thirty days can be prescribed within which a public notice of a previous 
equitable mortgage must be sent to th e registering officers and filed in Book 
I. 
 
 The next question is as to what will happen if the mortgagor fails to 
register a public notice of that deposit,  within the time prescribed, after the 
mortgage by the title deeds has been created?  The mortgagor may indeed 
enter into other transactions within the thirty days with third parties without 
informing them about the earlier mortgage.   Should it be then stated that any 
such transferees within that prescribed period, without notice of the 
mortgage, will be protected and that su ch subsequent transfers will  not be 
subject to the mortgage?  Or should a ny such transaction entered into after 
the date of the mortgage and before registration of the public notice be void?  
Or should non-registration of public notice be made punishable under the 
Act? There are the three alternatives available before us.  
 
 The first alternative of enabling a subsequent transferee without notice 
to ignore the mortgage will, in th e opinion of the Commission, seriously 
affect commercial transactions and w ill be a serious deviation from existing 
law.  If a time limit is imposed and it is said that fresh transactions entered 
into in that period by the mortgagor will not be subject to the mortgage, then 

 89 
that may indeed encourage unscrupulous mortgagors to enter into fresh 
transactions collusively to defeat th e anterior mortgage by deposit of title 
deed entered into (say) with Banks or Financial Institutions.  If we make the 
subsequent transactions to be dependent upon the bona fides of the purchaser  
and want of actual notice, we will be compelling every mortgagee to raise an 
issue that the subsequent transfer was not bona fide or that the transferee had 
notice of mortgage.  That will lead to lot of litigation.  Therefore, the first 
alternative is out of question.  
 
 We are then left with the remaini ng two alternatives – either to make 
the subsequent transactions void or to  penalize the transferor for suppression 
of the fact relating to the anterior mortgage.    
 
 In reality, we are torn between our de sire to preserve the even flow of 
commerce of which the mortgage by de posit of title deeds is an important 
facet and our desire to protect s ubsequent transferees who have no 
knowledge of the earlier mortgage.  Which of these is to have priority is the 
question?  
 
 In the opinion of the Commission, the cause of protecting commerce 
has to outweigh the interests of individual persons like subsequent 
transferees.  At the same time if a subsequent transferee has been roped into 
a transaction by an unscrupulous selle r, who has earlier mortgaged his 
property, the seller should not be allowe d to go scot-free, if he had not put 
the subsequent transferee on notice. 

 90 
 
 The Commission is, therefore, of the view that in the context of the 
peculiar problems arising out of the pres ent state of law of total absence of 
public notice in the case of mortgage  by deposit of title deeds, the proper 
course is to combine the second and third alternatives as follows. 
 
 The transactions, if any, entered in to after the date of the mortgage by 
deposit of title deeds and before the expiry of the time prescribed (we 
proposed thirty days) for registration of  the public notice must be declared 
void and at the same time the seller must be made liable for imprisonment  
and there must also be a provision th at the subsequent transferee will be 
entitled to get back his monies with  interest and also to monetary 
compensation from his unscrupulous vendor.   
 
 It is, therefore, proposed to intr oduce sec. 89C into the Registration 
Act in Part XVI requiring the registra tion of a public notice in Book No. 1 
within thirty days of the mortgage and also to provide that transactions 
subsequent to the deposit and before registration will be void but that the 
purchaser will be entitled to get back whatever money he has paid with 
interest and also to compensation.  It is also proposed to add sec. 89 D to 
enable rules to be made in this behalf.   
 
It is also proposed to introdu ce sec. 82A in Ch. XIV of the 
Registration Act relating to ‘Penalties’ to the effect that any subsequent 
transaction entered into by a mortgagor with a third party, without a recital 

 91 
as to the mortgage by deposit of title deeds, should be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend up to th ree years but subject to a minimum 
sentence of imprisonment for one year apart from fine. 
 
 The proposed sec. 89B, 89C and 89D are as follows: 
 
 
 Notice to be sent to registering officers by mortgagor after creation of 
mortgage by depositing title deeds and provision for compensation in 
favour of subsequent transferee 
 
89B.  (1) Every person who has mortga ged immovable property by way of a 
mortgage by depositing title deeds under clause (f) of section 58 of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 shall with in thirty days from the date of the 
mortgage, file a notice of intimati on of his having so mortgaged the 
property, giving details of his name a nd address, name and address of the 
mortgagee, date of mortgage, amount received under the mortgage, rate of 
interest payable, list of documents  deposited, and description of the 
immovable property as detailed in secti on 21, before the registering officer 
within the limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the property 
is situated and the said officer  shall file the same in his Book I. 
 
Provided that if the property so mortgaged falls within the 
jurisdiction of more than one re gistering officer, the procedure 
specified in this sub-section sha ll be followed in respect of the 
property within the jurisdiction of each such officers.  
 
(2) If the person who has mortgaged the property as aforesaid fails to 
file a notice within thirty days as stated in sub-section (1) before the 
registering officer or officers,as th e case may be, and enters into any 
transaction in relation to or affecting the immovable property which is 
the subject matter of the mortgage, with a third party; such a 
transaction shall be void and the th ird party shall be  entitled to refund 
of any amount paid by him together with interest at twelve percent 

 92 
from the date of payment and also  to compensation for any damages 
suffered by him , from his transferor.  
 
(3) The amount recoverable by such transferee as specified in sub-
section (2) shall be a charge on the interest of the mortgagor, in the 
mortgaged property. 
 
The proposed section in the Registra tion Act for failure to register a 
notice shall be as follows: 
 
“Section 89C: Punishment for failure to register notice under sec.89B: 
Any person who failed to file a notice under sec.89B before the 
registering officer within the period sp ecified in that section; shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a period which may extend up to 
three years but subject to a minimum punishment of imprisonment of 
one year together with fine.” 
 
We also propose that sec. 89 D be introduced to enable rules to be 
made for filing of documents and notices contemplated under section 
89A and 89B as above-stated. 
 
 
Power to make rules for filing of true copies of documents and notices 
referred to section 89A and 89B 
 
“89C. (1) The State Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for all purposes connected with the filing copies 
of documents or notices referred to section 89A and 89B, in the 
appropriate book under this Act.   
 
 (2)    In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for – 
 
(a)  the manner in which notices or true copies of documents 
shall be prepared; and  
 
(b)  the manner of filing the notices or true copies.   
 

 93 
 
  (3)   Every rule made under this  section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each  House of the State Legislature 
where it consists of two Houses or where such Legislature consists of 
one House, before that House.” 
 
 

 94 
13. Section 34 of Code of Civ il Procedure, 1908: Pendente lite 
and Post- decretal interest to be  increased from 6% to 12% and 
Sec. 34(2): 
 
Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 deals with award of                     
interest by the Court in suits for money.  It reads as follows:  
                                  
“34.  Interest – (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment 
of money, the Court may, in the decr ee, order interest at such rate as 
the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged, 
from the date of the suit to the date  of the decree, in addition to any 
interest adjudged on such principa l sum for any period prior to the 
institution of the suit, with further interest at such rate not exceeding 
six per cent, per annum, as the Court deems reasonable on such 
principal sum, from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to 
such earlier date as the Court thinks fit. 
 Provided that where the liability  in relation to the sum so 
adjudged had arisen out of a commercia l transaction, the rate of such 
further interest may exceed six pe r cent, per annum, but shall not 
exceed the contractual rate of intere st or where there is no contractual 
rate, the rate at which moneys ar e lent or advanced by nationalized 
banks in relation to commercial transactions.  
Explanation I – In this sub sec tion, “nationalized banks” means a 
corresponding new bank as define d in the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970. 

 95 
Explanation II – For the purposes of this section, a transaction is a 
commercial transaction, if it is conn ected with the industry, trade or 
business of the party incurring the liability.  
(2)Where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further 
interest on such principal sum from th e date of the decree to the date 
of payment or other earlier date, th e Court shall be deemed to have 
refused such interest and a separate suit therefor shall not lie” 
 
This section lays down the principl es for granting interest in suits. 
Firstly, under sub-section (1), by using the word ‘may’ a discretion is given 
to the Court either to grant or not to  grant interest for the period pending the 
suit, upon the principal sum adjudged.  S econdly, sub-section (1) states that 
the Court will have discretion to award ‘reasonable’ rate of interest from the 
date of institution of suit up to the date of decree, on the principal sum 
adjudged. This discretion under sub s ection (1) is with regard to the 
reasonable rate both for commercia l and non-commercial transactions. 
Thirdly, for the period after decree, the Court is again given discretion under 
sub section (1) to grant interest but  it shall not exceed 6% p.a. in non-
commercial cases.  In commercial cases , the court can award post-decretal 
interest at a rate more than 6% p.a. but not exceeding the contract rate or 
where there is no contract rate, the rate at which moneys are lent or 
advanced by nationalized banks in relation to commercial transactions. 
 
   So far as post-decree rate is c oncerned, prior to 1956, the Court had a 
discretion to award at a ‘reasonable rate’ but by Act 66 of 1956, it was 

 96 
restricted to 6%.  By Act 104/76, a rate above 6% was permitted in 
commercial transactions for the period after the decree. 
 
 It is common experience that in most  of the cases the Courts, in their 
discretion have been awarding interest  only at 6% from the date of suit till 
the date of decree though the maximum lim it of 6% is presently applicable 
only to the interest that may be awarded after the decree in non-commercial 
cases.  The result is that Courts have  been awarding only 6% interest per 
annum from the date of filing of the suit till payment. 
 
 The vast discretion that has been give n to the Court and the fact that in 
practice only a rate of 6% p.a. is being awarded, has induced most debtors to 
take advantage and drive those who have  lent or advanced monies to them, 
to Court.  Further, the upper limit of 6% p.a. in non-commercial cases for the 
period from date of decree appears to be too unrealistic from today’s 
standards when there is serious and c ontinuous erosion of the value of the 
rupee and in the context of long delays  in courts, and in the view of the 
Commission, sub-section  (1) of sec. 34, does not keep the scales even 
between the plaintiff and the defendant and permits Courts to lean more in 
favour of the defendant in most cases. 
 
 Sub section (2) again states that wh ere a decree is silent in respect of 
post-decree interest, interest is deemed to have been refused.  This provision 
appears to be based on principles of c onstuctive res judi cata.  There appears 
to be no logic why a person against whom a Court has passed a decree 

 97 
should be allowed to go sc ot free without paying interest even if the decree 
is silent.  The recent Arbitration and Conciliation Act,  1996 sec. 31(3) 
provides just the contrary.  Once the award is passed, the person against 
whom the award is passed has to pay interest at 18% “unless the Court 
directs otherwise”. 
 
 A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India, in its latest 
judgment, (Central Bank of India V. Ravindra and ors JT 2001 (9) SC 101 
has held that the words ‘principal sum adjudged’ used in sub section (1) of 
section 34 mean not the principal sum which was the subject matter of any 
contract of loan but the said sum with interest, computed upto date of suit.  It 
is on that sum that ‘interest’ pendente-lite or post-decree interest is awarded 
by the Court.  
 
 We propose, for the reasons given earlier, that the Court may award 
interest from the date of suit till the date of decree at a rate of interest up to a 
maximum of 12% per annum and similarly that the interest payable from the 
date of decree till the date of payment, in non-commercial cases can be up to 
a maximum of 12% per annum.  So far as commercial cases are concerned, 
the interest that may be awarded after the decree till payment can go beyond 
12% per annum subject, however, that it sh all not exceed the contract rate or 
the rate at which monies are lent or  advanced by a nationalized bank.  We 
also propose to amend Explanation I which defines nationalized banks as the 
corresponding new banks defined in Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 to also include the other corresponding 

 98 
new banks covered by the Banking Compan ies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980. 
 
 So far as post-decree interest is concerned, we have to first refer to 
sec. 34(2). It states that where the decree is silent as  to post-decretal interest, 
it must be deemed to have been refu sed.  As stated earlier, the Commission 
is of the view that there is no justif ication whatsoever for a person who has 
suffered a decree, to refuse  to  pay interest merely because the decree is 
silent.  The existing provisions of sec. 34(2) which are akin to a principle of 
constructive res judicata do not appear to render jus tice to the decree-holder.  
A judgment for money is treated in England as a judgment-debt upon which 
interest is payable.  The post deceretal interest as introduced 1985 in 
England is 15% under the Judgment Debt s (Rate of Interest) Order, 1985.  
Under sec. 44 of the Administration of  Justice Act, 1970, the Court cannot 
award a different rate for the period after the decree (see Annual Practice, 
1991 Vol. 1 page 61). (see also Halsbury’s Laws of England, Vol. 26, 4th Ed. 
Para 553).  Under American law too, post-decretal interest is mandatory 
under Title 28 (see American Jurisprude nce, Vol. 45 para 62), even though 
the judgment does not contain any specific recital to that effect. 
 
 We propose to amend sub section (2) of section 34 by providing that 
where the judgment and decree are silent with respect to payment of further 
interest on the principal sum from the da te of decree to the date of payment 
or other earlier date, the decree holder may apply to the Court within 30 days 
from the date of judgment before the Court which passed the decree to pass 

 99 
an order with regard to the further interest payable from the date of decree to 
the date of payment or other earlier date. 
  
In as much as the time for filing an  appeal against the main judgment 
and decree is 30 days under the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 where an appeal 
is preferred to a Court sub ordinate to a High Court it becomes necessary to 
make a further provision for extension of the period of limitation for filing 
an appeal against the main judgmen t and decree, in cases where an 
application is filed, w ithin 30 days of the judgment before the Court for 
passing an order in relation to post decret al interest as stated above.  It is 
proposed to say that while computing the period for filing an appeal against 
the judgment and decree the period of 30 days for filing an appeal shall be 
counted from the date on which the Cour t passes an order on the application 
for grant of interest for the period after the decree. 
 
In the light of the above proposals section 34 is proposed to be recast 
as follows: 
 
Interest 
 
“34.(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of 
money, the Court may, in the decree order interest to be paid on 
the principal sum adjudged, from th e date of the suit to the date 
of decree at a rate not exceeding twelve percent. per annum, in 
addition to any interest adjudge d on such principal sum for any 
period prior to the institution of the suit, with further interest at 
such rate not exceeding twelve pe rcent. per annum as the Court 
deems reasonable on such principa l sum, from the date of the 

 100
decree to the date of payment or  to such earlier date as the 
Court deems fit: 
 
Provided that where the liability  in relation to the sum so 
adjudged had arisen out of a comme rcial transaction, the rate of 
such further interest may exceed twelve percent., per annum, 
but shall not exceed the contract ra te of interest or where there 
is no contractual rate, the rate at which monies are lent or 
advanced by nationalized banks  in relation to commercial 
transactions. 
 
Explanation.- I  In this sub s ection, “nationalized banks” means 
a corresponding new bank as defined in the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970 and the Banking Companies (A cquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980. 
 
Explanation.- II A transaction is a commercial transaction, if it 
is connected with the industry, trade or business of the party 
incurring the liability. 
 
(2) Where a judgment and decree are silent with respect to 
the payment of interest on such principal sum from the date of 
the decree to the date of paym ent or other earlier date, the 
decree holder may apply to the Court which passed the decree 
for an order in relation to the lia bility of the judgment debtor to 
pay interest for the said period and as to the rate at which 
interest is payable for the said  period and the C ourt shall pass a 
reasoned order on the said appli cation and in case interest is 
awarded, the Court shall ame nd the judgment and decree in 
accordance with the said order. 
 
(3) The application referred to in sub-section (2) shall be 
filed within a period of 30 days  of the date of judgment and 
decree in the suit and while com puting the period for filing an 
appeal against the judgment a nd decree under the provisions of 
the Limitation Act, 1963, the period between the date of the 

 101
application referred to in sub-section (2) and the date of passing 
of the order thereon, shall al so be excluded, irrespective 
whether any interest was awarded or not in such application.” 
 
The 144th Report of the Law Commission recommended in Chapter III 
that the court may be empowered to gran t interest at a rate higher than the 
contractual rate, where the contractual rate is quite low, for the period during 
the pendency of the suit. 
 The Commission also noticed that section 79 of Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881 directs calculation of  the contractual rate of interest 
until ‘such date after the institution of the suit’.  Some courts have held that 
the discretion given in section 34 will not, therefore, to apply while some 
other courts have held that secti on 79 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 
prevails.  The Commission favored the view that the discretion under section 
34 for pendente lite  interest shall prevail and that section 79 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act be amende d by substituting the words “not later 
than the institution of the suit” for th e words “such date after the institution 
of the suit” in section 79 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881. 
 We are of the view on the first question that in the light of the 
proposal to increase the maximum interest up to 12% for the period during 
pendency of the suit, no further am endment as suggested in the 144 th Report 

 102
is necessary.  On the second question, we reiterate the same recommendation 
for amendment of section 79 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 as 
suggested in the 144th Report. 

 103
 
14. Section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 
 
  
 Section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act reads as follows: 
 
“19. Court to which petition sha ll be presented.- Every petition 
under this Act shall be presented to the district court within the local 
limits of whose ordinary civil jurisdiction – 
(i) the marriage was solemnized; 
(ii) the respondent, at the time of  the presentation of the petition, 
resides; or 
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or 
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of presentation of the 
petition, in case where the respondent is, at that time, residing 
outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been 
heard of as being alive for a pe riod of seven years or more by 
those persons who would naturally have heard of him if he were 
alive. 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
 According to this section, a suit seeking any of the reliefs provided by 
the Act has to be filed either at  the place (a) wher e the marriage was 
solemnized; (b) where respondent, resi des or (c) where the married couple 
last resided together.  A petition can be filed where the petitioner resides 
only when the respondent is residing out side India or who is not heard of 

 104
being alive for a period of seven years or more.  We are concerned with a 
situation where the wife who has been  driven out or deserted, seeks a 
remedy under the Act.  As the Act stands now, she cannot file a suit where 
she resides.  More often than  not, su ch deserted/driven out wife stays with 
her parents or brother or some other re lative, who may not reside in any of 
the places mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) or (iii) of section 19.   Sometimes, 
the marriage also does not take place at the bride’s place but at the place 
where the husband resides or some othe r convenient place.  For a woman, in 
the said situation to go and file a suit in any of the places mentioned in the 
said three clauses means unbearable  expense and inconvenience.  The 
deserted woman has to travel long di stances to file a suit and to attend 
hearings.   It is, therefore, necessa ry that section 19 should be amended by 
amending and inserting a new clause, clause (iiia) in section 19 to the 
following effect: 
 
“(iiia) in case the wife is the petiti oner, where she is residing on the 
date of presentation of the petition.” 
 
 Such amendment will give the wi fe the choice of court, including 
where she is residing, to file a suit fo r redressal of her grievance and would 
go a long way in relieving her of th e additional burden and expense now 
being faced by her.   It would also serve to advance the cause of gender 
justice consistent with justice and fair play. 
 

 105
 It may be mentioned that when th e maintenance is claimed by the wife 
under section 125 of the Code of Crim inal Procedure of 1973, the wife or 
husband is entitled to file petition fo r maintenance at the place of the 
residence as per clause (b) of section 126.    The section reads as under: 
 
“126. Procedure.- (1) Proceedings under section 125 may be taken 
against any person in any district – 
(a) where he is, or 
(b) where he or his wife resides, or 
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, 
with the mother of the illegitimate child. 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
 Thus in any proceedings under s ection 125 of the CrPC, a wife is 
entitled to file an application for her maintenance in a court of jurisdiction 
where she is residing.   There is no reason why section 19 of Hindu Marriage 
Act of 1955 be not amended to accord with the position under section 
126/125 of CrPC, 1973. 

 106
 
I5. Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code provides for maintenance of 
wife, children and parents, who cannot maintain themselves. The 
maintenance is allowed under section 125  which reads as under: 
 
 “125. Order for maintenance of  wives, children and parents.- 
(1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to 
maintain – 
(a) his wife unable to maintain herself, or 
(b) his legitimate or illeg itimate minor child, whether 
married or not, unable to maintain itself, or 
…. from the date of the application for maintenance….” 
 
This, maintenance can only be claime d by a female who is a wife or 
who has been divorced or has obtai ned divorce from her husband or is 
legally separated and is not remarried.   The pith and substance of the section 
is that a woman is entitled to maintenan ce only if she is or has been legally 
married to the respondent. 
 
 There have been many cases where the man misrepresents to the girl 
that he is unmarried or is divorced or is widowed and goes through  the 
formalities required by Hindu Marriage Ac t or the custom governing him.  
Subsequently, when the woman finds out  that she was misled into marriage 
by false representation, she cannot even  claim maintenance.   Because she 

 107
has to be legally married before she is entitled to maintenance under section 
125, her claim for maintenance fails. 
 
 It is relevant to note secti on 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 
which lays down the conditions for a la wful marriage.  Clause (i) in the 
section requires that “neither party has a spouse living at the time of 
marriage” and under section 11, a marriage solemnized contrary to the said 
requirement, after the Act came into force,  is null and void.  In view of this 
legal position, the Supreme court has held  that even if a woman is cheated 
into a marriage, she is not his lawful wife as the earlier marriage subsists 
and, therefore, she is not entitle d to maintenance (see Yamunabai v. 
Anantrao, 1988 (1) SCC p.530).   The Suprem e Court, while dismissing the 
appeal of Yamunabai, held that the marriage wa s void and, therefore, she 
was not entitled to any maintenance observed as follows: 
 
“It is also to be seen that while  the legislature has considered it 
advisable to uphold the legitimacy of the paternity of a child born out 
of a void marriage, it has not extende d a similar protection in respect 
of the mother of the child.   The marriage of the appellant must, 
therefore, be treated as null and void from its very inception.” 
 
 The Supreme Court further observed that: 
 

 108
“The legislature decided to bestow the benefit of the section even on 
an illegitimate child by express words but none are found to apply to a 
de facto wife where the marriage is void ab initio.” 
 
 The court held further that even if  the second wife was unaware, at the 
time of her marriage that husband was already married and has a wife living, 
even then she cannot claim maintenance under section 125. 
 
The Hindu Marriage Act while not gi ving protection to a female who 
enters into a wedlock on the basis of a misrepresentation does give 
legitimacy to the children born out of void or/and voidable marriages.  By an 
amendment effected in 1976, section 16 was amended to read as under: 
 
“16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages.- (1) 
Notwithstanding that a marriage is null and void under section 11, any 
child of such marriage who woul d have been legitimate if the 
marriage had been valid, shall be le gitimate, whether such child is 
born before or after the comme ncement of the Marriage Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree of 
nullity is granted in respect of that marriage is held to be void 
otherwise than on a petition under this Act.” 
 (sub-sections (2) and (3) omitted as unnecessary) 
 
 Similarly, clause (b) of sec tion 125 of CrPC entitles illegitimate 
children a right of maintenance as mentioned above. 

 109
 
 Since the illegitimate children ar e entitled to maintenance, it is 
reasonable to say that their mother who though not legally married but has 
been a de facto wife should also be allowed to claim maintenance.  Such 
amendment apart from protecting the victim of false representations would 
also deter a man from making false representations about his marital status. 
 
 It is, therefore, in section 125, sub- section (I), in the Explanation, in 
sub-clause (i) of clause (b), afte r the words “and has not remarried” the 
following shall be inserted, namely:-    
 
“or whose marriage is void under section 11 read 
with sub-section(1) of  section 5 of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955 or under cl ause (a) of  section 
4 read with section 24 of the Special Marriage Act, 
1954 or under section 4 of the Parsi Marriage Act, 
1936, or under any other provision contained in 
any enactment corresponding to the aforesaid 
provisions as may be notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf, and has not remarried.” 
 
  
 

 110
 
Position under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 
 
 The position of a Hindu wife whose marriage is void under section 11 
of the Hindu Marriage Act does not appear to be better either.  Sub-section 
(2) of section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act sets out the 
grounds upon which a Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from 
her husband without forfeiting her claim to maintenance.   Section 18 reads 
as follows: 
 
“18. Maintenance of wife.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this 
section, a Hindu wife, whether married before or after the 
commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained by her 
husband during her lifetime. 
(2) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her 
husband without forfeiting her claim to maintenance,- 
(a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without 
reasonable cause and without her consent or against her wish, or 
willfully neglecting her; 
(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable 
apprehension in her mind that it will be harmful or injurious to live 
with her husband; 
(c) if he is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy; 
(d) if he has any other wife living; 

 111
(e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is 
living or habitually resides with a concubine elsewhere; 
(f) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion; 
(g) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately. 
(3) A Hindu wife shall not be en titled to separate residence and 
maintenance from her husband if she in unchaste or ceases to be a 
Hindu by conversion to another religion.” 
 
 It is evident that ground (d) enable s a wife to live apart and yet claim 
maintenance if the husband has any other wife living.   It is possible to argue 
on the basis of the decision of the Supreme Court in Yamunabai referred to 
hereinbefore that the second marriage be ing void, clause (d) of section 18(2) 
is not satisfied even wher e, as a fact, the second ‘wife’ is living with the 
husband.   The argument can be that  the second ‘wife’ has not really 
acquired the status of a ‘wife’ within the meaning of section 18(2)(d).  This 
aspect needs to be put beyond doubt even though, it is true, some High 
Courts have upheld the first wife’s claim for maintenance on the ground of 
second marriage performed after the commencement of the Hindu Marriage 
Act.   Questions may also arise as to the right of the second wife to claim 
maintenance in certain circumstances  where too the husband can seek to 
non-suit her on the ground that her marriage being void under section 11 
read with section 5(i) of the Hindu Ma rriage Act, she is not a “wife” within 
the meaning of section 18(2)(d) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act.   It is necessary to clarify both these aspects consistent with the present-
day societal values. 

 112
  
Two questions arise in this behalf, namely, (i) whether a wife (first 
wife) can claim maintenance on the ground that the husband has contracted a 
second marriage after the commencemen t of the Hindu Marriage Act?  In 
such a case, should she be deprived of  the right given by section 18(2)(d) on 
the ground that since such a second marriage is void under section 11 of the 
Hindu Marriage Act, she cannot invoke cl ause (d) of sub-section (2) of 
section 18 of the Maintenance Act, and 
 
 (ii) whether the second wife whos e marriage has taken place after the 
commencement of Hindu Marriage Act, at  a time when the first wife was 
alive, is entitled to claim maintenan ce under section 18 of the Maintenance 
Act?  The argument on behalf of th e husband can be the same viz., her 
marriage being void under section 11 of  the Marriage Act, she is not a 
“wife” within the meaning of section 18(2) of the Maintenance Act. 
 
 These two questions may be dealt with separately. 
 
1) So far as the right of the fi rst/validly married wife to claim 
maintenance on the ground that the husband has married again after the 
commencement of the Hindu Marriage Act is concerned, we see no 
justification to refuse her claim for maintenance on the ground that the 
second marriage is void in law when, as a matter of fact, she is suffering all 
the disabilities, humiliations and ha rassment resulting from such second 
marriage.  We cannot shut our eyes to  the reality and continue the suffering 

 113
of the first wives.   The first wife s hould be held in such a case to be entitled 
to live apart and yet claim maintenance.    Such a provision would also deter 
the husbands from marrying again during th e lifetime of the first wife.    
More important, it is not consistent with public policy or interests of society 
to make the first wife not only suffe r the harassment and indignity flowing 
from the second marriage of her husba nd but also to disable her from 
claiming maintenance on the said ground.   We are therefore of the opinion 
that section 18 should be am ended and it should be clarified that first wife is 
entitled to claim maintenance on the ground that the husband has married 
again after the coming into force of the Hindu Marriage Act. 
 
2) So far as the right to claim ma intenance of a woman who has married 
a person knowing that he is already ma rried, is concerned, it stands on a 
different footing.      But here ag ain there may be cas es where the second 
wife may have been innocent and ha s married that person without knowing 
that he is already married and that hi s wife is alive.  In such cases, the 
equities are in her favour as pointed out hereinabove while dealing with 
section 125 of the CrPC.    We are th erefore of the opinion, for the reasons 
mentioned while discussing the positi on under section 125 CrPC that it is 
just and equitable to provide that a woman who has married a person, who 
has already a wife living, without know ing that he is already married and 
that his wife is living, should be held entitled to maintenance.  This would be 
an instance of advancing gender justice consistent with the principles of fair 
play and equity.  Now so far as the other category is concerned, namely, a 
woman who marries a person knowing that he is already married and that his 

 114
wife is living, there can be two opinions: one is that since she has knowingly 
entered into a void marriage, there is no reason to entitle her to claim 
maintenance, that too on the ground that the other wife is living.  The second 
view may be that in the conditions pr evailing today in Indian society, it 
would not be just to deprive such s econd wife of maintenance even where 
she has been deserted or driven out by the husband.  May be she is not 
entitled to claim maintenance on the ground that the other wife is living, yet 
there may be some equities in her favour  if her case falls under clauses (a), 
(b), (c), (e) and (f) of sub-section (2) of  section 18.    On a consideration of 
the contending points of view we are inclined to accept the second line of 
thinking and to provide that though a woman, who has married a person 
knowing that the husband is already marri ed and has a wife living, shall not 
be entitled to claim maintenance on the ground mentioned in clause (d) of 
sub-section 2 of section 18, yet she would be entitled to do so on the grounds 
mentioned in clauses (a), (b), (c), (e) and (f) of the said sub-section.    Such a 
provision would act as a deterrent against the husbands ill-treating or 
deserting second wives with impunity under the impression that since their 
marriage is void in law, they can be treat ed like dirt.  This would again be a 
case of advancing the cause of gender ju stice consistent with fair play and 
justice. 
 
 Accordingly, the following amendmen ts are suggested to section 18 of 
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956: 
 
 

 115
 
    In the Hindu Adoptions and Mainte nance Act 1956, in section 18, in sub-
section (2), 
 
 
(i) for clause (d) the following clause shall be substituted , 
namely:- 
 
“(d)if he has any other wife living, whether the marriage of 
the other wife had been sole mnized before or after the 
commencement of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.”  
 
(ii) after clause (g)  the following Explanations shall be 
inserted, namely: 
 
“Explanation.-1 A woman who marries a person without knowing that 
he is already married and that hi s wife is living shall, without 
prejudice to claim maintenance on th e ground mentioned in clause (d) 
,  be entitled to live separately from her husband.  
 
Explanation.-2 A woman who marri es a person knowing that he is 
already married and that his wife is living, shall be entitled to live 
separately from her husband w ithout forfeiting her claim to 
maintenance on any of the grounds men tioned in clauses (a), (b), (c), 
(e), (f) and (g).” 
 
So far as other personal laws dealing with maintenance are concerned, the 
Commission will make a separate report. 

 116
 
16. Problem of hostile witnesses and the need to ensure a fair 
investigation 
 
 Certain recent happenings, widely reported in the Press, call for 
introducing measures to ensure that a criminal trial does not end in a fiasco 
on account of the eye-witnesses or the material witnesses, as the case may 
be, turning hostile at the trial.   At the same time, it is equally imperative that 
a fair investigation is assured and room for manipulation at the stage of 
investigation should be eliminated as far as possible.  The experience shows 
that where the accused happens to be rich and/or influential persons or 
members of mafia gangs, the witnesses very often turn hostile either because 
of the inducements offered to them or because of the threats given to them or 
may be on account of promises that may be made to them.  To protect public 
interest and to safeguard the interests of society, measures need to be 
devised to eliminate, as far as possible, scope for such happenings. 
 
 The 14 th Law Commission had referred to this aspect while submitting 
its report (154 th Report) on the Code of Cr iminal Procedure.  After 
considering the earlier reports of the Commission, the reports of the National 
Police Commission and the responses it received pursuant to the circulation 
of its Working Paper, the Commission suggested the following measures:  
 
(a) “It is necessary to amend s ection 164 CrPC so as to make it 
mandatory for the investigating o fficer to get statements of all 
material witnesses questioned by him during the course of 

 117
investigation recorded on oath by the magistrate.   The statement thus 
recorded will be of much eviden tiary value and can be used as 
previous statement.  Such recording will prevent the witnesses turning 
hostile at their free will.  Such a ch ange will also help the Police to 
complete the investigation and s ubmit a final report on the basis of 
such statements made on oath a nd on other facts and circumstances 
stated as recovery, etc.”   A ccordingly, the Commission suggested 
introduction of sub-section (1A) in section 164.  The Commission 
however felt that adoption of this c ourse would require recruitment of 
a good number of additional magistrates, which course, it thought may 
not be immediately feasible - though this course was the most 
desirable one. 
 
(b) The other alternative measure suggested by the 14 th Law Commission 
was to retain the existing provisions in sections 161, 162 and 172 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure a nd to provide some checks against 
the witnesses turning hostile.  The suggested measures were: taking 
the signature of the witness, if he is literate, on his statement, giving a 
copy of the statement to the deponent under acknow ledgement and 
thirdly to send copies of the statem ents to the appropriate magistrate 
as well as to the superior Police officers. 
 
 We appreciate the difficulty pointed out by the 14 th Law Commission 
in recruiting as many more magistrate s as may be required, if the first 
measure suggested by it were to be in troduced.  We therefore thought of a 

 118
third alternative.   Inasmuch as the evil of witnesses turning hostile is more 
in vogue in serious offences and because  this evil must first be checked in 
serious offences and also because such  a measure is being introduced for the 
first time now after a long number of years, we suggest the following 
alternative: in all offences punishable  with ten or more years imprisonment 
(with or without fine) including offences for which death sentence can be 
awarded, the Police shall have the st atements of all important witnesses 
recorded under section 164 by a magist rate.  Indeed, it would be more 
appropriate, if this is done at the earliest opportunity i.e. at the very 
inception of the investigation.  It is well-known that generally witnesses 
stick to truth at the early stages but ma y change in course of time.   If their 
statement is got recorded by a magistrate at the earliest opportunity, that will 
also furnish guarantee of the truth of th e statement as well.    This is the 
general belief, though this cannot be stated as a definite or universal 
proposition.   Adopting this course woul d not require recruitment of a large 
number of additional magistrates.    The present number would suffice.    
 
 We must, however, hasten to add that the above measure by itself 
would not suffice.  Whether the statement is recorded before the magistrate 
under section 164 (or whether the signatu re of the witness is taken on his 
statement recorded under section 161 as suggested in the 154 th Report), they 
remain merely former statements of witnesses.  So far as statements 
recorded under section 161 are concerned,  the restrictions placed thereon by 
section 162 would also operate.  So fa r as the statements recorded under 
section 164 are concerned, they would be no more than former statements of 

 119
witnesses which can be used either fo r corroboration or contradiction.   
Obviously, there can be no question of cross-examination of these witnesses 
at the stage of investigation or at th e stage of recording their statements 
under section 164.   It is therefore n ecessary to provide a further measure, 
namely, that if a witness whose statement is recorded by a magistrate under 
section 164 CrPC departs from that stat ement at the trial, it should be open 
to the trial judge (sessions judge) to treat his statement recorded under 
section 164 as relevant evidence at the tr ial, subject to the provisions of the  
Evidence Act.  It is obvious that the trial judge would do so only when he is 
satisfied, in the facts and circumstances of the case, that th e statement of the 
witness before the magistrate recorded under section 164 C rPC was true and 
that his statement at the trial does not represent the truth.   Of course, he 
should also be satisfied that the statement under section 164 was made 
voluntarily.  We may in this connec tion recall the provision contained in 
section 288 of the Criminal Procedur e Code, 1898, which does not find a 
place in the present Code.   Under th e old Code, all im portant witnesses 
were examined (giving an opportunity  to the accused to  cross-examine 
them) in the committal court and in case these witnesses turned hostile at the 
trial before the sessions court, section 288 enabled the trial judge to treat the 
evidence of the witness given in the committal court as substantive evidence 
at the trial subject of course to the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872. 
 
 We are aware that the measure s uggested by us is rather radical, 
inasmuch as a statement, untested by cross-examination, is sought to be 

 120
made admissible as evidence for all pur poses – even in a case of murder.  
But the justification behind this meas ure is (a) ‘necessity’- a doctrine which 
is well-accepted in jurisprudence, examples of which are the several 
instances mentioned in clauses (1) to (8) of section 32 of Evidence Act; (b) 
the safeguards mentioned he reinabove viz., recording of the statement by a 
magistrate which itself is a guarantee, to a large extent, that the statement 
was voluntary and hence true and the further provision that the trial judge 
will treat such statement (u/s 164) as evidence at the trial only if and when 
he is satisfied in all the circumstances of the case that the statement recorded 
u/s 164 was voluntary and appears to be true. 
 
So far as offences punishable with less than ten years imprisonment 
(with or without fine) are concerned, the existing procedure may be followed 
subject to the following modifications :  the statement of a witness under 
section 161 of the Code shall be record ed as far as possible in the language 
in which the witness deposes; after the st atement is recorded, it shall be read 
over to the witness by the officer recording it and the signature or thumb 
impression, as the case may be, of the witness shall be obtained on the 
statement; the statements shall be r ecorded in the Case Diary and not upon 
loose sheets of paper;  copies of statements recorded under sub-section (3), 
shall be sent immediately to the Magi strate competent to take cognizance of 
the offence and to the Superintendent  of Police of the District; the Case 
Diary shall be a bound book, duly paginate d and maintained in the regular 
course of official business.  If this measure is adopted, it will not only ensure 
that the investigation is fair, it would also eliminate  room for any 

 121
manipulation by the investigating officers which is the common complaint 
of the accused.  Frequently allegations are made that the scene of offence is 
changed, the time of offence is alte red, the witnesses are shuffled or 
substituted, the names, numbers and identities of the accused are changed 
and so on.   The adoption of the above course would help eliminate room for 
such complaints and would not onl y assure to the accused a fair 
investigation but would also lend credib ility to the investigation process and 
would indeed increase the present poor ra te of conviction.   The measures 
suggested herein should indeed be followe d in all cases (i.e., even in case of 
offences punishable with ten years or  more imprisonment), which would go 
a long way in improving the quality of this phase of criminal legal system. 
 
 We are also of the opinion th at for a proper and effective 
implementation of the above measur es, the prosecution should seek to 
concentrate their attention on important cases instead of frittering their 
energies on all and sundry cases.   The recommendation made by the 14 th 
Law Commission in their 154 th Report regarding introduction of the 
procedure of ‘plea bargaining’ and in creasing the number of offences which 
can be compounded, should be implemente d without any further delay.  In 
chapter 13 of the 154 th Report, the Law Commission had recommended that 
the facility of plea bargain should be made applicable, to start with, to 
offences which are punishable with im prisonment for less than seven years 
and/or fine including the offences cove red by section 320 of the Code.   It 
was clarified that plea bargaining can also be in respect of nature and gravity 
of offences as well as to the quantum of punishment.  It was also suggested 

 122
that the process of plea bargaining shall be set in motion after issue of 
process and when the accused appears, either on a written application by the 
accused to the court or suo motu by the c ourt.   Indeed, the said chapter sets 
out in detail the procedure to be follo wed in this behalf which we do not 
think it necessary to reproduce here.  Similarly, chapter 12 of the said Report 
recommends increasing the number of offences which can be compounded 
without the permission of the court a nd also those offences which can be 
compounded with the permission of the court. 
 
 If the concept of plea bargaining is  so implemented in respect of 
offences punishable up to seven years imprisonment (with or without fine), a 
large number of less serious offences can be settled without the requirement 
of a trial.   
 
 Accordingly, we recommend the following amendments to the Code 
of Criminal Procedure: 
 
(a) Insertion of sub-section (1A) in section 164 CrPC: 
 
  
 
Evidence of material witnesses to be recorded by Magistrate in certain cases 
 
  
“164A (1) Any police officer making an investigation into any 
offence punishable with imprisonment for ten years or more (with or 
without fine) including an offence which is punishable with death, 

 123
shall in the course of such inves tigation, forward all persons whose 
evidence is essential for the just d ecision of the case, to the nearest 
Magistrate for recording their statements.   
 
(2) The Magistrate shall record the statements of such persons 
forwarded to him under sub-section (1) on oath and shall keep such 
statements with him awaiting further police report under section 173.     
 
(3) Copies of such statements sha ll be furnished to the investigating 
officer.    
 
(4) If the Magistrate recording the statement is not empowered to take 
cognizance of such offence, he sha ll send the statements so recorded 
to the magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the case. 
 
(5) The statement of any person dul y recorded as a witness under sub-
section (1) may, if such witness is produced and examined, in the 
discretion of the court and subject to the provisions of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, be treated as evidence.” 
 
(b) Insertion of section 311A: 
 
S.311A:  The statement of the witness duly recorded under sub-
section (1) of section 164 of this C ode may, in the discretion of the 
presiding judge, if such witness is produced and examined, be treated 
as evidence in the case for all purposes subject to the provisions of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
 
 Implementation of the recommendations of the 154 th Report of the 
Law Commission with respect of introduction of plea bargaining and 

 124
enlargement of compoundability of th e offences, may also be taken up 
immediately. 
 
 
 
 
There is another very importa nt measure, which too was 
recommended in the 154 th Report of this Commission, which needs to be 
implemented without further delay.   It relates to establishment of a separate 
investigating agency and an indepe ndent prosecuting agency set out in 
chapters 2 and 3 of the said Report.   Since the reasons in support of the said 
recommendations are duly stated in the said Report, we do not think it 
necessary to repeat them here.   Suffice it to say that we endorse and 
commend the said recommendations which would go a long way in ensuring 
fair and prompt investigation and would also contribute to the increase in the 
rate of conviction which is appallingly low at present. 
 
 

 125
 
 
17. Section 161, 162 Sec.173(5): Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:  
Need for transmission of statements of persons to Magistrate 
immediately. 
 
 
Chapter XII of the Code of Cr iminal Procedure, 1973 (containing 
sections 154 to 176) deals with ‘information to the police and their powers to 
investigate’.  Section 160 refers gene rally to the powers of the police “to 
require attendance of witnesses” who appear to be “acquainted with the facts 
and circumstances of the case”.  Sec tion 161 refers to the “examination of 
witnesses by the police” of any person “supposed to be acquainted with the 
facts and circumstances of the case” a nd states that the said person is bound 
to answer all queries other than questions, the answers to which would have 
a tendency to expose him to a criminal ch arge or to a penalty or forfeiture.  
The police officer is to reduce into wr iting any statement made to him in the 
course of an examination under this sec tion.  Under section 162, it is stated 
that this statement need not be signed by the person making the statement 
and that it cannot be used as evidence except to contradict such witnesses in 
the manner provided in section 145  of the Evidence Act, 1872.  Explanation 
to section 162 states that an omission to  state a fact or ci rcumstances in the 
statement may amount to a contradiction. 
 
These sections do not speak of fo rwarding the statement given under 
sec.161 immediately to a Magistrate. That is however, provided in sub 
section (5) of sec. 173 which states th at the statements under sec. 161 have 

 126
to be sent to the Magistrate but only at  the stage of filing the final report of 
the police.  If the statements are thus allowed to be file d after long delay, 
there is scope for several malpractices and manipulations.  In fact, as stated 
below various other sections in this Chapter require statements or record, 
etc. to be sent to the Magistrate forthwith: 
 
  
(i) Section 164 refers to the procedure for recording `confession and 
statement before any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate.  Under 
sub-section (6) of section 164, the Magistrate recording the confession or 
statement shall forward it to the Magistrate by whom the case is to be 
inquired into or tried. 
 
(ii) Section 165 refers to search by police officer and under sub-section 
(5) record of the search as made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) is to 
be sent to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the 
offence.  Section 166(4) also requires similar record to be sent to the 
Magistrate, where the search is made by another officer, referred to in 
section 166(1). 
 
(iii) Section 166B refers to letters of request received from a country or 
place outside India to a Court or an authority for investigation in India.  Sub-
section (2) requires all evidence taken or  collected or auth enticated copies 
thereof, to be forwarded by the Magistrate or police offi cer to the Central 
Government for transmission to the Cour t or the authority issuing the letter 
of request. 

 127
 
(iv) Section 167 which refers to a s ituation where investigation cannot be 
completed in twenty four hours, also re fers to the need fo r the police officer 
to transmit dairy entries to the nearest Judicial Magistrate. 
 
(v) Section 172 requires the Police officer  to send his diaries to the Court 
but the accused or his agents will not be  entitled to see them unless they are 
used by the police officer to refresh hi s memory or if the Court uses them, 
for the purpose of contradicting such police officer.  The provision of section 
161 or of section 145 of the Evidence Act shall apply to such diaries. 
 
 Therefore, there is no reason w hy the statements recorded under 
section 161 of the Code should not be dir ected to be sent to the Magistrate 
immediately. 
 
 The Commission has, therefore, felt that it should be required by 
statute that these statements be sent to the Magistrate “forthwith”, and if that 
is done, pre verification by witnesses or witnesses turning hostile can be 
prevented. 
 
 In the 154 th Report of the Law Commission (1996) in Ch.IX, various 
recommendations were made in connec tion with “Examination of witnesses 
and record of their statements; sec tion 161 and 162”.  In Ch. XXII, which 
contains the summary of recommendations, it is st ated as follows: (see para 
20):  “20.  The statements of materi al witnesses recorded under section 164 

 128
which could be more authentic and al so prevent and witnesses from turning 
hostile.  Further, Section 161, 162,  164 and 172 be amended on the way 
suggested in Ch. IX, para 7.  This cour se is more salutary  and will prove to 
be very effective in rendering crim inal justice in a speedy manner.  
However, the changes contemplated, namely, setting up and separating the 
investigating agency, and structuring the same and appointment of large 
number of magistrates will take some  time.  We, in the alternative, 
recommend to retain the provisions of sections 161, 162 and 172 as they are 
but with some checks in the direction of improving the authenticity of such 
statements recorded by the police a nd also obtaining signatures of the 
persons examined, if they are literate .  Further, a copy of the statement 
should be given the deponent under acknow ledgement and also send them to 
the Magistrate and to other superior o fficers.  That provisions would ensure 
against any error or malpractice being committed by the officer  (paras 
7,8,11,12,13 & 15 of Ch. IX).” 
 
 It is clear from a reading of Ch. IX of the Report and the  paras above 
referred to that two alternative procedures  were suggested in the 154 th 
Report and it was felt that the first alte rnative would take considerable time 
for implementation because of the dearth of the required number of 
Magistrates and therefore, the second alternative was suggested for 
immediate implementation,  namely, 
 
(1) that sections 161, 162 should be retained as they are,, 
(2) that if the witness is literate his signature be obtained. 

 129
(3) that copy of the statement  reco rded should be given to the witness 
under his signature, under acknowledgement, 
(4) that statement of witness should be sent to the Magistrate and superior 
officers. 
 
 
 As the Commission is proposing in the present report certain 
amendments which can be brought immediately to prevent witnesses turning 
hostile, and which would ensure that  there is no manipulation of the 
statements, it is recommended that the “other alternative” suggested in the 
154th Report be put in action immediately,  with the further rider that each 
statement so recorded under sec. 161 mu st contain the date and time of the 
recording of the statement and the pl ace where it is record ed and that the 
statement should be sent to the Magistrate ‘forthwith’. 
 
 We, therefore, recommend as follows: 
 
(A ) Sec. 161 can be retained as it is. 
(B ) So far as sec. 162 is concerned, heading of the section which at 
present reads “Statement to police not  to be signed: use of statements 
in evidence”, should be changed.  The body of sec. 162(1) has also to 
be amended.  The following sub-section (1), (1A) and (1B) may be 
substituted for the existing sub-section (1) of section 162: 
 

 130
“Sec.162  Statement to police to be signed: Transmission to 
Magistrate: Use of statement in evidence: 
 
“ (1)  The statement made by any person to a police officer in the 
course of an investigation under th is chapter shall, if reduced to 
writing, be signed by the person making it if the person who has given 
the statement is literate and in case the person is not literate, his thumb 
impression shall be obtained and in  every case, a true copy of the 
statement shall be furnished  to the person who gave the statement, 
immediately under acknowledgement.   
 
(1A)  Every such statement reco rded under section 161 shall contain 
the date and time as to when the statement was recorded and the place 
where it was recorded, and shall be forthwith forwarded to the 
Magistrate. 
 
(1B) Any such statement or record  thereof or any part of such 
statement or record whether in a police diary or otherwise, shall not be 
used for any purpose, save as her eafter provided, at any inquiry or 
trial in respect of any offence unde r investigation at the time when 
such statement was made, 
 
 Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in 
such inquiry or trial whose statement has been reduced into writing as 
aforesaid, any part of his statemen t, if duly proved, may be used by 
the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, 
to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part of such statement is 
so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of 
such witness, but for the purpose of  explaining any matter referred to 
in his cross-examination.” 
 

 131
 (C) Sub-section (2) of sec. 162 and the Explanation below sub-sec.(2) 
shall be retained. 
 

 132
 
18. Sec.174: Proposal to requires statements of persons examined at 
the Inquest to be sent forthwi th to the Magistrate along with  
Report: 
 
This is yet another section which if properly amended, can contribute 
to the elimination of subsequent manipulation of the evidence or record and 
also eliminate witnesses turning hostile. 
 
The section deals with the statements of persons who are examined at, 
what is known as the ‘inquest’, in the case of offences involving death of  
any person.  No doubt, these statements  are also statements which fall under 
section 161 but, we propose to make a se parate provision in regard to such 
statements on the same lines as proposed in respect of sec. 161. 
 
Under sub-section (1) of section 174, a report is to be submitted by the 
officer-in-charge of a police station or  some other police officer specially 
authorized by the State Government – in  regard to the ‘apparent cause of 
death’.  He is to give intimation to the nearest Executive Magistrate 
empowered to hold inquest, before pr oceeding to the place where the dead 
body is found. He shall have to make the investigation in the presence of two 
or more respectable inhabitants  of the neighbourhood.  The Report must 
contain the apparent cause of death, details of wounds, fractures, bruises, 
and other marks of injury as may be found on the body, and the manner, by 
what weapon or instrument, if any, such marks appear to have been inflicted. 

 133
 
 Under sub-section (2) of  section 174, the “Report”  is to be signed by 
the police officer and other persons, or by so many of them as concur therein 
and ‘ shall be forthwith forwarde d to the District Magistrate  or the Sub-
divisional Magistrate. 
 
 Sub-section (3) deals with sending the body for postmortem and sub-
section (4) deals with conferment of certain powers on the Magistrates. 
 
 During the investigation under section 174, statements are recorded 
from several persons, some of whom  may ultimately turn out to be 
prosecution witnesses.  These statemen ts would be of great importance, 
being statements given soon after the death of the person in regard to whom 
the offence is suspected. 
 
 If the statements of these persons are statutorily directed to be sent to 
the District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, along with the 
Report referred to in sub sec.(1) of sec. 174, that will ensure that there are no 
manipulations or malpractices in regard to those statements.  As at present, a 
Report could be loosely worded giving scope for improving upon it in the 
statements that may be sent ultimately to the Magistrate under section 
173(5), along with the final report. 
 
 It is, therefore, further proposed to amend section 174 (2) as follows 
by adding such sub sec. 2(A), below sub sec.(2): 
 

 134
“Section 174(2A): The statements of th e persons recorded at the inquest by 
such police officers shall be forwarded forthwith to the Magistrate.  
(2B) The signature or thumb impressi on, as the case may be, of the person 
making the statement shall be obtained on his statement. 

 135
 
19. Amendment of Chapter  XIX of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
 
Chapter XIX of the Code provides for trial of warrant cases by 
Magistrates. This chapter is sub-divided into two parts  – Part-A (governing 
the cases instituted on a police report) and Part-B (governing cases instituted 
otherwise than on police report).  The main difference in the procedure is 
that in cases governed by Part-A, the magistrate can frame charges 
straightaway after pursuing the police report and the accompanying 
documents. Section 239, no doubt, empowers him to examine the accused if 
he thinks it necessary and also to give an opportunity of hearing to the 
accused before framing the charge or discharging the accused, as the case 
may be, but this is only discretionary and not obligatory.  Whereas in cases 
governed by Part B, (i.e., in cases instituted otherwise than on Police report), 
the procedure is different and more elaborate.  In such cases, the magistrate 
has to first hear the prosecution and take all such evidence as may be 
produced in support of the prosecution and on consideration of such 
evidence, he may either discharge the accused,  if the complaint is found 
groundless or frame the charges, if he thinks there is material to show that 
accused has committed the offence triable under the said chapter.  Thereafter 
the accused is asked whether he pleads guilty and if he denies the charge he 
will be asked to cross-examine the witnesses and the trial proceeds.   
 
 There is a very good reason behind the distinction made by the Code 
between cases instituted on police report and cases instituted otherwise than 
on police report.  A police report is filed pursuant to and as a result of 

 136
investigation done by an independent agency i.e., the police, whereas in case 
of a private complaint, such an assurance is absent.  It is for this reason that 
the distinction between the two procedures was upheld by the Supreme 
Court in  Budhan Choudhary vs.  State of Bihar (AIR 1955 SC 191). 
 
 It is however brought to our noti ce that where the authority under the 
Income Tax Act, Central Excise Act, Customs Act, FERA/FEMA, 
Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 and the Companies Act, 1956 files 
complaints before a criminal court for prosecuting the persons under those 
enactments, the Courts are following the procedure in Part B of Chapter 
XIX, treating these cases as cases filed otherwise than on a police report.  
The course adopted by the Court appears to be unobjectionable on the 
language now employed in the chapter. In our opinion, however, this 
requires to be changed.  It must be provided that where a complaint is filed 
by the appropriate authority under any of the aforesaid enactments or similar 
enactments it should be proceeded with under Part A.  This is for the reason 
that appropriate authorities under these enactments also file complaints after 
a good amount of investigation, inquiry and verification.  Take for example, 
a criminal complaint filed under section 276 C of the Income Tax Act. 
According to this section “If a person willfully attempts in any manner 
whatsoever to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable 
under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be 
imposable on him  under on any other provision of this Act be 
punishable….” by a criminal court.   It is obvious that such a complaint will  
not be filed  merely on the filing of the  Return by the assessee but only after 

 137
the appropriate authority is satisfied  that there has been such a wilful 
attempt to evade the tax, penalty or interest chargeable/imposable under the 
Act.  Indeed, no complaint can be filed under section 276-C – as a matter of 
a fact under any of the Sections 275-A, 276, 276-A, 276-B, 276-BB, 276-
CC, 276-D, 277 and 278 – except with the previous sanction of the 
Commissioner, Commissioner (Appeals) or the appropriate authority (as 
defined in Explanation to sub-section (1) of section 279(1)) by virtue of the 
provision contained in section 279 of the Act.  The requirement of sanction 
of a higher official is a check against misuse of or frivolous  resort to,  the 
power to prosecute.  In fact, the I.T. Act provides greater safeguard against 
misuse of this power than the code of  criminal procedure. Even under the 
other enactments referred to above, a good amount of enquiry is made before 
launching the prosecution – it is never a matter of course.  Treating the 
complaints filed after such elaborate enquiry ought not to be equated with 
the complaints filed by private individuals and should not be subjected to the 
procedure in Part B of  Chapter XIX.  Applying Part-B is resulting in 
inordinate delay in processing these complaints, which in fact relate to 
economic offences, which must be given priority over the ordinary law and 
order crimes.   It is, just and appropriate that the complaints filed by the 
appropriate authorities under taxing enactments and other enactments 
mentioned hereinabove,  should be governed by the procedure contained in 
Part A of Chapter XIX.   
 
For achieving the above purpose it is necessary to amend the heading 
of ‘Part A’.  The present heading should be substituted by the heading 

 138
“Cases instituted on a police report or on a complaint  made by a public 
servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official 
duties.”  It is equally necessary to amend section 238 to provide that in any 
warrant case instituted upon a complaint made by a public servant, when the 
accused is brought before a Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the 
Magistrate shall satisfy himself that all the relevant documents constituting 
the basis of the complaint or referred to therein, have been furnished to the 
accused.  At present, section 238 requires that “when in any warrant case 
instituted on a police report, the accused appears or is brought before a 
Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Magistrate shall satisfy 
himself that he has complied with the provisions of Section 207”.  Section 
207 requires that in proceedings instituted on a police report, the magistrate 
shall, without delay, furnish to the accused, free of cost, copy of the police 
report, FIR, statement recorded under section 161(3), confessions and 
statements, if any, recorded under section 164 and any other document or 
relevant extract thereof forwarded to the magistrate with the police report 
under section 173(5).  A new section 207A is proposed to be inserted to 
provide that the Magistrate shall without delay, furnish to accused, free of 
cost, a copy of the complaint and documents on which it is based and other 
documents referred to therein.  This is a salutary provision and must be 
observed even by the authorities under the taxing and other enactments 
whose complaint  is now suggested herein to be equated with the police 
report.  The consequential amendments required to be carried out in other 
provisions of the Code are as follows:- 
 

 139
Amendment of section 190 
 
1. After clause (b) of sub-section (1) after the words “such facts” the 
following words shall be inserted, namely: - 
 
“or upon a complaint of facts wh ich constitute such offence 
made by a public servant acti ng or purporting to act in 
discharge of his official duties;” 
 
 Substitution  of the heading of Part A under Chapter XIX 
 
2. The existing heading of Part A under Chapter XIX shall be substituted 
as follows:- 
 
“A.-  Cases instituted on a poli ce report or on a complaint made 
by a public servant acting or purpor ting to act in discharge of 
his official duties.” 
 
 Insertion of new  section 207A   
 
3. After section 207 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely :- 
 
“207A.  In any case, where the proceeding has been instituted on 
a complaint made by a public servant acting or purporting to act in the 

 140
discharge of his official duties, the Magistrate sh all without delay 
furnish to accused, free of cost, a copy of the complaint and 
documents on which it is based a nd other documents referred to 
therein.” 
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any 
document referred to in the complaint is voluminous,he 
shall instead of furnishi ng the accused with a copy 
thereof,  direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it 
either personally or through pleader in court. ” 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 238 
 
4. Section 238 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section 
(1) and after sub-section as so renum bered, the following sub-section shall 
be inserted namely:- 
   
 “(2) When, in any warrant- case instituted upon a complaint 
made by a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge 
of his official duties, the accused is brought before a magistrate at the 
commencement of the trial, the Magistrate shall satisfy himself  that 
he has complied with the provisions of  section 207A.” 
  
 
     

 141
Substitution of section 239 
 
5.  For section 239 of the principa l Act the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
 
“ 239. If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent 
with it under section 173 or upon cons idering the complaint made by 
the public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his 
official duties and the documents  sent with it and making such 
examination, if any, of the accu sed as the Magistrate thinks 
necessary and after giving the prosecution and the accused an 
opportunity of being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge 
against the accused to be groundless,  he shall discharge the accused 
and record his reasons for so doing.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 142
 
 
 
Substitution of heading B below section 243 
 
6. The existing heading “B” below section 243 shall be substituted as 
follows:- 
 
“B.-Cases instituted otherwise than on police report or on a complaint 
made by a public servant acting or purporting to act in discharge of 
his official duties” 
 
Amendment of section 244 
 
7.  In section 244 of the principal Ac t, in subsection (1) for the words, 
“When in any warrant case instituted ot herwise than on a police report, the 
accused appears” the words “When in any warrant case instituted otherwise 
than on a police report, or upon a complaint made by public servant acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of hi s official duties, the accused appears” 
shall be substituted. 
 
 
Amendment of section 249 
 
8.  in section 249 , for the words,  “When the proceedings have been 
instituted upon complaint, a nd on any day fixed for the hearing of the case, 

 143
the complainant is absent,” the words “When the proceedings have been 
instituted upon complaint other than a complaint made by a public servant 
acting or purporting to act in the discha rge of his official duties, and on any 
day fixed for the hearing of case, th e complainant is absent,” shall be 
substituted. 
 
 
Amendment of section 256 
 
9. In section 256 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, “ If 
the summons has been issued on compla int and on the day appointed for the 
appearance of the accused, ” the words “ If the summons has been issued on 
complaint, other than a complain t made by public servant acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, and on the day 
appointed for the appearance of the accused,” shall be substituted. 
  
 If the above suggestion is implemented it will cut down a good 
amount of delay which is occurring in prosecutions lodged under taxing 
enactments and other enactments like those referred hereinabove.  It will 
advance the public interest and interests of justice without any manner 
compromising or affecting the legitimate rights of the accused. 
 
 
 
 

 144
 
This Report deals with various en actments of which some, like the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
are procedural while some others, na mely, the Partnership Act, 1932, Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955, Hindu Adoption & Ma intenance Act, 1956 etc. concern 
substantive laws.  (Of course, some pr oposals relate to new offences which 
are created and these cannot be retrospective).  We, therefore, felt that it is 
necessary to set out in detail which of these provisions apply to pending 
suits, appeals under the Code of Civ il Procedure and which provisions shall 
apply to the inquiries and judicial pr oceedings under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure and to what extent some of  the proposals for amendment of the 
substantive laws shall apply to pending proceedings.  We have, therefore, 
accordingly formulated these matters  under sec. 15 with the heading, 
“Transitory Provision”. 
 
The amendments in the Code of Criminal procedure, 1973, 
recommended in the 177 th report on ‘Law of Arrest ’, also need to be 
implemented along with the amendmen ts recommended in the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1973, in the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions 
Amendment) Bill, 2002, annexed with this report. 
 
 
 
 
 

 145
 
 
 
CONCLUSION: 
Our recommendations cover various enactments and with a view to translate 
these in to statutory provisions, we ha ve prepared a consolidated Bill under 
the name “ Law Reforms (Miscellane ous Provisions Amendment) Bill, 
2002” on the pattern of the U.K. Law Reforms (Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Act 1934. The Bill is enclosed with this report.  
 
We recommend accordingly. 
 
(Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
Chairman 
(Justice M.Jagannadha Rao) 
Vice Chairman 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Member 
 
(Mr. T.K.Viswanathan) 
Member-Secretary 
Dated:   14.12.2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 