 1 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
ON 
 
THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE AND PROTECTION OF 
INFORMERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DECEMBER 2001 
 

 2 
 
D.O.No6(3) (72) /2001-LC (LS)        
        December 14, 2001   
 
 
Dear Shri Jaitley, 
 
I am glad to forward here with Law Commission’s 179th Report on “Public 
Interest Disclosure Bill”. 
 
The Law Commission had received a letter dated 24/8/1999 from Mr. N.Vittal, 
the Chief Vigilance Commissioner (CVC) requesting the Commission  to draft a Bill 
encouraging to disclose corrupt practices on the part of public functionaries and 
protecting honest persons from such disclosures. In this connection Shri. Vittal also made 
reference to the speech of Prime Minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee condemning rampant 
corruption and highlighting the principle of “Zero tolerance’.  
 
Corruption has become a global malaise and for its eradication, “Whistle 
Blowing” laws have been enacted by U.K., U.S.A. and Australia. Corrupt practices 
violate human rights and basic freedom and affect the development of a Nation. The Law 
Commission considered it necessary to recommend some measures to check this evil. 
 
The 15th law Commission has already forwarded its 161st report on ‘Central 
Vigilance Commission and Allied Bodies’ in 1998 and 166th report on ‘The Corrupt 
Public Servants (Forfeiture of Property) Bill’ in 1999 to tackle this problem. 
 
The Commission after an in-depth study and taking into consideration similar 
legislations in other countries and keeping in view the needs and circumstances of our 
country has prepared this report. A Bill entitled ‘The Public Interest Disclosure 
(Protection of Informers) Bill’ is enclosed with this report. (Annexure-I). 
 
We hope the recommendations made by the Commission in this report will be 
implemented to achieve the larger objective of checking corruption. 
 
With warm regards, 
 
      Yours Sincerely, 
 
  
      (B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
 
Shri. Arun Jaitley, 
Hon’ble Minister for law, Justice & Co. Affairs, 
New Delhi. 
 

 3 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Sl.No             CONTENTS    P A G E  N o s. 
 
1.  CHAPTER-1: INTRODUCTORY                                          1-3 
 
2.                     CHAPTER-2: PHENOMENON OF CORRUPTION: 
                                          CAUSES AND EFFECTS                               4-19 
 
3.                     CHAPTER-3: ERADICATION OF CORRUPTION                     
                                                  AND WHISTLE BLOWING                        20-34 
 
4.                     CHAPTER-4: FREEDOM OF SPEECH, RIGHT TO 
                                                  KNOW AND RIGHT TO PRIVACY           35-42 
 
5.                      CHAPTER-5: JUDICIAL PROTECTION TO  
                                                 BLOWERS IN U.K., EUROPEAN 
                                                 UNION AND USA                                        43-58 
 
6.                     CHAPTER-6: STATUTORY PROTECTION TO 
                                                WHISTLE BLOWERS IN UK,  
                                                 AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND 
                                                  USA                                                              59-79 
 
7.  CHAPTER-7: THE PROPOSED BILL AND ITS 
                                                 BASIS                                                           80-110 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
1. THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE  
                    (PROTECTION- OF INFORMERS) BILL, 2002.            111-121          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
REPORT ON THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE AND 
PROTECTION OF INFORMERS 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
“Whistleblowers protection is a policy that all government leaders 
support in public but few in power tolerate in private” –  
              Thomas M. Devine 1 
Reference 
1. The Law Commission of India had received a letter dated 24th August, 
1999 from Shri. N.Vittal, the Central Vigilance Commissioner (CVC), 
requesting the Law Commission to draf t a Bill encouraging and protecting 
honest persons to expose corrupt practices on the part of public 
functionaries.  In this connection, he made a reference to the speech of Prime 
Minister Shri.Atal Bihari Vajpay ee condemning rampant corruption and 
highlighting the principle of ‘zero tolerance’ not only from the demand side 
of public servants but also from the supply side. 
1.1 In the aforesaid letter, Shri.Vittal informed the Law Commission that 
he had banned actions on anonymous/pseudonymous complaints which had 
been lodged by disgruntled elements to blackmail honest officials resulting  
                                                 
1  The Whistleblowers Protection Act, 1989: Foundation for the Modern Law of Employment 
Dissent’ by Thomas M. Devine, vol. 51, Washington College of Law, Administrative Law Review 
(1999), p. 533. 

 5 
1.’The Whistleblowers Protection Act, 1989: Foundation for the Modern Law of Employment Dissent’ by Thomas M. 
Devine, Vol. 51, Washington College of Law, Administrative Law Review (1999), p. 533. 
 
in their demoralization.  However, honest employees could complain to the 
Central Vigilance Commission and their na mes had to be kept confidential.  
Shri. Vittal, in the said letter, stressed the need of a statute regarding whistle 
blowing (meaning thereby disclosure of a conduct adverse to the public 
interest) that might go a long way in strengthening the fight against 
corruption in the country.  He found support for such a law in whistle 
blowing legislations already in operation in UK , US and Australia. 
 The Law Commission took cognizance of this communication of the 
Central Vigilance Commission and initiated a study on the subject. 
Scope of the Report: 
 The Commission proposes to refer, in this Report, to the evil of 
corruption among public servants and maladministration and the adverse 
effects thereof to the country, then to the options available for eradication of 
corruption, the right to freedom of e xpression and the right to know and the 
limitations of the right to privacy, then to the protection afforded to whistle 
blowers in various countries by the judiciary and in particular by the English 
Courts, the European Court and by th e American Courts.  The Commission 
also proposes to survey the salient features of various laws protecting 

 6 
whistle blowers in UK, Australia, New Zealand and USA.   Thereafter, The 
Commission will refer to the proposals for a Bill on the subject in India. 
 While in the United States of Am erica, the federal statute which 
protects whistleblowers is called the Whistleblower Protection Act, 1989, 
the English Act of 1998 and the Aust ralian Act of 1994 are called ‘Public 
Interest Disclosure Acts’.  The New Zealand Act of 2000 is called `Protected 
Disclosure Act’.  These enactments pr ovide a statutory procedure enabling 
public servants (in UK and in some of the States in USA enabling employees 
of private industries also) to make complaints in confidence to the  
prescribed authority regarding corrup tion or  maladministration by other 
public servants in the same organi zation.  Express provisions of the 
enactments protect the complainants from reprisals by those against whom 
complaints are made.  A Bill on similar lines is appended to this Report. 

 7 
CHAPTER II 
2. Phenomenon of Corruption: Causes and effects 
 Corruption is a common phenomenon in several countries, only the 
degrees of corruption differ. It is not as if there is corruption only in 
developing or poorer countries. There is  corruption in developed countries 
too. In the last five years, lead ing politicians in U.K., Belgium, France, 
Spain and Italy have been convicted of corruption and in fact, the entire 
European Commission resigned because of it. 
(a) Supreme Court’s views on Corruption:- 
 Corruption in our country has a hist orical perspective of its own. As 
pointed recently by the Suprem e Court, State of  M.P . vs. Ram Singh 2000 
(5)SCC 88 “the menace of corrupti on was found to have enormously 
increased by the First and Second World War conditions. Corruption, at the 
initial stages, was considered to be confined to the bureaucracy, which had 
the opportunities to deal with a variety of State largesse in the form of 
contracts, licences and grants. Even  after the war, the opportunities for 
corruption continued as large amounts of government surplus stores were 
required to be disposed of by public se rvants. As a consequence of the wars, 
the shortage of various goods necess itated the imposition of controls and 
extensive schemes of post-war reconstr uction involving the disbursement of 

 8 
huge sums of money which lay in the control of the public servants, giving 
them a wide discretion, with the resu lt of luring them to the glittering shine 
of wealth and property”. The Court obs erved that “in order to consolidate 
and amend the laws relating to prevention of corruption and matters 
connected thereto, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 was enacted 
which was amended from time to time. In the year 1988 a new Act on the 
subject, being Act 49 of 1988, was enacted  with the object of dealing with 
the circumstances, contingencies and shortcomings which were noticed in 
the working and implementation of th e 1947 Act.”  In the same case, the 
Supreme Court further observed : 
“Corruption is termed as a plague which is not only contagious but if 
not controlled, spreads like a fire in  a jungle.  Its virus is compared 
with HIV leading to AIDS, being incurable. It has also been termed as 
royal thievery.  The socio-political system exposed to such a dreaded 
communicable disease is likely to crumble under its own weight.  
Corruption is opposed to democracy and social order, being not only 
anti people, but aimed and targeted  against them.  It affects the 
economy and destroys the cultural he ritage.  Unless nipped in the bud 
at the earliest, it is likely to cau se turbulence – shaking the socio-

 9 
economic-political system in an othe rwise healthy, wealthy, effective 
and vibranting society”.  
(b) Meaning of the word ‘Corruption’:- 
There is no universal definition of wh at constitutes a corrupt behaviour.  
The definition of corruption and corrupt  practices varies from country to 
country.  The World Bank and other mu ltilateral institutions refer to it as 
“the abuse of public office for private gain 1.  It involves the seeking or 
extracting of promise or receipt of a gift or any other advantage by a public 
servant in consideration of the pe rformance or omission of an act, in 
violation of the duties required of the office.  Mark Philip, a political 
scientist, identified three broad definitions of corruption, viz., public office 
centered, public interest centered and market centered.2  
i) The public office centered corruption  is defined as a behaviour  
that digresses from the formal public duties of an official for 
reasons of private benefit. J.S.Nye provides an example of a public 
office-centered definition: 
 Corruption is behaviour, which deviates form the formal duties of a 
public role because of private regard ing (personal, close family, private 
clique) pecuniary status gains; or violates rules against the exercise of  
                                                 
1  Published by Transparency International World Bank in Financial Times September 16, 1997.  
2 Mark Philip, “Defining Political Corruption” political studies, Vol.45 No.3, special issue 1997. 

 10 
1. Published by Transparency International Wo rld Bank in Financial Times September 16, 1997. 
2. Mark Philip, “Defining Political Corruption” political studies, Vol.45 No.3, special issue 1997. 
certain types of private regarding infl uence. This includes such behavior 
as bribery (use of reward to pervert the judgment of a person of in a 
position of trust); nepotism (bestowal of patronage by reason of 
ascriptive relationship rather than merit); and misappropriation (illegal 
appropritation of public resources for private-regarding uses).3 
ii) The public office interest centered corruption  focuses on behaviour 
which has a negative impact on the welfare of the public.  Such a 
behaviour, in the words of Carl Friedrich, is said to exist “whenever a 
power holder, who is charged with doing certain things is by monetary or 
other rewards not legally provided fo r, induced to take actions which 
favour whoever provides for the rewards and thereby does damage to the 
public and its interest.”
4   
iii)   The market centered corruption points towards utilizing an economic 
methodology by individuals or groups to gain influence over the actions 
of the bureaucracy.  Accordingly, fo r a civil servant who regards his 
office as a business, the office becomes the maximizing unit.5   
  ________________________________________________ 
                                                 
3  J.S. Nye, Political Corruption: a Cost Benefit analysis in A.J. Heidenheimer, M. Johnston and V.le 
Vine(ed.), Political: A hand book, 1989 P.966 as refered in “The Asia Foundation Working Paper 
Series,1998 P.10 
4   See id at page 10. 
5 Naphaniel Leff, “Economic Development through Corruption” in Heidenheimer, id at 389. 

 11 
3. J.S Nye, Political Corruption: A Cost Benefit analysis in A.J. Heidenheimer, M.Johnst on and V. le Vine (ed.), 
Political: A hand book, 1989 p. 966 as referred in “ The Asia Foundation Working Paper Series, 1998, P. 10” 
4. See id at page 10 
5. Naphaniel Leff, “ Economic Development th rough Corruption” in Heidenheimer, id at 389.               
These three types of definitions have been used as a basis for 
analyzing political corruption in Heidenheimer’s Political Corruption  
(1970).  But the most functional defin ition adopted by various international 
organizations such as Transparency International and Asian Development 
Bank is the “misuse of public office for private profit or political gain” 
because, by and large, it covers all types of corruption/corrupt practices and          
abuses of public office.  To comb at corruption, the World Bank has 
identified specific abuses of public office for private gains, which are as 
follows: 
 “Public office is abused for priv ate gain when an  official accepts, 
solicits or extorts a bribe.  It is  also abused when private agents 
actively offer bribes to circumvent  public policies and processes for 
competitive advantage and profit.  Public office can also be abused for 
personal benefit even if no bribery occurs, through patronage and 
nepotism, the theft of state assets or the diversion of state revenues.6” 
   _____________________________________________ 
6. World Bank, Helping countries combat corruption:  the role of  World Bank 1977. Italics supplied. 
                                                 
6 World Bank, Helping countries combat corruption: the role of World Bank 1997.  Italics supplied 

 12 
 
 Syed Hussein Alats has, while de fining the term corruption “as the 
abuse of trust in the interest of pr ivate gain”, identified transactive and 
extortive corruption, the former being an agreement between a donor and 
recipient pursued by them for mutual benefit and the latter entailing some 
form of coercion to avoid the inf liction of harm on the donor. He also 
identified other kinds of corruption, e.g., investive corruption involving the 
offer of benefit without an immediate link but in anticipation of a future gain 
in which favour may be re quired; 
nepotic corruption  concerning favour to  
friends and relatives in appointment to public office; autogenic corruption  
taking place  when a single individual earns profit from inside knowledge of 
a policy outcome; and 
supportive corruption  referring to the protection or 
strengthening of existing corruption of ten through the use of intrigue or 
violence.7   
The definitions, enumerations and discussions of various types/forms 
of corruption focus essentially on behaviour of officials in the public sector 
who unlawfully or improperly enrich themselves by the misuse of public 
power entrusted to them. 
7. Syed Hussein Alatas, Corruption: Its Nature, Causes and Consequences. Aldershopt; Brookfield, Vt., USA Avebury, 1990 pp 3-4. 
                                                 
7 Syed Hussein Alatas, Corruption : its Nature, Causes and Consequences.  Aldershopt; Brookfield, Vt., 
USA Avebury, 1990 pp.3-4. 

 13 
(c) Causes of corruption:- 
There are many causes of corruption at both institutional and 
individual levels.  Experts of different  specialities have highlighted various 
factors, e.g.,  decline in religious beliefs or  in public morality, uncertainty in 
the standards of appropriate behaviour, divergence between the formal and 
informal rules governing behaviours in the public sector, value conflicts in 
the post colonial settings where the standards and practices embedded within 
traditional relationship differ from th e institutions left behind by the 
departing colonial power.   
 Robert Klitgaard, a political scie ntist, has conceptualized the 
opportunity for corruption within an institution in the following formula– 
Corruption = (Monopoly) + (Discretion) – Accountability 
According to him – 
“The opportunity for corruption is a function of the size of the rents 
under a public official’s control (M), the discretion that official has in 
allocating those rents (D), and the accountability that these official 
faces for his or her decisions.8 
 
 The empirical research done by Daniel Kaufmann and Jeffrey Sachs 
suggests that there is a complex set of  the determinants of corruption, e.g., 
poor institutions (including the rule of  law and safeguards for the rights of 
property), civil liberties, governance (including the level of 
                                                 
8 Robert Klitgaard, Controlling Corruption Berkeley; University of California Prss, 1988, page 75. 

 14 
professionalization of the administrative service) and economic policies as 
also characteristics like the size of th e country which seem to play an 
enabling role for corruption. 9  Along these lines, the World Bank points out 
both institutional and economic policy factors which generate a nourishing 
8. Robert Klitgaard, Controlling Co rruption Berkeley; University of California Press, 1988, page 75. 
9. See Asia Foundation Working Paper seri es on Corruption prepared by Amanda L. Morgan, Consultant Asia Foundation 
page 50. 
environment for corruption.  In its re port of 1997, it states that corruption 
thrives :  
where distortions in the policy and regulatory regime provide 
scope for it and where institutions  of restraint are weak.  The 
problem of corruption lies at the intersection of the public and 
the private sectors.  It is a tw o-way street.  Private interests, 
domestic and external, wield their influence through illegal 
means to take advantage of opportunities for corruption and 
rent seeking, and public instituti ons succumb to these and other 
sources of corruption in the absence of credible restraint. 
 
 Thus opportunities for corrupt behaviour develop –  
(i) whenever public functionaries have large discretion in exercising 
the powers and little accountability for their actions taken therefor; 
(ii) whenever government policies l eave some gap, then these gaps 
create opportunities for middlemen or the actors of corruption;   
                                                 
9 See Asia Foundation Working Paper series on Corrup tion prepared by Amanda L. Morgan, Consultant 
Asia Foundation page 50. 

 15 
(iii) such opportunities also deve lop because of prevalence of 
administrative secrecy which en courages corruption and lobbying 
and insularity from democratic control. 
 Hence such root causes of corrupti on and also other causes which give 
rise to corruption have to be properly understood. 
(d) Effects of corruption:- 
   It is an established fact that corruption or corrupt practices have 
detrimental or corrosive effects es pecially in developing countries.  
However, a debate on the effect of  corruption on economic development 
went on for long.  One view is that co rruption may not be incompatible with 
development and at times may even en courage it by serving as an effective 
method of cutting the red tape and clearing projects for development.  A 
bribe can be regarded as  a market payment to ensure that resources are 
allocated to those persons who are most likely to use them efficiently. 
 The other view maintains that corruption detracts from development 
because of its undermining competitive processes, focusing on short term 
profits in place of sustainable and broa d based development.   Further, as 
Gunnar Myrdal pleaded, corruption creates  incentives for officials to erect 

 16 
additional bureaucratic obstacles with a view to increasing  opportunities for 
more bribes.10 
 In the opinion of the World Bank, the arguments favouring corruption 
fail to account for any objective other th an short term efficiency.  Gunnar 
Myrdal also  said : 
“In the long run, expectations of bribery may distort the number 
and types of contracts placed fo r bidding, the method used to 
award contracts, and the speed or  efficiency with which public 
officials do their work in the ab sence of bribes.  It may also 
delay macroeconomic policy refo rm.  In addition, the gains 
from such bribery may be ine quitably distributed (accessible 
only to certain firms and public officials).11 
 
 In the view of  World Bank, the e ffect of bribery in the system as a 
whole is negative.  It can delay refo rm by diffusing pressure and lead to 
detrimental evasion of good regulations .  Secondly, small firms and poor 
segments of the society may dispr oportionately bear the burden of a 
dysfunctional system having the undesired effect of pushing business into 
the informal economy. 
 Moreover, corruption may lead to the divergence of funds from their 
intended targets and to th e financing of unproductive public expenditure.  It 
may result in loss of tax revenue in the form of tax evasion or improper use  
10. Gunnar Myrdal, Asian Drama: an inquiry into the Poverty of Nations, Vol. II, New York Pantheon, 1969. 
                                                 
10 Gunnar Myrdal, Asian Drama: an inquiry into the Poverty of Nations, Vol.II, New York Pantheon, 1969. 
11 World Bank Helping countries combat Corruption 1997 p.14. 

 17 
11. World bank Helping countries combat Corruption 1997, p.14. 
of discretionary tax exemption.  It may also affect allocation of public 
procurement contracts leading to inferior public infrastructure and services.   
 The composition of Government expe nditure may also be affected by 
corruption in that corrupt officials may favour expenditures on goods and 
projects tantamount to maximizing  opportunity for their personal benefits.   
Thus, it is clear that corruption ex acts heavy economic costs, distorts 
the operation of free markets and slows down economic development. 
Besides economic consequences, th e rampant corruption tends to 
undermine the legitimacy of state ins titutions and governments.  When a 
public official pursues his own intere st without regard to the interest 
attached to his public function, the balance of authority both among 
government entities and between the State and the civil society is effectively 
damaged.  If the general population a ssumes that public officials are not 
bound by the restraints of their public functions, it will be less likely to obey 
the laws of the society.  In such a situation, th ere is a need to combat 
corruption effectively because it is one of the root causes of destabilizing  
the rule of law.   
Corruption also casts a negative infl uence on the efforts to deal with 
the incidence of poverty.  It has beco me a mechanism by which a neo-nich  
class has been developed in many developing countries.  It can affect morals 

 18 
by the `perversion’ or `destruction’ of integrity in the discharge of public 
duties by bribery or favour or the use or existence of corrupt practices.  Thus 
it destroys the ability of institutions and bureaucracies to deliver services 
that society may expect thereby posing a serious threat to the democratic 
institutions and the very existence of social order.  Corruption in defence 
purchase and contracts tends to undermine the very security of the State.   
 Late Mehbub-ul-Haq, the famous economist spoke of two dimensions 
of corruption.  One is the exploitative corruption  where the public servant 
exploits the helpless poor citizen.  The other is collusive corruption  where 
the citizen corrupts the public servant by a bribe because he gets financially 
and beneficially, better benefits.  Collusive corruption depends on black 
money.  He pointed out four key char acteristics that make corruption more 
damaging in South Asian countries than in any other parts of the world: 
“First, corruption in South Asia occurs  up-stream, not down-stream.  
 Corruption at the top distorts fundamental decisions about 
 development priorities, policies and projects.  In industrial countries, 
 these core decisions are taken through transparent competition and on 
 merit, even though petty corruption may occur down-stream.  
Second, corruption money in South Asia has wings, not wheels.  Most 
 of the corrupt gains made in th e region are immediately smuggled out 

 19 
 to safe havens abroad.  Whereas th ere is some capital flight in other 
 countries as well, a greater proporti on goes into investment.  In other 
 words, it is more likely that corr uption money in the North Asia is 
 used to finance business than to fill foreign accounts. 
Third, corruption in South Asia often leads to promotion, not prison.  
 The big fish – unless they belong to the opposition – rarely fry.  In 
 contrast, industrialized countries often have a process of 
 accountability where even top leaders are investigated and prosecuted.  
 For instance, former Italian Prime  Minister Bettino Craxi forced to 
live in exile in Tunisia to escape extradition on corruption 
 charges in  Rome.  The most fru strating aspect of corruption in 
South Asia  is that      the co rrupt are often too powerful to go through 
such an  honest process of accountability.  
Fourth, corruption in South Asia occurs with 515 million people in 
poverty, not with per capita income s above twenty thousand dollars.  
While corruption in rich rapidly gr owing Countries may be tolerable, 
though responsible, in poverty strick en South Asia, it is political 
dynamite when the majority of the population cannot, but to massive 
human deprivation and even more extreme income  meet their basic 
needs while a few make fortunes through corruption.  Thus corruption 

 20 
in South Asia does not lead to simply Cabinet portfolio shifts or 
newspaper headlines inequalities.  Combating corruption in the region 
is not just about punishing corrupt politicians and bureaucrats but 
about saving human lives.  There are two dimensions of corruption.  
One is the exploitative corruption where the public servant exploits 
the helpless poor citizen.  The other is collusive corruption where the 
citizen corrupts the public servant by a bribe because he gets 
financially better benefits.  Collu sive corruption depends on black 
money.”   
 
(e) Transparency Internationa l and Corruption Perception 
Index 
The Transparency International is an  international body 
founded in 1993 and publishes Global Corruption Reports annually.  
It also publishes a Corruption Pe rception Index (CPI).  The Index 
refers to the rankings of various c ountries from the least corrupt to the 
most corrupt.   
 The latest report is of 2001 and it refers to serious cases 
of corruption in several countries in the world, including India.  It also 
refers to steps taken in various c ountries to eradicate corruption and 

 21 
the obstacles that legislations face in relation to challenge to their 
validity and also challenges to the  implementation of the legislation.  
The Report further refers to the judgment of the Kenyan High Court 
of December, 2000, declaring the Kenya Anti Corruption Authority as 
an unconstitutional body.  In South A frica, the head of the Special 
Investigating Unit who is mandated to probe corruption, was excluded 
by a Constitutional Commission from ta king part in a high profile 
investigation. Reference is also made in the Report to the OECD Anti-
Bribery Convention, 1999.  The United Nations is yet to formulate a 
Convention against Bribery. 
 It is significant that the Tr ansparency International also 
publishes a ‘Bribe Payer’s Index’ (B PI).  Eleven International Banks 
have evolved a ‘Know Your Custom er’ principles, which are called 
the ‘Wolfberg Principles’. 
 The Corruption Perception Index (CPI) was first 
published by the Transparency International in 1995.  The Index for 
the year 2001 is based on severa l surveys conducted in various 
countries.  It is however unfort unate that the CPI focuses only on 
corruption among public officials ‘ but not upon secret payments to 

 22 
finance political campaigns, the complicity of banks in money 
laundering or bribery by multinationals’.   
In a list of 91 countries for the year 2001, India stands set at 
No. 71 with a score of 2.7 out of  10.  There are, no doubt, 20 other 
countries where corruption is higher and those countries are listed 
between No. 71 to No. 91.  In that list come the following countries, 
namely, Vietnam, Zambia, Nicaragua, Equador, Pakistan, Russia, 
Tanzania, Bolivia, Cameroon, Kenya, Indonesia, Uganda, and Nigeria 
and Bangladesh comes last at No . 91.  Among the least corrupt 
countries from are Finland, Denm ark, New Zealand, Iceland, 
Singapore, Sweden, Canada, Netherla nds, etc. (which lie between 9.9 
and 8.8), UK stands at No. 13 and USA at No. 16 with 8.3 and 7.6 
points respectively.  Germany is at  No. 20 with 7.4 points, and Japan 
is at No. 21 with 7.1 points. 
 
 
 
 
- * - 
 

 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
ERADICATION OF CORRUPTION AND WHISTLE BLOWING 
  
In this Chapter, we shall deal w ith methods of punishing corrupt public 
servants and the means available for obtaining information regarding 
corruption and the need for whistle blowers. 
(A) Methods employed for taking  action against corrupt public 
servants: 
(a)  Departmental action 

 24 
One of the methods for arresting corruption is by way of initiation of 
departmental proceedings under the disciplinary rules. There are rules 
made by the Central Government as well as State Governments and 
Public Sector Undertakings to conduct preliminary enquiries and then if a 
prima facie  case is made out, to frame  charges and  to conduct  a regular 
enquiry observing principles of natural justice and then to  pass orders of 
punishments including dismissal, remova l, compulsory retirement and so 
on.   
(b) Criminal Prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption               
Act, 1988 read with relevant provisions of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 
Apart from departmental action, the other method is for the 
employer to take action against the public servant under the provisions 
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 read with relevant 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860).  The Prevention  
of Corruption Act contains elaborate procedure for prosecution of 
corrupt public servants. 
(c) Confiscation of properties illegally acquired by corrupt 
means: 
 
The Law Commission in its 167 th Report suggested enactment 
of a law for forfeiture of property of Corrupt Public Servants and a 

 25 
Bill titled ‘The Corrupt Public Serv ants (Forfeiture of Property)’ is 
annexed with the report.  The re port is pending consideration by the 
Government from Feb. 1999.  Sub- section (1) of the relevant 
provision states that as from the date of the comme ncement of the 
Act, it shall not be lawful for any person to whom the Act applied, to 
hold any illegally acquire d property either by himself or through any 
other person on his behalf.  The rele vant provision of the Bill further 
provides as follows: 
“where any person holds any illegally acquired property in 
contravention of the provisions  of sub-section (1), such 
property shall be liable to be forfeited to the Central 
Government in accordance with the provisions of the Act”.   
The provisions of the proposed Act regarding confiscation are in 
addition to the provision relating to  conviction for a minimum period 
of seven years, which may extend upto fourteen years.  The provisions 
of the proposed Act apply not only to  the public servant but also to 
every person who is a “relative” of the public servant or an 
“associate” of such person or the hol der of any property which was at 
any time previously held by the pub lic servant, unless such holder 
proves that he was a transfer ee in good faith for adequate 

 26 
consideration.  The provisions al so apply to a ny person who has 
deposited any amount or other moveable properties in any bank or any 
other concern outside the territory  of India, or has acquired any 
properties outside the territory of India without the requisite 
permission of the appropriate au thority.  The proposed Act also 
contains the definition of ‘relative’ referring to various relations of the 
public servant and also a definition of ‘associate’ referring to various 
types of persons associated with the public servant. 
 The Bill making the above provisions has not yet become law.  
Once it becomes law, there is no doubt, it will substantially put an end 
to corruption. 
 
(d )  Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 and 
acquisition of held benami properties:- 
The Act was the result of the 57 th report and the 130 th report of 
the Law Commission and precludes the person who acquired the 
property in the name of another pe rson from claiming it as his own.  
Section 3 of the Act prohibits `Ben ami transactions’ while section 4 
prohibits the acquirer from recovering the property from the 
benamidar.   

 27 
Section 5 of the Act is importa nt and permits acquisition of 
property held  benami.  It states;  
“(1) All properties held benami shall be subject to acquisition 
by such authority, in such manner and after following such procedure 
as may be prescribed. 
(2)For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no 
amount shall be payable for the acquisition of any property under sub-
section (1)”. 
Unfortunately, in the last more than 13 years, rules have not 
been prescribed by the government for the purposes of sub-section (1)   
of section, 5 and the result is th at it has not been possible for the 
government to confiscate properties acquired by the  real owner in the 
name of his benamidars.   
(e) Public Interest Litigation; judici ary enforcing rule of law 
“Vineet Narain” cases :- 
One of the methods by which inacti on or delay on the part of the 
concerned departments or police agencies is sought to be remedied is by 
resorting to public interest litigation in  the High Courts or in the Supreme 
Court.  .  The scope of such public in terest cases has been laid down by the 
Supreme court of India in a series of  cases, entitled Vineet Narain vs. Union 

 28 
of India :- 1996 (2) Scale (SP) 42, 1996 (2) SCC 199, 1997(4) SCC.  778, 
1998(1) SCC 226, 1998 (8) SCC.  661. 
In these judgments, the Supreme Court has directed the Central 
Bureau of Investigation and the Revenue authorities to fairly and properly 
conduct and complete the investigati on expeditiously against every person 
involved, irrespective of position and status. The  Supreme Court observed 
that it is the bounden duty of the judiciar y to enforce the rule of law and to 
see that investigation into corrupti on “is conducted in accordance with law 
and is not scuttled by anybody”.  (see 1998 (1) SCC 226)    
The Court observed:- 
“the holders of public offices ar e entrusted with certain powers 
to be exercised in public interest  alone and, therefore, the office 
is held by them in trust for the people.  Any deviation from the 
path of rectitude by any of them amounts to breach of trust and 
must be severely dealt with instead of being pushed under the 
carpet.  If the conduct amounts to  an offence, it must be 
promptly investigated and the offender against whom a prima-
facie case is made out should be  prosecuted expeditiously so 
that the majesty of law is upheld and the rule of law vindicated.  

 29 
It is the duty of the judiciar y to enforce the rule of law  and, 
therefore, to guard against erosion of the rule of law”. 
Adverting  to exposure of corruption by the media and public 
interest litigation, the court observed:- 
“The adverse impact of lack of probity in public life   leading to 
a high degree of corruption is manifold.  It also has adverse 
effect on foreign investment a nd funding from the International 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank who have warned that 
future aid to under developed countries may be subject to the 
requisite steps being taken to  eradicate corruption, which 
prevents International aid from reaching those for whom it is 
meant.  Increasing corruption has lead to investigative 
journalism   which is of value to a fr ee society.  The need to 
highlight corruption in public life through the medium of public 
interest litigation  invoking judicial review may be frequent in 
India but is not unknown in other countries”. 
(e)     The Lok Pal  Bill, 2001. 
One other law which has been envisaged over a long 
period for eradication of corr uption is the ‘Lok Pal and Lok 
Ayukt Bill’.  The first draft of  the Bill was prepared by the 

 30 
Morarji Desai Committee in 1968, the Bill was introduced in 
Parliament but was not passed on account of the dissolution of 
the then Lok Sabha.  Thereafter,  we have had number of draft 
Bills in the last 32 years namely in 1971, 1977, 1983, 1989, 
1996, 1998, 2000 and the latest in  the year 2001.  We shall 
revert back to these bills in Chapter 7. 
 
 
(B) Gathering information about co rrupt public servants – existing 
procedures: 
Detection of corruption is obviously li nked up with the evidence that can be 
gathered about the conduct of the person or body indulging in corrupt 
activities. 
Existing procedures today include (a) direct evidence of corruption 
(b) laying traps, (c) search and seizure operations and (d) proving that assets 
are owned or possessed by the public se rvant disproportionate to his known 
sources of income. 
If there is direct evidence of one’s corruption, there is no difficulty in 
arriving at a finding of corruption.  In other cases where a public servant has 
a reputation of dishonesty, the bribe giver informs the police in advance, 
currency notes which are chemically treated are handed over to the public 

 31 
servant by the bribe giver and almost  immediately the police land at the 
place and recover the currency notes from the public servant.  This is the 
trap procedure.  One other method that is followed is to conduct a search and 
seizure operation after obtaining necessa ry orders from a Magistrate and 
seize the money, jewellery or docum ents showing acquisition of property 
illegally.  There are provisions in the Income Tax Act, 1961 and other 
statutes for conducting such operations .  Yet another method is by finding 
out whether the assets owned or in the possession of the public servant are 
grossly disproportionate to his known s ources of income thereby raising a 
presumption that the assets must have been acquired out of corruption.   
(C) Whistleblowers: 
 Whistleblowers can also play a very important role in providing 
information about corruption and mal- administration.  Public servants 
working in the same department know be tter as to who is corrupt in their 
department but unfortunately, they are not bold enough to convey the said 
information to higher authorities for fear  of reprisals by those against whom 
complaints are made.  If adequate stat utory protection is granted, there can 
be no doubt, that the government will be  able to get more information 
regarding corruption and mal-administration.  Such provisions exist in 
England, Australia, New Zealand and in the United States of America. 

 32 
 Good faith whistle blowers repres ent the highest ideals of public 
service and challenge abuses of power.  They test loyalty with the highest 
moral principles but place the country a bove loyalties to persons, parties or 
Governments.  There is a close connection between whistle blower’s 
protection and the right of employees to disclose corruption or mal-
administration.  Protection of whistle blowing vindicates important interests 
supporting the enforcement of criminal a nd civil laws.  This aspect may be 
called the ‘rule of law’ concept implied in whistle blowing.  Again, whistle 
blowing can be seen as supporting public interests by encouraging disclosure 
of certain types of information.  Th is aspect may be called the ‘public 
information’ or ‘public interest’ c oncept implied in whistle blowing.  
Further, whistle blowing challenges institutional authority, prerogative and 
discretion.   It also enables and protects employee participation in the 
decision making process of public institu tions.  This aspect may be called 
‘institutional’ or the ‘democratic reform’ concept implied in whistle blowing 
laws.  Protection of whistle blowers can however be seen as creating a 
number of risks, such as disruption of the work place, rending of 
employment relationship, possibility of blackmail and harassment, etc. (see 
‘
State Whistleblower Statutes and the Future of Whistleblower Protection’ 

 33 
by Robert G. Vaughn in vol. 51, 1999, Administrative Law Review, 
Washington College of Law, p. 581). 
 In England, in the Report of the Nolan Committee   on “Standards of 
Public Life”, the importance and the n eed for ‘whistle blowers’ has been 
dealt with in detail.  In Para 112 of the Report, it is stated as follows: 
“Whistle Blowing: 
112. One of the conditions which can  lead to an environment in 
which fraud and malpractice can o ccur according to the Metropolitan 
Police, is the absence of a mech anism by which concerns can be 
brought to light without jeopardizing the informant .  The Audit 
Commission figures (see table 3) show that information from staff is a 
major contribution  to the detection of fra ud and corruption in the 
National Health Service (NHS).  Con cerned staff were instrumental in 
uncovering serious irregularities at  two colleges of “Further 
Education”.  As Public Concern at  Work (PCAW), a leading charity 
in this field, told us in their s ubmission, “if there is a breach of the 
standards appropriate to a public body, it is likely that the first people 
to suspect it will be the staff who work there”.  
 
Table 3: Method of detection of proven fraud and corruption in 
the NHS, over three years to 1994.  
 

 34 
(i)  Information from staff:   22%   
(2) Information from patients  09% 
(3) Accidental:    08% 
(4) Internal Contacts:   22% 
(5) Internal Audit   18% 
(6) External Audit   10% 
(7) Others    11% 
 
(Source: Audit Commission, 1994) 
 
113. However, it seems that staff concerns come to light despite 
rather than because of the system.  We are not aware of any central 
guidance for executive NDPBs and whilst the NHS have issued 
comprehensive central guidance, the Audit Commission’s 1994 
Report found that none of the 17 NHS  bodies they visited had a well-
publicised system which informs staff whom they should contact if 
they suspect fraud or corruption”. 
 Adverting to ‘gagging clauses’ in public employees contracts of 
employment, the Committee observed that  there is ‘public concern’ about 
such clauses.  While a loyal empl oyee has concerns about impropriety, 
making public allegations in the media is unlikely  to be the first recourse.  
However, without someway of voi cing concern, and without some 
confidence that it will be taken seriously  and dealt with if necessary, they 
may feel they have no other option.   The Committee ag reed with the 
sentiments expressed by Robat Shel don MP, (Chairman of the Public 

 35 
Accounts Committee) that “public mone y must never be allowed to have 
silence clauses”. 
 On the other hand, the Committee al so made it clear that they do not 
wish to encourage vexatious or irre sponsible complaints which undermine 
public confidence in institutions, without due cause.  It believed that the best 
way to achieve the balance was to develop sound internal procedures backed 
by an external review. 
 The Audit Commission in UK interviewed the staff of the NHS and  
found that about one third of the NHS staff would take no action in the face 
of impropriety because of fears of losi ng their jobs if they “rock the boat”.  
The Nolan Committee recommended nominati on of an officer or member to 
receive complaints and the complainant should be guaranteed ‘anonymity’.  
(HMSO 1995 cm 2850 I-II). 
 In its second Report on “Standards of Public Life” (cmd. 3270 I, 21) 
(May 1996) dealing with other areas  including Education, the Nolan 
Committee stated that there must be  an internal mechanism which will 
dissuade employees disclosing fraud or corruption to the media.  It said: 
“Encouraging a culture of openness w ithin an organization will help - 
prevention is better than cure … placing staff in a position where they 

 36 
feel driven to approach the me dia to ventilate concerns is un-
satisfactory both for the staff members and the organization”. 
 The recommendations of the No lan Committee were accepted by the 
British Government (see the Government ’s Response to the First Report of 
the Committee on “Standards in P ublic Life”, 1995, HMSO, 2931).  
Recommendation 23 of the Committee that the ‘draft Civil Service Code’ 
should be revised and recommendation 25 that departments and agencies 
should nominate one or more officials entrusted with the duty of 
investigating Staff concerns raised confidentially, were accepted with slight 
modification.  Similarly, the reco mmendation 53 was also accepted.  The 
New Service Code was shown in Annexur e B and para 11, 12 thereof deal 
with reporting procedure.  Annexure C contains the Draft Amendment to the 
Civil Service Management Code to en able employees to complain and for 
their protection. 
 The above Report and its acceptan ce by the Government led to the 
passing of the UK Public Interest Disclosure Act, 1998.   
 In the United States, the Whistlebl owers Protection Act, 1989 states in 
the opening section (section 2) that  Congress has found that federal 
employees who make disclosures serv e public interest by assisting the 
elimination of fraud, waste, abuse and unnecessary government expenditures 

 37 
and that it is necessary to protect the employees who disclose to the 
government illegality and corruption, and one of    the purposes of the Act is 
to strengthen and improve protection fo r the rights of the federal employees, 
to prevent  reprisals and to help eliminate wrong doing within the 
government by mandating that empl oyees should not suffer adverse 
consequences as a result of prohibite d ‘personnel practices’ and that it is 
necessary to establish that the prim ary role of the ‘Office of Special 
Counsel’ is to protect employees, especially whistleblowers, from prohibited 
‘personnel practices’. The Section further directs that the said  Special 
Counsel acts in the interests of em ployee who seeks his assistance, to 
discipline those who commit prohibited ‘personnel practices’ and to protect 
those who are subjected to such practices. 
 In Australia, the Fitzgerald’s Report and the Gibbs Committee Report 
led to the passing of the Public Intere st Disclosure Protection Act, 1994, and 
its objects are similar. 
 New Zealand has also passed a stat ute recently called ‘The Protected 
Disclosure Act, 2000’. 
 The provisions of the above said  enactments will be discussed in 
greater detail in Chapter VI. 
 

 38 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Freedom of Speech, Right to Know and Right to Privacy:   
 Before discussing the proposals for a Bill enabling public servants to 
provide information about corrupti on or mal-administration in their 
department, it is necessary to refer to the Constitutional provisions relating 
to Freedom of Speech, Right to Know and the Right to Privacy.  
Freedom of speech and expression is  guaranteed by sub clause (a) of 
Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India.   This right is, however, subject to 
Article 19(2) which permits law to be made for the purpose of imposing 
reasonable restrictions in the interest s of the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, the security of State, friendl y relations with foreign States, public 
order, decency or morality or in relati on to contempt of court, defamation or 
incitement to an offence.   
In this context, we may point out that  Art. 19 (a) of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and Art. 19 (2) of the Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights and Art. 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights 
and Fundamental Freedoms expressly refer to the: 
“freedom to seek,  receive and impart info rmation and ideas of all 
kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the 
form of art, or through any other media of his choice” 

 39 
and this right is, however, subject to  restrictions that may be imposed 
by law, (a) for respecting the rights or re putations of others or (b) for the 
protection of national security or of public order or of public health and 
morals. 
 The First Amendment to the Ameri can Constitution also refers to the 
Right of Free Speech.  The American S upreme Court has held  in one of the 
most celebrated judgments in New York Times vs. Sullivan, (1964) 376 US 
254 that the ‘central meaning’ of the First Amendment was the: 
“profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public 
issues should be uninhibited, robus t and wide open and that it may 
well include vehement, caustic and sometimes unpleasantly sharp 
attacks on government and public servants” . 
The above case involved the right of the public official to seek damages for 
libel and the court held: 
“The constitutional guarantees require ….. a federal rule that prohibits 
a public official from recovering da mages for a defamatory falsehood 
relating to his official conduct unle ss he proves that the statement was 
made with ‘ actual malice’ – that is, with knowledge that it was false 
or with reckless regard of whether it was false or not”. 

 40 
The word ‘Public official’ would incl ude an elected representative, an 
appointed official and all governmental employees, even those  located near 
the bottom of any organization  provi ded  they are government officials 
‘who have or appear to have substantial responsibility or  control over the 
conduct of governmental affairs’.  (Rosenblatt vs. Baer, (1966), 383 US 75).  
In principle, not every person in government  is a ‘public official’.  His 
position must be one which could inv ite the public scrutiny and discussion 
occasioned by the particular charges in c ontroversy.   Again, in relation to  
what is ‘official conduct’ of the public  servant, the law has been laid down 
expansively.  In Garrison vs. Louisiana (1964) 379 US 64, the Supreme 
Court held that allegations of ‘laziness,  inefficiency and obstruction directed 
against local criminal court judges were relevant to official conduct of such 
judges’.   Allegations could be ‘anythi ng which might touch on an official’s 
fitness for office’ and they would be relevant. 
 Our Supreme Court had occasion to  deal with the exposure of the 
conduct of government through the media or otherwise.  In one of the 
earliest cases in S. Rangarajan vs. P. Jagjivan Ram,  1989 (2) SCC 574, the 
Supreme Court held that criticism of government policies was not prohibited 
though there should be a proper balance between freedom of expression and 
social interests.  But courts cannot simply balance the two interests as if they 

 41 
are of equal weight.  The court’s commitment to freedom of expression 
demands that it cannot be suppresse d unless the situations created by 
allowing the freedom are pressing a nd the community interest will be 
endangered.  The anticipated damage should not be remote, or conjectural or 
farfetched.  It should have proximate  and have a direct nexus with the 
expression.  
 In Life Insurance Corporation  vs. Manubhai D. Shah , (1992) 3 SCC 
637, the Supreme Court held that there is nothing wrong in requesting the 
publication of the respondent’s rejoinder in the Life Insurance Corporation’s 
(LIC’s)  inhouse journal  though the rejo inder referred to the discriminatory 
practices of the   Corporation which we re adversely affecting the interests of 
a large of number of policy holders.  This was because; the statute required 
the Corporation to function in the be st interests of the community.  The 
Court observed that the ‘ community is, therefore, entitled to know  whether 
or not this requirement of the statute is being satisfied in the functioning of 
the LIC.  The LIC was bound to publish th e rejoinder of the organization be 
it, in its inhouse journal, so that the readers who read the magazine obtained 
a complete picture of the corporati on and not a one sided one.  The LIC’s 
refusal to publish the rejoinder was ther efore violative of the right of the 
community to know the internal functioning of the Corporation.’   

 42 
 The legal foundation for exposure of corruption , misconduct or mal-
administration by public servant was laid  down  by the Supreme Court in R. 
Rajagopal vs. State of Tamil Nadu , (1994) 6 SCC 632. The case involved 
the publication of serious misconduct of  public servants by a convict who 
was serial-killer.  The case squarely deals with the right to know and the 
limits of privacy of public servants.  The Supreme Cour t referred to the 
judgments of the American Court in New York Times  vs. Sullivan, already 
referred to and another j udgment of the House of Lords in England reported 
in Derbyshire vs. Times Newspaper Ltd., 1993(2) WLR 449.  The Supreme 
Court held that while decency and defamation were two of the grounds 
referred to in Clause (2) of Art. 19,  still any publication against any person 
will not be objectionable if such publication was based on ‘public record’.  
In addition, in the case of ‘public offici al’, the right to privacy or for that 
matter, the remedy of action for damages is simply not available with respect 
to their acts and conduct relevant to the discharge of their official duties.  
This is so even where the publication is ba sed upon facts and statements 
which are not  true, unless the public official establishes that the publication 
was made with reckless disregard for truth .  In such a case, it would, 
however, be enough for the person who pub lished the news to prove that he 
reacted after a reasonable verification of the facts.  It is not necessary for 

 43 
him to prove that what he has publis hed is true.  Of course, where the 
publication is proved to be false and actuated by malice or personal 
animosity, damages can be awarded.  No doubt, in matters not relevant to his 
official duties, the public official enjoys the same protection in respect of his 
privacy as any other citizen (The judici ary and  Parliament and legislatures 
are not subject to these principles a nd enjoy greater immunity).  The above 
principle does not, however, mean that the press is not bound by the Official 
Secrets Act, 1923 or any similar enactment.     
 The above declaration of law by the Supreme Court is of fundamental 
importance on the subject of exposure of corrupt officials.  If the law permits 
furnishing of information regarding co rruption, past present or impending  
and gives protection to the informants from reprisals,  unless the disclosure 
is    proved to be malicious,  such a law can play a very useful role.  
 Recently, the Supreme Court has traced the origins of the 
community’s ‘right to know’ from his right to freedom of speech and 
expression.  The Court observed in Dinesh Trivedi vs. Union of India , 1997 
(4) SCC 306 that in modern constitutiona l democracies, it is axiomatic that 
citizens have a right to know  about the affairs of the government which, 
having been elected by them, seek s to formulate sound policies of 
governance aimed at their welfare.   To ensure that the continued 

 44 
participation of the people in the demo cratic process, they must be kept 
informed of the vital decisions taken by the government and the basis 
thereof.  The Court was dealing with the Vohra Committee Report and stated 
that  though it was not advisable  to make public the basis on which certain 
conclusions were arrived at in that Report, the conclusion reached in that 
Report  should be examined by a new body or institution or a special 
committee to be appointed by the Presi dent of India on the advice of the 
Prime Minister and after consideration with the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. 
  It is therefore clear that the S upreme Court has accepted that the right 
to know is part of the fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression 
guaranteed under Art. 19 (1 ) (a).  Of course, it will be subject to the 
reasonable restrictions, as may be imposed by law under article 19 (2). 
 It is now recognized   that while a public servant may be subject to a 
duty of confidentiality, this duty doe s not extend to remaining silent 
regarding corruption of other public se rvants.  Society is entitled to know 
and public interest is better served more if corruption or maladministration is 
exposed.  The Whistleblower laws are based upon this principle.   
 In the light of the above judgment of the American and English Courts 
and our Supreme Court, on the question as to the scope of ‘free speech’, the 
Commission is of the view that a statut e enabling complaints to be made by 

 45 
public servants, or persons or NGOs ag ainst other public servants and the 
grant of protection to such complain ants is perfectly valid and will not 
offend the right to privacy emanating fro m sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of 
Art. 19.  The right to privacy has to be  adequately balanced against the right 
to know.  Both these rights emanate from same sub-clause in Art. 19.    
  

 46 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
JUDICIAL PROTECTION TO WHISTLE BLOWERS IN U.K, 
EUROPEAN UNION AND  USA 
 
 Before the legislature intervened and brought in statutory protection to 
whistle blowers, Courts in various countries evolved several principles to 
protect victimization of whistle blower s.  We shall refer to some of the 
judgments of the English Courts, the European Court and the US Courts. 
 English Courts:  
English Courts have consistently la id down in the last more than One 
hundred and fifty years that there is an  exception to the general principle of 
confidence which an employee has to ma intain vis-à-vis his employer, and 
the exception is that where he comes to know that certain actions of his 
employer are detrimental to public intere st, he has a duty to disclose to the 
public and such disclosure can neither be prevented by his employer nor is it 
actionable.   
 Abundant case law was developed in UK long before Parliament 
stepped in and enacted the Public In terest Disclosure Protection Act, 1998 
(For necessary case law, see “ Whistle Blowers and Job Security” by David 
Lewis in 1995 Modern Law Review, pp. 208-221) .  We shall refer to the 
principles laid down by the English courts in leading cases. 

 47 
 In Gartside vs. Outram (1857) 26. L.J.Ch. (N.S) 113, a former 
employee informed the victims of a fraud giving details of the fraud carried 
out by his employer.  The employer’s application for an injunction to 
prevent further disclosures was refused.    Wood VC observed as follows: 
 “The true doctrine is, that th ere is no confidence as to the 
disclosure of inequity.  You cannot make me the confidant of a crime 
or a fraud, and be entitled to clos e up my lips upon any secret which 
you have the audacity to disclose  to me relating to any fraudulent 
intention on your part”. 
 Explaining the above judgment, Lord Denning stated in Fraser vs 
Evans 1969 (1) QB 349 that the word “ini quity” here means “just cause or 
excuse for breaking the confidence”.   
 The public importance of uninhibited criticism of Government or 
public servants was recognized in Engla nd, as already stated, in Derbyshire 
vs. Times News Paper Ltd.  1993(2) WLR 449 as an important part of the 
democratic process.  Similar pr inciples were laid in Hector vs. A.G. of 
Antigua and Bermuda  1990(2) AC 312.  The Eng lish Courts substantially 
applied the principles laid down by the US Supreme Court in New York 
Times vs. Sullivan, already referred to.   

 48 
In England, whistle blowers in public as well as private sectors  have 
been protected by the Courts. 
 On the question as to whether there is an obligation to report the 
misdemeanor of fellow workers to the employer, it was held, that this was 
dependent upon the individual contract and the circumstances.  For example, 
in Sybron Corporation vs. Rochem Ltd.  (1983) (IRLR 253) (CA), the Court 
of Appeal held that by virtue of his position as a senior executive in a 
multinational corporation, the employee had a duty to disclose the 
involvement of his colleagues in a se rious fraud upon the employer, even if 
that required him to disclose his own misdeeds ( see also ‘Grassing on a 
Fellow Employee in (1994) New Law Journal 685). 
 In 1968, the courts refused an injunction to a company trying to 
prevent its former Sales Manager rev ealing the existence of a price fixing 
cartel. The  Company had put out a misleading circular, falsely blaming high 
prices on the new selective employment tax, when infact the increased prices 
would bring in substantial additi onal profits” ( Initials Services Ltd.  vs. 
Putterill, (1968) 1 QB. 396).  Lord Denning said: 
 “It seems to me that if that circular was misleading then it is at 
least arguable that it was in the public  interest that it should be made 
known.  I do not think that an employer can say to a servant; “I know 

 49 
we are issuing misleading circulars but you are to keep quiet about it, 
and if you disclose it, I shall sue you for damages”.  The servant may 
well be justified in replying; “I cannot stand such conduct.  I will 
leave and let the public know about it, so as to protect them” 
  According to Lord Denning an excep tion had to be made  to the general 
principle of confidentiality of an employee where there is ‘any misconduct 
of such a nature that it ought in the public interest to be disclosed to others’  
  In Lion Laboratories Ltd. vs. Evans (1985) Q.B. 526, the 
Laboratories tried to prevent the Daily Express from publishing  confidential 
documents of the Laboratory which ma nufactures Intoximeter breathalyzer.  
One showed that the head of the company’s calibration department seriously 
doubted whether the device complied with  the Home Office’s requirements.  
It had reached the point where he was no longer prepared to continue to 
certify that they were accurate.  The C ourt of Appeal refused the injunction 
sought by the Laboratories, finding that the disclosure was justified in the 
public interest to prevent the unjust c onviction of motorists, and permit the 
vindication of those who might have been unjustly convicted.   
In the famous Spycatcher No. 2 , 1987 (3) WLR 776, the government 
argued that no government public intere st defence could apply to members 
of the security service, in as mu ch as they were under a life long and 

 50 
absolute duty of confidentiality and th at could, in no circumstances, be 
breached.  The Law Lords accepted that the obligation was life long but that 
it was not absolute.  Lord Greffiths st ated that the public interest defence 
could, exceptionally, justify disclosing information.  He observed:  
 “theoretically, if a member of the service discovered that some 
iniquitous course of action was being pursued that was clearly 
detrimental to our national interest, and he was unable to persuade any 
senior members of his service or any member of the establishment, or 
the police, to do anything about it, then he should be relieved of his 
duty of confidence so that he coul d alert his fellow citizens to the 
impending   danger”. 
The learned law Lord also observed: 
“in certain circumstances, the public interest may be better served by a 
limited forum of publication perhap s to the police or some other 
authority who can follow a suspicion that wrong doing may lurk 
beneath the cloak of confidence.  Those authorities will be under a 
duty not to abuse the confidential information and to use it only for 
the purpose of their inquiry”. 
  

 51 
In Francome v. Daily Mirror, 1984 (1) WLR 892, the Court of Appeal 
held that the Daily Mirror coul d not, however, publish confidential 
information which suggested that a jo ckey had been engaging in misconduct 
in as much as public interest would be  equally served by a disclosure to the 
police or to the Jockey Club.    
A disclosure is more likely to be reasonable if it is about an on-going 
or future threat.  This is based upon th e general principle related to law of 
confidence.  ( Weld Blundell v. Stephens, 1919 (1) KB 520: Malone v. 
Metropolitan Police , 1979 (2) WLR 700. Schering Chemicals  v. Falkman, 
1981 (2) WLR 848. 
 In W v Egdell, 1990 (2) WLR 471, the Court of Appeal held that it 
was lawful for a consultant psychiatrist  to disclose information about an in-
patient to the medical director at the patient’s hospital, where the consultant 
genuinely believed that a decision to  release the patient was based on 
inadequate information and posed a r eal risk of danger to the public.  
However, the court held the sale of his story to the media would not have 
been justified, nor would an article in an academic journal, unless it had 
concealed the patient’s identity.  Wher e the disclosure breached a duty of 
confidence owed by an employer to a third party, in determining the 
reasonableness of the disclosure, it will be important to asses the affect of 

 52 
the breach on the right of the party and, in particular, any unjustified damage 
it caused him. 
 But more recently, in Re a Company’s Application  (1989) (3) WLR 
265, the High Court refused to grant an injunction preventing an employee 
in the financial service sector from di sclosing confidential information about 
his company to a regulatory body, notwithstanding that the disclosure might 
be motivated by malice.  Scott J. held that it was for the regulatory 
authorities to find out the truth.  It was observed as follows: 
“It may be the case the information proposed to be given, the 
allegations to be made by the defendant to FIMBRA and for that 
matter by the defendant to the Inla nd Revenue, are allegations made 
out of malice and based upon fiction or invention.  But if that is so, 
then I ask myself what harm will be done.  FIMBRA may decide that 
the allegations are not worth investiga ting.   In that case, no harm will 
have been done.  Or FIMBRA may d ecide that an investigation is 
necessary.  In that case, if the a llegations turn out to be baseless, 
nothing will follow from the investigati on.  And if the harm is caused 
by the investigation itself, it is a harm implicit in the regulatory rule of 
FIMBRA”. 

 53 
 In addition, in UK, it was held that a reprisal against a witness who 
has given evidence in legal proceedi ngs may well amount to Contempt of 
Court ( Att. General vs. Butterworth , 1963 (1), Q.B. 696 and Chapman vs. 
Honing 1963.  2. Q.B. 502).   
 Pressure exercised by an employe r on a whistle blower may be 
regarded as breach of an implied te rm that ‘employers will not, without 
reasonable and proper cause, conduct them selves in a manner calculated or 
likely to destroy or seriously challe nge the relationship of confidence and 
trust between employer and employee’.  ( Woods vs. W.M. Car Services 
Ltd., 1981, IRLR 347). 
Regulation 12 of the Regulations for Ma nagement of Health and Safety at 
Work, 1992 (UK) permitted complaints by employees regarding dangerous 
working conditions to the employer first.  In Harris vs. Silicon Timbers 
Finance Ltd. (15) case 59214/93, Mathew Harris’ complaint to the company 
about the ill effects of Lindane, a wood preservative  was in question. The 
employee was dismissed on account of the disclosure.  He was awarded 
8730 Pounds as damages for unfair dismissal.   
Duties of confidence reposed in an  employee in the public sector, it 
was held, can be treated as valid onl y if they do not conflict with public 
interest. A.G. vs. Jonathan Cape Ltd.  1976(1) AC 109.  It was further held 

 54 
that lack of public interest in the disclosure of information was a pre-
requisite for any duty of confidence. 
It is for the Court to decide whet her such disclosure was in public 
interest or not.  British Steel vs. Graneda Television 1981 AC 1097.  In that 
case the Court ordered the return of  confidential documents that would 
reveal the identity of the employee who had leaked them to Graneda 
Television.  The documents revealed mismanagement and Government 
intervention in a publicly owned company. 
From the above judgments of the Eng lish courts, it is clear that even 
without a statute, the English courts granted protection to disclosures by an 
employee in regard to the action of hi s employer, which were detrimental to 
societal interests. 
European Court and Commission: 
 The European court and Commission have also laid down similar 
principles such as those laid down by the English courts.  Apart from that, 
they are  governed by Art.10 of the European Convention on Human Rights 
and Fundamental Freedoms which guarantees a ‘right to know’.   
 Before the UK Human Rights Act, 1998 came into force in England, 
(i.e. before 2/10/2000), in a case aris ing from England relief was granted by 
European Court in Goodwin vs. United Kingdom, 1996-II Rep. Judgments 

 55 
and decisions 483 (1996).  One Mr. Goodwin, a journalist proposed to 
publish information supplied by an informant about Titre Ltd., and the 
company obtained injunction.  The tr ial Judge ordered Mr. Goodwin to 
reveal his source so that  the company can take proceedings against the 
informant.  He refused to do so a nd was fined   500 Pounds for contempt. 
This order was even upheld by the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords.  
However, the European Court held th at the order breached Art. 10 of the 
European Convention, which refers to freedom of speech and expression.  It 
held: 
“if journalists could be compelled to  reveal their resources, this would 
make it much more difficult for them to obtain information and as,  a 
consequence, to inform the public about matters of public interest”. 
 So far as public sector employees in UK are concerne d, the European 
Court held that there must be a proper balance between freedom of 
expression of the employee and the corresponding rights of the employer to 
expect loyalty and confidence fro m the employee.  (see Handyside vs. UK) 
(1981. E.H. R.R. 737).  This is because  the freedom is not only a personal 
right but is meant to serve public interest .   In another case, it was held that 
the electorate has a right to be suffici ently informed about irregularities or 
mal-administration.  ( Ticehurt vs. British Tele Communication plc  1992.  

 56 
(IRLR 219) and Faccenda Chicken  vs. Fowler 1986 LCR 291.   T h e  
argument is strongest when applied to a  public sector employer because the 
jobs there involve the carrying out of  government policy.  (see 1997 Public 
Law 594 by Lucy Vickers).    
At one time, in 1985, in Van Der Heijden vs. The Netherlands, (1985) 
D&R.42, the European Commission on Human Rights acknowledged that 
dismissal consequent to the exercise of the right to free speech by a whistle 
blower was not liable to challenge. 
 But in 1995, the European Court took a contrary view in Vogt v. 
Germany: (1996) 21. E.H.R.R. 205.  The cas e involved the dismissal of a 
teacher who was a member of an extremist political party.  The court held 
that Art. 10 of the European Convention was breached.  Vogt. was a member 
of staff at the time of her dismissal.   (It was a judgment by 10 judges against 
9)    The dismissal was  held not valid and the employee’s freedom of 
expression was   upheld. 
 But restrictions contained in a professional code of conduct governing 
medical staff were treated as valid being a rule ‘prescribed by law’.  
Barthold v. Germany 1985 (7) EHRR 383. 
  

 57 
 In order for a restriction to be “necessary in a democratic society”, the 
restriction must be proportionate to th e legitimate aim pursued.   ( Handyside 
vs. UK, 1981 EHRR 737).  The court allows a ‘margin of appreciation’ to 
States in their application of Art. 10 of the European Convention, accepting 
that what is proportionate can vary acco rding to different contexts and can 
depend upon the type and subject matter of the speech. 
 The Court will more readily concl ude that the restriction on freedom 
of speech is invalid if it amounts to a total ban of free speech and where the 
penalty comprises of criminal sanction.  ( Lingens vs. Austria (1986) 8, 
EHRR 407.  Thorgierason vs. Iceland: (1991) 14 EHRR  843 and 
Jacubowski vs. Germany: (1995) 14 EHRR 64. 
 An employee may contend that dismissal resulted in an effective ban 
on speech  (though an ex-employee may s till have a right to speak out) and 
the Court and Commission have further recognized that a threat of legal 
proceedings could also inhibit public debate:  Lingens vs. Austria: 1986 8 
EHRR 407. 
 In considering the proportionality of dismissal as a response to the 
exercise of freedom of speech, the following factors can be considered (Van 
Der Heijden vs. The Netherland (1985 D&R 42). 
(i) the nature of the applicant’s post 

 58 
(ii) the applicant’s conduct in that post 
(iii) the averments of the expression of the opinion, and  
(iv) the nature of the options expressed. 
(i) As to (i), the nature of the pos t, a Judge and a teacher (who criticized 
provincial authorities and heads of the school) were said to have impliedly 
accepted restriction in their free speech ( Morrisens vs. Belgium 1988 D&R 
56 and B&K (1986) D&P 45 and Hasledine vs. UK 1992 DER 225. 
In Vogt, (supra) the majority held that dismissal was  a severe 
sanction as it had the effect preventing Mrs. Vogt from getting a job as a 
teacher elsewhere. 
(ii) As to (ii), the applicants’ conduct in the post will also be relevant.  
The freedom to speak about workplace may be more restricted than a 
criticism of matters relating to funding for hospitals. 
(iii) As to (iii) , the circumstances  of the speech, where the speech is on 
T.V., the Court may find that the restri ction is appropriate.    ( Morrisens vs. 
Belgium) 1988 D&R 56.  The Nolan Committee in UK has held that 
publicity through a private TV channel ma y not be objectionable in as much 
as in a democratic process, such publicity should not be restricted.   
(iv) In regard to (iv), the nature of  the opinion expressed and the relevance 
of the type of speech or political deba te is given greater protection by the 

 59 
European Court.  In Castells vs. Spain (1992) 14 EHRR 445, the Court 
pointed out that: 
“in the democratic system, the actions or omissions of the 
government must be subject to the close scrutiny not only of 
legislature and judicial authoritie s, but also of the press and 
public opinion”. 
(see also Schwabe vs. Austria (1993) 14 H&LJ 26 and Oberschlick vs. 
Austria (1991) 19 EHRR 389. 
 The European Court’s decisi ons thus have given greater 
protection to employees of public sector.  (see in this connection 
‘Whistle Blowing in the public Sector and the ECHR’ by Lucy 
Vickers (1997) Public Law, p.594). 
The International Labour Or ganization Convention, 158 on 
Termination of Employment (see ILO, 68 th Session 1982) is of potential 
value to whistle blowers.  Art. 5 (c) thereof provided that the: 
“filing of a compliant or the partic ipation in proceedings against an 
employer involving alleged violation of laws or regulation or recourse 
to competent administrative author ities should not be regarded as a 
reason for dismissal.” 

 60 
 This Convention has not been ratified by UK but certain 
provisions in Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act recognize 
such a protection. 
  
The USA: 
 The US courts also laid down the same principle that was laid down 
by the English courts and the European Courts but they based their decision 
on a principle of ‘public policy’. 
In the United States, ‘whistle blowing’ is one of the public policy 
exceptions to the doctrine of employment-at-will.  The employee who 
alleges wrongful discharge from servi ce can bring an action against the 
employer to enforce public policy (Cummins vs. EG & G Seallol Inc. (1988) 
690 F.2d. 134.   
 It is a feature of whistle blowing disputes in US that Government 
employees can comment on their empl oyer and have free speech guaranteed 
under the First and Fourteenth Amendments. 
 Many major American companie s have established formal 
Ombudsman systems.  (see Brody, ‘Listen to your Whistle Blower’ (1986) 
Fortune, p.48)  (See also Minding Your Business (London) by Winfield, 
1990). 

 61 
 In the US, some cases even suggest that it would be contrary to public 
policy if an employee is sacked for refusing to obey breach of the 
professional code of ethics applicable to him.  Pierce vs. Orth 
Pharmaceutical Corporation (1980) 84 N. J 58 = 417. A.2d 505). 
 The above decisions of the Englis h Courts, the European Court and 
Commission and the US Courts amply pr otect the interest of the whistle 
blower on the ground of public interest a nd on the basis of the public policy.  
We shall however refer to the stat utory provisions in UK, Australia, New 
Zealand  and US separately in Chapter VI. 
  
 

 62 
CHAPTER VI 
STATUTORY PROTECTION TO WHISTLE BLOWERS  
IN UK, AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND USA 
In this Chapter, we shall refer to the statutory provisions made in the 
following four countries,  United Ki ngdom, Australia, New Zealand and the 
United States of America for protection of whistle blowers.   
(A) United Kingdom:  
(a) Rules or Codes before the  the Public Interest Disclosure 
Protection Act, 1998 came into force; 
Initially, there were stray provisions  or different rules or  Codes 
giving protection to whistle blowers befo re the Public Interest Disclosure 
Act, 1998 came into force.  We shall refer to them briefly. 
The British Airways Code of Conduct  tells a public servant  that he 
must: 
“be prepared to challenge if you belie ve that others are acting in an 
unethical way.  Create the clim ate and opportunities for people to 
voice genuinely held concerns about behaviors or decisions that they 
perceived to be unprofessional or inappropriate”. 
The Code further states as follows: 

 63 
“do not tolerate any fo rm of retribution against those who do speak 
up.  Protect individual’s career and anonymity if necessary”. 
But the above Code, rath er contradicted itself in stating that these 
instructions may stand superseded by any other provisions of the Code 
relating to confidentiality. 
So far as the Government is concerned, the Civil Service Management 
Code required civil servan ts, who believed that they  were being asked to do 
something unlawful to report the matter to their senior officers and ‘if legal 
advice confirmed that the action would be likely to be held unlawful, the 
matter should be reported in writing to the Permanent Head of the 
Department’ (principle 4.1.3 of the Code). 
The Code further stated that if a ci vil servant ‘considers that he or she 
is being asked to act in a manner wh ich appears to him or her to be 
improper, unethical or in breach of constitutional conventions, or to involve 
possible misadministration, or to be ot herwise inconsistent with standards of 
conduct prescribed in this memorandum and in the relevant civil service 
Codes and Guides, the matte r should be reported to a senior officer and, if 
appropriate, to the Permanent Head of the Department’ (see Paras 11 and 
12). 

 64 
While the Local Government Mana gement Board proposed similar 
guidelines, quite interestingly, para 72 the Purple Book prohibited officers 
from communicating to the public the pr oceedings of any Committee or the 
contents of any document.   
The Audit Commission, in relation to the Local Authorities and the 
National Health Scheme stated as follows: 
“any indication of fraud and the i rregularities from whatever source 
….. should be followed up forthwith.  In addition, the auditor should 
take note of any evidence….. whic h may indicate the possibilities of 
corrupt practices.  Where necessary  in public interest, any such 
evidence should be referred for further investigation by the 
appropriate authority”. 
There are similar instructions in the Guidelines on Ethics for members 
of the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy.   
It was however unfortunate that nur ses in the National Health Scheme 
were employed upon conditions which contained ‘gagging clauses’ and 
these clauses contradicted the 1993 Guid elines issued by the Department of 
Health. (see ‘
Whistleblower and Job Security’ by David Lewis (1995) vol. 
58, Modern Law Review, p. 208). 

 65 
While the US Occupational Health Services Act, 1976 offered 
protection to employees who disclose d mal-administration, the UK Health 
Safety at Work Act, 1974 did not contai n any such provision.  However, in 
U.K. the Regulations 12 of the Management  of Health and Safety at Work 
Regulations required employees to report to the ‘employers’ about safety 
measures at work places and the persons  who so complained were protected 
from dismissal by Section 57 A (1) (c ) and Section 22A (1) (c) of the 
Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act, 1978.   Initially, there appeared 
to be no protection to trade union lead ers who raised such complaints under 
the Trade Union and Labour Relation (C onsolidation) Act, 1992.  However 
such a protection has now been grante d by an amendment of the above said 
Act and  the amendment is contained in the UK Public Interest Disclosure 
Act, 1998. 
The UK Sex Discrimination Act,  1975 and the UK Race Relations 
Act, 1976 contain provisions supporting wh istle blowing. They further make 
it an offence to divulge information which has been disclosed by an informer 
if an investigation is being conduc ted by either the Equal Opportunity 
Commission or the Commission for Racial  Equality.    This protection 
somewhat got diluted by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Aziz vs. 
Trinity Taxis  (1988), IRLR 206 holding that the employee against whom 

 66 
action is taken by the employer for maki ng the complaint, had to prove the 
causal link.  Where, however, the em ployee has taken action under Section 
57 of the Employment Protection (Cons olidation)Act, 1978, alleging unfair 
dismissal, now the burden will on the employer. 
(b) The UK Public Interest Disclosure Act, 1998: 
The above Act is the outcome of  the Nolan Committee Report, 1995, 
the White Paper on Freedom of Info rmation ‘Your Right to Know’ (Cm 
3818, Dec., 1997), the Modern Local Government (Cm. 4014, July, 1998) 
and the Freedom of Speech in Nationa l Health Services (letter of the 
Minister, 1997).  The entire moveme nt was spear-headed by ‘Public 
Concerns for Work’ consisting of Lord Borrie, Q.C., Right Honourable Lord 
Oliver of Aylmerton and Others.  The Act took into account various 
disasters including the Bank of Credit and Commerce International collapse 
where the employee knew about mismanagement within the organization.  
The Act of 1998 adds Part IV A (Protected Disclosures) in the 
Employment Rights Act, 1996 which contai ns the new sections 43A to 43L, 
47B, 48 (1A), amends section 49, and adds section 103A, amends sections 
105, 108, 109, 112, 117, 118, adds section 127B amends section 128, 191, 
193, 196, 200, 205, 230 and 235. 

 67 
As already stated, the Act also amends the Trade Union and Labour 
Relations (Consolidation) Act, 1992.  The provisions amended are Section 
237 and the Order in Council applicable to Northern Ireland. 
We shall briefly refer to the salient provisions of the 1998 Act.  The 
Act aims at protecting whistle blower s from victimization and dismissal, 
where they have made complaints rais ing genuine concerns about a range of 
misconduct and malpractice (for a full summary see Halsbury’s Statutes, 
1999, vol. 1, p. 23 (1)). 
The Act covers virtually all empl oyees in the public, private and 
voluntaries sectors, and certain workers, includi ng agencies, home workers, 
trainees, contractors, and all professiona ls in the National Health Service.  
The usual employment law restrictions on minimum qualifying period and 
age do not apply.  The Act does not cover the army and the police. 
The workers who blows the whistle w ill be protected if the disclosure 
is made in good faith and is about (i) a criminal act, (ii) a failure to comply 
with a legal obligation, (iii) a miscarriag e of justice, (iv) a danger to health 
and safety, (v) any damage to the environment.  Any attempt to cover up any 
of these could also be covered by the disclosure. 

 68 
Under the scheme of the Act, ther e are three types of disclosure, 
namely, (i) Internal disclosure , (ii) Regulatory disclosure  and (iii) Wider 
disclosure. 
 An ‘ Internal disclosure ’ to the employer (which may include the 
manager or director) will be protected if the whistle blower has an honest 
and reasonable suspicion that the malp ractice has occurred, or is occurring 
or is likely to occur.  Where a third pa rty is responsible for the malpractice, 
the same principle applies to the disclosu r e  m a d e  t o  h i m .   I t  a l s o  a p p l i e s ,  
where some one in a public body which is subject to appointment by 
Government (e.g. National Health Service or Quangos), blows the whistle to 
the sponsoring department. 
 A  ‘ Regulatory Disclosure ’ is a disclosure ma de to a prescribed 
person.  These persons to whom disclosu re has to be made are likely to be 
regulators such as the Health and Sa fety Executive, the Inland Revenue and 
the Financial Services Authority.  Such  disclosures are protected where the 
whistle blowers pass the test for ‘Internal disclosure’ and where additionally, 
they honestly and reasonably believe that the information and allegations are 
substantially true.   
 A ‘ Wider disclosure ’ is one to the police, the media, Members of 
Parliament and non-prescribed regulator s.  These disclosures are protected, 

 69 
if, in addition to the test for ‘Regulat ory disclosures’ they are reasonable in 
all the circumstances and they are not made for personal gain.  The whistle 
blower must, however, meet other prec onditions to win protection for this 
type of ‘Wider disclosure’.  These are that (a) he reasonably believed that he 
would be victimized if he had rais ed the matter internally or with a 
prescribed regulator; (b) there was no prescribed regulator; and he 
reasonably believed that evidence was lik ely to the concealed or destroyed; 
or (c) the concern has already been rais ed with the employer or a prescribed 
regulator.  These preconditions do not, how ever, apply if the malpractice is 
of an extremely serious nature.   
 In the case of all these three types of disclosures, if the above said 
conditions are met and the Employmen t Tribunal is satisfied that the 
disclosure is reasonable, the whistle blower will be protected.  In deciding 
the reasonableness of the disclosure , the Tribunal will consider all the 
circumstances, including the identity of the person to whom it is made, the 
seriousness of the concern, whether the risk or danger remained, and 
whether the disclosure breached a duty of confidence which the employer 
owed a third party.  Where the concern had been raised with the employer or 
the prescribed regulator, the Tribunal w ill consider the reasonableness of the 
response.  Finally, if the concern had been raised with the employer, the 

 70 
Tribunal will consider whether any wh istle blowing procedure within the 
organization was or should have been used. 
 Full protection is given to the victim - whistleblower upon a claim 
made by the victim before the Empl oyment Tribunal for compensation.  
Where the victimization falls short of  dismissal, the Act provides that 
awards will be uncapped and based on lo sses.  Where the whistle blower is 
an employee and has been sacked, he ma y, within seven days, seek ‘ interim 
relief’ so that his employment continues or  is deemed to continue, until the 
full hearing.   
 As to compensation for unfair dismissal or the termination of a 
workers contract, the position is that the Government promised to make a 
regulation under the Act, which will provi de that the whistle blower will get 
compensation in a sum, which will be more than awards for normal unfair 
dismissal.  The compensation is expected to be uncapped.  
 ‘ Gagging clauses’ in employment contract a nd several agreements are 
declared void under section 43J of the U.K. Employment Rights Act, 1996 
in so far as they conflict with the provisions of the Act.   
 
 
 

 71 
(c ) The U K Official Secrets Act, 1989 and the U.K. Public interest 
Disclosure Act, 1998:  
 Under Section 1 of the U.K. Public Interest Disclosure Act, 1998, as 
already stated, Part IV of the Employment Rights Act, 1996 has been 
amended and Sections 43C to 43H have  been introduced into that Act.  
Section 43B refers to disclosure which qualified for protection called 
‘qualifying disclosure’.  It states that the disclosure of information which, in 
the reasonable belief of the worker, te nds to show the following, will be 
protected, namely: 
(a) that a criminal offence has been committed, is being committed 
or is likely to be committed,  
(b) that a person has failed, is faili ng, or is likely to fail to comply 
with any legal obligation to which he is subject, 
(c) that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is 
likely to occur, 
(d) that the health or safety of a ny individual has been, is being, or 
is likely to be endangered,  
(e) that the environment has been, is being, or is likely to be 
damaged, or  

 72 
(f) that information tending to s how any matter falling within any 
one of the preceding paragraphs has been, is being, or is likely 
to be deliberately concealed.  
Sub-section (2) of Section 43B states th at the relevant failure may occur in 
UK or outside UK.   
Sub-section (3) states that ‘where disclosure of information is not a 
qualifying disclosure if the person making the disclosure commits an offence 
by making it’.  It is here that the Official Secrets Act, 1989 becomes 
relevant. 
Where the disclosure of the inform ation is itself a crime, e.g., it 
breaches the Official Secrets Act, 1989, the disclosure is not protected.  It 
should be noted that raising such a concern formally within Whitehall or 
with the Civil Service Commissioner would not constitute a breach of a 
secrecy offence and so would qualify for protection in any event.      
Section 7 of the Official Secrets Act speaks of “authorized 
disclosures” and states that a disclosure  can be said to be made with lawful 
authority if, and only if, it is made in accordance with his official duty.  Sub 
section (4) thereof prescribes that a disc losure is to be treated as made with 
lawful authority if, and only if, it is made to a Crown servant for the 
purposes of his functions as such or in accordance with an official 

 73 
authorization.  Sub section (5) define s “official authorization” as one duly 
given or by a Crown servant. 
It was stated in the House of Commons debates on July 28, 1997, that 
the British Government had no plans to repeal the Official Secrets Act, 1989 
nor to introduce a public interest defe nce (H.C.Deb., vol. 299, col. 6) see 
1997 Public Law, p.712. 
(B) Australia:  Public Interest Disclosure Act, 1994: 
 Initially, the need for a Whistlebl owers Act was pointed out in the 
Fitzgerald Report (at p.134) in rela tion to investigation into public 
misfeasance in Queensland. (See Current Topics, Vol. 67 (1993) Austr. L.J. 
p. 249). It was observed in that Report as follows:– 
“There is an urgent need…..for le gislation which prohibits any person 
from  penalizing any other pe rson for making accurate public 
statements about misconduct, ineffi ciency, or other problems within 
public instrumentalities. What is required is an accessible independent 
body to which disclosures can be made  confidentially (at least in the 
first instance) and in any event fr ee from fear of reprisals. The body 
must be able to investigate any complaint.  Its ability to investigate the 
disclosures made to it and to protect those who assist it, will be vital 

 74 
to the long-term flow of info rmation upon whom its success will 
depend.” 
Later, the Gibbs Committee (on Crim inal Law) also made a similar 
recommendation.   
 The Public Interest Disclosure  Act, 1994 of Australia defines 
“employee” as including an employee within the meaning of the ‘Public 
Sector Management Act, 1994. The ‘proper authority’ is defined as the Chief 
Executive Officer or its Governing Body.  
 It defines ‘disclosable conduct’ and also ‘public interest disclosure’.  
It defines ‘unlawful reprisal’ also.  
 Section 4 elaborates ‘disclosable  conduct’, section 9 defines ‘proper 
authorities’, section 10 refers to proce dures to be established by government 
agencies, i.e., an administrative Unit, or territory instrumentality or a 
statutory office holder.  Section 12 enables the Ombudsman under the 
Ombudsman Act to exercise power under th at Act as if a reference in that 
Act to an investigation is a reference under this Act.  Section 17 deals with 
‘frivolous etc. disclosures’.  Section 19 refers to investigation by the proper 
authority and section 22 to action by it. 
 Part IV of the Act deals with unlaw ful reprisals.  Section 25 prohibits 
unlawful reprisals and penalties can be either imprisonment or in number of 

 75 
penalty units.  The prosecution could be defended only on the limited 
grounds set out in sub-section (2) of section 25.  Section 29 deals with 
‘liability in damage’, Sections 30, 31 with ‘injunction’. 
 Section 34 provides penalty of one year imprisonment or other points, 
for false or misleading information whic h is given knowingly or recklessly.  
This section is again in conformity with the principles laid down in New 
York Times vs. Sullivan (1964) 376 US 254 which ha s been referred to in 
Chapter IV.  The said judgment wh ich was followed in England in 
Derbyshire vs. Times Newspaper Ltd.  1993 (2) WLR 449 has also been 
followed by the Australian High Cour t in Theophanous vs. Harold and 
Weekly Times Ltd., 1994 (68) ALR. 713 
( C) New Zealand: The  Protected Disclosure Act, 2000   
 The Protected Disclosure Act,  2000 of New Zealand contains 
provisions which are similar to those in the Australian Act, 1994 with certain 
modifications.  Sec. 6 of the Act refe rs to “Disclosures to which the Act 
applies”, sections 7 to 14 refer to the manner in which disclosures have to be 
made to various authorities, sec. 17 enables grievances to be submitted 
against reprisals, and sec. 18 refers to immunity from civil and criminal 
proceedings and sec. 19 to confidentiality. 

 76 
 Sec. 17 states that if any retaliato ry action is taken by the employer or 
former employer such as dismissal or any action other than dismissal, the 
said employee may apply for redress under the provisions of the 
Employment Contracts Act, 1991.   
 Sub-section (1) of section 18 provides immunity from civil and 
criminal proceedings where a person has made a protected disclosure or one 
to the appropriate authority.  Sub-sec tion (1) of section 18 is important and 
reads as follows:- 
“Sec. 18(1); sub-section applies despite any prohibition of or 
restriction on the disclosure of in formation under any enactment, rule 
of law, contract, oath or practice”.   
 That means that the Act will cer tainly override any other law in 
Australia which deals with Official Secrets.  This appears to be a provision 
better than the one in UK. 
Section 19 requires the identity of the informant to be kept secret 
unless the informant concerned consents or unless it is required to reveal his 
identity for effective investigation, or to  prevent a risk to public health or to 
public safety or for purposes of observing principles of natural justice. 
 Section 20 refers to “false allega tions” and states that the protection 
under the Act and under section 66 (1) (a ) of the Human Rights Act, 1993 is 

 77 
not available to the person giving th e information if he has made the 
allegation with knowledge that the inform ation is false or has acted in bad 
faith.   The section conforms to the principles laid down in New York Times 
vs. Sullivan , (1964) 376 US 254, already referred to in Chapter IV.   
(D) United States of America:  Th e Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 
1989 (as amended in 1994): 
 Before we refer to the Federal en actment, namely the Federal Whistle 
Blower Protection Act, 1989 and other State statutes, we may briefly refer to 
the previous history in USA. 
 The False Claims Act, 1863 (revise d in 1986) was enacted to combat 
fraud by suppliers to the federal govern ment during the civil war.  Under 
that Act, whistle blowers could receive  a percentage of the money recovered 
or damages suffered by the government in fraud cases they exposed.  There 
were provisions for protection of whistle blowers even in the Civil Services 
Reforms Act, 1978 from reprisals. 
 The Civil Services Reforms Ac t of 1978 was not able to remedy 
several forms of reprisals such as transfers to ‘bureaucratic Siberia’, 
elimination of duties, career paralysi s, reprimand etc.  Between 1978 and 
1989, when the present Act was passed, even the federal Office of Special 
Counsel was not supportive of the whistle blowers effectively.  Things 

 78 
became better only after the 1989 Act and more so after the recent 
amendments of 1994 (see ‘The Whis tleblower Protection Act of 1989: 
Foundation for the Modern Law of Employment Dissent’ by Thomas M. 
Devine, vol. 51, Administrative Law Review (1999), p.531).   
 It appears that there are more th an a hundred similar statutes in the 
various States in US which protect diffe rent classes of whistle blowers.  In 
some of the States the protection is extended to employees in the private 
sector also.  Some of these laws also deal with the ‘right to disobey’  illegal 
orders of superiors.  (see “State Whistle  Blowers’ Statutes and the Future of 
Whistle Blowers Protection” by Robe rt G. Vaughn, in Administrative Law 
Review (1999), Vol.51, page 582). 
Mr. M. Devine, in the article referred to, states: 
‘Whistleblower protection is a policy that all government leaders 
support in public but few in power will tolerate it in private’. 
 The four corner stones of the Fe deral Act of 1989 are: (i) giving the 
whistle blowers control of their ow n cases (rather make them depend upon 
the willingness of Special Counsel to litigate for them) through an Individual 
Right of Action, providing expanded subject matter and personal jurisdiction 
for hearings before the Merit Systems Protection Board (MPSB); (2) making 
the Office of Special Counsel, a risk  free option by eliminating provisions 

 79 
granting discretionary authority to th e Special Counsel which powers were 
indeed abused earlier since 1978; (3) expanding the stage of protection by 
eliminating prior loopholes, broadening the shield for protected conduct and 
expanding the scope of illegal employe r conduct and; (4) creating more 
realistic legal burdens of proof in order to enable whistle blowers to prevail. 
 The Act covers not only protection against reprisals but also against 
removal of duties, failure  to provide training or reprimand.  The employee 
can also seek ‘interim relief’  (sec. 1221).  Even retired persons could file 
actions.  The employee who succeeds can  also be awarded costs.  The 
Special Counsel can pursue corrective action   for violation of the Freedom 
of Information Act, or for violati on of civil schemes, laws, rules and 
regulations.  He can also protect witnesses or others from harassment during 
the proceedings.  The Board can also pass orders for contempt of its orders. 
 The Act makes protection mandato ry whenever justified by the 
evidence in a disclosure.  Under the Act of 1989, “if the disclosure was 
reasonable and significant to public polic ies, - then the time, manner, place, 
further motives, audience and anything else will be irrelevant”. 
 The scope of the protection wa s expanded to protect witnesses and 
others assisting the inquiry .  What is more novel is that it also protected 
those “refusing to obey an order that would require an individual to violate a 

 80 
law” [sec 2302 (b) (a)] or those comma nded to do an illegal act and where 
the refusal is followed by a reprisal.  Bu t this right is not placed in sec. 2302 
(b) (8) and, therefore, does not trigger Individual Rights of Act but fell 
within sec. 2302 (b) (a) which requires the Special Counsel to act.  Even 
‘threats’ by employer became actionable. 
 The more important innovation was about the burden of proof.  At one 
time, in McDonnell Douglas v. Green, (1973) 411 US 792, it was held that 
there were two stages in relation to burden of proof.  First, the employee 
would have to make out a prima faci e case of discrimination and then the 
employer could try to rebut the same.  But, even if the employer’s case of 
absence of discrimination was accepted still the employee had to prove that 
the discrimination and the disclosure were inter-connected.   
Even later, it was held that the burden was on the whistle blower and 
this was on the basis of th e principle in Mt. Healthy vs.  Doyle (1977) 429 
US p. 274.  This principle has been reversed by sec. 1214 (b) (4) (B) (i) and 
sec. 1221 (e) (1), both in cases of Action by the Individual or by the Special 
Counsel.  Now the Board is bound to or der corrective action if the employee 
“has demonstrated that a disclosure  described in sec.  2302 (b) (8) was a 
contributing factor in the personnel action” taken against him. 

 81 
 Further the employer or the agency has now to prove through “clean 
and convincing evidence” that it “woul d have taken the same personnel 
action in the absence of such disclosure”  [see sec. 1214 (b) (4) (B) (ii) and 
sec. 1221 (e) (2)]. 
 Apart from ‘interim relief’, the 1989 Act provides a successful 
employee, i.e., one who obtains reinstat ement or other success, to opt to go 
to another department, on transfer.  There is no longer the ‘you cannot go 
home’ syndrome. 
 In addition, the new Act restor ed the remedies under other laws, 
except the constitutional tort, giving a go bye to principle laid down in Bush 
vs. Lucas: (1983) 462 U.S. 367.  The other remedies now saved are those 
under Back Pay Act, Civil Rights Ac t, 1871, Privacy Act, 1976 and 1997 
and the Tucker Act, 1994, the Veterans Preference Act, 1994 and others. 
 The Special Counsel cannot disclose  the informants’ identity without 
his consent unless such exposure is fe lt necessary “because of an imminent 
danger to public health or safety or imminent violation of any common law” 
by the whistle blower. 
 In 1994, twenty new amendmen ts were added to strengthen 
protection.  Now, after 1994, the em ployer cannot resort to “any other 
significant change in duties, responsibilities or working conditions” .  This 

 82 
prohibited even reprisals by employers quoting “ security reasons ” for 
change in duties or responsibilities.  Th is was to overcome certain reprisals 
based on “security clearance abuses” against whistle blowers in the 
Airway’s Strategic Defence Command and in the Star Wars Programme. 
 The 1994 Amendments enable c onsequential damages, medical 
expenses also to be paid with a view  to restore the employee wholly to the 
status quo ante as if no retaliation had occurred.  
 Since 1994, the complaints (appeals)  before the Board have yielded 
substantial results in favour of the employees. 
 The above provisions of the US Federal Act of 1989 are therefore of 
far-reaching importance and are wide r than the UK Act of 1998, the 
Australian Act of 1994 and the New Zealand Act, 2000. 
 
  
 
 
  

 83 
Chapter VII 
 
The Proposed Bill and Its Basis 
7.0 In the earlier Chapters, we have refe rred to the need for elimination of 
corruption and mal-administration in gove rnment and in the public sector.  
We have referred to the basic concepts of public policy a nd public interest, 
which are the foundation for protection of ‘whistle blowers’.  We have 
referred to the need to strike a pr oper balance between the Right to Free 
Speech and the Right to Know. We have also referred to judicial approaches 
in USA, UK, European Court and by our S upreme Court in that behalf.  We 
have also referred to the salient provisions of the UK Public Interest 
Disclosure Act, 1998, the Australian Public Interest Disclosure Act, 1994, 
the New Zealand Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 and the US (Federal) 
Whistle Blower’s Protection Act, 1989.  
7.1 In the light of the above principl es of law and provisions in other 
Countries, we proceed to formulate the Public Interest Disclosure 
(Protection of Informers) Bill, 2002 for application in our Country.   
Before we proceed to the Bill, we sh all briefly refer to the reports of 
certain earlier Committees, which have gone into corruption in India.   

 84 
(A) Earlier efforts 
7.2 (a) The Santanam Committee Report 1963  
 The Santhanam Committee, 1963 was a Parliamentary Committee 
which was requested to give a re port on the methods of eradicating 
corruption.  The Committee went into the matter extensively and suggested 
that there should be Vigilance Commissi ons both at the Centre and  in the 
States.  It referred to political corrup tion as more dangerous than corruption 
of officials.  It observed: 
“that there is wide spread public impression that some Ministers who 
held office for several years have enriched themselves illegitimately, 
obtained good jobs for their sons and relations through nepotism and 
have obtained other benefits inconsis tent with any notion of purity in 
public life”.  
The Committee counselled priority to prevention of political corruption over 
prevention of administrative corruption.  It opined that the top had to be 
made clean to expect cl eanliness at the lower levels.  It emphasized that 
elected representatives, ministers and legislators have to first create a climate 
of integrity as an example for others to follow.    
7.3 (b) The Administrative Reforms Commission Report 1967 and the 
Lok Pal and Lok Ayukta Bills  

 85 
 The Government of India set up a high level Administrative Reforms  
Commission on January 5, 1966 under the Chairmanship of Shri Morarji 
Desai.  The Commission, among others, made recommendations for the 
creation of Ombudsman-type institutions in India.  It recommended a two-
tier machinery, namely, Lok Pal at th e centre and Lok Ayukta at the State 
levels.  It submitted   report on Oc tober 20, 1966 appendi ng a draft Bill for 
Lok Pal and Lok Ayukta. 
 The Government of India introdu ced the Lok Pal and Lok Ayukta Bill 
1968 in the Lok Sabha on Ma y 10, 1968.  The Bill was referred to a joint 
Committee of two Houses of Parliament, which submitted its report on 
March 26, 1969.  The Lok Sabha pa ssed the Bill on August 20, 1969 but 
while it was pending in the Rajya Sabha , the  Lok Sabha was dissolved and 
the Bill consequently lapsed.  The same  was the fate of the Lok Pal Bill, 
1971, Lok Pal Bill, 1977, Lok Pal Bill, 1983, Lok Pal Bill, 1989, Lok Pal 
Bill, 1996, the Lok Pal Bill, 1998.  In th e States, as of now, about 14 States 
have Lok Ayuktas and Up Lok Ayuktas , under State laws.  The State of 
Haryana has however repealed the Act, which was in force. 
 The 1998 Lok Pal Bill provides for a Chairperson/Members consisting 
of the Chief Justice of India and two other Judges of the Supreme Court next 
to the Chief Justice in seniority, to  be appointed by the President on the 

 86 
recommendations of a Committee consisti ng of the Vice-President of India 
as its Chairman, the Prime  Minister, the Speaker of Lok Sabha, the Minister 
of Home Affairs, Leader of the Hous e to which the Prime Minister does not 
belong, the Leader of the Opposition in  the Lok Sabha a nd Rajya Sabha as 
Members. 
 The Lok Pal will enquire in compla ints, which are made alleging that 
a ‘public functionary’ has committed an offence under the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 and the expressi on ‘Public functionary’ covers the 
Prime Minister, Ministers and Ministers of State, Deputy Minister and 
Members of Parliament.  This is par tially in line with the recommendations 
of the Morarji Desai Committee. 
7.4 (c) Vohra  Committee Report:  
 The Vohra Committee reports have b een referred to extensively by the 
Supreme Court in the Vineet Narain cases, as stated earlier.(see Chapter II) 
7.5 (B) The Proposed Bill 
We shall now try to formulate provisions of the proposed Bill.   
7.6 (1)      title and extent; (proposed sec.1) 
The name of the proposed Act will be “Public Interest Disclosure 
(Protection of Informers) Act, 2002.  It applies also to public servants 
outside India.   

 87 
 This provision has also to be read  with sub-section (3) of section 6 
which states that the provisions of th e Act shall apply even to disclosable 
conduct committed before the commencement of this Act. 
7.7 (2)    Definitions: (proposed sec.2) 
 (a) “action” [proposed sec 2(a)] 
 Initially, it is necessary to define the word ‘action’.  This is with 
reference to the ‘action’ in regard to  which a complaint can be made.  The 
Lok Pal and Lok Ayukta Acts uniformly defined the word ‘action’.  In the 
Lok Pal and Lok Ayukta Bill of 1969 and similar enactments in the States, 
‘action’ was defined as 
“action taken by way of decision,  recommendation or finding or in 
any manner and includes failure to act and all the expressions 
connecting action shall be construed accordingly.” 
On the same analogy, it is proposed to define ‘action’ in the proposed Bill as 
follows: 
“action” means action taken by wa y of decision, recommendation or 
finding or any other proceeding and includes failure to act and all 
other expressions connoting acti on or act shall be construed 
accordingly.” 
 

 88 
7.8 (b) ‘Competent Authority’: [proposed sec 2 (b)] 
 It becomes necessary to define the word ‘Competent Authority’ to 
whom the complaint can be made.  In the Lok Pal and Lok Ayukta Bill of 
1969 and other enactments in the States, th e said word has been defined, as 
“in relation to public servant who is a Minister, the Prime Minister and in 
relation to others, such authority as may be prescribed” 
 It was decided to omit Prime Minist er from the purview of the Act in 
view of the proposed Lok Pal Bill, 2001.   On that analogy and having regard 
to the constitution of the Central Vigilance Commission   under the 
Ordinance of 1999 which lapsed and which is being continued under the 
Resolution dated 4.4.1999 of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training), it is proposed that the 
Competent Authority in the case of Mi nister will be ‘any Authority notified 
by the President in this behalf’ and in  the case of any other public servant, 
the “Central Vigilance Commissioner” as stated above.   
 ‘Competent Authority’ is therefore proposed be defined as follows: 
 “Section 2(b):  ‘Competent Authority’ in relation to  
(i) a Minister, means any Authority notified by the President in this 
behalf; 

 89 
(ii) any other public servant, means the Central Vigilance Commission 
constituted under the Central Vigilance Commission’s Ordinance, 
1999 which ceased to operate and c ontinued under the Government of 
India in the Ministry of Personnel,  Public Grievances and Pensions 
(Department of Personnel and Training Resolution No. 371/20/99-
AVD dated the 4th April, 1999”. 
7.9 (c)  ‘disclosure’ [proposed sec. 2 (c)] 
In as much as the basis of the inquiry under the proposed Act is the 
‘disclosure’, it is necessary to define the word ‘disclosure’. 
The Australian Act of 1994 defines ‘ public interest disclosure’ while 
sec. 43A of the U.K. Employment Rights Act, 1996 (section 43A was 
introduced by U.K. Public Interest Disclosure Act, 1998) defines ‘protected 
disclosure’ in sec. 43A. 
We propose a simple definition of ‘d isclosure’ in the proposed sec. 
2(c) as follows: 
“Section 2(c):  ‘disclosure’ means a disclosure of information that the 
person making the disclosure reasonably believes that it tends to show 
disclosable conduct’. 
 
 

 90 
7.10 (d) ‘disclosable conduct’ [proposed sec. 2(d )] 
 The Australian Public Interest Ac t, 1994 defines ‘disclosable conduct’ 
while section 43B of the U.K. Employment Rights Act, 1996 (as amended 
by the U.K. Public Interest Disclosu re Act, 1998) defines ‘qualifying 
disclosure’ (i.e. disclosure which is  disclosable and which qualifies for 
protection).  On those lines, we propose to define ‘disclosable conduct’ to 
include disclosure regarding past actions, present actions and proposed 
actions.  The definition of ‘disclosable conduct’ of a public servant in regard 
to which the disclosures can be made, is proposed as follows: 
“Section 2(d):  ‘disclosable conduct’ m eans such conduct as a public 
servant may engage in or  has engaged in or is engaging, or proposes 
to engage in, which amounts to – 
(i) abuse or misuse of power or discretion vested in him; or 
(ii) an attempt to commit or th e commission of an offence under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, the Indian Penal Code, 
1860 or any other law for the time being in force; or 
(iii) mal-administration.” 
7.11 (e)  ‘Mal-administration’[proposed sec. 2 (e )] 
 This word occurs in clause (iii)  of proposed sec. 2 (d) and has, 
therefore, to be defined. 

 91 
 There is a definition of  ‘mal administration’ in the Lok Pal and Lok 
Ayuktas Bill 1969 in sec. 2(g). This definition also refers to past and present 
acts or acts proposed.  We propose to  adopt the a definition of ‘mal 
administration’ as  found in  section 2 (8) of the above Bill as follows: 
“Section 2(e) :  ‘mal-administration’ includes any action taken or 
purporting to have been taken or be ing taken or proposed to be taken 
in the exercise of administrative or statutory power or discretion,- 
(i) where such action is unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or 
improperly discriminatory;  
(ii) where there has been neglig ence or undue delay in taking such 
action; 
(iii) where there has been reckless,  excessive or unauthorized use of 
power in taking such action; 
(iv) where such action amounts to breach of trust; 
(v) where such action involves the conduct of a public servant 
which would result in wastage of  public funds or causes loss or 
prejudice to the State or is prej udicial to public funds or causes 
loss or prejudice to the State or is  prejudicial to public interest 
in any manner; or 

 92 
(vi) where such action is outside the authority conferred by law or 
amounts to  violations of systems or procedure.” 
 
 
 
7.12 (f)     ‘Minister’: (proposed sec. 2(f). 
‘Minister’ is proposed to be define d as a Member of the Council of 
the Ministers for the Union and include s the Minister of State and Deputy 
Minister but does not include the Prime Minister. 
 The Prime Minister is proposed to be  excluded in as much as separate 
provisions appears to have been made  in the proposed The Lok Pal Bill, 
2001 so far as the Prime Minister is concerned.  
7.13 (g) ‘Prescribed’: (proposed sec. 2(g)) 
A formal definition of the word ‘p rescribed’ is proposed as meaning 
rules to be made under this Act. 
7.14 (h) ‘public servant’  [proposed section 2(h)] 
 The definition refers to every Minister at the Central level, (as 
proposed to be defined in the sec. 2(f)) (i.e. excluding the Prime Minister) 
Central Government servants, public se rvants in local authorities in Union 
Territories and Central Public Sect or undertakings servants, Cooperative 

 93 
societies or societies financed by the Central Government.  The definition of 
‘public servant’ in Clause 2 (k) of the Lok Pal and Lok Ayuktas Bill, 1969 is 
exhaustive ans we propose to adopt the sa id definition of ‘public servant’ as 
follows: 
“(i)  every Minister 
(ii) every officer who is appointed  to a public service or post in 
connection with the affairs of the Union,  
(iii) every person in the service of,- 
(A) any local authority in any Union Territory (which 
is notified by the Central G overnment in this behalf 
in the Official Gazette), 
(B)   any Corporation (not being a local authority) 
established by or under a Cen tral Act and owned or 
controlled by the Central Government, 
(C) any Government compa ny within the meaning of 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, in which not 
less than fifty-one per cent of the paid up share capital 
is held by the Central Government, or any company 
which is a subsidiary of a company in which not less 

 94 
than fifty-one per cent of the paid up share capital is 
held by the Central Government, 
(D) any cooperative society receiving any financial aid 
from the Central Government;or 
(E) any society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860, which is  subject to the control of 
the Central Government and which is notified by that 
Government in this behalf in the Official Gazette.” 
7.15 (i)  Victimisation: (proposed sec. 2(i)) 
  The Act is intended to grant ‘pro tection’ to the persons who make  
disclosures.  Protection against vic timization is provided under the proposed 
section 10.  Under sub-section (3) of the proposed section 10, the Competent 
Authority is being empowered to issue appropriate directions upon 
complaints made under sub-section (2) of  that section by all persons (other 
than Ministers) who are victimized.  Under sub-section (4) of section 10 as 
proposed, the competent authority is be ing empowered to restore the public 
servant making the disclosure to the 
status quo ante .  In that context, it is 
necessary to have a definition of ‘victimization’.   
While defining the said word, we have kept in mind the various 
provisions in the US Whistle Blower s Act of 1989, to which we have 

 95 
referred in extenso in chapter VI.  Under the US Law apart from dismissal 
from service, even withdrawal or  dilution of powers and functions, 
reprimand or censre could be the subject  matter of victimization.  We are 
also aware that the victimization ma y be by the person against whom the 
disclosure is made or may be by anot her person or public authority, at the 
instance of the person against whom disclo sure is made.  In the light of the 
above, it is proposed to define ‘victim ization’ as follows, in the proposed 
sec.2(i); 
“victimization” with all its gramma tical variations, in relation to 
public servant other than a Minister, shall include- 
(A) suspension pending inquiry, transfer, dilution or withdrawal of 
duties, powers and responsibilities,  recording adverse entries in the 
service records, issue of memos, verb al abuse, all classes of major or 
minor punishment specified in the disciplinary rules, orders or 
regulations applicable to such public  servant and such other type of 
harassment; 
(B) any of the acts referred to in  sub-clause (A) whether committed 
by the person against whom a disclosure is made or by any other 
person or public authority at his instance. 
 

 96 
7.16 Public Interest Disclosure: [Proposed sec. 3] 
 This section is proposed to deal with requirements of a ‘Public 
Interest Disclosure’ which can be pr otected.  Sub section (1) speaks of 
disclosure and sub section (2) contai ns a non-obstante clause overriding the 
provisions of the ‘Official Secrets Act,  1923’.  This is a clear improvement 
over the U.K. Public Interest Disclosure Act of 1998 where the protection, as 
already indicated, is very restricted.  As stated earlier, the New Zealand 
Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 also contains a provision overriding other 
Acts. (see Chapter VI). 
 Sub section (2) refers to the pers ons who can make the disclosure.  
They are: 
(i) Public Servants (except those referred to in clauses (a) to (d) of 
Art. 33 of the Constitution),or   
(ii) Any person, or 
(iii) Non-Governmental organizations. 
The disclosure must, under sub secti on (3), be in good faith, based on a 
solemn affirmation that the pers on making the disclosure reasonably 
believes that the information disclose d and any allegation contained therein 
is substantially true.  The disclosure  is to be made to the ‘Competent 

 97 
Authority’, supported by details and doc uments.  The Authority can call for 
further information or particulars. 
 The person who makes complaint must  disclose his identity.  In other 
words, anonymous complaints or those sent under false names, will not be 
entertained. 
7.17 Procedure on receipt of P ublic Interest Disclosure:  [proposed 
section 4] 
 The proposed section  provides fo r a preliminary inquiry unless the 
disclosure is frivolous or vexatious or is misconceived or lacking in 
substance or is trivial or has already been dealt with adequately (sub section 
(1)). 
 In case the issue has been determined by a Court or tribunal 
authorized to determine it, there w ill be no further inquiry (proposed sub 
section (2)). 
 Under proposed  sub section (3), if the Authority is of opinion that the 
disclosure should be inquired into, it shall proceed under sec. 5. 
7.18 Procedure of Inquiry : [proposed sec. 5] 
 The proposed 5 section requires that  the disclosure with relevant 
documents be sent to the public serv ant concerned against whom complaint 

 98 
is made and to his superior in the official hierarchy, giving reasonable 
opportunity.  [proposed sub section (1)]. 
 Proposed sub section (2) requires the inquiry ‘not to be open to 
public’ and that the ‘names  of the persons making the disclosure and of the 
public servant named in the disclosure” shall not be disclosed to the 
public. 
  Proposed sub section (3) directs that the name of the person making 
the disclosure shall be disclosed to the public servant provided that, if the 
person making the disclosure requests that his identity should not be 
disclosed to the public servant named in the disclosure, and if the Competent 
authority is satisfied that such a reque st may be acceded to in public interest 
or the safety of such person, it shall make the necessary direction in that 
behalf after recording its reasons.  
 Sub-section (4) of the proposed s ection 5 requires that the competent 
authority shall be bound by the principle of natural justice and also by the 
other provisions of the Act and it sha ll have the power to regulate its own 
procedure including the fixing of places and times of its inquiry. 
 Sub-section (5) of proposed secti on 5 provides that if after conducting 
the inquiry, the competent authority is of the opinion that (a) the facts and 
allegations contained in the disclosure  are frivolous or vexatious or are not 
made in good faith or (b) there are no sufficient grounds for proceedings 

 99 
with the inquiry, it shall close the inquiry and inform the concerned persons, 
the reasons for its opinion.  
 Sub-section (6) of the proposed 5 provided that, if after conducting 
such inquiry, the competent authority is of the opinion that disclosable 
conduct is established against a public se rvant, (a) it shall, if such public 
servant is other than a Minister, reco rd the appropriate finding and send its 
findings along with the relevant records,  to the Authority competent to take 
disciplinary action against the public serv ant; and (b) it shall, if such public 
servant is a Minister, record the appropriate the findings and send its 
findings along with the relevant records, to the Prime Minister. 
 Sub-section (7) of the proposed section 5 states that upon receipt of 
the findings as stated in clauses (a) or (b) of sub-section (6), the authority 
referred therein shall take  appropriate action immediately against the person 
named in the findings.  
 Sub-section (8) of the proposed section 5 states, if the inquiry held by 
the Competent Authority discloses c onduct, which constitutes an offence 
punishable under any law, the Compet ent Authority shall direct the 
appropriate authority, or agency to initiate criminal proceedings against such 
public servant including the Minister in  accordance with law.  It is also 
proposed to be provided in the same sub-section that where the Competent 

 100 
Authority directs as above, there is no need to obtain any sanction or prior 
approval for such prosecution under any law for the time being in force. 
 Sub-section (9) of the proposed sec tion 5 states that the conduct of an 
inquiry under the Act in respect of any action shall not affect, such action or 
any power or duty of any public servant to take further action with respect to 
any matter subject to the inquiry in  accordance with any law for the time 
being in force.  
 
7.19 Matters excluded from the purvi ew of the Competent Authority –  
(proposed section 6) 
 Certain matters are proposed to be  excluded from the purview of the 
competent authority such as where an  inquiry has been ordered under the 
Public Servants Inquiry Act, 1850 or  under the Commission of Inquiry Act 
(proposed sub section (1)). 
 Under proposed sub section (2), any disclosure  
(a) which is made after expiry of 12 months from 
the date on which the action complained 
against becomes known to the complainant or  
(b) (b) where 5 years have expired between date of 
‘action’ complained against and date of 

 101 
disclosure, shall not be entertained unless 
sufficient cause is made out for the delay in the 
case of disclosure falling under Clause (a). 
 Sub-section (3) of the proposed section 6 provides that subject to the 
provision of sub-section (2) referred to above, the provisions of the Act shall 
apply to all disclosable conduct committed before the commencement of this 
Act.   
 Sub-section (4) of the proposed section 6 states that nothing in the Act 
shall be construed as empowering the competent authority to question, in 
any inquiry under the Act, any administ rative or statutory action taken in 
exercise of a discretion ex cept where it is satisfied that the discretion is so 
exercised because of the ‘disclosable conduct’.   
7.20 Powers of Competent Authority: (proposed section 7) 
 The proposed section 7 deals with powers of the competent authority 
during the inquiry. 
 Proposed sub section (4) of secti on 7 precludes any ‘privilege’ to be 
claimed in regard to any evidence th at may be produced except as provided 
in proposed sub section (5), where the disclosure might prejudice the 
security or defence or internati onal relations of India or the ongoing 
investigation of crime; or might involve  the disclosure of proceedings of the 

 102 
Cabinet of the Union Government or any of its Committees.  This is to be 
certified as stated in proposed sub s ection (5) and if so certified, the 
certificate shall be binding and conclusive. 
 Proposed sub section (6) provides th at no person shall be compelled, 
for the purposes of inquiry, to gi ve evidence or produce any document 
whenever he could not be compelled to give or produce in proceedings 
before a Court. 
7.21 Report on Disclosure – (proposed section 8) 
 Sub-section (1) of the proposed sec tion 8, states that the Competent 
Authority shall prepare annually a consolidated annual report of the 
performance of its activities in such form as may be prescribed and forward 
it to the President. 
Sub-section (2) of the proposed secti on 8 states that on the receipt of 
the annual report under sub-section (1),  the President shall cause a copy 
thereof together with the explanator y memorandum to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
7.22 Periods of limitation – (proposed section 9) 
 Sub-Section (1) of the proposed section 9 states that the Competent 
Authority shall hold every such inquiry as expeditiously as possible and in 

 103 
any case complete the inquiry within a period of six months from the date of 
the receipt of the complaint. 
 It is proposed to add a provision to sub-section (1) stating to the 
Competent authority is of the opinion that the inquiry cannot be completed 
before the said period, it may reasons for be recorded in writing, extend the 
said period and in no case, the said period shall be ex tended beyond a period 
of two years from the date of the receipt of the complaint. 
 It is possible that in some cases , the inquiry not completed within a 
period of two years as stated in sub-sec tion (1).  But, that does not mean that 
the public servant is to be deemed as  exonerated.  We are, therefore, 
proposing by way of sub-section (2) th at nothing contained in sub-section 
(1) shall operate as a bar against initia tion or continuance of any action or 
proceedings under any other law for th e time being in force against the 
public servant named in the complaint.   
 
7.23 Safeguards against victimization – (proposed section 10 
 Sub-section (1) of proposed section 10 required the Central 
Government to ensure that no pers on who has made a disclosure under 
section 3 (2) of the Act is ‘victimized’ by initiation of any proceedings or 

 104 
otherwise made on the ground that such  person had made a disclosure under 
this Act. 
 This Sub-section and other sub-sec tions of section 10 have to read 
along with the definition of victimizati on in section 2 (i) which refers to 
‘victimization’ in the case of all government servant other than a Minister. 
 Sub-section (2) of proposed section 10 states that if any ‘person’ other 
than a Minister is aggrieved by any action on the ground that he is being 
victimized due to the fact that he had filed a complaint. 
 Under sub-Section 3, he may file an application before the Competent 
Authority seeking redress in the matter.   It will be noticed that the word 
‘person’ will obviously include a pubic se rvant (other than a Minister) or 
any person who is not a public serv ant and may also include a Non-
Governmental Organization. 
 Sub-section (3) of proposed section 10 states that an application under 
sub-section (2) of section 10, the Co mpetent Authority may, after making 
such inquiry as it deems fit, give appropriate directions as it may consider 
necessary, to the concerned public servant or public authority against whom 
the allegations of victimization have been proved. 
 We are also view that there shoul d be a proviso to above sub-section 
(3) stating that where the Competent Authority is of the opinion that the 

 105 
allegation of victimization is not true or is not maintainable for the reason 
that the action alleges to cause hardship is not relatable to the complaint is to 
subject matter, it may dismiss the application. 
 This provision has to be read along with section 14, which relates to 
burden of proof. 
 Sub-section (4) of the proposed section 10 states that notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the power to 
give directions under sub-section (3), in relation to a public servant, shall 
include the power to direct the restor ation of the public servant making the 
disclosure, to the status quo ante. 
 We have proposed that this power to restore the public servant to the 
status quo ante should be vested in th e Competent Authority and that where 
public servants have to be  restored back into service or the other acts of 
victimization have to be nullified, it will be desirable to enable the 
Competent Authority to issue directions to the concerned disciplinary 
authorities referred to in other Acts, Rule s, Codes, or Regulations applicable 
to the public servant.  It will not be a necessary for the public servant, to 
invoke the jurisdiction the Central Ad ministrative Tribunal or any other 
appropriate body for relie f and that is why we have introduced a 
non-
obstante clause at the opening of the section. 

 106 
 Sub-section (5) of the proposed section 10 enables the Competent 
Authority to issue directions to prevent the conduct or victimization 
continuing or occurring in the future.  There are similar provisions in other 
countries. 
 Sub-section (6) of the proposed sec tion 10 states that every direction 
given by the Competent Authority sh all be binding upon the public servant 
or the public authority against whom the allegation of victimization has been 
proved. 
7.24 Transfer of public servant for avoiding victimization:  
 It is possible that during the con tinuance of the inquiry against the 
public servant against whom the disc losure is made, the person who has 
made the disclosure may be harassed by way of transfer.  It may also happen 
that in spite of a bona fide belief in th e truth of the allegations contained in 
the disclosure, the allegations are not  proved in the inquiry conducted by the 
Competent Authority and in  such a case, the public servant who had made 
the complaint may be harassed within his department.  It is also possible that 
the allegations made by public servant are proved in the inquiry conducted 
by the Competent Authority and th ereafter the person who made the 
disclosure may suffer unnecessary harassment in his department. 

 107 
 In Australia and in United States of America, the relevant statutes 
(referred to in Chapter V I) give a choice to the public servant who made the 
complaint to seek a transfer to other department, subject of course to his 
qualification, experience and the availa bility of an equivalent post.  We 
propose a similar safeguard. 
7.25 Protection of witnesses and other persons:  (Proposed section 12): 
 There are provisions in the US Whistleblowers Act, 1989 to protect 
witnesses and other assisting the inquiry  so that the persons against whom 
complaints are made do not try to scu ttle the inquiry or interfere with the 
witnesses and other persons assisting the inquiry.  It is, therefore, necessary 
to protect the witness and other persons assisting the inquiry.  With a view to 
ensure this protection, we make a provision in section 12 to the effect that 
the Competent Authority shall pass such  orders granting adequate protection 
to the witnesses and other persons assi sting the inquiry as may be necessary 
in the circumstance of the case. 
 
 
7.26 Power to issue interim order: (Proposed section 13): 
 We find that in Australia and in Un ited States of America, the statutes 
of 1994 and 1989 respectively, contain provisions permitting interim orders 

 108 
to be passed by the Competent Authority to prevent victimization of the 
public servant making the disclosure. 
 In our view, such a provision is nece ssary so that before or during the 
continuance of the inquiry by the Competent Authority, there are no 
reprisals or victimization of the person making the complaint.  Unless such a 
power is vested in the Competent Au thority, it is possible that the person 
against whom the complaint is made may try to victimize the person making 
the complaint for the purpose of scuttling the inquiry.   
7.27 Burden of proof in certain cases: (Proposed section 14): 
 In the United States of America, in  the federal statute of 1989, there is 
a specific provision, as stated in Chap ter VI, that the burden of proving that 
the action or proceeding which is the subject of victimiza tion, would have 
been taken even if no such disclosure  was made by the applicant (applicant 
in the application under section 10) sh all be upon the public servant or the 
public authority against whom the allega tions of victimization are made. In 
fact, before such a provision was made in USA, the burden of proof to prove 
the nexus between the act of victimi zation and the disclosure was placed on 
the employee and such a procedure di d not yield any results in rendering 
justice to the person who made the di sclosure.  That was why the law was 
modified by shifting the burden of proof to the employer.    

 109 
 We have also stated in Chapte r VI that even in UK, where the 
employee has taken action under secti on 57 of the Employment Protection 
(Consolidation) Act, 1978, alleging unfair dismissal, the burden of proof is 
on the employer. 
 On the same lines as in the USA and in UK, we recommend that in the 
proposed section 15, the burden of proof  shall be on the public servant or 
public authority against whom the alle gations of victimization are made 
before the Competent Authority, to es tablish that the same action would 
have been taken or the same proceedings would have been issued against the 
public servant making the disclosure , even if he had made no such 
disclosure.  
7.28 Protection of action in good faith: (Proposed section 15):  
 It is proposed to protect all actions taken in good faith by the 
Competent Authority.  It is, therefore, proposed to have a section stating that 
no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Competent Authority or against any officer, employee, agency, or person 
acting on its behalf, in respect of a nything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under the Act.   
 
 

 110 
7.29 Punishment for False or Frivolou s Disclosures : (proposed section 
16): 
 We have seen in Chapter IV that  while dealing with the Right to 
Freedom of Expression as contained in Article 19 (1) (a) of our Constitution, 
and the similar right contained in the US Constitution and in Art. 10 of the 
European Convention, it has now been held that allegations against public 
servant are not actionable merely b ecause they are wrong or have been 
found to be not proved.  It is nece ssary to further establish that the 
allegations were made by the person with knowledge that they were false or 
were made, recklessly or maliciously.  In India, our Supreme Court has also 
laid down the same rule in Rajagopal’s case referred to in Chapter IV.  We 
have also referred to seve ral other cases in Chapter V which have protected 
disclosures with a view to protect public interest or interest of public policy.  
Therefore, any provision which proposes to punish the person making the 
disclosure, must necessarily take noti ce of the above provisions of law as 
laid down by the Supreme Court of India. 
 In fact, in Australia and New Zeal and, the relevant statutes which 
permit punishment of the person making the disclosure, take note of the 
above principle of law in the secti on which deals with punishment of the 
person making the disclosure.  It may al so be noticed, in the context, that 

 111 
clause (c) of the section 2 in the present Bill defines ‘disclosure’ as a 
disclosure of information that the person making the disclosure reasonably 
believes, that it tends to show disclosabl e conduct.  We have also provided 
in sub-section (3) of section 3 that every disclosure shall be made in good 
faith and the person making shall solemnly affirm that he reasonably believe 
that the information disclosed and a ny allegation contained therein, is 
substantially true. 
 Therefore, it will not be constitutionally or even otherwise permissible 
to punish a person merely because, in the inquiry conducted by the 
Competent Authority, the f acts and allegations mentioned in the disclosure 
could not be proved. 
We have, therefore, taken note of the above principle in drafting the 
section dealing with punishment of the person making the disclosure.  The 
Section as proposed reads as follows: 
“Section 16: any person who makes a ny disclosure which falls to his 
knowledge or reckless or malici ous shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto 3 years and also to 
fine which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees”. 
 
 

 112 
7.30 Rule making power: (proposed sec. 17): 
 Sub-section (1) of the proposed section 17 states that the President 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of the Act. 
 Sub-section (2) of the proposed section 17 states that every rule made 
under the Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  The provisions are similar to like provisions in various 
other Acts indicating the procedure for laying rules before Parliament.   

 113 
 
We recommend accordingly 
        
(Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy) 
         C h a i r m a n  
 
       (Justice M.Jagannadha Rao) 
           Vice Chairman 
 
        (Dr.N.M. Ghatate)  
           Member 
 
          (Mr.T.K.Viswanathan) 
         M e m b e r - S e c r e t a r y  
 
Date14.12.2001 
 
 
  
 

 114 
 
 
 