LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

EIGHTEENTH REPORT

(CONVERTS’ MARRIAGE DISSOLUTION ACT, 1866)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA: MINISTRY OF LAW

PRINTED IN INDIA BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVEKNMENT OF INDIA PRESS,
NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 1962


No. F.1(1) /60-LC.
5, Jor Bagh,
New Delhi-3.
February 23rd, 1967.

Shri Asoke Kumar Sen.
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My DEAR MINISTER,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Eighteenth
Report of the Law Commission on the law relating to the
Dissolution of Converts’ Marriages.

2. This subject is connected with the law relating to Marriage
and Divorce among Christians in India and was taken up for
consideration along with it. It was, however, considered desir-
able that there should be separate legislation dealing generally

-with the effect of conversion from one religion to another cn a
marriage previously contracted. A draft Report on the subject
was accordingly prepared by me and was considered by the Law
Commission at its meeting held on the 19th August, 1960. In
accordance with the decisions taken at that meeting the draft
Report was revised and circulated to the State Governments,
High Courts, Bar Associations and other persons and bodies
interested, for opinion. The comments received on the draft
Report were considered by the Commission at its meeting held
on the 6th January, 1961. The Report has been drawn up in
accordance with the decisions taken at that meeting.

3. Shri Sachin Chaudhuri has not been able to come down
to Delhi to sign the Report, but it has his concurrence.

4. The Commission desires to express its appreciation of the
services rendered by Shri D. Basu, Joint Secretary, and by
Shri P. M. Bakshi, Deputy Draftsman, in the preparation of the
Bill and the Notes.

Yours sincerely,
T. L. VENKATARAMA ATYAR.


REPORT ON THE CONVERTS’
MARRIAGE DISSOLUTION ACT, 1866

CONTENTS
PARAGRAPH © PAGES
I. The need for revision . . . . . I
2. Scope of the proposed legislation . . . 2
3. Difficulty caused by differences in personal laws . 2
4—6. Existing law as to effect of conversion to Islam from
monogamous religion. . . पु पु 2
हल Sham conversions . . . . . 4
8. Conversion from Islam | . : . : . 5
9. Summary of existing position regarding Islam, and
course adopted . 5
To. Jurisdiction and procedure. Maintenance. . 6
Il. Custody of children. 6
12. Marriages under the Special Marriage Act 7
13. Appendices 7
APPENDICES
APPENDIX I—Showing the recommendations of the Com-
mission in the form of a draft Bill . Ir
APPENDIX II.—Notes on clauses . . . पु पु 18

ApPENDIX III.—Comparative table पु . . . . 25


REPORT ON CONVERTS’ MARRIAGE DISSOLUTION
ACT, 1866

1. During the examination of the law relating to Need for
marriage and divorce among Christians in India, a question Tevsion-
which figured prominently in the evidence was as to the
effect of conversion of a person to Christianity on a marri-
age previously contracted by him. The Converts’ Marriage
Dissolution Act, 1866, provides for the dissolution of such
a marriage under certain conditions. Discussing this Act,
we observed in our report on the law relating to Marriage
and Divorce amongst Christians! as follows:-—

“But this Act applies only if the parties to the
marriage are not Muslims, Parsis, or Jews; and the
criticism levelled against it, that it is discriminative
in character, in that (1) it applies only to cases of
conversion from Hinduism, and (2) it gives relief only
in cases of conversion to Christianity, is well-founded.
In view of this, we are considering whether we should
not recommend the enactment of a law, which will be
generally applicable to all cases of conversion from
one religion to another religion. The question of the
repeal of the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act,
1866, can appropriately be taken up then for considera-
tion.”

Having, since, fully considered the matter, we are of
opinion that there is need for legislation on the lines of
that Act, because if (i) a marriage is contracted under a
Jaw which prohibits polygamy—and the present law
governing all the communities in India excepting Muslims
does that,—and (ii) conversion does not dissolve the
marriage already contracted in accordance with a mono-
gamous faith—and that is well-settled law—then hardship
is bound to be caused if no provision is made for dissolu-
tion of the marriage. It is obviously with a view to grant-
ing redress against this, that the Converts’ Marriage Dis-
solution Act, 1866, was enacted; but that enactment gives
relief only when the conversion is from Hinduism to
Christianity, and does not go far enough. We, therefore,
feel that that Act should be repealed and replaced by a
law which will be uniformly applicable to all conversions
and confer on a convert a right to have the marriage
contracted before conversion dissolved on such terms as
might be considered just and proper. That is the scope of
this Report.

15th Report, paragraph 63.


Scope of the

Difficulty
caused by
differences
in personal
laws.

2

2. It should be mentioned that the legislation which we
recommend is restricted to petitions by the convert for
dissolution of the marriage, because there is already pro-
vision in the existing law for the spouse who remains
unconverted to move for dissolution of the marriage. Thus,
section 13(1)(ii) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, provides
for a decree of divorce being granted in favour of the
petitioner on the ground that the other party has ceased
to be a Hindu by conversion 10 another religion. Under
section 32(j) of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936,
it is a ground for divorce that the defendant has ceased to
be a Parsi. In our Report!.on the law relating to marriage
and divorce amongst Christians in India, we have recom-
mended the insertion of a provision that the petitioner can
move for divorce on the ground that the respondent “has
ceased to be a Christian by conversion to another religion”.
It would, therefore, be sufficient to limit the proposed
legislation to petitions by converts.

3. As it is the personal law of the parties that governs
them in matters of marriage and divorce, the question
arises whether, in view of the difference in that law as it
obtains among the several communities in India, it would
be feasible to enact one law applicable generally to con-
versions from one religion to another. The difficulty
mainly arises by reason of the fact that, while some sys-
tems of law enjoin monogamy, others sanction polygamy.
According to the Jaw governing Christians, Jews and
Parsis, marriage is “a union for life of one man and one
woman to the exclusion of all others”. The Hindu law, as
it stood, sanctioned polygamy, but now, as a result of legis-
lation, marriage among the Hindus has also become
monogamous. The Muslim law permits the husband to
marry four wives, and therefore polygamy is possible only
among Muslims. Where the conversion is from one mono-
gamous religion to another, the question presents no
difficulty. The law is well-settled, that conversion does not
ipso facto put an end to the marriage, and, therefore,
unless and until it is dissolved as provided under the law,
the convert cannot enter into a fresh marriage’. The law
has, therefore, merely to provide for dissolution of the

‘marriage, prescribe the conditions therefor and prohibit

Existing
law as to
effect of
conversion
to Islam
from mono-
gamous re-
Tigion.

re-marriage until that is decreed.

4, The problem arises only when the conversion is from
a monogamous religion to a polygamous religion and
vice versa, and, as already stated’ it can now happen only
when it is to or from Islam. To decide whether, the pro-
posed legislation should or should not extend to these
conversions, it is necessary to see what the present law on
the subject is. Considering, first, the effect of conversion

1zsth Report, para. 63, first sub-para. and App. I, clause 30 (1)(i).
3566 for example, sections 4 and 52(2), Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act,
1936.
3866 para, 3, supra.


3

to Islam from a religion which is monogamous, the effect
of such conversion depends, according to Muslim jurists,
on whether it takes place in a country subject to Muslim
law or in a country where the law of Islam is not the law
of the land. In the former case, according to them, the
converted spouse should offer Islam to the other spouse,
and if that is refused the Kazi must dissolve the marriage,
and in the latter case the marriage will automatically
stand dissolved at the end of three “periods” of the wife.
The application of this rule to this country has been con-
sidered in a number of decisions, by the High Courts of
Caleutta, Madras and Bombay,' and the law as Jaid down
therein may be summed up as follows:—

(1) India is not a country subject to the law of
Islam, and therefore there can be no question of a
converted spouse offering Islam to the other spouse
and the marriage being dissolved by a Kazi on the
refusal of such offer. .

(2) The rule of Muslim law that on conversion in
a non-Islamic country the marriage previously con-
tracted becomes automatically dissolved has no
application to this country. .

(3) The incidents of a marriage solemnised in
India are determined by the personal law governing
the parties at the time of the marriage, and they can-
not be changed by either party unilaterally by
conversion to another religion.

(4) When one of the parties to a marriage becomes
a convert to another religion, and, as a result thereof,
there arises a conflict between the personal laws appli-
cable to the two parties, their rights are to be deter-
mined not according to the personal law applicable to
the convert, but according to rules of justice, equity
and good conscience. \

5. On the above principles, it was held that conversion
to Islam did not operate to dissolve the marriage which
had previously been solemnised, according to Hindu reli-
gion (vide Budansa Rowther v. Fatima Bibi)®; according
to Christian religion, per Edgley J. (vide Noorjehan v.
Eugene Tiscenko)’; according to Jewish religion (vide
Syeda Khatoon v. Mt. Obadiah); and according to Zoro-
astraian religion (vide Robasa Khanum v, Khodadad
Bomanjiy. This, it may be taken to be well-settled that

Vide Budansa Rowther v. Fatima Bibi, (1914) 26 M.L.J. 260 ; Noorjehan
v. Eugene Tiscenko, A.LL.R. 1941 Cal. 582 ; Syeda Khatoon v. Mt. Obadiah,
49 C.W.N. 745; Robasa Khanum y.Rhodadad Bomanji, A..R: 1947 Bom.
272.

7(1914) 26 M.L.J. 260.

SA.LR. 1941 Cal. 582.

“49 C.W.N. 745.

*A.LR, 1947 Bom. 272.

399MofL—2



Sham
conversions,

4

conversion from a monogamous faith to Islam does not
dissolve a marriage previously contracted, and, therefore,
in law, the position is the same whether the conversion is
to Islam or to a monogamous faith.

6. Does it make any differance in the result, that the
Muslim law permits polygamy? Can it be said that even
though conversion does not dissoive a marriage previously
contracted, neither does it prevent the convert from marry-
ing more wives in accordance with that law? Such a
view will conflict with the principles cn which conversion
to Islam has been held not to operate to dissolve the
marriage previously contracted. It was observed by Chagla
J. (as he then was) in Robasa Khanum v. Khodadad
Bomanji,' with reference to a marriage contracted between
two Parsis, that it was “a solemn pact that the marriage
would be monogamous and could only be dissolved accord-
ing to the tenets of the Zoroastraian religion”, and that “it
would be patently contrary 10 justice and zight that one
party to a solemn pact should be allowed to repudiate it
by a unilateral act”. In other words, the marriage already
contracted had created mutual rights and obligations
between the parties, which did not ८ e on the conversion
of either party, and therefore tne right of the convert to
marry more wives in accordance with Muslim law must be
held to be subject to the right which the wife has acquired,
under a monogamcus marriage prior to conversion, to
exclude all others in consortium 53 long as the marriage
subsists. if, as held in the decisions already r:ferred
to’, the pa re, after conversion, governed, where there
is a conflict of persenal law, by rules of justice, equity
and good conscience, a restriction on the right of the con-
vert to marry more wives until the marriage already
contracted is dissolved would be in accordance with the
law applicable to the marriage which was solemnised under
a monogamous religion, and that would also be in conson-
ance with justice end right, as observed by Lodge J., in
Syeda Khatoon v. Mt. Obadiah,’ and by Chagla J. in
Robasa Khanum v. Khodadad Bomanji.*

7. There is one other aspect of the matter which calls
for mention. In the evidence which was taken by us in
connection with the legislation on marriage and divorce
among Christians in India, it was strongly pressed on us
that sham conversions were resorted to for the purpose of
defeating the rights of the wife under the marriage, and
that to prevent such conversions there should be enacted
a provision that the convert should be governed by the
personal law which applied to him prior to conversion for a

N
a
u

1A.LR. 1917 Bom.
28९९ para. 5, supra.
3(1949) 49 C.W.N. 745, 749:

4A.LR. 1947 Bom. 272, at p. 275.


5

period of three years thereafter. Though we appreciate
the purpose behind this suggestion, we do not find any
need to adopt it. We have provided,’ that a marriage
entered into prior to conversion subsists until it is dissolv-
ed according to law, and that no action for dissolution can
be instituted within two years of such conversion. These
provisions are ample safeguards against sham conversions
and sufficient to protect the legitimate rights of the spouse
who remains unconverted.

8. So far, we have considered the position arising on Sonversion

conversion to Islam from a monogamous faith. Taking,
next, the converse case of conversion from Islam to some
other faith, the effect of such conversion is, under Muslim
law, that the marriage stands automatically dissolved. An
exception to this has been enacted by section 4 of the
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939. Section 2 of
that Act provides that a woman married under the Muslim
law should be entitled to sue for dissolution of the marriage
on the grounds mentioned therein. Under section 4, con-
version of a Mahomedan wife to another religion does not
operate to dissolve the marriage, bui this does not affect
her right to sue for dissolution of the marriage under
section 2. Thus, so far as the wife is concerned, conversion
does not dissolve the marriage. But as regards the hus-
band, the law still is ‘that on his conversion the marriage
or marriages previously contracted by him are ipso facto
dissolved.

9. Now reviewing the entire field of the law relating to Summary
conversions to and from Islam, it will be seen (i) that of existing
the effect of conversion to Islam is the same as that of fegarding
conversion to Christianity or Hinduism—the marriage is slam, and,
not dissolved;? (ii) that the effect of conversion of a wife Sdopte
from Islam is the same as that from Christianity or Hindu- * opted.
ism*—the marriage subsists notwithstanding the conversion,
but it may be dissolved on the grounds stated in section 2
of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939: and
(iii) that the effect of conversion of the husband! from
Islam is, that the marriage stands dissolved by reason of
such conversion, and it is only in this particular that the
Muslim law differs from other system. We are of opinion
that this difference is not so substantial as to require the
exclusion of conversion from Islam from the purview of
the proposed legislation. It is to be noted in this connec-
tion, that even the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act,

1939, in so far as it enacted that by conversion the marriage
of a Muslim wife was not dissolved, was a modification of
the pre-existing Jaw on the subject, and the proposed
legislation only seeks to extend the principle of that
enactment to conversion of husbands as well. We are of
opinion that the advantages of having one law applicable

2Appendix I, clauses 3 and 6.
3566 para, 5, supra.
3866 para, 8, supra.
“See para, 8, supra.


6

to all conversions far outweigh all considerations based
on such differences as have been noted above. The pro-
posed legislation should, in our opinion, generally govern
all conversions from one religion to another.

Jufiadiction 10. Coming, next, to the question of jurisdiction of the
dure. “courts wherein proceedings under the Act should be taken,

and the procedure to be followed therein, the proposed
legislation will, in general, follow the lines of the law
relating to marriage and matrimonial causes among Chris-
tians in India. There are, however, two matters which
require special mention: (i) alimony and maintenance to
the wife in case of divorce, and (ii) custody of children.
On the question of maintenance, the proposed legislation
will provide! as does the law relating to marriage and
matrimonial causes among Christians, that the court should
have the power to make suitable orders for alimony tc
the wife so long as she remains unmarried and also to
make such orders as regards settlement of property made
at the time of the marriage and properties given at that
time as to the court might seem just and equitable. It is
also proposed to add a further provision? that, unless the
court decides otherwise, a decree for dissolution of marri-
age under this Act should be passed only efter suitable
orders have been made for the maintenance of the wife,
the reason being that once a decree for dissolution has
been passed, the husband will be free to marry again, and
he might thereafter become indifferent and remiss in
carrying out his obligations to the divorced wife, and it
would work great hardship if she were to be driven to
hang on the court for enforcing her rights. If the arrange-
ments for maintenance are completed before a decree for
divorce is granted, then it will be merely a question of her
realising the fruits of her decree.

Maintenance.

Custody of 11. Dealing, next, with the question of the custody of
children. children when a marriage is dissolved on account of the
conversion of the petitioner, the law on the subject cannot
be said to be in a satisfactory state. Normally, it is the
father who is the guardian of the minor children, and
unless he is found to be unfit the court cannot award their
custody to another person. This rule has been applied in
some decisions’ even where the dispute has arisen by
reason of the conversion of the father, though the courts
have been careful to emphasise that the welfare of the
children is the paramount consideration on which an order
for custody should be made. It is debatable whether this
is a correct approach to the question. The right of the
father to the custody of children has its roots in his status
as pater familias, and it is doubtful if it can survive when

786९ Appendix I, clause 13.
*See Appendix 1, clause 13(2).

8Vide, Mayne’s ‘Ircatise on Hindu Law and Usage, 11th Edition, page
290, para.” 233, where the decisions are collected.


7

he ceases to be a member of the family by conversion. It
might well be said, that when two persons belonging to
a particular religion enter into a marriage, they do so in
the expectation that they will maintain a home as mem-
bers of that religion, and that when one of them defeats
that expectation by conversion, there is no reason why
he or she should take advantage of what is really a breach
of faith on his or her part, to the detriment of the other
party who is true to the faith. The question can be of
importance only in case of conversion of the husband. If,
for example, a Christian husband becomes a convert to
Islam, and the marriage is in consequence dissolved, and
there are children of the marriage, why should the wife,
apart from losing the husband, lose also the society of her
children? On the principles already discussed! the law
applicable to that situation cannot be one recognising any
preferential right in one of the parents under the ordinary
law, but a rule which will be in accordance with justice,
equity and good conscience, and that clearly requires that
it is the non-converted spouse that should have a preferen-
tial right to the custody of the children. We have pro-
vided accordingly? That, of course will be subject to the
paramount consideration of the welfare of the children.

12. Lastly, it should be mentioned that we have exclud- Marriages
ed,> from the operation of the proposed legislation, marri- wader fhe
ages performed under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, as Marriage
considerations based on the religious character of marriages Act.
will be foreign to the spirit of marriages performed under

that Act.

13. In order to give a concrete shape to our recommenda- Appendices,

tions, we have, in Appendix I, put them in the form of a
draft Bill.

Appendix II contains notes on clauses, explaining, with
reference to each clause of the Bill in Appendix I, the
points that need elucidation.

1566 para. 4, supra. *
256९ Appendix I, clause 15(2).
3868 Appendix I, clause 22.


8

Appendix III contains a comparative table, showing
the existing section of the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution
Act, 1866, and the corresponding clause of the draft Bill
in Appendix I.

1. T. L. VENKATARAMA ATYAR,
(Chairman).

2. P. SATYANARAYANA RAO.)

3. L. 8. MISRA. |

4. G. R. RAJAGOPAUL.

#5, 8. CHAUDHURL

6. N. A. PALKHIVALA. J

\ Members.

D. BASU,
Joint Secretary.

New Dewi;
The 18th February, 1961.

*Shri Sachin Chaudhuri has not been able to come down to Delhi to sign
the Report but it has his concurrence.


9
INDEX TO APPENDIX I

CLAUSE SURJECT-MATTER PAGE No.
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and extent VW
2. Definitions . . . 1
CHAPTER II
FECT OF CONVERSION ON MARRIAGES
A.—BEffect of conversion, gencrally
3. Conversion by itself not to dissolve marriage. Ir
4. Prohibition of bigamy 12
5. Dissolution of marriage on ground of conversion not
permitted except under the Act 12
B.—Dissolution of marriage on repudiation or refusal to
co-habit after conversion
6. Dissolution of marriage on conversion, where the other
party repudiates the spouse, or refuses to co-habit.. 12
7. Re-marriage of divorced persons 12
CHAPTER III
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE
8. Court to which petition should be made 13
9. Jurisdiction of Indian courts. . . . 13
to. Contents and verification of petition 13
11. Application of Code of Civil Procedure 13
12, Maintenance pendente lite, and expenses of proceedings . 14
13. Permanent alimony and maintenance . 14
14. Disposal of property 15
15. Custody of children . 15
16. Enforcement of decrees and orders. . : : 15
17. Appeals from decrees and orders . न . 5


10

CLAUSE SUBJECT-MATIER Pace No.

CHAPTER IV

MISCELLANEOUS

18. Rules by the High Court . पु : . : पु 16
19. Proof of refusal : पु पु : : . : 16
20. Dissolution of marriage not to affect status or right of

children पु पु : पु पु 76
21. Provision regarding persons to whom the Hindu Marriage

Act applies both before and after conversion . 16
22. Savings for marriages solemnised under the Special

Marriage Act . . . . . 16
23. Repeal 16

Explanation of abbreviations

Christian Marriage Act . . . The Indian Christian Marriage
Act, 1872.

Converts’ Act पु पु पु . The Converts’ Marriage Disso-
lution Act, 1866.

Divorce Act . . . . The Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

HLM.A. पु पु : : . The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

M.C.A. : . पु . . The (English) Matrimonial
Causes Act, 1950.

P.M.D.A. - . . . . The Parsi Marriage and Divorce
Act, 1936.

S.M.A. + . . . . The Special Marriage Act, 1954.


APPENDIX I
PROPOSALS AS SHOWN IN THE FORM OF A DRAFT BILL.
(This is a tentative draft only)

THE CONVERTS’ MARRIAGE DISSOLUTION
BILL, 1961

A
BILL

to provide for the dissolution under certain circumstances
of marriages of converts and for matters connected

therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY
1, (1) This Act may be called the Converts’ Marriage Short title
Dissolution Act, 1961. and extent.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State Re 3s 1

of Jammu and Kashmir. Converts’
te

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(a) “district court” means, in any area for which Cf. s. 3 (०)
there is a city civil court, that court, and in any other "
area the principal civil court of original jurisdiction,
and includes any other civil court which may be speci-
fied by the State Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the
matters dealt with in this Act;
(b) “India” means the territories to which this Act
extends; and
(c) “minor” means a person who has not com- Contrast ae री]

i 8 35 Chris-
pleted the age of eighteen years. ee
CHAPTER II गुट
Divorce Act.
EFFECT OF CONVERSION ON MARRIAGES ein
- A—Effect of conversion, generally कल्प

3, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law Conversion ,
for the time being in force, the conversion of a husband orby itself

१8 4


12

not to dis- a wife shall not by itself operate to dissolve his or her

solve mar~ षि
riage. marriage.

Cf. s. A

PMDA™

Compare

also s. 45

Dissolution

of Muslim

Marriages

Act, 1939.

Prohibition 4. Every person who, during the lifetime of his or her

of bigamy. spouse by a marriage contracted before conversion, con-

Gf..s. 44, tracts any other marriage after his or her conversion, shall

S.M.A. be subject to the penalties provided in section 494 and _sec-

45 of 1860, tion 495 of the Indian Penal Code for the offence of marrying
again during the: lifetime of his or her wife or husband, and
the marriage so contracted shall be void.

Dissolution 5. No marriage shall be dissolved at the instance of a
on ground spouse on the ground of the conversion of that spouse,
of conver- except as provided in this Act.

sion not

permitted

except

under the

Act.

B.—Dissolution of marriage on repudiation or refusal to
cohabit after conversion.

आपका 6. (1) If a husband or wife becomes converted to an-

on conve. other religion, and if, in consequence of such conversion, the

sion, where other spouse, not being a minor, repudiates or refuses to co-

the other habit with such husband or wife, the marriage, whether

पाए ie” solemnized before or after the commencement of this Act,

spouse or May, on a petition presented by such husband or wife, be

refuses to {dissolved by a decree of divorce on the ground of such repu-

co-habit. —_; diation or refusal.

Cf. s. 4 and

and s. 5,

Converts”

Act. (2) No petition shall be entertained under this section
unless at the time of the presentation of the petition a
period of not less than two years has elapsed since the con-

version of the petitioner.

Re-marriage 7. Where a decree of dissolution of marriage under this
of divorced Act has been passed, and the time for appealing has expired
of . without an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has

St ware’ been presented but has been dismissed and the decree of

first [५ कि
Converts” dissolution has become final, but not sooner, either party to

Act. the marriage may marry again.
Gf. s. 57

Divorwe Act,

$- 13(1)>

Mer

5, 13, S.M.A.

s. 15, H.M.
A.


13

CHAPTER III
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

8. Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the Court to
district court within the local limits of whose ordinary origi- which peti-

nal civil jurisdiction— tion should
be made,

cof. s. 6,
Converts’
Act.

(a) the respondent is residing at the time of the Compare 5.
presentation of the petition, or 3 MA.
(b) the marriage was solemnized, or SMA.
(c) the husband and wife last resided together, or

(d) the petitioner is residing at the time of presen-
tation of the petition, provided the respondent is, at that
time, residing outside India.

9. No court shali entertain any petition for the dissolu- lutisdiction
tion of any marriage under this Act unless the parties are of Indian
domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of the °™'-
petition. Cf. 8.35
Definitions
of “ hus-
band” and
“ wife”,
read with
ss. 4 and
5, Converts”
Ret.

10. (1) Every petion presented under this Act shall Contents
state distinctly the facts of the case and shall also state that and verifi-
there is no collusion between the petitioner and the other ptrition
party to the marriage.

\

Cf. 7
2nd para.
Conwerts”
Act

and

(2) The statements contained in every such petition ‘- 47, Di
shall be verified by the petitioner or some other competent 7 At
person in the manner required by law for the verification of s. 20,

plaints and may, at the hearing, be referred to as evidence. H.M.A.
8. 325
S.MLA.

11. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act Application
and to such rules as the High Court may make in this eh ode of
ivil Pro-
cedure.
Of. 8 22,
Converts”
Act,


14

Cf. s. 45: behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as

Divorce Act, fay as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

S.M.A.

5 of 1908.

Maintenance 12. Where in any proceeding under this Act it appears to
fevand the court that either the wife or the husband, as the case

expenses of May be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his

proceedings. support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it
oF. may, on the application of the wife or the husband, order

og s.36, the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the
ivoree Act. proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such sum

4 Ra. as, having regard to the petitioner’s own income and the
3... 365 income of the respondent, may seem to the court to be
S.MLA. reasonable.

Cf. 8. 285

earlier half,

Converts”

Act.

Permanent 43. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act

alimony anc ~ u व
maintenance, On the petition of any person, may, at the time of passing

any decree of dissolution of marriage or at any time sub-
8-१० sequent thereto, order that the petitioner shall, while the
7 respondent remains un-married, pay to the yespondent for

$. 253 4 हि है

HLM.A. her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such
8. 375 monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the
S.M.A. life of the respondent as, having regard to the petitioner’s

Cf. s. 28, OWP income and other property, if any, the income end

later half, other property of the respondent and the conduct of the

Converts’ parties, may seem to the court to be just; and any such

Act. payment may be secured, if necessary. by a charge on the
immovable property of the petitioner.

(2) Where a petition for dissolution of a marriage under
this Act has been filed by the husband, the court shall
not pass a decree of dissolution of the marriage without
passing an order ‘under sub-section (1) unless. for special
reasons to be recorded, the court thinks that such order
is unnecessary.

(3) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in
the circumstances of either party at any time after it has
made an order under sub-section (7), it may, at the
instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such
order in such manner as the court may deem just

(4) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose
favour an order has been made under this section has re-
married or, if such party is the wife, that she has not
remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he

has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wed-
jock, it shall rescind the order.


15 .

14. (1) In any proceeding under this Act, the court Disposal of
may make such provisions in the decree as it deems just Property.
and proper with respect to any property presented, at or 8५%
about the time of the marriage, which may belong jointly “4
to both the husband and the wife.

(2) In any proceeding under this Act in which the court Gf. 5. 4०.
pronounces a decree for dissolution of marriage, the court Divorce Act.
may inquire into the existence of ante-nuptial or post-
nuptial settlements made on the parties whose marriage
is the subject of the decree, and may make such orders,
with reference to the application of the whole or any part
of the property so settled (whether the settlement is for
the benefit of the children of the marriage or of the parties
to the marriage or both), as the court thinks fit.

(3) The court shall not make any erder under sub- Cf. s. 40,
section (2) for the benefit of the parents or either of them Proviso,
at the expense of the children. Divorce

27,

15. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), in Gustody of
any proceeding under this Act, the court may, from time oe
to time, pass such interim orders and make such provi- 4,43 sd
sions in the decree as it may deem just and proper with 44, Divorce

respect to the custody, maintenance and education of minor Act. ६ 26,
children, consistently with their wishes, wherever possible, io ss

and may, after the decree, upon application by petition SMA.
for the purpose, make. from time to time. all such orders
and provisions with respect to the custody, maintenance

and education of such children as might have been made

by such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding

for obtaining such decree were still pending, and the court

may also from time to time revoke, suspend or vary any

such orders and provisions previously made.

(2) Where a marriage is dissolved under this Act on
the petition of any person, the respondent shall be entitled
to the custody of the minor children of the marriage, un-
Jess the court, by reason of the special circumstances of
the case, deems it just to make an order to the ccntrary.

16. All decrees and orders made by the court in any Enforcement
proceeding under this Act shall be enforced in the like of decrees
manner as the decrees and orders cf the court made in व orders.
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time 554 0.
being are enforced. 5. 28, ह

HLMA,

$. 39;
S.MLA.

1%, All decrees and orders made by the court in any Appeals
proceeding under this Act shall be appealable as decrees from decrees
of the court made in the exercise of its original civil juris- ana orders,

Convenst

Act.

8. 28,
HMA.



S- 39.
SMA.

8. 55.
Divorce Act.
Se 96,
CP.C.

Rules by
the High
Court,

Cf. $. 62,
Divorce Act,
and s. 4161),
S.M.A.

Proof ol
refusal.

Ch. s. 21
"Converts?
Act.

Dissolution

Provision
regarding
persons to
whom the
Hindu
Ma:
Act applies
both betore
and after
conversion.
25 of 19६5.

Savings for

marriages

solemnised
der the

43 of 1954.

Repeai,
21 of 1866,
[New]

_ ¢eordi
? me

16

diction, and such appeal shall lie to the court to which

appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions cf the court given
in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction:

Provided that there shal! be no appeal on the subiect
of costs only.

CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS

18. The High Court may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make such rules consistent with the provisions
contained in this Act as it may consider expedient for the
purpose of carrying into effect the rrovisions of this Act.

19. In any proceeding under this Act, proof of the res-
pondent’s refusal to cohabit with the petitioner afier the
petitioner's conversion and after knowledge thereof by
the respondent shall be sufficient evidence of such refusal
being in consequence of the petitioner's conversion, unless
some other sufficient cause for such refusal be proved by
the respondent.

20, The dissolution of a marriage under this Act shall
not operate to deprive the respondent’s children (if any)
by the petitioner of their status as legitimate children or
of any vight or interest which they would have had ac-
g 10 the personal law applicable to them, by way of
a nienance, inheritance or otherwise. in case the marriage
shad not heen dissolved under this Act.

21. For the purposes of this Act, a person to whom the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, applies, shall not be deemed to
have been converted to another reiigion if, even after such
conversion, the said Act continues to apply to such person.

22, Nothing in this Act applies to any marriage solem-
nised under the Special Marriage Act, 1954.

23. (1) The Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866,
and any enactment corresponding to that Act in force in
any area immediately before the commencement of this
Act, are hereby repealed.


Ww

(2) Nothing contained in this section shall affect any Contrast
proceeding under the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, fy 447s, छः 4
4866, or any such corresponding enactment, pending at 5. sr “ay
the commencement of this Act, and any such proceeding (6), S.M.A.
may be continued and determined as if the Converts’ Mar-
riage Dissolution Act, 1866, or such corresponding enact- 71 °f 1866.
ment, as the case may be, had not been repealed. 21 of 1866,

(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall be without Cy. s. 51 (3),
prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6 of the S-MA.
General Clauses Act, 1897, which shall also apply to the
repeal of the corresponding enactment. 1


APPENDIX II
Notes on CLAUSES
Clause 1.

The existing Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act ex-
tends to the whole of India except the areas which were
comprised within Part B States. A recent Act passed by
Parliament, namely, the Miscellaneous Personal Laws
(Extension) Act, 1959 (48 of 1959), which amends section
35 of the existing Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, has
the effect of extending the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution
Act to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir and the Union Territory of Manipur’.

There is no reason why the Act should not apply to
Manipur?. The necessary change has been made accord-
ingly.

Clause 2.—“district court”

This follows the language of the corresponding provi-
sion in the Hindu Marriage Act.

Clause 2-—~‘India”

The expression “India” occurs in some of the clauses*
and has therefore been defined here.

Clause 2.—“Minor”

The expression “minor” occurs in some of the clauses*
and has therefore been defined here.

Clause 3.

The object of this clause is to provide that the conver-
sion of one spouse will not, hy itself, put an end to the
marriage’.

Clause 4.

When only one spouse is converted, cases often arise
where, after conversion, that spouse enters into a second
marriage with a person belonging to his or her new religion.
This, it is considered, causes hardship, and the object of
the clause under discussion is to provide that after conver-
sion a person will not re-marry.

\The Act came into force on rst February, 1960.

*Of. the recommendation made in para. 3 of the 15th Report of he Law
Qommission (Report on the law relating to marriage and divorc? amongst
Christians in India) regarding the applicability of that Act to Manipury

*For example, sce clause 9.
‘For example, see clauses 6 and 15.
*For 8 discussion of the reasons, see the body of the Report, para. 3.

18



19

Where the previous personal law itself prohibits bigamy,
the clause under discussion will be harmless.

Where the previous personal law does not prohibit
bigamy, the clause under discussion will benefit the non-
converted spouse by virtually enforcing monogamy. To that
extent, the personal law will be modified.

The clause, it is considered, should apply irrespective of
whether the new personal law allows polygamy or not.

Clause 5.

The object of this clause is to ensure that the converted
party should not dissolve the marriage on the ground of
conversion except under the Act. In other words, dissolu-
tion at the instance of the convert on the ground of conver-
sion will be governed entirely by the new Act.

Clause 6.

Sub-clause (1) enables a spouse to sue for divorce after
his or her own conversion, if the other party refuses to
cohabit with or repudiates the spouse in consequence of
such conversion. The substance of the provision is taken
from sections 4 and 5 of the existing Converts’ Marriage
Dissolution Act, but the requirement that the desertion or
repudiation must have been for the space of six continuous
months has been omitted as unnecessary. Further, the
word “desertion”, it is felt, is not appropriate, as the Act
gives relief not on the ground of any matrimonial offence
of the non-convert, but on_ the ground of conversion not
being acceptable to the other party. Hence the words
“refuses to cohabit” have been used.

Sub-clause (2) provides a minimum interval between the |
conversion and the petition. If no such minimum interval
is prescribed, it is apprehended: that sham conversions may
be resorted to with the sole object of getting a divorce on;
that basis. Some interval should therefore elapse between
the conversion and the presentation of the petition.

Under the ordinary law applicable to the parties,’
“desertion” itself will be a ground for matrimonial relief if
it has lasted for a particular period. The clause under dis-
cussion, by providing the same period, will ensure that
there will be no sham conversions, and secure uniformity.

756७ for example, section 10(1)(a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,
svhich allows judicial separation on desertion for two years, and section 22 of
the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, which allows judicial separation on desertion
for two years.


20

Clause 7.

This deals with the minimum interval for the re-marriage
of persons divorced under the Bill, and has been introduced
on the lines of the corresponding provision found in other
matrimonial laws."

Clause 8.

This deals with the court to which a petition under the
Act will be filed (assuming that Indian courts have juris-
diction under the separate clause.)*

The respondent’s residence will be the main basis, but
the court within whose jurisdiction the marriage was solem-
nised or the husband or wife last resided together will also
have jurisdiction as in the corresponding provision in the
Hindu Marriage Act and the Special Marriage Act.

Paragraph (d) provides for cases not covered by the
other paragraphs. If the respondent is residing within
India, the matter will be covered by the other paragraphs;
but, where he resides outside ‘India, the other paragraphs
may not cover the case, though Indian Courts as such have
jurisdiction.* Hence the necessity of this paragraph.’

Clause 9.

This seeks to provide that Indian courts have jurisdic-
tion only if the parties are domiciled in India. The existing
provisions of the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, sec-
tions 4 and 5, already contain this requirement, since the
definition of “husband” and “wife” in that Act requires that
‘either the husband or the wife must be domiciled in India
To prevent complications, it is considered that both the par-

ties must be domiciled in India.

Clause 10.

This is modelled mainly on the lines of the corresponding
provisions of the Indian Divorce Act, Hindu Marriage Act
and Special Marriage Act.‘

It appears unnecessary to prescribe any form of petition.

1These have been cited in the margin against the clause.
2866 clause 9.
‘See the next clause,

‘Compare clause 36(3)(d), in Appendix I, rsth Report of this Com-
mission, relating to Marriage and Divorce amongst Christians in Tndia.

*These have been cited in the margin against the clause.


24

Clause 11.

This is intended to provide for the application of all the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure to proceedings
under the Act (subject to the provisions of the Act and to
the rules to be made by the High Court). The correspond-
ing provisions of the Indian Divorce Act, ९८.7, may be com-
pared.

Clause 12.

This provides for interim maintenance and expenses, ete.

Clause 13.

This deals with permanent alimony and maintenance,
and is modelled mainly on the corresponding provisions
of the other Acts relating to matrimonial relief.”

3६ is considered that only the respondent in the main
proceedings should be entitled to the relief under this
clause. So far as the petitioner is concerned, he would
have instituted proceedings on account of his or her own
act, and hence it is not desirable that the petitioner should
be given a right to claim maintenance from the other
party.

As to sub-clause (2), the reasons have already been
given*

Clause 14.

Sub-clause (1) is intended to enable the court to pass
orders relating to the disposal of property presented to
the parties at the time of marriage and belonging jointly.
Jt has been modelled on the corresponding provision in the
Hindu Marriage Act.t

Sub-clauses (2) and (3) are intended to empower the
court to deal with properties settled before or after marri-
age of the parties, and are modelled on the corresponding
provision in the Indian Divorce Act.’

Clause 15,

Sub-clause (1) is an exhaustive provision authorising
the court to pass orders relating to custody, maintenance
and education of minor children. It has been modelled
on the corresponding provisions in the other Acts.*

*These have been cited in the margin against the clause.
*These have been cited in the margin against the clause.
"See the body of the Report, para, 10.

‘Cited in the margin against the clause.

SCited in the margin against the clause.

Cited in the margin against the clause.


22

Sub-clause (2) is intended to secure, in effect, that
only the non-convert party will have the right to the cus-
tody of the children, unless the circumstances are such as
to require a different order.'

Clause 16.

This is intended to deal with the execution of decress
and orders made under the Act, and is modelled on the
corresponding provision of the other Acts.”

Clause 17.

This is intended to provide for appeal against decrees
and orders made under the Act. It has been modelled
on the corresponding provision of the other Acts*, with this
verbal difference that decrees and orders will be appeal-
able as “the decrees” of the court and not as “the orders”
of the court. Orders are not normally appealable under
the Civil Procedure Code, and therefore it would not be
accurate to say that the decrees and orders will be ap-
pealable as the decrees “and orders” of the court in its
original civil jurisdiction. Certain other verbal changes
have also been made for clarity, and particularly to make
it clear that the right of appeal need not be sought for
in any other statute.

It may be noted that section 29 of the Converts’ Marri-
age Dissolution Act bars an appeal, and merely provides
for a reference of the case to the High Court. It is felt
that an appeal would be more convenient than a reference.
Hence the change.

Clause 18.

This does not need any comments.
Clause 19.

This has been suggested by section 21 cf the existing
Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act. That section (besides
providing that co-habitation is evidence of marriage—a
provision which need not be enacted) embodies two pre-
sumptions—

(i) Voluntary neglect to cohabit is sufficient
evidence of desertion or repudiation and of such
desertion, etc. being in consequence of conversion.

(ii) Refusal to cohabit is sufficient evidence of
desertion, etc. and of the desertion, etc. being in conse-
quence of the conversion.

*For reasons, see the body of the Report, para. 11.
*Cited in the margin against the clause.

Cited in the margin against the clause.


23

[In both cases, the voluntary neglect or refusal should
be after the petitioner’s conversion and after knowledge
thereof by the respondent, and in both cases evidence can
be tendered to show some other cause for his refusal or
voluntary neglect.]

So far as the first presumption is concerned, it can be
broken up into two parts again, namely:—

(a) presumption about voluntary neglect amount-
ing to desertion, and

(b) presumption about voluntary neglect being in
consequence of the conversion.

The second presumption can also be similarly broken
up. The process would therefore lead to four presump-
tions, in all, namely:—

1. Voluntary neglect proves desertion.

2. Voluntary neglect further proves that desertion
is in consequence of the conversion.

3. Refusal to cohabit proves desertion.

4. Refusal to cohabit further proves that the
desertion is in consequence of the conversion.

It has been considered unnecessary to deal with the
case of voluntary neglect; we can simplify the clause by
confining it to refusal to cohabit. Presumptions No. 1 and
2 therefore go out of the picture.

As regards presumption No. 3, in view of the language
adopted in the substantive clause," which uses the formula
“refusal to cohabit” instead of “desertion”, the presump-
tion becomes redundant.

The presumption at No. 4 has been embodied in the
clause under discussion, as a useful one. Certain verbal
changes have been made for simplicity and precision.

Clause 20.

This has been suggested by section 27 of the existing
Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, the substance of which
has been embodied here as a useful provision.

As to the effect of change of religion, and its effect on
proprietary rights, see the undermentioned Act*, which
deals with the rights of the convert.

2Clause 6.
2Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850 (21 of 1850).


24

Clause 21.

The object of this clause is to provide that change of
a mere sect within the fold of Hinduism—e.g., from Hindu-
isim to Jainisim, or to Virashaivsim, etc. —shall not be
deemed to be conversion.

Clause 22.

The Special Marriage Act, 1954, allows persons belong-
ing to different religions to marry. It is considered that
since initial difference of religion does not come in the
way of a marriage under that Act, the subsequent change
of religion should not also affect any such matriage.!
Hence this clause.

The clause has been framed on wide lines, to stress the
idea that personal law has nothing to do with such mar-
riages,

Clause 23.

This is a repeal clause and does not need any com-
ments.

‘See also the body of the Report, para, 12.



APPENDIX III

The following table shows the existing sections of the Converts’
Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866, and the corresponding clause in the
Gill in Appendix I: —

Section of the existing Act Clause
I : : : पु : . : + 1, part
2 (Repealed) . . . . . ewe
3, part . . . . + 2, part and 9
4 : : : पु . . + 6, part
5 . . . . : . . . 6, part
6 : पु : . : : मु न 8
7 (Second paragraph) . . . . » Io
19, first para. . . . . . _ 7
2 : : : : . : : - 19
22 II
27 . : . . . . 20
28 . . . . . . . + 12 and 13
29 . . + . . . . - I7
35 . . I, part

The following sections of the existing Act have not been adopted, as
unnecessary :—

ऊ part

7, first paragraph
8 to 18

1g, second para.
20

23 to 26

30 to 34.

25
G MGIPND— TS Wing—399Moi Law—13-5-61— 2,000