         
   LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 ONE HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT 
    O N  
 
ARTICLE 20(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA  
 AND THE RIGHT TO SILENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   MAY 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 9, 2002 
No:6(3) (76) /2002 –LC (LS) 
 
 
Dear Shri Arun Jaitley ji, 
 
 
I am sending herewith the 180 th report on “Article 20 (3) of the 
Constitution of India and the right to Silence” of a person accused. 
 
2. The Law Commission had taken up the above said subject, suo 
motu, in view of some developments in U.K. and other countries diluting 
the right to silence of the accused at the stage of interrogation and in 
criminal trial proceedings. In India, the right against self-incrimination is 
incorporated in clause (3) of article 20 of the Constitution. Further, after 

 2 
Maneka Gandhi V Union Of India,  (1978 (1) SCC 248), Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India requires a fair, just and equitable procedure to be 
followed in criminal cases. In the present Report, an analysis and a 
comparative study of ‘right to silence’ is made based on recently decided 
English and European Court cases and the position currently obtaining 
in various countries like U.S.A., Australia, Canada, U.K. and China. Our 
recommendation is to  emphasize that no change in the law relating to 
right to silence of the accused is necessary. The right is protected by  
Articles 20 (3) and 21 of the Constitution and  sections 161 (2), 313 (3) 
and 315 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  If the changes made 
in U.K. or those proposed in Australia are introduced in India, such 
changes will be ultra vires of Articles 20 (3) and 21 of the Constitution of 
India. Our recommendation, therefore, is that no dilution of the existing 
right to silence need be made nor can be made. 
 
With regards 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
(Justice M.Jagannadha Rao) 
       
Shri Arun Jaitley, 
Hon’ble Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs, 
Shastri Bhawan, 
New Delhi. 
 
 
Report 
on 
Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India and the Right to Silence 
 
  
“…..throughout the web of English crim inal law, one golden thread is 
always to be seen, that it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the 
prisoner’s guilt” (per Viscount Sankey). 
(Woolmington vs. DPP, 1935 AC 462 at 481) 

 3 
 
 The ‘right to silence’ is a princi ple of common law and it means that 
normally courts or tribunals of fact should not be invited or encouraged to 
conclude, by parties or prosecutors, th at a suspect or an accused is guilty 
merely because he has re fused to respond to questions put to him by the 
police or by the Court. 
 
 The origins of right to silence ma y not be exactly clear but the right 
goes back to the middle ages in England.   During the 16 th century, the 
English Courts of Star Chambe r and High Commission developed the 
practice of compelling suspects to take  an oath known as the “ex-officio 
oath” and, the accused had to answer  questions, without even a formal 
charge, put by the judge and the prosecuto r.  If a person refused to take oath, 
he could be tortured.  These Star Chambers and Commissions were later 
abolished.   The right to silence is based on the principle ‘nemo debet 
prodere ipsum’, the privilege against self-incrimination. 
 
 Wigmore regarded the principle of  silence as having crept into the 
common law almost by accident in th e mid-seventeenth century following 
the collapse of the political courts of  Star Chamber and Commissions.  Once 
the right was established, the right of  the accused was extended to witnesses 
and to allegations of crime and to ci vil litigation.  Wood and Crawford have 
argued that the device can be attribut ed to the widespread hostility aroused 
by compulsory testimony upon oath.  They  maintain that the right emerged 
in England as a basic democratic right established by public agitation long 
before it became the subject of judicial  consideration.  The second theory, 
offered by Maguire and Levy, traces  the ‘privilege against self-

 4 
incrimination’ to the English common law criminal procedure in the middle 
ages.  Both Levy and Maguire agree with Wigmore that the right was 
extended later to witnesses in a crimin al case and to allegations of crime 
made in civil proceedings.  Mc Nair ha s a third view that the above authors 
have put “the cart before the horse”.   The privilege originated in Roman 
Common Law, applying first to witnesses and to allegations of crime in civil 
proceedings before it was extended to  the accused in criminal law.  The 
Criminal Law Revision Committee (UK) said in 1972 in its 11 th Report that 
the principle did not emerge until the 19 th century.  (see ‘The Right to 
Silence: A Review of the Current De bate) (1990) Vol. 53 Mod L Rev p. 
709). 
 
 The 16 th and 17 th centuries show that the privilege against self-
incrimination was closely related to  the medieval version, which was 
involved in the protection against religious intolerance.  In England, 
prerogative courts such as the Star  Chamber and the High Commission and 
ecclesiastical courts used the oath ex-officio.   In this procedure, any person 
on the street could be picked up, asked to take oath and answer questions for 
finding out if they were in disagreem ent on questions of theology with the 
Crown.  The Privy Council on a motion from the House of Commons asked 
Coke and Chief Justice Popham wh en the oath could properly be 
administered.   They replied, “No Man…. shall be examined upon secret 
thoughts of his Heart, or of his secr et opinion”: (see “An Oath before an 
Ecclesiastical Judge ex-O fficio”, 12 Coke’s Rep 26 (3 rd Ed, 1727).  The 
Long Parliament abolished the Star  Chamber and High Commissions and 
forbade ecclesiastical courts to use the oath ex-officio.  (see “Origins of the 
Privilege against Self-incriminati on”: by R.H. Helmhotz 65. New York 

 5 
Univ. Law Rev 962 (1990); Michael R.T. Mc Nair, “The Early Development 
of the Privilege against self-incrimina tion”: 10 Oxford J. of Legal Studies, 
66 (1990); Eben Moglen, Taking the Fif lt: Reconsidering the origins of the 
Constitutional Privilege against Self Incrimination 92, Mich L. Rev. 1086 
(1994). (quoted at pp 216-217 by Prof. Akhil Reed Amar in his ‘The 
Constitution and Criminal Procedure, First Principles’ 1999, Yale University 
Press). 
 
 The right to silence has various f acets.  One is that the burden is on 
the State or rather the prosecution to  prove that the accused is guilty.  
Another is that an accused is presumed to be innocent till he is proved to be 
guilty.  A third is the right of the accuse d against self incrimination, namely, 
the right to be silent and that he cannot  be compelled to incriminate himself.  
There are also exceptions to the rule.  An accused can be compelled to 
submit to investigation by allowing hi s photographs taken, voice recorded, 
his blood sample tested, his hair or other bodily material used for DNA 
testing etc. 
 
 Some of the aspects relating to right  to silence came to be included in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.  Art. 11.1 thereof reads: 
 
“11.1 Everyone charged with a pena l offence has the right to be 
presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public 
trial at which he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defence.” 
 
 The International Covenant on Ci vil and  Political Rights, 1966 to 
which India is a party states in Art. 9.1 that none shall be deprived of his 

 6 
liberty except on such grounds and in acco rdance with such procedure as are 
established by law; Art. 9.2 states th at any one who is arrested shall be 
informed, at the time of arrest, of th e reasons for his arrest and shall be 
promptly informed of any charges agains t him.  Art. 11.3 refers to the right 
to be produced in a Court promptly and for a trial.  Art. 14(3)(g) refers to 
various “minimum guarantees” and states that everyone has a right: 
 
“Art. 14(3)(g):  Not to be compelled to testify against himself or to 
confess guilt.” 
 
 The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms states in Art. 6(1) that every person charged has a 
right to a ‘fair’ trial and Art. 6(2) thereof states: 
 
“Art. 6(2) Everyone charged with  a criminal offence shall be 
presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law.” 
 
 In India, the right against self incr imination is incorporated in clause 
(3) of Art. 20 and after Maneka Gandhi’s case: (1978 (1) SCC 248), Art. 21 
requires a fair, just and equitable procedure to be followed in criminal cases. 
 
 It is initially necessary to bear in mind the difference between burden 
of proving an issue (known as the legal or persuasive burden of proof), a 
burden which never shifts and the bur den of adducing credible evidence 
(known as evidential burden), which can  go on shifting during the trial.  
Several modern statutes, while maintaining the burden of proving a pleading 
or charge, alter the evidential burden.   For example, in  a civil case, a 

 7 
plaintiff may have to prove that th e defendant, having bo rrowed money, is 
indebted to him but under Sec. 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, the 
initial evidential burden is shifted to the defendant if he had executed a 
negotiable instrument in favour of the plaintiff.  This method of shifting 
evidential burden has been resorted to in criminal cases too particularly 
where an accused is found in possession of certain property which the law 
declares it illegal to possess, such as dr ugs or stolen property etc.  It is 
perfectly open to a legislature to shift the evidential burden.   
 
 For example, under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 the 
evidential burden is shifted to an  accused person from whom unaccounted 
monies or properties disproportionate to his known sources of income are 
recovered.  Under the Excise and Customs laws, and laws relating to 
smuggling, such evidential burden is  initially imposed on the accused in 
certain circumstances, where the accu sed may be having special knowledge 
about facts such as where contraband property is recovered from.  Such 
provisions have been challenged as viol ative of the principle against self 
incrimination but have been upheld in as much as there is no shift in the 
burden of proof on the charge which lies on the State or the prosecution.   
 
 However, in recent times, the basic principle that the prosecution has 
to prove the charge of guilt agains t the accused beyond reasonable doubt is 
being diluted by the legislature in several statutes.  This is contrary to basic 
rights concerning liberty.  Glanville Williams, one of the greatest jurists on 
criminal law has stated as follows: 
 

 8 
“Where it is said that a defendant to a criminal charge is presumed to 
be innocent, what is really mean t is that the burden of proving his 
guilt is upon the prosecution……Unhapp ily, Parliament regards the 
principle with indifference – one might almost say, with contempt.  
The Statute Book contains many offences in which the burden of 
proving his innocence is cast on the accused…….The sad thing is that 
there has never been any reason or expediency for these departures 
from the cherished principle; it has been done through carelessness 
and lack of subtleties.” 
(see Glanville Williams, The Proof of Guilt (1963, 3 rd Ed., Stevans pp 
184-185). 
 
 It is in the above background and in the light of the constitutional 
provisions in our Constitution that we  propose to consider whether any 
changes in the right to silence is n ecessary and whether, even if made, 
whether such changes will be valid. 
 
 We shall refer to certain recent developments in other countries. 
 
U.K. 
 Initially in England, the law-makers  were confronted with problems of 
terrorism in Northern Ireland.  In or der to combat the said problem, the 
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland)  Order, 1988 was amended permitting 
inferences to be drawn from the silence of an accused where the accused had 
a duty to speak.  Later on, similar cha nges were carried out in the English 
law by enacting sections 34 to 37 in th e Criminal Justice and Public Order 
Act, 1994.  These provisions permit ‘proper inferences’ to be drawn from 

 9 
the silence of the suspect during interrogation or of the accused at the trial.  
The Court can comment on the silence in its summing up to the jury.  The 
jury can take the silence into consideration. 
 
 In a case arising from Northern Ireland, under the Criminal Evidence 
(Northern Ireland) Order, 1988 the matter initially came up before the House 
of Lords in Murray vs. DPP (1993 Cr. App. Rep. 151).  There, the statute 
enabled the Judge to taken silence into account.  In N. Ireland the matters 
would not go before the jury, unlike th e provisions in the English Act of 
1994.  Lord Mustill observed that t hough the statute in Ireland enabled 
‘proper inference’ to be drawn in case of silence of the accused, it was first 
necessary that a prima facie case is made out against the accu sed.  Only then 
the new provisions could be resort ed to for the purpose of drawing 
conclusions about the guilt of the accu sed.  The Court has to make a 
‘common sense approach’.  He made it clear that no finding of guilt could be 
arrived at merely based on the silence of the accused. 
 
 On appeal,  the European Court in Murray vs. United Kingdom (1996) 
22 EHRR 29, held that the encroachments into the right to silence made in 
Ireland by the Irish law of 1988 did not viol ate the right to a fair trial nor the 
presumption of innocence mentioned in Article 6 of the European 
Convention.  It was further held that  the  trial Judge could not draw an 
adverse inference merely on account of the silence of the accused and that 
the guilt of the accused must be prima-facie established by the prosecution.  
An additional condition was laid down that the new provisions could not be 
resorted to unless it was proved that the accused was given an opportunity to 

 10 
call for an attorney at the time when he was interrogated by the Police or at 
the time of trial.   This was a mandatory rule.  
 
 After the judgment above referred to, which arose from the Irish law, 
the English Parliament, which had in the meantime introduced similar 
provisions in the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act, 1994, as applicable 
to England and Wales, amended the said Act by the Youth Justice and 
Criminal Evidence Act, 1999 by introducing provisions requiring the suspect 
or accused to be informed of his right to call an attorney. 
 
Sub-section 2(A) was introduced in 1999 in Section 34 and that 
section deals with pre-trial silence. Sub-section (2A) provides an opportunity 
to call a lawyer and reads as follows:  
 
“Section 34(2A). Where the accused was at an authorized place of 
detention at the time of the failure , sub-sections (1) and (2) above do 
not apply if he had not been a llowed an opportunity to consult a 
solicitor prior to being questioned, charged or informed as mentioned 
in sub-section (1) above.”  
 
A similar provision was introduced in Sec.36 by way of Sub-section 
(4A). Section 36 deals with failure of the accused to account for objects, 
substances, and marks. Sub-section (3A) was introduced in Section 35.  That 
section deals with right to silence at the trial. Similarly in Sec.37 which deals 
with the presence of the accused at the scene of offence, sub-sec.(3A) was 
introduced. All these new Sub-sections  require that the accused must be 
informed that he has a right to the pr esence of an attorney  whenever he is 

 11 
questioned. If he had not been so informed, the fact that he remained silent, 
could not be taken into consideration.  
 
If therefore, no presumption can be raised on account of the silence of 
the accused unless a prima-facie case of guilt has been established by the 
prosecution, it is difficult to see, a nd several jurists have also stated 
similarly, that there is no extra adva ntage in permitting the judge to rely on 
the silence of the accused.  Further, while the amendment to the English law 
has made a provision for raising “proper inferences”, the European Court in 
Murray Vs. UK  has reduced its rigour by limiting the use of the silence for 
the limited purpose of an assurance or corroboration and that too, provided 
the accused was informed of his right to have a lawyer by his side at the time 
of the questioning.  
 
But, according to the House of Lord s and the European Court, silence 
of the accused enters into  the decision-making process before arriving at a 
finding that the accused is guilty beyond reasonable doubt. 
 
One may ask the question as to in  how many cases Police Officers in 
India are strictly following the rule s laid down by the Supreme Court in 
D.K.Basu’s case? In a pending public interest litigation in the Supreme 
Court, it was reported by the amicus very recently that, according to the 
information received from various States, it was clear that D.K.Basu 
guidelines are not being followed in most of the States. Can anybody assure 
that in India, the Police invariably w ould inform a person in detention that 
he has a right to call a lawyer at the time of his interrogation? Even if we 
introduce a rule to that effect and even if the Police record in their diary that 

 12 
such an opportunity was given, one cannot say how much credence can be 
given to such a noting in India.  Even in England, it was stated that, if the 
signature of the accused was not obtained in the diary after recording that he 
was informed of his right to call an attorney, that would amount to a breach 
of section 78 of the Police and Crimin al Evidence Act, 1984.   One other 
thing to be noted is that Article 6(1) of the European Convention only speaks 
of a right to a fair trial and Art. 6(2) to a presumption of innocence.  There is 
no reference to a right against self in crimination, as contained in Article 
20(3) of our Constitution or as contai ned in the Fifth Amendment of the 
American Constitution.   In Murray vs. UK, the European Court no doubt 
observed that if the silence of the accused was taken into account, after a 
prima facie case was established and th e accused was informed of his right 
to call for an attorney, the provision as to  fair trial in Art. 6(1) would not be 
violated.   
 
 We shall next refer to the recent decision of the European Court in 
Condron vs. The United Kingdom  rendered on 2 nd May, 2000.  The case 
directly arose under the English Ac t of 1994.  The Court relied upon the 
judgment in Murray’s case  already referred to and st ated that the right to 
silence was not absolute but at the same time a prima facie case must be 
made out and the safeguards mentioned in that judgment namely, giving an 
opportunity to the accused or suspect, to call for a lawyer, must be followed.  
Condron’s case was one where the accused pe rsons exercised their right to 
call for a lawyer and as the lawyer a dvised them to remain silent during 
interrogation by the police, they remained silent and when cross-examined at 
the trial (a procedure which does not obtain in India), they said that they 

 13 
remained silent because of  the advice of the lawyer.  The Court then stated 
as follows: 
“…..the Court would observe at this juncture that the applicants were 
subjected to cross examination  on the content of their solicitor’s 
advice can not be said to raise an issue of fairness under Art. 6 of the 
Convention.  They were under no co mpulsion to disclose the advice 
given, other than the indirect compulsion to avoid the reason for their 
silence remaining at the level of a mere explanation.  The applicants 
chose to make the content of their solicitor’s advice a live issue as part 
of their defence.  For that reas on, they cannot complain that the 
scheme of sec. 34 of the 1994 Ac t is such as to override the 
confidentiality of their discussions with their solicitor”. 
 The above observations of the Eur opean Court lead to this.  If the 
accused remains silent, they run the risk of  an adverse inference.  But if they 
seek legal advice and state that their la wyer advised them to remain silent, 
the Court would then say that there was a fair trial and that they had waived 
their privilege of confidentiality.   They would be prejudiced either way. 
We may further notice that in Condron’s case, the solicitor was also 
examined at the trial as to the advice he  had given.  This is clear from what 
the Court observed later: 
“They (accused) testified that they acted on the strength of the advice 
of their solicitor who had grave doubts about their fitness to cope with 
police questioning….their solicitor confirmed this in his testimony  in 
the voir dire proceedings…….then admittedly the trial Judge drew the 
jury’s attention to this explanation.  However he did so in terms which 
left the jury at liberty to draw an adverse inference notwithstanding 
that it may have been satisfied as to the plausibility of the explanation.  

 14 
It is to be observed that the Court of Appeal found in terms of the trial 
Judge’s direction deficient in this  respect…In the Court’s opinion, as 
a matter of fairness, the jury should have been directed that it could 
only draw an adverse inference if sa tisfied that the applicant’s silence 
at the police interview could only sensibly be attributed to their 
having no answer or none that would stand up to cross examination…. 
 ….As the applicants have pointed out, it is impossible to 
ascertain what weight, if any, was given to the applicant’s silence (by 
the jury).  In its 
John Murray judgment, the Court noted that the trier 
of fact in that case was an expe rienced Judge who was obliged to 
explain the reasons for his decision to  draw inferences and the weight 
attached to them.  Moreover, the ex ercise of the Judges discretion to 
do so was subject to review by the appellate courts….However, these 
safeguards were absent in this case.   It was even more compelling to 
ensure that the jury was properly advised on how to address the issue 
of the applicants’ silence.  It is true that the Judge was under no 
obligation to leave the jury with the option of drawing an adverse 
inference from their silence, and le ft with the option, the jury had 
option to do so or not to do so.  It is equally true that the burden of 
proof lay with the prosecution to prove the applicants’ guilt beyond 
reasonable doubt and that the jury wa s informed that the applicants’ 
silence could not “on its own prove guilt”…However, 
notwithstanding the presence of thes e safeguards the Court considers 
that the Judge’s omission to restrict the jury’s discretion must be seen 
as incompatible with the exercise of  their right to silence at the police 
station.” 
The Court observed further  

 15 
“…the Court of appeal had no mean s of ascertaining whether or not 
the applicants’ silence played a signi ficant role in the jury’s decision 
to convict…” 
The Court observed that sec. 34 of the English Act as introduced in 1994 
gave the discretion only to the jury a nd inasmuch as the Judge did not give 
the discretion to the jury, the convicti on was liable to be set aside.  The 
Court further observed: 
“Any other conclusion would be at  variance with the fundamental 
importance of the right to silence,  a right which, as observed earlier 
lies at the heart of the notion of a fair procedure guaranteed by Art. 6.” 
We have set out passages from the j udgment of the European Court in 
Condron’s case   which arose out of the UK law as amended in 1994, in 
sufficient detail, only to show the rami fications into which the English law 
has been thrown after the 1994 amendments. 
 
Let us, therefore, consider the ne w problems the English Courts are 
presently facing after the 1994 changes in  the law relating to the right to 
silence. Presently in most cases, the accused would say, upon being 
questioned, that his lawyer had asked him to remain silent. Questions have 
arisen as to whether the lawyer has advised the accused to remain silent 
because the lawyer felt that the accused might not be able to withstand the 
hard questioning by the police or the clev er or complicated questions of an 
able prosecutor. Questions have also arisen as to whet her the lawyer knew 
about the guilt of the accused and felt that the accused should stand by his 
constitutional right. Yet another question that has arisen is whether the  
lawyer of the accused can be cro ss-examined, as done in Condron’s case  to 

 16 
reveal the details of the advise and wh ether that would or would not violate 
the basic principle of confidentiality between a lawyer and his client.    
 
 We shall refer to some more pr oblems faced by English Courts after 
the changes of 1994.  For example, th e present law requires the court to 
draw a ‘proper’ inference against the accused who has remained silent when 
questioned by the Police or by the Court.  There are no guidelines as to what 
type of inference should be drawn in different situations or facts.  Further, 
even after 1994, it is accepted that s ilence alone cannot be treated as 
evidence against the accused unless a prima facie case is made out first.  
Opinion about prima facie case can always differ.  For example, an accused 
may want to remain silent as he doe s not recognise the authority of the 
person questioning his innocence.  Jesus might have opted to remain silent 
as he did not accept the authority of Pontius Pilot to question his innocence.  
(see Mathew 27: 11-14; Luke: 22: 2- 5) (quoted by Rosemarry Pattenden on 
“Inference from Silence” 1995 Cr.L. Rev . p 602).   An accused may have 
been silent if he felt that the pr osecution case was weak.  He may have 
remained silent because his lawyer had asked him to remain silent. 
 
It is again not clear what Lord Mu still in the House of Lords or later 
the European Court meant in stating that a prima facie  case must first be 
established by the prosecution before  any inference is drawn from the 
silence of the accused (see Murray vs. DPP (1993) Cr. App. Rep. 151 (H L.) 
and (1996) 22 EHRR 29).  In the same judgment in the House of Lords, 
Lord Slynn used the words “ clear prima facie case” and Kelley J in R vs. 
Murphy (NICA Unrep. 2-4-93), used the words “ strong prima facie case”. It 
is again not clear whether the infere nce that may be drawn by the court 

 17 
against an accused should relate to the specific facts or whether it could be a 
general inference about the guilt of the accused.  But, Lord Mustill said that 
sec. 35 could apply to one issue and may not apply to other issues.  It is not 
clear how this can be done in practice.  In England, an accused may, in fact,  
rely on sec. 1(f)(ii) of the Criminal Evidence Act, 1898 and contend that he 
does not want to testify because of th e risk of cross examination.  What 
would happen to that right is not  clear.   For example, in R vs. Barkley 
(NICR, Nov. 27, 1992) the accused re fused to say anything because he 
feared that the co-accused may threaten him if he pointed out that the co-
accused was the really guilty person.  Could it then be said that even in these 
circumstances, it was a fit case, to dr aw an inference against the accused, 
because he remained silent? 
 
 Silence can always be consistent  with innocence – the accused might 
remain silent because of shock, confusion, embarrassmen t, a desire to 
protect another person or to avoid  repr isals, or in order to conceal some 
other improper conduct of some other person or it may be his personal trait 
to generally be silent or he may be having a low I.Q. or there may be a 
problem of language or literacy; there may be drug depende ncy; he may not 
have understood the caution administered  by the police; he may not have 
realised that certain facts known to him would prove his innocence; or as 
already stated, he may have remained silent because of a bona fide advice by 
a lawyer.  An accused cannot be punish ed because of a wrong advice of a 
lawyer.  In England it is also curious that except sec. 35 the other provisions, 
namely sec. 34, 36 and 37 even apply to children and those mentally ill or 
handicapped.  What is to happen to the right to seek legal advise as 
permitted under sec. 58 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act, 1984?  

 18 
These questions have still not been an swered satisfactorily.  Supposing an 
accused, when questioned at the  trial,  answers “I do not know” or “it is not 
true”, can an inference be drawn against him on the ground that the above 
words  amounted to silence?  If not, is there any difference between his 
verbal denial and his silence? 
 
 As already stated, initially the encr oachment into the right to silence 
started with the Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order, 1988 during 
times when terrorist activities starte d on a big scale in Ireland. The Law 
Revision Committee had earlier felt in 1972 that such an encroachment was 
necessary in the law relating to silence,  in the case of suspected terrorists, 
serious crimes of armed robbery and in  regard to businessmen suspected of 
sophisticated offences of serious fraud (see 11 th Report on Evidence (1972) 
by the Criminal Law Revision Committee (Cmnd. 4991, para  21 (v) and 30) 
and Report of Fraud Trials Committee 1986 (para 2.32).  A law which was 
proposed to tackle terrorism in Irela nd, came to be accepted in England in 
1994 and applied to all cases of crim es where an accused would choose to 
remain silent. 
 
 In England, it has been lamented that the Government had brought the 
1994 changes on the basis of the 11 th Report of 1972 of the Criminal Law 
Review Committee even though two other Royal Commissions  had 
recommended that the right to silence could not be encroached upon.  (see 
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Cmnd. 8092, 
1981) paras 4.47 and 4.53 and the Re port of the  Royal Commission on 
Criminal Justice, Ch.IV, paras 20-25. (ibid, 1995 Crl. L. Rev. p. 4). 
 

 19 
   As to when a Court can say th at a prima facie case has been proved 
and as to when a Court can say it has sufficient evidence of the accused 
having been advised of his right to call an attorney, these matters are capable 
of becoming serious issues in Indian courts.  If the accused and the lawyers 
are also to be cross examined in India, as to what advise was given, there 
would be more confusion.  It, ther efore, appears obvious not to go by the 
changes of 1994 made in the English la w.  Otherwise, there will be more 
litigation, more uncertainty and more arguments for the defence and perhaps 
more acquittals in India.  In fact, in Condron’s case, the European Court has 
referred to several judgments of the Court of appeal in England between 
1994 and 2000 and the said judgments reveal that the English law has 
become more  uncertain after 1994.. 
 
 There are also several articles wr itten by leading jurists published in 
the Criminal Law Review (UK) and other journals right from 1994 referring 
to the adverse consequen ces and serious problems that have crept into 
English law on account of these new changes. 
 
 
Australia:   
 In New South Wales, though the prosecution is expressly prohibited 
from commenting to the jury on the fact  that the defendant did not give 
evidence, the judge and any party (other than the prosecution) may comment 
to the jury if the defendant does not adduce evidence.  However, there are 
restrictions in the nature of comment s which are permitted.  Any suggestion 
that the defendant did so because of a belief of guilt is prohibited.   
 

 20 
 Section 20 reads as follows: (NSW) 
 “ Comment on failure to give evidence: 
 S.20. (1) This section applies onl y in a criminal proceeding for an 
indictable offence. 
(2) The judge or any party (other than the prosecution) may comment 
on a failure of the defendant to gi ve evidence. However, unless the 
comment is made by another defe ndant in the proceeding, the 
comment must not suggest that the defendant failed to give evidence 
because the defendant was, or believe d that he or she was, guilty of 
the offence concerned. 
 ………………                 …………………                  ……………….. 
 (5) If: 
(a) two or more persons are being tried together for an indictable 
offence; and 
(b) comment is made by one of those persons on the failure of any of 
those persons to give evidence, 
the judge may, in addition to commenting on the failure to give 
evidence, comment on any comment of a kind referred to in paragraph 
(b).”  
 
 Under sections 12 and 17, the de fendant is a competent but not a 
compellable defence witness.  In spite of the prohibition on prosecution 
comment, it can happen that the prosecution may refer to the judicial 
comment that the defendant remained s ilent.  The prosecutor has however to 
take care to see that he is not adopting the judge’s comment as his own. 
 

 21 
 The question as to the limits of th e right to silence indeed arose in 
Weissensteiner vs. The Queen (1993) 178 Com Law Rep 217.  In that case, 
which arose from Queensland, by majority  of four against three, Mason CJ, 
Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ upheld the trial judge’s direction to 
the jury that an inference of guilt could be drawn if the defendant elected not 
to give evidence about facts which mu st have been within his special 
knowledge.  They further held that a dverse inference could be drawn from a 
defendant’s election not to testify where the evidence established a prima 
facie case, and that the “silence” coul d then go into the evaluation of the 
evidence before the cour t.  The majority, however, admitted that mere 
failure to testify, was not evidence of guilt and that silence could not fill up 
gaps in the evidence.  The judge wa s bound to inform the jury that the 
defendant was entitled to remain silent  and that there could be good reasons 
for his silence which was unrelated to his guilt. 
 
 As stated earlier, the above cas e arose from Queensland where, the 
relevant statute did not contain any prohibition against comment.  There was 
no section corresponding to sec. 20 of the New South Wales law. 
 
 In the same case, the majority quot ed some early English rulings to 
the effect that the right to silence was always part of the common law, both 
in civil and criminal cases, that a person who could be presumed to have 
knowledge of some facts, must speak out and if not, that could go against 
him.  An earlier decision in Australia, namely, Petty vs. Queen: (1991) 173 
Com L.R. 95 was distinguished.  (In Petty, it was decided that, at trial it was 
not permissible to suggest that the accused’s exercise of the right to silence 
before trial, could provide a basis fo r inferring consciousness of guilt or for 

 22 
inferring that  he was aiding a defen ce newly invented which he failed to 
mention earlier.)  It was observed that Petty did not determine whether it 
was permissible for the trial judge to instruct the jury that an inference 
available from facts proved by the Crown could be drawn more safely when 
the accused elected not to give eviden ce on relevant facts which the jury 
perceived to be within the personal knowledge of the accused. 
 
 Mason CJ observed on behalf of the majority as follows: 
 
“…. doubts about the reliability of witnesses or about the inferences to 
be drawn from the evidences may be readily discounted in the absence 
of contradictory evidence from a part y who might be expected to give 
or call it.  In particular, in a crim inal trial, hypotheses consistent with 
innocence may cease to be rational or reasonable in the absence of 
evidence to support them when that ev idence, if it exists at all, must 
be within the knowledge of the accused.” 
 
At the same time, the following exceptions were accepted: 
 
“Of course, an accused may have reason not to give other than that the 
evidence would not assist his or her case.  The jury must bear in mind 
in determining whether the pros ecution case is strengthened by the 
failure of the accused to give eviden ce.  Ordinarily, it is appropriate 
for the trial judge to warn the jury accordingly.” 
 
“Not every case calls for explanation or contradiction in the form of 
evidence from the accused.   There may be no facts peculiarly within 

 23 
the accused’s knowledge.  Even if ther e are facts peculiarly within the 
accused’s knowledge, the deficiencies  in the prosecution case may be 
sufficient to account for the accused remaining silent and relying upon 
the burden of proof cast upon the prosecution.  Much depends upon 
the circumstances of the particul ar case and a jury should not be 
invited to take into account the failure of the accused to give evidence 
unless that failure is clearly capable of assisting them in the evaluation 
of the evidence before them.” 
 
Mason CJ further observed: 
 
“There is a distinction, no doubt a fine one, between an inference of 
guilt merely from silence and drawing an inference otherwise 
available, more safely, simply because the accused has not supported 
any hypothesis which is consistent  with innocence from facts which 
the jury perceives to be within his or her knowledge.  In determining 
whether the prosecution has satisfied  the standard of proof to be 
requisite defence, it is relevant to assess the prosecution case on the 
footing that the accused has not o ffered evidence of any hypothesis or 
explanation which is consistent with innocence.” 
 
After referring to all these various possibilities, Mason CJ clarified: 
 
“The failure of the accused to give evidence is not by itself evidence.  
It is not an admission of guilt by c onduct.  It cannot be, because it is 
the exercise of a right which the accused  has, to put the prosecution to 
its proof.  In some other circumst ances, silence in the face of an 

 24 
accusation, when an answer might  reasonably be expected, can 
amount to an admission by conduct.  (see e.g. Reg vs. Mitchell (1892) 
Cox. C.C. 503; Reg vs. Chandler (1976) (1) WLR 585 and discussion 
in Young, “Silence as evidence” Au stralian Law Journal, Vol. 66 
(1992) p. 675).   But when an accused elects to remain silent at trial, 
the silence cannot amount to an im plied admission.  The accused is 
entitled to take that course and it is not evidence of either guilt or 
innocence.  That is why silence on th e part of the accused at his or her 
trial, cannot fill in any gaps  in the prosecution case; it cannot be used 
as a make-weight.  It is only when the failure of the accused to give 
evidence is a circumstance which may bear upon the probative value 
of the evidence which has been given and which the jury is required to 
consider, that they may take it into  account, and they may take it into 
account only for the purpose of evaluating that evidence.  The fact 
that the accused’s failure to give evidence may have this consequence 
is something which, no doubt, an accused should consider in 
determining whether to exercise the right or not.” 
 
The principles laid above, together w ith the exceptions referred to, leaves 
one absolutely confused.  They, in  fact, appear to be absolutely 
contradictory. 
 
 Brennan and Toohey JJ gave a separate judgm ent concurring with 
Mason CJ.  They referred to sec. 3 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 
1892 (Q) which made a person accused of an  indictable offence and the wife 
or husband of every accused person, a competent but not a compellable 
witness. In 1961, this provision was carri ed into sec. 618A of the Criminal 

 25 
Code.  In 1977, sec. 8 of the Evidence Act, 1977 (Q) reproduced, with some 
variations, the earlier enactments.  In  several jurisdictions in Australia, 
similar laws precluded the making of any comment by the prosecution 
(Evidence Act, 1906 (West Australia); sec. 85(1)(c) of evidence Act, 1910 
(Tasmania); R 18(1)(II) Evidence Act, 1929 (South Australia); S 74(1) 
Evidence Act, 1971 (ACT).  In some instances, the statutes prohibited 
comment by the Judge (sec. 407(2) Crimes Act, 1900 (NS Wales); s. 9(3) of 
Evidence Act 1939 (NT); s. 399(3) Cr imes Act, 1958 (Victoria), on the 
failure of an accused person to testify.   No such provision was found in the 
Queensland statute. 
 
 We may point out that no provision from any Charter or Bill of Rights 
which guarantees a right against self-incrimination has been adverted by the 
majority in the above Judgment. 
 
 On the other hand, the minority  Judgment of Garedron and McHugh 
JJ observe significantly that the right to silence is, of course, concerned with 
more than the presumption of innocen ce and the duty of the prosecution to 
prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt.  They stated that, it is the presumption 
of innocence and the prosecution’s bur den of proof which preclude an 
adverse inference being drawn from s ilence.  Silence does not amount to 
evidence.   “Because of the presumpti on and because of the burden of proof, 
silence of that kind proves nothing and provides no basis for any inference 
adverse to the accused.   Neither the presumption of innocence nor the 
burden of proof bears upon the situation in  which failure to explain is, itself 
evidence.  Nor does the privilege against incrimination in circumstances 

 26 
involving an assumption that an innocent person would offer an explanation, 
the accused is not asked to testify against himself, but in favour of himself.” 
 
 In our view, the minority judgment is more consistent with the right 
against self-incrimination while, the majority judgment of Mason CJ and the 
other concurrent judgment contain mutu ally contradictory passages.  The 
majority had no occasion to refer to  any constitutional guarantee like Art. 
20(3) of our Constitution nor to any in ternational convention such as the 
ICCPR.   As stated earlier, any tria l Judge will find it extremely difficult to 
apply the exceptions to any given set of f acts.  The majority view is likely to 
lead to more litigation.  Latter cases in Australia are R vs. O.G.D. (1998) 45 
NSW CR 744, RPS vs. The Queen 2000 HCA 3,  have also not been able to 
lay down the law in clearer terms. 
 
 Another unfortunate fact that has to be noted so far as Australia is 
concerned, is that the right of the defendant to make an unsworn statement at 
trial has been abolished in New South Wales in 1994, although the right still 
exists in some residual trials.  Unswor n statements have now been abolished 
in all Australian jurisdictions.  Accord ing to several jurists, this is yet 
another serious infraction of the right  of an accused to speak, in case he 
wants to speak. 
 
 The Law Reform Commission of Ne w South Wales, in its recent 
Report No.95 rendered in the year 2000, on the subject “The right to 
silence”, after a review of the law in various countries and within Australia, 
has made several recommendations.  On e of the important recommendations 
is Recommendation No.1 and is to the effect that legislation based on 

 27 
sections 34, 36 and 37 of the Criminal  Justice and Public Order Act, 1994 
(UK) should not be introduced in  New South Wales.  However, 
Recommendation No. 5(a) and 5(b) appears to  us to take away the effect of 
the Recommendation No. 1.  The Reco mmendations 5(a) and (b) are 
important.  Recommendation 5(a) states th at the defendant shall be required 
to disclose the following material a nd information, in writing, unless the 
Court directs otherwise:- 
 
“5(a) In addition to the existing notice requirements for alibi-
evidence and substantial impairment by abnormality of mind, whether 
the defence, in respect of any elem ent of the charge proposes to raise 
issues in answer to the charge, (e.g. accident, automatism, duress, 
insanity, intoxication, provocation,  self-defence; in sexual assault 
cases, consent, a reasonable be lief that the complainant was 
consenting, or that the defendant  did not commit the act constituting 
the sexual assault alleged; in deemed supply cases, whether the illicit 
drug was possessed other than for the purpose of supply; cases 
involving an intent to defraud, claim of right. 
  
Recommendation 5(b) reads as follows: 
“5(b) In any particular case, whether falling within Recommendation 
5(a) or not, the trial Judge or ot her Judge charged with responsibility 
for giving pre-trial directions may at any time order the defendant to 
disclose the general nature of the cas e he or she proposes to present at 
a trial, identifying the issues to be raised, whether by way of denial of 
the elements of the charge or excu lpation, and sta ting, in general 
terms only, if actual basis of the case which is to be put to the jury.” 

 28 
 
 Recommendation No. 10 then refers to the consequences of an 
accused not complying with the direction to furnish the material specified in 
Recommendation No .5 ((a) and (b)).  It reads as follows: 
 
“10. The Commission recommends that  Judges be given a discretion 
to impose any of the following cons equences for non-disclosure or 
departure from the disclosed case during the trial: 
(a) A discretion to refuse to ad mit material not disclosed in 
accordance with the requirements. 
(b) A discretion to grant an ad journment to a party whose case 
would be prejudiced by material introduced by the other party 
which was not disclosed in accordance with the requirement. 
(c) In jury trials, a discretion to comment to the jury or to permit 
counsel to comment, subject, if appropriate, to any conditions 
imposed by the trial Judge. 
(d) In trials without jury, the tr ial Judge may have regard to the 
failure to comply with the disclosure requirements in the same 
way as a jury would be entitled to do so.” 
 
It appears to us that while the N.S.W. Law Commission has not 
recommended the incorporation of provisions similar to sections 34, 36 and 
37 of the English Act of 1994, it ha s however made recommendations to 
require the accused to disclose his de fence in several respects and upon the 
failure to so disclose, make adverse comments.  Both the prosecution and the 
Judge are permitted to comment on the re fusal of the accused to speak.  In 
our view the above restrictions on the ri ght to silence do not amount to a fair 

 29 
due process and further the jury and the Court cannot be allowed to take the 
silence into account before arriving at a finding that the prosecution has 
established  guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. 
 
  The Commission, no doubt,  refers to  a distinction between the silence 
at the time of questioning by the police,  when no charges are framed and to 
the right at the trial, after charges ar e framed and states that silence at the 
stage of interrogation of police cannot have the same importance as silence 
at the trial, in as much as at that stage, there is no allegation or evidence.   At 
the stage of interrogation, the suspect may remain silent because things are 
not clear.  At the stage of trial, ther e is a charge and th ere is evidence and 
therefore there is less chance of a shock or confusion or inadequate 
preparation to answer the questions.   Even so, it does not preclude silence at 
the stage of interrogation being taken into account by the Judge or the Jury. 
 
 The N.S.W. Law Commission in its Report indeed refers to various 
aspects relating to the right to silence and to Murray vs. UK decided by the 
European Court, but the Commission does not, however, refer to the 
conditions laid down by the European C ourt, namely, that a prima facie case 
must be made out first and that even so, silence cannot be relied upon unless 
the suspect or the accused has been informed  of his right to call an attorney.   
We do not also find any justification for the Legislature in Australia in 
abolishing the right of the accused to speak if he so desires.  In addition, the 
Commission has now recommended that, not only the Court, but even the 
prosecution can be permitted to comment  on the silence because the jury 
may mistake the comment made by the judge as an indication that an 

 30 
inference of guilt may easily be drawn.   The N.S.W. Commission, in the 
body of the Report, recommended as follows: 
 
“The Commission recommends that prohibition on prosecution 
comment in sec. 20(2) as Evidence Act 1995 (NSW) should be 
removed.  Prosecutors should be permitted to comment upon the fact 
that the defendant has not given evidence, subject to the restrictions 
which apply to comment by the trial judge and counsel for the 
defendant and any accused.  The prosecution should be required to 
apply for leave before commenting.” 
 
As already stated, we are of the view  that the above procedure is not a 
fair procedure.  The law relating to prosecution in Australia, in our view, 
does not conform to the minimum sta ndards prescribed by the ICCPR.  
Unfortunately, even the right of the accused to speak out has been abolished.   
 
 We shall next refer to the law in England and Canada, which is 
absolutely in favour of the right of the accused to remain silent. 
 
 
 
U.S.A. 
In The United States, the Fifth Ame ndment relates to the fundamental 
right against self incrimination and contains, more or less, the same language 
as in Article 20(3) of our Constitution. In fact, there is a federal statute of 
1878 which declared that it would be co mpetent for an accused  to give  
evidence on his own behalf but that his failure to do so shall not be subject 

 31 
to any unfavourable inference agai nst him.  Initially, in Adamson vs. 
California (1947) 332 US 46, the question re lating to the right to silence 
came to be considered.  The majority di d not refer to the Fifth Amendment.  
But the minority laid down, while referri ng to the Fifth Amendment, that the 
right to silence was absolute in US.  Subsequently, in Griffin Vs. California 
(1965) 380 US 609, the Supreme Court of United States refused to permit 
prosecuratorial or judicial comment to the jury upon a defendant’s refusal to 
take the ‘stand’ in his own behalf, because such comment was a “penalty 
imposed by courts for exercising a constitutional privilege” and it “cuts 
down on the privilege by making its a ssertion costly”.  The penalty 
“needlessly encouraged” a waiver of th e defendant’s Fifth Amendment right 
to plead not guilty.  The Court has stated  that the defendant has an absolute 
right not to take the “stand” and that  no adverse inference of guilt can be 
drawn if the defendant exercises his ri ght to silence. An innocent defendant 
may want to avoid taking the “stand” b ecause he feels that he is likely to 
perform badly, being uninformed about the law as compared to an 
experienced prosecutor who is skilled in  the artificial rules governing court 
rooms and that the prosecutor may be able to trip him up.  
 
However, American courts, have laid down a different principle, 
namely that, at a latter stage the sile nce of the accused can be taken into 
consideration by the court while decidi ng about the quantum of punishment.  
Such questions arise during plea barg aining.  The Court said that the 
pressure to take the ‘stand’ in respons e to the ‘sentencing issue’ was not so 
great as to impair the policies underl ying the self-incrimination clause.  
Similarly a notice by defendant regarding a plea of alibi does not offend the 

 32 
right against self-incrimination.  (s ee “The Constitution and the Criminal 
Procedure, First Principles” by Prof. Akhil Amar, Yale University, USA).   
 
Even in Miranda Vs. Arizona (1966) 384 US 436, it was held that the 
police have to give a warning to the su spect and that the suspect has a right 
to remain silent. He has a further right  to the presence of an attorney during 
questioning.  It is also important to  note that the US Supreme Court has 
nowhere laid down that on account of th e silence of the accused, an adverse 
inference can be drawn or that the silence can be treated as a piece of 
corroboration for inferring of guilt. 
 
Canada: 
We shall next refer to the judgmen t of Canadian Supreme Court in R 
Vs. Noble (1997) (1) SCR 874.  The majority in that case held that the right 
to silence is absolute and the silence of an accused cannot lead to any 
adverse inference against him nor be used for the purpose of arriving at a 
finding of guilt beyond reasonable doubt.  
 
Section 11(c) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
provides that any person charged with an offence has a right not to be 
compelled to be a witness in proceed ings against him in respect of an 
offence. Section 7 of the Charter also states that every person has the right to 
life, liberty and security of the pers on and the right not to be deprived 
thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. 
Section 11(d) codifies the common law presumption of innocence and the 
right to a fair trial.  
 

 33 
Section 4(6) of the Canadian Evidence Act 1985, provides as follows:   
“Section 4(6).  The failure of the person charged or of the wife or 
husband of that person to testify sh all not be made the subject of 
comment by the Judge or by counsel for the prosecution.” 
 
 
In the above case, the judgment for the majority was pronounced by Sopinka 
J who observed that the right to sile nce was a fundamental principle of 
justice incorporated into sec. 7 of the Canadian Charter a nd that sec. 11(c) 
referred to the non-compellability of a person to be a witness against 
himself.  The majority referred to R vs. Hebart 1990(2) SCR 151 wherein it 
was held that there was a right to silence upon arrest, charge or detention and 
that the State could otherwise trick a detained accused into making self 
incriminating statements by using an undercover police office eliciting 
information in the cell of the accused unde r the coercive power of the State.  
The right to silence vested in th e accused could only be waived by an 
informed decision of the accused.  The Court also referred to R vs. 
Chambers 1990(2) SCR wherein it was laid down that it would be a snare 
and a delusion to caution the accused that he need not say anything in 
response to the police officer’s questi on and at the same time put in the 
evidence that the accused had exercised his right to remain silent and that the 
said silence suggested guilt.  The court also referred to R vs. Amway Corp. 
1989(1) SCR p.21 where in it was held th at the silence of an accused could 
not be used to determine his guilt.  After referring to the above decisions, 
Sopinka J observed as follows: 
 

 34 
“….the use of silence to help establish guilt beyond a reasonable 
doubt is contrary to rati onale behind the right to silence.  Just as a 
person’s words should not be conscripted and used against him or her 
by the State, it is equally inimical to the dignity of the accused to use 
his or her silence to assist in  grounding a belief beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  To use silence in this manne r is to treat it as communicative 
evidence of guilt…The failure to testify tends to place the accused in 
the same position as if he has testified and admitted his guilt.” 
 
It was further held by the majority th at sec. 11(d) protects the accused when 
it states that the silence of the accu sed cannot be placed on the evidentiary 
scales against the accused.  The presum ption of innocence indicates that it is 
not incumbent on the accused to present any evidence at all.  If the Crown 
had proved the case beyond reasonable doubt, the silence of the accused may 
be referred to as evidence of the abse nce of an explanation, which could 
raise a reasonable doubt.  In fact, in that event, the accused need not testify, 
and if he does not, the Crown’s cas e prevails and the accused will be 
convicted.  It is only in this sense that the accused “need respond”, once the 
Crown has proved its case beyond a reas onable doubt.  If, silence is taken 
into account after arriving at a finding of guilt, it does not offend either the 
right to silence or the presumption of  innocence.  Sopinka J further observed 
as follows: 
 
“The right to silence and its underlyi ng rationale are respected, in that 
the communication or absence of co mmunication is not used to build 
a case against the accused.   The silence of the accused is not used as 
inculpatory evidence, which would be contrary to the right to silence, 

 35 
but simply is not used as excu lpatory evidence.  Moreover, the 
presumption of innocence is respected , in that it is not incumbent on 
the accused to defend him – or her – self or face the possibility of 
conviction on the basis of his or her s ilence.  Thus a trier of fact may 
refer to the silence of the accused simply as eviden ce of the absence 
of an explanation which it must consider in reaching a verdict.  On the 
other hand, if there exists in evidence a rational explanation or 
inference that is capable of ra ising a reasonable doubt about guilt, 
silence cannot be used to reject this explanation”. 
 
The majority also referred to R vs. Francois 1994(2)SCR 827, and to R vs. 
Lepage 1995(1) SCR 654, and further observed: 
 
“while it is permissible to conclude  from the failure to testify that 
there is no unspoken, innocent explan ation about which the trier of 
fact must speculate it is not permi ssible to use silence to strengthen a 
case that otherwise falls short of proving guilt beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  If the totality of the evidence leads to guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt, the accused’s silence simply fails “to provide any 
basis to conclude otherwise.” 
 
Sopinka J further observed that sile nce was not either inculpatory or 
exculpatory.  Silence could however  confirm a finding of guilt already 
arrived at independently on the basis of  the evidence led by the prosecution.  
Silence may indicate that the accused has not put forward any explanation or 
evidence to contradict or negative the evidence produced by the prosecution 
to prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt.  In this limited sense, silence may be 

 36 
used but if there is a rational explana tion which is consistent with innocence 
and which may raise a reasonable doubt, then silence cannot be used to 
remove that doubt.  The admissible uses of silence arise only after the trier 
of fact has reached the belief of guilt beyond reasonable doubt and therefore 
silence indeed is “superfluous”.  Finally Sopinka J observed: 
 
“I would therefore conclude that courts should generally avoid using 
the potentially confusing term ‘infer ence’ in discussing the silence of 
the accused.  “Inference” could be ta ken to indicate that the trier of 
fact used silence to help es tablish the case for the guilt beyond 
reasonable which is not permissible use of silence.  Indeed, because of 
the potential for confusion, discussion of the silence of the accused 
should be generally avoided.  Howe ver where silence is mentioned by 
the trial Judge as confirmatory of guilt, given the totality of evidence, 
but not as a “make-weight”, there is no reversible error.” 
 
It will thus be seen that according to the Canadian view it would be an error 
of law if the court directs the Jury to take into consideration the silence of 
the accused for arriving at a decision on the guilt of the accused.  On the 
other hand, we have seen that the English view and the view of the European 
Court particularly in Condron’s case is just the opposite.  It  is held there that 
the jury can be asked to take the sile nce into consideration for arriving at a 
decision on the guilt of the accused. 
 
China 
 

 37 
 It is very interesting to note that in China, the latest policy is to 
introduce the right to silence into its  criminal jurisprudence.  Such a 
regulation has been introduced recently in the procuratorates in Shenyang, 
Dalian and other cities. 
 
 The following item on (see China Daily dt. 23.11.2000) ‘Right to 
Silence in China’s Judicial System’ is worth noting.  (see http.//www.china. 
org.cn/English/2000/nov)   
 
“Procurators should prosecute susp ects based on proof other than a 
confession in criminal cases, as  announced by a procuratorate in 
Fushun of northeast China’s Liaoning Province in a newly-issued 
regulation. 
 
The regulation guarantees people’s ri ght to keep silence and entitles 
suspects to defend himself against accusations or keep silence during 
a criminal interrogation. 
 
It is the first time for China’s judici al system to officially adopt right 
to keep silence for suspects, ma rking the country’s progress in 
protection of human right and freedom of the people. 
 
According to the regulation, la w officers will give no credit to 
confession, and a conviction will be based on othe r impersonal and 
reliable proof, explained by Yang Xiaodong, researcher with the 
Research Office of Liaoning Provincial People’s Procuratorate. 
 

 38 
In spite of its subjectivity, a confession has been taken as the major 
source of proof in trying criminal cases  in China.  The right to silence 
application is believed to help eliminate inquisition by torture or 
extorting a confession. 
 
The regulation practically admits the presumption of innocence and 
therefore has brought a radical cha nge to the traditional judicial 
concept in the country, said Yang. 
 
The presumption of innocence mean s that a suspect is supposed 
innocent when the interrogation be gins and will not be convicted 
unless there is proof to prove his gu ilt.  Jiang Xiaoyang, a lawyer with 
a Ph.D. degree from Beijing University, said that some real criminals 
might escape punishment after application of the presumption of 
innocence and right to silence, but that  is the price the judicial system 
will have to pay in protection of innocent people. 
 
It reflects the respect for human beings’ dignity and spiritual freedom, 
said Jiang. 
 
Judiciary justness has always been  the focus of media and National 
People’s Congress (NPC), the count ry’s highest legislative body.  
China’s top leaders have also pledged many times to curb unlawful 
acts inside the judicial system. 
 

 39 
So far, the concept of right to  silence has been introduced and 
implemented in procuratorates in Shenyang, Dalian a nd otherk cities 
in the province. 
 
Chen Jie, judge in Dalian Interm ediate People’s Court said that 
though the right to silence is only at the beginning in China, it will 
trigger a series of innovations to the country’s legal system. 
 
China has been making reforms on its legal system in hope of 
protecting the citizens’ rights and interests in an all-round way and 
ensures judicial fairness. 
 
China established a new Criminal Law in 1996 and made amendments 
to the law in 1997 focusing on re scinding illegal privileges and 
assuring citizens’ rights. 
 
In 1998, China participated in United Nations’ International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights, which guarantees the right against self-
incrimination.” 
(China Daily 11/23/2000) 
 
India 
 In the Indian context, clause (3) of Art. 20 of the Constitution of India 
guarantees a fundamental right against self incrimination.  Art. 21 grants a 
further fundamental right to life and liber ty and states that the liberty of a 
person cannot be taken away except by a procedure laid down by the law.  In 

 40 
Maneka Gandhi’s case  it was further interpreted that the procedure 
envisaged by Art. 21 is a procedure which must be just, fair and equitable. 
 
 The Criminal Procedure Code contai ns several protections.  Sub sec. 
(2) of sec. 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 grants a right to 
silence during interrogation by police.  It reads as follows: 
 
“Sec. 161(2):  Such person sha ll be bound to answer truly all 
questions relating to such case put to him by such officer, other than 
questions the answers to which woul d have tendency to expose him to 
a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture”. 
 
Sub section (3) of sec. 313 again protects this right to silence at the trial.  It 
reads as follows: 
 
“313(3):  The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by 
refusing to answer such questions, or by giving false answers to them” 
 
Sub section (1) of sec. 315 contains a proviso and clause (b) of the said 
proviso precludes any comment  by any of the parties or the court in regard 
to the failure of the accused to give evidence.  It reads as follows: 
 
 “provided that-  
 (a)…………… 
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any 
comment by any of the parties or the court or give rise to any 

 41 
presumption against himself or any person charged together with him 
at the same trial.” 
 
The above provision also creates a presumption against guilt. 
 
 In other words, sec. 161, 313 and 315 raise a presumption against 
guilt and in favour of innocence, grant a right to silence both at the stage of 
investigation and at the trial and also  preclude any party or the court from 
commenting upon the silence.  This is quite contrary to what the Australian 
law permits.  Under the Australian law the Court can make a comment on 
the silence but the prosecution cannot make any comment.  Now the New 
South Wales Law Commission has, as stated earlier, recommended 
amendment of the law, to permit even  the prosecution to comment on the 
silence of the accused.   
 
Our law in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is consistent with 
clause (3) of Art. 20 of the Constitution and Art. 21.   
  
The earlier history of these provi sions under the Criminal Procedure 
Code, 1898, is equally revealing.  Durga Das Basu in his Commentary on 
Art. 20 of the Constitution (see Silver Jubilee Edition Vol.D p. 46, 47) refers 
to this aspect.  Sec. 342A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, as 
introduced in 1955 made it possible for the accused to testify on his own 
behalf and also stated that “his failure to give evidence shall not be made the 
subject of comment by any of the par ties or the court”.  However, sub 
section (2) of sec. 342 of the said Code contained a provision which 
contradicted the above prohibition and  read as follows: 

 42 
 
“Sec. 342(2):  The accused shall not render himself liable to 
punishment by refusing to answer  questions or by giving false 
answers to them; but the court and the jury (if any) may draw such 
inference from such refusal or answers as it thinks fit.” 
 
It will be seen that the underlined words in sec. 342(2) of the old Code 
permitted an inference to be drawn from the silence of the accused.  This 
provision was not however repeated in the Code of 1973 and was dropped 
obviously because of the guarantee under clause (3) of Art. 20 of the 
Constitution of India which came in to  force in 1950.  The provision was 
dropped presumably because it was cont rary to the constitutional protection 
against self incrimination.  In fact  Basu points out (ibid p.46) that the 
“foregoing lacuna” in the 1898 Code, was commented upon by the author at 
p. 38 of Vol.2 of the previous Ed. of this Commentary in the following 
words 
 
“To the author, it seems that it is due to oversight that the legislature 
did not omit the italicised words, while inserting sec. 342A in 1955; 
for, after the insertion of sec. 342 A, the italicised words have, at least 
become anomalous.  They are inconsistent with proviso (b) of sec. 
342A; for, the object of both s ections 342 and 342A as already 
explained is to offer an opportunity  to explain anything incriminating 
in the evidence against him.  If, th erefore, no inference may be made 
from the failure of the accused to take hold of the opportunity offered 
under sec. 342A by volunteering to testify on his own behalf, why 

 43 
should such inference be permissible when the court questions him for 
the same purpose? 
 
“Apart from the above statutory consideration, there is a constitutional 
implication if we take into account  the observations of the dissenting 
Judges in Adamson vs. California (1947) 332 US 46…..If you cannot 
compel an accused to make a statement against himself, you cannot 
draw any inference against him becau se he remains silent, since that 
would obviously oblige him to speak, rather than remain silent.”   
 
“To draw an adverse inference from th e refusal to testify is indeed to 
punish a person who seeks to exercise  his right under Art. 20(3).  Just 
as no inference of guilt can be made  from the fact th at the accused is 
invoking the protection of Art. 20(3) , so no inference of guilt can be 
made from the mere fact that he refuses to answer or to make a 
statement”. 
 
Basu now says (Silver Jubilee edition Vol. D p 47) that it is gratifying 
to note that in view of the above co mments in the earlier edition of his work, 
the legislature while it introduced th e 1973 Act, it omitted the words in the 
later part of sec. 340(2) of the old Act of 1898.  Basu states  
 
“It is now clear, therefore, that the Court cannot draw any adverse 
inference against the accused from hi s silence or refusal to answer 
court questions, under any circumstances”. 
 

 44 
The right to silence has been consider ed by the Supreme Court of India in a 
three-Judge Bench in Nandini Satpati vs.  P.L. Dani 1978(2) SCC 424 where 
the Supreme Court followed the earlier English law and the judgment of the 
American Supreme Court in Miranda.  Krishna Iyer J observed that the 
accused was entitled to keep his mouth shut and not answer any questions if 
the questions were likely to expose him to guilt.  This protection was 
available before the trial and during the trial.  The learned Judge observed as 
follows: 
 
“……whether we consider the Talm udic Law or the Magna Carta, the 
Fifth Amendment, the provisions of  other constitutions or Article 
20(3), the driving force behind the refusal to permit forced self 
incrimination is the system of torture by investigators and courts from 
medieval times to modern days.  Law is response to life and the 
English rule of the accused’s privile ge of silence may easily be traced 
as a sharp reaction to the Cour t of Star Chamber when self-
incrimination was not regarded as wrongful.  Indeed then the central 
feature of the criminal proceedi ngs, as Holdsworth noted, was the 
examination of the accused.” 
 
Summary: 
 
A survey of the current law in vari ous countries reveals that in USA, 
Canada and India in view of the c onstitutional provisions against self 
incrimination the Courts have required the prosecution to prove guilt beyond 
reasonable doubt and there has been no encroachment whether at the stage 
of interrogation or trial, into the right  to silence vested in the suspect or 

 45 
accused.  It is only in UK that certain deviations have been made recently.  
The UK law of 1994 has not yet been tested under the Human Rights Act, 
1998.  No doubt, two cases have gone be fore the European Court and the 
said Court has laid down some conditions which must be satisfied before the 
Court or jury could take into consid eration the silence of the accused.  
Firstly, a prima facie case as to guilt ha s to be made out by the prosecution.  
Secondly, the suspect or the accused must have been given an opportunity to 
call an attorney when he was questi oned.  This has led to the further 
amendment in the UK law in 1999 perm itting the suspect or accused to call 
for an attorney’s assistance.  But then fresh problems have arisen where the 
accused has relied upon the lawyer’s advice to  remain silent.   In such cases, 
the Courts are resorting to the cross- examination of the accused as well as 
his lawyers.  A lawyer’s wrong advice can lead to serious prejudice to the 
accused and this cannot be permitted.   In the light of the above 
complications, criminal trials have  become more co mplicated and the 
accused is having more grounds to question a verdict of guilt.  In our view, it 
may not therefore be wise to introduce similar changes in our system.   In 
fact, the New South Wales Law Commi ssion has clearly recommended that 
provisions like sections 34, 36 and 37 which permit the Court or jury to draw 
inferences from the silence of the suspect or accused, should not be 
introduced into the statute in New South Wales.  But,  unfortunately, N.S.W. 
Law Commission has recommended that the accused can be compelled to 
disclose various facts relating to hi s defence failing which the prosecution 
and the Court can make comment.  In our view, this does not amount to a 
fair trial and indirectly violates the right against self-incrimination.  The 
Australian Courts have not referred to any constitutional prohibitions.   
 

 46 
On the other hand, the American  and Canadian Courts have not 
permitted any inroads into the right to silence.  While English and European 
Courts and the Aust ralian Courts permit the jury and the Courts to take the 
silence into consideration before arriving at a finding of guilt beyond 
reasonable doubt,- of course, where a pr ima facie case is made out, and the 
accused is informed of his right to an  attorney - the American and Canadian 
Courts prohibit silence being taken in to consideration before arriving at a 
finding of guilt beyond reasonable doubt.  It is only after the Court comes to 
a finding of guilt beyond reasonable doubt, that the accused can be asked if 
he has any explanation.   
 
It is interesting that China has in troduced a regulation in some regions 
which entitles an accused to remain silent.  It is indeed rather surprising that 
when China is introducing this principl e into its laws some democracies like 
UK & Australia are introducing laws de viating from the old tradition as to 
right to silence.  
 
The law in India appears to be same  as in USA and Canada.  In view 
of the provisions of clause (3) of Art. 20 and the requirement of a fair 
procedure under Art. 21, and the provisions of ICCPR to which India is a 
party and taking into account the probl ems faced by the Courts in UK, we 
are firmly of the view that it will not  only be impractical to introduce the 
changes which have been made in UK but any such changes will be contrary 
to the constitutional protections referre d to above.  In fact, the changes 
brought about in the Criminal Procedur e Code, 1973 leaving out the certain 
provisions which were there in 1898 Code, appear to have been the result of 
the provisions of clause (3) of Art. 20 and Art. 21 of our Constitution. 

 47 
 
We have reviewed the law in other countries as well as in India for the 
purpose of examining whether any amendments are necessary in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973.  On a revie w, we find that no changes in the law 
relating to silence of the accused are necessary and if made, they will be 
ultra vires of Art. 20(3) and Art. 21 of the Constitution of India.  We 
recommend accordingly. 
 
 
                     (Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Member 
 
 
9.5.2002        (Dr. T.K. Vishwanathan) 
Member Secretary 