LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
ON 
 
 
 
AMENDMENT TO SEC. 106 OF THE TRANSFER OF 
PROPERTY ACT, 1882 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAY, 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
D.O.No.6(3)77/2002-LC(LS)       May 9, 2002 
 
Dear Shri Jaitley ji, 
 
 I am forwarding herewith the 181 st Report “Amendment to Section 106 of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882”. 
 
2. It may be mentioned that in 1998, the Law commission forwarded to the 
Government of India its One Hundred Fi fty-Seventh Report on Section 52: “The 
Transfer of Property Act, and its Ame ndment”.  The said report is awaiting 
implementation.  In the meantime, the Commission considered it proper to take up the 
study of amendment of section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, suo moto, in 
order to eliminate litigation in so far as it relates to computation of period of notice and 
to relax some of the rigid principles laid  down in some judgements which have led to 
serious injustice and multiplicity of litiga tion thereby often causing hardship to 
litigants.  While referring to the amendments made by the UP Act 24 of 1954 in Section 
106, we have emphasized inter-alia, that by virtue of the amendments proposed, the 
notice issued by the plaintiff would not be inva lidated even if the time falls short of the 
prescribed period, provided the suit is file d by plaintiff after expiry of the period 
prescribed in the section.  In tenancies wh ich are not yearly, the period of notice is 
proposed to be increased from fifteen days to sixty days.  Further, it is being made clear 
that the period shall count from the date of receipt of notice. 
 
3. The recommendations have been made with a view to remove serious injustice 
and prevent multiplicity of litigation in  the country.  We hope that the 
recommendations in this Report will go a long way in attaining the objectives set out 
above.  We are also recommending that th e proposed amendments be applied to 
pending proceedings. 
 
4. A draft Bill is also annexed with the report to suggest the amendments in the 
legislative form.  
 
 With Warm regards,  
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
Shri Arun Jaitley, 
Hon’ble Minister for Law, Justice & Company Affairs, 
Shastri Bhavan, 
New Delhi.  

 3 
    C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S 
 
      P A G E S  
 
1. Report    01-08 
 
2. Draft Bill    09-10 
 
 
 

 4 
 
 
 
Report on the Amendment to sec. 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882. 
 
 Ever since 1882, certain words in  sec. 106 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882, have given rise to a lot of litigation.  An amendment of 
sec. 106 is long overdue.  The purpose of  the present Report is to eliminate 
this litigation in so far as it relates to computation of period of notice and 
to relax some of the rigid principles laid down in some judgments which 
have led to serious injustice and multip licity of litigation.  In fact, in the 
State of UP, by virtue of a State Amendment under the UP Act 24 of 1954, 
this section was amended long back.  A similar amendment in the Principal 
Act has to be made so as to remove the hardship caused to litigants in the 
rest of the country.    
  
Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act reads as follows: 
 
“106. Duration of certain leases in  absence of written contract or 
local usage.-  In the absence of a contract or local law or usage to the 
contrary, lease of immovable property for agricultural or 
manufacturing purposes shall be deem ed to be a lease from year to 
year, terminable, on the part of either lessor or lessee, by six months’ 
notice expiring  with the end of a year of the tenancy ; and a lease of 
immovable property for any other purpose shall be deemed to be a 
lease from month to month terminable, on the part of either lessor or  
 

 5 
 
lessee, by fifteen days’ notice expiring with the end of a month of 
the tenancy. 
Every notice under this section must  be in writing, signed by or on 
behalf of the person giving it, and either be sent by post to the party who is 
intended to be bound by it or  be tendered or delivered personally to such 
party, or to one of his family or servan ts at his residence, or (if such tender 
or delivery is not practicable) affi xed to a conspicuous part of the 
property.” 
The controversy arises in respect of the words underlined. 
 
It will be seen that for the purpos e of termination of a lease from 
year to year, a notice ha s to be issued by the lessor or the lessee, six 
months in advance “ expiring with the end of a year of the tenancy”   In the 
case of a tenancy from month to month, the lessor or the lessee has to 
terminate the tenancy by issuing a fifteen days’ notice “
expiring with the 
end of a month of the tenancy .”  It is these words that have led to 
unnecessary litigation. 
 
  In several cases, it happens that a lessor or a lessee  gives a 15 days 
notice, in the case of a tenancy fro m month to month, terminating the 
tenancy.  Pleas in defence are taken th at the notice is defective in the sense 
that the period of notice falls short by one day, because the person who has 
given the notice has not taken into  account the principle accepted in 
Mangilal vs. Sugan Chand,  AIR 1965 SC 101 that the day on which the 
notice is served must be excluded though not the day on which the tenancy 
is sought to be terminated.  An issu e as to validity of notice is framed 

 6 
invariably in every case. Years after the notice and the filing of the suit, the 
court would be compelled to d eclare the notice invalid, though the 
defendant had more than the prescribed  time of six months or fifteen days 
by the date of filing of the suit or by the date of judgment dismissing the 
suit. 
In some other cases, there may be a dispute as to the exact date of 
commencement of tenancy and therefore a further dispute arises as to the 
date of expiry of the tenancy.  The matter will be put in issue and if the 
date assumed or pleaded by the plainti ff, whether he is the lessor or lessee 
is not accepted by the court, then the notice becomes invalid, though the 
defendant had, in fact, more than the prescribed time by the date of filing 
of the suit or by the date of the judgment. 
 
 We shall refer to an example.  A tenancy was from month to month 
and started on the 1 st of Jan., 2000, notice terminating the tenancy was 
issued on 31.12.1999 and served on 1.1. 2000 and the notice stated that the 
tenancy would stand terminated w.e .f. 15.1.2000. If the day on which the 
notice was served namely, 1.1.2000 has to be excluded as per the judgment 
of the Supreme Court in Mangilal vs. Sugan Chand, AIR 1965 SC 101, the 
notice would be short by one day.  Th e suit may have been  filed (say) on 
1.7.2001 for eviction and let us assume that the defendant raised a plea that 
the notice was deficient by one day.  The suit might (say) go to trial and let 
us assume that it is dismissed  in  April, 2002.   Even though between 
31.12.1999 and 1.7.2001 or in fact, by April 2002, the lessee had several 
months of time at his disposal to move out, the suit is liable to be 
dismissed as the law stands today.  The lessor, in such circumstances, 

 7 
would have to file a fresh suit af ter 15.4.2002, giving fresh notice under 
sec. 106 once again. 
A similar situation obtains if the le ssor has pleaded a particular date 
of commencement of tenancy and the lessee pleaded another and the 
lessee’s plea was accepted. This technica lity has been leading to too much 
of an injustice to the plaintiff t hough no prejudice at all is caused to the 
defendant.  Such questions can arise ev en in suits filed by a lessee against 
the lessor. 
 
 The purpose of the provision in sec. 106 is to terminate the 
relationship of lessor and lessee before  the lessor sues for possession.  He 
has no right of entry till the tenancy is disrupted.  Further, the idea is that 
every lessee must have some reasonable notice before he is asked to vacate 
the premises. 
 
 If these were the purposes behind section 106 but in fact, the lessee 
had, by the date of suit or  the date of dismissal of suit years later, more 
than the period specified, in the statut e, it is nothing but injustice to the 
lessor if he is compelled to file a fre sh suit.  Any procedure that leads to 
multiplicity of court cases must be avoided. 
 
 Though the Privy Council decided th at notice may be for a longer 
period (see Benoy Krishna Das  vs.  Salscicioni, AIR 1932 PC 279), it has 
also decided in another case that “where  a notice falls short of the requisite 
period, the mere fact that the tenant is actually allowed to hold the property 
for the full length of the period for wh ich notice ought to have been given 
and a suit for ejectment against him is brought only afterwards, will not 

 8 
cure the defect in the no tice so as to make it effectual for the purpose of 
terminating the tenancy” (see Gooderham & Worts Ltd.  vs. Canadian 
Broadcasting Corpn. AIR 1949 PC 90.  In Dattonpant  vs.  Vithalrao AIR 
1975 SC 1111 the facts were as follows :  the notice was served on the 
tenant on 21.11.1968 purporting to te rminate the tenancy by the 8 th 
December, 1968 treating the month of tenancy as commencing from the 9th 
day of a month and ending on the 8 th day of the month following.  It was 
held that the notice did not expire with  the end of the month of tenancy.  
The end of the month of  the tenancy was the 9 th day and not the 8 th day.  
Thus it was held that there was no valid and legal termination of the 
contractual tenancy. 
 
 Similarly, the Supreme Court of I ndia in Maya Chanda & others v. 
Krishnan Lal Dey & Anr.1969(II)SCWR 478 has decidedthat a notice 
which does not expire at the end of a year or a month of the tenancy will be 
invalid.  The above decision does not speci fically refer to sec. 106 but  it is 
obvious that the Court was having sec. 106 in mind when it declared the 
notice invalid. 
 
 Realising that this method of inte rpretation was leading to injustice 
compelling the lessors to file fresh suits after several years have lapsed and 
after giving a fresh notice, the UP le gislature had, by UP Act 24 of 1954, 
omitted the words “expiring with the end of a year of the tenancy” and the 
words “expiring with the end of a month of the tenancy”.  It had also 
increased the period of notice of 15 da ys in the case of monthly tenancies 
to 30 days.  This was w.e.f. 30.11.54. 
 

 9 
 After the said UP amendment, the first part of sec. 106 reads as 
follows: 
 
“In the absence of a contract or lo cal law or usage to the contrary, a 
lease of immovable property for agricultural or manufacturing 
purposes shall be deemed to be a l ease from year to year terminable, 
on the part of a lessor or lessee, by six months’ notice; and a lease of 
immovable property for any other purpose shall be deemed to be a 
lease from month to month, terminab le, on the part of either lessor 
or lessee, by thirty days’s notice.” 
 
 The section as amended in UP and as proposed to be amended by us 
applies to notices by lessor or by the le ssee.  We, therefore, propose that in 
the case of leases from y ear to year the words “e xpiring with the end of a 
year of the tenancy” and in the case of leases from month to month, the 
words “expiring with the end of the month of the tenancy” be omitted.   
 
 We shall refer to two cases decided in UP after the 1954 
Amendment.  It was held that by virtue of the aforesaid amendment carried 
out in U.P., the notice issued  by the plaintiff will not be invalidated even if 
the time falls short of the prescribed period, provided the suit is filed by the 
plaintiff after expiry of the period pres cribed in the section.  A short note 
on judgment of the Allahabad High Court in (1980) UPLT(NOC)11, in 
regard to the law as amended in U.P. reads as follows:- 
 
“Section 106 (as amended by the UP Act) – plaintiff describing 
cause of action to be arising two days before the expiry of 30 days 

 10 
time – relief claimed not invalidated as the suit was filed much after 
the date.” 
We propose to amend such 106 of the Principal Act, so as to make 
similar notices valid. Again, it has been observed by the Commission that 
there exist contrary views of High C ourts as to the commencement of the 
period mentioned in respect of the notice under section 106.  The said 
contrary view is reflected in Gorakh Lal v. Maha Pra sad Narain Singh, 
AIR 1964 All. 260 (FB).  Similar contra dictory views can also be noticed 
in other High Courts.  The Supreme Court had decided in Mangilal v. 
Sugan Chand AIR 1965 SC 101 that the date of  service of notice has to be 
excluded in computing the period.  We propose putting this as need in 
legislative form in as much as, ev en after the Judgment of the Supreme 
Court in 1965, litigants have been filing suits without noticing this 
principle decided by the Supreme C ourt.  We, therefore, propose to 
recommend amendment of section 106 providing that the period mentioned 
in respect of the notice shall be co mputed from the date  of receipt of 
notice.  In order to bring the aforesai d proposals in legislative form, a draft 
Bill is annexed with the Report, whic h incorporates amendments to sec. 
106. 
We further propose to give retrosp ectivity to the extent that the 
omission of these words `expiring with the end of a year of tenancy’ and 
`expiring with the end of a month of the tenancy’ shall be applicable to all 
notices issued before the date of  commencement of the amending Act, 
where such suits or other legal proceedings have been filed by the lessor or 
by the lessee by the date of commencem ent of the amending Act, unless of 
course the suits have been filed befo re the date of co mmencement of the 
amending Act and the dismissal of the suit or proceeding has become final. 

 11 
 
 We also propose to substitute th e words ‘fifteen days’ by ‘sixty 
days’ in the case of monthly tenancies, in respect of notices to be issued 
after the commencement of the amendi ng Act.  This will be a reasonable 
period of notice to either party.  Fifteen days period appears to be too short. 
 
We are also recommending that the pr oposed amendments be applied to 
pending proceedings. 
 
 We hope that, once these amendm ents are brought into force, 
unnecessary rounds of litigation will be avoided and justice will be done to 
the plaintiff who had issued the notice, be he the lessor or lessee. 
 
 We, therefore, recommend the am endments to the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882 in the manner mentioned below. The draft Bill could be 
on the lines of the draft Bill annexed with the report. 
 We recommend accordingly. 
 
(Justice M. Jaganadha Rao) 
Chairman 
 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Member 
 
 
(T.K. Viswanathan) 
Member-Secretary 
Dated: 09.05.2002 

 12 
 
 
 
THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY (AMENDMENT) BILL 2002 
 
        A  
     B I L L  
 
further to amend the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 
 
Short title 
 
 
   1.      This Act may be called the Transfer of Property (Amendment) Act 2002. 
 
 
Amendment of section 106 
 
    2.      In the Transfer of Property Act 1882, (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act), section 106 shall be renumbered as subsection (1) thereof and, - 
 
(a)  in subsection (1)  as so renumbered , for the words , “ six month’s 
notice expiring with the end of a year of the tenancy and a lease of 
immoveable property  for any other purpose shall be deemed to be a 
lease from month to month, terminable, on the part of either lessor or 
lessee, by fifteen day’s notice expiring with the end of a month of the 
tenancy.”, the following shall be  substituted, namely:- 
 
“six month’s notice and a lease of immoveable property  for any other purpose 
shall be deemed to be a lease from month to month, terminable, on the part of 
either lessor or lessee, by sixty days notice.”. 
 
 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely:- 
 
“ (2) A notice under sub-section (1) shall not be deemed to be 
invalid merely because the period mentioned therein falls short 
of the period specified under that sub-section, where a suit or 
proceeding is filed after the expiry of the period mentioned in 
that sub-section. 
   
(3) The period mentioned in the notice under sub-section (1) 
shall commence from the date of receipt of notice.” 
 
 

 13 
 
   
 
 
Transitory provisions 
 
 3.   Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract between the lessor and the 
lessee, the provisions of section 106 of the principal Act, as amended by section 2, shall 
apply- 
 
(a)  to all notices which are the subject matter of suits and proceedings 
pending at the commencement of this Act; 
(b) to all notices which have been issued before the commencement of this 
Act but where no suit or proceedings has been filed before the date of 
such commencement. 
 
Provided that in the case of clauses (a) and (b), clause (a) of section 2 shall 
apply subject to the modification that for the words “sixty days” the words 
“fifteen days” had been substituted. 
 