 
LAW  COMMISSION  OF  INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 ONE HUNDRED  EIGHTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
    O N  
  
 
  Amendment of Section 6 of the Land  
   Acquisition Act, 1894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    May, 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.O.No.6(3)(78)/2002-LC(LS)      May 9, 2002 
 
 
Dear Shri Jaitley ji, 
 
 I am sending herewith the 182 nd Report on Amendment of Section 6 of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894.   
 

 2 
2. The subject was taken up suo motu by the 16 th Law Commission of India for removing 
the lacuna regarding issuing of a fresh notifi cation for the acquisition of land for public purpose 
under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 which has arisen in view of the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Padamsundara Rao v. State of Tamil Nadu [ JT 2002 (3)SC 1] delivered on 
13.3.2002 overruling the view taken in N.Narasimhaiah v. State of Karnataka  [1996 (3) SCC 88] 
case, on the ground that fixing of any further period for making a fresh declaration would amount 
to legislation by judicial fiat.  In  Narasimhaiah’s case, it was held that where any declaration 
made under section 6(1) was set aside or quashed by a court, a fresh declaration could be made 
within one year from the date of the judgment of th e court.  It was this view that was not accepted 
in the recent case of 
Padamsundara Rao. 
 
3. The Commission, therefore, considered it appropriate to examine the said lacuna and 
recommends amendment of section 6 of the Land Ac quisition Act, 1894 with a view to subserve 
the public purpose, allow the land acquisition pr oceedings to be continued without a fresh 
notification under section 4(1) and render the judi cial process meaningful and efficacious as also 
to enable the aggrieved owner to vindicate his grievances in the pending land acquisition 
proceedings itself. 
 
4. We have, inter alia , recommended amendment in section 6 of the Act to enable 
authorities to make a fresh declaration within 180 days from the judgment of the court if any 
action or proceeding is taken in pursuance of sec tion 4(1) notification or any declaration made 
under section 6(1) has been set aside or quashed by the court. 
 
5. As the Supreme Court Judgment in Padamsundara’s case overrules Narasimhaiah’s case 
prospectively, separate provision is made to cover events after 13.3.2002. 
 
6. A draft Bill on the amendment to section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is annexed 
herewith. 
 
With regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
(Justice M.Jagannadha Rao) 
Shri Arun Jaitley, 
Hon’ble Minister for Law, Justice & Co. Affairs, 
Shastri Bhavan, 
New Delhi. 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Pages 
 
1.  Report on Amendment of Section 6 of the                              1-14                               
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
 

 3 
 
2.  Draft Bill on Amendment of Section 6 of the                           15-17 
Land Acquisition Act, 1894  
 
 
 
Report on Amendment to Section 6 of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 
 
 
This Report is prepared for the purpose of removing the lacuna in sec. 
6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, which has come to light in view of the 
decision of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India in its 
recent judgment in Padmasundara Rao (dead) & Others  vs. State of Tamil 
Nadu & Others : JT 2002(3) SC page 1 date d 13.3.2002.  The controversy 
which has arisen in regard to sec. 6 of the Act   has been set out in the 
judgment of the Supreme Court as follows: 
 
“The controversy involved lies with in a narrow compass, that is, 
whether, after quashing of notif ication under sec. 6 of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), fresh period 
of one year is available to the State Government to issue another 
notification under sec. 6.” 
 
Prior to this judgment, the deci sion in N.Narasimhaiah and others  v. 
State of Karnataka 1996 (3) SCC 88 (three Judges Bench), held the field and 
provided a further period of one year from the date of the judgment of the 
court qualify the declaration under section 6(1), received by the Land 

 4 
Acquisition Officer.  It was held in that case that such a construction would 
subserve the public purpose and woul d save the validity by the earlier 
notification issued under section 4(1) of  the Act.  Otherwise, if a fresh 
notification under section 4(1) was to  be issued, it could amount to going 
back  to square one. That would indeed  defeat the main legislative purpose.  
The land acquisition proceedings, which we re started, must be allowed to go 
on and the aggrieved partie s be given the necessary opportunity to vindicate 
their grievances. There was no need to  compel government to issue a fresh 
notification under section 4.  This was what was held in Narasimhaiah case. 
However, in Padmasundara Rao’s  case supra, the Constitution Bench 
overruled Narasimhaiah judgment on th e ground that fixing another period 
of one year from the date of judgment for making the section 6 declaration, 
would amount to legislation by judicial fiat.  The Supreme Court observed 
that courts can only interpret the la w and cannot legislate and that if a 
provision of law is misused or subjected  to abuse of process of law, it would 
be for the legislature to amend, modify  or repeal the law.  The court further 
held that the aforesaid view in Nara simhaiah’s case (supra) could not be 
reconciled with the language used by the Parliament in section 6(1). 
 
 In order to meet the said objectives  as set out in Narasimhaiah case, it 
is essential to bring certain amendments in section 6(1) of the Act. 
 
For the purpose of understanding this i ssue, it is necessary to briefly 
refer to the scheme of land acquisition under the Act and in particular to  
notification to be issued under section 4( 1) of  the Act and the declaration to 
be made under section 6 of the Act and to the history of time-limits 
mentioned in section 6 of the Act. 

 5 
 
 The Land acquisition Act, 1894 wa s enacted for the purpose of 
compulsorily acquiring of  land required for public purpose or for purpose of 
companies and for determination of th e amount of compensation to be paid 
on account of such acquisition.  The Act contemplated that initially a 
notification would have to be issued under sec. 4(1) indicating the intention 
of the Government to acquire land or other property.  The notification under 
sec. 4(1) has to be published in the official Gazette.   The 1984 Amendments 
require the sec. 4(1) notification to be also published in two local 
newspapers of which one at least should be in a regional language, in 
addition to the public notice of the subs tance of such notification which has 
to be made by the Collector at conve nient places in the locality where the 
land is situate.  Thus, there are three types of publications of section 4(1) 
notification.  The date of the last of  these publications and of such public 
notice is deemed to be the date of  the notification under sec. 4(1).  
Compensation has to be paid on the basis of the market value as on the date 
of the notification under sec. 4(1). 
 
 After sec. 4(1) notification is i ssued, section 5A contemplates an 
inquiry into objections to be filed by thos e interested in the land or property.  
That section refers to filing of objecti ons before the Collector, and he has to 
give an oral hearing and thereafter he has to submit a report to the concerned 
Government which issued sec. 4(1) no tification, for taking further action.  
The procedure regarding hearing of objections can be dispensed with in case 
of urgency under section 17(4).  If the inquiry is not dispensed with and a 
report is given after the inquiry, the concerned Government has then to apply 
its mind independently and decide whether to confirm the acquisition and go 

 6 
ahead.  If it decides to go ahead, it has to  make a  declaration under sec. 6 of 
the Act.  The said declaration will be conclusive proof of the public purpose.  
The declaration that is made under s ec. 6 has to be published, as per a 
procedure which is similar to the pro cedure prescribed for publication of a 
notification under section 4(1).  
 
Initially, under the Act of 1894, ther e were no time limits prescribed 
for the making of declaration under sec. 6 after the publication of the 
notification under sec. 4(1) of the Act.  This led to unreasonable delays.  In 
cases, where there was unreasonable dela y in the making of the declaration 
under sec. 6 of the Act, the owne r of the property was under a great 
disadvantage because the market value w ould  have to be determined on the 
basis of the sec. 4(1) notification published several years earlier.  Such 
unreasonable delays were criticized by the Supreme Court in State of MP vs. 
Vishnu Prasad AIR 1966 SC 1593. 
 
 For the purpose of expediting the maki ng of  declarations under sec. 6,  
the Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1967 was 
promulgated.  The Ordinance provide d that no declaration under section 6 
should be made [in respect of any particular land covered by the notification 
under section 4(1), published after the commencement of the Ordinance,] 
after expiry of three years from the date of such publication and in cases 
where notification under section 4(1)  has been published before the 
commencement of this Ordinance, the declaration should not be made after 
the expiry of two years from the co mmencement of the Ordinance.  The 
Ordinance also provided that, if necessa ry,  more than one declaration may 
be made from time to time in respect of different parcels of any land covered 

 7 
by the same notification under section 4(1)  of the Act.   The provisions of 
the Ordinance were later on incorporated into the Amending Act, 1967     
 
As stated above, the period of th ree years for making declaration 
under section 6 would apply to all notif ications under section 4(1) to be 
issued after the Ordinance of 1967.  Th e period of  three years between sec. 
4(1) notification and sec. 6 declar ation was treated by Parliament as 
reasonable.     
 
But, in 1984, Parliament felt that this period of three years between a 
notification under section 4(1) and the declaration under section 6 should be 
reduced to one year.  Therefore, the 1984 Amendment provided that  the sec. 
6 declaration must be made within one  year from the date of publication of 
the sec. 4(1) notification, where su ch notification under section 4(1) was 
published after the 1984 Amendment Act.  In law, if  sec. 6 declaration was 
not made within one year as provide d by the  1984 Amendment, it would be 
invalid.  Once there was no valid section 6 declaration made within one year 
as aforesaid, the sec. 4(1) notification issued earlier would also lapse and the 
State would have to come forward with a fresh sec. 4(1) notification.  May 
be, if the market value had increased between the date of earlier sec. 4(1) 
notification that has lapsed and the ne w sec. 4(1) notification that was  
issued,  then the State would have  to pay increased price  for the lethargy of 
its officers and for their not making the s ec. 6 declaration within one year of 
the sec. 4(1) notification. 
 
 The 1984 Amendment, while fixing a period of one year for  making 
of the declaration under sec. 6 from the date of publication of a sec. 4(1) 

 8 
notification, however, took care to see that those who went to Court and 
obtained stay orders did not deprive the State of the benefit of the full one 
year for taking the various steps necessa ry to reach the stage of declaration 
under sec. 6 – namely the holding of an  inquiry under sec. 5A etc.  It, 
therefore, inserted an Explanation below s ec. 6(1) to the effect that if stay of 
any action or proceeding taken in pursu ance of sec. 4(1) notification was 
obtained, the period covered by the st ay orders could be excluded while 
computing the period of one year. 
 
 The section 6, as amended in 1984,  reads as follows, to the extent 
relevant for our purpose: 
 
“Section 6. Declaration that land is required for a public purpose:-   
(1) Subject to the provisions of pa rt VII of this Act, when the 
appropriate government is satisfied after considering the report, if any, 
made under section 5A, sub-section (2 ), that any particular land is 
needed for a public purpose, or for a company, a declaration shall be 
made to that effect under the signature of a secretary to such 
Government or of some officer dul y authorized to certify its orders 
and different declarations may be made from time to time in respect of 
different parcels of any land cove red by the same notification under 
section 4, sub-section (1), irre spective of whether one report or 
different reports has or have b een made (whereve r required) under 
section 5-A, sub-section (2): 
 
Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land 
covered by a notification under section 4, sub-section (1)- 

 9 
 
(i)    published after the comme ncement of the Land Acquisition 
(Amendment and Validation) Ordi nance, 1967, but before the 
commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 
shall be made after the expiry of  three years from the date of the 
publication of the notification; or 
 
(ii) published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition 
(Amendment) Act, 1984, shall be made  after the expiry of one year 
from the date of the publication of the notification: 
 
Provided further that no such d eclaration shall be made unless 
the compensation to be awarded for such property is to be paid by a 
company, or wholly or partly out  of public revenues or some fund 
controlled or managed by a local authority. 
 
Explanation 1.- In computing any of the periods referred to in the first 
proviso, the period during which any action or proceeding to be taken 
in pursuance of the notification issued under section 4, sub-section 
(1), is stayed by an order of a court shall be excluded.” 
 
 It will be noticed that under  Explanation-I of 1984 Amendment Act 
introduced as above,  the period covere d by a stay order is liable to be 
excluded.  But, this Explanation is a pplicable only to cases where the Court 
granted stay and vacated the stay orde r either by an interlocutory order or 
where the stay got vacat ed by the dismissal of writ petition.  Whatever 
period is lost in taking the various steps between the sec. 4(1) notification 

 10 
and the sec. 6 declaration, is again re stored to the department by virtue of 
this Explanation. 
 
 But, the Explanation inserted in 1984 does not exclude the period 
covered by the  litigation where the va rious proceedings after sec. 4(1) 
notification (such as the sec. 5A inquiry) or the consequential section 6 
declaration are held to be bad by the C ourt.  This can happen, for example, 
where the sec. 5A inquiry is held  v itiated on account of breach of principles 
of natural justice  and consequentially th e sec. 6 declaration is also quashed.  
The Explanation –I, it will be noticed ,  only covers cases where sec. 6 
declaration is not quashed.   In that event, in the absen ce of a provision in 
sec. 6, the Court cannot exclude the period covered by the Court proceedings 
leading upto the date of quashing of the proceedings or of the section 6 
declaration. 
 
 It is appropriate here to refer to some of the earlier decisions of the 
Supreme Court as regards Section 6.  It was held by a Bench of three learned 
judges in A.S. Naidu & Others  vs. State of Tamil Nadu  (S.L.P. (C). No.11 
353 – 11355 of 1988 that, if by the date of quashing of the sec. 6(1) 
declaration, the one year period had expi red, the State would not be able to 
make a fresh declaration under sec. 6.  If the State was still interested in 
acquisition, it would have to issue a fre sh notification under sec. 4(1).  The 
same view was taken by another Bench  of two learned Judges in Oxford 
English School vs.  Govt. of Tamil Nadu  1995(5) SCC 206.  However,  a 
contrary view was take n by another Bench of three learned Judges in N. 
Narasimhaiah vs.  State of Karnataka  1996(3) SCC 88, wherein it was  held 
that if by the date the sec. 6 declara tion was quashed, the period of one year 

 11 
had expired, the State could make a fresh  sec. 6 declaration within one year 
from the date, of the judgment.  In State of Karnataka  vs. D.C. Nanjundiah 
1996 (10) SCC 19,  a similar view was ta ken and the Court went further to  
hold that the State would have a fresh period of one year from the date of 
“communication” of the copy of the judgment for the purpose of making a 
sec. 6 declaration again.  Si milarly, in  Venkata Swamappa  vs. Spl. Dy. 
Commissioner: AIR 1997 SC 503, the Court agai n held that the State could 
make a fresh sec. 6 declaration within one year of the judgment. 
 
 As there was a conflict between two judgments of the Court each 
rendered by the bench of  three learned Judges, i.e., A.S. Naidu and 
N.Narsimhaiah the question came to be referred to a Constitution Bench of 
five learned Judges in Padmasundara Rao’s case .  In that case, the learned 
Judges have recently held that once a s ec. 6 declaration was quashed or set 
aside, if the period of one year had expi red by the date of judgment of court,  
then the Court could not under its judi cial power, provide a fresh period of 
one year from the date of the judgment, for the issuing of a fresh declaration 
under section 6.  The effect of the judgmen t  is that  as there is no scope for 
making another declaration under sec. 6 within one year, the time having 
expired, the original notification under sec. 4(1) will also lapse.  The State, if 
it is still interested in the acquisition of the land, has to   issue a fresh 
notification under sec. 4(1).  The Constitution Bench, thus, overruled the 
decision in N. Narasimhaiah case and approved A.S. Naidu’s case 
 
The Supreme Court has, however, taken care to declare the law 
prospectively in Padmasundara Rao’s case,.  The Court observed in para 18 
as follows: 

 12 
 
“There is, however, substance in the plea that those matters which 
have obtained finality should not be re-opened.  The present judgment 
shall operate prospectively to the ex tent that cases where awards have 
been made and the compensation ha ve been paid, shall not be re-
opened by applying the ratio of the present judgment.” 
 
 The effect of the “prospective overruling” in the manner set out above 
is that where the State had initially issued a notification under sec. 4(1) 
followed by a sec. 6 declaration with in one year, and the said sec. 6 
declaration was quashed by a Court be fore 13.3.2002, i.e., the date of 
judgment in Padmasundara Rao’s case, and if a fresh sec. 6 declaration was 
made within one year of the judgmen t and an award ha d been passed and 
compensation had been paid before 13.3.2002,- that is where all these events 
happened before 13.3.2002,- then the owners or persons interested would not 
be able to fall back on the j udgment in Padmasundara Rao’s case , and seek 
the issue of a fresh sec. 4(1) notificati on.  They would not be allowed to rely 
on the above judgment and claim that the fresh sec. 6 declaration made 
within one year of the judgmen t as per Narasimhaiah’s case  was invalid,  
and that the earlier sec. 4(1) notificati on must be taken to  have lapsed and 
that a fresh sec. 4(1) notification has to be issued.  Obviously, the Supreme 
Court felt that those who were satisfied with a fresh sec. 6 declaration made 
in one year as per Narasihmaiah’s case and who received compensation on 
the basis of the market value based on the earlier sec. 4(1) notification, -  
before 13.3.2002, should not be allowed to claim that they were  entitled to a 
fresh sec. 4(1) notification and to a fresh award. 
 

 13 
 Having analysed the judgment in Padmasundara Rao’s case  and the 
effect of the prospective overruling, we shall now proceed to provide a 
legislative remedy for the lacuna point ed out by the Supreme Court in this 
case.  The lacuna here  is that there is no provision in section 6  to exclude 
the period covered by the court litigation  in which  sec. 6 declaration is 
quashed and where by the date of th e quashing, the one year period has 
expired. 
 
 In the matter of filling up this lac una in sec. 6, there are several 
options, viz.,  (i) the period between th e date of the initiation of the court 
proceeding (e.g. filing of the writ pe tition) and the date of the judgment 
quashing the first sec. 6 declaration wh ich was made within one year can be 
excluded; or (ii) the period from the date of grant of stay order up to the date 
of the judgment can be excluded; or (iii) a fresh period which is reasonable 
and which will enable the exercise of sec. 5A inquiry etc. to be repeated, can 
be provided. 
 
 After considering  these alternatives , we are of the view that the third 
alternative set out above is the best one  in the circumstances  in as much as 
the department must have enough time (say) to issue fresh notices for  sec. 
5A inquiry, to give a hearing and to subm it a fresh report.  In fact, if it is a 
case of acquisition of land for a major irrigation project, hundreds of notices 
have to be issued  under the sec. 5A i nquiry and  oral hearings have to be 
given.  If the period take n by Court proceedings leading to the quashing of 
sec. 6 declaration is alone excluded, the balance of the period remaining may 
not be sufficient. 
 

 14 
  We are of the view that in all cases where the action or proceedings 
after section 4(1) notification or the fi rst sec. 6 declaration made within one 
year is quashed on or after 13.3.2002 th e department should have a further 
period of one hundred and eighty days  from the date of the judgment unless, 
of course, the period remaining after the judgment quashing the first sec. 6 
declaration is more than 180 days.  However, where the first sec. 6 
declaration has been quashed before 13.3.2002, and a fresh sec. 6 declaration 
was made before 13.3.2002, the fresh s ec. 6 declaration so made would still 
remain protected by N. Narasimhaiah’s case  if the award was passed and 
compensation paid before 13.3.2002.  
 
In other words, the proposed amendment will apply only to cases 
where any action or proceeding taken in pursuance of notification issued 
under section 4(1) or a  declaration made under section 6 is quashed on or 
after 13.3.2002.  So far as declara tions under section 6 quashed before 
13.3.2002 are concerned, the judgment in Padmasundara Rao  saves them 
only if awards have been passed and compensation was paid before 
13.3.2002.  If that was not done before 13.3.2002, we do not propose to save 
them.  In other words, where awar d was not passed before 13.3.2002 or 
compensation was not paid before 13. 3.2002, the only method available for 
the State would be to issue fresh section 4(1) notification. 
 
We, therefore, propose that a period of one hundred eighty days  
should be provided from the date of judgment to enable the concerned 
department/authorities for making another declaration under sec. 6 where the 
action or proceedings after the section 4(1) notification or  initial sec. 6 
declaration made within one year ha s been quashed by Court  - unless of 

 15 
course, the period left out after the qua shing of the sec. 6 declaration, is 
more than 180 days, i.e.,  the period still available is more than the period of 
180 days as proposed by us for making a fresh section 6 declaration. 
  
One other aspect has to be taken care in this connection.  So far as the 
declarations to be made on or afte r 13.3.2002 under section 6 are concerned, 
as stated above, we have already propos ed to provide 180 days .  However,  
the proposed  amendment, as stated a bove, may take some time to come into 
force by way of a   notification in the Gazette.   Till then, no body would 
have  become aware of the extra time  proposed as above.  Hence, to cover 
cases where  any action or proceedi ng taken in pursuance of notification 
issued under section 4(1) or a section 6 declaration, are quashed on or after 
13.3.2002 and before the date of notifi cation of the present Amendment Act, 
we propose that notwithstanding any judgm ent, decree or order of any court, 
the above period of 180 days should be counted from the date of notification 
of the Amendment Act in the Gazette.   
  
 Further, we also propose that where any action or proceeding taken in 
pursuance of notification issued under section 4(1) or a declaration made 
under section 6 is set aside or quashed by judgment of a court on or after 13th 
March, 2002 and before the date of commencement of proposed Amendment 
Act and if any fresh notification is i ssued under section 4(1)  on or after 13 th 
March, 2002, it should be deemed to be ineffective if declaration under 
section 6 is made within one hundred and eighty days as proposed above.  
Obviously, if the fresh section 6 declar ation is allowed to be made within 
180 days and if it saves the original sec tion 4(1) notification, there cannot be 
another section 4(1) notification on a later date. 

 16 
 
In order to give shape to our reco mmendations in legislative form, we 
have annexed a draft Bill incorporating the recommendations made above. 
 
  We recommend accordingly. 
 
 
(Justice M.Jagannadha Rao) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Member 
 
 
 
(T.K.Viswanathan) 
Member-Secretary 
Dated: 07.5.2002 
 
 
 

 17 
 
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL 2002 
       A   
     B I L L  
 
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second year of the Republic of India 
as follows, namely:- 
 
Short title  
 
1. The Act shall be called the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 
2002. 
 
 
Amendment of Section 6 
 
 
2. In section 6 of the Land Acquis ition Act, 1894 (hereinafter called the 
principal Act), after sub-section (1 ),the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
 “ (1A) Where any action or pr oceeding taken in pursuance of 
the notification issued under section 4, sub-section (1) or any 
declaration made under sub-section (1) within the period of one year 
referred to in clause (ii) of the first proviso to sub-section (1), is set 
aside or quashed by a court on or after the commencement of the Land 

 18 
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2002,  a declaration may be made 
under sub-section (1) within one hundred and eighty days from the 
date of the judgment of the court if the  remaining period available 
under clause (ii) of the first proviso after the date of the judgment is  
less than one hundred and eighty days:  
 
Provided that where the remaining period is more than one 
hundred and eighty days, then a declaration under sub-section (1) may 
be made within that period. 
  
Transitory Provisions 
 
3.     Notwithstanding anything contai ned in any judgment, decree or order 
of any court, where any action or proceeding taken in pursuance of the 
notification issued under sub-section (1) of  section 4 of the principal Act, or 
any declaration under sub-section (1) of section 6 of the principal Act, made 
within the  period of one y ear referred to in clause (ii) of the first proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 6 of the principal Act, is set aside or quashed by a 
court on or after 13 th day of March 2002 but before the commencement of 
this Act ,  
 
(a) a  declaration may be made under sub-section (1) of section 6 of 
the principal Act within one hundred and eighty days from the 
date of the commencement of this Act; and 
 
(b) any fresh notification issued on or after 13 th March, 2002 under 
sub-section (1) of section 4 of the principal Act but before the 

 19 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be of no effect if a 
declaration under sub-section (1) of section 6  of the principal Act 
is made , in accordance with clause (a) of this section.  
 
 
 
 