 
 
 Law Commission of India 
 
183rd Report 
 
  
 
on 
 
 
 
A continuum on the General Clauses Act, 1897 
with special reference to the admissibility and 
codification of external aids to interpretation of 
statutes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2 
November, 2002 
 
  
 
  
D.O.No.6(3)(79)/2002-LC(LS)          8.11.2002 
 
Dear Shri Janakrishnamurthy Ji, 
 
I am sending herewith the 183 rd report on “A continuum on the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 with special reference to  the admissibility and codification of  
external aids to interpretation of statutes”. 
 
2. The s ubject was t aken up in p ursuance t o r eference dat ed 28.1.2002 
from the Legislative Dep artment, Minist ry of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs, 
Government of India for exa mining the Commis sion’s 60 th Repo rt on the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 submitted to the Go vernment of India in the year, 
1974.  The reference  spe cifically see ks the Commis sion’s views on the is sue 
whether extrinsic ai ds sh ould be m ade admissi ble in c onstruction or  
interpretation of a statute, and if so , whether rules for extrinsic aids should be 
codified and incorporated in the General Clauses Act, 1897?   F urther, it was 
stated in the reference that there has b een conflict in judici al decisions as to 
the admissibility of extrinsic aids an d our courts are not following uni form 
approach to princi ples of  statutory constructions especially regarding tools  
relating to external aids. Another question was also posed in the reference that 
since 1974 when the 60 th Report of the Commissi on was submitted, many new 
statutes have come into force and some of the cano ns of interpretation on the 
use o f ex trinsic a id have also undergone c hanges, wou ld it not le ad to  a 
‘criticism that the said report has lost its relevance because of a long gap’.  The 
Commission has examined the following main issues arising out of the sai d 
reference: 
A) Whether the General  Cla uses Act, 1897 s hould also provide the 
principles o f interp retation o f a statute as regards the extrinsi c 
aids of interpretation and; 
B) Whether recommendations made in the said 60 th Report need any 
revision or whether those have lost relevance now.  
 
 The Commission h as given it s con sidered rec ommendations on these  
issues in this report. 
 
 With regards, 
 
 2 

 3 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
Shri Janakrishna Murthy, 
Hon’ble Minister for Law & Justice, 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 

 4 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl.No  CONTENTS       PAGE Nos. 
 
1. Report – A continuum on the General   1 - 37 
Clauses Act, 1897 with special reference  
to the admissibility and codification of  
external aids to interpretation of statutes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law Commission has r eceived a reference dated 28.1.2002 
from the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
affairs, Government of India for examining the Commission’s 60 th Report 
on the Ge neral Clauses Act, 1897 submitted to the Govt. of India i n the 
year 1974.  The reference specifically seeks the Commission’s view on the 
issue whether extrinsic aids should be made admissible in construction 
or interpretation of a statute, and if so, whether rules for extrinsic aids 
should be codified and incorporated in the General Clauses Act, 1897?  It 
has been stated in the reference that there has been conflict in judicial 
decisions as to the admissibility of extrinsic aids and our c ourts are not 
following uniform approach to principles of statutory construction  
 4 

 5 
especially regarding tools relating to external aids.  Some decisions of 
Apex Court have also been cited in support of this observation.  We will 
discuss some of these decisions in this report. 
 
 The reference also states that the 60 th Report was submitted in  
1974 and since then, many new statues have come into force and some 
of the ca nons of interpretation on th e use of extrinsic aid have also 
undergone changes.  Further, if the Law Commission’s 60 th Repo rt is 
now implemented, then there may be “criticism that the sa id Report has 
lost its relevance because of a long gap”. We may, however, state that the 
question of external aids was specifically dealt with in Chapter II of the 
60th report. 
 
 It will be appropriate to extract the relevant passages of the above 
reference to the above effect as follows:  
“There has been a conflict as to the admissibility of extrinsic aids 
in construction of the provisions of the statutes.  The extrinsic aids 
to construe a statute may include debates in Parliament, report of 
the parliamentary Committees, Commissions, Statement of Objects 
and Reasons, Notes on Clauses, any international treaty or 
international agreement which is refe rred to in  the statute, any 
other document relevant to the subject matter of the statute, 
etc.”…  
 
“It has also been felt that o ur courts have no t been fo llowing 
uniform approach to principles of statutory construction especially 
regarding tools relating to external aids.”…  
 
“At the same time our courts have often been referring to text 
books, decision of t he foreign courts rather than the judgement of  
our Supreme Court.  In these circumstances, it needs to be 
 5 

 6 
considered whether there should be independent legislation or 
provisions which may be part of the General Clauses Act, clearly 
providing whether extrinsic aids or othe r aids may be admi tted for 
construction of a statute.” 
 
“Further, the Law Commission Report was given way back in 1974 
on a reference made in 1959.   Since then, many new statues have 
come into force bringing to the fore issues such as information 
technology, in the light of which even the Evidence Act has been 
amended.  Further some of the rules of interpretation on the use of 
extrinsic aids such as parliamentary debates, preparatory works, 
reports of the Law Commission of Indi a and Parliamentary reports 
have undergone changes.  It is also felt that if the 60 th Report  
(1974) of the Law Commission is now implemented, there may be 
criticism that the R eport has lost its relevance because of a long 
gap.” 
 
“In the light of above, it is considered appropriate to request the 
Law Commission of India to re-examine its 60th Report and to state 
whether at this stage the General Clauses Act should also contain 
the principles of interpretation of statu tes or the said report, as it 
is at this stage would serve the purpose or the said report needs 
otherwise to be revised.  The Commission may, accordingly, re-
examine whether the earlier report needs any modification and if 
so, further suggestion/recommendations in the matter may be 
made by the Commission.”  
 
 It may be pointed out that the Law Commission in Chapter 2 of the 
said 60th Report examined the issue regarding the feasibility of having a 
comprehensive code on the interpretation of statutes which may be 
inserted in the General Clauses Act, but found it to be impracticable on 
 6 

 7 
various grounds.  However, in the sai d Report, the Law  Commission,  
recommended certain changes in the General Clauses Act, 1897 and a 
tentative draft of Amendment Bill was also annexed with the said Report.  
 
 While examining the terms of this reference, the following main 
issues need  consideration: 
C) Whether the General Clauses Act, 1897 should also provide 
the principles of in terpretation of a s tatute as regards the 
extrinsic aids of interpretation and; 
B) Whether recommendations made in the said 60 th Report  
need any revision or whether those have lost relevance now.  
 
 
 
 
Regarding the above said issue (A):  
A statute is a will of legislature conveyed in the form of text.  
Interpretation or construction of a statute is an age-old process and as 
old as language.  El aborate rules of interpretation were evolved even at a 
very early stage of Hindu civilization and culture.  T he rules given by 
‘Jaimini’, the author of Mimamsat Sutras, originally meant for sruti s 
were employed for the interpretation of Smrities also.   (Law  Commission 
of India, 60 th Report, Chapter 2, para 2.2).  It is  well settled principle of  
law that as the statute is a n edict of the Legislature, the conventional  
way of interpreting or const ruing a statute is to seek t he intention of 
legislature.  T he intention of legislature assimilates two aspects; one 
aspect carries the concept of ‘meaning’, i.e., w hat the w ord means and 
another aspect conveys the concept of ‘purpose’ and ‘object’ or the 
‘reason’ or ‘spirit’ pervading through the statute.  T he process of  
construction, therefore, combines both the literal and purposive 
approaches.  However, necessity of interpretation would arise only where 
 7 

 8 
the language of a statutory provision is ambiguous, not clear or where 
two views are possi ble or where the provision gives a different meaning 
defeating the object of the statute.  If the language is clear and 
unambiguous, no need of interpretation would arise.  In this regard, a 
Constitution Bench of five Judges of  the Supreme Court in R.S. Nayak v 
A.R. Antulay, AIR 1984 SC 684 has held:  
 
“… If the words of the Statute are clear and unambiguous, it is the 
plainest duty of the Court to give effect to the natural meaning of  
the words used in the provision.  T he question of construction 
arises only in the event of an ambiguity or the plain meaning of the 
words used in the Statute would be self defeating.”  (para 18) 
 
 Recently, again Supreme Court in Grasim Industries Ltd. v 
Collector of Customs, Bombay , (2002)4 SCC 297 has followed the same 
principle and observed: 
 
“Where the words are clear and there is no obscurity, and there is 
no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for court to take upon itself the task of  
amending or altering the statutory provisions.” (para 10) 
  
For the purpose of construction or interpretation, the court 
obviously has to t ake recourse to various internal and external aids.   
“Internal aids” mean those materials which are available in the statute 
itself, though they may not be part of enactment.  T hese internal aids 
include, long title, preamble, headings, marginal notes, illustrations, 
punctuation, proviso, schedule, transitory provisions, etc.  When internal 
aids are not adequate, court has to t ake recourse to ext ernal aids.  It  
may be parliamentary material, historical background, reports of a 
 8 

 9 
committee or a commission, official statement, dictionary meanings, 
foreign decisions, etc.  
  
The Supreme Court has accepted the necessity of external aids i n 
interpretation of statutory provision.  O.Chennappa Reddy J. in B. 
Prabhakar Rao and others  v State of A.P. and others , AIR 1986 SC 120 
has observed :  
 
“Where internal aids are not forthcoming, we c an always have  
recourse to external aids to discover the object of the legislation.   
External aids are not ruled out.  This is now a well settled principle 
of modern statutory construction.” (para 7) 
 
 Recently, in District Mining Officer and others v Tata Iron & Steel 
Co. and another , (2001)  7 SCC 358, Supreme Court has observed: 
 
“It is also a cardinal principle of construction that external aids are 
brought in by widening the concept of context as including no t 
only other enacting provisions of t he same statute, but i ts 
preamble, the existing state of law, other statutes in pari materia 
and the mischief which the statute was intended to remedy.” (par a 
18)  
 
So far a s admissibility and utility o f these e xternal aids are  
concerned, law is almost settled in our country now.  The Supreme Court 
in K.P. Varghese v Income Tax Officer Ernakulam, AIR 1981 SC 1922 has 
stated that interpretation of statute being an exercise in the 
ascertainment of meaning, everything which is logically relevant should 
be admissible.   
 
 9 

 10 
Following are some known external aids, which are admissible for  
the interpretation of statutory provisions:  
(1) Parliamentary material 
(a) Debates  
Courts often take recourse to parliamentary material like debates 
in Constituent Assembly, speeches of the movers of the B ill, Reports of  
Committees or Commission, Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 
Bill, etc.  As per traditional English view, these parliamentary material or 
Hansard were inadmissible as external aids, on the basis of ‘exclusionary 
rule’.  This “exclusionary rule” was slowly given up and finally in Pepper 
v Hart, (1993) 1 ALLER 42 (HL), it was held that parliamentary material 
or Hansard may be admissible as an e xternal aid for inter pretation of a 
statute, subject to p arliamentary privilege, under following 
circumstances; where (a) legislation is ambiguous or obscure or leads to  
an absurdity; (b) the material relied on consists of one or more 
statements by a minister or other promoter of the Bill, together, if 
necessary, with su ch other parliamentary material as is necessary to 
understand such statements and their effect; and (c) the statements 
relied on are clear.  
 
Indian Courts, in early days followed the ‘exclusionary rule’ which 
prevailed in England and refused to a dmit parliamentary material or 
Constituent Assembly debates for the purpose of interpretation of 
statutory or constitutional provision (see State of Travancore- Cochin and 
others v Bombay Co. Ltd., AIR 1952 SC 366; Aswini Kumar Ghose and 
another v Arbinda Bose and another, AIR 1952 SC 369. However, i n 
subsequent cases, the Supr eme Court relaxed this ‘exclusionary rule,  
much before the law laid down in England in ‘Pepper’ case.  Krishna Iyer 
J. in State of Mysore v R.V. Bidop, AIR 1973 SC 2555, quoted a passag e 
from Crawford on Statutory Construction (page 383) in which 
exclusionary rule was criticized.  The relevant passage is quoted below:- 
 10 

 11 
 
“The rule of Exclusion has been criticized by jurists as artificial.  
The trend of academic opinion and the practice in the European 
system suggests that interpretation of statute being an exercise in 
the ascertainment of meaning, everything which is logicall y 
relevant should be admissible”  
 
Krishna Iyer  J. has observed in this case:- 
“There is a strong case for whittling down the Rule of Exclusion 
followed in the British courts and for l ess apologetic reference to 
legislative proceedings and like materials to read the meaning of 
the words of a statute.” (para 5) 
 
In this regard,  Bhagwati J. (as he then was)  in Fagu Shaw etc. v  
The State of West Bengal, AIR 1974 SC 613 has stated: 
 
“Since the purpose of inte rpretation is to a scertain the real 
meaning of a constitutional provision, it is evident that nothing 
that is logically relevant to this process should be excluded fro m 
consideration.  It was at one time  thought that the speeches made 
by the members of the Constituent Assembly in the course of th e 
debates  of the Draft Constitution were wholly inadmissible as 
extraneous aids to the interpretation of a constitutional provision, 
but of late there has been a shift in this position and following the 
recent trends in  juristic thought in some of the Western countries 
and the United States, the rule of exclusion rigidly followed in 
Anglo American jurisprudence has been considerably diluted…  
We may therefore legitimately refer to  the Con stituent A ssembly 
debates for the purpose of ascertaining what was the object which 
the Constitution makers had in view and what was the purpose 
 11 

 12 
which they intended to achieve when they enacted cls (4) and (7)  
in their present form.” (para 45) 
  
Again in R.S. Nayak v A.R. Antulay (Supra), the Supreme Court 
observed in this regard: 
 
“…Therefore, it can be confidently said that the exclusionary rule is 
flickering in its  dying embers in its native land of birth and has 
been given a decent burial by this Court.”  (para 34) 
  
The Supreme Court in a numbers of cases referred to debates in 
the Constituent Assembly  for interpretation of Constitutional provisions.  
Recently, the Supreme Court in S.R. Chaudhuri v State of Punjab and 
others, (2001) 7 SCC 126 has stated that it is  a settled position that  
debates in the Co nstituent Assembly may be relied upon as an a id to  
interpret a Constitutional provision because it is the function of the  
Court to find out the intention of the framers of the Constitution.  (para 
33) 
 But as far  as speeches in Parliament are concerned, a di stinction 
is made between speeches of the mover of the Bill and speeches of other  
Members. Regarding speeches made by the Members of the Parliament at 
the time of consideration of a Bill, it has been held that they are not 
admissible as extrinsic aids to the interpretation of the statutory 
provision.   (see - K.S. Paripoornan v State of Kerala and others, AI R 
1995 SC 1012).  H owever, speeches made by the mover of the Bi ll or  
Minister may be referred to for the purpose of finding out the object 
intended to be achieved by the Bill (see K.S. Paripoornan’s case ( supra).  
J. S. Verma J (as he then was)  in R.Y. Prabhoo (Dr.) v. P.K. Kunte, 
(1995) 7 SCALE 1 made extensive reference to the speech of the then Law 
Minister Shri A.K. Sen for construing the word ‘his’ occurring in sub-
section (3) of secti on 123 of the Representation of People Act 1951.  
 12 

 13 
Similarly, Supreme Court in P.V. Narsimha Rao v State, AIR 1998 SC  
2120 agreeing with the view taken in Pepper v Hart (Supra) has observed:  
“It would thus be seen that as per the decisions of this Court, the 
statement of the M inister who had moved the Bill in Parliament 
can be looked at to ascertain mischief sought to be remedied b y 
the legislation and the object and purpose for wh ich the legislation 
is enacted.  T he statement of the Minister who had moved the Bill 
in Parliament is not taken into account for the purpose of  
interpreting the provision of the enactment.”  (Para 77). 
The Supreme Court in Sushila Rani v CIT and another, (2002) 2 SCC 697 
referred to  the speech of the Minister to find out the object of ‘Kar Vivad 
Samadhan Scheme 1998’. 
 
(b) Statement of Objects and Reasons 
So far as Statement of Objects and Reasons, accompanying a 
legislative bill is  concerned, it is  permissible to r efer to it for 
understanding the background, the antecedent state of affairs, the 
surrounding circumstances in relation to the statute and the evil wh ich 
the statute sought to remedy.  But, it cannot be used to ascertain the 
true meaning and effect of the substantive provision of the statute.  
(Devadoss (dead) by L. Rs, v. Veera Makali Amman Koil Athalur, AIR 
1998 SC 750. 
  
 (c) Reports of Parliamentary Committees and Commissions  
 
Reports of Commissions including Law Commission or Committees 
including Parliamentary Committees preceding the introduction of a Bill 
can also be referred to in th e Court a s evidence of histo rical facts or of 
surrounding circumstances or of mischief or evil intended to be 
remedied.  Obviously, courts can take recourse to these ma terials as an 
external aid for interpretation of the Act.  T hough, the Supreme Court 
 13 

 14 
refused to take recourse to the Report of the special Committee which 
had been appointed by the Government of India to examine the provision 
of the Partnership Bill for construing the provisions of the Partnership 
Act, 1932 in CIT, A.P.  v Jaylakshmi Rice and Oil Mills Contractor Co., 
AIR 1971 SC 1015, yet in another case Haldiram Bhujiawala and another 
v Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar and another, (2000) 3 SCC 250, the  
Supreme Court too k recourse to the very same report of the Sp ecial 
Committee (1930-31) for construing the provisions of section 69 of the 
Partnership Act, 19 32.  T he Supreme Court in the above case held that  
decision in CIT v. Jaylakshmi Rice & Oil Mills (supra) in this respect is 
no longer  good law.  Law Commission’s Reports can also be referred to 
where a particular enactment or amendment is the result of 
recommendations of Law Commission Report. (see Mithilesh Kumari v 
Prem Behari Khare, AIR 1989 SC 1247).  Similarly, the Supreme Court in 
Rosy and another  v State of Kerala and others,  (2000) 2 SCC 230 
considered Law Commission of India, 41 st Report for interpretation of  
section 200 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1898.  
  
The abov e discussion obviously indicates that parliamentar y 
material including committees and commission reports are admissible 
external aid for interpretation of statutory provisions.   
 
(2) Reference to other statutes 
 It is a settled principle that for the purpose of interpretation or 
construction of a statutory provision, courts can refer to or can take help 
of other statutes.  It is also known as statutory aids.  The General 
Clauses Act, 1897 is an example of statutory aid.  Apart from this, Cour t 
can take recourse to other sta tutes which are in p ari mataria i.e. statute 
dealing with the same subject matter or forming part of the same system.  
Supreme Court in Common Cause, A Registered Society v Union of India, 
AIR 1996 SC 3081, took recourse to section 13A and 139 (4B) of the 
 14 

 15 
Income Tax Act 1961 for the purpose of interpretation of Explanation I to 
section 77 (1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.  
  
The appli cation of this rule of construction has the merit of  
avoiding any contradiction between a s eries of st atutes dealing with the  
same subject, it allows the use of an earlier statute to throw light on the 
meaning of a phrase used in a later statute in the same context.  On  the 
same logic when words in an earlier statute have received an 
authoritative exposition by a superior court, use of same words in similar 
context in a later  statute will give rise to a  presumption that the 
legislature intends that the same interpretation should be followed for 
construction of those words in the later statute.  ( see Bengal Imunity Co. 
Ltd. v State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 661).  However, a later statute i s 
normally not used as an aid to construction of an earlier statute, but 
when an earlier statue is truly ambiguous, a later statute may in certain 
circumstances serve as a parliamentary exposition of the former.  
 
(3) Usages and Practice 
  
Usages and practice developed under a statute is indicative of the 
meaning ascribed to its words by contemporary opinion and in case of an 
ancient statute, such reference to usage and pra ctice is a n admissible 
external aid to its c onstruction.  But this principle is not applicable to a  
modern statute and it is confined to the cons truction of ambiguous  
language used in old statute.  This principle of ‘contemporanea  exposito’ 
was applied by the Supreme Court in  National and Grindlays Bank v 
Municipal Corporation for  Greater Bombay , AIR 1969 SC 1048 w hile 
construing Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, 1888.  The apex court 
also referred to the actual practice in the matter of appointment of judges 
of Supreme Court and High Court in the context of interpreting Articles 
74 and 124 of the Constitution and observed that the practice being in 
 15 

 16 
conformity with the constitutional scheme should be accorded legal 
sanction by permissible co nstitutional  interp retation.  (see Supreme 
Court Advocates on Record A ssociation v Union of India, AIR 1994 SC 
268. 
 
(4) Dictionaries 
  
When a word is not defined in the statute itself, it is permissible to 
refer to dictionaries to find o ut the ge neral sense in which that word is 
understood in common parlance. (See Municipal Board Sarahanpur v 
Imperial Tabacco of India Ltd. (1999) 1 SCC 566) .  However, in the 
selection of one ou t of the various meanings of a word, regard must 
always be had to the scheme, context and legislative history. 
 
(5) Foreign Decisions 
  
For the purpose of construction of Indian statutes, courts also 
refer to decisions of foreign courts which are following same system of  
jurisprudence as ours.  The assistance of such decisions is subject to the 
qualification that prime importance is always to be given to the language 
of the relevant Indian statute, the circumstances and the setting in  
which it is enacted and the relevant conditions in India where it is to be 
applied.  These foreign decisions have persuasive value only and are not  
binding on Indian courts and where guidance is available from binding 
Indian decisions, reference to foreign decisions is of no use (see Forasol v 
ONGC, AIR 1984 SC 241; General Electric Co. v. Renusagar Power Co., 
(1987) 4 SCC 137).  
  
While interpreting provisions relating to fundamental rights 
contained in the  Indian Constitution, Supr eme Court took much 
assistance from Am erican precedents.  In case where an International  
 16 

 17 
Convention is involved, it is obviously desirable that decisions in different 
jurisdictions across the worl d should so far as possible be kept in line 
with each other.  T herefore, in such cases foreign decisions are more 
useful for guiding the courts.  
 
(6) Historical facts and surrounding circumstances 
  
Apart from the various external aids discussed above, courts while  
interpreting a statutory provision, can take into account relevant 
historical facts or history of enactment in order to understand the  
subject matter of statute.  Court can also have regard to the surrounding 
circumstances which existed at the time of passing of the statute.  But,  
like any other external aid, the infe rence from historical facts and 
surrounding circumstances must give way to the clear language 
employed in the e nactment itself.  In this re gard, Supreme Court in 
Mohanlal Tripathi v. Distt. Magistrate Rail Bareilly and others, (1992) 4 
SCC 80, has observed: 
 
“Value of ‘historical evolution’ of a provision or ‘reference’ to what 
preceded the enactment is an external aid to understand and 
appreciate the meaning of a provision, its ambit or expanse has 
been judi cially recognized and textually recommended.  B ut this 
aid to construe any provision which is ‘extremely hazardous’ 
should be resorted  to,  only, if any dou bt arises about the scope of 
the section or it is found to be ‘sufficiently difficult and ambiguous 
to justify the construction of its evaluation in the statute book as a 
proper and logical course and secondly, the object of the instant 
enquiry’ should be ‘to ascertain the tr ue meaning of that  part of  
the section which remains as it was an d which there is no  ground 
for thinking of the substitution of a n ew proviso was intended to 
alter’.”  (para 7)  
 17 

 18 
 
This rule of admissibility permits recourse to historical 
works, pictures, engraving and documents where it is important to  
ascertain ancient facts of a public nature.   
  
Recently, Supreme Court while dealing with the Dental Act, 1948 
in Dental Council of India v Hariprakash, (2001) 8 SCC 61 has observed: 
 
“The Act  is a pre constitutional enactment but it has application  
in the post constitutional era also.  When interpreting such an 
enactment, we have  not only to bear in mind the historical 
background leading to the legislation and the amendments effected 
therein,  but also various aspects covered by it”.  (para 3.1) 
  
It is apparent from this discussion that historical facts and 
surrounding circumstances are also relevant facts to be  taken into 
account by the Court as external aids for interpretation of statutes.  
 
(7) Later Development and Scientific Inventions 
  
It is often possible that after the enac tment of a statute, political 
and economic developments in the society may take place.  New scientific 
inventions may also come o ut.  T he legislature might n ot have b een 
aware of all these developments and inventions, when the law was made.   
Therefore, courts take into account  all these development while 
construing statutory provisions.  In this regard, Bhagwati J. (as he then 
was) in S.P. Gupta v Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 149 has stated: 
 
“The interpretation of every statutory provision must keep pace 
with changing concepts and values and it must,  to the extent to 
which its  language permits or rather does no t prohibit , suffer 
 18 

 19 
adjustments through judicial interpretation so as to accord with 
the requirement of the fast changing society which is undergoing 
rapid social and economic transformation …   It is elementary that 
law does not operate in a vacuum.  It is, therefore, intended to 
serve a social purpose and it cannot be interpreted without taking 
into account the social, economic and political setting in which it is 
intended to operate.  It is here that the Judge i s called upon to 
perform a creative function.  He has to inject flesh and blood in the 
dry skeleton provided by the legislature and by a process of 
dynamic interpretation, inve st it wit h a mea ning which will 
harmonise the law with the prevailing concepts and values and 
make it an effective instrument for delivery of justice.”   (para 62) 
 
Again, in S.P. Jain v Krishan Mohan Gupta and others, AIR 198 7 
SC 222, the Supreme Court has held: 
 
“We are of the opinion that law should take pragmatic view of the 
matter and respond to the purpose for which it was made and also 
take cognizance of the current capabilities of technology and lif e 
style of community”.  (para 18) 
 
 With the change of times, Article 21 of the Constitution which was 
at one time interpreted in a very narrow way, has now been interpreted 
in such a way, that the right to life includes everything which makes a 
man’s life meaningful, complete and worth living.  T he Supreme Court in 
J.K. Cotton Spinning & Wvg Mills Ltd. v Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 191 
observed at para 45  that in a modern progressive society it would be 
unreasonable to co nfine the intention of the legislature to the mea ning 
attributed to the word used at the time the law was made and unless a  
contrary intention appears, an interpretation should be given to the 
 19 

 20 
words used to take in new facts and situations, if the words are capabl e 
of comprehending them. 
  
Therefore, court has to take into account social, political and 
economic developments and scientific inventions which ta ke place after 
enactment of a statute for proper construction of its provision.   
 
International Conventions 
 
Apart from these external aids, court also take recourse to other 
material.  For example, wherever necessary, court can look into  
International Conventions (P.N. Krishanlal v Govt. of Kerala, (1995) Sup. 
(2) SCC 187).   T he Supreme Court in Visakha v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 
1997 SC 3011 took recourse to International Convention for the purpose  
of construction of domestic law.  The Court observed :- 
 
“In the a bsence of domestic law occu pying the field to formulate 
effective measures to check the evil of sexual harassment of 
working women at all work places, the contents of International 
Conventions and norms are significant for the purpose of 
interpretation of the guarantee of gender equality, right to work 
with human dignity in Articles 14, 15, 19(1)(g) and 21 of th e 
Constitution and the safeguards against sexual harassment  
implicit therein.  Any international convention not inconsistent 
with the fundamental rights and in harmony with its spirit must 
be read into those provisions to enlarge the meaning and content  
thereof, to promote the object of the Constitutional guarantee.”  
(para 7) 
 
Other materials 
 20 

 21 
Similarly, Supreme Court used information available on i nternet 
for the purpose of interpretation of statutory provision in Ramlal v State 
of Rajasthan , (2001) 1 SCC 175.  Courts also refer passages and  
materials from text books and articles and papers published in the  
journals.  We are of the view that these external aids are very useful tools 
not only for the proper and correct i nterpretation or construction of 
statutory provision, but also for understanding  the object of the statute, 
the mischief  sought to be remedied by it, circumstances in which it was 
enacted and many other relevant matters.  In the absence of the  
admissibility of these external aids, sometime court may not be in a 
position to do  justice in a case.   
 
 
 
Application of external aids cannot be uniform 
As discussed above, the external aids are very u seful tools for the 
interpretation or construction of statutory provisions.  Law is almost  
settled in our country on t he issue as to w hich external aids are 
admissible and what weight age should be given to each such aid.  Ther e 
is no un certainty about the admissibility of th ese aids.  Courts  are  
following uniform process in this respect.  But it does no t necessarily 
mean that in every case, court should take recourse to each admissible 
external aid.  Eac h case c ontains different fa cts and c ircumstances.  
Court has to apply the appropriate law to the  facts and circumstances of 
the case.  So, when the court refuses to take recourse to a particular 
external aid in a  specific case rather than t o another external aid 
because of the special facts, circumstances and context of the case, it 
does not mean that courts are not following uniform process or the law is 
uncertain.   
 
Whether external aids can be incorporated into the General Clauses Act 
 21 

 22 
Now, the issue arises whether law about admissibility of thes e 
external aids should be incorporated in the General Clauses Act 1897.    
This issue was examined by the Law C ommission in Chapter 2 of the its 
60th Report.   T he Law Commission was of the view that these rules of  
admissibility of external aid cannot be codified.  T hese are judge mad e 
rules.  The Commission thus observed as follows:  
 
“2.7  It is obvi ous that all ‘rules of interpretation’ cannot be 
codified.  Some rules are only guidelines, as we have alread y 
stated.  A suggestion was made later by Professor Acharya in hi s 
Tagore Law Lectures on codification in British India, that the scope 
of the General Clauses Act should be extended so as to make it a  
comprehensive code on the interpretation of statutes.  T his 
suggestion is, no doubt, attractive at first sight; but a close 
scrutiny will reveal its impracticability.  It is not possible to 
incorporate, in an Interpretation Act, the rules of interpretation 
enunciated in the text books on the subject.  One of the main 
reasons for having a n Interpretation Act is to facilitate the task of 
the draftsman in preparing parliamentary legisla tion.  T he courts 
also have recourse to Interpretation Acts to interpret statutes; bu t 
they do n ot confine themselves to these Acts.  T hey certainly take 
the aid of accepted rules of interpretation as laid down in decided  
cases.   
Moreover, a certain degree of  elasticity is necessary in thi s 
branch of the law.  Rules of construction of statutes are not static.  
Aims and objects of legislation will be better served by appropriate 
judicial interpretation of the l aw, rather than by rigid provisions i n 
the law th emselves.  At present, Judges have a certain amount of 
latitude in the matter, which enables them to do justice, after 
taking into consideration the nature and character of each statute .  
If the rules of construction are given a statutory form, the 
 22 

 23 
consequential rigidity in this branch of the  law is likely to do more 
harm than good.” 
  
 The recommendations of the  Law Com mission in its abov e Report 
are well defined and contain sound reasons.  These  re asons are still  
valid.  We are of the opinion that in view of the reasons forthcoming also, 
there is no need to disturb those recommendations in Chapter 2 para 2.7 
of the 60 th Law Commission of India Report and we reiterate the same.   
It would not be appropriate to limit the extent of resources to be 
considered as extrinsic aids to interpretation as this step would be anti-
progressive.  If th e rules regarding external aids are provided in  
legislative form, pr ovisions would become rigid and courts would be  
deprived of their judicial function of inte rpretation to achieve social goals 
or dispense justice. Courts will not be able to take judicial notice of some 
information which is useful, if reference to that kind of information is not 
to be made permissible because of strai ght-jacket rules prohibiting such 
use by legislative form.  T he Legislature cannot prepare an exhaustive 
list of situations to which alone courts may be confined for use of  
external aids.  
 
The British and Sc ottish Law Commission in it s Report ( 1969) on 
the Interpretation of Statutes also favoured non-codification of these 
rules.  Chapter V of the Report deals with this aspect.  At para 46, the 
Report says: 
 
“It is self-evident that in order to understand a statute a court has 
to take into account many matters which are not to b e found  
within the statute itself.  Legislatio n is not made in a vacuum, and  
a judge i n interpreting it is able to take judicial notice of much 
information relating to legal, social, economic and other aspects of  
the society in which the statute is to operate.  We do not think i t 
 23 

 24 
would serve a useful purpose to attempt to provide comprehensive 
directives as to these factors.” 
 
 Again in Chapter IX  (Summary of conclusions an d 
Recommendations at para 81 of the said Report), it is observed: 
 
“81. We accept nevertheless the argument summarized in  
paragraph 79 to the extent that we do n ot propose any 
comprehensive statutory enumeration of the factors to be taken 
into account by the courts in the interpretation of legislation; even  
in the countries with the most highly codified systems, the  
principles of inter pretation largely rest on a body of flexible 
doctrines developed by legal writers and by practice of the courts.” 
 
 We refer to the New Zealand Law Commission Report No. 17 (S) 
(1990) on ‘A New Interpretation Act’ in which the New  Zealand Law  
Commission had examined Interpretation Act 1924 and prepared a 
Report on a New Interpretation Act at para 16 of the summary of the  
Report, the said C ommission identified important issues.  One of the 
issues was whether the Act should regulate the use that can be made of 
material beyond the text of the enactment to assist its interpretation?  
Obviously, these materials are known as external aids.  T he answ er to 
the question is given under para 22 of the Summary of the Report as 
follows:  
 
“22. The Report concludes that practice shows there is sometimes 
value in considering parliamentary material.  Accordingly, a  
prohibitory rule is inappropriate. And while a permissive rule could 
address the questions outlined in t he Repor t, the le gislative 
answers given elsewhere do not appear to provide any significant 
assistance to the courts.  Rat her the courts themselves have been 
 24 

 25 
developing and will continue to develop rules and practices about  
relevance and significance.  Accordingly, the Commission does not 
propose the enactment of legislation regul ating the use of  
parliamentary material.” 
  
 The Com mission recommended that the use of parliamentary 
material in the interpretation of legislation should not be regulated by a 
general statute.   
  
It is apparent from the discussion above mentioned that all th e 
three Law Commissions viz., Law Commission of India (in its 60 th Report 
submitted in 1974), British and Scottish Law Commission in their Joint 
Report submitted in 1969 and New Zealand Law Commission in its 
report submitted in 1990, categorically recommended that rules of 
interpretation regarding use of extrinsic material should n ot be ena cted 
in legislative form.  T hese recommendations of all these Law  
Commissions are b ased on sound reasons and we concur with those 
recommendations.  T here are some other underlying reasons which also 
negate the concept of codification of these rules.  
  
Interpretation requires certain amount of discretion and flexibility 
and judges must h ave discretion.  If the rules regarding use of external 
aids are codified then judges would loose the discretion which they are  
having in the present system.  In the absence of discretion and flexibility, 
courts may not be in a position to do  justice.  
  
In Bhatia International v Bulk Trading S.A., (2002) 4 SCC 105, the 
apex court observed: 
 
“Notwithstanding the conventional principle that the duty of  
Judges is to expound and not to legislate, the courts have taken 
 25 

 26 
the view that the j udicial art of inter pretation and appr aisal is 
imbued with creativity and realism and since interpretation always 
implied a degree of discretion and choi ce, the courts would adopt, 
particularly in areas such as constitutional adjudication dealing 
with social and defuse (sic) rights.  Courts are therefore, held as 
‘finishers, refiners and polishers of legislation...”  (para 15) 
 
 Therefore, when the interpretation requires discretion and choice, 
it is not a dvisable to codify the rules for interpretation especially those 
regarding use of external aids.  
  
One of the main reasons which requires giving considerable 
latitude to courts in the matter of interpretation of statutory provision is 
that the Legislature cannot foresee exhaustively all the situations and 
circumstances that may emerge after enacting statutory provisions where 
their applications may be called for.  It is imp ossible even for the most 
imaginative Legislature to for esee all t he future circumstances.  In this 
regard, Supreme Court in Ratanchand Hirachand v Askar Nawaz Jung – 
(dead) by L.Rs., (1991) 3 SCC 67 has observed: 
 
“The legislature often fails to keep pace with the changing needs 
and values, nor it is realistic to expect that it will have provided all 
contingencies and eventualities.  It is, therefore, not only necessary 
but obligatory on the court to step in to fill the lacuna.”  (para 17) 
 
 The above principle is equally attracted if we propose to  legislate 
rules of interpretation regarding use of external aids.  The legislature 
cannot, when it ma kes a law today, fo resee the kind of aids which may  
be useful after a gap of years nor can it foresee all situations in which a 
particular aid can be helpful.  For example, now courts use information 
of judgements of fo reign jurisdictions which is available on internet, a s 
 26 

 27 
an external aid for interpretation.  This facility was unknown in the past.  
Similarly, in future  some other new technology may come out.  A gain, 
new or p eculiar circumstances may arise where the co urt has to take 
recourse to some material or aid which has not been used in the past as 
external aid.  T herefore, rigid  and statutory rules for inte rpretation of 
statutes for the use of external aids are not warranted.    
  
Similarly, a court has to interpret a statutory provision in the 
context of current social and economic circumstances prevailing in the 
society.  Krishna Iyer J. in State of Mysore v R.V. Bidop, AIR 1973 SC 
2555 has held that ‘social context’ can be looked as an external aid, 
where the language is ambiguous.  As stated in previous paragraphs, 
Bhagwati J. (as he then w as) in S.P. Gupta’s case has  held tha t the 
interpretation of every statutory provision must keep pace with changing 
concept and values and it must accord with the requirement of the fast 
changing society which is undergoing rapid social and economic 
transformation.  Such social and economic changes cannot be 
formulated  in the legislative form.  Moreover, with the pa ssage of time, 
meaning of words may also get changed.  For e xample, in 1950 in A.K. 
Gopalan’s case, meaning of words ‘life  and personal liberty’ in Article 21 
of the Constitution of India was interpreted in terms of only physical or 
bodily liberty and not more than and ‘procedure established by law’ was  
interpreted like ‘any kind of procedure prescribed by the law of any kind.  
But the meaning of the words ‘life and personal liberty’ has been widened 
considerably to mean protection to all those aspect of life which go to 
make a man’s life meaningful, complete and worth-living with dignity. 
Right to life would include all that give meaning to a man’s life e.g. his 
tradition, culture, heritage and protection of that heritage in its full 
measure. ( Ramsharan vs Union of India, (1989) Suppl.(1) SCC 251 (Prs. 
13-14). It would al so include the right to good health ( M.C. Mehta  vs 
Union of India , (1999)6 SCC 9 (Pr.1); right to healthy environment (A.P. 
 27 

 28 
Pollution Control Board II  vs Prof. M.V. Nayudu, (2001) 2 SCC 62); right 
to health care (State of Punjab vs Ram Lubhaya, (1998)4 SCC 11).  Now, 
‘procedure established by law’ means that substantive law as well as 
procedural law must be ‘just, fair and reasonable’. Meaning of words  
‘affairs of state’ ap pearing in section 123 of th e Evidence Act has also 
undergone drastic changes with the passage of time.  In this regard, Law 
Commission in its 60th Report at para 2.9 has observed: 
 
“Moreover, with the passage of time, there may be changes in the 
meaning of words.  As has been stated, ‘some words are confined 
to their history, while some are starting points for history.” 
 
 In Santa Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1976 SC 2386, Supreme 
Court observed: 
 
“It was Mr. Justice Holmes who pointed out in his inimitable style 
that, ‘a word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged’, it is the 
skin of a living thought and may vary greatly in colour and content 
according to the circumstances and the time in which it is used.”  
(para 4) 
 
 This kind of rule that the meaning of the words may get changed 
with the passage of time cannot be expressed in legislative form. 
  
While interpreting a provision, it is not proper for the court to take 
a mechanical or mathematical mean ing of a word.  T he Law Commission 
in its 60th Report has observed, in this regard: 
 
“2.12 It is of course, well recognized that interpretation is not 
merely a process of spelling  out the meaning by set gu idelines.  
Sometimes, it has to partake of the character of law making.   … 
 28 

 29 
Interpretation is not mathematics, where the answer given by every 
person to the particular mathematical problem must tally with 
each other if the a nswer are correct.  As we shall show later, a  
certain amount of latitude is left to those who have to interpret and 
to this extent, interpretation resembles law making.” 
 
 The Supr eme Court in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. A.D. 
Divelkar, AIR 1957 SC 121, has referred with approval the following 
passage from an A merican decision (Great Northern Rly. Co. v United 
States of America, (1942) 315 US 262): 
 
“We are not limited to lifeless words of the statute and formalistic  
canons of construction in search for the int ent of C ongress 
(Parliament in our case)”. … 
 
It was ob served in Distt. Mining Officer v Tata Iron and Steel Co., 
(2001) 7 SCC 358 that a bare mechanical interpretation of the words and 
application of legislative intent devoid of concept or purpo se will re duce 
most of the remedial and beneficent legislation to futility.   
  
 
In another case,  the apex Court has also observed: 
 
“Statutes, it is often said,  should be construed not as theorems of 
Euclid but with so me imagination of purpose which lies behind  
them and to be too  literal in  the mea ning of words is to  see the 
skin and miss the soul.” (see Tata Engg. and  Locomotive Co. Ltd. v 
State of Bihar, (2000) 5 SCC 346).  (para 15) 
 
 Further, rules of interpretation are not rules of la w; they are mere  
aids to construction and constitute some broad points.  It is the task of  
 29 

 30 
the court to decide which rules are, in the light of all circumstances, or  
ought to prevail (see Keshavji Ravji & Co. v CIT, (1990) 2 SCC 231).   
  
The Law Commission in its 60th Report has stated at para 2.9: 
 
“Statutes are the expression of the will of an authority constituted 
by society to announce general obligatory legal rules.  T he binding 
force of s tatute law attaches to the fo rmula in which the law is  
expressed.  The task of inter pretation of a statute is of, extracting, 
from the formula, all that it contains of legal rules, with a view to 
adapting it, as perfectly as possible, to the facts of life.  T herefore, 
the insertion of rigid rules may go against the very concept of 
interpretation.” 
 
 A statute is a will of legislature conveyed in the form of text.  
Words in any language are no t scientific symbols having any precise and 
definite meaning, but are capable of r eferring to a different meaning in 
different context of times.  Two views are often possible.  Language of a 
statutory provision may be a mbiguous.  All these things give room for 
interpretation.  Parliamentary draftsme n have be en criticized in various 
cases by the court.  In Institute of Chartered Accountants of India v Price 
Waterhouse,  (AIR 1998 SC 74) the apex court observed:  
 
“Interpretation postulates the search for the true meaning of the 
words used in the statute as a medium of expression to 
communicate a particular thought.  T he task is not easy as the  
‘language’ is often misunderstood even in ordinary conversation or 
correspondence.  The tragedy is that although in the matter of  
correspondence or conversation the person who has spoken the 
words or used the language can be approached for clarification, the 
Legislature cannot be approached as the Legislature, after enacting 
 30 

 31 
a law or Act, becomes functus officio, so far as that particular Act 
is concerned and it cannot interpret it.”  (para 47) 
 
The court further observed: 
 
“Statute being an edict of the Legislature, it is n ecessary that it is 
expressed in clear and unambiguous language.  In spite of Court s 
saying so innumerable times, the draftsmen have paid little 
attention and they still boast of the ol d British Jingle, ‘I am the 
Parliamentary draftsman, I compose the country’s laws. And of half 
of the litigation, I am undoubtedly the cause…”   (para 48) 
  
In another case (Keshav Mills Company Limited v CIT, Bombay  
North,  AIR 1965 SC 1636), the Supreme Court has observed:  
 
“…It is general judicial experience that in matters of law involving 
questions of construing statutory or Constitutional provisions, tw o 
views are often reasonably possible and when judicial approach 
has to ma ke a choice between the two  reasonable possible views, 
the process of decision making is often very difficult and delicate.”  
(para 23) 
 Now, if the rules of interpretations regarding use of external aids 
are also provided in  legislative form, then these statutory provisions 
about external aids may also require interpretation from the court as the 
language may bear two views or may be ambiguous.  T herefore, the 
codification of these rules would not serve any purpose, rather it may 
create some more problems of interpretation.  
 In our country, rules for interpretation in the form of a scientific 
system were developed since very early times known as Mimamsa  
Principles of Interpretation.  These principles were regularly used by our 
renowned jurists like Vijnaneshwara (author of Mitakshra), Jimutvahana 
 31 

 32 
(author of Dayabagh), Nanda Pandit (author of Dattak Mimamsa), etc .  
Whenever there wa s any con flict between two S mrities, eg., Manusmriti 
and Yagnavlkya Smriti, or ambiguity in a Shruti or Smriti, the Mimamsa 
Principles were uti lized.  These Mimamsa rules were l aid down by 
Jaimini in his Sutras written abound 500 B. C.  No doubt, these  
principles of interpretation were initially laid down for interpreting 
religious texts pertaining to ‘Yagya’ (sacrifice), but gradually the same  
principles came to be used for interpreting legal texts als o, particularly 
since in t he Smrities the reli gious texts and legal texts are mixed up in  
the same treatises.   
Sir John Edge, the then Chief Justice of Allahabad High Court, has 
referred to the Mimamsa principle in Beni Prasad v Hardai Bibi, (1892) 
ILR 14 All 67 (FB). 
 
  
Similarly, Gunapradhan Axi om of the Mimamsa principle was  
applied for interpretation of section 419 of UP Sales T ax Act in Amit 
Plastic In dustry, Ghaziabad  v Divisional Level Committee, Meerut (CM 
WP No. 372/1989 decided on Nov.10, 1993).  Again in Tribhuwan Mishra 
v Distt. Inspector of Schools, Azamgarh (CMWP No. 17554/1990, decided 
on March 30, 1992 ‘Samajasya Axiom’ was applied.   
 The Supreme Court has also taken note of these ancient principles.  
In UP Bhoodan Yagna Samiti, UP v Braj Kishore, AIR 1988 SC 2239); The 
apex court applied one of these principle after quoting a ‘Shloka’.  In thi s 
regard Court observed: 
“In this country, we have a heritage of rich  literature,  it is 
interesting to note that literature of interpretation also is very well 
known.  The principless of int erpretation have be en enunciated in 
various Shlokas which have been known for hundreds of years.”   
(para 11) 
  
 32 

 33 
Can these rules of Mimamsa be incorporated in the legislative 
form?  Answer would be a ‘no’.  Thus if rules of extrinsic aid and 
construction are codified then it may be that some radical sources are 
kept out of purview of interpretation unknowingly.   
  
The above discussion clearly indicates that rules for interpretation 
specially regarding use of external aids should not be a nd cannot b e 
given  legislative form.   
 
Even if it can be gi ven, it can be given only in an ‘inclusive’ form  
and not exhaustively.  Interpretation Act 1978 of UK also does not 
contain rules regarding use of external aids.  T he draft clauses, 
contained in Appendix A of t he joint Report of t he British and Scot tish 
Law Commission on the Interpretation of Statute submitted in the year 
1969, also do not contain these rules exhaustively.  La nguage of sub-
clause (1) of clause 1 clearly indicates this proposition.  This sub-claus e 
is as follows:   
 
“1 – (1)  In ascertaining the meaning of any provision of an Act, the 
matters which may be considered shall, in addition to thos e which 
may be considered for that purpose apart from this section, 
include the following, that is to say –  
…….” 
 
 A plain reading of this clause indicates that this provision is  
inclusive in form and not  exhaustive in form.  Furthermore, the 
Interpretation Act of 1978 (UK) does not even contain this provision.  
  
The Draft Interpretation Act, 1991 su bmitted by the New Zealand 
Law Commission along with its Report No. 17 (S) on “A New 
 33 

 34 
Interpretation Act”  does not contain provisions regarding use of external  
material.   
  
In Australia, a new section 15AB has been inserted in the 
Interpretation Act, 1901 regarding use of extrinsic material in the 
interpretation of an Act.  Sub-section (1) provides that in the 
interpretation of a provision of an Act, any material which is not forming 
part of the Act (extrinsic material) is capa ble of as sisting in the 
ascertainment of t he meaning of the provision in certain circumstances.   
Sub-section (2) provides a list of material that may be considered for the 
interpretation.  But this list is also  inclusive in  form.   
 
Further,  some of the rules of interpretation on the use of extrinsic  
aids even though they have undergone some changes, do not require any 
codification in this regard and the recommendations made in the 60 th 
Report have not lost relevance.   
 
On the basis of the discussion above, we are of the view; (1) in the 
event of ambiguity of a pro vision, for the purpose of interpretation of 
such a statutory provision, courts can certainly take recourse to material 
or aids outside the statute, i.e., external aids, and (2) the rules of 
interpretation specially regarding use of external aids, should not be  
incorporated in the General Clauses  Act, 1897 at all.   
 
We recommend accordingly.  
 
Regarding the issue (B): 
  
Whether recommendations made in the 60 th Report of th e 
Commission need any revision or whether they have lost relevance now.   
 
 34 

 35 
In the letter of reference, we have extracted a  passage regarding 
impact of information technology.  Merely because the Indian Evidence 
Act has been amended by th e Information Technology Act, 2000 keeping 
in view the advancement of information technology, that  should not l ead 
to amendment of t he General Clauses Act, 1897 because the terms 
expressed in the amended General Clauses Act will have an all pervasive 
impact on the “post-amendment General Clauses Act”, Central 
enactments only.  
  
It may suffice to mention that the proposed recommendations 
made in the 60th Report for m aking amendments in the General Clauses 
Act, 1897 will be a pplicable only to n ew Central statutes enacted after 
coming into force of the prop osed amending Act and hen ce there is no 
possibility of impact of any proposed amending provisions on the existing 
Central statutes.   
 
The Gene ral Clauses Act, 1897 is a consolidation of the General  
Clauses Act, 1868 a nd the General Clauses Act, 1887.  T he main object 
of these Acts as mentioned in the respective preambles of 1868 and 1887 
Acts  is to shorten the language used in the Central Acts as applicable i n 
India.  Hon’ble Mr. M.D. Chalmers, the then Law Member in the Council 
of Governor General, while introducing the Bill for 1897 Act, pointed i n 
the Council that the new Bill was not intended in any way to change the 
existing law.  He further stated that its object wa s simply to shorten the 
language of future statutory enactments. (see The Gazette of India, Part 
VI pp 35-6 dated Feb., 6, 1897). 
 
Section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 is the definitio n 
section.  T here are sixty six clauses in the said section which give 
meaning of words and phrases used in different statutes.  T he meaning 
of the words given in these definition clauses are applicable to this Act of 
 35 

 36 
1897 and all C entral Acts and Regulations made after the  
commencement of this Act, unless those Acts or Regulation contain  
separate definitions of their own or there is something repugnant in the 
subject or context.  The opening words of section 3 is as follows:- 
 
“3.Definitions – In this Act, and in all Central Acts and Regulations 
made after the commencement of this Act, unless there is anything 
repugnant, in the subject or context, ……” 
 
The words, “all Central Acts or Regulation made after the  
commencement of this Act”, indicate that definitions provided in this 
section would be applicable only to those Acts or Regulations which wer e 
made after 1897.  So far as the Acts or Regulations made before 1897, 
section 3 would not apply.  Therefore, it was hel d in State of Orissa v. 
Gangadhar Subudhi  ILR 1966 Cutt 102 that as the Provincial Small 
Causes Courts Act was passed in 1887, hence, definition provided in  
section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 does not apply to that Act. 
Similarly, Andhra Pradesh High Court in Fatima Fauzia v. Syed-ul-Mulk,  
AIR 1979 AP 229 has held that as Trust Act was passed in 1882, the 
definition of ‘good faith’ given in the General Clauses Act, 1897 is not 
attracted to the Trust Act.  On the same ground, Allahabad High Court in 
Lachmi Prasad  v. Lachmi Narain AIR 1928 All.41, also held that  
definition of ‘good fa ith’ given in the General Clauses Act, 1897 does not 
apply to the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. 
The General Clauses Act, 1897 also contains provisions regarding 
construction of Acts, Regulation, rules and bye-laws.  But t hese 
provisions are applicable only to those Acts, R egulations, etc., wh ich 
have been made after the commencement of the General Clauses Act, 
1897.  S o far as the Acts, Regulations etc. made before 1897, are 
concerned rules of construction specified in sections 5 to 13 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 would not apply to those enactments. 
 36 

 37 
 
In this connection section 29 of the Act of 1897 is relevant, which 
is quoted below: 
  
“29.  Savings for previous enactments, rules and bylaws. 
The provi sions of this Act respecting the construction of 
Acts, Regulations, rules or bye laws made after the 
commencement of this Act, s hall not a ffect the c onstruction 
of any Act, Regulation, rule or bye law made before the 
commencement of this Act, although the Act, Regulation, 
rule or bye-law is continued or amended by  an  Act, 
Regulation, rule or bye law made after the commencement of  
this Act.” 
 
This secti on 29 forbids the application of its provisions for the 
purpose of construction of such Acts, Regulations, rules or bye laws 
which had been made before the commencement of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897, even though they have continued in operation after the 
commencement of   Act of 1897 or amended by a subsequent legislation 
after 1897. 
 
This section 29  corresponds to  section 40 of British Interpretation 
Act, 1889.  It states as follows: 
 
“40. Saving for past Acts. 
The provi sions of this Act respecting the construction of Acts 
passed after the commencement of this Act shall not affect the 
construction of any Act passed before the commencement of thi s 
Act, although it is continued or amended by an Act passed after 
such commencement.” 
 
 37 

 38 
These provisions (secs. 3  a nd section 29 of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897) make it clear that the rules of construction of statutes and the 
meaning of the wo rds and phrases given in th e General Clauses Act, 
1897 would be applicable only to those Central A cts, Regulation, rules or 
bye laws which are made aft er the commencement of Act  of 1897.  As 
observed in the 60 th R eport of the Law Commission quoted below, the  
reason behind the above conclusion is that a particular statute should be 
interpreted according to the rules for construction prevailing at the time 
of its enactment.  Later changes in the rules of construction should not 
affect former enactments.  It is stated in the 60 th Report of the Law  
Commission of India at para 1.20 as follows: 
  
“1.20 Whether there should be one Act or two Acts 
Before making our detailed recommendation for revision of the Act, 
we consider it necessary to examine a few preliminary questions.  
One such question relates to the form which proposed changes 
should take.  The basic question is whether there should be one  
Interpretation Act, or whethe r there sh ould be two Interp retation 
Acts.  Need for making choice in this respect arises because a view 
has been put forth that the present General Clauses Act shoul d 
continue for the interpretation of the existing Central Acts etc. and 
a new full fledged interpretation Act s hould be proposed for the 
interpretation of Central Acts etc., to be enacted hereafter.” 
 
The Law Commission at para 1.21 of the 60 th Report observed  as 
follows: 
 
“No doubt, the initiation of a totally new interpretation Act (with 
only prospective effect) has an advantage inasmuch as the radical  
changes will not apply to existing Acts.  But the same object could, 
in a fair measure, be achieved  by suggesting new provisions for 
 38 

 39 
incorporation in the present Act, at the same time making those 
new provisions prospective. The proposal for having two Acts does 
not, in this respect have any peculiar merit.” 
     (emphasis laid) 
 
Again at para 1.22, the Law Commission has observed: 
“……As regards, the new provisions to be inserted in the A ct, care 
is being t aken to ensure that such of them as are likely t o create 
any difficulty will be prospective only…” 
Article 367 of the Constitution of India provides that unless the 
context otherwise requires, the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply for  
the interpretation of the Con stitution as it applies for the interpretation  
of an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India.  But, it is subject to 
any adaptation or modification that may be made under Article, 372.  
Now, question arises whether any amendment made i n the General  
Clauses Act, 1897 would affect the Interpretation of the  Constitution? 
The answ er to this question is stated in the 60 th Report of  Law 
Commission at para 1.28 which  is as follows: 
 
“Any amendment, additions or deletions which may be made in the  
General Clauses Act, 1897, would not affect the Constitution.  
Interpretation of th e Constitution  will continue to be gove rned by 
the General Clauses Act, a s in force immediately before the 
Constitution (subject to adaptations made under Article 372 of the  
Constitution).  T he Act cannot be so repealed or modified as to 
affect the interpretation of the Constitution.” 
 
The Commission concluded at para 1.31 as follows: 
 
“Our conclusion, therefore, is that the revision or amendment of 
the General Clauses Act, 1897 will not in any way, affect the 
 39 

 40 
operation of the Article 367; and the Ge neral Clauses Act, 1897 as  
it stood immediately before 26 January, 1950 ( subject t o 
adaptations made under the Constitution) will continue to apply.” 
 
 In this background, the Law Commission in its 60 th Report  
recommended insertion of new section 3 A and section 29A which states 
that proposed changes, in the definition section and rules fo r 
construction of Acts etc. would not affect the existing Central Laws and 
would apply only to future enactments. 
 
 The Law Commission in its 60th Report has  suggested few changes 
only. The Commission has observed at para 1.26 that the 
recommendations given in the  report are not nu merous or radical.  T he 
provisions of the said Act cause no serious difficulty which may 
necessitate any radical change in the Act. 
  
Therefore, the reco mmendations contained in th e 60th Report will 
not affect in any way the construction of any enactment which has been 
made before the date of im plementation of the  proposed amendments 
suggested in the 60th Report. 
 
The result is, that the most of the changes proposed in the General 
Clauses Act 1897 in 60 th Report of the Law Commission will be  
applicable only and only to statutes which will be enacted after the 
proposed amendments are enforced and not on t he existing enactments.  
Therefore, the Commission does not consider it necessary to undertake a 
fresh review of the aforesaid recommendations contained in the 6 0th 
Report. 
 
We recommend accordingly.  
 
 40 

 41 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Member 
 
 
 
(T.K. Viswanathan) 
Member-Secretary 
Dated: 01.11.2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 41 