 
Law Commission of India 
 
184th Report 
 
  
 
on 
 
 
 
The Legal Education & Professional Training and 
Proposals for Amendments to the Advocates Act, 
1961 and the University Grants Commission Act, 
1956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2002 
 
  
 
 
 

 2 
JUSTICE       LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
M. JAGANNADHA RAO   SHASTRI BHAVAN 
Chairman       NEW DELHI-110 001 
          TEL: 3384475 
       FAX:3073864, 3388870 
 
     Residence: 
     1, JANPATH, 
     NEW DELHI – 110 011 
     TEL: 3019465 
 
F.No.6(3)(62)/99-LC(LS) 
20.12.2002 
Dear Shri K. Jana Krishnamurthi ji, 
 
 I am forwarding herewith the 184 th Report on the “Legal Education 
& Professional Training and Proposals for Amendments to the Advocates 
Act, 1961 and the University Grants Commission Act, 1956”. 
 
 The Commission took up the subject of ‘Legal Education’, suo motu, 
as the said subject is fundamental to the very foundation of the Judicial 
system.  The Commission in the year 1999, issued a working paper 
proposing certain amendments to the advocates Act, 1961.  The scope of 
the working paper was wide and it contained five chapters.  Chapter I 
thereof was Introductory, Chapter II related to ‘Legal Education and 
Professional Training, Chapter III to ‘Professional Competence and Social 
Responsibility’, Chapter IV to ‘entry of Foreign Legal Consultants and 
Liberalization of Legal Practice, and Chapter V to ‘Management and 
Development of the Profession’.  However, in the present report, the 
Commission has confined its recommendations to the ‘Legal Education and 
Professional Training’ only. 
 
 The Bar Council of India (BCI), under Section 7 (1) (h) of the 
Advocates Act, 1961, is empowered to  promote legal education and lay 
down ‘standards’ of such education in  consultation with the Universities 
imparting such education.  The University Grants Commission, under 
Section 2 (f) of the University Gran ts Commission Act, 1956 (UGC Act) is 
also having power to exercise contro l over the Universities and affiliated 

 3 
colleges for prescribing standards of education.  The BCI may prescribe 
standards of legal education in consu ltation with the universities. L But in 
practice, it is not possible for the BCI to consult each and every University 
and there is no manner prescribed in the Advocates Act, 1961 for rendering 
effective consultation in this regard .  Therefore, in this Report, the 
Commission has proposed that the University Grants Commission should 
constitute its ‘Leal Education Committ ee’ consisting of various specified 
faculty members.  Th e Commission has recommended that the UGC Act, 
1956 be amended by providing a separa te provision for constituting the 
‘Legal Education Committee’ of the UGC.  It has also recommended that 
the UGC shall nominate three memb ers out of its Legal Education 
Committee, for the purpose of the ‘Leg al Education Committee of the BCI.  
It has proposed that, the Legal E ducation Committee of the BCI should 
also have one retired Judge of the Supreme Court and one retired Chief 
Justice or retired Judge of a High Court to be nominated by the Chief 
Justice of India.  Accordingly, it has recommended to amend section 10 (2) 
of the Advocates Act, 1961.  The Le gal Education Committee of the BCI 
should consult the Legal Education Comm ittee of the UGC.  It will have to 
fulfil the requirements of specified consultation process.  The procedure for 
consultation is provided in the proposed section 10AA of the Advocates 
Act, 1961.  Further, it is also r ecommended to elaborate the expression 
‘standards of legal education’, in the Act by amendment of section 7 (1) (h) 
of the Advocates Act.  
 
 The Law Commission has viewed  that accreditation and quality 
assessment of law schools in the count ry must be introduced by the BCI 
and UGC, so that healthy competition e nvironment may be generated.  The 
Commission is also of the view that  training of ‘Alternative Dispute 
Resolution’ system should be given to law students, lawyers and judges, in 
view of the recent amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(Sec.89) and observations of th e Hon’ble Supreme Court in Salem 
Advocates Bar Association v Union of India  2002 (8) SCALE 146 for 
following the mandatory procedure. 
 
The Commission is of the view that there is an overwhelming need to 
reintroduce appointment of adjunct teachers from lawyers and retired 
Judges on part-time basis. 
 
 In view of the Commission, it is necessary to impart professional 
training to the law teachers apart from the existing refresh course 

 4 
conducted by the UGC.  Accordingly,  the Commission has suggested to 
establish at least four colleges by th e UGC or by the Central Government 
in consultation with BCI, in the four corners of the country.  
 
 The provisions relating to recogn ition, de-recognition and inspection 
of Universities and law colleges are suggested for suitable amendments, in 
order to do away the conflicts in exerci se of powers of various bodies.  It is 
thus recommended that in the event of difference in the inspection report of 
the Bar Council and other bodies, a furt her inspection has to be done by a 
Task Force, as done under the All I ndia Council of Technical Education 
Regulations. 
 
 The Commission has recommended that a law graduate shall get 
training from an Advocates having 10 years experience in the Bar, and 
should also qualify Bar examination, be fore allowing him to be enrolled as 
an Advocate, as suggested by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in V. Sudeer vs 
Bar Council of India, 1999 (3) SCC 176. 
 
 In order to give shape to its recommendations, a draft Bill is also 
annexed with the Report to suggest the amendments in the Legislative 
form.  
 With warm regards,  
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
 
Shri K. Janakrishna Murthy, 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice, 
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 

 5 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS                                   PAGES 
                    
Ch. I  Introductory      1-8 
Ch. II Respective Roles of The Bar Council  
of India And UGC –  A  
Constitutional and Statutory Perspective 9-22     
 
Ch. III Membership of The Legal Education 
 Committee of the Bar Council of India 23-30 
 
Ch. IV The UGC Committee on Legal 
 Education and the Consultation Process 31-44  
 
Ch. V Standards of Legal Education, Legal  
Skills and Values (Mac Crate Report)  
and New Globalization Challenges  
and Accreditation     45-56 
 
Ch. VI Alternative Dispute Resolution training 
 for students as well as lawyers   57-63  
 
Ch. VII Adjunct Teachers from the Bar & Bench 64-70 
 
Ch. VIII Permissions and Inspections   71-84 
 
Ch. IX Examination System, Problem Method 
 and Training Centres for Law Teachers 85-93 
 
Ch. X  Education on Legal Education Literature 94-99 
 
Ch. XI Disaffiliation of College or University  100-101 
Ch. XII Training and Apprenticeship   102-116  
Ch. XIII Disqualification of Employees 

 6 
 Dismissed or Removed From Service  
and Section 24A     117-119  
Ch. XIV Summary of Recommendations   120-130  
Annexure Draft of Bill “The Advocates (Amendment)  
Bill, 2003”      1-10  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introductory 
 
 
1.0 The Law Commission of India took up the subject of legal education 
suo motu, as the said subject was seen as fundamental to the very 
foundation of the judicial system.  The Commission prepared a Working 
Paper in 1999 proposing amendments to the Advocates Act, 1961 (Act 25 
of 1961).  The paper contained five chapters, Chapter I was Introductory, 
Chapter II related to ‘Legal Educa tion and Professional Training’, Chapter 
III to ‘Professional Competence and Soci al Responsibility’, Chapter IV to 
‘Entry of Foreign Legal Consultants and Liberalisation of Legal Practice’ 
and Chapter V to ‘Management and De velopment of the Profession’.  We 
are, however, confining  the present report to ‘legal education’ only. 
 
1.1 Several responses and  repres entations were received by the Law 
Commission from the Bar Council of India, Bar Councils of various States, 
Bar Associations and members of th e Bar, some of th em accepting  the 

 7 
suggestions, while some others opposed the suggestions.  We shall initially 
refer to some of the important suggestions/representations. 
 
Response of the Bar Council of India: 
 
1.2 The Bar Council of India in its letter dated 3.8.2000, made elaborate 
suggestions.  It accepted some of the proposals, rejected some others  and 
suggested further amendments to so me sections.  These relate to 
amendments/new provisions proposed in working paper to sections 
2(1)(hh), 3(2)(b), 4(1), 7(1)(ic), 9( 1), 10(2), 9A, 7(1)(h), 24(1)(iiia), 
24(1)(f), sec. 24(1), sec. 24A(1)(c), sec.  33A, sec. 49(1)(ai), (aj), (ak), (al), 
(am), (ag)(agg)(ff), (ee)(ggg), (ff), sec.  49A, 45, 24(1)(b), 36B, 3(2)(a).  
We are not referring in this Report to all these suggestions in as much as 
the scope of the present report is limited and concerns only legal education 
and a few other related  matters .  In other words, we are not proposing, in 
the present report, to traverse th e entire ground covered by the Working 
Paper. 
 
Response of the UGC: 
 
1.3 The University Grant Commissi on, in its letter dated 16.9.1999, 
while welcoming the initiative taken by the Law Commission with regard 
to the improvement of Legal Education and quality of Legal Profession, 
referred to the  ‘Report of the Curriculum Development Centre, 1988-
1990’, headed by Prof. Upendra Baxi.  Pa rt-I of that Report runs into about 
100 pages and Part II runs into about 740 pages.  That Report was prepared 
by a team of expert academicians for the UGC during 1988-1990.  The 

 8 
UGC, in its letter remarked that unf ortunately in the Working Paper 
prepared by the Law Commission, no refe rence was made to the Report of 
the above Expert Committee. 
 
It further stated that the UGC Pa nel on legal education “was looking 
forward for better inter-action among UGC and BCI, among others.”  The 
UGC then gave its views with regard  to Chapters I and II of the Law 
Commission’s Working Paper.  It referred to the proposed amendments to 
sec. 7(1)(h) and sec. 10(2)(b). Seek ing greater representation for the law 
teachers in the Legal Education Comm ittee of the Bar Council of India it 
suggested that in the said Committee, it would not be nece ssary to have as 
members, the Secretary UGC  or the Secretary, Ministry of Law as was the 
case at present and that the Direct or of National Law School, Bangalore 
need not also be a member as proposed .  It was stated that the UGC was 
constitutionally empowered to deal with ‘Standards of Legal Education’.  It 
may here be stated that the above Expert Committee  referred to by UGC, 
in its Report also regretted that the B.C.I. had not consulted either the 
Universities or the UGC, at any stage.  Various other suggestions were 
made in the above letter on other matters. 
 
1.4 We may here add that a fre sh ‘UGC Model Curriculum’ was 
prepared  in the year 2001 by th e Curriculum Development Committee 
(CDC) constituted by the UGC in the year 2000. (This runs into 500 pages)  
In fact, the UGC panel on law had initiated the work of revision and 
updating of the LL.M. and LL.B. (Hons) syllabi prepared by the 
Curriculum Development Committee in  1988-1990.  It was stated that the 
Bar Council of India has already presented texts of the course for LL.B. but 

 9 
in as much as it did not formulate detailed subjects, the CDC was taking up 
the matter.  This Committee for LL.M. and LL.B. (Hons) consisted of Prof. 
C.M. Jariwala, Prof. N.S. Chandras hekharan, Prof. V.K. Bhansal, Prof. 
K.L. Bhatia, Prof. Mool Chand Shar ma, Prof. Hargopal Reddy, Prof. T. 
Bhattacharya and Prof. P. Leelakri shnan as Convenor.  The Committee to 
formulate LL.B. syllabus had eight members which included Prof. Ranbir 
Singh & Prof. M. Pinheiro also.  The New Report of the CDC of the UGC 
is dated 9.3.2001. 
 
Report of the Parliamentary Committ ee on Subordinate Legislation (1993-
94): 
 
1.5 The attention of the Law Co mmission has also been drawn to 
another Report, namely the Fifteen th Report of the Parliamentary 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation (1993-94)which is in seven 
Chapters, which deals with various aspects concerning the legal profession. 
Chapter VI of the said Report deals with ‘Continuing Le gal Education and 
Restructuring the Law Course’ and Chap ter VII deals with ‘Renewal of 
Registration’.  It appears that this Re port has not also been referred to in 
the Working Paper prepared by the Law Commission. 
 
Views of the Faculty: 
 
1.6 On the side of the Faculty , the Commission received the views 
arrived at in the  national conference of law teachers, viz., the All India 
Teachers Congress (22-25 Jan, 1999), held at the Faculty of Law, 
University of Delhi.  The said Conference was attended by law teachers 

 10 
representing over 460 law colleges in  the country.  The Congress was 
inaugurated by Justice S.B. Majmudar of  the Supreme Court of India.  The 
Congress published a separate volume  on the subject containing a large 
number of papers regarding various aspects of legal education. It also 
passed various resolutions.  It refe rred to the ‘Revised Curriculum’ 
prepared by the Bar Council of India (fo r 3 year and 5 year law courses).  
The main grievance of the entire F aculty drawn from all over the country 
was that the Bar Council of India was not complying with the requirement 
of ‘consultation’ with the Universities under sec. 7(1)(h) of the Advocates 
Act, 1961.  It was pointed out that unde r sec. 7(1)(h) , one of the functions 
of the Bar Council was 
 
 “to promote legal educati on and to lay down standards  of such 
 education in consultation with the Universities  in India imparting 
 such education and the State Bar Councils.” 
 
and the view was unanimously expre ssed that the Bar Council of India 
could not have revised a nd fixed the “curriculum” for law students without 
consulting the Universities.  It was ev en observed that the action of the Bar 
Council of India was ultra-vires of the provisions of the Act.  The Congress 
in its letter to the Commission date d 24.7.1999 went to the extent of 
suggesting that the Bar Council should not have any role to play in the 
matter of legal education or of fi xing up the curriculum and it should be 
vested in a separate body consisting of legal academics. 
 
1.7 Again, National Law School of I ndia University (NLSUI) organized, 
in conjunction with its 10 th Convocation, the ‘First National Consultative 

 11 
Conference of Heads of Legal Edu cation Institutions’ at Bangalore on 
12.8.2002.   The conference was inaugurat ed by the Chief Justice of India, 
Shir B.N. Kirpal and several Judges,  Professors and leading lawyers spoke 
on the occasion.  A draft of the final ‘issues and recommendations’ 
emerging therefrom has been forwar ded to the Law Commission of India 
on 5.11.2002.  The Report deals with ch allenges faced by legal education. 
It refers to academic goa ls of legal education; institutional structure; 
curriculum/syllabi; evaluation/examination; the difficulty in finding good 
teachers; technology and connectivity; class rooms; teaching tools and 
infrastructure; students; career opportunities and placements; Bar 
Examination/Apprenticeship, gove rnance; accreditation and quality 
arrangement; and finally financing.  The above Report dated 5.11.2002 sent 
by the National Law School has also  been taken into account while 
preparing this Report.  
 
Response of Association of Universities & Others: 
 
1.8 The Association of Universities ha s also sent up its views.  Various 
other individuals, Bar Councils or Bar Associations have also sent up a 
large number of representations. 
 
The Commission’s views: 
 
1.9 After the Working Paper, the Commission has now had the benefit 
of a variety of views expressed by th e various bodies.  It has perused the 
report of the Curriculum Developm ent Centre, 1988-1990 and 2001 of the 
UGC, the Report of the Parliame ntary Committee on Subordinate 

 12 
Legislation (1993-94),  considered the views of the All India Teachers’ 
Association of Universities 1999, and of the ‘First National Consultative 
Conference of Heads of Legal Educa tional Institutions’ organized by the 
National Law School of India University, Bangalore. 
 
1.10 The Commission feels that, in the light of the above views, 
particularly of  the Bar Council of India on the one hand and the Faculty 
and the UGC on the other hand, a deep er study  of the constitutional and 
statutory roles of the BCI and UGC is necessary.  These roles have already 
been demarcated by the constitutional provisions and by judgments of the 
Supreme Court and the High Courts.  As we shall presently show, the 
provisions relating to the jurisdiction or functioning of the Bar Council of 
India and the UGC/Faculty, have to be  ultimately harmonized. 
 
1.11 The respective roles of the Bar Council of India and of the Faculty 
have also been succinctly summarized  by the Law Commission of India in 
its 14th Report (1958), which was chaired by Shri M.C. Setalvad, the then 
leader of the Indian Bar.  We sha ll also refer to that Report.  The 
constitutional and legal position was c onsidered again in the Report of 
three-Judge Committee headed by Justice A.M. Ahmadi in 1994. 
 
1.12 The Commission does not propose to deal in this Report with issues 
relating to ‘Entry of Foreign Legal C onsultants and Liberalisation of Legal 
Practice’ nor with the question of  constitution and elections to Bar 
Councils or membership of disciplinary committees .  The Commission 
proposes to take up various issues wh ich are equally im portant and which 
would go a long way in improving the quality of legal education .  The 

 13 
subjects are: the respective roles of the Bar Council of India and the UGC 
in regard to maintaining standards of  legal education as  disclosed by the 
constitutional provisions in Sch. VII of the Constitution of India; the 
membership of the Legal Educati on Committee; devising an effective 
procedure for consultation by the Bar Council of India with the 
universities; need for the Bar Council of India and UGC to study various 
aspects of legal education; stream lining permissions and inspections; 
teaching of ‘problem methods’; training in ADR procedures; better system 
of examination  and establishi ng special centers for updating and 
improving the quality of teaching; a pprenticeship or training and Bar 
examination, etc. 

 14 
CHAPTER II 
 
Respective Roles of The Bar C ouncil of India And UGC –  A 
Constitutional and Statutory Perspective: 
 
2.0 At the outset, the Commission proposes to examine the existing 
Constitutional and Statutory scheme concerning legal education. 
 
The UGC Act & Entry 66 of List I: 
 
2.1 The University Grants Commi ssion Act, 1956 was an Act passed by 
Parliament with respect to the subject  matter of Entry 66 of List I of the 
Constitution of India, viz., 
 
 “ Entry 66, List I :  Coordination and dete rmination of standards in 
 institutions for higher education or research and scientific and 
 technical institutions.” 
 
The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the original Bill which 
preceded the UGC Act, states that the word “standards” in Entry 66 of List 
I means standards of ‘teach ing and examinations in Universities’.  It says 
that the  
 
“Commission will also have th e power to recommend to any 
University, the measures necessary  for the reform and improvement 
of  University education and to advise the University concerned 
upon the  action to be taken for the purpose of implementing such 

 15 
recommendations.  The Commission w ill act as an expert body to 
advise the Central Government on problems connected with the co-
ordination of facilities and maintenance of standards in Universities.  
The C ommission, in consultation with the University concerned, will 
also have the power to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made of 
any University….and to advise on any matter which has been the 
subject of an inquiry or inspection.” 
 
The Preamble to the UGC Act states that the Act is intended 
  
“to make provision for the co-ordination and determination of 
 standards in Universities.” 
 
In view of section 2(f) of the UGC  Act, the UGC has control over the 
Universities as well as affiliate d colleges.  In Premchand Jain  vs. R.K. 
Chhabra (AIR 1984 S.C. 981), the Supreme Court referred to Entry 66, List 
I as being the basis of  the UGC Act of 1956.  Later, in Osmania University 
Teachers Association vs.  State of AP  (AIR 1987 S.C. 2034), the Supreme 
Court observed: 
 
“The University Grants Commissi on has, therefore, greater role  to 
play in shaping the academic life of the country.  It shall not falter or 
fail in its duty to maintain a high standard in the Universities.” 
 
2.2 It was pointed out that the UGC could take all steps necessary to 
maintain standards, including fixing qualifications, written tests etc. and the 
UGC could withhold grants to the Universities if its directives were not 

 16 
implemented.  In University of Delhi vs.  Raj Singh: (1994 Suppl (3) SCC 
516), the Supreme Court held that qualifications for the teaching staff could 
also be prescribed by Regulations of  the UGC and the said Regulations 
would override any other legislation, even if made by Parliament, such as 
the Delhi University Act, 1922.  The Court observed, while dealing with 
the UGC Act, as follows: 
 
“These are very wide ranging power s.  Such powers, in our view, 
would comprehend the power to require those who possess the 
educational  qualifications required for holding the post of lecturer in 
Universities and colleges to appear for a written test…” 
 
 “These (powers) include the power  to recommend to a University the 
 measures necessary for the improve ment of University education and 
 to advise in respect of the ac tion to be taken for the purpose of 
 implementing such recommendations (clause (d)).  The UGC is also 
 invested with the power to perform  such other functions as may be 
 prescribed or as may be deemed  necessary by it for advancing the 
 cause of higher education in Indi a or as may be incidental or 
 conducive to the discharge of such functions (clause (j)).  These two 
 clauses are also wide enough to em power the UGC to frame the said 
 Regulations.” 
 
Thus, regulations made by the UGC could override any other statute  made 
by Parliament.  The recent decision of the Supreme Court in Preeti 
Srivastava vs. State of MP   1999(7) SCC 120, in relation to medical 
education, is of great relevance in  as much as the Court was there 

 17 
considering the provisions of anothe r statute like the UGC Act, passed by 
Parliament under the same Entry 66, List I of the VII Schedule, namely, the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, which specifically deals with 
“standards” of medical education.  The Pr eamble to that Act also states 
(like the Preamble to the UGC Act, 1956) that the Act is intended, among 
other things, to provide for the prescription of standards of post graduate 
medical education.  Section 20 of the Medical Council Act, 1956 deals with 
the constitution of the P.G. Medical Education Committee to assist the 
Medical Council in matters concerning P.G. Medical education and it states 
that in case there is difference be tween the Medical Council and the P.G. 
Medical Education Committee, the Medical Council “shall forward them 
together with its observations, to th e Central Government for decision.”  
Once Regulations are made by the Medical Council on the basis of the 
recommendations of the P.G. Medical Education Committee, 
they would 
be binding  on the State Governments.  Th e Regulations are not to be 
treated as merely recommendatory.  Standards of education under Entry 66, 
List I include calibre of teaching staff, proper syllabus , student-teacher 
ratio, calibre of students admitted to the institution, equipment and lab 
facilities, adequate accommodation fo r the college, the standards of 
examination, including the manner in  which the papers are set and 
examined. 
 
2.3 From the above decisions of the S upreme Court, the scope and effect 
of a law made under Entry 66 of List  I  dealing with ‘standards of 
education’ is quite clear.  The law, be it the UGC Act, 1956 or the Medical 
Council Act, 1956 (in so fa r as the latter authorized the laying down of 
standards of PG Medical Education), and laws made under the said entry 

 18 
for the purpose of laying down the ‘sta ndards’, which include standards of 
teaching, syllabus, examination, at th e admission level or later and they 
would override any other law made by Parliament. 
 
2.4 University Acts, passed by the St ate Legislatures under Entry 25 of 
List III or under old Entry 1 of List II would also be subject to the 
provisions of the UGC Act, 1956. 
 
The Advocates Act, 1961 & Entries 77 and 78 of List I: 
 
2.5 The Advocates Act, 1961 has been passed by Parliament by virtue of 
its powers under Entries 77 and 78 of List I of Schedule VII of the 
Constitution of India.  The legislativ e subject here is “practice in the 
Supreme Court or in the Hi gh Court.”  (see O.N. Mohindroo  vs. Bar 
Council, AIR 1968 SC 888),  ( Bar Council of UP  vs.  State of UP,  AIR 
1973 SC 231).  In fact in the latter case, namely, the Bar Council of UP  
case, AIR 1973 SC 231, the Supreme C ourt specifically held (see p. 238) 
that in pith and substance , the Advocates Act, 1961 deals only with the 
following subject-matter referred to in Entries 77, 78 of List I: 
 
 “Entry 77:  Constitution, organization, jurisdiction and powers of the 
 Supreme Court (including contempt of  such court) and the fees taken 
 therein; persons entitled to practice before the Supreme Court”. 
 
Entry 78 :  Constitution, organization (including vacations) of the 
High  Courts except provisions as to officers and servants of High 
Courts; persons entitled to practice before the High Courts.” 

 19 
 
The Advocates Act, 1961 thus deals with the conditions which a person has 
to satisfy before he can  be permitted to practice  in the Supreme Court or 
the High Court, but the Statement of  Objects and Reasons or the Preamble 
of the Advocates Act, 1961 does not expressly refer to ‘standards of legal 
education’ as do the Preamble and Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 
UGC Act, 1956 or the Medical Council Act, 1956.  It is only section 
7(1)(h) of the Advocates Act which refers to this aspect. 
 
2.6 In the view of the Commission, so  far as law courses in Universities 
which offer certain law degrees or di plomas (and where such students are 
notified that those degrees or diplomas will not entitle them to practice are 
concerned) which do not en able a person to practice , the Bar Council of 
India cannot impose mandatory conditions.    The UGC has the prerogative 
in such cases.  However, in th e laying down of standards by the 
Universities even in regard to such courses, though the prerogative is with 
the UGC and the Universities, they would benefit much by consulting the 
Bar Council of India.   In other words,  in regard to courses in law which do 
not lead to a professional career, the UGC and the Universities could, at 
their option, consult the Bar Council of India, though it is not mandatory.  
 
Width of Entries in one List of Sche dule VII of the Constitution not to be 
limited by Entries in other List or even same List: 
 
2.7 Whenever there are provisions in the Constitution referring to 
separation of legislative powers between a federal and state legislatures, it 
is necessary to examine the width of  the subject upon which the Federal or 

 20 
State legislature, as the case may be, is  primarily entitled to legislate.  This 
exercise is performed by examini ng the pith and substance of the 
legislation which is made with refere nce to those legislative entries.  
Certain well-settled principles of interpretation apply.   
 
2.8 Firstly, each entry in each list ha s to be given its widest scope, 
without any limitation.  Incidental encroachment into the field of 
legislation of another legislature is pe rmissible to a limited extent, i.e. if it 
is not in direct conflict with the la tter’s express provisions.  For example, 
where a federal legislature legislates on one of the subjects within its field, 
it may incidentally encroach into the field of a State legislation and vice-
versa, so long as it does not directly conflict with express provisions of the 
other statute.  As long as the pith and substance of the legislation is 
attributable to a subject within the fiel d of that legislature, as allocated by 
the Constitution, such a limited incident al encroachment into the field of 
another legislature, is permissible a nd is not liable to be struck down as 
ultra-vires. 
 
2.9 However, conflict, in the pres ent context, does not arise between 
legislations made under Entries pertaining to the Federal legislature and the 
State legislature.  Here the issue ar ises between two legislations made by 
the same legislature, i.e. UGC Ac t and Advocates Act, both made by 
Parliament.  In the case of the UGC  Act, 1956 and Advocates Act, 1961, 
we are concerned with two legislations in List I itself though they are made 
under different entries. 
 

 21 
2.10 If the UGC Act, 1956 is expressly meant to deal with standards of 
education, can the Advocates Act, 1961,  which is meant to deal with the 
‘right to practice’ be deemed as a law which is in pith and substance, one 
also relating to ‘standards of education’ ?  The point here is that, as stated 
above, both laws are made under different en tries in List I.  In that event, 
what is the principle of interpretation that is applicable? 
 
2.11 It was stated in India Cement vs. State of TN, 1990(1) SCC 12, that 
the constitutional principle mentione d in the preceding paragraph as 
between laws made by a Federal legi slature and a State legislature is 
equally applicable in the case of legi slation made under di fferent entries in 
the same List  by the same legislature.  In the above case, Sabyasachi 
Mukherji, J (as he then was) observed (see p 23, para 18): 
 
“In interpreting an entry, it woul d not be reasonable to import any 
limitation by comparing or contrasting that entry with any other one 
in the same list.” 
 
2.12 The same principle as in India Cement was reiterated by Sabyasachi 
Mukherji, J (as he then was) in Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd.  vs.  State of 
UP 1990(1) SCC 109 at 151 (para 67). 
 
2.13 In other words, provisions of the UGC Act under Entry 66 of List I 
dealing with standards of education and the provisions of the Advocates 
Act must be given as wide a scope as possible.  The UGC Act was passed 
under Entry 66, List I and deals with  standards of education while the 
Advocates Act owes its existence to Entrie s 77, 78 of List I.  That Entry no   

 22 
doubt, does not refer to ‘s tandards of legal education’ but deals with a 
subsequent stage, ‘the right to practice’.   
 
 
Harmonisation between powersof BCI and UGC: 
 
2.14 It must be noted that the Bar Council of India depends on the 
Universities for imparting legal edu cation which is necessary for the 
profession.  The Universities prepar e students for professional practice 
except where the law course is one fo r those who cannot practice.   This 
raises a question for application of the principle of harmonious 
construction. Section 7(1)(h) of th e Advocates Act, 1961 does enable the 
Bar Council of India to lay down ‘standa rds of legal education’.  Section 
7(1)(h) cannot be treated as in c onflict with the UGC Act, 1956.  The 
reason is that under section 7(1)(h) the BCI has to consult the Universities.  
The UGC can lay down ‘standards of education’ and the Bar Council of 
India can lay down the conditions for e ligibility of a law graduate to enter 
the legal profession.  If a student who joins a law university desires to enter 
the legal profession but is taught law in a manner not acceptable to the Bar 
Council of India, the law schools will not be serving the career class of 
students and, in fact, will find few ta kers.  Therefore, as a practical 
proposition, the law schools will have to  conform to the conditions set by 
the Bar Council of India, if they have  to supply prospective lawyers to the 
Bar.  At the same time, the Univer sities and UGC are concerned equally 
with standards of legal education, wh ether for practitioners or otherwise.  
The Universities are answerable to th e UGC in the matter of standards of 
legal education and so are the affiliate d colleges.    In other words, the 

 23 
subject of legal education comes with in the purview of two entities, the 
UGC and the Bar Council of India.  Precisely to ensure harmony, the 
Advocates Act in sec. 7(1)(h) has required consultation by the Bar Council 
of India with the Universities.  The two are partners with a common goal. 
 
2.15 Yet another aspect is that th e Universities and affiliated colleges 
employ thousands of  law teachers at various levels.  A large number of 
these teachers are highly qualified.   A good number among them have 
Doctorates or Masters degrees from India and several of them have 
Doctorates or degrees from reputed universities in the world like, 
Cambridge, Oxford, Yale, Harvard and Stanford and so on.  Several of 
these teachers have been teaching law for ten to twenty years or even more.  
It is incumbent, therefore, that thes e law teachers, who ha ve  ultimately to 
perform the function of teaching are consulted or allowed to express their 
difficulties or problems particularly wh en a new curriculum is introduced.  
The obligations of consultation are reciprocal and not one way.  There is 
ample need for the Universities to consult the Bar Council of India and 
likewise for the Bar Council of India to consult the Universities.  A fine 
balance has to be established with the mechanism of sec. 7(1)(h) of the 
Advocates Act which requires consulta tion with the Universities.     
Consultation means ‘effective’ consultation. 
 
2.16 In this connection, we may refer to the article “Revamping 
professional legal education: Some  observations on the LL.B curriculum 
revised by the Bar Council of India” by Prof. Gurdeep Singh published in 
the volume “Legal Education in India in 21
st Century: Problems and 
perspectives” (Jan 1999), published afte r the All India seminar at Delhi 

 24 
attended by Faculty from all over India.    The volume is published by the 
Delhi University Law Faculty.  The ar ticle refers to a large number of 
problems arising out of the recen t curriculum introduced by the Bar 
Council of India which problems could have found easy solution if there 
was effective prior consultation with the Faculty 
  
Here, one other aspect may be pointed out.  The Bar Council of 
India, by letter LE (Cir.No.4/1997) da ted 21.10.1997 had, after referring to 
the titles of the LL.B. courses and the title of the papers to be offered, left 
the details to be evolved by the Univ ersities.  The Bar Council of India 
stated in that letter:  
 
“The identification of the content and number of each paper in the 
prescribed courses is left to the discretion of the University 
Academic bodies.  The CDC Report (1988) Commissioned by the 
UGC may be followed by Universities while preparing the syllabi 
for the various courses.” 
(quoted from  pp. 1, 2 of the CDC Report of 2001 of UGC) 
 
 
2.17 The CDC Report 2001 of UGC, in fact, admits of considerable 
harmony in the process of consultation between the Bar Council of India 
and the Faculty but in our view,  the same has to be strengthened.   After 
referring to sec. 7 (1) (h) of the A dvocates Act, 1961 and sec. 12 of the 
UGC Act, 1956, the said Report  of 2001states (page 2):  
 

 25 
“In the field of legal education, there was, thus, a dilemma of dual 
responsibility of the BCI and UGC.  The CDC in the eighties were 
aware of this difficulty and sugge sted certain ways and means to 
solve the problems arising from the dual responsibility and called for 
more interaction , in the form of information sharing and 
consultation,  between UGC and BCI.  It is significant that BCI had 
an open mind  when they set out in 1995 for a reform.  They 
consulted the universities and the UGC law panel  while formulating 
the reforms for LL.B. courses.” 
 
The Report, however, says (page 2):  
 
“Although this cannot be descri bed as closer interaction , the gaps in 
common endeavors between BCI a nd UGC for reforms  in legal 
education were being fille d.  It is significant  that besides  asking to 
follow CDC Report in the preparati on of Syllabi, BCI resolved to 
accept some of the courses reco mmended by CDC.  Environmental 
law, human rights law and consumer  protection laws were made 
compulsory subjects.  Law and pove rty, comparative law, insurance 
law, law and medicine, women and the law and intellectual property 
were made optional papers.  Administrative law and labour law were 
promoted to the status of compulsory courses.” 
 
The CDC Report of 2001 of UGC thus accepts that there has been some 
consultation but it says th at ‘closer interaction’ is necessary between the 
BCI and UGC. 
 

 26 
2.18 It is in the light of the above  that the Law Commission proposes to 
recommend, a procedure which will ensure  ‘closer interaction’ between the 
BCI and UGC. 
 
2.19 While the obligations on both bodies are reciprocal in nature, 
however, one cannot ignore practical difficulties in the present form of sec. 
7(1)(h) which requires the Bar Counc il of India to consult all the 
Universities.  The Universities in whic h law is taught either directly or 
through affiliated colleges are large in number and make it practically 
impossible for the Bar Council of I ndia to consult every one of the 
Universities whenever it takes impor tant decisions relating to legal 
education.  If it has to consult each University, it will be a time consuming 
process.  The Bar Council of India a ppears to have bona fide felt that 
requirement of sec. 7(1)(h) is satisfied if some of the professors working in 
the Universities are invited to speak at certain seminars dealing with 
revision of curriculum.  In our view, such a procedure has to be modified in 
as much as a professor or two invited to a conference, may not be 
representative of the views of all the Universities. 
 
2.20 In as much as the Bar Council of India cannot be required to consult 
all Universities , the provisions of sec. 7(1 )(h) have to be amended by 
prescribing that the Bar Council of India must consult a body which 
effectively represents all the Universities.  
 
2.21 In order to solve the practical  problem and make consultation easy 
and meaningful, the Commission has felt it necessary to formulate a simple 
and effective procedure for consulta tion.  The consultation procedure 

 27 
between the Bar Council of India and the Universities must be simple and 
effective.   In this process, the Bar Council of India and the Universities 
have to cooperate and, as already st ated, work as equal partners having a 
common goal.   We shall deal with th is aspect in Chapter IV after first 
going into the question of membership of the Legal Education Committee 
in Chapter III.  Certain aspects to be discussed in Chapter IV depend on 
what we recommend in Chapter III.    
 
2.22 We accordingly recommend as follows:- 
 
“Inasmuch as the Bar Council of India cannot be required to consult 
all universities, as stated in secti on 7(1)(h), the provisions of section 
7(1) (h) have to be amended by pr escribing that the Bar Council of 
India must consult a body which effectively represents all 
universities and that such a body should be constituted by the 
University Grants Commission.  Th is requires amendments to the 
Advocates Act, 1961 and the University Grants Commission Act, 
1956.” 

 28 
Chapter III 
 
Membership of the Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India 
 
3.0 We shall initially deal with the i ssue of the membership of the Legal 
Education Committee of the Bar Council of India.  The Law Commission’s 
14th Report (1958) presided over by Shri M.C. Setalvad (see para 53, page 
546) referred to the recommendation of  the All India Bar Committee, 1953 
that the ‘Legal Education Committee’ should consist of 12 members of 
whom 2 should be Judges, 5 should be elected by the All India Bar Council 
and five other persons should be selected and co-opted from the 
Universities by the above seven members. 
 
3.1 But, the Advocates Act, 1961, in cl ause (b) of subsection (2) of sec. 
10 prescribed a membership of 10 members in the said Committee of 
whom 5 were to be elected members of the Bar Council of India and five 
were to be co-opted by the Bar Council of India from among non-members.  
It did not specify who were to be the other five non-members to be co-
opted. 
 
3.2 The Justice Ahmadi Committ ee Report 1994, for the first time 
suggested that the 10 member Committee should consist of five Bar 
Councillors, plus two from the hi gher judiciary, one from among 
academicians, and the remaining two, should be the Secretary, UGC and 
the Secretary, Ministry of Law, Government of India. The suggestion of the 
Justice Ahmadi Committee has been implemented by the Bar Council of 
India soon after 1995 and a retired Supreme Court Judge and a retired High 

 29 
Court Judge are now in the Committee as per the above recommendations.  
There is only one from th e academic community.  In other words, out of 
ten, five are Bar Councillors, two are Judges, one is an academician, and 
the Secretary UGC and Secretary, Law are the other members. 
 
3.3 However, in the Working Pa per prepared by the Law Commission 
(1999) the membership of a 15-me mber Committee was suggested as 
follows:  five from the Bar Council, fi ve from the faculty, and out of the 
remaining five, two to be from the Judiciary, and the Secretary, UGC and 
Secretary, Law are to be the third a nd fourth members and the fifth should 
be the Director of the National Law School, Bangalore. 
 
3.4 The Bar Council of India has strongly opposed the above proposal 
made in the Working Paper in as much as the existing ratio of Bar 
Councillors which is 5/10 becomes 5/15. 
 
3.5 On the other hand, the Faculty at  its deliberations at the All India 
Law Teachers Congress (Jan. 22-25, 1999)  was of the view that in a 
Committee of ten, there should be mo re representation to the academic 
community and that the Ahmadi Committee was wrong in permitting only 
one from the Faculty to be on the Committee.  Of course, a further 
suggestion was made that the Faculty alone must be concerned with legal 
education and that the lawyers and Judges have no place there. 
 
3.6 Similarly, the 12.8.2002 Conferen ce at Bangalore called the ‘First 
National Consultation Conference of Heads of Legal Educational 
Institutions’, in its draft recommendations observed (at p. 10) 

 30 
 
“The regulatory structure for legal education in India is 
currently seriously flawed and n eeds careful reconsideration.  
A typical law college has four masters  at a minimum: the 
University to which it is affilia ted; the State Government, the 
University Grants Commission and the Bar Council of India.  
These four agencies have va rying mandates, interests and 
constituencies and do not provide  coherent guidance for the 
improvement of legal education in the country.” 
 
It also says: 
 
There is wide concern among legal academics that they are not 
adequately consulted currently by any of these authorities.” 
 
“Of course, the further suggesti on is to form an All India 
Legal Education Council on the model of AICTE for technical 
education and that the BCI woul d then be responsible only for 
regulating entry into the legal profession and maintenance of 
professional standards rather than for legal education”. 
 
But, we feel that if ‘legal education’ is kept totally out of the purview 
of the BCI and its role is limited only to admission to profession and 
discipline of lawyers, it may not be able  to prescribe a definite course of 
legal education which can meet the needs of the Bar.   As  at present, the 
Law Commission feels that there are prac tical difficulties in the way of the 
suggestion to exclude the BCI totally  from legal education.  Such a 

 31 
decision cannot be taken without consu lting the Bar and the Judiciary.  We 
do not propose to go into this further suggestion for the reason given 
below. 
 
3.7 The criticism that the Ahma di Committee recommended only one 
member of the Faculty to be on the Legal Education Committee is, in our 
view, justified.  But, the other view, that the Bar Council and Judges should 
have nothing to do with legal educati on cannot be accepted in as much as, 
under Entries 77 and 78 of List I, th e subject matter of legislation is 
‘practice in courts’ and the Advocates  Act, 1961 is a law made for that 
purpose.  As pointed out in Chapter II, though generally, in the matter of 
‘standards of legal education’ the UGC or the Universities may have 
primacy, in the matter of standards of  legal education for those students 
who will practice in Courts, the primacy is of the Bar and the Judiciary.  
This was the view of the Seta lved Committee also in the 14 th Report.  But 
at the same time,  that does not mean  that the law teachers have no place in 
the fixing of  the standards.  In our  view, there must be discussion by the 
Bar Council of India with the Univer sities or with, as proposed, a body of 
legal faculty, representative of the law teaching commun ity in the entire 
country, to be nominated by the UGC.  We are of the view that the 
proposal made in this Chapter and the next Chapter (viz., Chapter IV), will 
balance the roles of the Bar, Judici ary and the law teachers and once the 
number of teachers in the Legal Edu cation Committee is increased, there 
will be no room for any grievance. 
 
3.8 Here, we may mention that in the next chapter, i.e. Chapter IV, we 
are recommending the constitution of a Legal Education Committee of the 

 32 
UGC, a body which will be representative of all Universities with whom 
the Bar Council of India will have to  consult for the purposes of sec. 
7(1)(h). 
 
3.9 Further, we have re -examined the issue of membership of the Legal 
Education Committee in the light of the responses of the UGC, Bar Council 
of India and the Faculty, to the Worki ng Paper.  We find that the grievance 
of the Bar Council of India that it has been given only a one-third share (5 
out of 15) is genuine and has to be accep ted.  The original ratio of 5 out of 
10 is to be maintained.  It is, theref ore, proposed to drop the idea of the 15-
member Committee as proposed in the Wo rking Paper and to adhere to the 
10-member Committee as at present making it clear that one half, i.e. five 
members, will be Bar Councillors.   As of now, the remaining five are non-
Bar Councillors.  We propose to make some changes in the composition of 
the remaining five and here the Bar Council of India can have no 
grievance.  Out of the remaining five  members, one will continue to be a 
retired Judge of the Supreme Court,  one other will be a retired Chief 
Justice/retired Judge of a High Court, to be nominated by the Chief Justice 
of India.  (It appears that such a  procedure is already being followed by the 
Bar Council of India).  Of the remain ing three to be nominated, the Law 
Commission agrees with the UGC that the Law Secretary, Govt. of India 
and the Secretary, UGC can be droppe d.   In those two places  now 
occupied by non-Bar Councillors, it is pr oposed to bring in two more from 
the faculty making it three from the faculty instead of one as at present and 
these three are to be nominated by th e UGC and the thr ee faculty members 
must, as stated in the next Chapter, be faculty members of the proposed 
UGC Legal Education Comm ittee and also be teachers actually in office.  

 33 
In case, during the tenure of the Bar Council of India’s  Legal Education 
Committee, any vacancy occurs in th ese three faculty positions either by 
retirement or otherwise, the UGC will have to nominate fresh faculty 
members who are in office, in replacemen t.  They must be of the rank of 
Law Professors/Principals of Law Co llege/Vice-Chancellors/Directors of 
Law Universities, as stated in Ch. IV. 
 
3.10 The retired Judge of the Suprem e Court on the Committee should, in 
our view, be the Chairman of the Le gal Education Committee in the same 
manner as at present, and shall have a casting vote. 
 
3.11 We would also like to recomme nd a separate provision enabling the 
Attorney General for India to partic ipate in the meetings of the Legal 
Education Committee whether on his own or on invitation by the Chairman 
of the Committee, and he may, if necessary, vote on any resolution. 
 
3.12 We, therefore, recommend that the Legal Education Committee of 
the Bar Council of India will thus be a committee representing the Bar, the 
Bench and the Faculty, as visualized  by the Report of the All India Bar 
Committee, 1953, referred to in the 14
th Report of the Law Commission of 
India, headed by Shri M.C. Setalv ad and will have five from the Bar 
Council of India, three from the facu lty, a retired Judge of the Supreme 
Court and a retired Chief Justice/Judge of the High Court.   The Attorney-
General for India can participate on his own or on invitation and he may, if 
necessary, vote on any resolution. 
 
 The above proposals will be made in the proposed section 10AA. 

 34 
 
3.13 We, therefore, propose as follows: 
 
 
(1) Section 7(1)(h) has to be amended by providing for 
“consultation” as proposed in sec tion 10AA to be inserted in the 
Advocates Act, 1961, with the Le gal Education Committee of the 
UGC constituted by the University Grants Commission. 
(2) Clause (b) of subsection (2) of sec. 10 has to be amended to 
provide for membership of Le gal Education Committee of the 
Bar Council of India representing different classes of persons.  
The Committee shall comprise of 5 members from the Bar 
Council of India, one retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India, 
one retired Chief Justice/Judge  of a High Court both to be 
nominated by the Chief Justice of India and three academicians in 
law to be nominated by the Un iversity Grants Commission and 
these three should be members of the proposed UGC Committee 
on Legal Education and all three of  them must be in office and 
one of them must be Director/V ice-Chancellor of a statutory Law 
University. The Chairman of the Committee, namely, the retired 
judge of the Supreme Court, shall have a casting vote. 
(3) The Attorney General for India can, at his option, participate in 
the meetings of the Legal E ducation Committee of the Bar 
Council of India and the Chairman  of that Committee shall be 
entitled to request the Attorney General to participate in the 
proceedings of the Committee and wh en he so participates, he is 
entitled to vote. 

 35 
(4) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Bar 
Council Legal Education Comm ittee shall be decided by a 
majority of the votes of the members present and voting and in 
the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have and 
exercise a second or casting vote.  It requires insertion of sub-
section (2A) in section 10 of the Advocates Act, 1961. 
(5) The Bar Council Legal Educati on Committee should meet at least 
once in every three months. 
(6) In section 10A of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the 
words, “every committee ther eof except the Disciplinary 
Committees ”, the words “every committee thereof except the Bar 
Council Legal Education Committee  and the Disciplinary 
Committees”, shall be substituted. 
 
 

 36 
Chapter IV 
 
The UGC Committee on Legal Education and the Consultation Process 
 
Section 7(1)(h) to be amended so that consultation by BCI will be, not with 
all Universities (which is imprac ticable) but with a new body to be 
nominated by UGC, representing the Universities: 
 
The UGC Committee on Legal Education to be constituted : proposed sec. 
10AA 
 
4.0 As stated earlier, section 7(1)(h ) of the Advocates Act, 1961 requires  
the Bar Council of India to consult the “Universities” for the purpose of 
laying down standards of le gal education.  We ha ve already pointed out 
that there are practical difficulties if the BCI has to consult each and every 
university which confers degrees in law.  It is one of the statutory functions 
of the UGC to deal with co-ordina tion and the laying down standards of 
education in the universities and therefor e, for the purpose of sec. 7(1)(h), 
the UGC can constitute a Legal Education Committee which is 
representative of all Universities and affiliated law schools.  Consultation 
under sec. 7(1)(h) must then be with  an academic body of law teachers to 
be nominated by the UGC.   In our view, that Committee should consist of 
ten eminent law teachers of whom  six shall be law teachers in office, two 
law teachers who have retired and two vice-chancellors or Directors of 
statutory law universities.  The said body can be called the UGC 
Committee on Legal Education .  It must also be ensured that the UGC 
nominates three law teachers who are members of the UGC Legal 

 37 
Education Committee and who are in offi ce as teachers, to be members of 
the Legal Education Committee of the Bar  Council of India, so that they 
can co-ordinate the decisions taken by the UGC Committee on Legal 
Education with those taken by the Le gal Education Committee of the Bar 
Council of India.   One of these thr ee must be a Director/Vice Chancellor 
of  statutory Law Universities. 
 
Consultation Process:  
 
(i) First stage of consultation should be with the State Bar Councils 
under sec. 7(1)(h), as at present: 
 
4.1 It will be seen that sec. 7( 1)(h) presently requires consultation 
between the Bar Council of India a nd Universities and the State Bar 
Councils.  It is not proposed to make any change in regard to consultation 
with the State Bar Councils .  But, the consultation with Universities, i.e. 
with the proposed UGC Committee of  academicians under sec. 7(1)(h) 
must be  effective  consultation.  Obviously, it will be convenient if the 
Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India first consults the 
State Bar Councils and the decisions arrived at as a result of the said 
decisions are sent to the UGC Committee on Legal Education for its views.  
The proposed amendment would be that the Bar Council of India will, 
through its Legal Education Committee, consult the State Bar Councils and 
after receiving their responses, will finalise the proposals which have to be 
sent to the Legal Education Committ ee of the UGC, as stated in this 
chapter:  
 

 38 
(ii) Second stage of consultation thereafter should be with the body 
nominated by UGC, as now proposed: 
 
4.2 The consultation by the Bar Council of India with the UGC 
Committee on Legal Education will be after the consultation with the State 
Bar Councils  and will have to be as follows. 
 
4.3 As stated above, the Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council 
of India will consult the State Bar C ouncils and will have to provisionally 
finalise its proposals.  This will be for the purpose of the  further 
consultation with the UGC Committee on Legal Education. The said 
proposals will then have to be sent  by the Legal Education Committee of 
the  Bar Council of India to the UGC Committee on Legal Education.  That 
Committee will have the benefit of the views of the three academicians 
who are also in the Bar Council of India’s Legal Education Committee and 
once the views of the UGC  Committee are finalized , the decision of the 
UGC Committee will have to come back to the Bar Council of India’s 
Legal Education Committee for disc ussion.  Once again the three 
academician members can explain the views of the UGC Legal Education 
Committee to the Bar Council of India’ s Legal Education Committee.  The 
two members from the Judiciary will also  consider these views.   Once the 
Bar Council Legal Education Comm ittee considers these views, a 
collective decision has to be taken in the said Committee by all the ten 
members, including the Chairman (the retired Judge of the Supreme Court).  
In the new scenario, it is expected that the BCI Legal Education Committee 
and the UGC Legal Education Committee will give due and proper 
consideration to each other’s views and arrive at a consensus.  Of course, in 

 39 
the absence of a consensus, the majo rity view of the Legal Education 
Committee of the Bar Council will have to prevail.    It is expected that at 
such a meeting, all the members and, in particular, the retired/sitting Judge 
of the High Court, will invariably be present to help in the emergence of a 
satisfactory solution to any problem arising out of differences between the 
BCI Committee and the UGC Committee. 
 
4.4 In certain situations, the Faculty  may like to initiate and place some 
suggestions before the Bar Council of I ndia.  There must, therefore, be a 
separate procedure whereby the UGC Committee on Legal Education may 
initiate and send its suggestions to the Legal Education Committee of the 
Bar Council of India.  In that event,  the latter Committee shall first consult 
the State Bar Councils and then after arriving at a provisional view, refer 
the same to the Legal Education Committee of the UGC.  The said 
Committee will give its final views a nd forward the same to the Legal 
Education Committee of the Bar Council of India. 
 
4.5 The second aspect which the Bar C ouncil has to take care of is that 
whenever a new curriculum is introduced – sufficient advance notice must 
be given to the law schools so that they can take steps to conform to the 
prescriptions.  Let us assume that ne w subjects in intellectual property or 
cyber law or environmental law are pr oposed to be introduced.  It may be 
noted that all the 460 law schools may not immediately be able to get 460 
law teachers in each of these subjects who are duly qualified and who can 
take up these classes.  There may be  other difficulties like non-availability 
of standard books which can meet the requirements of students.  There 
have been serious complaints from ma nagements and faculty that some of 

 40 
the Bar Council’s directives tend to be arbitrary.  These  reactions of the 
law schools cannot be treated as resist ance or disobedience.  The practical 
difficulties in the way of law schools must also be taken into account. 
 
4.6 For example, in the recent curri culum which has been circulated by 
the Bar Council of India, there are quite a good number of matters which 
perhaps require a second look.  Th e manner in which some important 
subjects have been put in the list of optional subjects and the manner in 
which two subjects which have not much  of connection, have been joined 
together in one paper, appears to re quire correction.   In a number of 
conferences and articles published by the Faculty, these anomalies have 
been pointed out.  It appears to the Commission that there is considerable 
force in the view of the Faculty th at effective consultation and greater 
interaction with the Faculty would have  eliminated such anomalies.  This 
view was also expressed at th e Conference on 12.8.2002, of Law 
Professors organized by the National Law School of India University.  
Several articles have b een published by experienced Professors in the 
volume published after the All India C onference of Faculty  at the Delhi 
University in Jan. 1999 entitled “L egal Education in India in 21 st Century, 
Problems and Perspectives” edite d by Prof. A.K. Kaul and Prof. V.K. 
Ahuja.     The suggestions of the Facu lty require serious consideration.  We 
have already referred to Prof. Gurdeep Singh’s article “Revamping 
Professional Legal Education: Some observations on the LL.B Curriculum 
Revised by the Bar Council of India” and we feel that it will be extremely 
useful to read the said article. 
 

 41 
4.7 It must be noted that standards of legal education relate to various 
aspects of legal education.   They are known to the Bar as well as to the 
Faculty.  Hence, they must be arri ved after a thorough study and after an 
effective interaction between the Bar Council and the Faculty.   Bar 
Councillors and Judges and faculty members of the Legal Education 
Committee must make an in-depth study of the subject of ‘Legal 
Education’ which is a specialized branch by itself.  It is not sufficient either 
for the Bar or Faculty to have a general or vague idea about Legal 
Education.  There is voluminous litera ture both Indian and foreign on the 
subject.  If one reads the Report of the Curriculum Development Centre of 
the UGC 1988-1990, one will notice that it is very elaborate and consists of 
various aspects of Legal Educati on and runs into 800 pages and the 
subsequent Report of 2001 consists of 500 pages.   There are several earlier 
reports.  (See also the articles in th e Journal on Legal Education available 
in the Indian Law Institute).  The recent curriculum prepared in 2001 by the 
National Law School University, Bangalore  is said to be  on the basis of 
the Mac Crate Report and Harvard models.  Of course, whatever is adopted 
must suit Indian conditions.  New cour ses are necessary in the light of 
liberalization, privatization and globa lisation.  The standards of legal 
education concern the entry to the co llege, the curriculu m, as also the 
method of examination at the time of entering the college and leaving it or 
entering the profession and the qualification of teachers etc.  There must be 
full coordination between the Bar Council and the Faculty on these matters. 
 
4.8 There is one other aspect here which concerns the implementation of 
the recommendations of the Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council 
of India by the Bar Council of India. The earlier Working Paper of the Law 

 42 
Commission suggested that the Bar Council of India should accept and act 
in accordance with the decisions of the Legal Education Committee of the 
Bar Council of India.  It is very gra tifying to note that in the letter of the 
Bar Council of India dated 3.8.2000, the Bar Council of India has agreed to 
implement the recommendation of its Legal Education Committee without 
raising any objections.  In the said letter dated 3.8.2000, the Bar Council of 
India has further explained the various matters in regard to which the Legal 
Education Committee could give its vi ews.  This is a very happy augury 
and obviates the introduction of any provision like sec. 20 of the Medical 
Council Act, 1956 which requires that in the event of any difference 
between the Committee of the Medical Council and the Medical Council of 
India, the matter will be referred to the Central Government.  The proposal 
of the Bar Council of India in its lette r dated 3.8.2000 is that sec. 7(1)(h) 
should read as follows: 
 
 “to lay down standards of profe ssional legal education in accordance 
 with the recommendations of the Legal Education Committee of the 
 Bar Council of India, which, inte r alia, includes curriculum, teaching 
 methods, examination, admission of students, number of teachers, 
 location and infrastructure requi rements, and management in 
 consultation with…” 
 
4.9 There can be no objection to this proposal.  Therefore, the views of 
the Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council are to be implemented 
by the Bar Council of India, – without demur. 
 

 43 
4.10 As to the co-ordination between  the Bar Council of India and the 
faculty,  it is advantage ous to refer to the 14 th Report of the Law 
Commission in regard to ‘Consu ltation process and the minimum 
standards’ to be prescribed by the Bar Council of India.  As to the meaning 
of ‘standards’, we shall dealt with this aspect in Chapter V. 
 
4.11 The 14 th Report of the Law Commission (1958) presided over by 
Shri M.C. Setalvad dealt with the above aspects in extenso.  It is 
worthwhile to refer to that Report.  It stated (p. 546, para 54) as follows: 
 
“We have already seen how in Engla nd, professional legal education    
and the admission to the prof ession are controlled by a body 
consisting exclusively of professional men.  There is no reason why 
a  similar control and regulati on should not be vested in the 
profession in  India.  Co-ordination between the bodies  
regulating professional  training and the Universities with a view to 
ensuring minimal  standards can be achieved in the manner 
indicated above.  In our view  the Legal Education Committee of 
the All India Bar Council may be  empowered to keep itself in 
touch with the standards of legal education  imparted at the various 
Universities  by  visits  and  inspection  as  in  the  case of the 
medical and dental professions  or  as  is done  by  the  American Bar 
Association in the case of the American Law Schools.  If the Council 
or its Committee is of the view that the standards prescribed  by a 
particular University in legal e ducation are not adequate or that 
institutions established by it or a ffiliated to it for imparting legal 
education are not well-equipped or properly run, it may decide to 

 44 
refuse admission  of the graduates of th at University, to the  
professional examination till the University  has taken steps to reach 
the minimum standards.” 
 
That is how the principle of th e Bar Council of India laying down 
minimum standards necessary for the profession came into existence.  
Obviously, the UGC or the University cannot reduce these standards.  Of 
course, they can certainly require higher standards (say) for LL.M and 
Ph.D. degrees even for LL.B they can lay down higher standards. 
 
4.12 In this connection, it is necessa ry to refer to the recommendation 25 
at page 550 of the 14th Report of the Law Commission which  is as follows: 
 
 “ 25:  The All India Bar Council shoul d be empowered to ascertain 
 whether law colleges mainta in the requisite minimum standards and 
 should be empowered to refuse recognition, for the purpose of entry 
 into the profession, of degrees conferred by institutions which do not 
 conform to the minimum standards.”  
 
Similar is the view expressed by the Justice Ahmadi Committee in 1994. 
After referring to the judgments of the Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka High 
Courts, the Committee stated: 
 
 “It is also the view expressed by Courts that the Bar Council lays 
 down only the 
minimal standards required at the entry point into law
 college and the enrolment point in to the profession.  (AIR 1972 AP 
 206 and AIR 1985 Karn. 223)” 

 45 
 
In the Karnataka High Court Judgm ent quoted by the Committee, viz. 
Sobhana Kumar  vs. Mangalore University  (AIR 1985 Karn 223), Rama 
Jois, J (as he then was) observed: 
 
“A combined reading of these provisions (Sec. 49(1)(af) and sec. 7 
of the Advocates Act) show that th e Bar Council is invested with the 
responsibility of ensuring standards of legal education and it is also 
empowered to prescribe the 
minimum conditions  of eligibility for 
admission to the law course…   
 
… Therefore, the universities cannot  prescribe any conditions of 
eligibility for admission to the law degree course which is lower than 
the conditions of eligibility prescribed by the Bar Council.” 
 
This  appears to be the legal position. 
 
4.13 It is hoped that, if the Bar Counc il of India and the faculty implement 
the proposals made in Chapters III and IV, the difficulties faced by the Bar 
Council of India in regard to consu ltation with all Universities and the 
grievance of the faculty in regard to insufficient consultation, will get 
resolved. 
 
4.14 The proposals are, therefore, for the constitution of the Legal 
Education Committee of the Univer sity Grants Commission of ten 
members, of whom six would be academ icians in office of the level of 
Professors, Deans or Principals or of equal rank and two law teachers of 

 46 
similar ranks who have retired and two should be Directors/Vice 
Chancellors of statutory Law Universities.   
 
4.15 The further proposal is in regard  to consultation between the Legal 
Education Committee of the Bar Council of India and the Legal Education 
Committee of the UGC and its accepta nce and implemen tation by the Bar 
Council of India. 
 
4.16 Provision is also to be made for the Legal Education Committee of 
the UGC to initiate and make sugge stions to the Legal Education 
Committee of the Bar Council of India, and the latter shall then follow the 
procedure of consulting the States  Bar Councils and the UGC Legal 
Education Committee. 
 
4.17 It is also proposed that the Legal Education Committee of the Bar 
Council of India shall, while passing resolution concerning standards of 
legal education, have regard to the following factors: 
 
(a) the time required for the law schools to provide the necessary 
infrastructure; 
(b) availability of books or facu lty members who are qualified to 
teach any new subject that may be introduced in the curriculum; 
(c) availability of funds with the law schools to implement the 
resolution or the time required to gather the necessary funds. 
 
4.18 The proposals for the constituti on of the UGC Legal Education 
Committee are contained in the propos ed amendment to the UGC Act and 

 47 
the proposals for the consultation pro cess are contained in the proposed 
sec. 10AA to be inserted in the Advocates Act, 1961. 
4.19 The consultation process will be as stated in para 4. 3, 4.4, 4.5 above 
and in the other paras of the Chapter. 
4.20 We, therefore, recommend that ne w section in the form of section 
10AA be inserted in the A dvocates Act, 1961 for providing 
consultation procedure  as follows:- 
Consultation procedure by the Legal Education Committee of the 
Bar Council of India: 
“ 10AA.  The procedure for consu ltation under clause (h) of 
sub-section (1) of section 7, shall be as follows, namely:- 
 
(a) in respect of proposals relating to standards of professional 
legal education, the Bar  Council Legal Education 
Committee, shall first consult the State Bar Councils and 
arrive at provisional proposals and the same shall be 
communicated to the Univers ity Grants Commission Legal 
Education Committee for its views on such proposals.  
 
(b) after receiving the views of the University Grants 
Commission Legal Education Committee, the Bar Council 
Legal Education Committee , shall consider the same and 
arrive at its final decision. 
 
(c) the final decision of the Bar Council  Legal Education 
Committee, arrived at under clause (b) shall be enforced by 
the Bar Council of India a nd shall be binding on all 
universities and all law colleges affiliated to universities, in 
so far as they relate to standards of legal education 
necessary for students to get enrolled at the Bar for 
practicing the profession of law;  
 
(d)  the University Grants Commission Legal Education 
Committee may  send any proposal in regard to the matters 
referred to in clause (a) fo r consideration of the Bar 
Council Legal Education Committee; 
 

 48 
(e) if any proposal is received under clause (d) from the 
University Grants Commission Legal Education 
Committee, the procedure  speci fied in clauses (a) to (c) 
shall be followed by the Bar  Council  Legal Education 
Committee. 
 
(f) the standards of legal edu cation as may be finalized under 
this section shall be the minimum standards necessary for 
students to get enrolled at the Bar for practicing  the 
profession of law in  Courts.” 
 
 
4.21 We, further recommend that the University Grants Commission Act, 
1956 be amended and a separate provi sion in the form of section 5A 
for constitution of the ‘Legal Education Committee’ of the 
University Grants Commission, as follows:- 
 
Legal Education Committee of the University Grants Commission  
“5A (1). The Commission shall c onstitute a Legal Education 
Committee of the University Grants Commission consisting of 
ten members of whom- 
(a)  six shall  be law teachers of the rank of 
Professor, Dean or Principal holding office as 
such or others of equal rank; 
(b)  two shall be retired law teachers of the  rank 
of Professor, Dean or Principal or others of 
equal rank; 
(c)  two shall be Vice-Chancellors or Directors 
of law universities established by statute. 
  
(2) The University Grants Commission Legal Education 
Committee shall represent all the universities and law colleges 
for purpose of clause (h) of sub- section (1) of section 7 of the 
Advocates Act, 1961. 
 
(3)  The University Grants Commission shall nominate- 
 

 49 
(a)  two law teachers in office from among the six 
members referred to in clause (a) of sub-section(1); 
(b) one member from among th e category referred to in 
clause (c) of sub-section (1),  
 
to be members of the Bar Council Legal Education Committee 
for the purpose of sub-clause (iv)  of clause (b) of sub-section 
(2) of section 10 of the A dvocates Act, 1961 (Act 25 of 
1961).” 
 
 
 
 

 50 
Chapter V 
Standards of Legal Education, Legal Skills and Values (Mac Crate Report) 
and  
New Globalization Challenges and Accreditation 
 
 
5.0 The provisions of sec. 7(1)(h) of the Advocates Act, 1961 enable the 
Bar Council of India to lay down the st andards of legal education required 
for students who seek enrolment to the Bar.   It is therefore necessary to 
refer to some aspects of the standards,  particularly those relating to legal 
skills.  In chapter IV we have dealt w ith ‘minimum standards’ to be laid 
down by the Bar Council of India.  Now, we shall refer to what is meant by 
‘standards of legal education’. 
 
5.1 Several efforts have been ma de from time to time, to improve 
standards of legal education.  The 14 th Report of the Law Commission 
headed by Sri M.C. Setalvad is one of the best and elaborate reports on 
Legal education.  It is something which every person must read.  The UGC 
Curriculum Reports 1988-90 and 2001 must also be read.  They were 
prepared by eminent professors, incl uding Prof. Upendra Baxi.  One must 
also read the recent Ahma di Committee Report which  contains extracts of 
letters of the Chairman, Bar Council of India and Chairman, University 
Grants Commission, and views of Chief Justices of various High Courts in 
the matter of Legal education.   Vari ous suggestions were given regarding 
the courses of study, attendance, entr ance examination, final examination, 
the lecture method, case method, problem method, constitution of 
Committees and membership, and n eed for apprenticeship and Bar 
examination.  In this Chapter, we are referring briefly to some of these 

 51 
aspects and we propose to lay empha sis on Legal Skills and Values as 
adumbrated in the Mac Crate Report of USA. 
 
Standards of Legal Education & Legal Skills: 
 
5.2 In the Bar Council of India ru les, Part IV (as amended upto 
30.11.1998) dealing with the subject of  ‘Standards of Legal Education and 
Recognition of Degrees in Law for admission as advocates’, Section A 
refers to 5-year law course after 10+2 or 11+1, Sec tion B relates to 3-year 
law course after graduation, and Section C refers to Rules regarding 
inspection of law colleges by Stat e Bar Councils.  Again Schedule 1 
contains a list of the Directives issu ed under Rule 21 in Section A or under 
Rule 14 in Section B.  Sch. II is th e questionnaire to be answered by any 
college which is seeking affiliation.  Schedule III deals with Proforma for 
Inspection of law colleges and Schedule IV with the Form of Annual 
Return to be submitted by the law colle ges.  We also have the Training 
Rules, 1995 made under sec. 24(3)(d) of the Advocates Act, 1961 which 
have been struck down by the Supreme c ourt as being ultra vires of the Act 
or rather beyond the rule-making power. 
 
5.3 Recently, new proforma format s have been prescribed for 
application seeking permission to ope n law colleges and in respect of 
inspections, compliance, responses in  respect to standards of legal 
education, recognition of degrees etc. 
 
5.4 The Ahmadi Committee Report dea lt elaborately with the methods 
of teaching.  It referred to the “ case method” introduced by Prof. Langdell 

 52 
of  Harvard Universtiy and to the “problem method” pioneered by Prof. 
Carl Llewellyn and Judge Jerome Frank and the Notre Dame Law School.   
The Report referred to Rule 21 of the Ru les and to Sch. I dealing with the 
5-year course which contains the following directive: 
 
“10. Every university shall end eavour to supplement the lecture 
method with the case method, tutorials and other modern techniques 
of imparting legal education.” 
 
The Report recommended as follows: 
 
“This Rule must be amended in a mandatory form and we should 
include problem method, moot courts , mock trials and other aspects 
in this Rule and make them compulsory.” 
 
In tune with the above recommendati ons, we find in the 5-year course 
syllabus that Rule 2(c) says as follows: 
 
“2(c): That the course of study in  law has been by regular attendance 
for the requisite number of lectures, tutorials, moot courts  and 
practical training given by a college….” 
 
5.5 Rule 3(2) refers to contact a nd correspondence programme, tutorials, 
home assignments, library, clinical work etc. – in all 30 hours per week but 
class room lectures should not be less than 20 hours. 
 

 53 
5.6 Rule 9(1) lists 6 subjects for part  I (compulsory), Rule 9(2) lists 21 
subjects for part II (compulsory), Rule 9(3) lists 15 subjects (optional) out 
of which three have to be selected.  Ru le 9(4) refers to 6 months practical 
training which will include the following compulsory papers: 
 
Paper I: Moot-court, pre-trial prepar ations and participation in trial 
proceedings – 10 marks for each, total 30 marks. 
Observance of trial in two cases, one  civil and one criminal case (30 
marks). 
 Interviewing techniques and pre-trial preparations (30 marks). 
 Viva-voice (10 marks). 
 
Paper II: Drafting, pleading (15 exercises) and conveyancing (15 
exercises). 
 Civil, criminal, writ petition and drafting sale deed, mortgage etc. 
 
Paper III: Professional ethics, account ancy for lawyers and Bar-Bench 
relations – 80 marks.    Viva-voice 20 marks. 
 
Paper IV: Deals with public interest lawyers, legal ai d and para legal 
services (100 marks). 
 
5.7 We may, however, proceed to re fer to certain skills aspect of 
standards of Legal Education. 
 
Professional skills & professional values – the Mac Crate Report: 
 

 54 
5.8 On legal skills, we will be refe rring to the Mac Crate Report of USA 
(1992) which is the Report of the “Task Force on Law Schools and the 
Profession: Narrowing the Gap”, pr epared by the American Bar 
Association.  This  was followed by subsequent resolution of the ABA 
House of Delegates in Feb,  1994 and the Report on Learning 
Professionalism 1996 (Chicago).     It is also necessary to refer to the study 
made by the Law Society of Engla nd and Wales on ‘Pre paratory Skills: 
Review of the Institute of Professional Studies (Auckland) 1990; the earlier 
Reports, namely, Crampton Report on Lawyer Competency (US) (1979) 
and the Carrrington Report on Training fo r Public Professions of the Law 
(1971), Washington. The National Law Sc hool, Bangalore is said to have  
prepared a new curriculum in 2001 based on the Mac Crate and Harvard 
curriculum, with modifications suited for Indian conditions. 
 
5.9 There are 10 chapters in the M ac Crate Report in Parts I to III.  
Chapter 5 of the Report refers to th e ‘Statement of Fundamental Lawyers 
Skills and Professional Values ”’, Chapter 7 refers to ‘Professional 
Development during Law School’, Ch apter 8 to ‘Transition from Law 
Student to Practitioner, Chapter 9 to  ‘Professional Development after Law 
School’, Chapter 10 refers to the Need  for a National Institute to Enhance 
the process of Professional Development (see 
http://www.abanet.org/legaled/publications/onlinepubs/maccrate.html). 
 
5.10 Under chapter V(A) thereof, th e legal skills referred are (1) legal 
research, (2) factual investigation, (3) communication, (4) counselling, (5) 
negotiation,  (6) skills re quired to employ or to advise a client about the 
options of litigation and alternative di spute resolution mechanisms, (7) the 

 55 
skill to identify the administrative skills  necessary to organize and manage 
legal work effectively and (8) fina lly, the skill of analyzing the skills 
involved in recognizing and resolving ethical dilemmas. 
 
5.11 Professional values, according to  the Mac Crate Report, include 
‘training in professional responsibilities’  and involve more than ‘just the 
specifics of the Code of Professional Responsibility and the Model Rules 
of Professional Conduct’; they should encompass ‘the values of the 
profession’, including the ‘obligations  and accountability of a professional 
dealing with the lives and affairs of c lients’.  These values are many, such 
as, (1) the value of competent represen tation, analyzing the ideals to which 
a lawyer should be committed as a memb er of a profession dedicated to the 
service of clients, (2) the value of st riving to promote justice, fairness and 
morality; the ideals to which a lawyer should be committed as a member of 
a profession that bears special respons ibilities for the quality of justice, (3) 
the value of striving to improve the profession; explore the ideals to which 
a lawyer should be committed as a member of a ‘self-governing’ 
profession, (4) the value of professi onal self-development, analyzing the 
ideals to which the lawyer should be committed as a member of a ‘learned 
profession’.  The Report also refers to  the relationship between the ‘skills’ 
and the ‘values’. 
 
5.12 Chapter V(b) of the Report refers  to ‘Fundamental lawyers skills as 
follows: 
 

 56 
(1) diagnosing a problem, generating alternative solutions and strategies, 
developing a plan of action, implementing the plan and keeping the 
planning process open to new information and new ideas. 
 
(2) identifying and formulating legal issues, formulating relevant legal 
theory, elaborating legal theory , evaluating legal theory and 
criticising and synthesizing legal argumentation. 
 
(3) knowledge of the nature of Le gal Rules and Institutions, knowledge 
of and ability to use the most funda mental tools of legal research, 
understanding of the process of devising and implementing a 
coherent and effective research design. 
 
(4) determining the need for factua l investigation, planning a factual 
investigation, implementing the investigative strategy, 
memorializing and organizing info rmation in an accessible form, 
deciding whether to conclude the process of fact gathering, 
evaluating the information that has been gathered, assessing the 
perspective of the recipient of the communication; using effective 
methods of communication. 
 
(5) establishing a counselling relations hip that respects the nature and 
bounds of a lawyer’s role; gatheri ng information relevant to the 
decision to be made; analyzing the decision to be made; counseling 
the client about the decision to be made, ascertaining and 
implementing the client’s decision. 
 

 57 
(6) preparing for negotiation, conducting a negotiating session, 
counseling the client about the term s obtained from the other side in 
the negotiation and implementing the client’s decision. 
 
(7) advise the clients about the op tions of litigation and alternative 
dispute resolution, and have a fundamental knowledge of  
(a) litigation at the trial-court level 
(b) litigation at the appellate level 
(c) advocacy in disputes between and Executive Forms 
(d) proceedings in other Dispute Resolution Forums  
 
(8) skills of efficient management such as formulating goals and 
principles, developing systems and procedures to ensure that time, 
effort and resources are allocated  efficiently; develop system to 
ensure work is completed at the appropriate time; develop system or 
procedures to work effectively w ith other people, develop system 
and procedures for efficiently administering the law office. 
 
(9) keep familiar with nature and sources of ethical standards, the means 
by which ethical standards are enforced, the processes for 
recognizing and resolving ethical dilemmas.  
 
5.13 The Mac Crate Report says that  law schools and the practicing bar 
should look upon the development of lawyers as a common enterprise , 
recognizing that legal education  and practising lawyers  have different 
capacities and opportunities to impart to future lawyers the skills and 
values required for the competent and re sponsible practice of law.    Each 

 58 
law school, the Report says, should dete rmine how its school can best help 
its students to begin the process of acquiring the skills and values that are 
important in the practice of law.  Law schools should be encouraged to 
develop or expand instruction in such areas as ‘problem solving’, ‘fact 
investigation’, ‘communication’, ‘counselling’, ‘negotiation’, and 
‘litigation’. 
 
5.14 One has to read the elaborate ar ticle by Prof. John J. Costonis, Dean 
of Vandebilt University: “The Mac Cr ate Report: Of Loaves, Fishes and 
the Future of American Education)  in vol. 43 (1993) Journal of Legal 
Education, p. 157, which refers to several important developments in the 
field of Legal education. 
 
5.15 We would think that the Members of Legal Education Committee of 
the Bar Council of India and UGC should study the above Report and 
various subsequent modifications of the same.  Criticism of the Report is 
found in other articles in the Journa l on Legal Education.    The Bar 
Council and UGC committees must also  look into similar Reports in UK, 
Canada and Australia so that our standards match with standards elsewhere 
and we are able to produce, in a ll our 460 and odd law schools and the 102 
universities which offer lega l education, students of  the same calibre and 
knowledge.  Apart from that, in the cont ext of liberalization, privatization 
and globalisation, we have to keep pace with international standards. 
 
5.16 The emergence of new economy – globalisation, privatization and 
deregulation have thrown up new cha llenges.  There are today 
revolutionary changes in informati on, communication and transportation 

 59 
technologies which require correspondi ng changes in the legal system.  
Many highly specialized areas of law like intellectual property, corporate 
law, cyber law, human rights, alternativ e dispute resolution, international 
business transactions, have to be in troduced in all our law schools.  The 
opening of trade and capital markets as  a result of globalisation and the 
retreat of the State from traditional ro les, have raised new legal issues 
concerning ways in which poor and marginalized sections can protect 
themselves from further impoverishment.  Special emphasis has to be made 
on criminal justice.  The very natu re of law, legal institutions and law 
practice are in the midst of paradigm shifts. 
 
5.17 Legal education must seek to serve distinct interdisciplinary 
knowledge domains – law and society,  law, science and technology; law, 
economics, commerce and management.  To that extent, certain new law 
subjects should be introduced in the five year course of LLB in the first and 
second years. 
 
5.18 Teaching must focus on building up  the student, skills of analysis, 
language, drafting and argument.  Teach ers must bear in mind that while 
most of the students may choose a pr ofessional career as a lawyer, some 
others may choose a judicial career or career as a legal consultant or law 
officer in government or an academic career. 
 
5.19 Alternative Dispute Resolution systems – mediation, conciliation, 
arbitration etc. must be and remain as a  compulsory subject. 
 

 60 
5.20 The curriculum should not make th e mandatory element too large but 
subjects which are in need in the bulk of  the courts in the mofussil, in the 
civil and criminal law, must be mandatory.  While subjects mostly in use in 
the courts at the grass-root level must be mandatory and some new subjects 
can also be made mandatory, care must be taken to give more choice to the 
students in the optional subjects. 
 
5.21 Syllabus could be structured not  merely on the basis of mandatory 
subjects but also on basis of “credits” as done in the National Law School. 
 
5.22 Accreditation and quality assessment of  law schools must be 
introduced by the UGC & BCI fastly to build up a sense of competition 
between the different law schools.   Legal education institutions are not 
today adequately subject to a rigor ous system of quality assessment and 
accreditation processes.   The va rious well-known parameters for 
evaluating the performance of a law sc hool must be laid down by the UGC 
and the BCI and annual rating must be given to each law school and 
published in the internet to enable prospective students to compete for 
admission to the best law schools. 
 
5.23 If necessary, this task may be  performed by the UGC and BCI by 
taking the help of professional ag encies who are well versed in 
accreditation processes of law schools.   There must also be transparency 
about the quality of the assessment. 
 
5.24 We, therefore, recommend substitution of the existing clause (h) of 
subsection (1) of section 7 which mere ly refers to “promotion of legal 

 61 
education and laying standards in c onsultation with the Universities and 
State Bar Councils” as follows: 
 
(a) for clause (h), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“(h) to promote legal education and lay down standards 
of such education in  accordance with the 
recommendations of the Bar Council Legal Education 
Committee arrived at in the manner specified in section 
10AA including, in the matter of-  
 
(i) the prescription of standards relating to 
curriculum, admission of students, appointment 
and qualification of teachers; 
(ii) the appointment of adjunct teachers from the 
Bar and from among the retired judges; 
(iii) the prescription of cond itions of service of  the  
law teachers; 
(iv) the prescription of student-teacher ratio; 
(v) the laying down of guidelines for adopting 
different teaching methods;  
(vi) specifying the conditions as to the location of 
law colleges, infrastru cture, library and 
management; 
(vii) promoting excellence in  legal education for the 
purposes of the accreditation scheme if any, 
introduced by the University Grants 
Commission; 
(viii) promoting alternative dispute resolution as a 
subject of academic study in the law schools for 
students; 
(ix) promoting continuing education on alternative 
dispute resolution  for legal practitioners; 
 

 62 
Chapter VI 
Alternative Dispute Resolution training for students 
as well as lawyers 
 
6.0 The Commission has felt it expedien t to add a sepa rate chapter on 
‘Alternative Dispute Resolution’ both for students at the law schools and 
for lawyers who are already at the Bar. 
 
6.1 Recently, Parliament enacted new sec. 89 in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 by requiring every civil suit to  mandatorily  go through 
the ADR process, however, giving the parties the option to choose one or 
other of the processes – like arbitr ation, mediation, conciliation and 
settlement through Lok Adalats.  Thes e provisions have come into force 
from 1.7.2002. 
 
6.2 Parliament enacted these provisions into our civil procedure with a 
view to lessen the burden of the civil courts and to save money and time for 
the litigants.  But, unfortunately, the s ubject of ADR is not familiar to most 
of the lawyers at the Bar . Not only are they not familiar but there is some 
kind of antagonism or disbelief in the efficacy of these systems.  Lawyers 
and judges are known for their conserva tism.  This conservative experience 
regarding ADR is not peculiar to our country. Even in advanced countries 
in America, Europe and in the Co mmonwealth when, over just about 20 
years ago, these ADR systems were proposed there was resistance from the 
lawyers and Judges.  There is vast literature on this aspect.  But over a 
period, the lawyers and the litigants in  this connection have realized and 
recognized the utility of these systems.  In those countries, in just about 20 

 63 
years, the number of civil matters settled at the stage before trial, has risen 
to nearly 90% and only 10% of cases are going for trial. 
 
6.3 Recently, the Supreme Court had occas ion to deal with the utility of 
ADR systems and we shall refer to the said judgment in Salem Advocate 
Bar Assn.  v. Union of India , 2002 (8) SCALE 146.   Speaking for the 
Bench, after referring to sec. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, Kirpal CJ 
observed as follows: (see para 9 to 12) 
 
“It is quite obvious that the reason why sec. 89 has been inserted is 
to try and see that all the cases which are filed in court need not 
necessarily be decided by the court its elf.  Keeping in mind, the laws 
delays and the limited number of J udges which are available, it has 
now become imperative that resort should be had to Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Mechanism with a view to bring an end litigation 
between the parties at an early date.  The Alternative Dispute 
Resolution (ADR) Mechanism as contemplated by sec. 89 is 
arbitration or conciliation or judi cial settlement including settlement 
through Lok Adalat or mediation.  S ubsection (2) of sec. 89 refers to 
different Acts in relation to arb itration, conciliati on or settlement 
through Lok Adalat, but with regard to mediation, sec. 89(2)(d) 
provides that the parties shall follow the procedure as may be 
prescribed.  Sec. 89(2)(d), therefor e, contemplates appropriate rules 
being framed with regard to mediation. 
 
In certain countries of the world where ADR has been successful, to 
the extent of over 90 per cent of th e cases are settled out of court, 

 64 
there is a requirement that the parties to the suit must indicate the 
form of ADR which they would like to resort to during the pendency 
of the trial of the suit.   If the pa rties agree to arbitration, then the 
provisions of the Arbitration a nd Conciliation Act,  1996 will apply 
and that case will go outside the str eam of the court but resorting to 
conciliation or judicial settlement or  mediation with a view to settle 
the dispute would not ipso facto ta ke the case outside the judicial 
system.  All that this means is  that effort has to be made  to bring 
about an amicable settlement  between the partie s but if conciliation 
or mediation or judicial settlement  is not possible, despite efforts 
being made, the case will ultimately go to trial. 
 
Sec. 89 is a new provision a nd even though arbitration or 
conciliation has been in place as a m ode for settling the dispute, this 
has not really reduced the burden on th e courts.  It does appear to us 
that modalities have to be formulat ed for the manner in which sec. 
89 and, for that matter, the ot her provisions which have been 
introduced by way of amendments, may have to be in operation.  All 
counsel are agreed that for this purpose, it will be appropriate if a 
Committee is constituted so as to en sure that the amendments made 
become effective and result in quicker dispensation of justice. 
 
………………   This Committee may consider devising a model 
case management formula as well as rules and regulations which 
should be followed while taking rec ourse to the ADR referred to in 
sec. 89.  The model rules, with or without modification, which are 

 65 
formulated may be adopted by the High Courts concerned for giving 
effect to sec. 89(2)(d).” 
 
In the light of the above judgment,  it is clear that every case must 
compulsorily pass through a process where an attempt is made for 
settlement by ADR procedures. 
 
6.4 The Commission is, therefore, of  the view that ADR procedures 
must form and continue as a  compulsory subject in all law schools and that 
there is urgent need for training lawy ers, who are already practising in the 
courts, in these ADR procedures.   
 
Courts must be recognized as centers for adjudication or settlement: 
 
6.5 According to age old and popul ar conception, courts were 
recognized only as places where disputes are adjudicated by a competent 
judge in a court established by the State.    But, these age old concepts have 
now undergone a complete transformati on.   According to Prof. Frank EA 
Sander, today, the status of the court is different.  Today, the court is also a 
place which encourages settlement.  Prof. Sander’s vision was that the: 
 
“court  was not simply a courthouse but a dispute resolution centre  
where the grievant, with the aid of a screening clerk, would be 
directed to the process (or sequen ce of processes) most appropriate 
to a particular type of case”  (Sander, Frank, EA ‘Varieties of 
Dispute processing’ 707 RD 111 quoted in ‘Dispute Resolution’ by 
Goldberg, Sander and Rogers, 3
rd Ed, 1999) 

 66 
 
The law students, the Bar and the Bench  must, therefore, consider that 
practice in courts is no longer confined to developing skills in advocacy but 
also skills in ADR procedures. 
 
6.6 In an adversarial system, lawyer s have grown to view courts as 
places for a combat or a legal fight.  Law students and lawyers must be 
trained  not merely to speak for their c lients but to listen to the views of the 
opponent and see if an adjustment can  be made which will save time and 
money for the litigants and incidentally save time for the courts.   If some 
cases are settled, courts can deal faster  more complex or important cases or 
cases relating to criminal offences etc. which must necessarily be 
adjudicated by the courts. 
 
If the training in respect of ADR pr ocedures starts right from the law 
school, a lawyer who has gone through that  training or prospect will not be 
averse to a system of settlement by ADR methods.   A culture different 
from the one now prevailing has to be de veloped and this has to be started 
in right earnest from the law school level.   Now that sec. 89 imposes a 
mandate that every case must go th rough ADR processes. ADR processes 
must be made a 
compulsory subject in the law school for students. 
 
But, the more important thing today is that l awyers at the Bar,  have 
not had sufficient knowledge of the techniques relating to the ADR systems 
or the ground rules or the ethical asp ects of the system, - such as those 
relating to confidentiality – but are co mpelled to participate in the ADR 
processes by virtue of the mandate of sec. 89 of the Code of Civil 

 67 
Procedure, even though they have not ha d any training while at college or 
at the bar so far in regard to those ADR processes. 
 
6.7 A look at the vast literature on ADR systems shows that the subject 
does require considerable  training to be  given to lawyers.   The norms and 
the nuances and the rules of the game have first to be learnt.  There are 
several standard books on the subject.  There is voluminous literature that 
can be immediately accessed through the In ternet even in remote parts of 
the country. 
 
6.8 In order to familiarize the lawy ers at the Bar to ADR procedures, 
there is urgent need to go about trai ning in ADR systems more or less on a 
‘war footing’.   The Bar Council of India a nd Bar Associations and Indian 
Law Institute and its Branches and ot her recognized organizations like the 
ICADR must step in to start training in ADR systems urgently (The High 
Courts and Districts courts must start training in ADR system for Judicial 
officer). 
 
6.9 We have introduced a system into  our civil law by virtue of sec. 89 
of the Code of Civil Procedure w.e.f. 1.7.2002 before the Bar is able to 
accept it, or recognize its worth, much less implement it.  In text books on 
the subject, hundreds of pages are wr itten on each of the techniques of 
mediation, conciliation, negotiation, settlement a nd arbitration, about 
which our lawyers are not quite familiar.   
 
6.10 One has to first learn which of th ese procedures is suitable to a given 
case and if so, how to go about it. 

 68 
 
It is in the light of the above urgency of situation that the Law 
Commission has introduced   a separate  chapter on ADR in this Report to 
emphases that  (1) law students and (2) lawyers who are at the Bar –must 
be trained in the ADR systems. 
 
6.11 It appears that Bar Council of India has already treated ADR as a 
compulsory subject (see page 92 of the UGC Model Curriculum 2001).  It 
also appears that the UGC Curricu lum Report 2001 has accepted the said 
recommendation as is clear from the same paragraph of the Report.   
 We, therefore, recommend that cl ause (h) of sub-section (1) of 
section 7 be amended for enabling th e Bar Council of India to promote 
ADR as a subject of academic study in the law school for students and also 
to promote continuing education on ADR for legal practitioner.   
 We, also recommend that the Hi gh Courts, BCI, State Bar Councils, 
the Indian Law Institute, the ICADR a nd similar organisations should start 
ADR training programmes for lawyers a nd judicial officers.  The training 
could be a short term one for one week, or it may a one-month certificate 
course or a six-month/one-year diploma course. 

 69 
Chapter VII 
Adjunct Teachers from the Bar & Bench 
 
7.0 One of the important recommendations of the Mac Crate Report 
relates to the need not only for permanent full time faculty but also to 
 
“make appropriate use of skilled and experienced practicing lawyers 
and Judges in professional skills”,  
and receive guidance, from part- time adjunct teachers drawn from 
practicing lawyers and retired Judges. 
 
The Report also refers to ‘apprentice programmes’. 
 
7.1 From the time-old method of ‘lect ures’, the Langdel’s ‘case method’, 
and Prof Llewellyn and Judge Jerome Frank’s ‘problem method’, we have 
now reached the new method of training the students in various ‘skills and 
values’ with the help of faculty a nd the ‘adjunct faculty’ of practicing 
lawyers and judges, as advocated in the Mac Crate Report. 
 
7.2 Andre Thomas Starkis and others  refer in ‘Meeting the Mac Crate 
objectives (affordably): Massachusetts  Law School: (Vol. 48) Journal of 
Legal Education (1998) at p. 231 to a combination of faculty, lawyers and 
judges, as follows: (p. 231) 
 
“The Mac Crate Report challenged the traditionalist’s view of legal 
education because it proceeded from the premises that preparing law 
students to practice  law is the business of law schools…. 

 70 
Massachusetts Law School (MSL) has accomplished this….   The 
keys have been a heavy reliance on practitioners and judges to teach, 
a small full time faculty that not only teaches but mentors a 
permanent group of 
adjuncts, a shared commitment to teaching….” 
 
and at p. 232: 
 
“With the exception of faculty members who founded MSL some ten 
years ago, all but  one of the full time faculty were recruited from the 
ranks of the schools’ adjuncts.   At present nearly half of all course 
hours each year are taught by adjuncts drawn from the ranks of 
working lawyers and judges.” 
 
7.3 The reason why lawyers and judges are actively involved in so far as 
the teaching of law schools is stated as follows: 
 
“The school’s view is that, a lthough teaching involves a different 
(but not entirely distinct) set of skills from lawyering or adjudication, 
those with relevant experience are far better teachers on the whole 
than those whose knowledge is largely academic.” 
 
7.4 The Massachusetts view is that  ‘reliance on adjuncts provides depth 
and benefit to the curriculum at a re latively low cost.  To hire full time 
faculty with as much knowledge and experience (as lawyers and judges) 
would be very expensive.   They say that  
 

 71 
“And there is no need to fit square-peg faculty into round-hole 
courses.” 
 
7.5 In several laws schools in US, between 20% to 40% of the credit 
hours are allocated to the adjuncts, that is the practising lawyers and 
judges. 
 
 Prof. Jonathan Rose of Arizona Un iversity in his article ‘The Mac 
Crate Reports’ Restatement of Legal E ducation (Vol. 44) (1994) Journal of 
Legal Education 548 says (at p. 559): 
 
“The report does recognize that law schools cannot produce mastery 
(of skills) without some help from the bar” 
 
He again says at p. 564: 
 
“Many academics lack the intere st, even if they have the 
competence, to devote a large porti on of their professional life to 
skills training.  Part of the expl anation lies in traditional academic 
hiring standards and promotion and tenure culture.” 
 
7.6 Donald J. Weidmen in his article “The Crisis of Legal Education, a 
wake-up call for faculty” (Vol. 47) (1997) Journal of Legal Education p. 92 
says: 
 

 72 
“There are equally important que stions about the appropriate 
admixture of faculty scholarship and whether too much of it is 
directed only towards often academics.” 
 
and refers to Graham C. Lilly “Law  Schools without Lawyers? Winds of 
change in Legal Educa tion” 81 Va L Rev p 1921 (1995) and to Harry T. 
Edward’s article “The Growing Disj unction between Lega l Education and 
the Legal Profession” 91 Mich. L Rev 34 (1992) and says at p. 103: 
 
“Because of the tremendous gap between academic lawyers and 
practicing lawyers, an affirmativ e action program to integrate law 
faculties into the profession  will be required.  Most schools bring in 
a significant number of Judges and practicing attorneys  as adjunct 
teachers, guest lecturers, and advisers to students.  The problem at 
many law schools is that the faculty don’t get out enough.  Schools 
should work with bench, the bar and government agencies to have 
professors in residence, faculty as speakers, facu lty team teaching 
with the bench and the bar, and so forth.” 
 
and laments that there is far little communication between legal academics 
and members of the practising bar.   He thinks it is imperative that more 
faculty take interest with the bench and bar. 
 
7.7 Prof. Eleanor W. Myers in her “Teaching Good and Teaching Well: 
Integrating Values with Theory and Practice” (Vol. 47) (1997) Journal of 
Legal Education p. 401 (at p. 407) says: 
 

 73 
“The adjunct teachers teach the skills asp ects of the simulations and 
provide feedback on the weekly written work.  We choose the 
adjunct faculty from a variety of pr actice settings – urban, suburban, 
outside and inside counsel, …. 
 
Our adjunct faculty are indispensable .   They provide a ‘realness’ to 
the program by bringing fresh and concrete examples from their 
practice.   They lend credibility to  the problems when they tell the 
students that these things actually  happen and lawyers actually deal 
with them.  …. Their presence, in an explicit and articulated 
partnership with us faculty, bridges the so called “gap”  or 
“disjunction” between the law school and practice more effectively 
than any other model we have encountered. 
 
The adjunct teachers follow the prescribed curriculum, which 
includes assigned readings as skills  development and weekly written 
assignments.  They spend most of their classroom time commenting 
on students’ performance and giving practical advice.  We arrange 
for the adjuncts to be trained in  the National Institute of Trial 
Advocacy method of giving feedback  – a four-part formula – that 
focuses on one aspect of the pe rformance and gives examples of 
ways to improve it…. 
 
The full-time teachers regularly observe the skill sections, to monitor 
both the students’ and the adjuncts’ performance.  Every semester, 
all 
the students evaluate the adjunct faculty, using a form specifically 
designed for adjuncts teaching skills courses.” 

 74 
 
7.8 Prof. Deborah Jones Merrit in he r article “New C ourse Offering in 
the Upper Level Curriculum: Report of  an AALS Survey (Vol. 47) (1997) 
Journal of Legal Education p. 524 (at p. 546) says: 
 
“Adjuncts taught a significantly hi gher percentage of litigation – 
related courses (42.2 %) , the new courses (31.1 %)….   Tenure-track 
faculty seemed to teach  a somewhat smaller pe rcentage of litigation 
classes (48.6 %) than other new courses (55.9 %).” 
 
and at p. 550 
 
“Adjuncts taught a particularly hi gh percentage (53.2%) of lawyers 
courses.  Tenure-track faculty, on the other hand, were significantly 
less likely to teach lawyers course s (43%) than other new offerings 
(56%).” 
 
7.9 From the above views expressed by leading academicians, it is clear 
that if various types of ‘legal skills’ programs are proposed to be 
introduced into the curriculum, it becomes necessary to introduce an 
‘adjunct faculty’ consisting of “lawye rs and Judges” on the teaching side 
into the faculty on a part time basis. 
 
7.10 As at present, there does not appear  to be such a system. In the last 
several decades, there was the system of leading lawyers taking up classes 
part-time in the evening or morning Law colleges or even day time regular 
classes.  In fact, very distinguished lawyers who later became Judges of the 

 75 
High Court or Supreme Court or became senior counsel in the High Courts 
or Supreme Court, have rendered yeoman  service as part-time lecturers.  
That system has practically been discontinued with the abolition of 
morning or evening colleges or part-time courses. 
 
7.11 Taking into account the experience in USA and also the reality that 
will obtain in law schools once the ‘legal skills’ subjects are proposed to be 
introduced in the curriculum, it beco mes necessary for the Bar Council of 
India to seriously consider this opti on and have a rethi nking in the matter 
of permitting lawyers and retired  judge s to become part of an ‘adjunct 
faculty’ so far as the teaching of legal skills is concerned.   The 
Commission is of the view that th ere is an overwhelming need to 
reintroduce lawyers and retired Judges to  take up classes in the ‘practical 
skills’ as part of the curriculum. 
 
7.12 We, therefore, recommend amendmen t of clause (h) in sec. 7(1) 
enabling the Bar Council of India to lay down procedure and conditions for 
appointment of Adjunct teachers who are to be appointed from among 
members of the Bar and the retired Judges.  This has to be done in 
consultation with the State Bar Councils and the Legal Education 
Committee of the Bar Council of India and the Legal Education Committee 
of the UGC. 
 
 

 76 
Chapter VIII 
Permissions and Inspections 
 
Permissions: 
 
8.0 The question of maintaining standa rds of legal education extends to 
over 460 laws schools and 102 universities.   Some of these law schools are 
university schools, while others are law colleges or law schools affiliated to 
one or other university. Unfortunate ly, the Bar Council of India has 
permitted law schools to be opened not only in State and district 
headquarters but also in non-district h eadquarters in several States.   Some 
cities have more than 20 law college s and some States around 40 or more 
law colleges.   This was done over a decade ago.  This has seriously 
affected the quality of legal education. 
 
8.1 A large number of law colleges were permitted to be started in 
several places, by the Bar Council of India without properly considering 
whether the colleges will be able to provide the necessary infrastructure 
and competent staff and teachers.  Af ter their establishment, when later 
various prescriptions or standards were set by the same Bar Council of 
India, several colleges were not able to meet the sta ndards.  It is therefore 
obvious that great care has to be taken at the time of grant of permission.  
Today, a medical college is not sanctioned unless various items of 
infrastructure are  provided – including the facility for a 300 bed hospital.  
We do not mean to say that conditions for establishment of medical 
colleges and law schools are comparable  but nonetheless in the matter of 
grant of permission to law schools – which are intended to produce good 

 77 
students who will go to the Bar or  the Bench later. Utmost care must to be 
taken by the Bar Council of India at the threshold itself.   
 
8.2 If care is not taken while granti ng permission, there are bound to be 
too many and unending inspections whic h result in uncertainty for the 
students and staff, apart from avoidable expenditure for the law schools, let 
alone the expense of frequent inspec tions both at the stage of initial 
establishment and also later. 
 
 In India, we do require a good num ber of law schools but they must 
produce students who have received lega l education of sufficient quality.   
No doubt, several permissions grante d to a large number of schools had 
been withdrawn in the last ten years.  Why did it happen?   Such closures 
caused lot of suffering and inconvenien ce to the students who joined those 
Colleges.  Several of thes e students had to be absorb ed in other colleges.  
Obviously, the initial inspections were not satisfactory. 
 
8.3.1 The power of the Bar Council of India to grant permission for 
affiliation and withdrawal of permissi on for affiliation is contained in the 
Rules made by the Bar Council of Indi a.  The Rules, in our view, are 
certainly intra-vires of the Act.  But the Commission felt that there should 
be a substantive provision in the Act on this aspect of the power of the Bar 
Council of India in regard to grant of  prior permission to start law course 
which lead to an enrolment as an advocate and withdrawal of such 
permission.  The Bar Council of Indi a should exercise this power of 
granting permission and withdrawal of  such permission in consultation 
with the Bar Council Legal Education Committee. It is proposed to put this 

 78 
aspect in section 7(1) which deals with the powers of the Bar Council of 
India. The Commission felt that previous exercise of such powers would be 
justified on the basis of various principles including the ‘de-facto’ doctrine.  
But, again, by way of abandon caution,  the Commission felt that a separate 
provision validating all previous acti on of the Bar Council of India in 
regard to permission for affiliation or withdrawal of permission be inserted. 
It is also proposed that no law college or law department of a university or 
any other institution should offer or impa rt instruction in a course of study 
in law which leads to enrolment as an advocate and no student should be 
admitted in any such course without  obtaining prior permission in this 
regard from the Bar Council of India. It is further proposed that no law 
college or law department of a unive rsity or any other institution should 
continue to impart instruction, if the permission granted by the Bar Council 
of India has been withdrawn. It is al so proposed that any fees or amount by 
whatever name called collected fro m any person towards admission in 
violation of this requirement shall be refunded.  Accordingly, it is proposed 
to put this aspect in proposed section 7A.  (The existing section 7A should 
be renumbered as section 7D).   
8.3.2 In order to emphasize the mandato ry nature of requirement of prior 
permission from the Bar Council of India and to deter violation of this 
requirement, the Commission felt that it is necessary to incorporate a 
provision that if any person including a ny institution or body, society, trust 
or company starts any law course whic h leads to enrolment as an advocate, 
without prior permission, or continues to impart instruction, if permission 
granted by the Bar Council of India ha s been withdrawn, it would be an 
offence.   For this purpose, section 45A is proposed to be inserted making 
the violation a punishable offence.  

 79 
 
 
Inspections: 
  
8.4 As per section 7(1)(i) of the Ac t, the Bar Council of India may visit 
and inspect those universities whose de gree in law may be recognized for 
the purpose of enrolment of law gradua tes as lawyers. Bar Council of India 
may also direct the State Bar Councils to visit and inspect universities. As 
per section 6(1)(gg), the State Bar Councils may also visit and inspect 
universities in accordance with the direc tions of the Bar Council of India. 
Further, rule 8 of Section A of Part  IV of the Bar Council of India Rules 
refers to ‘Inspection’.  Recently, new formats have been prepared for 
inspection, responses, Reports and for further responses to the Report.  
Procedure for recommending disaffiliation for the University on the basis 
of the Reports, is also indicated. 
 
8.5 No doubt, inspections are necessary.  Quite a good number of 
inspections have yielded good results and in fact, some of the colleges 
which were bad have been weeded out  after inspection.  But still, the 
inspection process has to be revamped . On the other hand, some colleges 
complain that though they have complie d with all the requirements needed 
for affiliation still, they are not gran ted permanent affiliation but are given 
affiliation only for one year and that there are inspections every year and in 
some cases, more than once in an year, and each time the managements are 
asked to deposit a minimum of Rs.50,000/ - as inspection fee to enable the 
Committee Members to in spect. There are also complaints that the 
expenditure for the inspection team is becoming very expensive, 

 80 
particularly  if the inspection team stays in costly hotels.  It is for the Legal 
Education Committee to take note of these complaints and rectify them. 
 
8.6 There are again comp laints that some inspections are cursory and 
colleges which are badly run are given clean chit while  colleges which are 
running well and whose students have c onsistently obtained first ranks in 
the University or whose students ha ve consistently been selected by 
reputed universities in UK and USA for post graduate studies, are 
disaffiliated. 
 
8.7 There are indeed several court cases filed by managements against 
the Bar Council of India and while no doubt some have been dismissed, 
some have been allowed with critical observations against the manner in 
which inspections were  conducted or disaffiliation proposed.  The law 
reports of the High Courts are evidence to these facts. 
 
8.8 We agree that in the matter of inspection of a large number of 
colleges, there are bound to be some co mplaints or even litigation.  What 
we, however, mean to say is that the Bar Council of India must take 
extreme care while granting permission and while conducting inspections. 
 
8.9  When, under the Rules, lawful directives of the Bar Council have to 
be obeyed by the Universities and the Law Schools, which if not obeyed, 
may lead to penal action, the procedure in the matter of inspections must be 
streamlined.  While there is need to  be tough with colleges which do not 
conform to the required standards, care must be taken to see that good 
colleges do not suffer on account of ba d inspections.  The Bar Council of 

 81 
India, when it wields powers, is also accountable like any other public 
body. 
 
8.10  The procedure for inspecti on, therefore, requires a thorough 
overhaul.  Periodically, we can intr ospect, take stock and review and 
evolve procedures which will either eliminate mistakes of the past or which 
can lead to better inspections so as to  avoid public criticism.   After all, our 
goal is the same, to see that good la w schools are established and proper 
quality of legal education is imparted to the students. 
 
8.11 Again, there  are inspections by more than one body.  Now, there are 
inspections by the UGC or by the Un iversity authorities under various  
statutes of the Universities and th ere are also inspections by the Bar 
Council of India.  There was similar duplication in regard to inspections 
under the AICTE Act where, in respect  of Engineering Colleges,  there 
were inspections by the Universities or UGC as well as by those deputed 
by the AICTE.  Similar was the situation with respect to inspections of 
medical colleges.   There also, there  are more th an one inspections, some 
by the universities and some by the Medical Council of India.  Multiple 
inspections normally give rise to conflicting reports. 
 
8.12 When conflicts between these reports arise, managements are 
dissatisfied with one or the other in spection.  The Supreme Court has had 
occasion to deal with the question of inspections in several cases in 
Engineering and Medical colleges.  In  particular, we would refer to the 
judgment in Jaya Gokul  Educational Trust  vs. Commissioner & Secy. to 
Government: 2000(5) SCC 231.  In that case,  there were conflicting reports 

 82 
and the Court had occasion to refe r to the Regulations framed by the 
AICTE Act which gave some solutions .  The AICTE has powers similar to 
the Bar Council of India.   Regulation 8(4) provides that at the stage of 
initial grant of approval, the Bureau of the Council seeks 
comments/recommendations of 
 
(i) the State Government concerned, 
(ii) the affiliating University 
 
apart from the regional bodies of the AI CTE.  Regulation 8(5) requires the 
Regional Office to arrange visits by an expert committee constituted by the 
AICTE which will put forward its r ecommendations before the AICTE.  
Reg. 8(8) states that if there is disagreement between the recommendations 
made by the State Government, Univer sity or the Regional Office of the 
AICTE, then the Central Task Force  shall invite representatives of the 
respective agencies for further consultations before making 
recommendations.  On the recommendations of the Central Task Force, the 
AICTE will take a final decision.  Regul ation 8(10) states that the decision 
of the AICTE shall be communicated to the State Government concerned 
or the UGC, as the case may be, and to the University concerned before the 
30th of April of the next year wher e the applications for starting an 
institution are made before the 31 st December of the previous year.  The 
Task Force would also consist of a member of the Subordinate Judiciary, at 
the level of a District & Sessions Judge.   
We recommend that the Inspection Rules framed by the Bar Council of 
India be also amended providing that among the members of the Inspection 
Committee, at least one  academician from a different State other than the 

 83 
one where the college is proposed to be established or is already 
established, must be included. 
 We also recommend that separate provisions be incorporated in the 
Advocates Act, 1961 for providing that  in case of any conflict in the 
inspection reports of the Bar Council of India and of the UGC/Universities 
or where there is a big gap between th e claims of the management and the 
Inspection Committee, a Task Force should make inspection on the same 
lines as in the Regulations of the AI CTE in which a Judicial Officer would 
be a member. 
These recommendations should not  be considered by the Bar 
Council of India as diluting the author ity of its inspection committees, but 
as one intended to prevent complaints in regard to the inspection process 
and in fact, such a procedure is now followed in respect of Engineering 
Colleges by the AICTE.  The inspec tions by the Committees of the Bar 
Council of India  must be open and tr ansparent and principles of fairness 
and natural justice must be strictly  followed.  A complaint against an 
inspection should not be viewed as a dispute between adversaries but as a 
fact-finding mission consistent with principles of natural justice.   In fact, if 
the findings of the Task Force confir m the findings of the Bar Council of 
India’s inspection committees, it would only enhance the strength of the 
findings of the Inspection Committee of the Bar Council of India.  
 
8.13 We, therefore, recommend that  
(i) for the purpose of obtaining prior permission from the Bar 
Council of India by the law colle ges and law department of a 
university or any other institu tion, a separate provision be 
incorporated in the form of section 7A, namely:  

 84 
 
Prior permission of Bar Council of India. 
 
“7A. (1) No law college or a law department of a 
university or any other institution, after the commencement of the 
Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2003, shall offer or  impart 
instruction in a course of study in law which will lead to 
enrolment as an advocate, and no student shall be admitted to any 
such course unless prior permissi on for starting such course has 
been granted by the Bar Council of India.   
Provided that any permission or  approval for its affiliation 
given by the Bar Council of Indi a under the Bar Council of India 
Rules, prior to the commencement of the Advocates(Amendment) 
Act, 2003,  shall be deemed to be a permission granted under this 
sub-section. 
 
(2) No law college or a law de partment of a University or 
any other institution shall continue to impart instruction 
in a course of study in law leading to enrolment as an 
Advocate, and no student shall be admitted thereto if the 
permission granted under sub-section (1) has been 
withdrawn by the Bar Council of India. 
(3) Any fees or amount by whatever named called collected 
from any person towards admission in violation of the 
provisions of sub-section (1) and (2) shall be refunded. 
(4) Any violation of provision of sub-sections (1) and (2)  
shall be an offence punishable under section 45A. 

 85 
(The existing section 7A should be renumbered as section 7D) 
(ii) For the purpose of providing punishment for the violation of 
proposed section 7A, a provision in the form of section 45A be 
incorporated, namely:  
Penalty for imparting instruction without prior permission from 
the Bar Council of India. 
“45A (1)  After the commencem ent of the Advocates 
(Amendment) Act, 2003, if any pe rson, including any institution, 
company, society, trust or body contravenes the provisions of 
sub-sections (1) and (2) of secti on 7A, he shall be punished  with 
simple imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to one year or 
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.   
 
(2) The offence mentioned under s ub-section (1) shall be tried by 
the Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of first 
class, as the case may be.   
(3) Where an offence mentioned under sub-section (1) is 
committed by any institution, company, society, trust or body, 
every person who at the time th e offence was committed, was 
in charge of and was responsible for the conduct of the affairs  
of such institution, company, society, trust or body as well as 
the institution, company, soci ety, trust or body shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offe nce and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to  any punishment if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 

 86 
he had exercised all due dilig ence to prevent the commission 
of such offence.” 
 
(iii) The existing section 7 (1) (i) should deals only with recognition 
of universities.  For the purpose of inspection of universities and 
colleges, separate sections 7B and 7C be added, namely:  
Inspection of Law Colleges and Universities 
 
7B. (1) The Bar Council of India may, for the purpose of granting 
recognition, permission or for ascertaining whether standards of 
legal education are maintained, visit or inspect any- 
 
(i) University which confers a degree in 
law; 
(ii) Department of law in a University; 
(iii) Law college affiliated to a 
University. 
 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Bar 
Council of India may also direct the State Bar Councils to visit or 
inspect any such University, Depa rtment or Law College referred 
to in that sub-section for the purpos es specified in that sub-section 
and submit a report.   
 
 
Task Force 
 

 87 
7C. (1) Where there is a difference of a substantial nature in the 
reports submitted by the Bar Council under section 7B and the 
report submitted by the University Grants Commission and the 
reports relate to a University or  Department of a University, a 
further inspection shall be done by a Task Force comprising of – 
 
(i) two members nominated by the Bar 
Council of India; 
(ii) two members nominated by the 
University Grants Commission; 
(iii) one Judicial Officer in the service of the 
State to be nominated by the Chief 
Justice of the State concerned.  
 
(2) Where there is a difference of substantial nature in the 
reports submitted by the Bar Council under section 7B and the report 
submitted by the University and the re ports relate  to a law college 
which is affiliated to it , a further inspection shall be done by a Task 
Force comprising of – 
 
(i) two members nominat ed by the State Bar 
Council; 
(ii) two members nominated by the University 
concerned; 
(iii) one Judicial officer  in the service of the 
State, to be nominated by the Chief Justice 
of the State concerned.  

 88 
(3) The Bar Council of India shall c onsider the other reports in the 
light of the Report of the Task  Force and take a decision in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act.” 
 
(iv) Section 6 (1)(gg) should be substituted as follows: 
 
“(gg) to visit and inspect any Univ ersity which confers a degree in 
law or a Department of law of a University or a law college affiliated 
to a university, in accordance with  the directions given under sub-
section(2) of section 7B;”   
(v) Section 7 (1) (i) should be substituted as follows:  
“(i) to recognize universities whose degree in law shall be a 
qualification for enrolment as an advocate or to de-recognise such 
University or to issue direction to any University to disaffiliate a law 
college in consultation with the Bar Council Legal Education 
Committee ” 
 
(vi) A separate clause in sub-section (1) of section 7 be  added to enable 
the Bar Council of India to grant permission to a law department of a 
university or a law college for imparting instruction as follows:  
“(id) to grant permission to a law department of a University or a 
law college for imparting instructi on in course of study in law for 
enrolment as an advocate, or to  withdraw such permission in 
consultation with the Bar Council  Legal Education Committee. 

 89 
(vii) The following clause be added in sub-section (1) of section 49: 
“(ak) the procedure regarding granting permission to impart 
instruction to law colleges, law department of university or any other 
institution as referred to in clause (i d) of sub-section (1) of section 7 
and the procedure regarding withdrawal of such permission.” 
(viii) Section 49 (1) (d) should be substituted as follows:  
“(d) the standards of legal educati on as referred to in clause (h) of 
sub-section (1) of section 7 to be observed by the universities and the 
Law Colleges affiliated to the universities and the manner of 
inspection  of such universities and Law Colleges, as referred to in 
section 7B and section 7C.”  
 

 90 
Chapter IX 
Examination System, Problem Method and 
Training Centres for Law Teachers 
 
9.1 We shall now refer briefly to th e examination systems.  The Ahmadi 
Committee Report, 1994, has referred to this aspect and considered it as 
something quite important to improve the quality of the students who may 
ultimately come to the Bar. 
 
9.2 There has been a belief for several years in the past that if one takes 
up the study of law, one need not attend classes regularly and that if one 
reads some small books published by so me publishers who have an eye 
only on profit making, - one can easily pass the law examination.  Such 
easy methods have remained very attr active and continue to stay even 
today for students who just want a bare  pass.  There are some students who 
have never read the text of a bare Act, much less any leading commentary.  
They only depend on some of thes e  small books containing a few 
theoretical questions which the students  think are sufficient.   When they 
go to the Bar, they for the first time open the books containing the Acts or 
the commentaries and are unable to cope up with the problem of the litigant 
and the  needs of the profession.   Of  course, what we have said does not 
apply to the more serious students w ho have been  regular and who are 
interested deeply in the subjects and in making a mark in the profession but 
such students are today a small percen tage.  Nor are we referring here to 
the students from the  new law Univers ities or to some colleges which are 
still rated as the best. 
 

 91 
9.3 Whatever be the percentage of students who adopt short cuts to pass 
the law examination, there is, in the view of the Commission, great need to 
revamp the examination system with the dual object of eliminating 
malpractices like copying (which do ta ke place in some centres) and the 
perennial problem of absenteeism in law schools.   Mere bookish 
knowledge must give way to practical as pects of law.  This has to start in 
the college itself. 
 
The Lecture method and Case method: 
 
9.4 Methods of teaching have been changing from time to time.  The 
time old method of lectures was supplemented by the ‘case method’ 
introduced by Prof. Langdell in Harvard in 1911 and these have been 
supplemented by the ‘problem method’later. 
 
Problem method: 
 
9.5 The ‘problem method’ of teaching is today considered more 
important than the other two methods.   
 
9.6 The problem method was introdu ced by Prof. Jerome Frank in his 
article “Why not a Clinical Lawyer  School’ 81. U. Pa L. Rev. 907 (1933) 
which he expanded in his thesis in “Both Ends Against the Middle’ (1951) 
100 U. Pa L. Rev. 20, where he grumbled that Legal education should not 
remain ‘hypnotized by Langdell’s ghost’.   He also said that the law 
curriculum should include ‘social scie nces and humanities’.  Law is linked 
with economics, politics, cultural an thropology, and ethical ideals.  

 92 
Humanities must also be added to so cial sciences.  ‘Students’, Prof. Frank 
said must be exposed to 
 
“the great literary artists” whose “poetic insights…. concern…. the 
particular, the unique” 
 
and these goals too will have to be accomplished in the legal clinic. 
 
9.7 Mr. Stephen Nathanson in his ‘Developing Legal Problem Solving 
Skills’ (1994) Vol. 44 Journal of Le gal Education (p. 215) says that 
teachers should synthesize “general problem-solving skills and context-
specific knowledge”. 
 
9.8 In 1979, Russel Stewart, in Australia, said that teaching  legal 
problem-solving skills should be the primary goal of professional legal 
education.  In 1984, in America, Anthony G. Amsterdam predicted that by 
the 21 st century, legal education would have shifted its focus from case 
reading, doctrinal analysis and lega l reasoning to a broader spectrum of 
practical skills, including problem solv ing skills.  In 1991, in England, a 
research study by Kim Economides and Jeff Small listed the main tasks and 
skills and stated that professional legal training should address problem-
solving figures prominently among th em.  In 1992, the American Bar 
Association’s Mac Crate Report iden tified problem-solving as the most 
fundamental of all legal skills.   
9.9 A curriculum design has to be made , theory and practice must be put 
together, a problem-data bank must be generated and circulated to all law 
schools. 

 93 
 
9.10 Prof. Myron Moskovitz of th e Golden Gate University has 
extensively dealt with the ‘problem method’ in his article “Beyond the 
Case Method: It’s Time to Teach with Problems” [See (1992) Vol. 42 
Journal of Legal Education, p. 241). 
 
9.11 The American Association of Law Schools (AALS) in their 1942 
Report stated as follows: 
 
“The merit of the problem method is that it more effectively forces 
the law student to reflect on the app lication of pertinent materials to 
new situations and accustoms him to thinking of case and statute law 
as something to be used, rather than as something to be assimilated 
for its own sake.” 
 
A later AALS Report lists five virt ues of the problem method: (1) it 
approximates the lawyer’s approach to the law, (2) it affords training in 
planning and advising, (3 ) it broadens the range of matters open to the 
students consideration, (4) it increases  the effectiveness of instruction 
where  case-law is inadequate (primarily where legislation is involved), and 
(5) it provides the stimulus to student in terest.    Prof. Myron Moskovitz in 
the above article (at Page 249) has referred to a large volume a literature on 
‘problem method’.  The author refers to a problem in criminal law where 
the Miranda Rule is involved and to the string of four cases of the US 
Supreme Court, each of the rulings refe rring to minor variations in the law 
on the subject of Miranda warnings students must learn these aspects.  He 
says (at p. 258) that ultimately the ‘problem method swallows up the case 

 94 
method’.   The author also disagrees with the view that the problem method 
is suitable only for small classes of student s.   The author also refers to the 
manner in which ‘problems have to be set’.   He then says (p. 267) “we 
now have books that contain problems”  and there are several types of 
problem books.  Reference is made to five types of such books. 
 
9.12 Prof. Borch refers to what a me dical professor said, that there is 
“widespread conservatism” among academ ics to innovation in teaching.  
Teachers must also be trained in  the matter of problem-solving.  
Professional academics and the ‘Adjunct t eachers’ can deal with this part 
of the curriculum effectively. 
 
 There is a vast literature on the subject of ‘problem methods’. 
 
New Examination System will eliminate absenteeism and malpractices:  
  
9.13 The Ahmadi Committee Report sugge sted a system where the theory 
part of the examination – where it is not difficult to get pass marks – is 
restricted to 25% or 20% marks while 75% or 80% marks should be 
allocated for legal problems.  There must be a separate minimum for the 
theoretical part and the problems pa rt.  The importance of the legal 
problems part is that the candidate will have to apply his mind 
independently in the examination hall.  He cannot resort to copying nor 
will he be able to seek any help from the supervisor for unless one is 
thorough, one cannot follow even if some obliging supervisor in the 
examination hall is prepared to help him.  We may make it clear that we are 
not here referring to the good and reputed colleges where there are no 

 95 
malpractices.  We are only referring to  those colleges where malpractices 
do persist or are encouraged by some managements.  Apart from 
prevention of malpractices, the probl em-method will make the student to 
think and come forward with a practical  solution.   This is not possible 
unless the student is thorough with th e subject.  The problem method will 
be able to eliminate malpractices. 
 
9.14 In our view, so far as this part  of the paper  containing the problems 
is concerned, the students can even be allowed to have the bare Acts to 
enable them to read the sections clearly and think of an answer.   Of course, 
this may not apply to some subjects like the Law of Torts where several 
legal principles are based on case law and not statutes. 
 
9.15 The second advantage of the problem method is that students will 
have to necessarily attend all classes and cannot hope to remain absent, if 
they have to face such a system of examination.  
The third advantage is that students have to apply their mind 
independently.   
Thus the problem method has several advantages – (i) it precludes 
malpractices; (ii) it makes the student s think and study the statutes closely 
and (iii) absenteeism in classes will get automatically controlled.    
 
The introduction of ‘problem method’   requires generation of a huge 
data Bank of problems in various subjects. 
 In the matter of prescribing topics for the law course, the 
Commission considers that clinical  legal education may be made 
mandatory subject.  This course features as part of the law curriculum in all 

 96 
universities in South Africa and is an excellent supplement to the legal aid 
system.  Even here in India, the Delhi university has for many years now 
been running a successful legal clin ical education programme where 
students are able to provide minimal legal assistance in the form of drawing 
of the petitions/applications and o ffering legal advice, to undertrial 
prisoners and inmates of custodial institutions.  This could be made 
mandatory in all law colleges.  
 
Training centres for Law teachers 
  
9.16 Yet another important aspect is about the need to revamp the 
teaching system by establishing a number of special institutions to enable 
law teachers to update their knowledge.   While we agree that there are 
several good  teachers in law schools who are highly qualified and very 
competent, there is always  need to keep abreast of  latest  needs of the 
practitioners, and of the latest Judgments  of our Courts and our statutes as 
well as Judgments of the House of Lords, American and Canadian Supreme 
Courts, Judgments of the Australian High Court and New Zealand Courts 
and of the European Human Rights C ourt at Strausborg.  It is also 
necessary to keep in touch with new principles of law emanating abroad 
and to several developments in important subjects like  trademark, 
copyright, patents, the Trips Agreem ent, Cyber law, Environmental law, 
Human Rights  and other new subjects. 
 
9.17 Further, when it is necessary to  teach several subjects dealing with 
procedural laws  at the college level,  there is need that law teachers must 

 97 
get acquainted with severa l practical aspects of the procedural laws.   
Training for the teachers is, therefore,  necessary. 
 Apart from the existing refresher courses conducted by the 
University Grants Commission, it is necessary to impart professional 
training to the law teachers.  
 
9.18 To start with, at least four colleges  must be started by the  Central 
Government in consultation with the Bar Council of India and UGC, in the 
four corners of India.    The law t eachers must have exposure to centres by 
experts in various branches of law and for this purpose guest lecturers from 
other States or even from other countries have to be invited. 
 
9.19 It will be for the UGC and the Government of India to make the 
necessary funds available for the above purpose. 
 
9.20 We recommend addition of clauses (ie) and (if)  after proposed 
clause (id) in section 7 (1) as follows: 
“(ie) to take such measures to facilitate the establishment of  
institutions by the Central Government for continuing legal 
education for law teachers; 
(if) to take measures for raising th e standards of teaching in law  in 
consultation with the Central Government, the State Governments 
and the University Grants Commission.” 
 
 
9.21 We also recommend that the ‘problem method’ be introduced in the 
examination system to an extent of above 75% in each paper, apart from 

 98 
25% for theory.  The students should obtain a separate minimum number of 
marks for the theory and a separate minimum in the problem part of the 
examination.  This will enable the stude nt to apply their mind seriously to 
every subject.  This will also eliminat e malpractices.  Attendance to classes 
is also bound to improve. 
 
 

 99 
Chapter X 
 
Education on Legal Education Literature 
 
10.0 Today, ‘Legal Education’ is in  itself a specialized branch for study 
and there is abundant litera ture available, both Indian as well as foreign 
which refer to various concepts of le gal education relevant both to teachers 
and students. The Commission is of the view that it is necessary for the Bar 
Councillors, the Faculty, the UGC and th e Managements to keep abreast of 
the developments in legal educati on in India and abroad.   The 14 th Report 
of the Law Commission (1958) presided over by Sri M.C. Setalvad referred 
to legal education literatu re in India, USA , UK and Canada available at 
that time. 
  
10.1 It is suggested that the Legal Education Committee of the Bar 
Council of India as well as the UGC should have Libraries on the subject of 
legal education, consisti ng of literature on legal e ducation so that the two 
committees could have the benefit of all the reports, past and present in 
India and contemporary literature on le gal education from other countries.  
In the context of liberalization, privatization and globalization, the methods 
of legal education may ha ve to be modified and  innovations elsewhere 
have to be kept in mind by our Co mmittees.   Several new subjects may 
also have to be introduced.   
 
10.2 In a recent book on Legal Educati on and Profession in India by Shri 
P.L. Mehta & Ms. Sushma Gupta, the history of legal education is traced 
and the following reports are referred to in Chapter 4.  The Reports are: 

 100
 
1. Legal Education during 1861-1961. 
2. First India University Commission Report 1902. 
3. Report of the Chagla Committee, 1955. 
4. Report of the Bombay Legal E ducation Committee consisting of Dr. 
 P.V. Kane, Justice N.H. Bhagwati. 
5. Report of the Inter-University Board, 1950. 
6. Report of the All India Bar Committee, 1953. 
7. Report of the Rajasthan Legal Education Committee, 1955. 
8. 14 th Report of the Law Commission, 1958 presided over by Shri 
M.C.  Setalvad. 
9. Recommendations of the Gejendragadkar Committee, 1964 
appointed  by Dr. C.D. Deshmukh, VC of Delhi University. 
10. Formulations of All India Seminar on Legal Education, 1972. 
11. UGC Curriculum Development Report, 1988-90 presided over by 
Prof.  Upender Baxi (in two volumes running into 800 pages). 
12. Justice Ahmadi Committee Report, 1994. 
 
 We shall add to this list, the UGC Curriculum Development Report, 
2001.  There are  reports on legal education produced by leading 
Universities and academic bodies in UK, USA and other countries.  There 
are also journals on legal education.  Steps must be taken to see that the  
copies of all these reports are available both with UGC and the Bar Council 
of India and they will be of immense help to the two Committees on Legal 
Education. 
 

 101
10.3 Several of the above Committees in India have also emphasized on 
the practical aspects of law.  In this context, it is necessary to note that 
today the emphasis abroad is also on the practical aspects of law and the 
recent Report in USA on the subject is the celebrated Mac Crate Report 
(also called the Report of the Task Fo rce of the American  Bar Association 
on ‘Law Schools and profession: Na rrowing the Gap’)(1992) which has 
been subject of subsequent resolutions  of the ABA House of Delegates in 
Feb. 1994 and there is a subsequent  report called the Report on Learning 
Professionalism (1996)(Chicago).  Then  there is the study of the Law 
Society of England and Wales on ‘Preparatory Skills; Review of the 
Institute of Professional Legal Studies  (Auckland) 1990; the US Crampton 
Report on Lawyer Competency 1979 (ABA); the Carrington Report on 
Training for Public Professions of the Law (1971)(Washington).  The 
National Law School, Bangalore, is said to have brought about a new 
curriculum modelled on the Harvard & McCrate models. 
 
10.4 There are again several important journals on legal education.  For 
example, the Journal of Legal Education, published by the Association of 
American Law Schools (AALS) and th e Journal of Professional Legal 
Education(USA) are leading journals and there are hundreds of articles in 
these journals on the subject in the past more than one decade.  The 
journals also review books on legal edu cation.  There is, in addition to the 
above, a vast literature of articles by Judges, lawyers, academicians in India 
and abroad on legal education. 
 
10.5 It appears that in the USA 20 new courses were added during 1989-
92 to the curriculum by the American Association of Law Schools.  (see 

 102
‘New Course Offerings in the uppe r-level curriculum by Deborah Jones 
Merrit & Jennifur Citon) (Vol 47).  J ournals of Legal E ducation, 1997, p. 
524).  The Committee on Curriculum a nd Research in USA meets every 
three or four years to review the pos ition (ibid. 569).  (In footnote No 149, 
a long list of articles and studies in curriculum studies is referred to). 
 
10.6 The Law Commission has referred to the above literature on legal 
education only with a view to impress one and all that Legal Education is a 
subject which requires in-depth study and research by members of both the 
Legal Education Committees so that our law schools and Universities can 
benefit by the said information and steps can be taken to improve the 
quality of teaching and produce st udents who can catch up with 
international standards. 
 
10.7 It is true that in recent times a few specialized institutions have been 
started in various States – in Hyde rabad, Jodhpur, Bhopal, Calcutta etc.  
These statutory law universities or  d eemed universities have been started 
on the model of the National Law School, Bangalore.  In fact, the need to 
establish such institutions was one of  the recommendations of the Justice 
Ahmadi Committee in 1994.  These in stitutions, in each State, today 
project an image of excelle nce in legal education.  (Unfortunately, most of 
these students are taking up jobs in big companies and only a few among 
them are coming to the Bar.  May be , corporates also need some well 
trained personnel or else, otherwise the companies may go outside India for 
expert legal advice.  But, most of th ese law graduates must be persuaded to 
come to the bar). We cannot, however ,  rest content with a few star 
colleges.  We must be concerned with all the rest of the hundreds of law 

 103
colleges located in cities and districts headquarters all over the country.  It 
is these students who come to the Bar in great numbers at the grass-root 
level.  It is the desire of the La w Commission that the Bar Council of India 
and academic community must co-ordinate and take steps which  can result 
in upgrading the standards of legal e ducation in these colleges which are 
spread over length and breadth of the country.  A few bright-star colleges 
with limited number of student-intake based on all-India selection is not the 
end and may not result in an overall change in the level of legal education. 
 
10.8 Upon the law student who emer ges from the college depends the 
legal profession.  Upon the legal profession depends the quality of the 
Judiciary.  Once a lawyer practices for 3 years, he becomes eligible in most 
States to become a judicial officer at the level of a munsif.  (Now, the 
Supreme Court has said that a law graduate can straight-away go as a 
Judicial officer). With seven years e xperience, he becomes eligible – in 
most States – to be recruited as a District & Sessions Judge directly, who 
can deal with civil cases of unlimite d pecuniary jurisdiction and who can 
recommend a sentence of death.  Such  are the high stakes involved.  
Therefore, there is need to make th e curriculum stronger, and lay a firm 
foundation.  Legal Educati on has to be taken seri ously and kept on a high 
pedestal.    
 
10.9 We, therefore, recommend that in s ec. 7, clause (ig) to be added as 
follows: 
“(ig) to create awareness of the la test trends in legal education by 
establishing legal education libraries at the offices of the Bar Council 

 104
of India and all State Bar Counc ils and Universities and in law 
colleges.” 

 105
Chapter XI 
Derecognition of University and Disaffiliation of College  
 
Provision in sec. 7(1)(i) to derecognise University to be modified as one for 
derecognising either the University or a particular institution/College 
imparting legal education. 
 
11.0 Sec. 7(1)(i) of the Advocates Act, 1961 enables the Bar Council of 
India to recognise universities whose law degrees shall be sufficient 
qualification for enrolment as an a dvocate.  Now, the colleges which are 
imparting legal education are in larg e number, within every university.  
Today, there are also Law Universities established under statutes.   
 
11.1 Question arises as to what s hould be done when a particular law 
college does not conform to the prescr ibed standards or violates other 
directives of the Bar Council of India and the latter wants to de-recognise a 
college.  As at present clause (i) of sec. 7(1) speaks of recognizing 
universities.   This impliedly  incl udes derecognition also.   Certain doubts 
have been expressed whether for the fault of a single college within a 
university, the university itself of wh ich it is a part, has to be de-
recognised.  In such a situation, it is  pointed out that it would be sufficient 
if the BCI should require the Univer sity concerned to withdraw its 
affiliation to the said colle ge.  Of course, in the cas e of a University, if it 
violates any directive of the Bar Counc il of India, question may arise if the 
University itself has to be derecognised. 
 

 106
11.2 In the light of this discussion, cl ause (i) of sec. 7(1) needs to be 
amended for conferring powers to the Bar Council of India to recognize a 
university or to issue direction to any university to disaffiliate a law college 
in consultation with the Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of 
India. 
 
11.3 We recommend that section 7(1)(i) should be substituted as follows: 
“(i) to recognize universities whose degree in law shall be a 
qualification for enrolment as an advocate or to de-recognise such 
University or to issue direction to any University to disaffiliate a law 
college in consultation with the Bar Council Legal Education 
Committee ” 
We further recommend that in section 49 (1), following clause 
should be inserted:  
“(aj) the procedure regarding rec ognition and de-recognition of such 
universities as referred to in clause (i) of sub-section(1) of section 7 
and the procedure regarding the issuing of direction to a university to 
disaffiliate a Law college.” 
 
 

 107
Chapter XII 
Training and Apprenticeship 
 
12.0 Before the Advocates Act, 1961 wa s enacted, there was a system by 
which a law graduate had to undergo training by way of apprenticeship in 
the chambers of a lawyer for one year  and pass a separate  Bar examination 
conducted by the Bar Council on the subjects of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1898.   It was only 
after a law graduate successfully completed his apprenticeship and the Bar 
examination that he became eligible to  be enrolled as an Advocate.  (Prior 
to 1961, the enrolment had to be moved in the court of the Chief Justice of 
the High Court concerned and the motion for enrolment was to be by a 
senior advocate practicing in the High Court.   There was convention of a 
brief interview in the chambers of the Chief Justice of the High Court 
before the enrolment was later moved in open court on the same day). 
 
12.1 After the Advocates Act, 1961 cam e into force, the procedure for 
apprenticeship was continued by virtue of cl ause (d) of subsection (1) of 
sec. 24.  (The enrolment was, how ever, to be before the enrolment 
committee of the State Bar Council.)  Th at clause required the graduate in 
law to undergo a course of “training in law and pass an examination after 
such training”, before he could be en rolled.  Certain categories of persons 
were exempted under a proviso to the said sub-clause. 
 
12.2 In the year 1964 there were certain  amendments to sec. 24 but it is 
not necessary to refer to them in as  much as in 1973, by Act 60/73, clause 
(d) of subsection (1) of sec. 24 was omitted and the amendments made in 

 108
1964 to the proviso were also omitted.  The result was that after 1973, there 
was no requirement of the training or the Bar  examination. 
 
12.3 Yet another amendment related to the rule making power of the State 
Bar Councils.  In sec. 28 (2)(b), the clause permitting the State Bar Council 
to make rules regarding the training and Bar examination was also deleted 
by the same Act 60 of 1973. 
  
12.4 In 1994, the Chief Justice of India, Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah 
constituted the Ahmadi Committee on Legal Education.  The Committee 
consisted of Justice A.M. Ahmadi, Ju stice B.N. Kirpal and one of us 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao).  The Committee wrote to all Chief Justices of 
High Courts seeking their views.  Almo st all the Chief Justices felt that 
having regard to deterioration in the standards of students and in skills of 
advocacy, it was incumbent for the Bar Council of India to reintroduce the 
Training Programme for graduates.   Responses were also received by the 
Committee from State Bar Councils and the Bar Council of India. 
 
12.5 After the Ahmadi Committee Report in 1994, the Bar Council of 
India reconsidered the earlier decision of 1973 and decided to reintroduce 
the Training for one year after gradua tion.  It accordingly made Rules soon 
after 1994 and the Rules were replaced by fresh Rules made on 19.7.98.  It 
is these rules that were challenged in the Supreme Court.  The Supreme 
Court considered the question in V. Sudheer vs. Bar Council of India 1999 
(3) SCC 176 whether, having regard to the legislative history which 
revealed that the Training was part of  the mandate in the Act, the same 
could not be reintroduced by way of a Rule by the Bar Council of India.  

 109
The court held that once the relevant statutory provisions in sec. 24(1)(d) or 
in the proviso thereto were deleted a nd also when the subject of Training 
which was one of the items enumerated in clause (b) of subsection (2) of 
sec. 28, (sec. 28 being the section rela ting to rule making), was deleted in 
1973, the Bar Council of India could not  have made any rule regarding 
Training and such a condition had to be introduced only by an Act by the 
Legislature.   It was also held th at it was for the State Bar Councils to 
introduce Training and that the Bar Council of India could not by itself 
introduce the Training.   
 
12.6 It must be noted that the Supreme Court in V. Sudheer’s  case merely 
considered whether the new Rules were ultra vires of the provisions of the 
Act.  It did not say anywhere that Training was not necessary.  On the other 
hand, it expressly endorsed the need for reintroducing training and 
accepted the recommendations of the Ahmadi Committee.  It said: (pp. 
210-211) 
 
“Before parting with these matters, it is necessary to note that in the 
light of the experience of various  courts in which advocates are 
practising since the time the Advocates  Act has come into force, the 
Law Commission of India and othe r expert bodies that were 
entrusted with the task of sugges ting improvements in the standards 
of legal education and legal practiti oners felt it necessary to provide 
for compulsory training to young advocates entering the portals of 
the courtrooms.  Training under Senior Advocates with a view to 
equip them with court craft and to make them future efficient 
officers of the court became a fe lt need and there cannot be any 

 110
dispute on this aspect.  In fact, the question of making some 
suggestions regarding admission to law colleges, syllabus, training, 
period of practice at different levels  of courts, etc., was taken up as 
Item 16 in the last Conference of  the Chief Justices held in 
December 1993.  The Conference reso lved that Hon’ble the Chief 
Justice of India be requested to constitute a Committee consisting of 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice A.M. Ahmadi as its Chairman, and two other 
members to be nominated by Hon’bl e the Chief Justice of India to 
suggest appropriate steps to be ta ken in the matter so that the Law 
graduates may acquire sufficient experience before they become 
entitled to practise in the courts.  The said High-Powered Committee, 
after inviting the views of the Chief Justices and State Bar Councils 
as well as the Bar Council of India made valuable suggestions.  The 
relevant suggestions in connection with legal education are 
Suggestions 1, 12, 13, 15, 16 which are required to be noted.  They 
read as under: 
 1. In laying down the standards of legal education, the Bar 
Council’s ‘Legal Education Committ ee’ constituted under Rule 4 of 
Chapter III of the Bar Council of India Rules, 1965 must reflect the 
participation of representatives of  (1) the judiciary, (2) the Bar 
Council and (3) the UGC.  It is pr oposed that the Rules be amended 
and the Legal Education Committee be restructured to involve the 
bodies above-mentioned. 
 12. Rule 21 of the Bar Counc il Rules directing that every 
university shall endeavour to s upplement the lecture method with 
case method, tutorials and other modern techniques of imparting 
legal education must be amended in a mandatory form and it should 

 111
include problem method, moot courts , mock trials and other aspects 
and make them compulsory. 
 13.(i) Participation in moot c ourts, mock trials, and debates 
must be made compulsory and mark s awarded, (ii) practical training 
in drafting pleadings, contracts can be  developed in the last year of 
the study, and (iii) students’ visits at various levels to the courts must 
be made compulsory so as to provide a greater exposure. 
 15. Entrance into the Bar after 12 months or 18 months of 
apprenticeship with entry examination.  For obtaining the 
licence/sanad from State Bar Councils it must be prescribed that one 
should secure at least 50 per cent or 60 per cent marks at the Bar 
Council examination. 
 16. So far as the training unde r a Senior Lawyer during the 
period of one year or 18 months of  apprenticeship, the Act or the 
Rules must stipulate that the senior must have at least 10 or 15 years’ 
standing at the District Court/Hi gh Court and the student’s diary 
must reflect his attendance for three months in the grassroot level in 
a civil court and for three months in  a Magistrate’s Court and at least 
six months in a District Court.  The advocate in whose office he 
works must also certify that the student is fit to enter the Bar.  Unless 
these formalities are completed, th e student should not be permitted 
to sit for the Bar Council examination.” 
 
 12.7 After saying so, the Supreme Court further observed (p. 211) as 
follows: 
 

 112
“It is true that these suggesti ons of the High-Powered Committee 
clearly highlighted the crying need  for improving the standards of 
legal education and the requirements for new entrants to the legal 
profession of being equipped with  adequate professional skill and 
expertise. There also cannot be any dispute on this aspect.  However, 
as the saying goes “a right thing must be done in the right manner”.  
We appreciate the laudable object with which the Bar Council of 
India has framed the impugned Rule s for providing training to the 
young entrants to the profession by laying down details as to how 
they should get appropriate training during their formative years at 
the Bar.  Unfortunately for the Bar Council of India, that right thing 
has not been done in the right manne r.  We equally share the anxiety 
of the Bar Council of India for evolving suitable methods for 
improving the standards of legal education and legal profession.  The 
aforesaid recommendations made by the High-Powered Committee 
could have been put into practi ce by following appropriate methods 
and adopting appropriate modalities by the Bar Council of India.” 
 
12.8 The Supreme Court further obser ved that the need to introduce 
training is a matter which cannot be le ft to the decision of the State Bar 
Councils.  In as much as an enrolled lawyer can practice anywhere in India, 
this power of prescribing training and examination must be entrusted to the 
Bar Council of India  so that the training coul d be uniform.  The Supreme 
court observed: (p. 212-213) 
 
“It is easy to visualize that appropriate amendments in sections 7 and 
24(1) would have clothed the Bar Council of India with appropriate 

 113
power of prescribing such pre-enrolment training for prospective 
entrants at the Bar.  That woul d have provided an appropriate 
statutory peg on which the appropria te rule could have been framed 
and hanged.  It is also necessary  to note in this connection that 
merely leaving the question of providing pre-enrolment training and 
examination to only the State Bar Councils may create difficulties in 
the working of the all-India statute.  It goes without saying that as an 
enrolled advocate is entitled to pr actise in any court in India, 
common standard of professional expertise and efficient uniform 
legal training would be a must fo r all advocates enrolled under the 
Act.  In these circumstances, appr opriate statutory power has to be 
entrusted to the Bar Council of I ndia so that it can monitor the 
enrolment exercise undertaken by the State Bar Council concerned in 
a uniform manner.  It is possible to visualize that if power to 
prescribe pre-enrolment training and examination is conferred only 
on the State Bar Councils, then it may happen that one State Bar 
Council may impose such pre-enrolment training while another Bar 
Council may not and then it would be easy for the prospective 
professional who has got the requis ite Law Degree to get enrolment 
as an advocate from the State Bar Council which has not imposed 
such pre-enrolment training and ha ving got the enrolment, he may 
start practice in any other court in India being legally entitled to 
practise as per the Act.  To avoid such an incongruous situation 
which may result in legal evasion of the laudable concept of pre-
enrolment training, it is absolute ly necessary to entrust the Bar 
Council of India with appropriate statutory power to enable it to 
prescribe and provide for all-India basis pre-enrolment training of 

 114
advocates as well as the requisite  apprenticeship to make them 
efficient and well-informed officers of the court so as to achieve 
better administration of justice.  We, therefore, strongly recommend 
appropriate amendments to be made in the Act in this connection.” 
 
12.9 The Supreme Court suggested that  before the Act is amended on the 
above lines for introducing Training, in the meantime, in-house training 
may be given to the new recruits afte r enrolment, as a temporary measure 
for a period of one year. 
 
12.10 The Supreme Court also referred in  (para 34) to the suggestions of 
the court as extracted in a le tter dated 24.9.1977 of the Counsel 
representing the Bar Council of India.  Those suggestions also included the 
Training programme for one year and a practical test.  Certain further 
suggestions were given in para 5 in relation to those who have worked in 
solicitors’ offices or as corporate lawyers. 
 
 We may refer to the following observation at p. 213 of the Judgment: 
 
“We, therefore, strongly recommend appropriate amendments to be 
made in the Act in this connection.” 
 
12.11 In view of the specific recomme ndation or rather directive of the 
Supreme Court of India, it becomes n ecessary to reintroduce the provisions 
relating to Training programme and examination. 
 

 115
12.12 As per the information furnished in the “Directory of 
Commonwealth Law Schools, 2003/2004”  published on behalf of the 
‘Commonwealth Legal Education Societ y, UK’, in most of the countries 
like Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, Hong Kong, Malaysia New Zealand, 
Pakistan, Singapore, South Africa and UK, some period of training or 
apprenticeship or pupilage and the pa ssing of Bar examination, completion 
of course are mandatory before a student  enters into the legal profession.  
Similar is the situation in othe r countries like Botswana, Cameron, 
Caribbean, Malawi, Malta, Mauritius,  Namibia, Nigeria, Papua New 
Guiana and Zambia.   
In the recent conference in the National Law School, Bangalore on 
12.8.2002 of faculty from all over India, lawyers and judges expressed their 
views in regard to apprenticeship.   Sri K.K. Venugopal, Senior Advocate, 
stated that having regard to the fact that 90% of students are likely to go to 
the Bar in courts located in mofussil areas or district headquarters and as 
these students have come from severa l colleges located in those areas, 
apprenticeship after law degree and be fore practice and Bar examination 
must be reintroduced for such students.  
 
12.13 No doubt, in recent times, some  law schools are deputing their 
students for ‘placement’ to the chambers  of several senior  lawyers or law 
firms in cities like Delhi, Bombay, Cal cutta, Chennai, etc., for a few weeks 
each year.  This method of ‘placement’ is good and must be encouraged.  
But, it must be noted that students from only a few of the top law schools – 
may be about 10 or 20 law schools in the counting – are now getting this 
benefit but the bulk of the stude nts from the remaining over 400 law 
schools are not getting the benefit.  In  fact, it is practically difficult for 

 116
senior counsel in these big cities to increase the number of ‘placement 
students’.  The senior counsel cannot  be overburdened by sending a large 
group of students nor will senior counsel agree to take a large number.  The 
Bar Council has, therefore,  to take  care of the students who cannot get 
entrance to the chambers of seniors in big cities and indeed, who cannot 
afford financially to stay in the big cities for the purpose of placement.  A 
student in a remote colle ge in Madhya Pradesh, North East or Gujarat or 
Bihar or from the South cannot go to th ese big cities or get placement.  The 
Law Commission is, therefore,  of the opinion that ‘placement’ is not a 
substitute for ‘apprenticeship’.  Furthe r, placement in chambers of seniors 
in Supreme Court or High Court does not always give an insight of what is 
happening at the grass-root level in the trial courts.  Students must get 
sufficient knowledge and experience of c ourts at various levels. That is 
why, placement procedure, which cannot cater to the needs of students 
from all the 400 law schools and odd, - cannot be an effective  substitute 
for one year apprenticeship.  
 
12.14 In this connection, we may point out that in several countries across 
the world, a graduate from the Bar is not permitted to get enrolled and 
practice straightaway.  There is a pe riod of training between one year or 
more.   In some countries it even extends  to 5 years.  Today, an advocate in 
India, once enrolled, can directly a ddress even the Hon’ble Judges in the 
Supreme Court of India.  We do not th ink that in India we should allow the 
law graduates to address any Court straightaway without  further training 
and a Bar examination. 
 

 117
12.15 There are other good reasons w hy a graduate should undergo the 
Training and pass the Bar Examination.   It is true that several parts of the 
legal skills have been introduced into the curriculum.  But still, there is a 
great difference between learning about the skills in the college curriculum 
and witnessing the actual presentation of skills in court.  Once a person 
joins the office of a senior and studies an individual case, either at the trial 
stage or at the appellate stage, watche s the preparation and research of the 
senior in his chamber, or assists him in the preparation or research or the 
actual process of witness examination,  discovery, inspection procedures in 
a civil case or the actual arguments in interlocutory matters, (e.g. injunction 
or receiver applications) or the arguments  at the final stage of the trial or 
appeal or watches the preparation in  a criminal case from the stage of 
anticipatory bail to the ultimate stage of arguments after the trial – then 
only can he realize the difference be tween reading about skills and the 
actual performance of skills .  Ther e are so many legal skills in the 
profession which can be learnt only in the chambers of a lawyer or in a 
court and these are learnt day by day.  All these cannot be learnt in the 
college even though, the studying in co llege may give the student some 
idea of the skills.    In fact, there is a further difference between a lawyer 
assisting his senior in the court and the lawyer himself arguing the case. 
 
12.16 In the light of the observations of the Supreme Court, the opinion of 
the Ahmadi Committee and the opinion of  the Chief Justices of the High 
Courts, and the need to revamp the Legal education system, we recommend 
amendment of the Act, reintroduci ng the Training Program and the Bar 
examination. 
 

 118
12.17 There is a strong view that wh en some students are passing out of 
good Law schools, there is no need for furt her training.  Here  we  have to 
keep in mind not the students coming out from the few star colleges or 
universities but from the bulk of the colle ges in various other places in the 
cities, district headquarters and ot her mofussil areas.  These are the 
students who go to the courts at the grassroot level upon enrolment.  Rules 
regarding pre-enrolment training and examination cannot be restricted to a 
few students.  They have to apply to everybody.  The Supreme Court in 
Sudheer’s case suggested exemption only in  two types of cases – those 
trained in solicitor’s office or in cor porate work but we have considered 
this aspect and do not recommend any exemption, having regard to the 
current scenario of deteriorating standards. 
 
12.18 Some more objections to training ar e raised – some say that a student 
can easily ‘cook up’ the diaries meant to be maintained while attending the 
chamber of a senior lawyer or after a ttending court.    Some say that very 
few seniors have time to interact with these young graduates.  We do not 
agree that these objections have any re levance.  If there are some students 
who do not take the training seriously or if there are some seniors who take 
these apprentices into their chambe rs and do not have time, we cannot 
blame the system.  Then why are th ese same critics supporting ‘placement’ 
with seniors.  One should see how a similar system is working 
satisfactorily in the cas e of Chartered Accountants.  Again, a medical 
graduate has to go through ‘housemansh ip’ for one year.  We do not see 
any good reason as to why law graduate should not. 
 

 119
12.19 Yet another objection is that the student has already spent 5 years at 
the college level and his right to ma ke a living should not be postponed by 
one more year.   We do not agree.  Th e student, once he starts practicing in 
the court, is dealing with important ri ghts of those who approach the court, 
such as civil rights or constitutional right s or rights relating to the liberty of 
a person accused in a criminal case.   A single mistake in drafting a legal 
notice may ruin a case or an error in  a plaint or written statement may 
ultimately be the cause for a pers on losing a case.   A single wrong 
question in cross-examination may ag ain be the sole cause for a party 
losing a civil case or in his getting convict ed in a criminal case.   We are of 
the view that the ‘legal profession’ is a profession which is at least as 
serious as that of a chartered accountant or a medical doctor.  
Unfortunately, in the last five decad es, everybody has come to think that it 
is easy to pass a law examination, and that whatever be one’s training or 
knowledge and whatever the means, it is  not difficult to attain success in 
the profession.  It is this attitude  that has diluted the quality of the 
profession. 
 
12.20 We may next refer to another as pect of the matte r.  In a recent 
judgment in All India Judges Assn. vs. Union of India, 2002 (3) Scale 291, 
the Supreme Court issued a direction that law graduates from college must 
be enabled to directly enter the Judici al service at the lowest level instead 
of being required to have a minimum experience of 3 years at the Bar but 
that after entering service, they should be given one year’s training. 
 
12.21 We have referred to the above judgment of the Supreme Court in the 
context of the question relating to ‘t raining’.  If in some States law 

 120
graduates are proposed to be recruited straightaway as observed by the 
Supreme Court, at least a one-year apprenticeship and Bar examination 
before enrolment, would be certainly advantageous and, in fact, will be 
necessary.  
 
12.22 We may also point out that in some countries, apart from training 
and Bar examination, there is also a requirement of periodical renewal of 
the permission to practice grante d by the Bar Council.  There are 
mandatory requirements for attendi ng courses in continuing legal 
education.   We do not have such a system.   In that light, to insist upon one 
year training and Bar examination at  the threshold before enrolment, 
cannot, in our view, be objected to seriously. 
 
12.23 We, accordingly, recommend re introduction of training and Bar 
examination by the Bar Council of India as follows: 
 
(A) Insertion of clause (ha) in sub-section (1) of section 7 as 
follows: 
“(ha) to ensure that sufficient pr actical training is imparted to 
candidates seeking to enroll at the Bar, by way of attachment 
to legal practitioners and also to  prescribe  for matters relating 
to the conduct of Bar examination for such candidates in 
accordance with the provisions of clause (d) of subsection (1) 
of section 24.” 
 
(B) Insertion of clause (d) in sub-section (1) of section 24 as 
follows: 

 121
 
“(d) after obtaining a degree in law recognized under clause (i) 
of sub-section (1) of section 7,  he has undergone a course of 
training by way of attachment to  a legal practitioner of more 
than ten years’ standing, for such duration not less than one 
year and has qualified at the Bar  Examination in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the Bar Council of India”. 
 
 
(C) Insertion of clauses (ai) in section 49 as follows: 
“(ai) the period of training a nd conduct of Bar examination 
and matters relating thereto under clause (ha) of sub-section 
(1) of section 7 and clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 24; 
 
 

 122
 
Chapter XIII 
Disqualification of Employees Dismissed or Removed 
from Service and Section 24A 
 
13.0 It appears that for quite some time, the Bar Council of India is not 
satisfied with the present system of permitting the entry to the profession of 
certain law graduates who have either  been convicted by a Court or who, 
having been in service, have been removed or dismissed from service on 
the grounds of moral turpitude. 
 
13.1 Section 24A deals with disqualifica tion for enrolment.  As per clause 
(a) and (b) of sub-section (1), a pers on cannot be enrolled as an advocate if 
he is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude or under the 
provisions of Untouchability (Offence) Ac t, 1955.  Similarly, as per clause 
(c), if a person is dismissed or removed from employment or office under 
the State or any charge involving moral turpitude, he cannot be enrolled as 
an advocate.  But, at present,  sec. 24A(1) contains a proviso which enables 
law graduates, who have been convict ed or who have been dismissed or 
removed from service to be enrolled af ter the expiry of two years from the 
date of his release from the prison or after the expiry of two years from the 
date of dismissal or removal, as th e case may be.  The said proviso to 
section 24A (1) reads as follows: 
 
 “Provided that the disqualification for enrolment as aforesaid shall 
 cease to have effect after a period of two years has elapsed since his 
 release or dismissal or, as the case may be, removal.” 

 123
 
Above this proviso, there is an ‘Explanation’ dealing with service under the 
State which states that the expre ssion ‘State’ shall have the meaning 
assigned to it under Art. 12 of the Constitution. 
 
13.2 A few issues arise in connection with section 24A. 
 
 It has been brought to the notice of the Commission that the proviso 
below sec. 24A(1) is permitting a large number of persons who have been 
convicted or dismissed or remove d from service on charges involving 
moral turpitude to enter the profession after the expiry of 2 years from the 
dates specified in the proviso.   Ther e is a request from the Bar Council of 
India that such persons ought not to be allowed to enter the profession.  It is 
said that the profession requires high st andards of ethics and morality to be 
maintained and that those who have previous bad record should not be 
allowed at all to enter the profession.  As a consequence, it is stated that the 
proviso should be deleted. 
 
13.3 The Commission is of the view that in the matter of legal ethics and 
morality no relaxation is permissible.  There is no guarantee that those who 
have been convicted or whose servi ces have been terminated on charges 
involving moral turpitude, would cease to show similar tendencies just 
after the expiry of two years of the da te of release from prison or date of 
dismissal or removal.  The disqualification must therefore extend to the rest 
of their life, and an absolute bar alone  will be in the interests of preserving 
the purity of the legal profession. 
 

 124
13.4 Therefore, we are of the emphatic  view that the proviso below sec. 
24A(1) must be deleted. 
 
13.5 Yet another aspect is whether dismissal or removal on the ground of 
moral turpitude should be a disqualifi cation only in respect of employees 
under the ‘State’ as defined in Art. 12 of the Constitution of India and 
whether persons in private employment who have been dismissed or 
removed from service should not suffer su ch a disqualification.  We do not 
find any good reason to allow those in service under entities not falling 
within Art. 12, who are dismissed or removed from private service, on 
charges involving moral turpitude, to be  allowed to be enrolled.  As at 
present, sec. 24A(1) does not disqualify such persons even for two years.   
 
It is, therefore, necessary to delete the words ‘under the State’ in sec. 
24A(1)(c) and to also delete the Explanation. 
 
13.6 We, therefore, recommend dele tion of the Explanation and the 
proviso below sec. 24A(1), and also the deletion of the words “under the 
State” in clause (c) of sec. 24A (1). 
 

 125
 
Chapter XIV 
Summary of Recommendations 
  
This summary of recommendation is gathered from the various 
Chapters I to XIII and arranged subject-wise for the purpose of 
convenience. 
 
1) In as much as the Bar Council of India cannot be required to consult 
all Universities, as now stated in section 7 (1) (h), the provisions of section 
7(1)(h) have to be amended by prescr ibing that the Bar Council of India 
must consult a body which effectively represents all the Universities and 
that such a body should be constitu ted by the University Grants 
Commission.  This requires amendmen t of the Advocates Act, 1961 and 
the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. 
        ( p a r a  2 . 2 2 )  
 
2) The consultation procedure between the Bar Council of India and the 
Universities must be simple and effective. 
        ( p a r a  2 . 2 1 )  
 
3) Section 7(1) (h) has to be amended by providing for ‘consultation’ as 
proposed in sections 10AA to be inse rted in the Advocates Act, 1961 with 
the Legal Education Committee of the University Grants Commission. 
        ( p a r a  3 . 1 3 ( 1 ) .  
 

 126
4) Clause (b) of subsection (2) of s ec. 10 has to be amended to provide 
for membership of Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India, 
representing different classes of pers on.  The Committee shall comprise of 
5 members from the Bar Council of India, one retired Judge of the Supreme 
Court of India, one retired Chief Jus tice/Judge of a High Court both to be 
nominated by the Chief Justice of India and three academicians in law to be 
nominated by the University Grants Commission and these three should be 
members of the proposed UGC Comm ittee on Legal Education and all 
three of them must be in office and one of them must be Director/Vice-
Chancellor of a statutory Law Univer sity.  The retired Judge of the 
Supreme Court shall be the Chairman of the Committee.   
        ( p a r a  3 . 1 2 ( 2 ) )  
 
 
5) The Attorney General for India can , at his option, participate in the 
meetings of the Legal Education Co mmittee of the Bar Council of India 
and the Chairman of that Committ ee shall be entitled to request the 
Attorney General to participate in the proceedings of the Committee and 
when he so participates, he is entitled to vote. 
        ( p a r a  3 . 1 3  ( 3 ) )  
 
6) The Bar Council Legal Education Committee shall decide all matters 
in its meeting by majority of votes of  the members present and voting, and 
in the event of equality of votes, the Chairman shall have an exercise a 
casting vote.    
        ( p a r a  3 . 1 3  ( 4 ) )  
 

 127
 
7) The Bar Council Legal Education Committee shall meet at least once 
in three months.  
        ( p a r a  3 . 1 3  ( 5 ) )  
 
 
8) In sub-section (4) of section 10A, for the words ‘every committee 
thereof except the disciplinary comm ittees’, the words ‘every committee 
thereof except the Bar Council Le gal Education Committee and the 
disciplinary committees’, should be substituted.  
        ( p a r a  3 . 1 3  ( 6 ) )  
  
9) The U.G.C. Committee on Legal Edu cation to be constituted by the 
U.G.C.    The Committee to consist of ten members, of whom (a) six shall 
be academicians of the le vel of Professors, Deans or Principals or of equal 
rank, (b) two shall be law teachers of similar ranks who have retired and (c) 
two shall be Directors/Vice-Chancellors of statutory Law Universities. 
Section 5A to be inserted in th e UGC Act, 1956 for constitution of UGC 
Legal Education Committee. 
      (paragraphs 4.14 and 4.21) 
 
10) The procedure for consultation referre d to in sec. 7(1)(h) shall be as 
follows:  After the Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India 
consults the State Bar Councils, it shall consult the Legal Education 
Committee of the UGC which shall forward its views back to the Legal 
Education Committee of the Bar Council of India and the latter Committee 
shall then take a final decision. S ection 10 AA to be inserted in the 

 128
Advocates Act, 1961 for providing cons ultation procedure to be followed 
by the Bar Council Legal Education Committee. 
      (paragraphs 4.3 and 4.20) 
 
11) The UGC can also initiate proposals by sending the same for 
consideration of the Legal Educa tion Committee of the Bar Council of 
India, in which case the same pro cedure will be followed by the Legal 
Education Committee of the Bar Council of India, which it follows in the 
matter of proposals initiated by it. 
        ( p a r a  4 . 4 )  
 
12) The Bar Council of India should implement the decisions of the 
Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India. 
        ( p a r a  4 . 1 5 )  
 
13) The Bar Council Legal Educa tion Committee should take into 
consideration various factors mentioned in para 4.17 before passing any 
resolution in respect of standards of legal education.   
        ( p a r a  4 . 1 7 )  
 
14) Section 7(1)(h) be amended to provide that standards of legal 
education shall be laid down by th e Bar Council of India in accordance 
with the recommendations made by th e Legal Education Committee of the 
Bar Council of India after consultation with the State Bar Councils and the 
Legal Education Committee of the UGC, as mentioned in the proposed 
section 10AA and the word, ‘standard s’ shall mean various matters 
referring to curricula etc. as detailed in para 5.24. 

 129
        ( p a r a  5 . 2 4 )  
 
15) ADR training must be introduced for law student and lawyers as 
follows:  
(1) for students, ADR system to be made compulsory subject in 
LL.B. course; and  
(2) for lawyers, short-term training, certificate, diploma courses 
on ADR to be introduced on a massive  scale all over the country, for 
purpose of section 89 of Civil Procedure Code. 
         ( p a r a  6 . 5 ,  6 . 6 )  
 
16) The High Court and the Bar Council of India, the State Bar Councils, 
the Indian Law Institute and the ICADR and similar organizations should 
start ADR training programmes for lawyers and judicial officers.  The 
training should be a short one for one week, or it may be one-month 
certificate course or a six-month or a one-year diploma course. 
 
         ( p a r a  6 . 1 1 )  
 
17) Section 7 (1) (h) to be amended to enable the Bar Council of India to 
promote ADR as a subject of academic  study in the law school to students 
and also to promote continuing education on ADR to legal practitioner. 
         ( p a r a  6 . 1 1 )  
 
18) Bar Council of India can lay down minimum standards necessary for 
courses for students who will come into legal profession but not in respect 
of other law courses which do not lead to a professional career.  UGC can 

 130
prescribe higher standards.       
        (para  4.10 to 4.12) 
 
19) UGC and BCI to introduce a sy stem of Accreditation of law 
colleges.  Section 7 (1) (h) should be  amended to enable Bar Council of 
India to promote excellence in le gal education for the purpose of 
accreditation system.   
        ( p a r a  5 . 2 2 )  
 
20) It is proposed to recommend amendm ent of clause (h) in sec. 7(1) 
enabling the Bar Council of India to lay down procedure and conditions for 
appointment of Adjunct teachers who are to be appointed from among 
members of the Bar and the retired Judges.  This has to be done in 
consultation with the State Bar Councils and the Legal Education 
Committee of the Bar Council of India and the Legal Education Committee 
of the UGC. 
        ( p a r a  7 . 1 2 )  
 
21) It is proposed that a separate provision be inserted in the Advocates 
Act for providing that no law college or  a law department of a university 
shall impart instructions in course of  study in law which lead to enrolment 
as an advocate unless a permission ha s been granted by the Bar Council of 
India in this regard. It is also proposed that no law college or law 
department of university or any other institution shall continue to impart 
instruction in such course, if the permission granted by the Bar Council of 
India has been withdrawn. Further that any fees collected towards 
admission in violation of this provisi on shall be refunded.  It is also 

 131
proposed that violation of this pr ovision shall amount to an offence 
punishable under proposed new section 45A. 
 It is proposed that existing secti on 7A be renumbered as 7D and after 
section 7, above mentioned provision be inserted. 
        (paras 8.3.1 & 8.3.2) 
 
22) A separate clause in sub-section (1) of section 7 be  added to enable 
the Bar Council of India to grant permission for imparting instruction to a 
law department of a university or a law college and to withdraw such 
permission.   
        ( p a r a  8 . 1 3 )  
 
23) It is recommended that separate provisions be incorporated in the 
Advocates Act, 1961 for providing that  in case of any conflict in the 
inspection reports of the Bar Council of India and of the UGC/Universities 
or where there is a big gap between th e claims of the management and the 
Inspection Committee, a Task Force should make inspection on the same 
lines as in the Regulations of the AI CTE in which a Judicial Officer would 
be a member.  For this purpose, it is proposed that new sections 7B and 7C 
be added in the Advocates Act.  Consequently, inspection Rules framed by 
the Bar Council of India should be amended.   
        ( p a r a  8 . 1 2 )  
 
24) The existing section 7 (1) (i) should deal only with recognition of 
universities.  For the purpose of inspection of law colleges and universities, 
separate provisions should be inserted in the form of section 7B and 7C.   

 132
 Consequently, sections 6 (1) (gg), 7 (1) (i), 49 (1) are also required to 
be amended. 
        ( p a r a  8 . 1 3 )  
 
25) It is recommended that the ‘problem method’ be introduced in the 
examination system to an extent of about 75% in each paper, apart from 
25% for theory.   The students shoul d obtain a separate minimum number 
of marks for the theory and a separate minimum in the problem part of the 
examination.  This will enable the students to apply their mind seriously to 
every subject.  This will also elim inate malpractices like copying or 
seeking help of invigilators.  A ttendance to classes is also bound to 
improve. 
(para 9.21) 
 
26) It is also recommended that the c linical legal education may be made 
a compulsory in legal education. 
        ( p a r a  9 . 1 5 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 133
 
27) The Central Government should start at least four colleges in the 
country for providing professional trai ning to law teachers in consultation 
with the Bar Council of India and the University Grants Commission.   
        ( p a r a  9 . 1 8 )  
 
28 Section 7 (1) may be amended by adding clauses (ie) and (if) as 
follows: 
“(ie) to take such measures to establish institutions for continuing 
legal education for law teachers; 
 (if) to take measures for raising the standards of teaching in law  in 
consultation with the Central Government, the State Governments 
and the University Grants Commission.” 
        ( p a r a  9 . 2 0 )  
29) It is recommend that in sec. 7 (1), clause (ig) be added as follows: 
“(ig) to create awareness of the late st trends in  legal education by  
establishing legal education libraries at the offices of the Bar Council 
of India and all State Bar Counc ils and universities and in  law 
colleges.” 
        ( p a r a  1 0 . 9 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 134
 
30) Section 7(1) (i) to be ame nded for providing disaffiliation or 
derecognition of a College or a Univers ity in case a College  or University 
does not implement the lawful directi ons of the Bar Council of India or 
State Bar Councils. 
        ( p a r a  1 1 . 1 )  
31) In Section 49 (1) following clause should be added, namely: 
“(aj) the procedure regarding rec ognition and de-recognition of such 
universities as referred to in clause (i) of sub-section(1) of section 7 
and the procedure regarding the issuing of direction to a university to 
disaffiliate a Law college;” 
        ( p a r a  1 1 . 3 )  
32) Training for one-year (Apprenticeshi p) in the Chambers of a lawyer 
with at least ten years standing and Bar  Examination to be introduced for a 
law graduate before he enters the legal profession, by amendment of the 
Act.  Power to do so to be vested only in Bar Council of India.  Sections 7, 
24 and 49 to be amended.   
        ( p a r a  1 2 . 2 3 )  
33) Officers in private or public se rvice, dismissed or removed from 
service or convicted on the ground of charges involving moral turpitude, to 
be debarred totally from entering into  the profession.  Section 24A (1) 
should be amended. 
       (paras 13.2 & 13.6) 

 135
We recommend accordingly.  
 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Member 
 
 
 
(T.K. Viswanathan) 
Member-Secretary 
Dated: 20.12.2002 
 
 