Law Commission of India 
 
185th Report 
 
  
 
on 
 
 
 
  
 
 
REVIEW  OF  THE  INDIAN  EVIDENCE     
ACT,  1872 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March, 2003 
 

 
 
DO No.6(3)(70)/2001-LC(LS)      13 th March, 2003 
 
 
Dear Sri Arun Jaitley, 
 
 The Law Commission has great pleasure in submitting its 185 th Report 
on Review of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, along with a draft Bill.  It is 
one of its most comprehensive Reports on the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
 
 By the letter of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs 
(Government of India) issued with the approval of the Minister of State for 
Law, Justice & Co. Affairs in D. No . 3273/95-9 dt. Sept., 28, 1995, the 69 th 
Report submitted by Justice P.B. Gaje ndragadkar and other Members dt. 
9.5.1977 was sent back to the Law Commission only on the ground of lapse 
of time before it was implemented.   By  subsequent letters of Jan. 1, 2001, 
DO No.15/1/2001(ii) dt. 19/22 June 2001, and FNo. 7(11)/83-IC dt. 
2.5.2002, reminders were sent.    The Commission has taken up 
reconsideration consequent to these letters. 
 
 Law of Evidence is one of the mo st important laws administered by 
our civil and criminal courts.    Since 1872, when the present Act was 
enacted, there has been a sea-change in human rights jurisprudence all over 
the world.   Seventy years later, basic principles governing human rights 
were enunciated in the Universal Decl aration of Human Rights, 1948.  This 
was followed by the International Cove nant on Civil and Political Rights, 
1966.  The said Convention has been  ratified by India in 1976.   Our 
Constitution came into effect from Janua ry 26, 1950.   Art. 20(3) of our 
Constitution declares the fundamental right  against self-incrimination.  Art. 
21 guarantees liberty and a right to pr ocedure established by law which after 
Maneka Gandhi , requires the procedure to be just, fair and equitable.  
Principles of evidence which are app licable to criminal law have to 
necessarily satisfy the basic requirement s both of Art. 20(3) and Art. 21.   
Nor can the procedure be discriminato ry or arbitrary, otherwise it may 
offend Art. 14.   Special protection is  necessary for women who are victims 
of crime.  Transparency in government al functioning is an essential feature 
of democracy.  Press freedom has to  be protected and its boundaries 
delineated. 
 

 The proposed amendments are in tended to conform to these new 
standards. 
 
 We may very briefly highli ght a few of the important 
recommendations made in this Report.  Admissibility or otherwise of 
confessions is covered by sections 24 to 29.  We have proposed amendment 
to sec. 27 to conform to the several judgments of the Courts.  Sarkar in his 
commentary on the Evidence Act, 1872 (15 th Ed., 1999, p.534) has stated 
that while sec. 27 requires to be ame nded, only a person of the eminence of 
Sir James Stephen can make an attempt.    Such was the magnitude of the 
task under sec. 27.  Sec. 27 is now pr oposed to be an exception to sections 
24 to 26.  By the introduction of the wo rd ‘or’ it applies to facts discovered 
from statements by those in custody and not in custody.  The words 
‘distinctively’ and ‘so much of such  information’, are proposed to be 
deleted.  Under sec. 27, it is furt her proposed that facts discovered from 
statements can be admitted in evidence only if the statements have not been 
made under threats, cruelty, violence or torture.   Facts discovered by 
inducement or promise will still be relevant. 
 
 We had to differ totally fro m the recommendation in the 69th Report to 
incorporation of sec. 26A to make a ll confessions to senior police officers 
admissible irrespective of the nature  of the offences, a recommendation 
which according to us, goes contrary to  the views of the Supreme Court and 
in particular, the views expressed in Kehar Singh’s  case.   What can be 
sustained under Art. 14 or 21 as an exception in the case of terrorist’s 
confessions or of those involved in organized crime, cannot be made a 
general rule and a pplied to the admission in evidence of every confession 
made to a senior police offi cer, in the context of ever y other offence.   This 
would, as per the statement of the la w by the Supreme Court, violate Art. 14 
and 21 and all considerations of propor tionality.    While not accepting sec. 
26A as proposed in the 69 th Report, we have however proposed amendments 
in regard to accomplices’ evidence,  conspiracy, hostile witnesses, 
compellability of accused and witnesses to give evidence. 
 
 Under sec. 59, which deals with or al evidence, we have dealt with 
video-conference and video-recorded ev idence.  We have referred to recent 
developments in USA, New Zealand,  Australia and UK.   We have, 
however, given reasons as to why we are not making a separate provision. 
 

 Regarding ‘affairs of State’ and production of unpublished 
government records and ‘confidential communications’ to a public officer, 
amendments are proposed to sections 123, 124 and 162, taking into account 
changes in the law as declared in 
S.P. Gupta .    We have accepted the 
recommendation in the 69 th Report and the 88 th Reports which are identical 
in this behalf.    We have, however, proposed one change.    Instead of an 
appeal, as proposed in the 88 th Report from orders of subordinate Courts on 
questions as to affairs of State d ecided under sec. 123, we have proposed 
that there should be a ‘reference’ to  the High Court on the said question by 
the subordinate Court. 
 
 With reference to proof of patern ity, in sec. 112, apart from the sole 
exception of ‘non-access’, other exceptions by way of blood-group tests, 
DNA have been proposed but subject to very stringent conditions.    Further, 
the benefit of the presumption as to paternity in case of those born during the 
continuance of a marriage or within two hundred eighty days of dissolution, 
is now extended not only to childre n of voidable marriages which are 
avoided but to children of void marriag es where a declaration of nullity is 
obtained, provided such children are,  under their respective personal laws, 
treated as legitimate. 
 
 Compulsorily calling an attestor to prove documents required to be 
attested is proposed to be dispensed with as done in UK in 1938, except in 
the case of wills.  Sections 68 to 71 ar e proposed to be modified and made 
applicable to wills only. 
 
 Presumption of genuineness of an cient documents is proposed to 
apply, in sec. 90, to documents 20 years old rather than 30 years old as done 
in other countries.   It is also proposed to introduce subsection (2) to sec. 90 
to include registered documents the orig inals of which are twenty years old, 
as done in UP by 1954 Amendment.  S ec. 90 raises presumption as to 
execution, handwriting and attestation.  Sec. 90A is proposed, as done in UP 
in 1954, in respect of registered docum ents, the originals of which are less 
than twenty years old, to raise only a presumption of execution. 
 
 With reference to persons whose whereabouts are not known, 
presumption under sec. 108 is modified.     As to presumption of death by a 
particular date, we propose to clarif y, while not accepting the view of the 
Privy Council that, at the end of 7 years, the death must be presumed, unless 
the person who wants to prove the person was alive after 7 years, is able to 

prove that fact.   Of course, if a pa rty contends that the person died by any 
particular date within 7 years, he has to prove the same.  The proposed 
amendment helps persons to take decisions in respect of remarriage or 
succession. 
 
 A new provision 108A in respect of  simultaneous deaths is proposed 
and a special provision therein covers cases where both spouses die in the 
same accident or calamity.    This was proposed in the 69 th Report.   Similar 
provisions are there in other countries.    It is proposed that, where claims are 
made to the estate of one spouse, the ot her spouse, even if he or she is the 
younger one, should be presumed to have  predeceased, so that the heirs of 
the younger one do not take aw ay the property of the other spouse, in every 
case of simultaneous death.  This is the position in UK and USA.   There is a 
further exception proposed by us, where the younger spouse is the sole heir 
or one of the heirs. 
 
 Quite a good number among the proposed amendments concern proof 
by primary and secondary evidence.  Special provision for communications 
during marriage (sec. 122) are propos ed following recent ruling of the 
English Courts. 
 
 Sec. 132A is proposed to protect the media from being compelled to 
disclose the source of their publi cation, except in cases where the 
publication affects the sovereignty, inte grity of India, security of State, 
friendly relations with foreign State,  public order, decency, morality or 
contempt of Court.  We have survey ed the law in UK and elsewhere and in 
particular the recent decision of the European Court in Goodwin’s case.  We 
have also referred  to the recommendations made in the 132 nd Report by 
Justice K.K. Mathew. 
 
 We have proposed sections 132B, 132C covering privilege in regard 
to communication with patent and trademark agents as in UK. 
 
 Regarding questioning a woman about her previous character, we 
found that the proviso added below s ec. 146(3) by the recent amendment of 
2002 is narrow and we have enlarged the privilege as recommended in the 
172nd Report.  These proposals as to que stions relating to character are 
contained in sections 53A and 156(4). 
 

 A host of other amendments, in all, more than one hundred are finally 
suggested. 
 
 As to the applicability of these pr oposals, we have proposed that the 
proposed amendments should apply to civil proceedings where the 
examination of witnesses has not  yet commenced on the date of 
commencement of the proposed Ame nding Act.  (Some Explanations 
introduced, we felt, could however be re trospective.)   So far as criminal 
proceedings are concerned, we have proposed that the amendments shall 
apply only if the offences concer ned are those committed after the 
commencement of the proposed Amending Act.   We are grateful to Sri 
Vepa P. Sarathi, former Member of  the Law Commission for scrutinizing  
our first draft of the Report and giving his valuable suggestions. 
 
 The 69 th Report submitted in 1977 was returned to the Law 
Commission in 1995 only on the ground that several years had lapsed before 
it could be taken up for implementation.   We hope, at least, that the present 
Report which is an exhaustive study r unning into more than 950 pages, and 
prepared over a period of nearly one year, will not go in vain but will be 
taken up for legislation at an  early date.    To facilitate early law reform, we 
have annexed a Draft Bill to this Report running into ninetynine sections. 
  
 With regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
Sri Arun Jaitley 
Union Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
NEW DELHI 
 
        
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS                                   PAGES 
                    
Ch. I  Introductory      1-4 
 
Ch. II           Review of the provisions of the 
                    Indian Evidence Act,1872   5- 834 
 
Ch. III Summary of recommendations   835-946 
 
Annexure The Indian Evidence (Amendment ) 
  Bill, 2003      1-57 
 
 