LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
PROPOSAL TO CONSTITUTE ENVIRONMENT
 COURTS
SEPTEMBER, 2003

JUSTICE
M. JAGANNADHA RAO LAW COMMISSION OF
INDIA
Chairman SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI-110001
TEL. : 3384475
FAX: 3073864,3388870
Residence:
1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI-110011
TEL. : 3019465
DO No.6(3)84/2003-LC(LS)   September 23,
2003
Dear Sri Arun Jaitley ji,
I have great pleasure in forwarding the 186th Report of the Law Commission on ‘Proposal to
constitute Environment Courts’.
Pursuant to the observations of the Supreme Court of India in four judgments, namely, M.C. Mehta
vs. Union of India, 1986 (2) SCC 176; Indian Council for Environmental-Legal Action Vs Union of India:
1996(3)SCC 212;  A.P. Pollution Control Board Vs M.V. Nayudu:1999(2)SCC 718  and A.P. Pollution
Control Board Vs M.V. Nayudu II: 2001(2)SCC62, the Law Commission has undertaken a detailed study of
the subject of “Environmental Courts”.  In the 3rd of the above judgments, reference was made to the idea of
a “multi-faceted” Environmental Court with judicial and technical/scientific inputs as formulated by Lord
Woolf in England recently and to Environmental Court legislations as they exist in Australia, New Zealand
and other countries.  Having regard to the complex issues of fact of science and technology which arise in
environmental litigation  and  in  particular  in  the  elimination  of  pollution  in air  and  water,  it  is now
recognized in several countries that the Courts must not only consist of Judicial Members but must also
have a statutory panel of members comprising Technical or Scientific experts.   We may in this context refer
to the recent  Report of Dr. Malcolm Grant in UK(2000) and also to the Report of the Royal Commission
(23rd Report , March 2002).
With Judicial and Technical inputs on the Bench, the Environmental Courts in Australia and New
Zealand function as appellate Courts against orders passed under the corresponding Water Acts, Air Acts
and Noise Acts and various Environment related Acts and also have original jurisdiction.   They have all the
powers of a Civil Court.  Some have  even powers of a Criminal Court.
The Commission has, therefore, prepared a Report (copy enclosed)  containing Chapters I to X
reviewing the Laws on “Environment Courts”  in each State (or for group of States) and suggested in
Chapters IX and X that these Courts must be established to reduce the pressure and burden on the High
Courts and Supreme Court.   These Courts will be Courts of fact and law, exercising all powers of a civil
court in its original jurisdiction.  They will also have appellate judicial powers against orders passed by the
concerned authorities under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Air (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  with an enabling provision
that the Central Government may notify these Courts as appellate courts under other environment related
Acts as well.  Such a law can be made under Art. 253 of the Constitution of India, read with Entry 13A of
List  I  of  Schedule  VII  to  give  effect  to decisions  taken in Stockholm Conference  of  1972  and  Rio
Conference of 1992.
The proposed Environment Courts at the State level will, in the Commission’s view, be accessible
to citizens in each State.
2

It has been, however, reported in the press recently that Government has taken a decision that there
will not only be regional authorities constituted under Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
(for which there can be no objection) but that there will be a single appellate body (consisting inter alia, a
Supreme Court Judge) at Delhi.  It is also reported that the Union Cabinet has approved this proposal.  
The Commission is of the view that if there is a single appellate authority as proposed, at Delhi, it
will be almost inaccessible to the citizens of the country in remote parts and serious issues relating to
environment will remain  un-addressed since there will not be an effective right of access to Courts.  The
appeal, it will be noticed, is the first opportunity for affected citizens to question decisions taken by the
authorities.   Further, in the proposal of the Government, there is no provision for technical/scientific inputs
in the centralized Appellate Authority.   Moreover, the proposal does not make the said Court at Delhi an
appellate authority under the Water Act or Air Act but it remains an  appellate authority  only for purposes
of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.   As at present, the appellate authorities under the Water Act
and Air Act are government officials and there are neither Judges nor Technical personnel involved in the
decision making process under those Acts and orders passed thereunder are being questioned only under
Art. 226 or Art. 32.  There is no reason why the appeals under these two Acts should not go before a
Judicial body within each State.
The scheme proposed by the Law Commission in this Report, on the other hand,
is very comprehensive.  The Judicial body will be an Environment Court at State
Level consisting of sitting/retired judges or members of the Bar with more than 20
years standing, assisted by a statutory panel of experts in each State.  It will be a
Court of original jurisdiction on all environmental issues and also an appellate
authority under all the three Acts, viz., Water Act, Air Act and Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 and will reduce the burden of  High Courts/Supreme Court.
There will lie a further statutory appeal direct to the Supreme Court against the
judgment  of  the  proposed  Environment  Court.   In  our  view,  this  scheme  is
preferable to the Government’s proposal of a single appellate Court at Delhi,
which will be beyond the reach of affected parties.
We, therefore, request you to kindly take up the matter with the Ministry of  Environment for
further discussion at your earliest, before any law is passed in this behalf.
With regards 
Yours sincerely,
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Shri Arun Jaitley
Union Minister  for Law and Justice
Government of India
NEW DELHI.
3

I N D E X
Chapter Pages
I Introductory
1-6
II Uncertainty of Science and Problems of Environment Courts     7-18
III. The Constitutional Mandate and Survey of Supreme Court’s
Judgments on Environmental Issues 19-49
IV Environmental Courts in other countries 50-86
V. Environmental Courts or Appellate Environmental bodies
in India as at present 87-95
VI Two other Statutory Environmental Tribunals & Defects
therein          96-100
VII Can a law made by Parliament under Art 252 (Like the Water
(P&CP) Act, 1974), be amended by Parliament under a law 
made under Art. 253?  What is the purpose of Art. 247?        101-116
VIII Environmental Courts to follow certain Fundamental
Principles        117-135
IX Proposals for Environmental Courts in India
136-158
X Recommendations        159-164
********
4

Chapter I
INTRODUCTORY
In the Judgment of the Supreme Court of India in  A.P. Pollution
Control Board vs. M.V. Nayudu: 1999(2) SCC 718, the Court referred to the
need for establishing Environmental Courts which would have the benefit of
expert advice from environmental scientists/technically qualified persons, as
part of the judicial process, after an elaborate discussion of the views of
jurists in various countries.  In the subsequent follow-up judgment in A.P.
Pollution Control Board vs.  M.V. Nayudu: 2001(2) SCC 62, the Supreme
Court, referred to the serious differences in the constitution of appellate
authorities under plenary as well as delegated legislation (the reference here
is to the appellate authorities constituted under the Water (Prevention and
Control  of  Pollution)  Act,  1974  and  Air  (Prevention  and  Control  of
Pollution) Act, 1981), and pointed out that except in one State where the
appellate authority was manned by a retired High Court Judge, in other
States they were manned only by bureaucrats.  These appellate authorities
were not having either judicial or environment back-up on the Bench.  The
Supreme Court opined that the Law Commission could therefore examine
the disparities in the constitution of these quasi- judicial bodies and suggest
a new scheme so that there could be uniformity in the structure of the quasi-
judicial  bodies  which  supervise  the  orders  passed  by  administrative  or
public authorities, including orders of the Government.   For instance, these
5

appellate bodies can examine the correctness of the decision of a pollution
control board to grant or refuse a no-objection certificate to an industry  in
terms of the Water Act.    Environmental Courts were advocated in two
earlier judgments also.  One was M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India: 1986(2)
SCC 176 (at page 202) where the Supreme Court said that in as much as
environment cases involve assessment of scientific data, it was desirable to
set up environment courts on a regional basis with a professional Judge and
two experts, keeping in view the expertise required for such adjudication.
There should be an appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of the
environment court.  The other judgment was  Indian Council for Enviro-
Legal Action vs. Union of India, 1996(3) SCC 212, in which the Supreme
Court observed (see p. 252) that Environmental Courts having civil and
criminal jurisdiction must be established to deal with the environmental
issues in a speedy manner.
We  may  also  state  that  the  National  Environmental  Appellate
Authority  constituted  under  the  National  Environmental  Appellate
Authority Act, 1997, for the limited purpose of providing a forum to review
the administrative decisions on Environment Impact Assessment, had very
little work.    It appears that since the year 2000, no Judicial Member has
been appointed.  So far as the National Environmental Tribunal Act, 1995 is
concerned, the legislation has yet to be notified despite the expiry of eight
years.   Since it was enacted by Parliament, the Tribunal under the Act is yet
to be constituted.   Thus, these two Tribunals are non-functional and remain
only on paper.
6

In view of the observations of the Supreme Court in the above said
judgments, and having regard to the inadequacies of the existing appellate
authorities, - which neither contain judges nor have the assistance of experts
- and their limited jurisdiction, - the Commission proposed to review the
position with a view to bring uniformity in the constitution of these bodies
and the scope of their jurisdiction.   These bodies must, in our view, be
called  ‘Environmental  Courts’  and  should  consist  of  judicial  members
assisted by technical experts.  Our scheme as proposed in Chapter IX is that
there should be an Environmental Court in each State (or in some cases for
one or more States) which should be able to take on the burden of the
environmental cases from the High Courts and at the same time decide these
cases with the help of experts.   An Environmental Court at the level of each
State is proposed so as to be accessible to the litigants in each State.   The
said Court must have appellate jurisdiction over the authorities under Water
Act, 1974, Air Act, 1981 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.     It
is proposed that the Environment Court should exercise original as well as
appellate jurisdiction.  It should be able to grant all orders which a Civil
Court could grant, including the grant of ‘compensation’ as visualized by
the National Environmental Tribunal Act, 1995.
The  alternative  suggestion  for  having  a  single  appellate  Court  at
Delhi  over the statutory authorities  has  not appealed  to us  inasmuch  as
practically no person or groups of persons residing in any local area who are
aggrieved by orders of these authorities will be able to come all the way to
Delhi to raise their grievances.  If the Court is a single Court in Delhi, it will
not be accessible and several environmental issues will remain stagnant,
may not  be  pursued  and  will  remain  unadjudicated  by a  Court  of  law.
7

Access  to justice,  particularly, in  matters  relating  to  environment,  is  an
essential facet of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The proposals for
constitution of Environmental Court is dealt with in detail in Chapter IX.
While dealing with this subject of Environmental Courts, which is of
great importance for the millions of our country, we have to keep in mind
several aspects such as the following:
(a) The uncertainties of scientific conclusions and the need to provide,
not  only  expert  advice  from  the  Bar  but  also  a  system  of
independent expert advice to the Bench itself.
(b) The  present  inadequacy  of  the  knowledge  of  Judges  on  the
scientific and technical aspects of environmental issues, such as,
whether  the  levels  of  pollution  in  a  local  area  are  within
permissible  limits  or  whether  higher  standards  of  permissible
limits of pollution require to be set up.
(c) The  need  to  maintain  a  proper  balance  between  sustainable
development and control/regulation of pollution by industries.
(d) The  need  to  strike  a  balance  between  closure  of  polluting
industries  and  reducing  or  avoiding  unemployment  or  loss  of
livelihood.
(e) The need to make a final appellate view at the level of each State
on decisions regarding ‘environmental impact assessment’.
(f) The need to develop a jurisprudence in this branch of law which is
also  in  accord  with  scientific,  technological  developments  and
international treaties, conventions or decisions.
8

(g) To achieve the objectives of Art. 21, 47, 48A and 51A(g) of the
Constitution  of  India  by means  of  a  fair,  fast  and  satisfactory
judicial procedure.
In this context, several important questions arise for consideration:
(a) In as much as the proposed changes in law, in some respects, (like
water)  relate  to  entries  in  List  II  of  the  VII  Schedule  to  the
Constitution,  can Parliament  enact a law under Art  253  of the
Constitution  for  constituting  Environmental  Courts  both  in  the
States as well as the Centre, without the need for legislation by
States or even resolutions of State legislatures under Art. 252?
(b) Should there be one Environment Court in each State?
(c) Should  these  Courts  oust  the  jurisdiction  of  the  High
Courts/Supreme Court or should it be left to the discretion of these
superior Courts to direct parties to first exhaust (seek) the effective
alternative  remedy  before  the  proposed  Environmental  Courts?
Should  the  jurisdiction  of  normal  civil  and  criminal  courts  be
totally ousted?
(d) Is there need for a further Environmental Appellate Court at Delhi
exercising  jurisdiction  over  the  State  Environmental  Courts  or
should there be a direct appeal to the Supreme Court from the
State Environmental Courts?
(e) What  should  be  the  nature  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  State
Environmental Courts, - should it be only appellate jurisdiction
against  orders  of  administrative  or  public  authorities  and
9

government  but  also  original  jurisdiction,  so  as  to  reduce  the
burden of PILs in the High Courts?
(f) What should be the composition of the Courts and qualification of
the Members?
(g) What should be the procedure of these Environmental Courts?
(h) Should public interest or class actions cases be allowed before the
these Courts?
(i) What relief these Courts should be able to grant – ad interim, final,
injunctions (permanent and mandatory), appointment of receivers,
grant of compensation/damages etc.?
(j) Should they exercise civil as well as criminal jurisdiction?
(k) What is the mode of execution of the orders?
(l) Should the Court have power to punish wilful disobedience of its
orders by exercising power of contempt of Court?
(m) Should  the  National  Environment  Tribunal  Act,  1995  and  the
National Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997 be repealed
and powers and jurisdiction of the tribunals thereunder be vested
in the proposed State Environmental Courts?
These and various other aspects concerning Environmental Courts are
proposed to be discussed in the following Chapters.
10

Chapter II
UNCERTAINTY OF SCIENCE AND PROBLEMS OF
ENVIRONMENTAL COURTS
While the advances in science and technology in the last few decades
have been extraordinary, the fact remains that in certain areas concerning
environment,  where  the  data  play  a  crucial  role,  results  of  experiments
conducted by scientific institutions have remained tentative.  The results are
accurate  in  proportion  to  the  accuracy  of  data  and  to  the  extent  that
experiment by use of technology has been able to eliminate all chances of
inaccurate conclusions.  In a recent book, it is stated:
“Faced  with  the  growing  complexity  and  globality  of  ecological
phenomenon, science has ceased to be omnipotent.  Strictly speaking,
it  is  no longer possible  to have so-called  technical  standards  that
express the facts in a definitive manner.  Complete scientific certainty
is the exception, rather than the norm.  As pointed out in Hans Jones’
‘The Imperative  of Responsibility’, a paradigm of uncertainty has
taken the place of certainty; “whereas Descartes recommended that
we  hold  as  false  everything  that  can  be  questioned,  faced  with
planetary risks, it would, on the contrary be advisable to treat doubt
as a possible certainty and thus as a fundamentally positive element in
any  decision.  ….no  longer  omniscient,  science  will  not  have  the
power  categorically  to  express  single  truth…….  Henceforth,
however,  when  scientists  are  committed,  they  will  inform  the
11

decision-maker  that  their  knowledge  is  incomplete  and  express
doubts and differences, even ignorance…..The disappearance of the
alliance  between  knowledge  and  power  will  shatter  the  Weberian
myth of the expert providing indisputable knowledge to a politician
who takes decisions that reflect the values he defends.”
(Environmental  Principles  by  Nicolas  de  Sadeleer,  Ch.3,
‘Precautionary Principle’, p. 177-178, Oxford University Press, 2002)
The U.S. Supreme Court, in its landmark judgment in Daubert vs.  Merrel
Dow  Pharmaceuticals  Inc:  (1993)  113  S.ct.  2786  while  referring  to  the
different goals of science and law in the ascertainment of truth observed as
follows:
“…there are important differences between the quest for truth in the
court-room  and  the  quest  for  truth  in  the  laboratory.   Scientific
conclusions are subject to perpetual revision.  Law, on the other hand,
must resolve disputes finally and quickly.”
On the same lines, Mr. Brian Wyne states in his article ‘Uncertainty and
Environmental  hearing:  (Vol.2,  Global  Envtl.  Change  p  111)(1992)  as
follows:
“Uncertainty,  resulting  from  inadequate  data,  ignorance  and
indeterminacy, is an inherent part of science.”
Uncertainty  becomes  a  problem  when  scientific  knowledge  is
institutionalized in policy-making or used as a basis for decision-making by
12

agencies and Courts.  Scientists may refine, modify or discard variables or
models when more information is available: however, agencies and courts
must make choices based on existing scientific knowledge.  In addition,
agency decision-making evidence is generally presented in a scientific form
that cannot be easily tested.  Therefore, inadequacies in the record due to
uncertainty  or  insufficient  knowledge  may  not  be  properly  considered.
(Charmian Barton:  The Status of the Precautionary Principle in Australia:
(Vol 22, Harvard Environmental Law Rev. p 509 at pp 510-511 (1998).
The reason for scientific inaccuracies can be summarized as follows:
‘The  inadequacies  of science  result  from identification  of  adverse
effects of a hazard and then working backwards to find the causes.
Secondly, clinical tests are performed, particularly where toxins are
involved, on animals and not on humans,- that is to say, are based on
animal studies or short term cell-testing.  Thirdly, conclusions based
on epidemiological studies are flawed by the scientists’ inability to
control  or  even  accurately  assess  past  exposure  of  the  subjects.
Moreover, these studies do not permit the scientists to isolate the
effects  of the substance  of concern.   The latency period  of many
carcinogens  and  the  toxins  exacerbates  problems  of  later
interpretation.  The timing between exposure and observable effect
creates intolerable delays before regulation occurs’ (see Alyson C.
Flournay:  Scientific  Uncertainty  in  Protective  Environmental
Decision-Making’ (Vol 15, 1991. Harv. Environmental Law Rev. p
327 at pp 333-335).  
13

From the above survey of views, it is quite clear that the opinions as
to science which may be placed before the Court keep the Judge always
guessing whether to accept the fears expressed by an affected party or to
accept the assurances given by a polluter.
In an earlier case, namely, Vincent vs. Union of India: (AIR 1987 SC
990),  a  direction  was  sought  in  public  interest,  for  banning  import,
manufacture, sale and distribution of certain drugs as recommended by the
Drugs Consultative Committee.  In this case the Supreme Court did not
think  of  referring  the  matter  to  an  independent  scientific  body  but  felt
compelled to accept the Committee’s Report.  It said:
“Having regard to the magnitude, complexity and technical nature of
the  enquiry  involved  in  the  matter  and  keeping  in  view  the  far-
reaching implications of the total ban of certain medicines for which
the petitioner has prayed, we must at the outset clearly indicate that a
judicial proceeding of the nature initiated is not an appropriate one
for determination of such matters.”
The Court felt that once the experts had approved or disapproved the
drugs, the Court will not go into the correctness of their decision.
But, in a latter case, the Supreme Court made an effort to refer the
issues to an independent committee of experts.  In Dr. Shivrao vs. Union of
India:  AIR  1988  SC  953,  7500  cartons  (200  MT)  of  Irish  Butter  were
imported  into  India  under  the  EEC  Grants-in-Aid  for  Operation  Flood
Programme and  supplied  to Greater  Bombay.  The use of the  imported
14

butter was challenged on the ground that the butter was contaminated by
nuclear fallout.  The Bombay High Court dismissed the writ petition relying
on the report of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, a statutory body.  The
Report  however  referred  to  ‘permissible  limits’.   Fortunately,  when  the
matter  came  to  the  Supreme  Court,  the  Court  ‘thought  it  desirable’  to
appoint a committee of three experts (1) Prof. M.G.K. Menon, (2) Dr. P.K.
Iyengar and (3) G.V.K. Rao to go into the correctness  of the so called
‘permissible limits’ and to give its report on the following question:
“Whether milk and dairy products and other food products containing
man-made radio-nuclides  within  permissible  levels by the  Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board  on  27th August,  1987,  are safe  and  /or,
harmless for human consumption.”
The Committee of Experts gave a Report stating that the ‘permissible limits’
laid down by the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board were arrived at after due
consideration  of ‘ICRP limits  for the General  Population’, that the said
Board had, in fact, allowed a further safety margin and that the levels fixed
were ‘safe and harmless’.  The Court accepted the Report of Experts and
confirmed the dismissal of the writ petition.  
In like manner,  in A.P. Pollution Control Board vs.  M.V. Nayudu
1999(2) SCC 718, the Court proceeded to have the claims of the party tested
by experts.  There the question was whether the industry was a hazardous
one and whether, in case it became operational, the chemical ingredients
produced would sooner or later percolate into the substratum of the earth,
get mixed  up  with  the  underground  waters  which  flow  into  huge lakes
15

which are the main sources of drinking water to two metro cities.  The issue
was  whether  the  oil  derivatives  such  as  hydrogenated  castor  oil,  12-
hydroxystearic acid, dehydrated castor oil, methylated 12-HAS, DCO, fatty
acids  and  by-products  like  glycerine,  spent  bleaching  earth,  carbon  and
spent nickel catalyst would enter the underground water streams flowing
into the water lakes.  Nickel, which was part of the residue, it was common
ground, would be poisonous, if it percolated into the lakes.   The industry
filed a report of an expert which was accepted by the appellate authority
constituted under sec. 28 of the Water Act, 1974 manned by a retired High
Court Judge.  The learned Judge, basing his decision on the opinion of a
single scientist which was produced by the industry, came to the conclusion
that if the industry became operational, it would not pose any hazard to the
drinking  water.  This  decision  was affirmed by the  High  Court  in  writ
jurisdiction under Art 226 of the Constitution of India.  The High Court too
simply went by the opinion of the expert scientist which was produced by
the industry.  But the Supreme Court felt that the opinion of the scientist
was  not  tested or scrutinized  by any expert  body and required  it  to  be
thoroughly examined.  The Supreme Court sought expert advice from the
National Environmental Appellate Authority (NEAA), which consisted of a
retired Judge of the Supreme Court and other experts.  The NEAA was
permitted to take evidence and obtain technical help from other scientific
institutions.
The  NEAA visited the  site, took  oral  evidence, examined  various
technical aspects and gave an elaborate report, containing vast scientific
data, as to why the industry should not be permitted to operate.  It also
consulted  the  Central  Ground  Water  Board.   The  NEAA  Report  went
16

against the industry.  When the matter again came before Court, the industry
relied upon an earlier order of the A.P. Pollution Control Board that the
industry could be permitted to function if certain safeguards were complied
with.  The industry sought a further opportunity on this limited contention.
The  Court  then  referred  the  matter  to  the  University  Department  of
Chemical Technology, Bombay, to be assisted by the National Geophysical
Research Institute, Hyderabad (NGRI).  This was done.  The reports of these
institutions contained an exhaustive detailed discussion of the scientific data
which they freshly procured.  The NGRI which is the highest scientific body
on geology examined the flow of the underground water streams, and its
final conclusion
“from  results  of  multi-parameter  investigations   (i.e.  field
investigations,  hydrogeological  studies,  geophysical  investigations,
electric resistivity investigation, magnetic survey and tracer studies)
carried out in the areas, is that hydraulic connectivity exists across the
dolerite  dyke  located  between  Choudergudi  and  Sirsilmukhi
facilitating  the  groundwater  movement…..  In  the  post-monsoon
scenario, the groundwater table will go up and thereby may result in
more groundwater flow across the dyke.”
It stated that there was sufficient scope for poisonous residual substitutes
like  nickel  percolating  underground  and  reaching  the  drinking  water
sources.  On that basis, the Supreme Court set aside the judgment of the
High Court and the order of the Authority given under sec. 28 of the Water
Act and refused permission for the industry to operate.  (A.P. Pollution
Control Board vs.  M.V. Nayudu: 2001(2) SCC 62).  The case is a clear
17

example of the benefit of extensive scientific investigation.  If this scientific
investigation was not done, the life of millions of citizens in the two cities
could have been endangered.  The precautionary principle clearly applied
here. Because the Appellate Authority and the High Court did not have the
benefit of the opinion of any scientific bodies to test the correctness of the
report of the single scientist whose report alone was there available to the
appellate authority and the High Court, the decision went in favour of the
Industry.  But, as the Supreme Court had the benefit of the Reports of these
institutions, it could arrive at a different conclusion.
As stated earlier, scientific conclusions are based on the ‘data’ and
‘procedures’  applied  by  the  scientific  institutions  concerned.   The
conclusions are correct to the extent of the data available or to the extent of
the efficacy of the procedure or technology adopted for analysis.  With more
data and by application of  better scientific procedures, or better technology,
a more accurate conclusions can always be arrived at.
Instead of leaving it to the discretion of the Courts to refer or not to
refer  scientific  issues  to  independent  experts,  we  propose  to  provide  a
statutory mechanism to provide scientific advice to the Court concerned. 
Complex issues of science and technology arise in court proceedings
concerning water and air pollution.  For example, we have serious problems
of  cleansing  our  rivers,  streams  and  lakes,  and  cleansing,  disposal  or
recycling  of waste and  sewage,  disposal  of toxic waste, hospital  waste,
nuclear waste, radio active material, removal of the effect of detergents,
waste-oils, dealing with genetically modified organisms, adverse effects of
18

pesticides, asbestos etc.  A variety of industries like steel, textiles, leather
pose different types of problems of pollution.  Air pollution from industries
and from traffic today is quite grave.  Then we have problems of climatic
changes, depletion of ozone etc.  We have serious problems of noise both at
the work place and in residential areas.  There are no proper systems for
Environment Impact Assessment.  There are problems faced in the matter of
protection of forests and wild life.  The list of issues is unending.
Technical and scientific problems today arise in a variety of ways and
at various stages before the Courts.  Some questions arise at the stage of
initial establishment of an industry.  Other issues arise when the effluent-
prevention/cleansing mechanisms or the pollution-prevention or pollution-
reduction systems are installed by the industry.  The industry would say that
these safeguards are sufficient but the Pollution Control Boards may say
that they are not sufficient.  Even where both may agree that the safeguards
are sufficient, members of the public may still find water pollution or air
pollution unbearable to bear.  Then the question would arise whether the
running industry has to be closed or be allowed to continue with better
safeguards.   There  would  be  need  for  short-term  as  well  as  long  term
remedies.  The point here is that if the industry is closed, it may lead to
unemployment of hundreds of employees.  It may also result in loss of
excise duty or sales tax to the Government.  If the industry is to be shifted
out, land elsewhere may have to be provided, though for a price.   In many
cases, the plant itself may have to be shifted.  Enormous  costs  will be
involved.  If the polluting industry is not shifted, there could be serious
danger to the health and well being of citizens in that locality.  The Supreme
Court in several cases has been going into all these aspects and giving
19

directions for shifting of industries outside the cities, by framing schemes
for payment of compensation for workmen, and for their re-employment and
providing land for the industry elsewhere etc.
Prevention of pollution and environmental damage is one side of the
story.   But,  we  cannot,  at  the  same  time,  lose  sight  of  the  need  for
development of our industries, irrigation and power projects.  Nor can we
ignore the need to improve employment opportunities.  There is also the
need for generation of revenue by way of excise duties or sales tax and
increase our exports to other countries.  The Courts must therefore be able
to perform a balancing task.  That cannot be done effectively, unless the
Court gets judicial as well as scientific inputs.  The Courts cannot simply
close  down  industries  based  on  the  evidence  produced  by  the  industry
concerned
We may here advert to another problem.  There are also many who
file public interest cases (PILs) against industries as a measure of black-
mail.   There  are  industrialists  who  would  think  of  abusing  the  legal
procedures for their own gain.  Some polluting industries would like to
close  down  under  Court  orders  and  would  thereby  want  to  escape  the
statutory procedures which otherwise have to be followed for “closure” of
industries as contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and want to
escape paying compensatory wages to workmen.  Some others would like to
close down or dismantle the plant and sell away prime land to builders.
Some others would want concessions from government for shifting their
industries to other places.  These problems which are like under-currents,
should also be taken care of by the proposed Environmental Court.
20

  It is true that the High Court and Supreme Court have been taking up
these and other complex environmental issues  and deciding them.  But,
though they are judicial bodies, they do not have an independent statutory
panel of environmental scientists to help and advise them on a permanent
basis.  They are prone to apply principles like the Wednesbury Principle and
refuse to go into the merits.   They do not also make spot inspections nor
receive  oral  evidence   to  see  for  themselves  the  facts  as  they exist  on
ground.  On the other hand, if Environmental Courts are established in each
State, these Courts can make spot inspections and receive oral evidence.
They can receive independent advice on scientific matters by a panel of
scientists.
  These  Environmental  Courts  need  not  be  Courts  of  exclusive
jurisdiction.  However, the High Courts, even if they are approached under
Art.  226  either  in  individual  cases  or  in  PIL  cases,  where  orders  of
environmental authorities could be questioned, may refuse to intervene on
the ground that there is an effective alternative remedy before the specialist
Environmental Court.  As of now, when we have consumer Courts at the
District  and  State  level,  the  High  Courts  have  consistently  refused  to
entertain writ petitions under Art 226 because parties have a remedy before
the fora established under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.  We have
also the example of special environmental courts in Australia, New Zealand
and in some other countries and these are manned by Judges and expert
commissioners.  The Royal Commission in UK is also of the view that if
environmental  courts  are  established,  the  High  Courts  may  refuse  to
21

entertain  applications  for judicial  review on the ground that  there is an
effective alternative remedy before these Courts.  
It is for the above reasons we are proposing the establishment of
separate environmental courts in each State.  In Chapter IX, we propose to
give the details of the constitution, power and jurisdiction of these Courts.
22

Chapter III
THE CONSTITUTIONAL MANDATE AND SURVEY OF SUPREME
COURT’S JUDGMENTS ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES:
In a very significant manner, the Supreme Court of India observed in
Tarun vs. Union of India (AIR 1992 SC 514) in regard to the importance of
environmental issues as follows:
“A  great  American  Judge  emphasizing  the  imperative  issue  of
environment  said  that  he  placed  Government  above  big  business,
individual liberty above Government and environment above all.”
Such is the importance of the subject under consideration.  We shall first
refer to the constitutional provisions relating to environment and then to the
judgments of the Supreme Court only to show the range of environmental
issues that are today being handled by our constitutional Courts.
Constitutional provisions:
The Indian Constitution contains several provisions which require the
State and the citizens to protect environment.  Though in the Constitution as
it stood on 26.1.1950, there was no specific provision for environmental
protection,  there  were  other  significant  provisions.   The  following
provisions  in  the  Constitution  as  it  originally  stood,  have  a  bearing  on
environment:
23

“Art 21:  Protection of life and personal liberty: No person shall be
deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure
established by law.
Art  42:   Provision  for  just  and  humane  conditions  of  work  and
maternity relief:  The State shall make provisions for security just and
humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.
Art. 47 :  Duty of the State to raise the level of nutritional and the
standard  of living  and to improve  public  health:  The State shall
regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living
of  its  people  and  the improvement  of  public  health as  among  its
primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring
about  prohibition  of  the  consumption  for  medicinal  purposes  of
intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.
Art. 49:  Protection of monuments and places and objects of national
importance:  It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every
monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest, declared
by or under law made by Parliament, to be of national importance,
from  spoliation,  disfigurement,  destruction,  removal,  disposal  or
export, as the case may be.”
The  Stockholm Declaration  of  1972,  however,  resulted  in  several
amendments  to  the  Constitution.   Under  the  Constitution  (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976 (which came into force on 3.1.1977), Art. 48A was
24

introduced in Part IV which is the chapter dealing with Directive Principles.
It read as follows:
“Art.  48A.   Protection  and  improvement  of  environment  and
safeguarding of forests and wild-life:  The State shall endeavour to
protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and
wild life of the country.”
Art 51A(g) was brought into Part IVA of the Constitution which deals with
‘Fundamental Duties’.  That Article reads as follows:
“Art. 51A: Fundamental Duties:  It shall be the duty of every citizen
of India – 
(a) to (f): …………
(g)  to  protect  and  improve  the  natural  environment  including
forests,  lakes,  rivers  and  wildlife  and  to  have  compassion  for
living creatures.”
Under the same Forty-Second Amendment, Forest and protection of wild
animals and birds were brought into the Concurrent List as entries 17A and
17B.
Judgments of the Supreme Court:
The  Supreme  Court  of  India  has  made  immense  contribution  to
environmental jurisprudence of our country.  It has entertained quite a lot of
genuine public interest litigation (PIL) cases or class-action cases under Art.
25

32 of the Constitution.  So have the High Courts under Art. 226 of the
Constitution.  These Courts have issued various directions on a number of
issues concerning environment as part of their overall writ jurisdiction and
in that context they have developed a vast environmental jurisprudence.
They have  used  Art.  21  of  the  Constitution  of  India  and  expanded  the
meaning of the word ‘life’ in that Article as including a “right to a healthy
environment”.
We shall refer to some of the important decisions of the Supreme
Court of India.
The  first  case  of  considerable  importance  is  the  one  in  Ratlam
Municipality vs. Vardhichand AIR 1980 SC 1622 where the Supreme Court
gave  directions  for  removal  of  open  drains  and  prevention  of  public
excretion by the nearby slum dwellers.  The matter came up by way of a
criminal appeal.  The Court relied upon Art 47 which is in the Part IV of the
Constitution  relating  to  the  Directive  Principles.   That  Article  refers  to
‘improvement of public health’.  In that judgment, the Supreme Court gave
several directions to the Ratlam Municipality for maintenance of ‘public
health’.  That judgment was followed in B.L. Wadhera vs. Union of India
AIR 1996 SC 2969 and directions were issued to the Municipal Corporation
of old Delhi and New Delhi, for removal of garbage etc.  
Long before the Court enlarged its levels of scrutiny, the Supreme
Court, in  Sachidanand Pandey vs.  State of West Bengal:  AIR 1987 SC
1109, laid down rules which unfortunately sound like  Wednesbury rules
applied in administrative law.  It said:
26

“Whenever a problem of ecology is brought before the Court, the
Court is bound to bear in mind Art. 48A of the Constitution ….. and
Art. 51A(g)…..When the Court is called upon to give effect to the
Directive Principles and the fundamental duty, the Court is not to
shrug its shoulders and say that priorities are a matter of policy and so
it is a matter for the policy-making authority.  The least that the Court
may do is to examine whether appropriate considerations are borne in
mind and irrelevancies excluded.  In appropriate cases, the Court may
go further but how much further must depend on the circumstances of
the case.  The Court may always give necessary directions.”
This limited nature of scrutiny is no longer followed today by the Courts.
Today the Courts appoint independent experts and test the claims of parties
on the basis of the expert advice that is given to the Court.
The  Court  referred  to  the  ancient  civilization  of  our  country  in  Rural
Litigation & Entitlement Kendra vs. State of UP AIR 1987 359.  There the
exploitation of limestone from the Himalayas and its adverse effect on the
ecology and environment came up for consideration.  The Supreme Court
stated:  “Over thousands of years, man had been successfully exploiting the
ecological system for his sustenance but with the growth of population, the
demand for land has increased and forest growth has been and is being cut
down  and  man  has  started  encroaching  upon  Nature  and  its  assets.
Scientific developments have made it possible and convenient for man to
approach  the  places  which  were  hitherto  beyond  his  ken.    The
consequences of such interference with ecology and environment have now
27

come to  be realized.   It  is  necessary that  the Himalayas  and  the  forest
growth on the mountain range should be left uninterfered with so that there
may be sufficient quantity of rain.  The top soil may be preserved without
being eroded and the natural setting of the area may remain intact.  …..
tapping of (natural) resources have to be done with requisite attention and
care, so that ecology and environment may not be affected in any serious
way, (and) there may not be any depletion of the water resources and long
term planning must be undertaken to keep up the national wealth.  It has
always to be remembered that these are permanent assets of mankind and
are not intended to be exhausted in one generation…. Preservation of the
environment and keeping the ecological balance unaffected is a task which
not only Governments but also every citizen must undertake.  It is a social
obligation and let us remind every Indian citizen that it is his fundamental
duty as enshrined in Art. 51A(g) of the Constitution.”  The Supreme Court
then referred to the Stockholm Declaration of 1972.  
Indian scriptures were quoted again in the case of Rural Litigation &
Entitlement Kendra vs.  State of UP AIR 1988 SC 2187.  While stopping
mining in the forest area in Doon Valley, the Supreme Court quoted from
the Atharva Veda (5.30.6) to the following effect:
“Man’s paradise is on earth; This living world is the beloved place of
all; It has the blessings of Nature’s bounties; Live in a lovely spirit.”
It  was  pointed  out  that  it  was  in  these  forests  in  the  Himalayas  that
thousands of years ago, our saints did penance and lived.  In ancient times,
the trees were worshipped as gods and prayers for the upkeep of forests
28

were offered to the Divine.  With the developments in science and outburst
of population, the degradation of forests  started.  The earth’s crust  was
washed away and places like Cherapunji in Assam which used to receive an
average  rainfall  of  500  inches  in  one  year  started  facing  drought
occasionally.  After referring to the contribution of forests for rainfall, pure-
air,  good  health  and  to  the  unfortunate  cutting  of  forests  which  was
responsible for the washing away every year, of nearly 6000 million tones
of soil, the Supreme Court referred to the Amendment of the Constitution in
1976 when Art. 48A and 51A(g) were inserted and ‘Forests’ were shifted
from Entry 19 of List II to the List III.  The Court also referred to the
constitution of the National Committee of Environment and Planning and
Coordination by the Government of India in 1972, and to the passing of the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.    
In  State of Bihar vs.  Murad Ali Khan, AIR 1989 SC, page 1, the
Supreme Court was dealing with an appeal concerning protection to wild
life in Kundurugutu Range forest in Bihar.  The Supreme Court quoted from
a  decree  issued  by Emperor  Asoka in  the third  century BC, that  has  a
particularly contemporary ring in the matter of preservation of wild life and
environment.  The decree said:
“Twenty six years after my coronation, I declared that the following
animals  were not  to  be  killed:  parrots,  mynas, the  arunas,  ruddy-
geese, wild geese, the nandimukha, cranes, bats, queen ants, terrapins,
boneless  fish,  rhinoceroses…  and  all  quadrupleds  which  are  not
useful or edible….forests must not be burned.”
29

The Supreme Court observed:
“Environmentalists’ conception of the ecological balance in nature is
based on the fundamental concept of nature as ‘a series of complex
biotic communities of which a man is an inter-dependent part’ and
that it should not be given to a part to trespass and diminish the
whole.  The largest single factor in the depletion of the wealth of
animal life in nature has been the ‘civilized man’ operating directly
through  excessive  commercial  hunting  or,  more  disastrously,
indirectly through invading or destroying natural habitats.”
In 1987, the Court  laid down principles of strict liability in the matter
of injury on account of use of hazardous substances.  Under the rule in
Rylands vs. Fletcher (1868) LR 3 HL 330, absolute liability for negligence
could  be imposed only for non-natural use of land and for ‘foreseeable
damage.  However, such exceptions were held by the Court as no longer
available in the case of injury on account of use of hazardous substances.
Hazardous  industries  which  produced  gases  injuring  the  health  of  the
community took a beating in M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India AIR 1987 SC
1086 (the Oleum gas leak case) where the rule in Rylands vs. Fletcher was
modified, holding that the ‘enterprise which is engaged in a hazardous or
inherently dangerous industry which poses a potential threat to the health
and safety of persons working in the factory and residing in the surrounding
areas, owes an absolute and non-delegable duty to the community to ensure
that  no  harm  results  to  anyone  on  account  of  hazardous  or  inherently
dangerous nature of the activity which it has undertaken…the enterprise
must be absolutely liable to compensate for such harm and it should be no
30

answer to the enterprise to say that it had taken all reasonable care and that
the harm occurred without any negligence on its part…The larger and more
prosperous  the  enterprise,  greater  must  be  the  amount  of  compensation
payable for the harm caused on account of an accident in the carrying on of
the hazardous or inherently dangerous activity by the enterprise.
Ganga river pollution by tanneries was supposed to be stopped in
M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India: AIR 1988 SC 1037.  Adverting to Art. 48A
and 51A(g) the Supreme Court observed:
“…it is necessary to state a few words about the importance of and
need for protecting our environment.  Art. 48-A of the Constitution
provides that the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the
environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.
Art  51-A  of  the  Constitution  imposes  as  one  of  the  fundamental
duties on every citizen, the duty to protect and improve the natural
environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have
compassion for living creatures.”
The proclamation adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment which took place at Stockholm from 5th to 16th of June, 1972
was  set  out  in  the  judgment.   After  summarizing  the  recommendations
pertaining to the need for the State to stop exploitation of natural resources,
the Supreme Court pointed out that Parliament had thereafter significantly
passed the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for preventing environmental pollution.
31

Declaring  that  the  “right  to  life”  referred  to  in  Art.  21  of  the
Constitution included the right to free water and air which is not polluted,
the Supreme Court stated in  Subhash Kumar vs.  State of Bihar AIR 1991
SC 420 that applications in the nature of a public interest litigation under
Art. 32 would be maintainable by persons or groups genuinely interested.
But if the applicant has a motive of personal gain or personal vendetta, such
applications must be dismissed.
While restraining 400 licensees who had mining licences granted in
Rajasthan to mine lime and dolmite stones in the ‘Sariska Tiger Park’, the
Supreme Court, in Tarun Bharat Sangh, Alwar vs. Union of India AIR 1992
SC 514, observed that this kind of litigation should not be treated as the
usual adversarial litigation.  Petitioners were acting in aid of a purpose, high
on the national agenda.  Petitioners’ concern for the environment, ecology
and the wild life should be shared by the Government.
Holding that the Government had no power to sanction lease of the
land vested in the Municipality for being used as ‘open space for public
use’, the Supreme Court in Virendra Gaur vs. State of Haryana 1995(2) SCC
577 observed, after referring to the Stockholm Declaration  of 1972 and
Principle 1 laid down in that Conference and after referring to Art. 48-A,
Art. 47 and Art 51A(g), and Art. 21, as follows:
“The word ‘environment’ is of broad spectrum which brings within
its  ambit,  “hygienic  atmosphere  and  ecological  balance”.   It  is,
therefore, not only the duty of the State but also the duty of every
citizen to maintain hygienic environment.  The State, in particular has
32

duty in that behalf and to shed its extravagant unbridled sovereign
power and to forge in its policy to maintain ecological balance and
hygienic environment.  Art. 21 protects right to life as a fundamental
right.  Enjoyment of life and its attainment including their right to life
with human dignity encompasses within its ambit, the protection and
preservation of environment, ecological balance free from pollution
of air and water, sanitation without which life cannot be enjoyed.
Any  contra  acts  or  actions  would  cause  environmental  pollution.
Environmental,  ecological,  air,  water,  pollution  etc.  should  be
regarded as amounting to violation of Art. 21.  Therefore, hygienic
environment is an integral facet of right to healthy life and it would
be  impossible  to  live  with  human  dignity  without  a  humane  and
healthy environment.  Environmental protection, therefore, has now
become a matter of grave concern for human existence.  Promoting
environmental protection implies maintenance of the environment as
a  whole  comprising  the  man-made  and  the  natural  environment.
Therefore,  there  is  a  constitutional  imperative  on  the  State
Government and the municipalities, not only to ensure and safeguard
proper  environment  but  also  an  imperative  duty  to  take  adequate
measures to promote, protect and improve both the man-made and the
natural environment.”
  The case in  Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action vs.  Union of
India 1996(3)  SCC 212  is again  one of the landmark judgments  of the
Court.   The  case concerned  serious  damage  to  mother Earth  by certain
industries producing toxic chemicals.  It was found that the water in wells
and streams turned dark and dirty rendering it unfit for human consumption
33

or even for cattle and also for irrigation.  The Court gave several directions
including the closure of industries.  The decision in the  M.C. Mehta vs.
Union of India 1987(1)SCC 395 (Oleum Gas Case) as to absolute liability in
the case of pollution or damage to life by hazardous industries, was re-
affirmed.  The view of one of the Judges (Ranganatha Misra CJ) in Union
Carbide Corpn. vs. Union of India 1991(4) SCC 584, that the principle of
absolute liability laid down in Oleum Gas Case was obiter was held to be
wrong.  A Committee of experts appointed by the Supreme Court concluded
that there was direct correlation between the sludge from the industries,
contamination in the wells and streams.  Objections to the expertise of the
members  of  the  Committee  for  arriving  at  the  above  conclusion,  were
rejected by the Court.  The Court referred to Art. 48A and Art. 51A(g) of the
Constitution of India and to the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended
to  the  Bill  which  later  became  the  Water  (Prevention  and  Control  of
Pollution) Act. 1974, to the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1981 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and to its preamble and
finally to the Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989.
The Court then referred to the ‘Polluter Pays’ principle.  It said that ss 3 and
5  of  the  Environment  (Protection)  Act,  1986  enabled  the  Central
Government to provide remedial measures in this behalf.  The Court gave a
number of directives.  Item 6 of the directions given by the Court (see p
252) refers to the need for establishment of environmental courts ‘manned
by legally trained persons/judicial officers’.
Foundation  for  applying  the  Precautionary  Principle,  the  Polluter
Pays Principle and the new Burden of Proof was laid down by the Supreme
Court in Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum vs. Union of India 1996(5) SCC
34

647 which dealt with pollution from tanneries.  The Court also referred to
the concept of ‘Sustainable Development’ and to the Stockholm Declaration
of 1972 and to the Rio Conference of 1992.  After referring to Arts. 47, 48A
and 51A(g) and Art. 21, and to the various statutes from 1974 to 1986, the
Court observed:
“The traditional concept that development and ecology are opposed to
each other is no longer acceptable.  ‘Sustainable Development’ is the
answer.  In the international sphere, ‘Sustainable Development’ as a
concept  came  to  be  known  for  the  first  time  in  the  Stockholm
Declaration of 1972.  Thereafter, in 1987 the concept was given a
definite  shape  by  the  World  Commission  on  Environment  and
Development  in  its  report  called  ‘Our  Common  Future’.   The
Commission was chaired by the then Prime Minister of Norway, Ms.
G.H.  Brundtland  and   as  such  the  report  is  popularly  known  as
‘Brundtland Report’.  In 1991, the World Conservation Union, United
Nations Environment Programme and Worldwide Fund for Nature,
jointly came out with a document called “Caring for the Earth” which
is a strategy for sustainable living.  Finally, came the Earth Summit
held in June 1992 at Rio which saw the largest gathering of world
leaders ever in the history- deliberating and chalking out a blueprint
for the survival of the planet.  Among the tangible achievements of
the  Rio  Conference  was  the  signing  of  two  Conventions,  one  on
biological  diversity  and  another  on  climate  change.   These
Conventions  were  signed  by  153  nations.   The  delegates  also
approved  by  consensus,  three  non-binding  documents,  namely,  a
Statement  on  Forestry  Principles,  a  declaration  of  principles  on
35

environment policy and development initiatives  and Agenda 21, a
programme  of  action  into  the  next  century  in  areas  like  poverty,
population and pollution.”
The Court further observed:
“During  the  two  decades  from  Stockholm  to  Rio,  ‘Sustainable
Development’  has  come  to  be  accepted  as  a  viable  concept  to
eradicate poverty and improve the quality of human life while living
within  the  carrying  capacity  of  the  supporting  ecosystems.
‘Sustainable  Development’  as  defined  by  the  Brundtland  Report
means  ‘Development  that  meets  the  needs  of  the  present  without
compromising the ability of the future generations to meet their own
needs.”   We  have  no  hesitation  in  holding  that  ‘Sustainable
Development’  as  a  balancing  concept  between  ecology  and
development  has  been  accepted  as  a  part  of  the  customary
international law though its salient features have yet to be finalized by
the international law jurists.”
In the same case, after referring to the Polluter Pays principle, the
Supreme Court observed that remediation of the damaged environment is
part of the process of ‘Sustainable Development’.  It then referred to the
Precautionary Principle and the Polluter Pays Principle and New Burden of
Proof and supported them on the basis of Art. 21, 47, 48A and 51A(g) of the
Constitution.  It declared that they have become ‘part of the environmental
law of the country’.
36

In M.C. Mehta vs. Kamal Nath: 1997(1) SCC388, the Supreme Court
referred to the ‘Public Trust’ doctrine and stated that it extends to natural
resources  such  as  rivers,  forests,  seashores,  air  etc.  for  the  purpose  of
protecting the ecosystem.  It held that by granting a lease to a motel located
at the bank of the river Beas which resulted in interference by the Motel, of
the natural flow of the water, the State Government had breached the above
doctrine.   The  prior  approval  granted  by the  Government  of  India  was
quashed, the Polluter Pays Principle was applied and the public company
was  directed  to  compensate  the  cost  of  restitution  of  environment  and
ecology in the area.
The adverse effect of ‘Shrimp Culture’ in the Coastal Zone notified
under the Coastal Zone Regulation Notification dated 19.2.91, under the
Environment  (Protection)  Rules,  1986,  came  up  for  consideration  in  S.
Jagannath vs.  Union of India: AIR 1997 SC 811.  The employers were
directed to close the Shrimp Culture industry in view of the ecologically
fragile coastal areas and the adverse effect on the environment.  The Court
directed the employees to be paid six years’ wages.  It referred to Art. 48A
of the Constitution, the damage by aquaculture and shrimp culture in several
States  resulting  in  wells  and  streams  in  coastal  areas  becoming  saline
resulting in pure water not being available for irrigation and for drinking
purpose.  The Court called for and considered the requests from the Marine
Products  Export  Development  Agency  (MPEDA),  and  the  State
Government.  It also considered the Report of the Central Pollution Control
Board on ‘Coastal Pollution Control’, report of the Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FAO) of the UN, the Alagiraswamy Report, another Report of
team of scientists, the reports of the Neeri (Nagpur), report of Justice Suresh
37

Committee, the report by Mr. Solon Barraclong & Andrea Finger-Stitil of
UN, and then applied the provisions of the Water (Protection and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974, the Polluter Pays principle, the new onus of proof, and
referred to the concept of sustainable development.  It finally directed the
constitution of a high powered ‘Authority’ under that Act to scrutinize each
and every case from the environmental point of view, under sec. 3(3) of
Environment  (Protection)  Act  and  confer  on  the  authority  the  requisite
power under sec. 5.  The authority should be headed by a retired Judge of
the High Court and members having expertise in the field of aquaculture,
pollution  control  and  environment  protection.   The  Government  should
confer  powers  under  sec.  5  on  the  said  authority  to  take  appropriate
measures.  The Authority should implement the ‘Precautionary Principle’
and  the  ‘Polluter  Pays’ principle.   All  aquaculture  industries  should  be
closed.  
In the course of the discussion, the Supreme Court referred to  Art.
253 of the Constitution and the legislative powers of Parliament to make
laws in respect of matters in the State List in the VII Schedule.  The Court
observed: (page 846)
“At this stage, we may deal with a question which has incidentally
come  up   for  our  consideration.   Under  para  2  of  the  CRZ
notification,  (of  the  Government  of  India)  the  activities  listed
thereunder  are  declared  as  prohibited  activities.   Various  State
Governments have enacted coastal aquaculture legislations regulating
the (industries) set up in the coastal areas.  It was argued before us
that certain provisions of the State legislation including that of the
38

State of Tamil Nadu are not in consonance with the CRZ notification
issued  by  the  Government  of  India  under  sec.  3(3)  of  the  Act.
Assuming that or so, we are of the view that the Act being a Central
Legislation, has the  overriding effect.  The Act, (the Environment
Protection Act, 1986) has been enacted under Entry 13 of List I of
Schedule VII of the Constitution of India.  The said entry is as under:
“Participation  in  international  conferences,  associations  and
other bodies and implementing of decisions made thereat”.
The  preamble  to  the  Act  clearly  states  that  it  was  enacted  to
implement the decisions taken at the United Nations Conference on
the  Human  Environment  held  at  Stockholm  in  June  1972.   The
Parliament has enacted the Act under Entry 13 of List I of Schedule
VII  read  with  Art.  253 of  the  Constitution  of  India.   The  CRZ
notification having been issued under that Act shall have overriding
effect and shall prevail over the law made by the legislators of the
States.”
In M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India: 1997(11) SCC 312, the Supreme Court
dealt  with  ‘ground  water’  management.   It  directed  the  Ministry  of
Environment & Forests, Government of India to appoint Central Ground
Water Board as an authority under sec. 3(3) of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 permitting it to exercise powers for regulating and control of
ground water management.  Central Government should confer powers on
that authority under sec. 5 to issue directions.
39

Use of pesticides and chemicals causing damage to health came up
for consideration in Ashok (Dr) vs. Union of India: 1997(5) SCC 10.  The
Supreme Court directed a committee of senior officers to be appointed to
look into the matter by gathering  information through internet and take
suitable  measures  in  future  in  respect  of  any  other  insecticides  and
chemicals which is found to be hazardous for health.
In  Animal  and  Environment  Legal  Defence  Fund vs.  Union  of
India:1997(3) SCC 549, the activity of fishing in reservoirs within the areas
of the National Park, Madhya Pradesh, came up for consideration.  The
Court  referred  to  the  Wildlife  (Protection)  Act,  and  to  permits  issued
thereunder, and observed that the livelihood of tribals should be considered
in the context of maintaining ecology in the forest area.  If there is shrinkage
of forest area, the Government must take steps to prevent any destruction or
damage to the environment, the flora and fauna and wild life under the Act,
keeping Art 48A and Art. 51A(g) in mind.
The Calcutta tanneries’ discharge of untreated noxious and poisonous
effluent into Ganga river came up for consideration in M.C. Mehta (Calcutta
tanneries matter) vs.  Union of India: 1997(2) SCC 411.  Referring to the
Water  (Protection  and  Prevention  of  Pollution)  Act,  1974  and  the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, and the Pollutor Pays principle, the
Supreme Court directed closure of the tanneries, relocation and payment of
compensation to the employees.
In M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India: 1997(11) SCC 327, in an elaborate
judgment,  the  Supreme  Court  dealt  with  shifting,  relocation,  closure  of
40

hazardous/noxious/heavy/ large industries from Delhi, and to the utilization
of  land  available  as  a  result  thereof  and  payment  of  compensation  to
workmen.
As to preservation of forests, a series of orders were passed by the
Supreme Court in T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad vs. Union of India: 1997
(2) SCC 267; 312 etc.  The case concerned the unlawful felling of trees in
all  forests  in  the  country.   Directions  were  given  under  the  Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980.  In 1997(7) SCC 440, the Court appointed a High
Powered Committee. 
The preservation of the tourists spots near Delhi at the Badkal and
Surajkund lakes (located in Haryana, bordering Delhi) came up in  M.C.
Mehta (Badkal and Surajkund Lakes Matter) vs.  Union of India: 1997(3)
SCC 715.  The Supreme Court referred to Art. 47, 48A and 51A(g) as well
as Art 21, the concept of ‘sustainable development’ and the ‘Precautionary
Principle’ and banned construction activities within the radius of 1 km from
the Lakes.  It clarified that, in view of the reports of experts from NEERI
and the Central Pollution Control Board, it was not advisable to permit
large-scale construction activity in the close vicinity of the lakes because if
such construction is permitted, it would have an adverse impact on the local
ecology.  It  could  affect  water  levels  under  the  ground  and  could  also
disturb the hydrology of the area.  NEERI had recommended a green belt of
1 km radius.  The Court, however, clarified that where plans were already
sanctioned, they should have the further clearance of the Central Pollution
Control Board and the Haryana Pollution Control Board..
41

Preservation of Taj Mahal came up in  M.C. Mehta (Taj Trapezium
Matter) vs.  Union of India 1997(2) SCC 353 = AIR 1997 SC 734.  The
Court, after accepting the report of NEERI, directed that, with a view to
balance  industry  and  environment,  the  coke/coal  industry  within  Taj
Trapezium Zone must changeover to the use of natural gas or otherwise the
industries  should  stop  functioning  or  shift.   The  Court  gave  directions
regarding the compensation payable to workmen who may be discontinued
pursuant to the directions.  It relied upon the Dr. Varadarajan Committee
Report of 1995.
Vehicular pollution in Delhi city, in the context of Art 47 and 48 of
the Constitution came up for consideration in  M.C. Mehta vs.  Union of
India:  1998(6) SCC 60 and 1998(9) SCC 589.  It was held that it was the
duty  of  the  Government  to  see  that  the  air  was  not  contaminated  by
vehicular pollution.  The right to clean air also stemmed from Art 21 which
referred to right to life.  Lead free petrol supply was introduced in  M.C.
Mehta vs.  Union  of  India 1998  (8)  SCC  648  and  phasing  out  old
commercial vehicles more than 15 years old was directed in M.C. Mehta vs.
Union  of  India 1998(8)  SCC  206.   These  judgments  are  important
landmarks for the maintenance of clean air in Delhi.
The Supreme Court observed that illegal mining in Doon Valley was
to be assessed by a Committee appointed by the Court and matter had to be
investigated.  (T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad vs. Union of India  1998(2)
SCC 341 and 1998(6) SC 190).  Felling and removal of felled trees in the
State of J&K was prohibited by the Court in T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad
vs. Union of India: AIR 1998 SC 2553.
42

In regard to the poor efficiency of the Common Effluent Treatment
Plants (EFTPs) at Patancheru, Bolaram and Jeedimetla in Andhra Pradesh,
the Supreme Court, in India Council for Environ-legal Action vs. Union of
India: 1998(9) SCC 580, gave directions that the industries should not be
allowed to discharge effluents which exceeded permissible levels and they
should install systems which would release effluents upto the permissible
levels.  The areas concerned had showed tremendous ground water pollution
by industrial effluents.
Similar directions were issued in case of UP industries which were
discharging  effluents  beyond  the  permissible  limits  and  directions  were
issued in World Saviour vs. Union of India: 1998(9) SCC 247.
Issue of Urban solid waste management came up for consideration in
Almitre  H.  Patel vs.  Union  of  India:  1998(2)  SCC  416  and  the  Court
appointed a committee to go into the questions.
The  appointment  of  a  Committee  by  the  Supreme  Court  for
management of hazardous wastes lying in the docks/ports/ICDS came up in
Research Foundation for Science vs.  Union of India: 1999(1) SCC 223.
The authorities having custody of wastes were directed not to release or
auction  the  wastes  till  further  orders.   This  was  in  the  context  of  the
Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989.
43

Pollution from effluents from distillery attached to a Sugar industry
came up for consideration in Bhavani River Sakthi Sugars Ltd. RE: 1998(6)
SCC 335.  
In  M.C.  Mehta  vs.  Union  of  India:  1998(2)  SCC  435,  the  Court
criticized  the casual  manner in which the Pollution  Control  Board gave
consent.  The Supreme Court referred to the constitution of the appropriate
authority  under  section  3(3)  of  the  Environment  Protection  Act  for  the
National Capital Territory.  Regarding such committees for other States,
directions were again issued in T.N. Gudavarman Thirumalpad vs. Union of
India: 1999(9) SCC 151.
Right to clean air and the need for slowly eliminating ‘diesel’ for
motor vehicles came up in M.C.Mehta vs. Union of India (matter regarding
diesel emissions) 1999(6) SCC 9.  Right to life was held to include right to
good health and health care.  M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India 1999(6) SCC
9.
Hot mix plants meant to supply hot mix for the runways in airports
and the pollution by the smoke emitted by them came up for consideration
in M.C. M`ehta vs. Union of India 1999(7) SCC 522.
Coastal Regulation Zone for Mumbai came up for discussion in  P.
Navin Kumar vs.  Bombay Municipal Corpn: 1999(4)SCC 120.
Deficiencies  of the  judicial  and  technical  inputs  in  environmental
appellate authorities were elaborately discussed in  A.P. Pollution Control
44

Board vs.  Prof.  M.V. Nayudu 1999(2)  SCC  718.   (This  case  has  been
elaborately discussed in Chapter II.)  It referred to uncertainties in scientific
evidence,  to  the  Precautionary  Principle,  the  new  Burden  of  Proof  and
Polluter  Pays  Principle,  and  required  a  detailed  study into  the  question
whether environmental courts which should comprise not only of judges but
also as to scientists/environmentalists to effectively assess expert evidence.
Preservation  of  the  environment  around  Beas  river  in  Himachal
Pradesh came up for consideration in M.C. Mehta vs. Kamal Nath 1999(1)
SC 702.  Court’s power to impose fine or special damages came up in M.C.
Mehta vs. Kamal Nath 2000(6) SCC 213.  Providing clean drinking water
for Agra town came up for consideration in D.K. Joshi vs. Chief Secretary,
State of UP: 1999(9) SCC 578.
Need to bring about awareness of environmental issues came up for
consideration in M.C. Mehta vs.  Union of India: 2000(9) SCC 411.
Denotification of Chinkara Sanctuary by the State Legislature under
sec. 26A(3) of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 was upheld in Common
Education & Research Society vs. Union of India 2000(2) SCC 599.  The
denotification resulted in permitting a restructured and controlled mining in
an area of 321-56 km of Narayan Sarovar Chinkara Sanctuary.  It was held
that the economic development of an impoverished and backward area, was
equally important - Environmental protection and economic development
would have to be balanced.
The Supreme Court observed that the Pollution Control Board and
their  appointees  or  experts  were  accountable  for  the  wrong  advice.
(Pollution Control Board vs.  Mahabir Coke Industry: 2000(9) SCC 344).
45

Three experts who gave a clean chit to certain industrial units, in respect of
levels of emissions while advising the Pollution Control Board, were given
show  cause  notices  by  the  Supreme  Court  as  their  report  was  not  in
conformity  with  the  evidence  which  showed  existence  of  severe  air
pollution.  
In  the  matter  of  criminal  prosecution  for  offences  relating  to
environmental pollution, the liberal attitude of the High Court in the matter
of  the  quantum of  punishment  was seriously  criticized  by the  Supreme
Court in U.P. Pollution Board vs. Mohan Meakins Ltd.: 2000(3) SCC 745.
It was observed that the Courts could not afford to deal lightly with cases
involving  pollution  of  air  and  water.   The  Courts  must  share  the
parliamentary concern on the escalating pollution levels of our environment.
Those who discharge noxious polluting effluents into streams appear to be
totally  unconcerned  about  the  enormity  of  the  injury  which  they  are
inflicting  on  the  public  health  at  large,  to  the  irreparable  impairment  it
causes on the aquatic organisms, and to the deleterious effect it has on life
and health of animals.  Courts should not deal with the prosecution for
pollution-related offences in a casual or routine manner.
There was a serious dispute about the correctness of a latter Report of
the Central Pollution Control Board, in regard to pollution, as it contained
certain  adverse  findings  which  were not  pointed  out  by it  in  an  earlier
inspection Report.  The Court then felt, in the facts of the case, that another
independent agency should inspect the site, in the presence of the officers of
the Central Pollution Control Board, and file a report. (Imtiaz Ahmed vs.
Union of India 2000(9) SCC 515).
Processing  of  hazardous  waste  and  finding  out  the  number  of
industries  releasing  such  waste  came  up  for  consideration  in  Research
46

Foundation for Sciences vs.  Union of India 2000(9) SCC 41.  Directions
were issued to the Union Government to file particulars.
One  of  the  major  irrigation  projects  in  the  country  relating  to
construction  of  Dam  on  Narmada  river  came  up  for  consideration  in
Narmada Bachao Andolan vs. Union of India: 2000(10) SCC 664.  We shall
deal with this case in some detail.  In that case there was a final award by
the Tribunal  constituted under the  Inter-State Water Disputes  Act, 1956
published on 12.12.79.  The Dam was to be of the height of 455 feet.  The
Tribunal gave its directions regarding submergence, land acquisition and
rehabilitation of displaced persons.  It stipulated that no submergence of any
area should take place unless the oustees were rehabilitated.  The Tribunal
allocated the utilizable water stream to four States.  The Narmada Control
Authority (NCA) was directed to be constitute for implementation of the
award.  Eight years later, on 24.6.1987, the Ministry of Environment and
Forests  granted  ‘environmental  clearance’  to  the  Sardar  Sarovar  Project
subject to the following conditions:
1. NCA will ensure that environmental safeguards are planned and
implemented pari passu with progress of work on the project.
2. Detailed surveys/studies will be carried out as per the schedule
proposed.
3. The rehabilitation  plans which have to be drawn up should be
completed ahead of the filling up of the reservoir.
Initially a letter of one B.D. Sharma was treated as a PIL and a direction was
given on 20.9.91 by the Supreme Court to constitute a committee to monitor
the rehabilitation  of oustees.   But  in April  1994,- seven years after the
Ministry gave clearance – the Narmada Bachao Andolan filed a writ petition
to stop the construction of the dam and prayed for not opening the sluices.
47

The Supreme Court called for various reports.  The construction was halted
in May 1995 and the case was finally decided in the year 2000.  (Narmada
Bachao  Andolan vs.  Union  of  India:  2000(10)  SCC  664.   The  project
involved construction of a network of over 3000 large and small dams.  The
three learned Judges were unanimous that the PIL of April 1994 was belated
and could not be allowed to seek to stop the project itself.  Two learned
Judges found that Environmental Impact Assessment Notification under the
Rules made under the Environment (Protection Act), 1986 was issued much
later on 27.1.94 and was not retrospective and applicable for the purpose of
grant of clearance by the Ministry earlier on 24.6.87.  The clearance given
on 24.6.1987 in fact required that the NCA could ensure that ‘environmental
safeguard measures’ be taken and therefore the project did not require any
further  environmental  impact  assessment  to  be  done.   Adverting  to  the
Precautionary Principle laid down in  Vellore Citizens’ Welfare forum vs.
Union of India 1996(5) SCC 647 and distinguishing A.P. Pollution Control
Board vs. M.V. Nayudu: 1999(2) SCC 718, the Supreme Court said that the
Precautionary Principle and the Burden of Proof rule – (which shifted the
burden to the person or body which was interfering with the ecology, to
prove that there is no adverse impact) – would apply to a polluting project
or industry where the extent of damage likely to be inflicted, is not known.
But where the effect on ecology or environment on account of the setting up
of an industry is known, what has to be seen is whether the environment is
likely to suffer, and if so, what mitigative steps have to be taken to efface
the same.    Merely because there will be a change in the environment is no
reason to presume that there will be ecological disaster.  Once the effect of
the project is known, then the principle of sustainable development would
come  into  play  and  that  will  ensure  that  mitigative  steps  are  taken  to
48

preserve the ecological balance.  Sustainable development means what type
or  extent  of  development  can  take  place  which  can  be  sustained  by
nature/ecology with or without mitigation.  In the present case, the dam is
not comparable to a nuclear establishment nor to a polluting industry.  No
doubt, the construction of a dam would result in the change of environment
but it will not be correct to presume that the construction of a large dam like
this will result in an ecological disaster.  India has an experience of 40 years
in  construction  of dams.  Those  projects  did not  lead  to  environmental
disasters  but  have  resulted  in  upgradation  of  ecology.  On  the  above
reasoning,  two  learned  Judges  (out  of  three)  felt  that  inasmuch  as
rehabilitation was provided by the award, there was no violation of Article
21. The court issued directions as to allotment of land to oustees. There was
no need to have another authority to monitor rehabilitation. The NCA could
itself do this. Its decision could be reviewed by the Review Committee.
(One of the three Judges however felt that environmental impact assessment
was necessary and the construction work should stop till such assessment
was made). 
The provision of s.3 (2) (v) of the Environment Protection Act, 1986
and ss. 2 (e), 2(k) and 17, 18 of the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974 came up for consideration again in  A.P. Pollution
Control Board (II) v. Prof. M. V. Naidu (2001) 2 SCC 62.  The court relied
upon Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of India (2000) 10 SCC 664 and
A.P. Pollution Control Board (I) v. Prof. M. V. Naidu (1999) 2 SCC 710
and  held  that  once  the  State  Government  issued  an  order  prohibiting
location  of  any  industry  within  10  km radius  of  the  lakes  which  were
providing drinking water to two cities, the State Government ought not to
49

have granted exemption as it offended the precautionary principle. Without
permission of the Pollution Control Board, no industry could be established.
While dealing with the construction of a hotel in Goa for a sea-beach
resort, the Supreme Court in Goa Foundation v. Diksha Holdings Pvt. Ltd.
(2001) 2 SCC 97 held that economic development had to be maintained.
The permission granted by the State Government was based upon a proper
consideration  of  the  Coastal  Regulation  Zone  (CRZ)  notification  dated
19.2.1991 issued by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government
of India under ss.3 (1) and 3 (2) (v) of the Environmental Protection Act,
1986 and Rule 5 (3) (d) of the Rules and approved by the Coastal Zone
Management Plan of the State of Goa. The plot of land allotted to the hotel
fell within an area ear-marked as settlement (beach/ resort) by notification
of the Governor of Goa under the Goa, Daman and Diu Town and Country
Planning Act, 1974 and situated in category CRZ–III.
Need for balance between development and preservation of ecology
was  again  stressed  in  Live  Oak  Resort  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  v.  Panchgani  H.S.
Municipal Council (2001) 8 SCC 329.
With reference to vehicular pollution in Delhi and implementation of
the orders for introduction of CNG, the court passed a series of orders in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India (2001) 3 SCC 763, 756 and (2002) 4 SCC
356.
Smoking cigarettes in public places was prohibited by the Supreme
Court in Murli S. Deora v. Union of India (2001) 8 SCC 765. The right to
clean air was part of the right to life under Article 21.
In Hinch Lal Tiwari v. Kamla Devi (2001) 6 SCC 496 the Supreme
Court held that healthy environment enables people to enjoy a quality of life
which is the essence of the rights guaranteed under Article 21.
50

Concern for safety and well-being of wildlife in zoos came up for
consideration  in  a  case  where  a  tiger  was  skinned  alive  in  a  zoo.  The
provisions of Article 48-A of the Constitution and the Wildlife (Protection)
Act, 1972 (ss.38 (a), 38 (c), 38 (h) and 38 (j)), the provisions of the Forest
Act,  1927  also  were  considered.  (Navin  M.  Raheja  v.  Union  of India
(2001) 9 SCC 762)
The Supreme Court pulled up the Madhya Pradesh State Pollution
Control Board for not taking any interest and, in fact, acting negligently in
the  matter  of  discharging  its  functions  since  various  industries  were
discharging pollutants in contravention of the provisions of the laws: State
of M.P. v. Kedia Leather and Liquor Ltd. (2001) 9 SCC 605.
In Bittu Seghal v. Union of India (2001) 9 SCC 181 (Judgment dated
31.10.1996) the court gave a direction to the State of Maharashtra in regard
to the protection of Dahanu Taluka, regarding CRZ – notification of the
Government of India dated 19.2.2001 and the Regional Development Plan
as approved by the Government of India (subject to conditions) on 6.3.1996.
The court directed the Central Government to constitute an authority under
s.3 (3) of the Environment Protection Act, 1986 to be headed by a retired
Judge of the High Court and to confer on the authority powers required to
protect the region, control pollution and issue directions under s.5 and for
taking measures as stated in s.3 (2) (v) 2 (x) and (xii) of that Act. The said
authority was to bear in mind the Precautionary Principle and the Polluter
Pays Principle. 
Cleaning and developing ponds which had dried up was part of the
duty of the Government under Article 21. (Hinch Lal Tiwari v. Kamla Devi
(2001) 6 SCC 496).
51

Closure, shifting, re-location of polluting industries in the residential
areas of Delhi came up again in  M.C. Mehta v. Union of India (2002) 9
SCC 481, 483 and 534.
Protection of monuments and religious shrines came up in  Wasim
Ahmed Saeed v. Union of India  (2002) 9 SCC 472. The court held that
shifting of 24 licensed shops from the vicinity of the religions shrine of
Dargah of Salim Chishti in Agra as recommended by the Archaeological
Department, did not violate Article 21.
In  M.C. Mehta v. Union of India (2002) 4 SCC 356, the Supreme
Court held that one of the principles underlying environmental law is that of
sustainable development. The principle means that such development which
also sustains ecology can take place. The essential features of sustainable
development  are  (a)  precautionary  principle  and  (b)  the  polluter  pays
principle.
In N.D. Jayal vs. Union of India: (dt. 1.9.2003), the Supreme Court
considered the issues arising out of construction of the Tehri Dam.  One of
the  important  issues  related  to  environment  impact  assessment,
rehabilitation of oustees etc.
Summary
The above judgments of the Supreme Court of India will show the
wide range of cases relating to environment which came to be decided by
the said Court from time to time.  The Court has been and is still monitoring
a  number of cases.   It  will  be noted  that  the  Court  constantly  referred
environmental issues to experts, and the Court has been framing schemes,
issuing  directions  and  continuously  monitoring  them.   Some  of  these
52

judgments of the Supreme Court were given in original writ petitions filed
under Art. 32 while the others were decided in appeals filed under Art 136
against judgments of the High Courts rendered in writ petitions filed under
Art 226.    
These cases have added tremendous burden on the High Courts and
the Supreme Court.  The proposal for Environmental Courts is intended to
lessen this burden, as already stated.  But that as it may, the Supreme Court
has, in the various cases referred to above, laid down the basic foundation
for environmental jurisprudence in the country.
CHAPTER IV
ENVIRONMENTAL COURTS IN OTHER COUNTRIES
We had referred to the need for establishing environmental courts in
Chapter II.  In this Chapter, we shall refer to the constitution or proposals
for constitution of environmental Courts in other countries.  Australia and
New  Zealand  have  taken  the  lead  in  establishing  Environmental  Courts
which are manned by Judges and Commissioners.  The Commissioners are
generally persons having expert knowledge in environmental matters.
Australia:
New South Wales
In  Australia,  in  the  State  of  New  South  Wales,  the  Land  and
Environmental Court was established by legislation in 1980 under the Land
53

and Environment Court Act 1979.  (At the same time, the Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act, 1979 was also enacted.)  It is a superior court
of record and is composed of Judges and nine technical and conciliation
assessors.  Its jurisdiction combines appeal, judicial review and enforcement
functions in relation to environmental and planning law.  Proceedings can
be commenced by anyone.
We shall refer to the provisions of the NSW Act of 1979 in some
detail.   The  broad  outlines  of  that  Act,  rather  than  certain  details,  are
important for us.  We find that, in certain respects, the classification of
various classes of cases and the mode prescribed for filing appeals is quite
complicated under the NSW law.  We would however be only adopting the
broad scheme of the NSW Act.  
  Under sec. 7 of the NSW Land and Environment Court Act, 1979 of
New South Wales, it is stated that the Court shall consist of the Chief Judge
and such other Judges as may be appointed by the Governor.  Section 12
contemplates appointment of Commissioners of the Court by the Governor
and the qualifications prescribed for them are as follows:
“(a) Special knowledge of and experience in the administration of
local government or town planning;
(b) Suitable  qualification  and  experience  in  town  or  country
planning or environmental planning;
54

(c) Special knowledge of and experience in environmental science
or  matters  relating  to  protection  of  the  environment  and
environmental assessment;
(d) Special knowledge of and experience in the law and practice of
land valuation;
(e) Suitable  qualifications  and  experience  in  architecture,
engineering, surveying or building construction;
(f) Special knowledge of and experience in the management of
natural  resources  or  the  administration  and  management  of
Crown lands, lands acquired under the Closer Settlement Acts
and other lands of the Crown, or
(g) Suitable  knowledge  of  matters  concerning  land  rights  for
Aborigines and qualifications and experience suitable for the
determination of disputes involving Aborigines, or
(h) Special  knowledge  of  and  experience  in  urban  design  or
heritage.”
Section 12 further states as follows:
“In appointing Commissioners, the Minister should ensure, as far
as practicable, that the Court is comprised of persons who hold
qualifications  across  the  range  of  areas  specified  in  this
subsection.”
Clause (2A) of sec. 12 states that a person may be appointed as a full-time
Commissioner or a part-time Commissioner.  Clause (2B) of sec. 12 states
that a part-time Commissioner will be treated as guilty of misbehaviour if,
55

during the term of his or her appointment, the person appears as an expert
witness, or acts as the representative of any party, in proceedings before the
Court.  Clause (3) states that one of the full-time Commissioners may, by
the  instrument  of  the  Commissioner’s  appointment  or  by  a  subsequent
instrument, be appointed to be Senior Commissioner.  Clause (4) points out
that Schedule 1 contains the conditions of service of Commissioners.
Section 13 permits appointment of Acting Commissioners for a time
not exceeding 12 months to be specified in the instrument of appointment.  
Section 14 refers to disqualifications of Commissioners.  Section 15
deals with appointment of other officers of the Court.
Section 16 (in Division 2 of Part 3) deals with the jurisdiction of the
Court generally.  It reads as follows:
“Section 16.  (1) The Court shall have the jurisdiction vested in
it by or under this Act or any other Act.
(1A) The  Court  also  has  jurisdiction  to  hear  and  dispose  of  any
matter not falling within its jurisdiction under any other provision of
this Act or under any other Act, being a matter that is ancillary to a
matter that falls within its jurisdiction under any other provision of
this Act or under any other Act.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the jurisdiction of the Court is
divided into 7 clauses, as provided in this Division.”
56

Section 17 to 21, 21A and 21B deal with these 7 clauses of jurisdiction.
Section  17 deals with appellate jurisdiction under various Acts relating to
planning  and  production.   Section  18  deals  with  appeals  under  statutes
relating to local government, miscellaneous appeals and applications which
are listed in various clauses of the sections.  Section 19 deals with land-
tenure,  valuation,  rating  and  compensation  matters  –  viz.  appeals  and
references  or proceedings  under various  Acts.  Section 20(1) deals  with
proceedings  under  various  Acts  relating  to  environmental  planning  and
protection  and,  development  contract,  civil  enforcement.   Section  20(2)
states that the Court has the same civil jurisdiction as the Supreme Court
would have, but for section 71, to hear and dispose of proceedings:-
“(a) to enforce any right, obligation or duty conferred or imposed
by a planning or environmental law or a development contract,
(b) to review, or command, the exercise of a function conferred or
imposed by a planning or environmental law or a development
contract,
(c) to  make  declaration  of  right  in  relation  to  any  such  right,
obligation or duty or the exercise of any such functions, and
(d) whether or not as provided by section 68 of the Supreme Court
Act, 1970, to award damages for a breach of a development
contract.”
Subsection (3)(a) gives a list of various Acts as falling within the meaning
of as ‘planning or environmental law’.  Subsection (3)(b) and (c) include
within  the  meaning  of  ‘planning  or  environmental  law’,  the  following,
namely:-
57

“(b) any statutory instrument made or having  effect thereunder or
made for the purposes thereof, including any deemed environmental
planning  instrument  within  the  meaning  of  the  Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act 1979 or
(c) as respectively in force at any time, whether before, on or after
1 September, 1980”.
Subsection (4) states that the provisions of the Supreme Court Act, 1970
and  the  rules  thereunder,  relating  to  the  enforcement  of judgments and
orders of the Supreme Court apply to the enforcement of any judgment or
order of the Court in proceedings referred to in class 4 of its jurisdiction.
Subsection  (5)  states  that  ‘development  contract’  means  an  agreement
implied by sec. 15 of the Community Land Management Act 1989, sec. 281
of the Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act, 1973 or sec. 49 of the
Strata Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act, 1986.
Section 21 refers to Class 5 ‘environment planning and protection’
summary enforcement.  It states that the Court has jurisdiction to hear and
dispose of in a summary manner, proceedings under various statutes (a) to
(hb) and clause (i) refers to “any other proceedings for an offence which an
Act provides may be taken before, or dealt with by, the Court.”
Section 21A (class 6) deals with appeals from convictions relating to
environmental offences.  It states that the Court has jurisdiction (referred to
in this Act as Class 6 of its jurisdiction) to hear and dispose of appeals
under Part 5B of the Justices Act, 1902, other than appeals under Division
3A of that Part.
58

Section  21B  (class  7)  deals  with  ‘other  appeals relating  to
environmental offences’  It states that the Court has jurisdiction (referred to
in this Act as class 7 of its jurisdiction) to hear and dispose of appeals under
Division 3A of Part 5B of the Justices Act, 1902.
Section  22  deals  with  the  jurisdiction  to  determine  the  matter
‘completely and finally’ to avoid multiplicity of actions while sec. 23 refers
to jurisdiction to pass orders, including interlocutory orders.  They are as
follows.  Section 22 reads as follows:
“Section 22: The Court shall, in every matter before the Court,
grant either absolutely or on such terms and conditions as the Court
thinks just, all remedies to which any of the parties appears to be
entitled  in  respect  of  a legal  or equitable  claim properly  brought
forward by that party in the matter, so that, as far as possible, all
matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and
finally determined and all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any
of those matters, may be avoided.”
Section 23 refers to ‘making of orders’ and reads as follows:
“Section 23: The  Court  has  power,  in  relation  to  matters  in
which it has jurisdiction, to make orders of such kinds, including
interlocutory orders, as the Court thinks appropriate.”
59

In sections 24, 25 of Division 2 of Part 3, ‘claim for compensation’ (i.e.
compulsory land acquisition) has also brought within the purview of the
Court including determination of estate, interest and amount.
Sections  25B to 25D of Division 3 of Part 3 deal with orders of
conditional  validity  for  certain  ‘development  consents’.   It  permits
invalidation of consents to development for not taking steps or complying
with  conditions  of  the  consent  granted  by  the  Minister  under  the
Environmental Planning & Assessment Act, 1979.
Sections 26 to 28 in Division 2 of Part 4 refer to the ‘Distribution of
business among the Divisions’ of the Court.  These are:
(a) Environmental Planning and Protection Appeals Division.
(b) Local Government and Miscellaneous Appeals Division.
(c) Land Tenure, Valuation, Rating and Compensation Division.
(d) Environmental  Planning  and  Protection  and  Development
Contract Civil Enforcement Division.
(e) Environmental  Planning  and  Protection  Summary  Enforcement
Division and
(f) Environmental Appeals Division.
Section 29 in Division 3 of Part 4 permits the Court to sit at such
places as the Chief Justice may direct.  Sec. 30 vests the power to distribute
business  in  the  various  Divisions  of  the  Court,  in  the  Chief  Judge.
Provision is made in sec. 31 for transfer from one Division to another.
60

What  is  of  special  significance  is  that  sec.  33  states  that  the
jurisdiction in classes 1, 2, 3 can be exercised by the Judge, or one or more
commissioners (i.e. environmental planning and protection appeals (Class
II) and land tenure, valuation, rating and compensation matters (Class III)).
But only a Judge according to sec. 33, can exercise jurisdiction under
classes 4, 5, 6 (i.e. environmental planning and protection and development
contract civil enforcement (class 4); environmental planning and protection
summary  enforcement  (class  5);  appeals  from  convictions  relating  to
environmental offences (class 6)).
There is a special situation, referred to in sec. 33, that jurisdiction
under sec. 16(1A)(i.e. ancillary matters) has to be exercised by a Judge but
he may be assisted by one or more Commissioners in accordance with sec.
37.  Under sec. 37, the jurisdiction under Class 1, 2, 3 can also be exercised
by the Judge – assisted  by one or more commissioners.   Various  other
provisions are made in sec. 37.
Section  34A  refers  to  proceedings  in  Class  I  relating  to
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act of 1979.  Sec. 34B refers to
on-site hearing – sec. 34C to arrangements in dealing with court-hearing
matters; sec. 35 refers to Inquiries by Commission in cl. 3, sec. 36 refers to
delegation to Commission by the Court in respect of matters falling under
sec. 97 of Environmental Planning and Assessment Act, 1979.  Under sec.
36(1A), the Government may, by Regulation, add to or alter or omit items in
Schedule 2 or insert a new Schedule.
61

Section 37 refers to places where Commissioners sit with a Judge and
the procedure relating thereto.
Section 38 states that proceedings in class 1, 2, 3 shall be conducted
with  as  little  formality  and  technicality  as  possible  and  with  as  much
expedition.  The Court is  not bound to follow rules of evidence.  It may
obtain assistance of any person having professional or other qualifications
relevant to any issue.  Sec. 39 refers to power of Court of Appeal – which
can take additional evidence.  Various other details are referred to in other
sub sections.  Section 39A refers to joinder of parties in appeals.  Sec. 40
refers to additional powers of Court – protection of easements.  Section 48
refers to procedure where defendant does not appear, sec. 49 as to what
would happen if either party does not appear and sec. 50 as to what should
happen if both parties appear.  Section 51 gives power to consolidate cases;
Section 52 to payment of costs, sec. 53 to enforcement of fines or orders.
Section  55  to  the  effect  of  aiding,  abetting,  counseling  or  procuring
commission of offences.
 Finality of the Court’s orders is referred to in Part 5 in secs. 56 etc.
Under sec. 56 orders will be final except as stated in Division 2 of Part 5 or
except in regard to criminal appeals.
Division 2 of Part 5 (sec. 56A) permits appeal to the Court in class 1,
2, 3 matters against the Commissioners.  Otherwise appeals from classes 1,
2, 3 to the Supreme Court.  Sec. 58 refers to powers to appellate Court
including  suspension,  etc.   Part  5A  refers  to  ‘Mediation  and  neutral
evaluation’ by the Court.  Referral is only by consent of parties.  Various
details as to confidentiality etc. are referred to.
62

Part  6  of  Division  2  deals  with  miscellaneous  matters,  e.g.
proceedings  to be in open Court, issue of process, costs which may be
awarded by the Court but not by Commissioners, except with consent of
Court; interest payable on deposits, vexatious litigants and transfer from
Supreme Court, Rules, Regulations.
The  above  are  broadly  the  provisions  of  the  N.S.W.  Act,  1979
regarding Environmental Courts.  While certain broad features commend
themselves to us, we find that the classification of cases and the proceedings
into various classes appears to be quite complicated.  In our view, a simpler
method is necessary so far as procedure in the Indian Environmental Courts
is concerned.
New Zealand:
The  N.Z.  Environment  Court  was  established  under  the  Resource
Management (Amendment) Act, 1996 by amending the 1991 Act and it
replaced the former Planning Tribunal.  Prior to the introduction of the
Resource Management Act, 1991 (RMA), the statute that applied was the
New Zealand’s Town and Country Planning Act, 1977 which was based on
the British Model.  (A detailed account by Mr. Mark Southgate is available
from the Supplementary Memorandum published by the Royal Society (UK)
(2000) for the protection of Birds (PI. 19(a)) and is adopted hereunder (with
minor  changes)  in  view  of  its  precise  and  correct  assessment  of  the
provisions of the New Zealand Act).
63

The Environmental Court in New Zealand under the Amendment Act
of  1996  is  an  independent  specialist  Court  consisting  of  Environment
Judges (who are at the level of the District Judge) and the Environment
Commissioners (technical experts).  They are appointed for a period of five
years each time by the Governor-General on the recommendation of the
Minister  of  Justice.   In  appointing  the  Judges  and  Commissioners,  the
Governor-General  is  to  have  regard  to  the  need  to  ensure  a  mix  of
knowledge and experience – including commercial and economic affairs;
local government; community affairs; planning and resource management;
heritage  protection;  environmental  science;  architecture;  engineering;
minerals; and alternative disputes resolution processes.
The Environment Court encourages  mediation and arbitration and a
high proportion of cases are resolved by such agreement, usually presided
by an Environmental Commissioner alone.  However, all such agreements
are not given effect unless they have been looked at by  the Court, which
may alter  the  settlement.   Where  adversarial  processes  do  occur  in  the
Court, they are primarily aimed at developing high quality information to
allow the Court to reach a decision.
The  New  Zealand  Environment  Court  usually  consists  of  one
Environmental  Judge  and  two  Commissioners,  -  except  in  enforcement
proceedings which are matters of law and are presided over by a Judge
alone.  (Even under the NSW Act of 1979, enforcement is always by the
Judge or with his consent).
64

The  New  Zealand  Environment  Court  is  not  bound  by  rules  of
evidence and  it  is  free  to  establish  its  own  rules  of  procedure.
Consequently, the proceedings  are often less  formal than  those in other
Courts.  Lawyers do normally represent the parties but anyone may appear
in person and the Court encourages  individuals and groups to represent
themselves.
The  right  of  appeal,  on  resource-consent  decisions,  to  the
Environment Court extends to any person who makes a submission on that
consent, i.e. to third parties, and to applicants.  Third parties may also apply
to the Court for an order to enforce the RMA against anyone else.  The
Environmental  Court  decisions  may  be  appealed  to  the  High  Court  on
questions of law only.
The  Environment Court  of New Zealand also  hears  references  on
regional and district statements and plans (development plan equivalents)
and appeals from resource-consents (planning application equivalents); it
can make declarations, i.e. interpret the law; and it can enforce the RMA
through Civil or Criminal proceedings.  Local authorities are obliged to
make  necessary  amendments  in  the  plans  to  give  effect  to  the  Court’s
decisions.  Decisions by the Court on consents given by local authorities
can be taken afresh, after taking new evidence.  The Court’s duties include
avoiding, remedying or mitigating adverse effects on the environment and a
general duty to promote  sustainable management, in accordance with the
RM Act.
65

Even policy judgments and decisions are the ‘daily diet’ of the New
Zealand Environmental Court as stated by Mr. B. Birdsong in his Oxford
Fellowship Report (1998), Auckland, on “Adjudicating sustainability (1998)
New Zealand’s Environment Court and the Resource Management Act.”
On  the  positive  side,  the  N.Z.  Environment  Court  provides
environmental expertise, both legal and technical, and a track  record of
environmental decision-making, in public interest.  The Court has also a
duty  to  promote  sustainable  management when  hearing  cases  afresh,  as
stated in the Act.  The environmental expertise would help address the need
for greater environmental expertise within the Inspectorate also in certain
planning cases.
Another  advantage  is  that  the  Court  itself  hears  cases  relating  to
enforcement and views breaches of environmental legislation seriously.  It
can impose and does impose significant fines.  It can also hear enforcement
cases referred to it by third parties, - enforcement is not at the discretion of
the  local  authorities,  as  it  is  in  the  UK.   In  fact,  the  criticism  of  the
Magistrate’s Courts in UK and other Courts is that sometimes they fail to
impose  appropriate  punishment  for  breaches  of  planning  control  or
environmental legislation.  The seriousness of environmental offences are
better appreciated by Environmental Courts in New Zealand.
The  NZ  Act  encourages  alternative  dispute  resolution –  e.g.
Mediation, conciliation or other procedures to facilitate the resolution of
disputes  before  the  initial  hearing  of  the  case.   These  provisions  have
proved very successful.
66

However, there  is some criticism of the Court’s  power to impose
costs against unsuccessful parties but imposition of costs is a normal feature
of litigation  except where plans or policy statements or public interest is
involved.  It is however pointed out by critics as to why costs could go as
high as $8,500 upto $20,000, and that for that reason threats by developers
about  costs  could  discourage  genuine  objections.   The  criticism against
taking a vast range of evidence is not correct because the experts on the
Bench could always cut short unnecessary evidence.
The 1999 Amendments to the New Zealand Act of 1991, have been
summarized as follows: (See Angelo Rego).   The Bill was aimed to address
several  components  of  the  law.   Firstly,  it  was  designed  to  reduce
unnecessary delays  and  costs  in  the procedure  without  undermining  the
objectives.  Secondly, there are a number of provisions relating to heritage
and archaeology, which recognize the protection of historic heritage as a
matter of national importance and brings archaeological controls from the
NZ  Historic  Places  Act,  1993.   In  addition  to  this,  the  Bill  aims  at
strengthening  the  national  environmental  standards  and  national  policy
statement provisions.  The Bill introduces a new definition of ‘environment’
which focuses more closely on the biophysical environment and narrows the
human element to health, safety, amenity and cultural values.
Three other important amendments are those relating to the ‘resource
consent processing’, the ‘direct referral to the Environmental Court’ and the
‘use  of  Environment  Commissioners’  to  hear  cases  and  take  decisions.
These changes allow applicants to choose whether their applications will be
67

processed by the Council or by a private consent processor and to have
complex or contentious applications referred directly to the Environmental
Court.  Applicants and those who oppose applications will also be able to
choose whether they want the Council or an independent commissioner to
hear the case and make the decision.  This was designed to improve the
impartiality  of  decision-making  and  remove  any  appearance  of  bias  or
conflict on the part of the decision-maker.
The NZ Bill was introduced in the House in July 1999, and the Report
of  the  Select  Committee  came  on  8.5.2002,  and  further  changes  were
suggested  by  the  Report  of  the  Business-compliance-Costs  Panel,
Government announced further changes.
The NZ Resource Management Act, 1991 consists of 433 sections
and 11 Schedules and consists of 15 parts.  After Parts 1 to 10, we have the
Environmental Court in Part II (sections 247 to 308).  Part 11 deals with
‘Declarations, Enforcement and Ancilliary Powers’ (section 309 to 343D).
There are in all  110 sections from section 297 to 343D which deal
with the Environmental Court, as per the 1999 Amendment to the NZ Act of
1991.  We shall briefly refer to some of the sections and to the sub headings
in Part 11 and 12.
Section  247  names  the  erstwhile  Planning  Tribunal  as  the
Environment Court, sec. 248 deals with its Membership, sec. 249 with the
eligibility  for  appointment  as  an  Environment  Judge  or  alternate
Environment Judge; sec. 250 deals with the appointment of not more than 8
68

such Judges.  Basically they are District Judges in service; sec. 251 deals
with the Principal Environment Judge.  Section 252 states when an alternate
Environment Judge may act.
Environment  Commissioners  and  Deputy  Environment
Commissioners  are  contemplated  by  the  Act.   Sec.  253  refers  to  their
eligibility.   It  states  that  the  Environment  Commissioner  must  have
knowledge and experience in
(a) Economics,  commercial and  business  affairs,  local  government,
and community affairs;
(b) Planning, resource management and heritage protection;
(c) Environmental  sciences,  including  the  physical  and  social
sciences;
(d) Architecture,  engineering,  surveying,  minerals  technology,  and
building construction;
(da)   Alternate dispute resolution processes;
(e)     Matters relating to Treaty of Waithangi & Kaupapa Maori,  
 and sec. 254 refers to the appointment of a Commissioner for not more than
5 years.  Sec. 255 mentions when a Deputy Environment Commissioner
may act.  Section 256 with the  oath of office for the Commissioner or
Deputy Commissioner.
Sections 257, 258 deal with procedure for resignation and removal of
members  by  the  Governor-General,  including  the  Judge  for  inability  or
69

misbehaviour.  Removal of a Judge will not amount to cancellation of his
appointment as a District Judge.
Section 259 refers to special advisors, sec. 260 to ‘officers of the
Environment Court’ i.e.  Registrar and other  offices.  Sec. 261  refers  to
‘Protection from legal proceedings’.  Sec. 262 refers to members of the
Environment Court who are rate-payers and it is made clear that it is not a
disqualification to be a rate-payer if one is proposed to be appointed to the
Environment  Court.  Sec.  263  deals  with  remuneration  of  Environment
Commissioners and special advisors.  Sec. 264 refers to Annual Report of
Registrar to be submitted to the Minister concerned in charge of Courts.
In the NZ Act, procedure of the Environment Court  is dealt with
separately.  Sec. 265 refers to the sittings of the Court and its  quorum.
Quorum will be one Judge and one Commissioner, except in relation to
some sections, where quorum consists of the Judge alone.  The decision of
the majority of members of the Court will hold good and if there is no
majority, the decision of the presiding member will prevail; sec. 266 says
constitution of Court is not to be questioned; sec. 267 refers to conferences
and procedure and powers; sec. 268 to ‘Alternative Dispute Resolution by
one of the Members by way of mediation or conciliation or other procedure.
These persons are not disqualified to act as Judges later.
Powers of the Court and procedures are defined in several sections.
Sec. 274 deals with ‘representation at proceedings’; Section 274(1) states
that in proceedings before the Court under the Act, the Minister, any local
authority, any person having any interest in the proceedings greater than the
70

public generally, any person representing some relevant aspect of public
interest,  and  any  party  to  the  proceedings,  may  appear  and  may  call
evidence on any matter that should be taken into account in determining the
proceedings.  Others must give 10 day notice to the Court, if they wish to
appear;  sec.  275  refers  to  appearance  in  person  or  representative,  and
section  276  with  ‘Evidence’.   It  states  that  the  Court  may  receive  any
evidence which it considers appropriate or it may call for any evidence
which  it  considers  will  assist  in  the  making  of  a  decision  or  a
recommendation and call any person before it for that purpose.  The Court is
not inhibited by the principles of law about evidence that apply to judicial
proceedings.  Sec. 277 states that hearings and evidence has to be public
subject to certain specific exceptions.  Sec. 278 states that the Environment
Court  to  have  powers  of  s  District  Court;  sec.  279  to  powers  of  an
Environment Judge sitting alone.  He may strike off vexatious proceedings.
Sec. 280 refers to powers of Environment Commissioners sitting without
Environment Judge and section 281  to waivers and directions;  sec. 282
invests the Court with power to commit for contempt, sec. 283 take action
for  non-attendance  or  refusal  to  co-operate;  sec.  284  to  witnesses
allowances,  sec.  285  to  costs  through  the  District  Court,  sec.  286  to
enforcing order as to costs; sec. 287 permits reference of question of law to
the High Court; sec. 288 refers to privileges and immunities of witnesses
and counsel.
Appeals,  inquiries  and  other  proceedings  before the  Environment
Court are dealt with by sections 289 to 291.  Sec. 289 deals with ‘Reply to
Appeal or request for inquiry’.  Sec. 290 refers to powers of Environment
71

Court in regard to appeals and inquiries; sec. 291 refers to other proceedings
before the said Court.
With regard to Plans and Policy statements, the Environment Court is
given special powers.  Sec. 292 deals with ‘Remedying defects in Plans’,
sec. 293 to the power of the Court to order changes to policy statements and
plans.  Sec. 294 refers to review of decision of Environment Court if new
and important evidence becomes available or there has been a change in
circumstances which might affect the decision.
Sec. 295 states that decision of the Environment Court is final; sec.
290 states that ‘No review of decisions unless right of appeal or reference to
inquiry exercised’.  The section states that if there is a right to refer any
matter  to  the  Environment  Court  or  to  appeal  to  that  Court  against  a
decision of a local authority or any person under the Act, any other Act or
regulation, no application for review under Part I of the Judicature Act,
1972  can  be  made  and  no  proceedings  seeking  a  writ  of  mandamus,
prohibition or certiorari or a declaration may be heard by the High Court,
“unless the right has been exercised by the applicant in the proceedings and
the Environmental Court has made a decision.”  Sec. 297 says that decision
of Court has to be in writing; sec. 298 to judicial notice of documents.
The  next  question  is  as  to  appeals  from  decision  report  or
recommendation of the Environment Court.  Sec. 299 states that appeal shall
be ‘on a question of law’ to the High Court.  Sections 300 to 307 refer to the
procedure in the High Court in the appeals against the Environment Court,
sec. 308 deals with appeals to Court of Appeal.
72

Part  12  deals  with  declaration,  enforcement  and  ancillary  powers
which have to be exercised only by the Judge or Court.  Section 309 says
proceedings  have  to  be  heard  by  an  Environment  Judge (i.e.  not  a
Commissioner/Dy. Commissioner).  Sections 310 and 311 & 312, 313 deal
with  nature  of  declarations  and  procedure;  sec.  314  to  321  with
Enforcement orders by the Environmental Court; sec. 322 to 325B with
‘Abatement notices’ (i.e. Abatement of nuisance) and appeal to Court and
stay;  section  326  to  328  with  ‘Excessive  Noise’,  sec.  329  with  ‘Water
shortage’, section 330 to 331 to ‘Emergency Works’, sec. 332 to 335 to
‘power of entry and search’, sec. 336 to ‘Return of Property’, section 337 to
return of property seized under warrant’.
Offences are dealt with in sec. 338 to 343.  Section 338 refers to
‘offences against this Act’, sec. 339 to ‘Penalties’ like imprisonment for 2
years or fine up to 200 thousand dollars and if the offence is a continuing
one,  upto  1000  dollars  per  day.   Violation  of  some  sections  results  in
summary convictions; sec. 339A refers to ‘Protection against imprisonment
for dumping and discharges offences involving foreign ships’, sec. 339B to
‘additional  penalty  for  certain  offences  for commercial  gain’  upto  three
times the said gain, sec. 339C to the ‘Amount of fine or other monetary
penalty recoverable by distress and sale of ship or from agent’; sec. 340
deals with ‘liability of principal for acts of agents’, sec. 341 refers to strict
liability  and  defences’.   Subsection  (1)  of  sec.  341  states  that,  in  any
prosecution for an offence in respect of certain sections (sections 9, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15) it is not necessary that defendant intended to commit the offence.
Subsection  (2)  permits  exceptions in  case  (a):  (i)  action  or  event  was
73

necessary  for  saving  or  protecting  life  or  health  or  preventing  serious
damage  to  property  or  avoiding  actual  or  likely  adverse-effect  on  the
environment;  and (ii) the conduct of the defendant was reasonable in the
circumstances,  and (iii) the effects of the action or event were adequately
mitigated or remedied by the defendant after it had occurred or (b):  the
action or event was due to an event beyond the control of the defendant –
including natural disaster, mechanical failure or sabotage and  in each case
(i) the action or event could not reasonably have been foreseen or been
provided against by the defendant; and  (ii) the effects of the action or event
were adequately mitigated or remedied by the defendant after it occurred.
Subsection (3) states that the above defences can be raised only by leave of
Court if applied for within 7 days after service or notice.  Sec. 341A refers
to ‘liability and defences for dumping and storage of waste or other matter’
with similar defences, sec. 341B to ‘liability and defences for discharging
harmful  substances’.   In  the  case  of  discharge  of  harmful  substances,
contaminants,  or  water  in  breach  of  sec.  15B,  it  is  not  necessary  that
defendant  intended  to  commit  the  offence.   Defences,  in  relation  to
discharges from shops are similar to those under sec. 341.  Sec. 342 to ‘fines
to  be  paid  to  local  authority instituting  prosecution’;  sec.  342  refers  to
‘Discharge from ships’ (repealed).
Infringement offences are defined in sec. 343A.  Infringement offence
means an offence specified as such in regulations made under sections 360
(1)(ba).  ‘Infringement fee’ in relation to the above  offences  means the
amount  fixed  by  regulations  made  under  sec.  300(1)(bb)  as  the
‘infringement  fee’  for  the  offence.  Sec.  343B  refers  to  ‘commission  of
infringement offence’ and states that any person who is alleged to have
74

committed an infringement offence may either be proceeded against for the
offence under the Summary proceedings Act, 1957 or be served with an
infringement  notice  as  provided  in  sec.  343C;  sec.  343C  refers  to
‘infringement notices’ and sec. 343D refers to ‘Entitlement to infringement
fees’ of the local authority.
These  are  basically  the  provisions  of  the  Act  relating  to
Environmental Courts in Part 11 and 12.
In New Zealand, the statutes which deal with environment are the
‘Water and Soil Conservation Act, 1967; the Clean Air Act, 1972; the Noise
Control Act, 1982; Marine Farming Act, 1971; Harbour Act, 1950; Forests
Act; Historic Places Act; Local Government Act; Transit NZ Act; etc.
Schedule 1 deals with ‘Preparation, changes  and review of  Policy
statement and Plans’, Schedule 2 refers to ‘Matters that may be provided for
in  Policy statement and Plans; then comes  Schedule 3;  Schedule 4 with
Assessment of effects on the Environment.  (Other Schedules upto 11 deal
with certain other aspects’.
Summarising the functions of the NZ Environment Court, it is seen
that it consists of Environmental Judges, who are also District Court Judges
in office and of Environmental Commissioners.  The Court has a Central
Registry  at  Wellington  and  holds  sittings  throughout  New  Zealand.
Normally,  the  panel  will  consist  of  one  Environment  Judge  and  two
Environment  Commissioners  (except  where  enforcement  proceedings
involve questions of law).  Parties before the Court are usually represented
75

by lawyers, but anyone may appear in person, or be represented by an agent.
The Court is not bound by the rules of evidence and the proceedings are
often  less  formal  than  the  general  Courts.   Most  of  the  Court’s  work
involves public interest questions.  The jurisdiction of the Environmental
Tribunal consists of matters arising under (1) the Resource Management
Act, (2) References about the consents of regional and district statements
and plans; and appeals arising out of applications for resource consent; (3)
The consents applied for may be for a land use, for a sub-division, a coastal
permit, a water permit or a discharge permit or a combination of these.
The Environment Court’s work includes:
(1) issue  of  directions  authorizing  public  works  such  as  energy
projects,  hospitals,  schools,  prisons,  sewage  works,  refuse
landfills, fire-stations, major roads and bypasses; and also major
private  projects  –  for  example,  dairy,  factories,  tourist  resorts,
timber-miles and shopping centers.
(2) Classification of water, water permits for dams and diversions,
taking  of  geothermal  fluids,  discharges  from  sewerage  works,
underground mines; maximum and minimum levels of lakes and
flows  of  rivers,  and  minimum  quality  standards;  and  water
conservation orders.
(3) Land sub-division approvals and conditions, development levies,
car-parking contributions, reserve contributions, development levy
fund  distribution,  road  upgrading  contributions,  regional  roads,
limited access to roads and stopping roads.
76

(4) Environmental  effects  of  prospecting,  exploration  and  mining,
including underground, open pit and alluvial mining.
(5) Enforcement proceedings (including interim enforcement orders,
declarations about the legal status of environmental activities and
instruments, existing and proposed, and appeals against abatement
notices.)
Some of the issues that arise before the N.Z. Environment Court are:
(1) Water and hydrothermal resources, including use for electricity
generation.
(2) Levying  and  distribution  of  public  funds  (reserves  and
development levies).
(3) The physical environment, including  the coast, bush, landform,
lakes, rivers, productive soil.
(4) Noise environment and cost of protecting the environment from
noise nuisance.
(5) Public safety, e.g. bulk LPG installations, exposure to earthquake
risk, flooding, erosion.
(6) Mining in reserves, developments in coastal environment, regional
planning.
(7) Social issues including social effects of mining or other industrial
projects.
United Kingdom:
77

In UK, the Department of Environment was set up in Nov. 1970.  The
statutes governing environment are the Wildlife and Countryside Act, 1981,
the  Water  Act,  1989,  the  1990  Planning  Acts  and  the  Environment
Protection Act, 1990 (EPA).  The Town and Country Planning Act, 1990
consolidated the legislations for England and Wales and amendments were
made to the Planning and Compensation Act, 1990.  The Scottish legislation
is the Town and Country Planning Act, 1997.  The Scottish Environment
Protection Agency was established in 1996.
The Environment Agency in England and Wales was established in
1996  to  bring  together  functions  previously  exercised  by  the  National
Rivers  Authority  (created  in  1989)  and  Her  Majesty’s  Department  of
Pollution.   Then came the Environment Act, 1995 which deals with the
Agency’s powers.
The House of Lords held in R vs. Secretary of State for Environment,
Transport and the Regions exparte Alconbury Development Ltd. & Others”
2001 UKHL 23 that the role of the Secretary of State, as both policy-maker
and a decision-maker in individual planning cases (such as call inns) was,
(when taken together with the right of Judicial review), compatible with the
requirement under the European Convention on Human Rights. 
The above decision of the House of Lords (according to the Royal
Commission  on  Environmental  Pollution)(23rd Report  on  Environmental
Planning,  March  2002  para  5.33)  dealt  only  with  the  position  of  the
Secretary of State, and recognized that planning decisions in general raise
questions of civil rights.   The judgment had significantly left open the
78

position of planning inspectors making delegated decisions, the extent to
which  third  parties  have  rights,  and  the  extent  to  which  other  areas  of
environmental regulations are equally subject to such principles.
The  Magistrate  Courts,  the  Crown  Courts  (Appellate  Courts)  the
Court of Criminal Appeals; the Country Court and the High Court were and
are dealing with the planning and environmental cases.  It was felt that there
should be one Court or Tribunal to deal with the whole range of planning
and appeal and enforcement work, including the levy of penalties.  This was
pointed out in the report ‘Enforcing Planning Control’ (HM SO May 1989)
by Robert Carnworth Q.C.  (See “Environmental Enforcement: the need for
a  Specialist  Court”  Journal  of  Planning  &  Enforcement,  1992  p.  798).
While  some  of  the  other  recommendations  were  accepted  in  bringing
forward the Planning and Compensation Act, 1991, there was no response
in regard to the need for a unified system of Courts.  
At that juncture, Lord Woolf, in his Garner lecture to U.K.E.L.A. on
the  theme  ‘Are  the  Judiciary  Environmentally  Myopic’  summed  up  the
problems  of  increasing  specialization  in  environmental  law  and  on  the
difficulty of Courts, in their present form, moving beyond their traditional
role  of  detached  ‘Wednesbury’ review.   (The  speech  of Lord  Woolf  is
printed in 1992 J.E.L. Vol 4, No.1, p.)  He went on to discuss the benefits of
“…having a Tribunal with general responsibility for overseeing and
enforcing  the  safeguards  provided  for  the  protection  of  the
environment…The Tribunal could be granted a wider discretion to
79

determine its procedure so that it is able to bring to bear its specialist
experiences of environmental issues in the most effective way.”
The  Tribunal,  according  to  Lord  Woolf,  should  have  the  benefit  of
architects, surveyors and a ‘multi-disciplined adjudicating panel’ with broad
discretion over rights of appearance; power to instruct independent counsel
on behalf of the Tribunal or members of the public; resources for direct
investigation by the Tribunal itself; incorporation into the Tribunals of the
existing Inspectorate to deal with ‘cases of lesser dimensions’.  Lord Woolf
concluded:
“I  hope…I  have  said  enough…to  indicate  that  what  I  am
contemplating is not just a Court under another name, nor is it an
existing Tribunal under another name.  It is a multi-faceted and multi-
skilled body which would combine the services provided in existing
Courts,  Tribunals  and  Inspectorate  in  the  environmental  field.   It
would be a ‘one stop shop’ which should lead to faster, cheaper and
the more effective resolution of disputes in the environmental area.  It
would  avoid  increasing  the  load on  already  overburdened  lay
institutions by trying to compel them to resolve issues with what they
are not designed to deal.  It could be a forum in which Judges could
play a different role.  A role which enabled them not to examine
environmental problems with limited vision.  It could however be
based on our existing experience, combining the skills of the existing
inspectorate, the lands Tribunal and other administrative bodies.  It
could be an exciting project.”
80

In the article by Robert Carnworth, Q.C., referred to earlier, the author has
dealt with the strength and weakness of the existing jurisdictions in England
in  the  areas  of  (i)  enforcement  procedures,  (ii)  the  public  inquiry,  (iii)
judicial review and statutory appeals, (iv) local ombudsman, and (v) Lands
Tribunal and stated
“With  the  impetus  given  by  Sir  Harry  Woolf,  there  is  now  an
opportunity  to  review  the  structure  of  the  Courts  and  agencies
concerned with the supervision of environmental law.  Such a review
should  start  by  a  pooling  of  ideas  and  experiences  of  all  those
involved in the practical working of the present system –  specialist
Judges and lawyers; the local ombudsman; the planning inspectorate,
local authorities and other relevant public agencies; voluntary groups,
business organizations etc.  The aim should be a pragmatic evolution
towards a logical and simplified structure, incorporating the best of
existing practice and procedure.”
Lord Woolf again, in another lecture in May 2001, suggested that there was
a case for some new form of Environment Court or Tribunal.   This was in
his  ‘Environmental Law Foundations  Prof. David Hall Medical  Lecture’
while speaking on the subject ‘Environmental risk: the responsibilities of
the law and science’.
It  was  at  that  stage  that  a  major  study  was  undertaken  by  Prof.
Malcolm Grant of Cambridge in what is known as the “Environment Court
Project”.  The Report on the project was published on February 18, 2000.  It
was prepared by the Dept. of Land Economy, University of Cambridge.  The
81

project initiated and supported by the Dept. of Environment Transport and
Regions  (IETR) and  had  the  support  of the  Financial  Management  and
Performance Review of the Planning Inspectorate made in 1995-96.  The
purpose of the project was to study the concept of an Environment Court in
the background of experience in other countries, such as Australia and New
Zealand.  The Report identified the following ten characteristics that help
define the concept though it did not firmly recommend such a Court for UK
(see 2000 JPL p 453 ‘The Case for an Environmental Court’).   These are:
(a) a specialist and exclusive jurisdiction;
(b) a power to determine merits appeals;
(c) vertical and horizontal integration – (by which is meant a
wide  environmental  jurisdiction  which  integrates  both
subject matter and different types of legal proceedings);
(d) the hallmarks of a  court or tribunal;
(e) dispute  resolution  powers  –  (even  disputes  over  the
formulation  of  policy  as  well  as  a  more  traditional
adjudication.);
(f) expertise  –  (the  members  would  be  specialists  in
environmental issues);
(g) access  –  (there  would  be  broad  rights  of  access  to  the
Court);
(h) informality of proceeding (such as use of alternative dispute
resolution procedures);
(i) costs  (this  is  linked  to  the  need  for  access  and involves
means of overcoming the problem of high costs inhibiting
access); and
82

(j) capacity for information.
Comment has been made that the above ten criteria are quite general and
that  they  lack  clarity.   While  it  is  true  that  the  above  criteria  may be
common to several types of modern Courts or Tribunals not necessarily
dealing with ‘environment’,  the fact remains that these general criteria are
equally suitable and applicable for Environmental Courts also.
Prof.  Malcolm  Grants’  Project  Report  published  in  May  2000
recommended  six  possible  alternative  arrangements  ranging  from  a
‘Planning Appeals Tribunal’ to an ‘Environmental Court’ as a division of
the High Court.  
As regards discussions within Town and Country Planning systems,
the Royal Commission no doubt stated in its 23rd Report on Environmental
Planning (March 2002) (para 5.35) that what was needed was “a system that
commands public confidence, improves consistency, is effective at reaching
decisions and is not unduly costly.  Our main consideration is with merits
appeals.  With the Administrative Court now established within the High
Court,  we  are  not  convinced  that  there  is  any  need  for  a  specialist
environmental court dealing with  judicial review or  statutory appeals on
legal  grounds  so  far  as  the  Town  and  County  planning  systems  were
concerned.   Criminal  offences  concerning  planning  and  environmental
matters are probably best left to the ordinary criminal courts, though there is
a case for improved guidance on sentencing and more training, especially
for magistrates”.
83

Finally,  the  Royal  Commission  recommended  establishment  of
Environmental Courts so far as environmental matters outside the Town and
County planning systems, for establishment of an Environmental Court, as
follows:
“…there is a great deal of inconsistency at present, both in whether
there is a right of appeal on merits and in who decides any such
appeal.  Some appeals are made to the Secretary of State.  Others,
such as those concerning contaminated land or statutory nuisances,
are made to the magistrate’s Courts, which often lack the expertise to
handle the considerable technicalities involved.  In many contexts, for
example, the granting of consents in relation to genetically modified
organisms, there is no right of appeal on merits.  Procedures have
grown up haphazardly with no apparent underlying principle, and we
consider they fail to provide a system appropriate for contemporary
needs.  We recommend the establishment of Environmental Tribunals
to handle appeals under environmental legislation other than the town
and  country  planning  system,  including  those  now  handled  by
planning inspectors.” (para 5.36)
The  Royal  Commission  observed  (para  5.37)  that  establishing  an
Environmental  Tribunal  would  be  a  significant  contribution  to  a  more
coherent  and  effective  system  of  environmental  regulation.   As  to  its
constitution, and scope of appeals from it, the Commission said:
“We envisage such a Tribunal would consist of a  legal chairperson
and members with appropriate specialized expertise.  It would rapidly
84

develop the authority and understanding needed to handle complex
environmental  cases.   We  envisage  several  tribunals  would  be
established  to  cover  England  and  similar  tribunals  for  Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.  On points of law, there would be
right of appeal from the Tribunal to the High Court.  Applications for
judicial review or environmental matters would not be considered by
the  High  Court  unless  the  applicant  had  exhausted  any  remedy
available from the Environmental Tribunal or from other sources.”
The ‘alternative remedy’ principle as exercised by our High Courts in India
in jurisdiction under Art. 226 is clearly accepted here.
As to the jurisdiction and powers of the Environmental Courts, the Royal
Commission stated (para 5.38):
“The precise jurisdiction of the Environmental Tribunal would be a
matter for government, but we have indicated in box 5B various areas
that would be appropriate.  We envisage civil litigations will continue
to be handled by the civil courts and criminal matters by the criminal
courts.  The new Tribunals would take over such functions as the
present  jurisdiction  of  magistrates’  courts  on  such  subjects  as
contaminated land and statutory nuisance.  Although, in general, the
Tribunal should have the final rights of decision on appeals submitted
to it, there may be cases of acute policy sensitivity where it ought to
make a recommendation to the Minister rather than the final decision,
and the Alconbury decision implies that such a mechanism would be
consistent with the Human Rights Act.  It also would then be similar
85

to that of a planning inspector where a planning appeal is received by
the Secretary of State.  The Tribunal’s main concern would be with
appeals, but it might have some original jurisdiction, for example, in
deciding statutory nuisance cases currently taken by complaints to a
magistrate’s court.”
Thus, the proposal is for the Environmental Court would have ‘appellate’ as
well as ‘original’ jurisdiction.    They would not oust the normal civil and
criminal jurisdiction of ordinary Courts but would remain special Courts for
environmental issues.
The Box 5B contains a chart at the bottom of which we have the ‘New
Regional  Environmental  Tribunals’ which  will  hear  appeals  on
‘environmental  matters’.   These  are  appeals from  (a)  decisions  of
Environmental Agencies (in respect of IPPC, discharge to water courses
waste licences etc.) (b) appeals, currently heard by magistrate’s courts, from
notices  served  by local  authorities  in relation  to contaminated  land  and
statutory nuisances, (c) designation of sites of special scientific interest and
Habitat  Regulations,  (d)  decision  of  Secretary  of  State  on  licences  for
genetically modified organisms and other government decisions where there
is no right of appeal at present other than by judicial review.
In UK, the Criminal Courts would deal with environmental offences
in  the  same  way  as  at  present;  one  Court  in  each  County  might  be
designated to deal with environmental offences.   The Civil Courts would
continue to deal with environmental disputes between  private parties on
issues such as nuisance or negligence.
86

The Commission went on to recommend (see para 5.39) to combine
the Environmental Tribunal with the Planning Inspectorate to establish a
‘Planning and Environmental Tribunal’ (on the lines of some of the options
considered by Professed Grant).  That would resolve the doubts remaining
about the position of planning inspectors in relation to the Human Rights
Act.  It would be an advantage to have a firm institutional linkage between
the appeals system for land use and the procedures for a more specialized
environmental  regulation.   Such  a  development,  the  Royal  Commission
said, may come after some time.  But the Commission’s view was that it was
preferable for a tribunal to start by taking over and consolidating the wide
variety of other procedures for environmental regulation, rather than risk
being swamped by the much greater volume of appeals.
As to locus standi, so far as judicial review matters are concerned,
the Royal Commission had a liberal view when it stated (see para 5.40) that
a 
“very important distinction between appeals on merits and judicial
review is that appeals by way of judicial review are not restricted to
the applicant.  Third parties such as a  neighbour or  amenity groups
may also bring judicial reviews against, say, the decision of a local
planning authority to grant planning permission, the Environmental
Agency to grant an IPPC licence, or the decision of the Secretary of
State on a merits appeal.  To do so, they have to satisfy the Court that
they have ‘sufficient interest’….  Contemporary practice is far more
liberal.   Local  amenity  groups  and  national  environmental
87

organizations  have frequently been granted leave  to bring judicial
review,  particularly  if  they  made  representations  concerning  the
original applications.”
The Royal Commission then referred to the 1990 E.C. Directive on
the freedom of access to information on environment as implemented in
U.K.  by  the  Environment  Information  Regulations  1992  and  the  1998
Convention  on  ‘Access  to  Information,  Public  Participation  in  Decision
Making and Access to Justice’ on Environmental Matters (see paras 5.41 to
5.47)  and  to  several  aspects  as  to  locus  standi  of  individual  and
environmental organizations in respect of planning and development as well
as environmental matters.
 U.K.  has  not  yet  established  Environmental  Tribunals  for
environmental issues, but it appears to us that the country is in the process
of establishing such Courts soon.
The following is the further literature on the subject in respect of
U.K.:
(i) William Birties: “Why we need an Environment Court’
          (Legal Week, 2000, 2(1), 19
(ii) Freshfields: “The Environmental Courts Concept”
 (Comm LJ 2000 17(28-31))
(iii) Editorial: “The case for an environmental court”
        ((2000) JPL 453)
88

(iv) Editorial:  “The  Govt’s  response  to  the  Grant  Report  on  an
Environmental Court” ((2000) JPC B 95)
(v) Paula de Prez: ‘An environmental court: the case for inclusion
of  a  criminal  law  jurisdiction’  (Environmental  Law  and
management (2000, 12(5), 191)
(vi) Martyn Day, Richard Stein and William Birties:
“An Environmental  Court  Part-I” [(2001) 151  New LJ 630;
Part II (2001) 151 New LJ 672].
(vii) “Do we need an environmental court?”
(In House Lawyer No. 81, June 2000, 64.)
Canada, Europe and USA
We shall not go into details but briefly state that the environmental
disputes are being decided by the following Courts in Canada, Europe and
USA.
(A) Canada:
(a) Alberta: Environmental Appeals Board
(b) Ontario: Environmental Assessment and Appeals Boards
(B) Europe:
(a) Denmark: Environmental Appeals Board.
(b) Irish Republic: The Planning Appeals Board.
89

(c) Sweden: Environmental  Courts  and  the  Environmental
Court of Appeal (see the new Environmental Code)
See also James Hurst: “Sweden: the Environmental Code.  EELR
(1999)8 (5) pp 134-135
(C) U.S.A. : The Vermont Environmental Court.
90

Chapter V
Environmental Courts or appellate environment bodies 
in India as at present
General jurisdiction of various civil, criminal and constitutional Courts:
We have referred, in detail in Chapter III, to the case law showing the
wide range of powers exercised by the High Courts and the Supreme Court
on  a  variety  of  environmental  issues  under  Art.  226  and  Art.  32
respectively.  Apart from these superior Courts, the subordinate civil courts
exercise powers in regard to public and private nuisances.  (See sec. 9 and
also sec. 91 of the Code of Civil Procedure Code, 1908).  Criminal Courts
exercise  powers  under  various  sections  of the  Indian  Penal  Code  (IPC)
dealing with offences relating to environment.  Chapter XIV of the IPC
refer to offences under sections 269, 270 (neglecting or doing malignant
acts likely to spread infectious diseases dangerous to life, disobedience of
quarantine rules (sec. 271), fouling water of public spring or reservoir (sec.
277), making atmosphere noxious to health (sec. 278), negligent conduct
with respect to poisonous substances, fire or combustible matter, explosive
substances, machinery, and pulling down or repairing buildings; animals
(sec. 291), endangering life or personal safety of others (sections 336 to
338), mischief (sec. 425), mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by
wrongly diverting  water   (sec.  430),  mischief  by injury  to  public  road,
bridges,  river  or  channel  (sec.  431),  mischief  by causing  inundation  or
obstruction  to  public  drainage,  attended  with  damage  (sec.  432),  and
culpable homicide (sec. 299 to 304A).  Chapter X of the Code of Criminal
91

Procedure,  1973  also  contains  provisions  for  enforcement  of  various
provisions of the substantive law (for e.g. sec. 133 CrPC).
In addition, new offences are created by sections 41 to 50 (Chapter
VII) of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; sections
37 to 46 (Chapter VI) of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1981, sections 14 to 18 of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991, sec. 3A,
3B of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; sec. 51 to 58 (Chapter VI) of the
Wild  Life  (Protection)  Act,  1972;  sec.  15  to  17  of  the  Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986.  All these offences today go for trial before the
ordinary criminal courts.  The appropriate criminal court will deal with the
matter  and  is  identified  on  the  basis  of  the  territorial  jurisdiction  and
depending upon its power to award sentence of imprisonment to any person
for  particular  number  of  years.   The  appeals  on  the  criminal  side  are
governed by the laws relating to criminal procedure.
Obviously,  whether  the  matter  is  one  of  civil  nature  or  criminal
nature, once it is taken cognizance by any Court subordinate to the High
Court, it will be dealt with by the said civil or criminal court along with the
other cases before it and environmental cases are not normally given any
priority in the matter of disposal.  Of course, if the issue comes before the
High Court or the Supreme Court under writ jurisdiction whether the matter
is  one  brought  by  the  affected  party  or  parties  or  in  a  Public  Interest
litigation, these Courts take up these matters faster but the cases are not
taken up day by day as may be done by an Environmental Court dealing
exclusively with such cases.
92

What we mean to say is that none of the above Courts are courts
having exclusive jurisdiction as regards environmental issues and the result
is that there is delay in their disposal as compared to the time within which
any  special  Environmental  Court  dealing  only  with  issues  relating  to
environment could have taken.  It cannot be disputed that environmental
matters have to be taken up early, monitored from time to time and be
finally disposed of by a procedure quicker than that obtaining now.  Further,
the Courts today lack independent expert advice on environmental matters
by a statutory panel attached to the Court and depend mostly on the expert
evidence that may be adduced by the parties.  We have already pointed in
the previous chapters, the need for experts in environment to be associated
with the Courts dealing with these cases.   
Special Acts and appellate powers:
Environment (Protection) Act & Rules made thereunder:
Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 enables the
Central Government to constitute an authority or authorities for the purpose
of  exercising  and  performing  such  of  the  powers  and  functions  of  the
Central Government under that Act (including the power to give directions
under sec. 5 of that Act) and for taking measures with respect to the matters
referred to in sec. 3(2) and subject to the supervision and control of the
Central Government.
Several rules have been framed under section 25 of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986.  These rules provide for ‘authorities’ who implement
93

the rules and also provide for ‘appellate authorities’ who are all officers or
Departments of Government.  Various rules have been made under sec. 25.
Some rules framed under the Act regarding appointment of ‘authorities’ do
not prescribe appellate authorities.
In the Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989,
Rule 18 provides for an appeal against any order of grant or refusal of an
authorization by the Member-Secretary, State Pollution Control Board (or
any officer designated  by the  Board) – to  the Secretary, Department of
Environment of the State Government.
In the Rules of 1989 relating to Manufacture, Storage and Import of
Hazardous chemicals, Rule 2(b) refer to the ‘authority’ mentioned in Col. 2
of Schedule 5 as being the authority which will perform various functions
under Rule 3.  The said Schedule 5 designates various authorities or persons
to exercise the functions  such as (1) Ministry of Environment and Forests
under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; (2) Chief Controller of Imports
and Exports  under the Import  and Export (Control)  Act, 1947;  (3) The
Central  Pollution  Control  or  the  State  Pollution  Control  Board  or
Committee  under  the  Environment  (Protection)  Act,  1986;  (4)  Chief
Inspectors of Factories under the Factories Act, 1948; (5) Chief Inspector of
Dock  Safety  appointed  under  the  Dock  Workers  (Safety,  Health  and
Welfare)  Act,  1987;  (6)  Chief  Inspector  of  Mines  appointed  under  the
Mines Act, 1952; (7) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board appointed under
Atomic Energy Act, 1972; (8) Chief Controller of Explosives appointed
under the Explosives Act and Rules, 1973.  No provision is made for an
appeal in these Rules.
94

In the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules,
2000, various functions are to be performed by the Municipal Authority,
State Governments, Union Territories, Central Pollution Control Board and
State Pollution Control Board or Committee.  No appeal provision is made.
In the Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation & Control) Rules,
2000, various functions have to be performed by the authority specified in
Schedule V thereof.  Here, in Col (4), the Schedule specifies the ‘authority’
and Col. 6 specifies the appellate Authority also.  The appellate authorities
are Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, or in certain cases, the
Dy. Secretary in the same Ministry.
In the Noise Pollution (Regulation & Control) Rules, 2000, Rule 2(c)
defines  ‘authority’  as  an  authority  or  officer  authorized  by  the  Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in accordance
with  the  laws  in  force  and  includes  a  District  Magistrate,  Police
Commissioner or any officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent
of Police.  There is a definition of ‘Court’ in Rule 2(d) but the Rules do not
deal with the functions of the ‘Court’.  No appellate authority is referred.
Bio-Medical Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 defines
‘Prescribed  Authority’  under  Rule  7  for  enforcement  of  the  Rules  and
designates the authority as the State Pollution Control Board in States or
such  Committees  in  Union  Territories.   Rule  13  defines  the  appellate
authority as the authority to be notified by the State Government or Union
Territory.
95

Thus, it will be seen that in the various Rules made under sec. 3 of the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, there are authorities/(or in some cases)
appellate authorities constituted but there is no appeal to a judicial body.
Nor do the appellate authorities, wherever they are constituted, have any
expert assistance.  They are all bureaucrats. 
Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 and Rules made thereunder:
The Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 contains provisions for ‘appeals’ to an
appellate authority, to be constituted by the State Governments to deal with
appeals by persons aggrieved by orders of State Board and then a revision to
the State Government.  (See sec. 25 and 26).
The  Union  Territory  of  Chandigarh,  on  11.4.88,  appointed  three
officers of Government as the appellate authority for purposes of sec. 28 of
the Water (P & Co of P) Act, 1974.  The Pondicherry Government, on
5.4.88, appointed its Chief Secretary as the appellate authority.  The Delhi
Administration  appointed  a single  person  appellate  authority on  18.2.92
who is the Financial Commissioner.
Haryana (Prevention and Control of Water Pollution) Rules, 1978
(22.12.78) state in Rule 23 that the appellate authority shall consist of two
persons to be nominated by the Government and must have the following
qualifications  with  qualification  of  graduate  in  Engineering  and  a  third
person who is a law graduate with 3 years experience as a lawyer.
96

Maharashtra Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Rules, 1983
prescribe an appeal to the ‘appellate authority’ to be designated by the State
Government.   Punjab Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Appeal
Rules, 1978 provide for an appeal to the appellate authority.    It is not clear
who is designated under these Rules.
Uttar Pradesh Water (Consent for Discharge of Sewerage and Trade
Effluents)  Rules,  1981  provides  for  an  appeal  to  an  appellate  authority
specified by the Government.
Only in Andhra Pradesh, the appeal under sec. 28 of the Water Act,
1974 read with AP (Water P & P) Rules, 1977 lies to a High Court Judge.
(See A.P. Pollution Control Board vs. Prof. M.V. Nayudu 1999(2)SCC 718
at 735.)
Thus, except in Andhra Pradesh, there is no appeal to a body which
consists of a Judicial Member.   There are also no experts to assist the
appellate authority.
Air (P&CP) Act, 1981 and Rules made thereunder:
The Air (P&CP) Act, 1981, contains provision in sec. 31 for ‘appeals’
to an appellate authority to be constituted by the State Government. 
The Andhra Pradesh Air (Prevention and Control) Rules, 1982 Rule
37 speaks of an appeal to the appellate authority against orders of the State
Board.  Gujarat Rules, 1983 also provide in Rule 18 for an appeal.  So does
97

Rule 24 of the Haryana Rules, 1983.  Rule 25 of the Karnataka Rules, 1983
provide for an appeal.  Kerala Rules, 1984, provide for an appeal under
Rule  34  to the  appellate  authority.  Rule  21  of Madhya Pradesh  Rules
provide for the appeal.  Rule 32 of the Maharashtra Rules deal with appeals.
Tamil Nadu  Rules,  1983,  provide for appeal in Rule  35.   West Bengal
Rules, 1983 provide for appeal in Rule 17.  The Union Territories Rules,
1983 provide for appeal in Rule 17.   We do not have any evidence before
us to say that the appeals lie to a Court or a judicial officer who is also
having expert advice.
Summary of the appeal provisions in the above Acts and Rules (Lack of
judicial and expert inputs):  
It will be noticed that several of the special statutes e.g. Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986, Water (P&CP) Act, 1974, Air (P&CP) Act, 1981,
delegate power to the State Governments/Union Government to designate
appellate authorities.  The appeals lie generally, as can be seen from the
above  paragraphs,  to  various  officers  of government  or  Departments  of
Government.  Except in one or two cases, the appeals do not lie to a judicial
body comprising a judicial officer.  In no case does the appellate authority
have the assistance of experts in the field of environment.
In the light of the discussion in the earlier chapters and experience of
establishment of Environmental Courts abroad, the Law Commission is of
the opinion that the present system is not satisfactory so far as disposal of
these appeals are concerned.   The appeal is practically the first opportunity
for a party or even third parties affected by pollution, to seek relief.    In the
98

view of the Commission, such appeals must lie to an appellate Court having
special jurisdiction and must comprise of persons who have or had judicial
qualifications or have considerable experience as lawyers.   They must also
be assisted by experts in environmental science.  As stated in the earlier
chapters, it is now well recognized in several countries that the appeals must
lie to Court manned by persons with judicial knowledge and experience,
assisted by experts in various aspects of environmental science.
99

Chapter VI
Two other statutory Environmental Tribunals and Defects therein
National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995:
This enactment was made by Parliament, as stated in the preamble, to
provide for strict liability for damages arising out of any accident occurring
while handling any hazardous substance and for the establishment of the
Tribunal for effective and expeditious disposal of cases arising from such
accidents, with a view to giving relief and compensation for  damages to
person, property and the environment and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.  Liability under sec. 3 is to be on basis of ‘no fault’
and under sec. 4 compensation is payable.  Under sec. 9(1), the Tribunal
shall  consist  of  a  Chairperson  and  such  members  as  Vice-
Chairpersons/Judicial  Members  and  Technical  members  as  the  Central
Government deems fit.  It can sit in Benches but each Bench must consist of
a Judicial and Technical member.  Chairman shall be person who is or has
been a Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court, or has at least been Vice-
Chairman for 2 years.  A Vice-Chairman should be a person (a) who is or
has been a Judge of a High Court or was a Secretary to Government of India
for  at  least  2  years  or  has  held  any  other  post  in  Central  or  State
Government,  carrying  a  scale  of  pay  which  is  not  less  than  that  of  a
Secretary to Govt. of India or (c) held post of Addl. Secretary in Govt. of
India for 5 years and has acquired knowledge of or experience in legal,
administrative, scientific or technical aspects of the problems relating to
environment, or has at least 3 years experience as a Judicial member or a
100

Technical member; or (3) a Judicial Member must be one who is or has been
qualified to be a Judge of a High Court or has been a member of the Indian
Legal Service and has held a post in grade I of that service for at least 3
years.  A Technical Member is a person who has adequate knowledge of or
experience in or capacity to deal with administrative, scientific or technical
aspects of the problems relating to environment.  No appointment of the
Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson can be made without consultation of the
Chief Justice of India.  No appointment of a Judicial or Technical Member
can  be  made  except  on  the  recommendation  of  a  Selection  Committee
appointed by the Central Government consisting of 
(a) Chairperson of the Tribunal.
(b) Secretary, Govt. of India, Ministry of Environment and Forests.
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.
(d) Director-General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.
(e) An Environmentalist to be nominated by the Central Government.
Term of office of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members is 5
years.  Appeals lie to Supreme Court on question of law.
It may be stated that so far as the National Environmental Tribunal is
concerned, since the Act itself has not been notified, the Tribunal has not
been constituted in that last eight years.   The fact remains that neither the
Chairperson, nor Vice-Chairman nor Judicial or Technical Members have
been appointed to this Tribunal in the last eight years.  Such an important
environmental  Tribunal  envisaged  by  Parliament  has  unfortunately  not
come into being.  In fact, if there is tragedy like the Bhopal one, there is
now no Tribunal which would grant damages expeditiously.
101

There are other aspects concerning the powers of the above Tribunal.
It can only award compensation.  It should have been given all powers
which a Civil Court enjoys – so that it can grant declarations, permanent and
mandatory injunctions, possession etc.  No doubt, there is provision for the
Tribunal sitting in Benches but the scheme does not envisage Court in each
State.  Further, the Members other than Judicial Members, are not always or
necessarily experts in environmental matters.  For example, under sec. 10(2)
(b), if a Secretary to Government is appointed as Vice-Chairman, he need
not possess any experience in environmental matters.  It is not clear why
only in the case of an Addl. Secretary who could be appointed as Vice-
Chairman  under  sec.  10(2)(c),  experience  in  environmental  matters  is  a
condition precedent.  Similarly under sec. 10(3)(b), it is not stated that a
member of the Indian Legal Service who can be appointed as a Judicial
member  need  be  person  who  has  done  some  work  in  the  field  of
environment.  Again, so far as Technical members under sec. 10(4) are
concerned,  they  can  be  persons  only  with  administrative  or  scientific
knowledge without any experience in problems relating to environment.
If one looks at the consistent pattern in other countries, as pointed out
in Chapter IV, the Environmental Court should consist of Judicial Members
and  Environmental  experts.   The  reason  is  that  if  they are  expected  to
exercise normal judicial function of a Civil Court (as now proposed), or as a
Court of original and appellate jurisdiction, there is no scope for appointing
administrative  officials  or  public  servants  other  than  judicial
officers/members  of  the  Bar  with  considerable  experience.   The
Commission is of the view therefore that the Environmental Court must be
102

manned by persons with judicial experience in the High Court and Members
of  the  Bar  with  at  least  20  years  standing  and  have  to  be  assisted  by
Environmental experts. 
The National Environmental Appellate Authority Act, 1997
This Act was, as stated in the preamble, intended to provide for the
establishment  of  a  National  Environmental  Appellate  Authority  to  hear
appeals  with  respect  to  restriction  of  areas  in  which  any  industries,
operation or process (or class of industries, operation or processes) shall be
carried  out  or  shall  not  be  carried  out  subject  to  safeguards  under  the
Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986.
Under sec. 4 of the Act, the Appellate Authority was to consist of a
Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and such other Members not exceeding
three,  as  the  Central  Government  may  deem  fit.   Under  sec.  5,  the
qualification for appointment as Chairperson is that a person who has been
(a) a Judge of the Supreme Court
(b) the Chief Justice of High Court
A person cannot be appointed as Vice-Chairman unless he has (a)
held for two years the post of a Secretary to Govt. of India or any other post
under the Central/State Govt. carrying a scale of pay which is not less than
that of a Secretary to Govt. of India and (b) had expertise or experience in
administrative, legal, management or technical aspects of problems relating
to environmental management law or planning and development.
103

It will be noticed that there is some difference between the above
provisions and those under the National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995.
But here too, the Secretary to Govt. need not necessarily have experience in
environmental matters to be appointed as Vice-Chairman.
The term of office is three years.
It is understood that the Appellate Tribunal did not have much work
in view of the narrow scope of its jurisdiction as per notification issued.   It
dealt with very few cases.  After the term of the first Chairman was over, no
appointment has been made. 
Thus  these  two  National  Environmental  Tribunals  are  today
unfortunately  non-functional.   One  had  only  jurisdiction  to  award
compensation and never actually came into existence.  The other came into
existence but after the term of the first Chairman ended, none has been
appointed.
It is in the background of this experience with the laws made by
Parliament with regard to Environmental Tribunals that we propose to make
appropriate proposals in chapter IX for constitution of environmental courts
which can simultaneously exercise appellate powers as a Civil Court, and
original jurisdiction as exercised by Civil Courts.  These proposals will be
contained in Chapter IX.
104

CHAPTER VII
Can a law made by Parliament under Art. 252 (like the Water (P&CP) Act,
1974), be amended by Parliament under a law made under Art. 253?
What is the purpose of Art. 247?
An important issue that arises when we are contemplating a Central
Act on ‘Environmental Courts’ by Parliament, revolves round Arts. 252 and
253 of the Constitution of India.  As explained below, the said Articles
enable Parliament to make laws with respect to matters falling under List II
(State List) in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution in regard to which
the State Legislature is entitled to make legislation.
We shall initially refer to Art. 252 and Art. 253.
Art. 252 deals with the power of Parliament to legislate for two or
more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.
It reads as follows:
“Art. 252: (1) If it appears to the Legislatures of two or more States
to  be  desirable  that  any  of  the  matters  with  respect  to  which
Parliament  has  no  power  to  make  laws  for  the  States  except  as
provided in Articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in such States
by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by
all the House of the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for
Parliament to pass an Act for regulating that matter accordingly, and
any Act so passed shall apply to such States and to any other States
105

by which it is adopted afterwards by resolution in that behalf by the
House or, where there are two Houses, by each of the Houses of the
Legislatures of that State.
(2)  Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended or repealed by
an Act of Parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not,
as respects any State to which it applies, be amended or repealed by
an Act of the legislature of that State.”
Art. 253 contains a non-obstante clause.  It reads as follows:
“Art. 253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements:
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this chapter,
Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of
the  territory  of  India  for  implementing  any  treaty,  agreement  or
convention with any other country or countries or any decision made
at any international conference, association or other body.”
Entry 13 of List I of Schedule VII reads as follows:
“Participation in international conferences and associations and other
bodies and implementing decisions made thereat”
The above entry enables Parliament to make laws under this entry even
though the subjects may fall within the domain of the State Legislatures.
Art.  253  gives  overriding  power  to  Parliament  in  this  behalf.     In  S.
Jagannath vs.  Union  of  India:   1997  (2)  SCC  87,  the  Supreme  Court
observed that Art. 253 is in conformity with the object declared by Art. 51
106

(c) (fostering respect for international law and treaty obligations), Treaty-
making and implementing of treaties etc. and is subject to Union legislation,
under Entry 14, List I.    Art. 253 (entering into treaties and agreements and
conventions)  by  the  use  of  the  words  “notwithstanding  the  foregoing
provisions”, empowers the Union Parliament to make laws with regard to
entries  in  List  II,  insofar  as  that  may  be  necessary  for  the  purpose  of
implementing the treaty obligations of India.   Thus, an enactment made
under  Entry  13,  List  I,  Schedule  VII  (participation  in  international
conferences  etc.)  read  with  Art.  253  to  implement  an  international
agreement  would  override  and  prevail  over  any  inconsistent  State
enactment.
We shall next refer to the entries in List I (Union List), List II (State
List) and List III (Concurrent List) of the Seventh Schedule which contain
the list of legislative powers of Parliament and the States, in so far as some
environmental related matters are concerned.
List I (Union List):  Atomic energy and mineral resources (Entry 6);
industries declared necessary for defence (Entry 7); shipping and navigation
(Entry  24);  maritime  shipping  and  navigation  (Entry  25);  industries
expedient in national interest (Entry 52); regulation and development of oil
field and mineral oil resources (Entry 53); regulation and development of
mines and minerals (Entry 54); regulation and development of inter-state
river or river valleys (Entry 56); fishing and fisheries (Entry 57).
List II (State List): Public health and sanitation (Entry 6); agriculture (Entry
14); preservation, protection and improvement of animal stock (Entry 15);
107

water, water supplies, irrigation, canal, drainage and embankment (Entry
17);  fisheries  (Entry  21);  regulation  of  mines  and  mineral  development
(subject  to  the  provisions  of  List  I  with  respect  to  regulation  and
development under the control of the Union) (Entry 23); industries subject
to the provisions of Entries 7 and 52 of List I (Entry 24).
List  III  (Concurrent  List):  Prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals  (Entry  17);
forests (Entry 17A); protection of wild animals and birds (Entry 17B).
The  Tiwari  Committee  appointed  by  Government  for
“Recommending Legislative Measures  and Administrative Machinery for
Ensuring  Environment  Protection”  (1980)  (Dept.  of  Science  and
Technology, New Delhi), recommended that a new entry as ‘environmental
protection’ be introduced in List III to enable the Central as well as State
Governments to legislate on environmental subjects.  This has not been
done so far.
But, it is undoubted that under various Articles, such as Arts. 252 and
253, Parliament has power to pass central legislations on subjects in the
State List (List II) of the Seventh Schedule, in certain circumstances.
So  far  as  prescribing  an  appellate  Court  like  the  proposed
Environment Court by law to be made by Parliament under Art. 253 by
amending the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981, the Environment (Protection) Act,
1986, there is no difficulty because these two laws have also been made by
Parliament in exercise of its legislative powers under the same Art. 253.
The issue arises only so far as the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 is concerned
108

which was made by Parliament in exercise of its legislative powers under
Art. 252(1) and not under Art. 253.    Question is whether it can be amended
only by following the procedure of State Legislatures passing resolutions or
whether, without following such a procedure, the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974
can be amended by Parliament by passing an amending law under Art. 253
for  the  purpose  of  providing  appellate  jurisdiction  to  the  proposed
Environmental Court under the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974?
The  Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974 was  enacted  after  some  States  desired
Parliament to enact law under Art. 252(1) on the subject of ‘water’ etc.
which are in List II (State List) for the purpose of uniformity.  Those State
Legislatures  had  passed  resolutions  for  that  purpose.   After  Parliament
passed  those laws, several other States  adopted  the Water  (P&CP)  Act,
1974.     In view of Art. 252(2), if such a law is passed by Parliament under
Art. 252(1) in respect of a matter in List II for the purpose of amendment in
the said law, it is necessary to follow the same procedure envisaged by Art.
252(1) by way of State resolutions.    Clause (2) of Art. 252 requires such a
procedure to be followed.
But, the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981 was, however, passed by Parliament
not under Art. 252 but under Art. 253 which enables Parliament to make
laws in respect of subjects in List II, if it is for the purpose of implementing
“any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or
any  decision  made  at  any  international  conference,  association  or  other
body.”   
109

The Air Act (P&CP)  Act, 1981  in its  Preamble, expressly refers to the
“decisions  taken  at  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  the  Human
Environment held in Stockholm in June 1972, in which India participated”,
and the decision was that countries should ‘take appropriate steps for the
preservation  of  the  national  resources  of  the  earth  which,  among  other
things  include  the  preservation  of  the  quality  of  air  and  control  of  air
pollution’.    The preamble further states that ‘it is considered necessary to
implement the decisions aforesaid insofar as they relate to the preservation
of the quality of air and control of air pollution’.   Thus, Parliament resorted
to Art. 253 rather than to Art. 252 while passing the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981.
That Act can be amended by another law by Parliament under Art. 253.
The  Environment  (Protection)  Act,  1986 was  also  passed  by
Parliament under Art. 253 and the preamble refer to the decisions taken at
UN Conference on the Human Environment held at Stockholm in June 1972
on the protection and improvement of human environment.  The preamble
states that “it is considered necessary further to implement the decisions
aforesaid  insofar  as  they  relate  to  the  protection  and  improvement  of
environment and the prevention of hazards to human beings, other living
creatures, plants and property”.   The above Act can, therefore, also be
amended by Parliament under another law if passed under Art. 253.
The  National  Environment  Tribunal  Act,  1995 in  its  preamble
squarely relies  on the  ‘United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and
Development’  held  at  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  June  1992,  in  which  India
participated, calling upon States to develop national laws regarding liability
and  compensation  for  the  victims  of pollution  and  other  environmental
110

damages.    It also states that it was considered expedient “to implement the
decisions of the aforesaid Conference so far as they relate to the protection
of  environment  and  payment  of  compensation  for  damage  to  persons,
property and environment while handling hazardous substances”.  This Act
can,  therefore,  be  amended  or  repealed  by  another  law  if  made  by
Parliament under Art. 253.
The National Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997 is an Act to
provide  for  the  establishment  of  a  National  Environment  Appellate
Authority to hear appeals with respect to restriction of areas in which any
“industries,  operation  or  process”,  “or  class  of  industries,  operations  or
processes” shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain
safeguards under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto”.   In view of its linkage with the
above Act of 1986, there is thus no difficulty in amending or repealing this
Act by an Act to be made by Parliament under Art. 253.
Thus, so far as constituting an Environment Courts with appellate
powers, there is no difficulty with regard to amending the Air (P&CP) Act,
1981 (passed expressly for the purpose of implementing the decision taken
at  the  Stockholm  Conference,  1972)  or  in  regard  to  the  Environment
(Protection)  Act,  1986  (passed  for  the  same  purposes  of  the  1972
Conference).  These two Acts are also referable to Art. 253 and the new law
conferring such appellate powers on the proposed Environment Court can
be made by Parliament under Art. 253, by amending or repealing provision
in  the  three  enactments,  namely,  the  Air  (P&CP)  Act,  1981,  the
Environment  (Protection)  Act,  1981  and  the  National  Environment
111

Appellate Authority Act, 1997, under Art. 253 once again.    Similarly, the
National  Environment  (Tribunal)  Act,  1995  can  also  be  repealed  or
amended under Art. 253.
Question, however, arises, as stated earlier, with reference only to the
Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974  which  was  expressly  passed  under  Art.  252,
whether it would require, in view of clause (2) Art. 252, passing of fresh
resolutions by the State Legislatures as envisaged by that clause for the
purpose of deleting sec. 28 which enables appellate powers to be conferred
by the State Government and transfer the appellate powers to the proposed
Environmental Court.  This has become necessary because, as at present, the
States  (except  A.P.)  have  constituted  appellate  authorities  consisting  of
bureaucrats.
This question is, however, not difficult to answer.
We shall first explain the scope of Art. 253.   Parliament chooses to
exercise powers under Art. 253, where Parliament feels it necessary to make
a law for implementing international agreements, or treaties or decisions
taken at international conferences in which India has participated.   This
power of Parliament is an independent power and is not controlled by Art.
252.   Further, Art. 253 opens with the words, “Notwithstanding anything in
the foregoing provisions of this Chapter”.  The non-obstante clause puts the
matter  beyond  doubt  and  is  applicable  not  only  for  making  a  law  by
Parliament on the subject for the first time under Art. 253 (e.g. Air (P&CP)
Act, 1981) when no law on the subject was made earlier by Parliament
either under Art. 252 or under any other of the foregoing Articles preceding
112

Art. 253 (i.e. Art. 245 to 252), but also where Parliament wants to exercise
its special powers under Art. 253 even where it had passed a law under Art.
252 based on the resolutions of State Legislatures.  In other words, where,
under Art. 252 pursuant to desire of the States which passed resolutions
(e.g. the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974), Parliament had passed an Act under Art.
252, still Parliament if it later feels that such a law requires to be amended
or repealed  for the purpose of “implementing international agreements or
treaties or decisions taken at international conferences” in which India has
participated, it is, in the opinion of the Commission, clearly permissible for
Parliament  to  exercise  its  special  powers  under  Art.  253  to  pass  an
amending or repealing Act (under Art. 253) for the purpose of amending or
repealing such earlier law made by Parliament under Art. 252, in regard to a
matter falling under List II.    The Parliament’s power under Art. 253 is an
independent power and is not confined to a law made for the first time but is
also applicable for the purpose of amending or modifying a law made by
Parliament under Art. 252.   The power of Parliament under Art. 253 to do
so is further clearly safeguarded by the non-obstante clause in the opening
part of Art. 253.   The words “foregoing provisions of this chapter” in the
opening clause, “Notwithstanding anything in the  foregoing provisions of
this Chapter” permit Art. 253 to override Articles 245 to 251 of the Chapter
but also to override both the clauses (1) or (2) of Art. 252 in that Chapter,
which precede Art. 253.
When Art. 253  thus  overrides  clause  (2) of Art.  252, there  is  no
difficulty  in  stating  that  though  the  Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974  was  one
expressly passed by Parliament under Art. 252 in respect of a matter in List
II (after resolutions were passed by State Legislatures), the said law made
113

by Parliament can  be amended  or modified or repealed  under Art. 253,
without following the procedure indicated in clause (2) of Art. 252 for the
purpose of implementing decisions taken in international conferences ‘for
protection of environment’.   All that is necessary is that while passing such
amending  or  repealing  Act,  amending  the  Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974,
Parliament  must  state  in  the  preamble  that  Parliament  is  passing  the
amending  law  for  giving  effect  to  international  agreements,  treaties  or
decisions taken at international conferences.    In the present context, such
conferences are the 1972 Stockholm Conference and the Rio de Janeiro
Conference of 1992.
We have to refer here to another aspect concerning the Water (P&CP)
Act, 1974.   The said Act was passed by Parliament pursuant to resolutions
passed by the legislatures of the State of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana,
Himachal  Pradesh,  J&K,  Kashmir,  Karnataka,  Kerala,  Madhya  Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Tripura and West Bengal.  The Act was adopted under Art. 252
by the States of Sikkim ((1989), Meghalaya (1977), Maharashtra (1989),
Manipur (1988)).
It  appears  to  us  that  the  Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974  has  not  been
adopted in some States as such.
We are also aware that certain amendments made by Parliament by
Act 53/78 following the procedure under Art. 252(2)  to the Water (P&CP)
Act of 1974 are yet to come into force in some States which had passed
resolutions for enacting the Principal Act or which had adopted it later,
because some of those States have not yet passed fresh resolutions adopting
114

the Amending Acts.  Such a situation has arisen because the Amending Act
of 1978 was not specifically passed by Parliament under Art. 253 for giving
effect to international agreements, treaties or decisions taken at international
conferences.  If Parliament had passed the amending law of 1978 under Art.
253, there would have been no need for the States to pass resolutions in
their Legislatures or to adopt the amending law of 1978 amending the Water
(P&CP) Act, 1974.   After all, the idea is to have uniform laws in all the
States  if  they  are  made  to  implement  decisions  taken  at  international
environment-related conferences.
Two proposals can be considered here.
(1) One is that sec. 28 of the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 be substituted
under the proposed Act, prescribing an appeal to the Environment
Court.   The said amendment will then get incorporated in the
parent Act and will substitute sec. 28 in all those States where the
Water Act is in force, either because of its original resolution or
because of subsequent adoption.   But, in those States where the
Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974  has  not  come into  force  at  all, it  is
possible to make a provision in the proposed Act that the proposed
sec. 28 giving a right of appeal to the Environment Court shall
alone  be  applicable  whenever  the  Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974  is
adopted in those States, or
(2) We may, instead, provide that notwithstanding anything in sec. 28,
Water (P&CP) Act, 1974, the person aggrieved by an order of
Pollution Board passed under sec. 25 or 26 of Water Act, can
appeal to the Environment Court.   Such a provision would apply
115

to Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 where it is now in force or where it
will be adopted in future.
In our view, the second proposal is preferable inasmuch as it will be
referable to Art. 253 and will have overriding effect over the Act passed
under Art. 252, even where the States, which have not so far adopted the
Act, would opt to adopt the parent Act of 1974 or the Act as amended in
1978 or in some other manner.
Summarising  our  conclusion,-  the  Air  (P&CP)  Act, 1981  and  the
Environment  (Protection)  Act,  1986  were  passed  by  Parliament  with
reference to the Stockholm Conference of 1972 (i.e. under Art. 253) and the
National  Environment  Tribunal  Act,  1995  was  passed  by Parliament  by
referring  to  the  Rio  de  Janeiro  Conference,  1992  and  the  National
Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997 was passed specifically for the
purpose  of enforcing  the  safeguards  under  the  Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986.  Therefore, there is no difficulty for Parliament passing a law
relating to Environment Courts in exercise of its powers under Art. 253 to
amend or repeal the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981, The Environmental (Protection)
Act,  1986,  National  Environment  Tribunal  Act,  1995  and  National
Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997.    Similarly, such a law made
under Art. 253 can override the provisions of sec. 28 of the Water (P&CP)
Act, 1974 which enables the State Government to constitute the appellate
authorities.   The power which was given to the State Government under the
Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 in sec. 28 to constitute appellate authorities can be
superceded by fresh provisions of law proposing Environment Courts, as the
116

appellate Court, in the manner stated above.   Such a law can be passed
under Art. 253 of the Constitution.
Art. 253 and special law for Environment Courts: Does it flow from any
decision in an International conference to which India is a party?
The  question  is  whether  the  constitution  of separate  Environment
Courts  by a statute  of Parliament  under  Art.  253  could  be  justified  by
tracing  this  as  an  act  of  implementation  of  any  decision  taken  at  an
International Conference?   If it is so, invoking Art. 253 to make such a law
will be permissible for Parliament.
There are two answers to this question.
(A) The fact that the National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995 and the
National  Environmental  Appellate  Authority  Act,  1997  were
passed by Parliament (as analysed earlier in this chapter), for the
purpose of implementing the decisions at the Rio Conference of
1992 and Stockholm Conference of 1972 show that the proposed
Environmental  Courts  Act  can  also  be  similarly  passed  by
Parliament.   All  these  Acts  are  intended  to  provide  speedy
adjudicatory bodies in respect of disputes arising in environmental
matters.
(B) The  Rio  Declaration  of  1992  expressly  refers  to  ‘remedies’  to
achieve the objects of the Declaration made at the Conference.
117

Principle  10  of  the  Rio  Declaration  on  Environment  and
Development, 1992 refers to effective access to ‘judicial and administrative
proceedings including  redress and  remedy’ and states that they ‘shall be
provided’.
Principle 10 reads as follows:
“Principle  10:   Environmental  issues  are  best  handled  with  the
participation of all concerned citizens, at the relevant level.  At the
national  level,  each  individual  shall  have  appropriate  access  to
information  concerning  the  environment  that  is  held  by  public
authorities,  including  information  on  hazardous  materials  and
activities in their communities, and the opportunity to participate in
decision-making process.   States shall facilitate and encourage public
awareness and participation by making information widely available.
Effective access to judicial and administrative proceedings, including
redress and remedy, shall be provided.”
Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration, clearly requires Judicial remedies to be
provided.    There  is,  therefore, no  difficulty  in  Parliament  invoking  its
special powers to make a law on the subject of ‘Environmental Courts’
under Art. 253, even if it be that there is an encroachment into the entries in
List II of Schedule VII relating to ‘Water’, which is a State subject.
The proposed Courts will also be referable to Art. 247 read with Entry 13 of
List I
118

The  Central  Government  can  establish  ‘additional  Courts’  for
purposes  of  implementation  of  statutes  made  by  Parliament  or  for
implementation of pre-existing statutes as on 26.1.1950, referable to List of
VII Schedule under Art. 247.
Art. 247 reads as follows:
“Art. 247:   Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of
certain additional Courts – Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
Parliament  may  by  law  provide  for  the  establishment  of  any
additional  Courts  for  the  better  administration  of  laws  made  by
Parliament  or  of  any  existing  laws  with  respect  to  a  matter
enumerated in the Union List.”
Entry  13  of  List  I  reads:   “Participation  in  international  conferences,
associations and other bodies and implementing of decisions made thereat”.
Text  of  Art.  247  is  drawn  from the  Canadian  Constitution.   The
Calcutta High Court dealt with this Article elaborately in Indu Bhushan De
vs. State:   (AIR 1972 Cal).     But the words ‘additional Courts’ have not
come for interpretation.  In our view, the words ‘additional Courts’ must be
construed  widely  and  apply  also  to  special  Courts  like  the  proposed
Environment Courts.  The word ‘additional’, in our view, mean additional to
the overall number of Courts existing  and it is not necessary that there
should be an existing class of such Courts.  In fact, whenever the Central
Government establishes Courts for a particular class of cases for the first
time, this provision is attracted and it is not an argument to say Art. 247
119

cannot be invoked unless there are existing Courts for that class of cases.
Otherwise, Art. 247 can never be invoked at all.    When such Courts are
and can be established for the first time, it cannot be argued that there were
no such Courts earlier and hence they cannot be established even initially.
Some day or other, they must be established for the first time.
Further,  in  view  of  Art.  11A  in  List  III,  inserted  by  the  42nd
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1976, deleting these words from Art. 3 of
List II, Parliament can establish these proposed Environment Courts under
the head ‘Administration of Justice’.    The word ‘Courts’ in that Article
cover the proposed Environmental Courts which are Civil Courts.  See Re
Special Courts Bill, 1978 = AIR 1979 SC 69.
Right of Appeal to Supreme Court
The right to a statutory appeal to the Supreme Court is referable to
Entry 77 of List I of VII Schedule.    Such a right of appeal is now available
against orders of the CEGAT, the MRTP Tribunal, Consumer (Protection)
Act, 1986, and POTA (see Chapter IX for a detailed discussion) and new
amendments to the Companies Act, 1956.
120

Chapter VIII
Environmental Courts to follow certain fundamental principles
We are  of  the  view  that  the  Environment  Court  must  follow  the
following principles.  These principles must be part of the  proposed statute
dealing with Environmental Courts.
Polluter Pays Principle
The Polluter Pays Principle was first adopted at international level in
the  1972  OECD  Council  Recommendation  on  Guiding  Principles
concerning the International Aspects of Environmental Policies.  The 1974
principle  experienced  revival  by  OECD  Council  in  1989  in  its
Recommendation  on  the  Application  of  the  Polluter  Pays  Principle  to
Accidental Pollution, and the principle was  not to be restricted to chronic
polluter.    In  1991,  the  OECD  Council  reiterated  the  Principle  in  its
Recommendations on the Uses of Economic Instruments in Environmental
Policy.
The European Council adopted it in its Recommendation 75/436 in
1975 and reiterated in the Fifth Environmental Action Programme and in
the 2001 EC Guidelines and in the Waste Framework Directive 1991 and
Art. 10 of the Directive 1999/31/EC and Art. 99 Directive 2000/Cr/EC.   It
was adopted in single European Act (SEA) by Art. 130 R(Z) (new Article
174(2)) and Art. 130 of the EC Treaty.
121

National laws  in Belgium, France, Germany have adverted to this
principle.
In international law, the principle is incorporated in the 1980 Athen
Protocol,  the  1992  Helsinki  Convention  on  the  Transboundary  Effects
Industrial Accidents, the 1993 Lugano Convention on Civil Liability for
Damage Resulting From Activities Dangerous to Environment.  A host of
other treaties and conventions are set out (at pp. 23, 24) in ‘Environmental
Principles’ (by Nicolas de Sadeler, Oxford 2002). 
This principle was first stated in the Brundtland Report in 1987.  This
principle was also adverted to in Indian Council for Enviro-legal Action vs.
Union of India 1996(3) SCC 212.  It was stated; (p 246 at para 65)
“…we are of the opinion that any principle evolved in this behalf
should be simple, practical and suited to the conditions obtaining in
this  country……….  Once  the  activity  carried  on  is  hazardous  or
inherently dangerous, the person carrying on such activity is liable to
make  good  the  loss caused  to  any  other  person  by  his  activity
irrespective of  the  fact  whether  he  took  reasonable  care  while
carrying on his activity”.
122

In Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum vs. Union of India: 1996(5) SCC 647,
(at 659), Kuldip Singh J stated:
“The ‘Polluter Pays Principle’ as interpreted by this Court means that
the absolute liability for harm to the environment extends not only to
compensate the victims of the pollution but also the cost of restoring
the  environmental  degradation.   Remediation  of  the  damaged
environment is part of the process of ‘Sustainable Development’ and
as such the polluter is liable to pay the cost to the individual sufferers
as well as the cost of reversing the damaged ecology.”
This principle of compensating the victim as well as the environment
is laid down in sec. 3 of the National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995.
Section 3(1), as already stated, refers to the compensation payable and it
will be as per the heads specified in the Schedule.  The Schedule contains
items (a) to (n) out of which items (a) to (e) relate to the individual affected
by the polluter while items (f) to (n) relate to the environmental damage,
including that to the  flora and fauna.
Hazardous substances – Absolute liability
Absolute or strict liability is one where fault need not be established.
It is no-fault liability.
Initiatives such as the 1993 Lugano Convention on Civil Liability for
Damage Resulting from Activities Dangerous to Environment; the European
123

Commission Green Paper on environmental liability (1993) and the Chapter
on liability for contaminated land of the Swedish Environment Code (2000),
suggest that the polluter pays principle calls for the establishment of a strict
liability regime.  There are four Nuclear Conventions, one of 1960, two of
1963 and another of 1971 which lay down strict liability.  There are others
dealing with oil spill-overs of 1969, 1971 and 1992 which too impose strict
liability.  More recently, in its White Paper on Environmental Liability, the
European Commission stressed that liability independent of fault must be
favoured for two reasons: first, it is very difficult for plaintiffs to establish
fault in environmental liability cases; and secondly, it is the person who
undertakes an inherently hazardous activity, rather than the victim or society
in general, who should bear the risk of any damage that might ensue.
Our Courts or statutes have, however, not extended the principle of
strict liability to all cases where ‘Polluter Pays Principle’ applies, but have
confined such absolute liability only to cases  where injury to person or
property is occasioned by use of ‘hazardous’ substances.
  
In the Oleum Gas Leak case (M.C. Mehta vs.  Union of India) AIR
1987 SC 1086, the Supreme Court laid down that an enterprise which is
engaged in a hazardous  or inherently dangerous  industry which poses a
potential threat to the health and safety of persons working in the factory
and to those residing in the surrounding areas, owes an absolute  and non-
delegable duty to the community to ensure that no harm results to any one
on  account  of  hazardous  or  inherently  dangerous  nature  of  the  activity
which  it  has  undertaken.   The  enterprise  must  be  absolutely liable  to
compensate for such harm and it should be no answer to the enterprise to
124

say that it had taken all reasonable care and that the harm occurred without
negligence  on  its  part.   The  larger  and  more  prosperous  the  enterprise,
greater  must  be  the  amount  of  the  compensation  payable  for  the  harm
caused on account of an accident in the carrying on of the hazardous or
inherently dangerous activity by the enterprise.  The principles laid down in
Ryland vs.  Fletcher:  LR  3  H.L.  330  were  modified.   It  is  no  longer
permissible in the case of injury by use of hazardous substances, to prove
merely that the injury was not foreseeable or that there was no unnatural use
of the land or premises by the factory, as was the position under the law laid
down  in  Rylands vs.  Fletcher.  This  principle  was  reiterated  in  Indian
Council for Environ-Legal Action vs. Union of India 1996(3) SCC 212 (see
p 246, para 65) and other cases by the Supreme Court of India.
The  above  principle  (called  ‘no  fault’  principle)  was,  in  fact,
incorporated in sec. 3 of the National Environmental Tribunal Act,
1995, read with the special definition of the words ‘accident’ in sec. 2
(a) and ‘handling’ in sec. 2(e) and ‘hazardous substance’ in sec. 2(f)
of that Act.  Sec. 2(a) and 2(e) refer to hazardous substances which
are used or handled and which cause the ‘accident’.  Sec. 2(f) defines
‘hazardous  substance’  as  any  substance  or  preparation  which  is
defined as hazardous in the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and
exceeding  such  quantity  as  specified  by  the  Central  Government
under  the  Public  Liability  Insurance  Act,  1991.   Sec.  3  states  as
follows:
“Sec. 3:  Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on principle of
no fault:
125

(1) Where death of, or injury to, any person (other than a
workman) or damage to any property or environment has
resulted from an accident, the owner shall be liable to pay
compensation for such death, injury or damage under all or any
of the heads specified in the Schedule.
(2) In  any  claim  for  compensation  under  subsection  (1),  the
claimant shall not be required to plead and establish that the
death, injury or damage in respect of which the claim has been
made was due to any wrongful act, neglect or default of any
person.
Explanation: (i) ‘workman’…….
(ii) ‘injuries’…..
(3) …………………………………………….       ………..
…………………………………………….       ……….”
Clause (3) refers to apportionment of liability between different tort feasors.
In the Schedule, there are clauses (a) to (n).  Clauses (a) to (e) deal with
damage to person or property, clause (f) to (n) deal with damage to ecology.
Precautionary Principle
The precautionary principle had its origin in the mid-1980s from the
German Vorsorgeprinzip.  The decisions adopted by States within the North
Sea  Ministerial  Conference  mark  the  first  use  of  this  principle  in
international  law.  Explicit  reference is  made to it in the 1984 Bremen
Ministerial Declaration of the International Conference on the Protection of
126

North  Sea,  the  1987  London  Ministerial  Declaration  of  the  Second
International  Conference  for  the  Protection  of  the  North  Sea,  the  1990
Hague Declaration of the Third Conference on the Protection of the North
Sea and the 1995 Declaration of the Fourth Conference on the Protection of
the North Sea.
It was expanded in the field of marine pollution since 1980 and came
to be set out in the  1990 OPRC Convention and various other Conventions.
It was then extended to protection of coastal areas and fisheries sector and
to atmospheric pollution.  (See Environmental Principles, Oxford, 2002 by
Nicolas de Sadeleer p 94-95).
It soon came to be included as a general principle of environmental
policy in the U.N. Economic Commission of Europe in 1990 (UNECE) in
Bergen;  in  1989  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  UN  Environment
Programme  (UNEP);  in  1990  by  the  Council  of  Ministers  of  the
Organisation  of  African  Unity  (CAU);  and  of  the  1990  Ministerial
Conference on the Environment of the UN Economic Commission for Asia
and  Pacific  (ESCAP)  and  finally  in  January  1991  in  the  Environment
Ministers of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD).
It then came to be accorded universal recognition in Principle 15 at
Rio in the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development which
resulted in the Declaration on Environment and Development.  Similarly,
the 1992 Framework Convention on Climatic Change (UNFCC) also refers
127

to it.  So does the preamble to the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD).
It has been accepted by the European Court of Human Rights and
applied by WTO Dispute Resolution Bodies, the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea, the European Community Law.
National  legislations  in the  EC Member States  (Germany, France,
Belgium, Sweden) have adopted it.  It is applied in UK because of Art 174
(2) of EC Treaty.  It is applied also by US Courts and in Australia.
The Supreme Court of India, in the case of Vellore Citizens’ Welfare
Forum vs.  Union of India 1996(5) SCC 647 referred to the precautionary
principle and declared it to be part of the customary law in our country.
The Principle is contained in Principle 11 of the Principles laid down
in the UN General Assembly Resolution on World Charter for Nature, 1982
and was reiterated in the Rio Conference of 1992 in its Principle No. 15.  It
reads as follows:
“Principle 15: In order to protect the environment, the precautionary
approach  shall  be  widely  applied  by  States  according  to  their
capabilities, where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage,
lack  of full  scientific  certainty shall  not  be  used  as  a  reason  for
proposing  cost  effective  measures  to  prevent  environmental
degradation”.
128

In the Vellore case, 1996 (5) SCC 647, Kuldip Singh J referred to this
principle as part of our law: (p 660 para 14)
“In  view  of  the  above  mentioned  constitutional  and  statutory
provisions, we have no hesitation in holding that the  precautionary
principle and the polluter pays principle are part of the environmental
law of the country.”
In the  A.P. Pollution  Control  Board   case  1999(2) SCC 718, the
Supreme Court referred to an article (Vol 22 Harv. Envtt L Rev 1998 p 509
at 547) to this principle as follows (see para 34):
“There  is  nothing  to  prevent  decision-makers  from  assessing  the
record and concluding that there is inadequate information on which
to reach a determination.  If it is not possible to make a decision with
‘some’ confidence, then it makes sense to err on the side of caution
and prevent activities that may cause serious or irreversible harm.  An
informed decision can be made at a later stage when additional data is
available or resources permit further research.  To ensure that greater
caution is taken in environmental management, implementation of the
principle through judicial and legislative means is necessary”.
The Principle of Prevention
The Prevention Principle takes care of reckless polluters who would
continue polluting the environment in as much as paying for pollution is a
small fraction of the benefits they earn from their harmful acts or omissions.
129

Prevention of pollution must therefore take priority over compelling the
polluter to cough up.
The  Train Smelter case was an international award which directed
Canada to install protective measures to stop pollution in the neighbouring
countries arising out of a foundry.  This was treated as a transboundary
obligation  under  international  law.   This  principle  was  engrafted  in
Principle 21 of the 1972 Stockholm Declaration on Human Environment
which stressed the ‘responsibility (of States) to ensure that activities within
their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of other
States  or  areas  beyond  the  limits  of  national  jurisdiction’.   This  was
reiterated  in  Principle  2  of  the  Rio  Declaration.   This  principle  is
incorporated in the 1979 LRATP Convention, the 1985 Vienna Convention
for the Protection of the Ozone layer and the 1992 (B) and the Preamble of
the UNFCCC.  This is also a part of E.C. Law.
There are treaties based on this principle on the subjects of marine
environment, highseas fisheries, protection of rivers, atmospheric pollution,
the  Alps,  Antarctica  etc.  (See  Environmental  Principles  by  Nicolas  de
Sadeleer, Oxford 2002, pp 62 to 65.
The  concept  of  sustainable  development  draws  support  from  the
Prevention Principle as stated in ICJ’s ruling in Gabakovo-Nagymares case,
relating to dam on the Danube.
National laws have also recognized this principle.  Swiss, Danish,
Belgian, French, Greek laws incorporate this principle.  So does the US
130

Pollution Prevention Act, 1990 (ibid, Nicolas de Sadeleer, page 70 to 72).
Best  available  Technologies  (BAT)  is  another  aspect  of  this  principle.
Environment Impact Assessment is the crucial procedure which seeks to
ward  off  prevention.   This  is  reiterated  in  Principle  17  of  the  Rio
Declaration.
Principle of New Burden of Proof:
The UN General Assembly Resolution of 1982 on World Charter for
Nature established this principle.  It stated:
“Activities which are likely to pose a significant risk to nature shall
be  preceded  by an  exhaustive  examination;  their proponents  shall
demonstrate  that  expected  benefits  outweigh  potential  damage  to
nature…”  
EC Law also demonstrates the shift in the burden in the case of use of
drugs,  pesticides,  food  products,  additives,  food  stuffs  etc.   EC’s  new
hazardous wastes lists 200 categories of listed wastes.
In US, though the Supreme Court in  Industrial Union Department
AFL – CIU vs. American Petroleum Institute 448 US at 632-635 (1980) put
the initial burden on the regulator, several American statutes have shifted
the burden of proof – as Federal Foods and Drug Act (21 U.S.C. sec. 348(c)
(3)A), The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFA) (21.
USS sec. 360(a)(4)(B), Marine Mammal Protection Act. (16 USC sec. 1371)
and the ESA.  The WTO Appellate body has also applied this principle.
131

Environmental  Impact  Assessment  is  intended  to  reduce  the
uncertainties attached to potential impacts of a project. 
In the Vellore Case 1996(5) SC 647, Kuldip Singh J observed (see p
658)(para 11) as follows:
“(iii) the ‘onus of proof’ is on the actor or the developer/industrialist
to show that his action is environmentally benign.”
In A.P. Pollution Control Board case: 1999 (2) SCC 718 (at p 734) it
was explained that the ‘precautionary principle’ has led to the new ‘burden
of  proof’ principle.   In environmental  cases  where  proof of absence  of
injurious effect of the action is in question, the burden lies on those who
want to change the status quo.  This is often termed as a reversal of the
burden of proof, because otherwise, in environmental cases, those opposing
the  change  could  be  compelled  to  shoulder  the  evidentiary  burden,  a
procedure  which  is  not  fair.   Therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  the  party
attempting to preserve the status quo by maintaining a less polluted state
should not carry the burden and the party who wants to alter it, must bear
this burden.
Sustainable Development:
132

Development of the countries  and eradication  of poverty must  be
balanced against  conservation of environment.  Principle 3 of the Earth
Summit Declaration (1992) at Rio states that the ‘right to development must
be fulfilled so as to equitably meet developmental and environmental needs
of present and future generations’.    Principle 4 states that in order ‘to
achieve sustainable development, environmental protection shall constitute
an integral part of the development process and cannot be considered in
isolation  of  it’.   Principle  5  states  that  all  ‘States  and  all  people  shall
cooperate in the essential tasks of eradicating poverty as an indispensable
requirement for sustainable development, in order to decrease the disparities
in standards of living and better the needs of the majority of the people of
the world’.  Principle 6 requires  that the special  situation and needs  of
developing  countries  shall  be  given  priority.   Principle  7 requires  that
developed  countries  acknowledge  the  responsibility  they  bear  in  the
international pursuit of sustainable development.   Principle 8 requires that
in order to achieve sustainable development and a higher quality of life for
all people,  States  should  reduce and  eliminate  unsustainable  patterns  of
production and consumption and promote appropriate demographic policies.
Principle  9  requires  improvement  in  capacity  building  for  sustainable
development.  Principle 27 requires States and people to cooperate for the
purpose of sustainable development.
In Gabakovo vs.  Nagymares: the ICJ ruling on the dam on Danube
(1997), the majority observed that the ‘concept of sustainable development’
arose out of the need to reconcile economic development with the protection
of environment.  Weeramantry J, went further and observed that the concept
has become a principle of modern international law.
133

Art. 37 of the December 2000 Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European  Union  refers  specifically  to  the  principle  of  ‘sustainable
development.  The preamble to the WTO Agreement too refers to it.  So
does the WTO Ministerial Declaration of 2001.  Art. 2 of the EC Treaty
refers to it.
134

This concept was mentioned in the Bruntland Report, 1987.  The
principle  of  ‘sustainable  development’  is  at  the  basis  of  the
fundamental principles of the law of environment.  The principle was
referred to in  Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum case : 1996(5) SCC
647.   It  was  stated  that  there  is  today  no  conflict  between
‘development’  and ‘safeguarding  ecology’;   it is  a  viable  concept
which has been developed after two decades from Stockholm to Rio;
it is a principle which seeks to eradicate poverty and improve the
quality of human life while living within the carrying capacity of the
supporting ecosystem.  The Bruntland Report stated as follows:
“Development  that  meets  the  needs  of  the  present  without
compromising the ability of the future generations to meet their own
needs.”
It is a principle which balances development and ecology.  The ‘polluter
Pays’ principle is part of this concept as it requires the polluter to restore the
status quo ante as it stood before the pollution.
In Narmada Bachao Andolan vs. Union of India 2000(10) SCC 664, it
was  pointed  out  that  when  the  effect  of  a  project  is  known,  then  the
principle  of  sustainable  development  would  come  into  play  which  will
ensure that mitigative steps are and can be taken to preserve the ecological
balance.   “Sustainable  development means  what  type  or  extent  of
development can take place which can be sustained by nature/ecology with
or without mitigation.”
135

In fact,  in  several  modern  constitutions,  the  fundamental  right  to
protect  the  environment  from  degradation  is  coupled  with  the  right  to
sustainable  development.  The  latest  Constitution  of South  Africa is an
example where Art. 24 deals with this aspect.  It reads as follows:
“Article 24:  Everyone has the right –
(a) to an environment that is not harmful to their health or well
being; and
(b) to have the environment protected, for the benefit of present
and  future  generation,  through  reasonable  legislative  and
other measures that –
(i) prevent pollution and ecological degradation;
(ii) promote conservation; and
(iii) secure ecologically sustainable development and use of
national resources  while promoting  justifiable economic and
social development.”
The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution
refers  to  the  right  to  safe  drinking  water,  clean  environment  and
proposed the insertion of Art. 30D in the Constitution.   Art. 30D as
recommended by the Commission reads as follows:
“Art. 30-D.  Right to safe drinking water, prevention of pollution,
conservation of ecology and sustainable development.-
Every person shall have the right –
136

(a) to safe drinking water;
(b) to an environment that is not harmful to one’s health or
well being; and
(c) to  have  the  environment  protected,  for  the  benefit  of
present and future generations so as to –
(i) prevent pollution and ecological degradation;
(ii) promote conservation; and
(iii) secure ecologically sustainable development   and use of
natural resources while promoting justifiable economic
and social development.”
The above Commission states in paras 3.22.1 and 3.22.2 (Vol. 1) that
the  right  to  healthy  environment  and  its  protection  and  the  right  to
development are “group rights” now loosely described as “third generation
rights”.  The right to “sustainable development” has been described by the
UN General Assembly as an inalienable right.  The Declaration recognizes
that “Human being is the central subject of the development process and
that  the  development  policy  shall  make  the  human  being  the  main
participant and beneficiary of development”.  “Development” is defined as
“a comprehensive, economic, social, cultural and political process, which
aims at the constant improvement of the well being of the entire population
in development and in the fair distribution of benefits therefrom”.  The Rio
Conference  of  1992  declared  human  beings  as  centers  of  concern  for
sustainable development.  Human beings are, it is said, entitled to a healthy
and  protective  life  in  harmony  with  nature  (Principle  1).   “In  order  to
achieve sustainable development, environmental protection shall constitute
an integral part of the development process and cannot be considered in
isolation of it”.  The 1997 Earth Summit meeting of 100 nations in New
York affirmed these principles.
137

Public trust doctrine:
The ‘public trust’  doctrine was referred to by the Supreme Court in
M.C. Mehta vs. Kamal Nath: 1997 (1) SCC 388.  The doctrine extends to
natural resources such as rivers, forests, sea shores, air etc., for the purpose
of protecting the eco-system.   The State is holding the natural resources as
a trustee and cannot commit breach of trust.  In the above case, the State’s
order for grant of a lease to a motel located on the bank of the river Beas
which resulted in the Motel interfering with the natural flow of the water,
was quashed and the public company which got the lease was directed to
compensate the cost of restitution of environment and ecology in the area.
Inter-generational equity:
Principles 1 and 2 of the 1972 Stockholm Declaration refer to this
concept.  Principle 1 states that Man bears solemn responsibility to protect
and  improve  the  environment  for  the  present and  future  generations.
Principle  2  states  that  the  national  resources  of  the  Earth  must  be
safeguarded for the ‘benefit of the  present and  future generations through
careful planning or management, as appropriate’.
Principle 3 of the Rio Declaration, 1992 also states that the right to
development must be fulfilled so as to  equitably meet developmental and
environmental needs of present and future generations.
138

The UN General Assembly Resolution 37/7 of 1980 also refers to the
need for maintaining the balance between development and conservation of
nature in the interest of present and future generations.
Over-exploitation of earth, water and other natural resources by the
present generation must be prevented so as to preserve them for the benefit
of future generations.
The  Philippines  Supreme Court  entertained  a  case  by  a  group  of
citizens representing the future generations for preservation of the ecology.
(Minors  Oposa vs.  Secretary  of  the  Dept.  of  Environment  and  Natural
Resources (DENR) (1994) 33 ILM 173 (see Right of Future Generations by
K.I. Vibhuti Vol. 21 Academy Law Review p. 219-235.)
The Constitution of Philippines of 1987 confers in Art. 11, sec. 16 a
fundamental right to  a balanced and healthful ecology and mandates the
State ‘to protect and advance the right of the people to a balanced and
healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature’.   The
then President of the Philippines issued an executive order in 1987 in that
behalf which specifically referred to the right so conferred ‘not only for the
present generation but for future generation as well’.
In Minors Oposa, a group of Filipino minors named OPASA, joined
by their respective parents, representing their own generation as well as
generations yet unborn, urged the Supreme Court to enforce their and their
unborn successors’ constitutional right to a balanced and healthful ecology
guaranteed under Art. 11, sec. 16 and sought cancellation of all existing
139

logging permits issued by the Dept. of Environment and Natural Resources
(DENR)  to  different  companies  on  the  basis  of  the  Timber Licence
Agreements  (TLAs)  and  for  restraining  the  DENR  from  accepting,
processing, reviewing or approving the TLAs.
The  Supreme  Court  allowed  the  applicants  to  file  the  case  and
emphasized the duty of the State as parens patriae.   The Court observed that
the petitioner’s ‘personality to sue on behalf of the succeeding generations
can only be based on the concept of intergenerational responsibility’.   The
Court said:
“Needless to say, every generation has a responsibility to the next to
preserve  that  rhythm  and  harmony  for  the  full  enjoyment  of  a
balanced  and  healthful  ecology.    Put  differently,  the  minors’
assertion of their right to sound environment constitutes, at the same
time, the performance of their obligation to ensure the protection of
that right for generations to come.    The present generation, the Court
opined, is a trustee and  guardian of the environment for succeeding
generations. Or else, the future generations would inherit nothing but
‘parched earth’”.
These and other principles  must  be required  to be applied  by the
Environment Courts and provision must be made therefor in the statute.
140

CHAPTER IX
Proposals for Environmental Courts in India
As pointed  out  in  Chapter  I, Environmental  Courts  manned  by a
Judge and two experts at the regional level was advocated by the Supreme
Court in M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India, 1986 (2) SCC 176 (at 202).  This
was reiterated by the Supreme Court in  Indian Council for Enviro-Legal
Action vs. Union of India, 1996 (3) SCC 212.   Finally, the need for such
Environment Courts was referred to in  A.P. Pollution Control Board vs.
M.V. Naidu, 1999 (2) SCC 718 and in the follow up case in A.P. Pollution
Control Board II vs. M.V. Naidu, 2001 (2) SCC 62, the Court required the
Law Commission to go into this question.
We have referred, in Chapter V, to the existing Court-system in India
in regard to environmental issues and also to the scheme of appointment of
bureaucrats as appellate authorities by the State Governments under sec. 28
of the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 or sec. 31 of the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981 or
by the Central government under sec. 25 of the Environment (Protection)
Act,  1986.   These  appeals  under  the  special  Acts  at  present  are  being
disposed  of  by  senior  public  servants  nominated  by  the  Governments.
Presently, appeals are neither to a judicial body (except under the Water
(P&CP) Act, 1974  in Andhra Pradesh) nor to  an expert  in  the  field  of
environment.
141

For the first time, when the National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995
was passed, Parliament thought that the Tribunal should be manned by a
member of the superior Judiciary.   Similarly, in 1997 when the National
Environment Appellate Authority, 1997 was constituted, the authority was
to consist of a retired Supreme Court Judge and Members having scientific
experience etc.  But, these Tribunals are now non-functional. 
In  our  view,  it  is  necessary  that  all  the  appellate  powers  now
conferred under the (a) Water (P&CP) Act, 1974, (b) the Air (P&CP) Act,
1981 and (c) the appellate authority constituted under various Rules made
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 must go before the proposed
Environment Court, which shall consist (in each State or a group of States)
of three Judicial Members, who are (a) either sitting or retired Judges of a
High Court or (b) experienced Members of the Bar (with not less than 20
years standing).  These three Judicial Members have to be assisted by three
environmental experts (to be called Commissioners) in each Environmental
Court.  It will be permissible to have one Environmental Court for more
than one State.  Union Territories may avail the Environment Court of the
neighbouring State.  Delhi can perhaps have a separate Environment Court.
Appellate Jurisdiction
It is now proposed, as stated earlier, that there will be an Environment
Court in each State (or group of States)  and will have appellate jurisdiction.
It will have appellate jurisdiction which is now being exercised by officers
of the Government under the special Acts.   Pending appeals under the
Water  (P&CP)  Act,  1974,  Air  (P&CP)  Act,  1981  and  under  the  Rules
142

framed under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 must be transferred to
the proposed Environment Court in each State and all future appeals must
be filed in the said Court.   Sec. 28 of the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 and sec.
31 of the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981 must be amended, as stated earlier, stating
that  the  appeals  shall  hereafter  lie  to  the  Environment  Court  under  the
proposed Act and that pending appeals shall stand transferred to the said
Court.    Similarly,  a  provision  must  be  inserted  in  the  Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 stating that all appeals against orders passed by the
various authorities under the Rules made under that Act shall be filed in the
concerned Environment Court at the level of each State (or group of States)
and that pending appeals before appellate authorities constituted under the
said Rules shall also stand transferred to the Environment Court.
A provision may also have to be made in the proposed Environment
Courts  Act enabling the Central Government  to issue notifications  from
time to time, notifying that the Environment Court will be the appellate
authority in respect of orders passed under any other Central Act and also
enabling  the  State  Governments,  with  the  approval  of  the  Central
Government, to notify, from time to time, the Environmental Court as the
appellate Court for purposes of other State Acts.  
The National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995 was a law intended to
award  compensation  to  those  affected  by  hazardous  substances  and  we
propose that this relief of damages which was to be granted by the National
Environment Tribunal - for injury on a strict liability basis - should be a
relief which will be granted by the proposed Environment Court.   This will
143

necessitate  repeal  of  the  National  Environment  Tribunal  Act,  1995  and
bringing those provisions into the proposed Act.
It is also proposed that the relief which could have been granted by
the  Environment  Appellate  Authority  under  the  National  Environment
Appellate  Authority  Act,  1997  should  now  be  granted  by the  proposed
Court,  in  respect  of  violation  of  safeguards  under  the  Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 and the appellate powers contemplated by sec. 11 of
that Act be now granted to the proposed Court.    This will require repeal of
the National Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997 and transfer of
those provisions into the proposed Act.
We are also of the view that the appeals against awards passed by the
Collector under sec. 8 of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 (which
deals with compensation payable for injury to person or property on account
of hazardous substances) should lie to the proposed Environment Court.
Sec. 8 of that Act contemplates that the compensation payable and paid
under sec. 7 shall go in reduction of any compensation payable “under any
other law”.  
The  proposed  Environment  Court  will  be  entitled  to  pass
interlocutory orders, including ad interim and ex parte orders pending the
appeals.
The appeals by the proposed Court must be entertained on payment of
a fixed court fee of Rs.500.
144

Original Jurisdiction
The proposed Court shall have original jurisdiction on environmental
disputes with all powers of a Civil Court and shall grant (apart from the
damages contemplated under the National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995
in  the  case  of  injury  on  account  of  use  of  hazardous  substances  in  its
original jurisdiction) all reliefs which a Civil Court can grant under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or other statutes like the Specific Relief Act,
including declaration, setting aside of orders by public authorities or the
State, permanent injunction, mandatory injunction, appointing receivers to
manage the property, damages or compensation, possession etc.  The Court
can be approached by way of an original petition.   The proposed Court
shall also be entitled to pass all interlocutory orders – both ad interim and
final,  pending  disposal  of  the  original  petitions.   A  fixed  court  fee  of
Rs.1000 should alone be payable in the original petitions that may be filed
before  the  proposed  Court.   The  Court  must  have  powers  to  award
exemplary costs if frivolous or vexatious original petitions are filed.
Definition of ‘environment’ as in sec. 2(f) of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 can be engrafted into the proposed Act as follows:
“‘environment’  includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship
which  exists  among and between  water, air  and  land, and human
beings; other living creatures, plaints, micro-organism and property.”
We can have a provision defining ‘environmental pollution’ as in sec.
2C(b)(c) of the 1986 Act.
145

So  far  as  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Court  is  concerned,  it  must  be
provided that the Court will have jurisdiction
(a) to  protect  the right  to safe drinking  water  and  the  right  to  an
environment that is not harmful to one’s health or well being and
(b) to have the environment protected for the benefit of present and
future generations so as to
(i) prevent environmental pollution and ecological degradation
(ii) promote conservation and
(iii) secure  ecologically  sustainable  development  and  use  of
natural resources while promoting justifiable economic and
social development.
Explanation has to be added to the above (proposed) provision that the
jurisdiction shall include 
(a) the protection of natural environment, forests, wild life, sea, lakes,
rivers, streams, fauna and flora;
(b) preservation of natural resources of the earth;
(c) prevention,  abatement  and  control  of  environmental  pollution
including water, air and noise pollution;
(d) enforcement  of  any  legal  or  constitutional  rights  relating  to
environment  and  pollution  under  the  Constitution  of  India  or
under any other law for the time being in force;
(e) protection  of  monuments  and  places,  objects  of  artistic  or
historical interest of national importance as declared by the law
made by Parliament.
146

Jurisdiction of ordinary Civil Court and conflict of decisions
We have already stated that we are not ousting the jurisdiction of the
Civil  Courts  to  entertain environment  related  disputes.   As of now,  for
example, if a chimney in a neighbour’s house is releasing polluted air or a
small sewage channel from one house or land is creating pollution to a
neighbour’s  house  or  land,  parties  in  villages  are  able  to  approach  the
nearest munsif Courts which are quite accessible to these villages.   If we
oust the jurisdiction of these Courts, villagers cannot be expected to go all
the way to the seat of the Environment Court for each adjournment and
contest the same.   (May be, if a large section of people is involved, they
may be able to contest the case in the Environment Court, even if it is
located at a distant place.)  In fact, even in Australia and New Zealand, the
jurisdiction of ordinary Courts is not ousted.  Proposals in UK are also
likewise.   We are here only proposing to provide special Courts,- like the
Consumer fora – which parties may easily approach, if they want a speedy
or specialist Court.   In fact, the Consumer (Protection) Act, 1986 states that
the Act is in addition to the remedies under ordinary law.
But,  on  the  question  of  finality,  it  has  to  be  provided  that  if  an
adjudication has become final in the Civil Court (or in the Environmental
Court) it should be binding on the parties and parties cannot be allowed to
move the Environmental Court (or Civil Court) which has not yet been
approached.
147

If a dispute on some subject matter is pending in the Environment
Court and another similar case is filed later in the Civil Court, or vice versa,
parties can always obtain stay of the latter proceeding from the Court where
the latter case is filed by filing an application on the same principle as in
sec. 10 of Civil Procedure.
Rules of evidence and Conciliation/Mediation
The proposed Court will not be bound by rules of evidence and can
lay down its procedure.  It can entertain oral and documentary evidence and
consult experts.  It shall, however, have to observe principles of natural
justice.  The Judicial Members and the Commissioners may, if necessary,
make spot inspections and record oral evidence.
The proposed Environment Court should encourage Conciliation and
Mediation at any stage of the proceeding – be it an appeal or an original
petition.  
Environmental Principles to be applied
Obviously, the proposed Court will have to apply the fundamental
principles of environmental law as stated in Chapter VIII.
The statute must state that the Environment Court must keep in mind
the Precautionary Principle, Polluter Pays Principle, New Burden of Proof
Principle,  Prevention  Principle,  Strict  Liability  so  far  as  hazardous
148

substances  are  concerned,  Public  Trust  doctrine,  Concept  of  inter-
generational equity and the Concept of Sustainable Development.
Repeal of the National Environmental Tribunal Act, 1995 and the National
Environment Appellate Tribunal Act, 1997
The  National  Environmental  Tribunal  Act, 1995  and  the  National
Environment Appellate Tribunal Act, 1997 must be repealed and provisions
relating  to  the  jurisdiction  and  powers  of  those  Tribunals  must  be
incorporated in the proposed Act.
Amendments to the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974, the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981
and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
Sec.  31  of  the  Air  (P&CP)  Act,  1981  be  suitably  amended  for
providing appeals to the Environment Court and a separate section must be
introduced in the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 that appeals shall lie
to the proposed Environment Courts.
An extra provision must be made in the proposed Act so far as the
Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 is concerned that, notwithstanding anything in the
Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 appeals shall lie to the proposed Environment
Court, not only in the States where the principal Act is in force but also in
States in which it may be brought in force in future.
Power to frame schemes and monitor them
149

The  Environment  Court,  in  our  view,  must  have  power  to  frame
schemes and monitor them and also have power to modify the schemes from
time to time.  If one looks at the problems raised in several cases and the
directions issued by the Supreme Court, it will be observed that such a
power is necessary to be vested in these Courts.  Take the case of air, water
pollution, which are caused by an industry or a group of similar industries
located in an area.  Directions may have to be issued for their shifting, for
closure of the industry temporarily and for directing payment of wages to
the employees to cover two or three years of their wages; for directing local
authorities to provide necessary amenities at the new location, like water
and electricity, or to direct the industries to install effluent plants etc.  A
variety of issues arise simultaneously, involving several departments of the
Central/State  Government  or  local  authorities.   The  Environment  Court
must be able to provide an “environmental solution” to grave problems like
the one mentioned above and unless it has power to frame comprehensive
schemes which will involve issuing directions to various departments, the
solution cannot be implemented.  Such a comprehensive jurisdiction is now
being exercised both by the Supreme Court and High Courts.  In our view,
the proposed Courts must have similar powers.  They will also have to
monitor the schemes till they are successfully implemented on ground and,
if necessary, modify the schemes from time to time.
Execution of orders and contempt procedure
It was prescribed in sec. 25 of the National Environment Tribunal
Act,  1995, that whoever fails  to  comply with  an order of the  proposed
150

Tribunal should be liable for imprisonment upto a term of 3 years or with
fine which may extend upto Rs.10 lakhs or with both.   (We are aware that
sec.  19  of  the  National  Appellate  Authority  Act,  1997  prescribed
imprisonment upto seven years  and  fine  upto  rupees  one lakh or both.)
Obviously, the punishment could be awarded only by the normal criminal
courts competent to award such punishment.  This could take a pretty long
time.
So far as execution of its orders are concerned, proposed Courts must
have all powers which a Civil Court has for execution and should also be
able to exercise contempt jurisdiction.  There is no difficulty in conferring
such a power on these Courts.    The Commission is of the view that having
regard to the fact that big industries which pollute the environment (or our
streams, lakes and rivers or air) come before the Court, there is need to
invest the Court with contempt powers so that the Court can, by way of
summary  proceedings,  see  that  its  orders  are  effectively  implemented
instead  of  taking  out  lengthy  proceedings  by  way  of  execution  or
proceedings under the criminal law.  Parliament can invest these proposed
Courts with such a power by law made under Entry 14, List III of the VII
Schedule.
Power to mould appropriate relief
Normally, Civil Courts do not grant relief which is not prayed for.
But, like Writ Courts, these environment Courts must be able to mould any
relief appropriate to the facts and circumstances of the case.
151

Therefore, we are of the view that, in the original  petitions  or in
appeals, the proposed Courts should have power to grant any other relief
other than what is sought for, which is suitable in facts and circumstances of
the case.
Locus standi
So far as locus standi before the proposed Court in original petitions
is concerned, it must be as wide as it is today before High Courts/Supreme
Court in the writ jurisdiction in environment matters.    This is the position
in Australia and New Zealand also.  Any person or organization who or
which is interested in the subject matter or in public interest must be able to
approach  the  Court.   As stated  earlier,  the  Court  must  be  permitted  to
impose exemplary costs in case of frivolous or vexatious litigation.
Amicus curiae
There must be provision for intervention by individuals/organization
and also power in the Court to appoint amicus curiae.
Qualification of Judicial Members
So far as the persons who man the proposed Environment Court are
concerned, as stated earlier, there will be three Judicial Members assisted by
three expert Commissioners.    In the light of the fact that the proposed
Court will have all powers of a Civil Court, original and appellate, we are of
the view that the Courts should be manned only by Judicial Members drawn
152

from the Judiciary or the Bar.  We are not dealing here with the constitution
of Tribunals like the Administrative Tribunals or Tax Tribunals which were
established to decide dispute in service matters or tax matters.    We are here
dealing with a Court which is exercising powers of a regular Civil Court in
its original jurisdiction and in its appellate jurisdiction while dealing with
environmental matters.  It will not be permissible or appropriate to appoint
members lacking judicial or legal expertise.
Provision relating to qualification must be on the following lines:
“(1) The qualification for appointment of  Chairman and Members
shall be that they must be persons;
(a) who are or who have been Judges of a High Court ;
(b) advocates of a High Court or two or more of such High Courts in
succession with a standing of not less than twenty years.
Explanation:  Preference  shall  be  given  to  those  who  have  had
experience in environmental matters whether as Judges or lawyers.”
We have proposed a three Judge Court, inasmuch as very complicated
and important questions (affecting the entire State in which the proposed
Court is located), would come before the Court and we have felt that it is
not  sufficient  to  empower  a  Single  Member  Court  to  deal  with  such
important and grave issues.  As of now such matters are dealt with by a
Bench of two or more Judges in the High Courts and Supreme Court.  There
must therefore be at least two Judicial Members but, in order to deal with
153

situations where there is a difference of opinion, it will be necessary to have
an odd number of Judicial Members, namely, three.   The quorum must be
two Judicial Members.
The  Court  must  also  be  assisted by  a  statutory  panel  of
Technical/Scientific personnel called Commissioners as is done in Australia
and New Zealand.    Having regard to the variety of issues that come before
Environment Courts, it will be necessary to have a panel of at least three
such Commissioners.    Their role will be advisory and they have to be
present  in the Court  during  the  course  of the  hearings.   They are  not
Members of the Court but  are a statutory panel intended to independently
advise  and  assist  the  Court  in  analyzing  and  assessing  scientific  or
technological issues.  At least one Commissioner must always be present in
the Court.   In case the Court feels that any other expert in a different branch
than those in the panel is to be examined, the Court may on its own or in
consultation with the panel of Commissioners, refer the matter for opinion
to other expert/experts in the particular field under consideration.
Qualification of Commissioners
The Members in the panel of three Commissioners which is advisory
and which is attached to each Environment Court must, in our view, be
qualified in the following manner.   Each commissioner must have
“(1) a degree in environmental sciences together with at least five
years experience as an environmental scientist or engineer, or
154

(2) adequate  knowledge of and  experience to deal  with  various
aspects of problems relating to environment, and in particular
the scientific or technical aspects of environmental problems
including protection of environment and environment impact
assessment.”
We also recommend an Explanation to be inserted on the model of
sec.  12  of  the  NSW  land  and  Environment  Act,  1979,  with  a  slight
modification, as follows:
“In  appointing  Commissioners,  it  must  be  ensured,  as  far  as
practicable,  that  they  are  persons  who  hold  qualifications  and
experience across  the range of areas  in regard to which issues  of
environment or ecology arise”
Criminal and judicial review jurisdiction kept out
We have deliberately kept criminal appellate jurisdiction and judicial
review jurisdiction exercised today by the High Courts, beyond the purview
of the proposed Courts.  In respect of offences under the Penal Code or the
Special Act like the Water (P&CP) Act, 1974 or the Air (P&CP) Act, 1981
and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or any other offence connected
with  environment,  parties  or  the  State  have  therefore  to  go  before  the
normal  Criminal  Courts  and  to  the  criminal  appellate  Courts  having
jurisdiction according to the procedural law applicable.   We have examined
the matter in detail and felt that, in the abstract sense of power, Art. 253
read  with  Entry  13  of  List  I  (Schedule  VII)  would  enable  criminal
155

appeals/revisions from the trial Courts, in so far as they are presently filed in
High Courts, - whether in case of conviction or acquittal – could be shifted
to the Environment Court.   In this context, Entry 13, 95 of List I and
Entries 1, 2, 11A and 46 of List III would be relevant.
But, we have not come across any special law (except the TADA or
the POTA) where the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court in criminal
matters has been taken away from the High Court and vested in another
Court  at the State level,  manned  by retired  judges.    In order  to avoid
unnecessary litigation  as  to  the  competency of  Parliament  to  make  law
transferring  the  criminal  appellate  jurisdiction  to  another  Court  at  State
level, we have decided not to touch the criminal appellate procedure as it
now stands.
Likewise, we have not thought if fit to enable the Environmental
Courts, to have judicial review powers exercised by the High Court under
Art. 226 of the Constitution of India.  We have felt that it is sufficient to
vest  original  civil  jurisdiction  as  exercisable  by  a  Civil  Court,  in  the
Environmental Courts.  If we vest powers of Judicial review as under Art.
226, then there may be need to subject the orders to the writ jurisdiction of
High Courts as held in L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India, 1997 (3) SCC
261.
No doubt, the Environment Court exercising powers of a Civil Court
or as an appellate Court in civil jurisdiction, may be technically amenable to
writ jurisdiction of the High Court but inasmuch as we are providing an
appeal to the Supreme Court, the High Courts may decline to interfere on
156

the ground that there is an effective alternative remedy of appeal on law and
fact to the Supreme Court, as explained later in this Chapter.
Appeal to Supreme Court
We are also of the view that Parliament can, under Entry 13 of List I
read with Art. 253 or Entry 95 of List I or Entry 11A and 46 of List III,
provide for a statutory appeal direct to the Supreme Court.
Remuneration
Remuneration of Members and Commissioners shall be as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Method of appointment and other matters
The method of appointment of the Judicial Members shall be by the
Central  Government  in  consultation  with  State  Government,  the  Chief
Justice  of the  State/Union  Territory concerned  and  the  Chief  Justice  of
India.  The method of appointment of the Commissioners shall be by the
State Government/Union Territory concerned in consultation with the Chief
Justice  of  the  State  concerned  and  the  Chairman  of  the  proposed
Environment Court.
A Commissioner who has a pecuniary interest direct or indirect or is
connected with the subject matter or any of the parties to a dispute shall not
157

be entitled to give any report in regard to the dispute.  Every Commissioner
shall inform the Chairman of the Court if he has any such connections.  
The three Members of the Commission (i.e. the three retired Judges of
High Court) and the three Commissioners in the panel must have five years
tenure.
The Court shall have a Registrar and such other officers and staff as
may  be  decided  by  the  Rules  made  by  the  Central  Government,  in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
The procedure for resignation and removal of Members (i.e. the three
retired Judges of the High Court) will be on the same model as in sec. 13 of
the National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995.
So  far  as  the  Commissioners  are  concerned,  the  proviso  for
resignation may be on the model of sec. 13(1) of the above Act of 1995.  So
far as removal is concerned, it shall be on the basis of such rules as may be
prescribed by government, but the inquiry must be by a retired Judge of a
High Court.
Other provisions like sec. 15, 16, 17 of the National Environment
Tribunal Act, 1995 can be enacted so far as the position after expiry of
tenure, financial and administrative powers, staff of Court.
Provision like secs. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 and 31 of the said Act of 1995,
can be added to take care of ‘offences’, ‘protection’ etc.   Protection against
158

legal proceedings for acts performed in good faith must be there for the
Judicial Members and the Commissioners.
Oath of office to the Judicial Members has to be administered by the
Governor of the State in which the proposed Court is located or by his
delegate.   If  a Court is established exclusively for a Union Territory, such
oath may be administered by the Lt. Governor or his delegate.
Resignation by the Judicial Members or the Commissioners may be
submitted  to  the  Central  Government.   The  Commissioners  can  submit
resignations to the State Government.
Appeals  to  Supreme  Court  will  persuade  High  Court  not  to  interfere
normally on the principle of ‘alternative effective remedy’
As stated earlier, the proposal for a statutory appeal to the Supreme
Court of India, both on fact and law, will be an important reason as to why
the  High  Court  will  not  normally  interfere  with  the  orders  of  the
Environment Court.  The case in L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India, AIR
1997 SC 1125 referred to earlier, is distinguishable because there the statute
(the Administrative Tribunals Act) made under Art. 323A sought to transfer
judicial review power of the High Courts under Art. 226 to a statutory
Tribunal and excluded the power of the High Court to interfere.  Further, the
statutes  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  Act  did  not  provide  for  any
statutory appeal to the Supreme Court in the manner we are now proposing.
It was because of the above scheme of that Act, the Supreme Court felt that
the powers of the High Court under Art. 226, 227, which are part of the
159

basic structure of the Constitution, could not be taken away and, therefore,
the orders of the Administrative Tribunal would be amenable to Art. 226
before  our  Division  Bench.    The  above  decision  does  not  apply  here
inasmuch as our proposal is not to take away any judicial review powers of
the High Court either specifically or remotely, nor to vest such powers in
the proposed Courts.   Firstly, the proposed Court is a Civil Court with
original jurisdiction in environmental matters and an appellate jurisdiction
against orders passed by public authorities under three enactments (or other
enactments  to  be  notified).   Secondly,  we  are  proposing  an  affective
alternative remedy of a statutory appeal to the Supreme Court on law and
fact.   The Court which we are proposing is not a Tribunal under Art. 323A
nor one under Art. 323B, even on the basis that the list of subjects referred
to in Art. 323B for constituting such special Tribunals is not exhaustive.
We  may  point  out  that  the  Monopolies  and  Restrictive  Trade
Practices  Act,  in  sec.  55  provides  appeals  against  the  orders  of  the
Commission to the Supreme Court.  Likewise, sec. 130E of the Customs
Act, 1962 and sec. 35L of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 provides
for appeal to the Supreme Court.  The Consumer (Protection) Act, 1986
provides appeal for the District Forum to the State Forum and from the State
Forum to the National Forum.  From National Forum judgments in certain
cases,  appeal  lies  to  Supreme  Court.   The  High  Courts,  within  whose
territorial jurisdiction these Courts are located do not normally entertain
writ petitions.   Further, it is held that they will not ordinarily interfere under
Art. 226 or 227 in respect of order of Consumer fora because the Consumer
(Protection) Act, 1986 provides an effective alternative remedy of appeal.
(see long list of judgments of High Court referred to in Commentary on the
160

Act by J.N. Barowalia (2nd Ed., 2000) (pp. 195 to 206) and Commentary by
Shri Dilip K. Sheth (2001) (pp.66 to 69).   
The Supreme Court has held, in a number of cases, that High Court
will not normally interfere if there is an effective alternative right of appeal:
S. Jagadeesan vs. Ayya, AIR 1984 SC 1512; Titagarh Paper Mills vs. State
of Orissa, AIR 1983 SC 603.
Apart from this, when issues of environment raise serious disputes of
fact, where oral as well as expert evidence is necessary, the High Courts are
ill-suited to decide the issues on the basis of affidavits alone: Jai Singh vs.
Union of India, AIR 1977 SC 898;  Than Singh vs.  Supat, AIR 1964 SC
1419.
It  is,  therefore,  proposed  that  appeals  against  the  orders  of  the
Environmental Court shall lie to the Supreme Court of India.  We are here
adopting the appeal procedure that was contained in sec. 24 of the National
Environment Tribunal Act, 1995.   Further, the scheme of the Consumer
(Protection) Act, the Monopolies and Restrictive Practices Act, Customs
and Excise Act, Companies Act and other statutes is similar, where a right
of appeal direct to the Supreme Court is given.  Appeals under the proposed
Act must be on fact and law.
This is a legislation by Parliament under Art. 253 of the Constitution
for the purpose of implementing the decisions in regard to protection to
environment  taken  in  the  Stockholm  Conference,  1972  and  the  Rio  de
Janeiro Conference of 1992 and in national interest.  Further, the Courts are
161

appellate bodies for purpose of Central Acts, Water Act, 1974, Air Act,
1985, Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 etc.  Therefore, it is the duty of
the Parliament to provide for the establishment of additional Courts and the
Central Government has to bear the cost of establishing and maintaining
these Courts under Art. 247 of the Constitution of India.  Art. 247 reads
thus:
“Art. 247.  Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of
certain additional Courts:  Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
Parliament  may  by  law  provide  for  the  establishment  of  any
additional  Courts  for  the  better  administration  of  laws  made  by
Parliament or of  any  existing  laws  with  respect  to  a  matter
enumerated in the Union List.”
These Courts obviously come within the words in the first part of the last
clause  of  Article  247,  namely,  “better  administration  of  laws  made  by
Parliament”.   (The second part of the clause deals with existing laws as on
26.1.50  which  are  with  respect  to  matters  in  List  I).   There  can  be
Environment  Court  for  more  than  one  State  as  stated  earlier.   Union
Territories could avail of the Court in the neighbouring State.  Delhi can
have a separate Court.
We, therefore, recommend that a law be made by Parliament under
Art. 253 for constitution of Environmental Courts in each State (or group of
States) having original and appellate jurisdiction as stated in this Chapter
and  having  jurisdiction  on  environmental  issues.    The  Courts  will  be
manned each by three members with judicial or legal experience as stated
162

and a panel of expert Commissioners.   An appeal against the judgment shall
be to the Supreme Court of India.   The procedure to be followed by the
Court will be as stated in this Chapter.
Other  formal provisions  like  power  of  appointment  of  staff,  rule-
making power, laying in the Houses of Parliament, can be made on the same
lines as those contained in the recent amendment to Companies Act, 2002 or
as in the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
163

CHAPTER X
RECOMMENDATIONS
On the basis of our discussion in previous chapters, we recommend
the following, namely:
1. In view  of the  involvement  of  complex  scientific  and  specialized
issues  relating  to  environment,  there  is  a  need  to  have  separate
‘Environment Courts’ manned only by the persons having judicial or legal
experience  and  assisted  by  persons  having  scientific  qualification  and
experience in the field of environment.
2. In order to achieve the objectives of accessible, quick and speedy
justice, these ‘Environment Courts’ should be established and constituted by
the Union Government in each State.  However, in case of smaller States
and Union Territories, one court for more than one State or Union Territory
may serve the purpose.
3.(a) In view of the provisions contained in Art. 253 read with Entry 13 of
List I of VII Schedule to the Constitution of India, Parliament is having
exclusive jurisdiction to enact a law for the purpose of establishment of
Environment Courts, because various decisions relating to protection and
improvement of environment and preservation of natural resources of earth,
were taken in International Conferences held at Stockholm in 1972 and at
Rio-de-Janeiro in 1992, in which India also participated.
164

(b) The following words in Art. 253, “Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Chapter”, enable the Parliament to enact a law
even on subjects falling in State List.  Art. 253 is having overriding effect
over Arts. 245 to 252.
(c) In view of  the non-obstante  clause  in  Art.  253,  Parliament  while
enacting a law exercising power under Art. 253, may touch or enter into an
enactment  made  under  Art.  252(1)  without  following  the  procedure
prescribed  in  Art.  252(2).   Therefore,  the  provisions  of  the  Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, which were enacted by the
Parliament under Art. 252(1), can be altered by a subsequent law made by
the Parliament under Art. 253 without following the procedure laid under
Art. 252(2).
4.(a) The proposed Environment Court shall  consist of a Chairperson and
at least two other members.  Chairman and other members should either be a
retired Judge of Supreme Court or High Court, or having at least 20 years
experience of practicing as an advocate in any High Court.  The term of the
Chairperson and members shall be 5 years.
(b) Each Environment Court shall be assisted by at least three scientific
or technical experts known as Commissioners.  However, their role will be
advisory only.  The qualifications  of the Commissioners is given in Chapter
IX (supra).
5.(a) The proposed Environment Court shall have original jurisdiction in
the  civil  cases  where  a  substantial  question  relating  to  ‘environment’
165

including  enforcement  of  any  legal  or  constitutional  right  relating  to
environment is involved.  Details of this aspect are given in Chapter IX.
(b) The jurisdiction of civil courts is not ousted.
(c) The  proposed  Environment  Court  shall  also  have  appellate
jurisdiction in respect of appeals under:
(i) The  Environment  (Protection)  Act,  1986  and  rules  made
thereunder;
(ii)The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and
rules made thereunder:
(iii) The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and
rules made thereunder;
(iv)The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991.
The Central and State Governments may also notify that appeal under
any other environment related enactment or rules made thereunder,
may also lie to the proposed Environment Court.
6.(a) The  proposed  Court  shall  not  be  bound  to  follow  the  procedure
prescribed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but will be guided by
the principles of natural justice. The Court shall also not be bound by the
rules of evidence contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(b) The proposed Court shall have all powers of civil court including
power to punish for contempt, as discussed in Chapter IX.
166

(c) The  minimum quorum  for  hearing  a  case,  shall  be  two  members
including the Chairperson.  At least one Commissioner should also remain
present during the hearing of a case.
The  proposed  Court  can  pass  all  kinds  of  orders,  final  or
interlocutory.  It can also award damages, compensation and can also grant
injunctions (permanent, temporary and mandatory).   Details are given in
Chapter IX.
(d) The proposed Environment Court shall follow the principle of strict
liability  in  case  of  hazardous  substance,  polluter  pays  principle,
precautionary principle, preventive principle, doctrine of public trust, Inter-
generational equity and sustainable development.
(e) The locus standi before the proposed Environment Court in original
jurisdiction shall be as wide as it is today before High Court/Supreme Court
in the writ jurisdiction in environmental matters.
(f) The  proposed  Environment  Court  shall  also  have  power  to frame
schemes relating  to environmental  issues,  monitor  them and  modify the
schemes.
7. The  proposed  enactment  for  establishment  of  these  Environment
Courts  should  also  contain  other ancillary and  miscellaneous  provisions
which are necessary, for example provisions regarding other staff, funds,
place of sitting etc.
167

8(a) In view of the appellate powers of the proposed Environment Court,
provisions relating to appeals contained in:
(i) Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and rules made thereunder;
(ii)The Air (Protection and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and rules
made thereunder;
(iii) The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991
are required to be suitably amended.
(b) The proposed enactment should also contain a provision, namely,
“Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sec.  28  of  the  Water
(Prevention  and  Control  of  Pollution)  Act,  1974,  any  person
aggrieved by the order passed by the State Board under sec. 25, 26 or
27 may prefer appeal to the Environment Court”.
9. The  National  Environment  Tribunal  Act,  1995  and  The  National
Environmental  Appellate  Authority  Act,  1997  may  be  repealed  and
provisions regarding functions and powers of the Tribunal and the Appellate
Authority contained in those Acts be suitably transferred in the proposed
enactment for establishment of the Environment Court.
10. Appeal against the orders of the proposed Environment Court, shall
lie before the Supreme Court on the question of facts and law.
11. The powers of High Courts under Arts. 226, 227 of the Constitution
of India and of the Supreme Court under Art. 32 of the Constitution of India
shall not be ousted.
168

We  acknowledge  the  extensive  contributions  made  by  Dr.  S.
Muralidhar, Part-time Member of Law Commission of India in preparation
of this Report.
We recommend accordingly.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate)
Vice-Chairman
(T.K. Vishwanathan)
Member-Secretary
Dated: 23.09.2003
169