187th  REPORT
ON
MODE OF EXECUTION OF DEATH
SENTENCE AND INCIDENTAL MATTERS
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
OCTOBER, 2003

DO No.6(3)/85/2003-LC(LS) 17th October, 2003
Dear Sri Arun Jaitley,
I  have  the  pleasure  of  forwarding  the  187th Report  of  the  Law
Commission  of  India  on  ‘Mode  of  Execution  of  Death  Sentence  and
Incidental Matters’.  The subject was taken up by the Commission suo motu.
At present, as per section 354(5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
the mode of execution of death sentence is ‘hanging till death’.
The Supreme Court in  Bachan Singh vs.  State of Punjab (1982) 3
SCC 25, has observed that physical pain and suffering which the execution
of the sentence of death entails is also no less cruel and inhuman.  The
Commission  therefore  undertook  a study to provide  a humane mode of
execution  of  death  sentence.   Accordingly,  it  circulated  a  Consultation
Paper  on  this  issue.   The  Commission  considered  various  modes  of
execution of death sentence prevailing world wide.  Many responses were
received to this Consultation Paper.  A seminar was also organized on this
subject at New Delhi.  On the basis of the various responses and also the
deliberations held at the seminar, the Commission has prepared this Report.
The Commission has recommended that sec. 354(5) of the Cr.P.C.,
1973 be amended by providing an alternative mode of execution of death
sentence by lethal injection until the accused is dead.  It will be in the
discretion of the Judge to pass an appropriate order regarding the mode of
execution of death sentence.  The convict shall, of course, be heard on the
question of mode of execution of death sentence before such discretion is
exercised.
Further, at present, there is no statutory right of appeal to the Supreme
Court in cases where High Court confirms the death sentence passed by a
Session Judge or where the High Court enhances the sentence passed by the
Session  Judge  and  awards  sentence  of  death.   The  Commission,  on  a
2

consideration  of  the  various  responses  and  views,  recommends  for
providing a statutory right of appeal against the judgment of the High Court
confirming or awarding the death sentence.  Accordingly, the Commission
has  recommended  that  the  Supreme  Court  (Enlargement  of  Criminal
Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 be suitably amended for providing right to appeal to
the Supreme Court.
Yet another aspect is important vis-à-vis the armed forces.  As of
now, there is no provision of right of appeal against the sentence of death
passed by Court Martial under the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and
the  Air  Force  Act,  1950.   The  Commission  has,  after  considering  the
responses and views, recommended that there should be an appeal to the
Supreme Court against the order of death sentence passed by Court Martial
mentioned above.   It is also recommended that one of the present mode of
execution of death sentence in the statutes above referred to i.e. ‘hanging by
neck’, should be replaced by ‘administering lethal injection until accused is
dead’.  There should be a further provision that lethal injection should be an
alternative mode of execution of death sentence passed by Court Martial.
The Commission has therefore recommended that suitable amendments in
these Acts may be made for these purposes.
Finally, the Commission also recommends that death sentence matters
should be heard by a five-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court.    It also
recommends that the Supreme Court Rules may be suitably amended to
bring into effect these objectives.
                               With regards,
Yours sincerely,
                                                                                    
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Sri Arun Jaitley
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHI.
Contents
3

S.No. CHAPTER PAGE NO.
1. Introduction …………….………………………………………………………..03
2. Methods of execution Through Ages….…………………………………….08
(a) Crucification ………………………………………………………….. 09
(b) Burning at Stake………………….……………………………….…..09
(c) The Wheel…………………………………………………………….. .10
(d) Guillotine……………………………………………….………………10
(e) Hanging and Garotteh……………….…………………………….…11
(f) Headman's Axe……………………….……………………………….12
(g) Firing Squad………………………….………………………………..13
(h) Gas Chamber…………………………..………………………………13
(i) Electrocution…………………………..………………………………14
(j) Lethal Injection ………………………….……………………………15
3. Federal Executions and Typical Execution Procedure 
      in Different States in the USA  ………………………………………………18
The Federal Execution ………………………………….……….…………...18
Execution in different States …………………………..……………………19
4. Execution of Death sentence in India………………………………………21
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Prison Manual…………….21
Execution in accordance with Army Act, Air Force Act 
& Navy Act ……………………………………………………….……………..29
5. Mode of execution of death sentence………………………………………32
6. Right of Appeal to the Apex Court in cases where death sentence 
has been affirmed or awarded by the High Court and the procedure 
in the  Apex Court relating to passing of death sentence………………42
7. Proceedings of the Seminar and Public Responses to the
Consultation Paper……………..……………………………………………. 61
8. Recommendations…………………………………………………………..  69
Annexure I: Summary of the Consultation Paper on Mode of Execution  
of Death Sentence and Ancillary Matters (With Questionnaire)…….. (I – X) 
4

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
"State should not punish with vengeance". Emperor Ashoka
Death penalty has been a mode of punishment since time immemorial. The
arguments for and against have not changed much over the years. Crime as well as the
mode of punishment correlate to the culture and form of civilization from which they
emerge.  With the march of civilization, the modes of  death punishment have witnessed
significant humanized changes. However, in India not much has been debated on the
issue of mode of execution of death sentence.
The Law Commission of India has taken up the subject  suo moto due to the
technological advances in the field of science, technology, medicine, anaesthetics and
since  more  than  three  decades  have passed  by after  the  35th Report  of  the  Law
Commission on Capital Punishment, 1967 with reference  to the mode of  executing
death penalty. The various modes of execution of death sentence as prevalent at that
time in 1967 were studied by the  Law Commission. The Commission in Topic 58(c)
paragraph 1149, concluded ;
  "We find that there is a considerable body of opinion which would like hanging
to be replaced by something more humane and more painless….."
5

However, the Commission was not able to arrive at any firm conclusion on this
point as explained in Paras 1150 and 1151. 
"1150. The matter is, to a certain extent, one of medical opinion. That a method
which is certain, humane, quick and decent should be adopted, is the general
view, with which few can quarrel. It is true that the really agonizing part is the
anticipation of impending death. But society owes to itself that the agony at the
exact point  of  execution  be kept to the minimum.  It  is, however,  difficult to
express an opinion positively as to which of the three methods satisfied these
tests most, particularly when the two other methods are still untried. We are not,
at present, in a position to come to a firm conclusion on this point. Progress in
the science of anaesthetics and further study of the various methods, as well as
the experience gathered in other countries and development and refinement of
the  existing  methods,  would  perhaps,  in  future,  furnish  a  firm  basis  for
conclusion on this controversial subject.
1151. We do not, therefore, recommend a change in the law on this point. We
should,  however,  state  here  that  we do not  subscribe  to  the  view  that  the
substitution of any other method will reduce the deterrent effect of the penalty of
death." 
Also the Royal Commission in its Report on Capital Punishment 1949-1953 dealt
with prevalent modes of execution of death punishment and stated that three conditions
should be fulfilled in executing the death sentence (a) it should be as less painful as
possible; (b) it should be as quick as possible; and (c) there should be least mutilitation
of the body.  It observed at pages 256-61 as follows:
"in carrying out this task the Commission did not confine itself to the four main
methods of execution, (lethal gas, shooting, electrocution, guillotine). It persuaded
enquiry  whether  there  was  any  method  still  untried  that  would  inflict  death  as
painless and certain as hanging but "with greater decency and without the degrading
and barbarous association with which hanging is tainted…
6

The  Commission decided for  various reasons that  if lethal injection were to be
constituted as method of judicial execution in the same case…..The question should
be periodically examined especially in light  of  progress  made  in the science of
anesthetics" (p.261)
It is now accepted that death punishment is qualitatively different from any other
punishment in as much as it is irreversible and if an error is committed, there is no way
to  rectify  the  error.  However,  in  Bachan  Singh's case  (AIR  1982  SC  1325),  the
constitutional validity of death sentence was upheld by the Constitutional Bench of the
Supreme  Court  of  India  by  majority  of  4:1  with  Hon'ble  Justice  P.N.  Bhagwati,
dissenting. 
Nevertheless, the Indian society, being one of the oldest civilizations in the world
owes to itself that the agony at the exact point of execution should be kept to the
minimum.  This  is more  so when execution  is the  result  of  a judicial verdict.   The
execution of death sentence in India is discussed in Chapter 4 of this Report. 
The Law Commission, in pursuance of the observations made in the 35th Report,
decided to conduct study of various modes of execution of  death sentence and to
suggest any reforms if needed in the present system of execution of death sentence in
India. The Law Commission prepared a Consultation Paper alongwith a questionnaire,
the purpose of which was NOT whether the death punishment should be abolished or be
retained  but  this  is  strictly  confined   to  three  issues,  namely,:  (a)  the method  of
execution of death sentence, (b) the process of elimination of difference in judicial
opinions among Judges of the apex Court in passing sentence of death penalty, and  (c)
the need to provide a right of appeal to the accused to the Supreme Court in death
sentence matters.  In this paper, the Commission had referred to the cases decided by
the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  India,  various  enactments,  the  reports  of  various
7

Commissions,   history  of  various  modes  of  execution,  various  books,  articles,
newspaper reports,  contemporary developments  and concerned web sites on these
aspects. 
The  Consultation Paper  was also made available on the Law Commission's
website lawcommissionof india.nic.in" and it was requested that responses should be
sent by email or by post to the Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India, New Delhi.
The Law Commission also made a summary of the Consultation Paper along
with the Questionnaire for the press and this was also made available on the website
The Law Commission received many responses to the Questionnaire.  On the
basis of this, the Law Commission prepared statistics which are referred to in the latter
part of this Report.  On   August 9, 2003 the Law Commission also held a seminar at
Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi, which was inaugurated by Shri Arun
Jaitley, Hon'ble Minister for Law & Justice and Commerce and Industry.
The Law Commission is encouraged to note that there was wide public interest
on  this  issue.  Not  only  the  press  gave  wide  publicity  but  some  newspapers  and
magazines also wrote editorials and articles (for example, see India Today, April 28,
2003,  and The Times of India, July 25, 2003). 
The people, including women, who responded to the questionnaire came from
various walks of life such as Judges, Advocates, Medical Practitioners, Armed Forces,
Central Police Organizations.  The  responses by email were from India as well as
8

abroad. This report is based on the Consultation Paper and public responses to the
Questionnaire and the discussions at the Seminar.
At the Seminar the Law Commission also gave a power point presentation. 
The recommendations of the Law Commission are given at the end.  The
Summary of the Consultation Paper on the Execution of Death Punishment along with
the questionnaire is annexed as Annexure - I to this Report.
9

CHAPTER 2
METHODS OF EXECUTION THROUGH AGES
 Various modes and methods of inflicting death sentence upon the convict as
practiced  in  different  societies  are  examined  in  this  chapter.  This  study  is  not
exhaustive of all the modes of execution but covers some of the important practices
followed.  
Since Middle Ages death sentence was the common practice throughout the
world and was inflicted in the case of conviction for large number of crimes, including
petty offences involving property. In England, during the 18th century, death was the
punishment  for  several specific  offences   which were about a hundred.  The  death
penalty  was  executed  in  various  ways.  Several  methods  of  execution  of  death
sentences  involved  torture,  burning  at  the  stake,  breaking  on  the  wheel,  slow
strangulation, crushing under elephant's feet, throwing from a cliff, boiling in the oil,
stoning to death etc. With the emergence of various principles relating to fair procedure
contained in the Constitutions  of  several democratic  countries  and with the  strong,
growth of human rights movement, such severe death punishments involving torture
began to die out since the 18th century. The number of offences punishable by death
was also reduced in all leading countries. Also, penalties involving torture disappeared
with the idea that punishment by way of death sentence should be swift and humane,
whether  by  guillotine,  hanging,  the  garotte,  or  the  headman's  axe.  Some  of  the
important practices of death penalty are as follows1 :-
1 The source of the present description is based on the secondary source of data. The
Law Commission owes the origin of present information from the various reports of the
studies conducted by various  Commissions, e.g. the New York Commission of Inquiry,
1888, Royal Commission on Capital Punishment 1949 - 1953.  The reliance is also
10

(a)  CRUCIFICATION
Nailing a person to a wooden cross and leaving him there till he died was the
torturous and popular method of executing death sentence during the years in B.C.
Jesus Christ was crucified in this manner.  This is the most cruel method of death
punishment and order of this mode of execution of death punishment is found even
today in several countries all over the world in the symbol of the cross over every
Christian Church.
(b) BURNING AT THE STAKE
'Burning' dates back to the Christian era. Burning at the stake was a popular
death sentence and means of torture, which was used mostly for heretics, witches, and
suspicious women. It was in  the year  643 AD, an Edict issued by Pope declared it
illegal to burn witches.  However, the increased persecution of witches throughout the
centuries resulted in millions of women being burned at the stake. The first major witch-
placed on newspaper reports, articles, books. For more information, please find
reference as follows 
(1) Scott - Story of Capital Punishment, Oxford University Press (SC Judges
Library, classification No.343.253).
(2) The Library of Criminology, Elizabeth Orman Tuttle, London
Stevenes,Soursluit, Chicago Querd, Books 1961
(3) Administration of Death Penalty in U.S. International Commission of Jurists,
Report of Mission, June 1996
Related websites:
1. http://lastmile.inftykitten.com/intoduction.html.
2. http://worldbook.bigchalk.coml320440.htm
3. http://cehat.org/publications/edo3.html
4. http://www.deathrowbook.com
11

hunt  occurred  in  Switzerland  in  the  year  1427  AD.  Throughout  the  16th  and  17th
Centuries,  witch  trials  became  common  throughout  Germany,  Austria,  Switzerland,
England, Scotland, and Spain during the Inquisition. Soon after, witch trials began to
decline in parts  of  Europe,  and in England  and the death penalty for  witches was
abolished. The last legal execution by burning at the stake took place at end of the
Spanish Inquisition in 1834. 
(c) THE WHEEL
The wheel as a method of torture and execution could be used in a number of
ways. A person could be attached to the outer rim of the wheel and then rolled over
sharp spikes, or down a hill, to his death. Also, the wheel could be laid on its side, like a
turntable, with the person tied to it. The wheel would turn, and people would take turns
beating the victim with iron bars, breaking his bones and eventually causing his death.
This method was used throughout Europe, especially during the Middle Ages. 
(d ) GUILLOTINE
The guillotine became a popular form of execution in France in the year 1789,
when Dr. Joseph Guillotine proposed that all criminals be executed by the same method
and that torture should be kept to a minimum. Decapitation was thought to be the least
painful and most humane method of execution at that time. Guillotine suggested that a
decapitation machine be built.  Subsequently, the decapitation machine came to be
named after him. The machine was first tested on sheep and calves, and then on
human corpses. Finally, after many improvements and trials, the blade was perfected,
and the first execution by guillotine took place in the year 1792. It was widely used
12

during the French Revolution, where many of the executions were held publicly outside
the prison of Versailles. King Charles I was also executed in the same way in England.
The last public execution by guillotine was held in France, in June 1939. The last use of
the guillotine came in 1977 in France, and the device has not officially been used since
then. Though the guillotine is less painful, it is not acceptable today as it is primitive and
involves the mutilation of the condemned person.  After France was admitted to the
European Union, death sentence itself has since been abolished in France.
(e) HANGING AND THE GAROTTE
Hanging was a very common method adopted for execution among the various
methods available.  The prisoner could simply be hanged with a noose, which could lead
to death by fracturing the neck. However, if torture was also intended, there could be
methods other than hanging with a noose.
In medieval times,  if  torture was intended,  a person would be drawn and
quartered before being hanged. For extremely serious crimes such as high treason,
hanging alone was not considered enough. Therefore, a prisoner would be carved into
pieces while still alive before being hanged. The Garotte was also a popular method of
torture, and was similar to hanging. A mechanical device such as a rack or a gag would
be  tightened  around the  person's  neck,  causing  slow strangulation,  stretching,  and
obstruction of blood vessels. A device could also be placed in a prisoner's mouth and
kept in place by tying and locking a chain around his or her neck.
Hanging is one of the oldest methods of execution and today it is used in some
countries as a form of execution. Delaware, New Hampshire and Washington authorize
13

hanging as a form of execution; depending on the convict's sentencing date he or she
may  be  allowed  to  choose  between  hanging  or  lethal  injection.  Since  1976,  three
prisoners have been hanged in the United States. Prior to the execution the prisoner
must be weighed. The "drop" must be based on the prisoner's weight, to deliver 1260
foot-pounds of force to the neck. The prisoner's weight in pounds is divided into 1260 to
arrive at the drop in feet. The noose is then placed around the convict's neck, behind his
or her left ear, which will cause the neck to snap. The trap door then opens, and the
convict drops. If properly done, death is caused by dislocation of the third and fourth
cervical vertebrae, or by asphyxiation. This lengthy measuring process is to assure
almost instant death and a minimum of bruising. If careful measuring and planning is not
done, strangulation, obstructed blood flow, or beheading often result. The death by
hanging however according to most of the medico-jurisprudential writers is result of
asphyxia or strangulation and fracture of the neck is an exception (both in judicial as
well as suicidal hanging).  
(f) HEADMAN'S AXE
This form of execution was quite popular in Germany and England during the
16th and 17th centuries, where decapitation was thought to be the most humane form of
capital punishment. An executioner, usually hooded, would chop off the person's head
with an axe or sword. The last beheading took place in 1747 in United Kingdom. Later
on, and before capital punishment was abolished recently, with a greater interest in
humanitarianism, capital punishment became less gruesome than the beheadings and
torture that were common place centuries before. Lethal injection and electrocution have
become the preferred methods of execution in many countries mostly because these
methods appeared to be less offensive to the public and more humane for the prisoner. 
14

(g) FIRING SQUAD
There  is no  fixed  procedure  when  it  comes  to execution  by firing  squad.
Usually the convict is tied to the pole, with hands and is blind folded and a cloth patch is
put on his heart, or he is tied to a chair.  In most cases, a team of five executioners is
used to aim at the convict's heart. In some countries few of the rifles are loaded with
blank bullets and the shooters are not told about it so that the true killer is unknown.
Several  countries  like  Russia  and  eastern  countries  like  China,  Thailand  use  this
method.  It is significant to note that shooting by firing squad is also permitted in India
when  a  death  sentence  is  given  by  Court  Martial  (This  is  discussed  in  detail
subsequently).  In some states in United States like Utah and Oklahoma, choice is given
to the convict whether he should be shot to death by firing squad or by lethal injection.
Gary Gilmore in 1977, and John Taylor in 1996 were executed by firing squad in Utah, 
It is significant to note that the leaders of the third Reich of Germany, who
were given death punishment by hanging at the Nuremberg trials, asked for execution of
death punishment by the firing squad as the former was degrading and they wanted a
military death. This reflects that death by hanging is not a dignified method of execution.
(h) GAS CHAMBER
In an execution by the way of lethal gas, the prisoner is restrained and sealed
in an airtight chamber. When given the signal, the executioner opens a valve, allowing
hydrochloric acid to flow into a pan. Upon another signal, either potassium cyanide or
sodium cyanide crystals are dropped mechanically into the acid, producing hydrocyanic
gas. The hydro cyanic gas destroys the body's ability to process blood hemoglobin, and
unconsciousness can occur within a few seconds if the prisoner takes a deep breath.
However, if he or she holds their breath, death can take much longer, and the prisoner
15

usually goes into wild convulsions. Death usually occurs within six to 18 minutes. After
the pronouncement of death, the chamber is evacuated through the use of carbon and
neutralizing  filters.  Crews  wearing  gas  masks  decontaminate  the  body  with  bleach
solution, and it is out gassed before being released. If this process was not done, the
undertaker or anyone handling the body would be killed.  Nevada was the first state to
sanction the use of the gas chamber, and the first execution by lethal gas took place in
February, 1924. Since then it remained a means of carrying out the death sentence 31
times. Five States in the U.S.A. authorize the use of the gas chamber as an alternative
to lethal injection, viz. Arizona, California, Maryland, Missouri, and Wyoming. In most
cases the prisoner is allowed to choose the method of execution, depending on his or
her date of sentencing. Eleven people have been executed by lethal gas in the United
States since 1976.  This method however is expensive and cumbersome.  It  also brings
back to the mind the sad fact that hundreds of thousands of Jews were killed in gas
chamber by the Nazi Germany.
(i) ELECTROCUTION
In a typical execution using the electric chair, a prisoner  is strapped to a
specially  built  chair,  his  head  and  body  shaved  to  provide better  contact  with  the
moistened  copper  electrodes  that  the  executioner  attaches.  Usually  three  or  more
executioners push buttons, but only one is connected to the actual electrical source and
therefore the real executioner is not known. The jolt varies in power from state to state,
and is also determined by the convict's body weight. The first jolt is followed by several
more in a lower voltage. In Georgia, executioners apply 2,000 volts for four seconds,
1,000 volts for the next seven seconds and then 208 volts for two minutes. Electrocution
produces visibly destructive effects on the body, as the internal organs are burned. The
prisoner usually leaps forward against the restraints when the switch is turned on. The
16

body changes color, swells, and may even catch fire. The prisoner may also defecate,
urinate, and vomit blood. The first electric chair designed for an execution was created
by George Westinghouse at the turn of the century. Westinghouse was propositioned by
the New York City Correctional Institution to design an electric chair, because many felt
that the present form of execution, hanging, had become too inhumane and out-dated.
Westinghouse  told the correctional institution  that  the chair's power source was so
deadly that it would only take five seconds of 1,000 volts to cause death. However, the
first man executed did not die after five seconds, but instead took four minutes of a
steady stream of power to be finally pronounced dead. During these four minutes the
body of the convict started to smoke, the hair on his arms and head ignited in flames,
and blood spilled from every orifice on his face. After this display, the electric chair was
considered a failure. Today the electric chair is modernized and is used in eleven States
of U.S.A. But, Arkansas, Kentucky, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, and
Virginia States of U.S.A. authorize both lethal injection and electrocution, allowing the
inmates to choose one of these methods. Alabama, Florida, Georgia, and Nebraska,
however, use electrocution as the sole means of execution. Since 1976, 144 people
have been executed by electric chair. 
(j) LETHAL INJECTION
 Death by lethal injection involves the continuous intravenous injection of a
lethal quantity of three different drugs. The prisoner is secured on a gurney with lined
ankle and wrist restraints. A cardiac monitor and a stethoscope are attached, and two
saline intravenous lines are started, one in each arm. The inmate is then covered with a
sheet. The saline intravenous lines are turned off, and Sodium Thiopental is injected,
causing the inmate to fall into a deep sleep. The second chemical agent, Pancuronium
Bromide, a muscle relaxer, follows. This causes the inmate to stop breathing due to
17

paralysis of the diaphragm and lungs. Finally, Potassium Chloride is injected, stopping
the heart.
 
Since 1976, many prisoners have been executed by lethal injection in the
United States. Lethal injection is now the most common method of execution in the
United States in regard to all the 66 executions carried out during 2001 being by this
method. Of the 749 executions in America upto 2000, 586 have been carried out by
lethal injection, including those of seven women. China also reported 8 executions by
lethal injection during 2000.
Lethal injection was first considered as a means of execution in 1888 when
New York's J. Mount Bleyer MD put it forward in an article in the Medico-Legal Journal
suggesting that the intra-venous injection of six grains of Morphine should be used for
execution of death sentence. The idea did not catch on and New York introduced the
electric chair instead ( Based on the findings of the New York Commission of Inquiry
1888). It was again put forward in 1977 by Dr. Stanley Deutsch, who at the time chaired
the Anaesthesiology Department of Oklahoma University Medical School. In response to
a call by an Oklahoma State senator Bill Dawson for a cheaper alternative to repairing
the State's derelict electric chair, Deutsch described a way to administer drugs through
an intravenous drip so as to cause death rapidly and without pain. Deutsch wrote to the
Senator Bill Dawson "Having been anaesthetised on several occasions with ultra short-
acting barbiturates and having administered these drugs for approximately 20 years, I
can assure you that this is a rapid, pleasant way of producing unconsciousness". And
Oklahoma thus became the first State in the U.S.A. to legislate for it in 1977. Texas
introduced similar legislation later in the same year to replace its electric chair and
carried out the first execution by the method of lethal injection on December 7, 1982
18

when Charles Brooks was put to death for the murder. It will be relevant here to mention
the observation of this execution procedure. The procedure began at 12.07 a.m. He was
certified dead at 12.16 a.m. There was no apparent problem and Brooks seemed to die
quite easily. At first he raised his head, clenched his fist and seemed to yawn or gasp
before passing into unconsciousness. 36 American States now use lethal injection either
as their sole method or as an option to one of the traditional methods. 
These are Arizona, Arkansas,  California,  Colorado, Connecticut,  Delaware,
Florida, Idaho,  Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky,  Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New
York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington and Wyoming.
The Philippines has also decided to use lethal injection for future executions to
replace  the  electric  chair  and  carried  out  its  first  execution  since  1976  when  Leo
Echegaray was put to death for child rape on February 4, 1999 and 6 more men have
been executed by this method by the end of 2000. Guatemala has also switched to
lethal injection after a botched firing squad execution in 1996 and carried out three
executions since then. China also has been experimenting with lethal injection although
most executions continue to be by shooting. The present trend thus seems to be that of
favoring execution by lethal injection.
19

CHAPTER 3
FEDERAL EXECUTIONS AND TYPICAL
EXECUTION PROCEDURE IN DIFFERENT
STATES IN THE U.S.A.
THE FEDERAL EXECUTION
The American Federal Bureau of Prisons has lethal injection facility at the
federal prison in Terre Haute, Indiana. The death house is located inside a non-descript
brick building outside the main penitentiary compound, and consists of five viewing
rooms surrounding the execution chamber. The chamber is a stark, hospital-like room
lined with green tiles and bare except for the large gurney equipped with five Velcro
restraints  and  a  sink  in  one  corner.  The  intravenous  tubes  pass  through  a  small
opening in the wall and into the executioner's room nearby. All but one room, the
executioner's, are equipped with large two-way windows with curtains. The executioner's
room is fitted with one-way glass. During an execution, prison officials will maintain an
open telephone line to the Justice Department in Washington as the President of the
U.S.A. has sole authority to grant last-minute clemency. Overhead, a camera linked to a
monitor  inside  the  executioner's  room  will  watch  the  process  to  note  whether  the
prisoner  suffers  any  pain  during  the  procedure.  On  the  June  11th  2001  Timothy
McVeigh, the Oklahoma City bomber became the first person to be executed under
Federal law since 1963. He had placed a bomb outside the Alfred P Murrah Federal
Building, killing 168 people and injuring 850. The intravenous drip that delivered the
lethal  chemicals  went  to  a  catheter  in  McVeigh's  right  leg.  The  first  drug  was
20

administered at 8.10 a.m., with the second being given at 8.11 and the final one at 8.13
and he was pronounced dead at 8.14 a.m. The whole process took only four minutes.
On June 19, Juan Raul Garza, a Mexican-American drug lord, who was also fond of
murder, was executed on the same gurney. The American military has also moved to
lethal injection (from hanging) and now has a facility in the basement of the military
prison at Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas which is currently housing six or seven inmates.
EXECUTION IN DIFFERENT STATES
Lethal injection protocols ( which are confidential in nature ) vary from State to
State. Typically the prisoner is strapped to a gurney (which is a wheeled hospital style
trolley bed) or a fixed execution table rather like an operating theatre table by leather or
webbing straps over the body and legs. His bare arms are strapped to boards projecting
from the sides of the gurney. Trained technicians then insert a catheter into a vein in
each arm, a process that sounds much simpler than it often is. Once the catheters are in
place tubes carrying saline solution are connected to the catheter ends and the prisoner
is either wheeled into the execution chamber or the curtains surrounding it are drawn
back to allow the witnesses to see the procedure. When the condemned person has
made any final statement the prison warden gives the signal for the execution to begin
and the technician(s), hidden from view behind a two way mirror begins to manually
inject the three chemicals comprising typically 15 – 50 cc of Sodium thiopental, 15 - 50
cc of Pavulon (the generic name for Pancuronium bromide) and 15 - 50 cc of Potassium
chloride. There is a short interval between each chemical during which saline solution is
injected to clean the vein and prevent any chemical reaction which could block it.
 Typically the actual injections will take from three to five minutes to complete.
Sodium thiopental is a short acting barbiturate which causes unconsciousness quite
quickly. Pavulon is a muscle relaxant that paralyses the diaphragm and thus arrests
21

breathing whilst Potassium chloride finishes the job by causing cardiac arrest. In most
cases the prisoner is unconscious in about a minute after the Sodium thiopental has
been injected and is dead in around eight minutes, with no obvious signs of physical
suffering. In some States, a fully automated lethal injection machine is used that runs off
a  12  volt  battery.  It  injects  the  chemicals in the  right  order  and amount  once the
catheters are in place. The machine has six syringes activated by mechanical plungers.
Three syringes hold the lethal drugs; the other three contain harmless saline solution.
Two buttons control the machine, one for the lethal syringes and one for the identical
looking harmless ones. The two executioners each press a button and the syringes
release the drugs into the vein. The condemned prisoner thus is put to death while in
sleep by this swift and painless method.
22

CHAPTER 4
EXECUTION OF DEATH SENTENCE IN INDIA
The execution of death sentence in India is carried out by two modes namely
hanging by neck till death and being shot to death. The jail manuals of various States
provide for the method of execution of death sentence in India. Once death sentence is
awarded  and  is  confirmed  after  exhausting  all  the possible  available  remedies  the
execution is carried out in accordance with section 354(5) of  the Code of Criminal
Procedure1973 i.e. hanging by neck till death. It is also provided under The Air Force
Act, 1950, The Army Act 1950 and The Navy Act 19572 that the execution has to be
carried out either by hanging by neck till death or by being shot to death (as has been
explained in detail herein below).
A. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and the Prison
Manual
 Section 368(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 provided for hanging by
neck till death. This has been amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Section 354(5) reads as under:-  
2 Chapter VI of The Air Force Act, 1950 in Section 34 provides for the offences in relation to the enemy
which are punishable with death. Section 37 provides for the infliction of death sentence in case the accused
is convicted.  Chapter  VII  provides for  the  various punishments and  the  competent court-martials are
empowered to recommend such punishments. Section 73 provides for the punishments awardable by Court
martial. Chapter XII provides for the Confirmation and Revision provisions. Chapter XIII provides for the
Execution of Sentences, section 163 deals with the form of the sentence of Death.  The provisions relating
to awarding the Death penalty in The Army Act, 1950 are enunciated in Chapter VI Section 34 (a) to (l)
relates to offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death, Section 37 relates to Mutiny and
provides for the infliction of death sentence in case the accused is convicted. Chapter VII deals with
punishments awardable by court-martials, Chapter XII relates to Confirmation and Revision, Chapter XIII
is on Execution of Sentences, Section 166 deals with form of Sentence of Death. Section 147 of The Navy
Act 1957 provides for the Form of Death Sentence   
23

"When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be
hanged by the neck till he is dead."
The execution of the death penalty in India, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, is
thus carried out by hanging by neck till death during the last over hundred years. The
execution of the death penalty is carried out in accordance with section 354(5) of the
Code of the Criminal Procedure, 1973, and Jail Manuals of the respective States. For
example, Chapter XXXI, Jail Manual of Punjab and Haryana provides for the various
steps leading to the execution of the death sentence:-
“Paragraph  847(1) Every  prisoner  under  the  sentence  of  the  death  shall
immediately on his arrival in the prison after sentence, be searched by, or by order of
the Deputy Superintendent, and all articles shall be taken from him which the Deputy
Superintendent deems it dangerous or inexpedient to leave in his possession.”  
“Paragraph 847(2) Every such prisoner shall be confined in a cell apart from
all other prisoners, and shall be placed by day and by night under the charge of a
guard.”
After such admission of the prisoner in the jail, the Deputy Superintendent is
required to examine the cell and has to satisfy himself that it is secure and has no article
which can be used as a weapon or instrument with which the prisoner can commit
suicide. The said Deputy Superintendent also has to ensure that there is nothing in the
cell which in his opinion is inexpedient to permit its remaining in such cell.
Paragraph 848 Cell to be examined - Every cell in which any convict who is
under sentence of death, is at any time to be confined shall, before such convict is
placed in it, be examined by the Deputy Superintendent, or other officer appointed in
that behalf, who shall satisfy himself that it is secure and contains no article of any kind
which  the prisoner  could  by  any possibility  use as a weapon  of  offence  or as  an
24

instrument  with  which  to  commit  suicide,  or  which  it  is,  in  the  opinion  of  the
Superintendent, inexpedient to permit to remain in such cell.'
The Manual also describes  various restrictions pertaining to the use of the apparels etc.
Paragraph 851 provides that the condemned prisoner shall not be provided Munj mat or
bhabbar mat. This clause is intended to avoid presence of any substance which can be
used by the prisoner as instrument for committing suicide.
"Paragraph 851 Munj mat not to be issued - Prison clothing, bedding and necessaries
shall be issued to condemned as to other convicts, with the exception of the Munj or
bhabbar mat which shall be withheld and an extra blanket substituted."
The  para  854  provides  that  such  prisoner  shall  be  under  the  constant
surveillance  of  the  guard,  and  further  that  he  should  not  be  allowed  to  meet  or
communicate with any person except those persons authorized by the Superintendent.
Paragraph 855 provides for raising of the alarm in case the prisoner tries to commit
suicide.
Paragraph 855 : Management of keys, Conditions under which the door may be
opened
(1) The keys of the cell in which a condemned prisoner is confined shall be
kept by the head warder on duty who, on hearing the alarm, shall proceed
to such cell which, in case of emergency such as attempt by the prisoner
to commit suicide, he shall enter and with the help of the sentry fregrate it.
(2) At no other time shall the door of the  cell in which a condemned prisoner
is  confined,  be  opened   without  first  handcuffing  the  prisoner  and  so
25

securing him against the possibility of using violence or, if he declines to be
handcuffed,  unless  at  least  three  members  of  the  establishment  are
present.
(3) The locks in use in a condemned cell shall be such as cannot be opened
by any keys in use in the jail, other than those properly belonging to them.
The  condemned  prisoner  and  the  cell  in  which  he  is  residing  are  required  to  be
searched  twice  a  day by  Deputy  Superintendent.  The  paragraph  also  provides  for
maintenance of a journal of such searches and results thereof.
Paragraph  858  Condemned  prisoners  to  be  searched  twice  daily  -
Morning and evening daily, the Deputy Superintendent or, under his directions, the
Assistant Superintendent, shall carefully search every condemned prisoner and the cell
he occupies, with his own hands and make a note of his having done so and of the
result in his Journal.
Paragraph 859 casts  duty on Deputy Superintendent  and other  officers to
examine the food given to such condemned prisoner. It is enunciated that the ordinary
diet of a labouring convict should be provided to the condemned prisoner.
Para 859 - Diet. Precautions to be taken - (1) A prisoner under sentence of
death shall be allowed the ordinary diet of a labouring convict.
(2) All  food  intended  for  consumption  by  a  condemned  prisoners  shall  be
examined  by  the  Deputy  Superintendent,  Assistant  Superintendent  or  Medical
Subordinate, who may withhold any article he regards with suspicion and report the
circumstances to the Superintendent.  The food shall be delivered to the prisoner in the
presence of one or other of these officers.
26

The provisions regarding the execution of a pregnant woman, exceptions in
cases of  female,  allowing  the  prisoner  to  make  use of  books  etc.  are  elaborately
discussed in Paragraphs 859 to 864. The elaborate description of the rope to be used
for the purpose of hanging, its testing etc. is provided in Paragraph 866.
 Paragraph 866 Description and testing of rope. - (1) A  Manilla  rope  one  inch  in
diameter shall be used for executions.  At least two such ropes in serviceable condition
shall be maintained at every jail where executions are liable to take place.
Note - The rope should be 19 feet in length, well twisted, and fully stretched.  It should
be of equal thickness, capable of passing readily through the noose-ring and sufficiently
strong to bear a strain of 280 lbs. with a 7 foot drop.
(2) The ropes shall be tested in the presence of Superintendent, at least a
week before the date fixed for the execution and if they fail to pass the test,
others shall be obtained at once and tested when received.
(3) Ropes that have been tested shall be locked up in a place of safety.
(4) On the evening before the execution is to take place, the gallows and rope
should be examined to ascertain that they have received no injury since
being tested.
Note - The rope shall be tested by attaching to one end a sack of sand or clay equal
to one and a half times the weight of the prisoner to be executed and dropping this
weight the distance of the drop to be given to the prisoner. 
The above provision provides for the testing of the rope to be used for the
execution at two occasions firstly at least before a week form the date of the execution
and secondly on the evening before such execution is to take place. It provides for the
maintaining at least two Manilla ropes of one inch diameter in serviceable condition. The
27

method for testing such rope is by attaching the sack of clay or sand to one end which is
equivalent to one and half times of the weight of such prisoner. The length of the drop to
be kept same as required for the condemned prisoner.
  
The actual execution process with such background of preparations etc. made
has to be carried out in accordance with Paragraphs 868 to 873. It is briefly as follows:-
1. The  officers  required  to  be  present  at  the  execution  are,  The
Superintendent and Medical officer of the jail and Magistrate of the District
or a first class Magistrate deputed by him. (Paragraph 867)
2. The execution is to be carried out by the public executioner, whenever
service  of  such  executioner  are  available.   If  such  services  are  not
available then some trustworthy individual who is locally trained is to be
assigned this job. The duty is entrusted to the Superintendent to satisfy
himself  that  the  person  so  assigned  is  competent  to  fulfils  the  job.
(Paragraph 868)
3. Regulation of the drop: it is most important factor in deciding the regulation
of the death sentence to be executed. The slightest error in deciding the
length of the drop may lead to the lingering death of the condemned man.
The  drop  is  regulated  according  to  the  height,  weight  and  physical
condition  of the prisoner. The Superintendent may also take the advice of
the  Medical  Officer  in  this  regard.  Paragraph  871  provides  for  the
comparative chart for general guidance of the Superintendent as follows:-
Paragraph 871.  Regulation of the "drop" -  The following scale of drop proportioned
to the weight of the prisoner, is given for general guidance, the Superintendent must
28

use his discretion and be guided by the advice of the Medical Officer and the physical
condition of the prisoner :-
For a prisoner under 100 lbs weight 7 
For a prisoner under 120 lbs weight 6.
For a prisoner under 140 lbs weight 5- 1/2. 
For a prisoner under 160 lbs weight 5.
Note: The last figures namely 7, 6, 5-1/2, 5 denote the height of the drop in terms
of feet. 
Note:- The "drop" is the length of the rope from a point on the rope
opposite the angle of the lower jaw of the criminal as he stands on the scaffold,
to the point where the rope is embraced in the noose after allowing for the
constriction of the neck that takes place in hanging. 
Time of the execution: The time of the execution is provided in the early hours
of  the  day.  However  the  time  varies  as  per  the  chart  in  the  Paragraph  872.
Paragraph 872. Time of executions.  Procedure to be adopted - (1) Executions
shall take place at the following hours:-
November to February 8 AM
March, April, September and October 7 AM
May to August 6 AM
 
4. The Superintendent, Deputy Superintendent will reach to the cell of the
condemned prisoner and will ensure that the identity of such condemned
prisoner. The warrant of death will be read over to him and the signatures
required on the various documents such as will etc. may be placed by the
29

prisoner in the presence of the Superintendent. Then the Superintendent
will  move  towards  the  scaffold.  In  the  presence  of  the  Deputy
Superintendent the convict will be pinioned behind his back and his legs
irons (if any) will be struck off.
5. Marching towards death: The condemned prisoner shall be marched to the
scaffold  under  the  charge  of  the  Deputy  Superintendent.  He  will  be
guarded by Head warder and six warders, two proceeding in front, two
behind and one holding either arm. 
6. After  reaching  at  the  scaffold  {where  the  Superintendent,  District
Magistrate, Medical Officer already at their respective places} the warrant
should be read in the vernacular to the convict and he be made over to the
executioner.
7. The  warders holding  the arm  of  the convict also  shall also  mount  the
scaffold with the convict and place him under the direct beam to which rope
is attached.
8. The executioner shall next strap his legs tightly together, place the cap
over his head and face and adjust the rope tightly around his neck. The
noose should be placed one and half inches to the right or left of the
middle line and free from the flap of the cap.
9. The warders holding the condemned man’s arms to withdraw at that time
and at the signal from the Superintendent the executioner shall draw the
bolt.   
10. The body of such condemned prisoner should remain suspended half an
hour and shall not be taken down till the medical officer declares the life
extinct.  The  Superintendent  is  required  to  return  the  warrant  with  the
endorsement to the effect that the sentence has been carried out.
30

Executions  in  Accordance  with  Army Act, Air Force  Act and
Navy Act
The Army Act and Air Force Act also provide for the execution of the death
sentence. The procedure of execution of death sentence are though not explained in
details but the relevant provisions as has been mentioned in this Report are important
from the view of provisions pertaining to the confirmation and revision petition too. The
various provisions under these Acts can be stated here as under, 
 
The Air Force Act, 1950
The Air Force Act, 1950 also provides for the awarding of the death sentence
and its executions relating to some offences provided there under3 explained in detail. 
The Death Sentence as provided under The Air Force Act, 1950 will be relevant
for the purpose of studying the execution of the death penalty awarded according to the
provisions  of  the  Act.  Section  34  of  the  Act  provides  for  the  various  offences
contemplated for which the death penalty can be awarded. It provides as,
“...shall, on the conviction by court-martial, be liable to suffer death or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned”.
This section empowers the court martial to award the death sentence for the
offences  mentioned  in  section  34  (a)  to  (o)  of  The  Air  Force  Act,  1950.  These
punishments however are subject  to provisions as enunciated in Chapter XII which
3 Chapter VI of The Air Force Act, 1950 in Section 34 provides for the offences in relation to the enemy
and punishable with death, Section 37 is on mutiny and provides for the infliction of death sentence in case
the accused is convicted. Chapter VII provides for the various punishments and the competent court-
martials to pass it, section 73 provides for the punishments awardable by Court martial. Chapter XII
provides  for  the  Confirmation  and  Revision  provisions.  Chapter  XIII  provides  for  the  Execution  of
Sentences, section 163 deals with the form of the sentence of Death.  
31

contains  procedure  for  the  Confirmation  and  Revision  provisions.  The  provision  in
Chapter XIII provide for the Execution of sentences.
SECTION 163 provides for the form of the sentence of death as:-
“In awarding a sentence of death, a court-martial shall, in its discretion, direct
that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead or
shall suffer death by being shot to death”. 
This provides for the discretion of the Court Martial to either provide for the
execution of the death sentence by hanging or by being shot to death. This section
provides for the procedure and method in which death sentence is to be carried out in
accordance with the provisions under the Act. It is important to note that The Air Force
Act, 1950 provides for the execution of the death by being “shot to death.”  This method
though not being prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, is provided in The
Air Force Act, 1950 for the execution of  the Death sentence.  This means that the
execution procedure in India also permits the execution of the Death sentence up to
certain extent  by another  method  namely by being shot to  death.  This  is with the
objective to provide for the easy simple method of the execution in case of the convicted
offender of the offences mentioned in the Act4.
It is worth mentioning that unless the punishment is confirmed by the concerned
authorities under the Act5 convict will not be executed. The Act provides for the findings
and the order to be confirmed by the Central Government or any officer empowered by
the same in this behalf6. This provides for the mandatory review of the all the decisions
of the Court Martial by the Central Government. This enables the Central Government to
scrutinize the irregularity pertaining to the procedure or the finding of the Court Martial.  
4 Section 34 (a) to (o) of The Air Force Act, 1950. 5 Chapter XII of The Air Force Act, 1950. 6 Section 153 of The Air Force Act, 1950 
32

The Army Act, 1950, The Navy Act 1957 also provide for similar provisions like
The Air Force Act, 1950.  The provisions of The Army Act, 1950, The Navy Act 1957
are similar in nature to that of in The Air Force Act, 1950 providing for the option of the
execution of the death penalty by being shot at death7. 
After referring to these relevant provisions in these Acts inference can be drawn
that the method of shooting as one of the methods provided for execution of the death
penalty under the Act aims to make it simple and easy to be executed with the weapons
and equipments available with these forces. The form of shooting a condemned man
necessarily involves less agony as compared to that in the case of the hanging in which
there is an elaborate procedure as to weighting, measuring of the height, etc. in order to
determine the length of the drop specific restrictions are also put as to wearing certain
kinds of apparels, etc. 
It may be pointed out here that during the Nuremberg trials after the Second
World  War  executions,  the  members  of  the  German  High  Command  who  were
condemned to death opted for the execution of the death sentence by being shot to
death  as against  the method  of  hanging.  They wanted  soldiers'  death by shooting
instead of the degrading death by hanging. This is sufficient to objectively assert that the
execution by being shot to death is simpler and less painful to the hanging by neck till
death. The practice of this method both in various developing and developed countries
is apparently because this method is simple, easy to execute and less painful. 
7 The provisions relating to awarding the Death penalty in The Army Act, 1950 are enunciated in Chapter
VI Section 34 (a) to (l) relates to offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death, Section 37
deals with Mutiny and provides for the infliction of death sentence in case the accused is convicted. Chapter
VII pertains to Punishments awardable by Court Martial, Chapter XII is on Confirmation and Revision,
Chapter XIII is on Execution of Sentences, Section 166 deals with form of Sentence of Death. Section 147
of The Navy Act 1957 provides for the Form of  Death Sentence.   
33

CHAPTER 5
MODE OF EXECUTION  OF DEATH SENTENCE
The  Commission  in  this  background  proposes  to  comparatively  analyse
various modes of execution of death sentence and suggest the most humane, least
painful mode, with no mutilation of body and easy to execute. This chapter aims at a
comparative analysis of the  Hanging, Intravenous Lethal Injection and Shooting.
This analysis is founded on some basic and  widely accepted norms. These are drawn
from the cases decided by Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, findings of the Commissions
and resolutions adopted by the United Nations Economic and Social Council(ECOSOC
resolution as to standards and safeguards guaranteeing protection of the rights of those
facing the death penalty viz;  Economic and Social Council Resolution 1984/50, annex.
General Assembly Resolution 29 / 118, 1984.). 
The test laid down in Deena v. Union of India (1983)4 SCC 645 provides that
the execution of death punishment should satisfy the threefold test viz;
1. It should be quick and simple as possible, the act of execution should be as quick and
simple as possible and free from anything that unnecessarily sharpens the poignancy of
the prisoner's apprehension. 
2. The act of the execution should produce immediate unconsciousness of the person
passing quickly into the death 
3. It should be decent. 
4. It should not involve mutilation.
The  ECOSOC  describes  one  of  the  important  standards  and  safeguards
against the death penalty and this is enunciated in safeguard No.9 as,
34

“Where  capital  punishment  occurs  it  shall  be  carried  out  so  as  to  inflict
minimum possible suffering.”
 The execution of the death sentence by hanging by rope has to be judged with
reference to the objective factors such as the international standards or norms or the
climate of the international opinion, modern penological theories and evolving standards
of human decency. The standard of human decency with reference to death punishment
is required to be judged with reference to various aspects which  vary from society to
society depending on the cultural and spiritual tradition of the society, its history and
philosophy and its sense of moral and ethical values. To take an example, if a sentence
of cutting off the arm for the offence of theft or a sentence of stoning to death for the
offence of adultery were prescribed by law, as practiced in South Africa, there can be no
doubt that such punishment would be condemned as barbaric and cruel in our country,
even though it may be regarded as proportionate to the offence and hence reasonable
and just in some other countries. So also the standards of human decency vary from
time to time even with in the same society. In an evolutionary society, the standards of
human decency are progressively evolving to higher levels and what was regarded as
legitimate and reasonable punishment proportionate to the offence at one time, may
now according to the evolving standards of human decency, be regarded as barbaric
and inhuman punishment wholly disproportionate to the offence.
It may be observed that even when a dog is to be killed, shooting it is no
longer a norm but it is killed by intravenous injection.  Therefore the question arises as
to why man should be executed through archaic method of extinguishing a life?
35

In light of the above safeguards and views, it is important to note here the
view taken by Justice Bhagwati (in dissenting Judgment) in  Bachan Singh v.
State of Punjab (1982) 3 SCC 25).  The said view is as follows:-
“29. The physical pain and suffering which the execution of the sentence
of death involves is also no less cruel and inhuman. In India, the method
of execution followed is hanging by the rope. Electrocution or application
of  lethal gas has not  yet taken  its place  as in some of  the western
countries. It is, therefore, with reference to execution by hanging that I
must consider whether the sentence of death  is barbaric and inhuman as
entailing  physical pain  and agony.  It  is no doubt  true  that  the Royal
Commission on Capital Punishment 1949-53 found that hanging is the
most humane method of execution and so also in Ichikawa v. Japan
(Vide David Pannick on Judicial Review of Death Penalty, p. 73), the
Japanese  Supreme  Court  held  that  execution  by  hanging  does  not
correspond to 'cruel punishment' inhibited by Article 36 of the Japanese
Constitution. But whether amongst all the methods of execution, hanging
is the most humane or in the view of the Japanese Supreme Court,
hanging is not cruel punishment within the meaning of Article 36, one
thing  is  clear  that  hanging  is  undoubtedly  accompanied  by  intense
physical torture and pain. Warden Duffy of San Quentin, a high security
prison in the United States of America, describes the hanging process
with brutal frankness in lurid details : 
The  day  before  an  execution  the  prisoner  goes  through  a
harrowing experience of being weighed, measured for length of
36

drop to assure breaking of the neck, the size of the neck, body
measurements et cetera. When the trap springs he dangles at the
end of the rope. There are times when the neck has not been
broken and the prisoner strangles to death. His eyes pop almost
out of his head, his tongue swells and protrudes from his mouth,
his neck may be broken, and the rope many times takes large
portions of skin and flesh from the side of the face that the noose
is on. He urinates, he defecates, and droppings fall to the floor
while witnesses look on, and at almost all executions one or more
faint or have to be helped out of the witness-room. The prisoner
remains dangling from the end of the rope from 8 to 14 minutes
before the doctor, who has climbed up a small ladder and listens
to  his heartbeat  with  a stethoscope,  pronounces  him  dead.  A
prison guard stands at the feet of the hanged person and holds
the body steady, because during the first few minutes there is
usually considerable struggling in an effort to breathe. 
          If the drop is too short, there will be a slow and agonising
death by   strangulation. On the other hand, if the drop is too long,
the head will be torn off. In England centuries of practice have
produced a detailed chart relating a man's weight and physical
condition to the proper length of drop, but even there mistakes
have been made. In 1927, a surgeon who witnessed a double
execution wrote : 
37

The bodies were cut down after fifteen minutes and placed in an
antechamber, when I was horrified to hear one of the supposed
corpses  give  a  gasp  and  find  him  making  respiratory  efforts,
evidently  a  prelude  to  revival.  The  two  bodies  were  quickly
suspended again for a quarter of an hour longer.... Dislocation of
the neck is the ideal aimed at, but, out of all my post-mortem
findings,  that  has  proved  rather  an  exception,  which  in  the
majority of instances the cause of death was strangulation and
asphyxia. 
These passages clearly establish beyond doubt that the execution of
sentence of death by hanging does involve intense physical pain and suffering,
though it may be regarded by some as more humane than electrocution or
application of lethal gas."
These observations of Bhagwati, J., are clear in light of the fact that most of
the developed as well as developing countries have replaced the mode of execution by
hanging by the modes of intravenous lethal injection or by shooting. The description of
these methods of executions prove that the death penalty by hanging  involves immense
pain and suffering. It is with these views and the observations made in relation to the
various other modes of execution that the lethal injection becomes acceptable as the
most humane method of execution of the death sentence. This mode involves less pain
and suffering to the convict undergoing the death sentence. The death as a result of the
hanging in most of the cases is because of the asphyxia or strangulation which causes
the lingering and painful death of the condemned person. We may here again quote
from justice Bhagwati's (supra) judgment:
38

"30. If this be the true mental and physical effect of death sentence on the
condemned prisoner and if it causes such mental anguish, psychological strain
and physical agony and suffering, it is difficult to see how it can be regarded as
anything  but  cruel  and  inhuman.  The  only  answer  which  can  be  given  for
justifying  this infliction  of  mental  and physical pain and suffering  is that the
condemned prisoner having killed a human being does not merit any sympathy
and must suffer this punishment because he 'deserves' it. No mercy can be
shown to one who did not show any mercy to others. But, as I shall presently
point out, this justificatory reason cannot commend itself to any civilized society
because it is based on the theory of retribution or retaliation and at the bottom of
it lies the desire of the society to avenge itself against the wrong-doer. That is
not a permissible penological goal." 
It is important to state here that the Law Commission of India is aware that the
views expressed by the learned judge in the above mentioned case are not a result of
any special bias as is clear from what is stated in the Para 38 of the judgment:
"I may make it clear that the question to which I am addressing myself is only
in regard to the proportionality of death sentence to the offence of murder and
nothing that I say here may be taken as an expression of opinion on the question
whether a sentence of death can be said to be proportionate to the offence of
treason or any other offence involving the security of the State."
It is also important to mention here the viewpoint adopted by the Supreme
Court in the case of  Deena v. Union of India, 1983 (4) S.C.C. 645 with regard to the
lethal injection based on the information  and practice of  the use of  lethal injection
prevalent more than two decades ago. It was observed as follows,
"76. What remains now to consider is the system of lethal injection.
The Royal Commission has discussed that method in paragraphs 735 to 749 of
39

its Report.  Lethal injection is by and large an untried method. But that is not its
most serious defect. The injection is required to be administered intravenously,
which is a delicate and skilled operation. The Prison Medical Officers who were
interviewed by the Royal Commission, doubted whether the system of lethal
injection was more humane than hanging (see paragraph 739 of the Report).
The British Medical Association told the Commission that no medical practitioner
should be asked to take part in bringing about the death of a convicted murderer
and that the Association would be most strongly opposed to any proposal to
introduce a method of execution which would require the services of a medical
practitioner, either in carrying out the actual process of killing or in instructing
others  in  the  technique  of  that  process.  The  Commission  expressed  its
conclusions in paragraph 749 by saying that it could not recommend that, in the
present circumstances, lethal injection should be substituted for hanging since
they were not satisfied that executions carried out by the administration of lethal
injections would bring about death more quickly, painlessly and decently in all
cases.  The  Commission,  however,  recommended,  unanimously  and
emphatically, that the question should be periodically examined, specially in the
light of the progress made in the science of anaesthetics.8"
This was also, as mentioned earlier, the opinion of the Law Commission of
India expressed in its 35th Report of 1967.
In  light  of  these  observations  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  process  of
administering  lethal injection is not regarded as a practice of medicine and most of the
states in the U.S.A. are  able to overcome this issue and outside the scope of medical
ethics. One of the solutions to this problem is to train persons having  knowledge of the
8 .This issue from Law Commission's 35th Report On Capital Punishment 1967 has been already been dealt
in the introduction to this report.
40

medicine and related field specifically for this purpose, and to see that such persons are
designated by the appropriate authority in this behalf (similar practice adopted in various
States of U.S.A. e.g.  New Jersey, Montana, Idaho etc.). 
New Jersey
Doctors are however, excluded in the New Jersey statute from administering the
lethal  dose.   The  statute  provides  that  the  Commissioner  of  Department  of
Corrections, " shall designate persons who are qualified to administer injections and
who are familiar with medical procedure other than licensed physician …….  To
assist in carrying out of executions, but the procedure and equipments shall be
designed  to  ensure  that  the  identity  of  the  person  actually  inflicting  the  lethal
substance is unknown even to the person himself…….. N.J. Statute Ann.# 2C; 49-2
Montana
In Montana doctors are not prohibited from carrying out executions according to the
statute, "An execution  carried out by lethal injection must be performed by person
selected  by  warden  and  trained  to  administer  the  injection.   The  person
administering  the  injection  need  not  be physician,  registered  nurse,  or  licensed
practical nurse or registered under the laws of this or any other state…..
Idaho
In Idaho State prescribes that any infliction of punishment of death by administration
of the required lethal substance or substances in the manner required by this section
should not be construed to be practice of medicine.
It may be mentioned here that in  Deena's  case  (supra) the Supreme Court
upheld the constitutional validity of Section 354(5) of Code of Criminal Procedure of
1973 for carrying out of death sentence by hanging by neck till he is dead as the best
available method in India as compared to electric chair, shooting or lethal injection.  As
mentioned earlier by reference to the Punjab and Haryana Jail Manual, the procedure of
hanging starts a day earlier as the condemned person is weighed. Furthermore, his
hands and legs are tied and the black mask is put on his head before he is hanged.
This  causes further punishment although  the judgment  holds that no further  agony
41

should be caused.  It may be noted that hands and legs are tied and the mask is kept
not for the benefit of the condemned person but for the benefit of people who are
present for carrying out the death punishment by hanging as they cannot bear the last
sight of restlessness of the condemned person. Furthermore, because many times,
tongue and eyes  protrude, a black mask is placed on the convict’s head.  As the person
is kept hanging and as there is no provision for postmortem, it is not known whether
death was caused by painful strangulation or instantaneously by breaking of the spinal
cord.
It may also be mentioned that the Supreme Court observed that method of
shooting to death was practiced in dictatorships.  But this is not fully correct.  In fact the
Army, Navy and Air Force Acts in India give discretion to the Court Martial tribunal to
hold that the condemned person be hanged to death or be shot to death, as mentioned
earlier.  It may be further noticed that since hanging has been given up in several states
in the United States of America and has been substituted by electrocution, or lethal
injection. In thirty four States, the execution is carried by lethal injection. These methods
are adopted as they are more civilized and hanging has been abolished by most of
these states in the U.S.A
There  is  also  significant  increase  in  the  number  of  countries  which  have
adopted the method of execution by lethal injection and today thirty five States use this
method. 
The following table gives comparative analysis of different modes of executing
death sentence:
Hanging  By  Neck
Till Death
Shooting  Intravenous  Lethal
Injection 
1. Simple to execute 1.Simple to execute 1. Simple to execute
42

2. Execution process takes
more  than  40  minutes  to
declare prisoner to be dead
2. Execution process takes
not more than few  minutes
to  declare  prisoner  to  be
dead
2. Execution process takes
5  to  9  minutes  to  declare
prisoner to be dead
3.  Less  scientific
equipments are required.
3.  Less  scientific
equipments are required.
3.  More  scientific
equipments  are  required,
they are easily available.
4.  Uncertainty  as  to  time
required for the prisoner to
become unconscious
4. Instant death. 4.  Unconsciousness  takes
place immediately after the
application  of  anaesthesia
and dies in sleep. 
5.  May  cause  lingering
death
5. Instant death 5. Not a lingering death.
6.  Most  of  the  time  may
involve enormous pain
6.  Pain  may  hardly  be
involved.
6.Pain  only  as  result  of
needle prick. 
7. Has been abandoned by
most  of  the  countries
considering  it  not  to  be  a
civilized mode
7.  Most  of  the  countries
provide  for  the  option  of
either  lethal  injection  or
shooting.
7. It is being accepted now
to be most civilized mode of
execution  of  death
sentence.
8. Mutilation involved. 8. Mutilation involved. 8. No mutilation involved..
9. Not a controlled way of
execution.  It  depends  on
various factors.
9. It is always under control
and  does  not  depend  on
the  factors  like  physique
etc. of the convict.
9. It  is the best controlled
way of execution. 
10. Not generally swift 10. It is comparatively swift
and painless
10.  It  is  the  painless  and
swift method of execution.
43

   CHAPTER 6  
RIGHT OF APPEAL TO THE APEX COURT IN CASES
WHERE DEATH SENTENCE HAS BEEN AFFIRMED OR
AWARDED BY THE HIGH COURT AND THE PROCEDURE IN THE
APEX COURT RELATING TO  PASSING OF DEATH SENTENCE
After examining this issue of the appropriate mode of execution, what
remains to be examined is the process of the confirming the death penalty applicable to
Courts or other authorities. 
As has been provided in ECOSOC resolution as to safeguard No. 6 as,
" Anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to appeal to a court of higher
jurisdiction and steps should be taken to ensure that such appeals shall become
mandatory"
The similar view has also been expressed by Justice Bhagwati, in Para 82 in
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab (supra)  of dissenting  judgment as,
"82. Before I part with this topic I may point out that the only way in which the
vice of arbitrariness in the imposition of death penalty can be removed is by the
law providing that in every case where the death sentence is confirmed by the
High Court there shall be an automatic review of the death sentence by the
Supreme Court sitting as a whole and the death sentence shall not be affirmed
or imposed by the Supreme Court unless it is approved unanimously by the
entire  court  sitting  en  banc  and  the  only exceptional  cases  in  which  death
44

sentence may be affirmed or imposed should be legislatively limited to those
where the offender is found to be so depraved that it is not possible to reform
him by any curative or rehabilitative therapy and even after his release he would
be a serious menace to the society and therefore in the interest of the society he
is required to be eliminated. Of course, for reasons I have already discussed
such exceptional cases would be practically nil because it is almost impossible to
predicate  of  any  person  that  he  is  beyond  reformation  or  redemption  and
therefore, from a practical point of view death penalty would be almost non-
existent. But theoretically it may be possible to say that if the State is in a
position to establish positively that the offender is such a social monster that
even  after  suffering  life  imprisonment  and  undergoing  reformative  and
rehabilitative therapy, he can never be claimed for the society, then he may be
awarded  death  penalty.  If  this  test  is  legislatively  adopted  and  applied  by
following the procedure mentioned above, the imposition of death penalty may
be rescued from the vice of arbitrariness and caprice. But that is not so under
the law as it stands today."
The Law Commission is quite aware of the difficulties in formulating standard
guidelines for channelizing  the discretion of the Courts as observed by Mr. Justice
Harlan in McGautha   Vs. California (402 US 183) at Page 3. He observed:
"Those who have come to grips with the hard task of actually attempting to draft
means of channeling capital sentencing discretion have confirmed the lesson
taught by... history... To identify before the fact those characteristics of criminal
homicides and their perpetrators which call for the death penalty, and to express
these characteristics in language which can be fairly understood and applied by
45

the sentencing authority, appear to be tasks which are beyond present human
ability."
 Justice  Bhagwati  in  Bachan  Singh  case (supra)  has  made  the  following
observations pertinent to the arbitrariness involved in awarding the death sentence:-
"70.  Now this conclusion reached by me is not based merely on theoretical or a
priori considerations. On an analysis of decision given over a period of years we
find that in fact there is no uniform pattern of judicial behaviour in the imposition
of  death  penalty  and  the  judicial  practice  does  not  disclose  any  coherent
guidelines for the award of capital punishment. The judges have been awarding
death penalty or refusing to award it according to their own scale of values and
social philosophy and it is not possible to discern any consistent approach to the
problem  in the judicial decisions.  It  is apparent  from  a study of  the  judicial
decisions that some judges are readily and regularly inclined to sustain death
sentences, other are similarly disinclined and the remaining waver from case to
case. Even in the Supreme Court there are divergent attitudes and opinions in
regard to the imposition of  capital punishment.  If  a case comes before one
Bench  consisting  of  Judges  who  believe  in  the  social  efficacy  of  capital
punishment, the death sentence would in all probability be confirmed but if the
same case comes before another Bench consisting of Judges who are morally
and ethically against the death penalty, the death sentence would most likely be
commuted to life imprisonment. The former would find and I say this not in any
derogatory or disparaging sense, but as a consequence of psychological and
attitudinal factors operating on the minds of the Judges constituting the Bench -
46

'special reasons' in the case to justify award of death penalty while the latter
would reject any such reasons as special reasons. It is also quite possible that
one Bench may, having regard to its perceptions, think that there are special
reasons in the case for which death penalty should be awarded while another
Bench may bona fide and conscientiously take a different view and hold that
there are no special reasons and that only life sentence should be imposed and
it may not be possible to assert objectively and logically as to who is right and
who is wrong, because the exercise of discretion in a case of this kind, where no
broad standards or guidelines are supplied by the legislature, is bound to be
influenced by the subjective attitude and approach of the judges constituting the
Bench, their value system, the individual tone of their mind, the color of their
experience  and  the  character  and  variety  of  their  interests  and  their
predispositions.  This  arbitrariness  in  the  imposition  of  death  penalty  is
considerably accentuated by the fragmented Bench structure of our courts where
Benches  are  inevitably formed  with  different  permutations  and  combinations
from time to time and cases relating  to  the offence of murder come up for
hearing sometimes before one Bench, some times before another sometimes
before a third and so on. Professor Blackshield has in his article on "Capital
Punishment in India" published in Volume 21 of the Journal of the Indian Law
Institute (At pp. 137-226 (Issue of April-June, 1979)) pointed out how the practice
of Bench formation contributes to arbitrariness in the imposition of death penalty.
It is well known that so far as the Supreme Court is concerned, while the number
of Judges has increased over the years, the number of Judges on Benches
which hear capital punishment cases has actually decreased. Most cases are
now heard by two-Judge  Benches.  Professor  Blackshield has  abstracted  70
cases in which the Supreme Court had to choose between life and death while
47

sentencing an accused for the offence of murder and analysing these 70 cases
he has pointed out that during the period April 28, 1972 to March 8, 1976 only 11
Judges of the Supreme Court participated in 10 per cent or more of the cases.
He has listed these 11 Judges in an ascending order of leniency based on the
proportion for each Judge of plus votes (i.e. votes for the death sentence) to total
votes and pointed out that these statistics show how the judicial response to the
question of life and death varies from judge to judge. It is significant to note that
out of 70 cases analysed by Professor Blackshield, 37 related to the period
subsequent to the coming into force of Section 354, sub-section (3) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. If a similar exercise is performed with reference to
cases decided by the Supreme Court after March 8, 1976, that being the date up
to which the survey carried out by Professor Blackshield was limited, the analysis
will reveal the same pattern of incoherence and arbitrariness, the decision to kill
or not to kill being guided to a large extent by the composition of the Bench.
Take  for  example  Rajendra  Prasad  case ((1979)  3  SCC  646)  decided  on
February 9, 1979. In this case, the death sentence imposed on Rajendra Prasad
was commuted to life imprisonment by a majority consisting of Krishna Iyer, J.
and  Desai,  J.,  A.P.  Sen,  J.  dissented  and  was  of  the  view  that  the  death
sentence should be confirmed. Similarly in one of the cases before us, namely,
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab ((1979) 3 SCC 727)  when it was first heard by
a Bench consisting of Kailasam and Sarkaria, JJ., Kailasam, J. was definitely of
the view that the majority decision in Rajendra Prasad case ((1979) 3 SCC 646)
was wrong and that is why he referred that case to the Constitution Bench. So
also  in  Dalbir  Singh v. State  of  Punjab ((1979)  3  SCC  745),  the  majority
consisting of Krishna Iyer, J. and Desai, J. took the view that the death sentence
imposed on Dalbir Singh should be commuted to life imprisonment while A.P.
48

Sen, J. struck to the original view taken by him in Rajendra Prasad case ((1979)
3 SCC 646) and was inclined to confirm the death sentence. It will thus be seen
that the exercise of discretion whether to inflict death penalty or not depends to a
considerable extent on the value system and social philosophy of the Judges
constituting the Bench. 
71. The most striking example of freakishness in imposition of death penalty is
provided by a recent case (Harbans Singh v. State of U.P., (1982) 2 SCC 101),
which  involved  three  accused,  namely,  Jeeta  Singh,  Kashmira  Singh  and
Harbans Singh. These three persons were sentenced to death by the Allahabad
High Court by a judgment and order dated October 20, 1975 for playing an equal
part in jointly murdering a family of four persons. Each of these three persons
preferred a separate petition in the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal
against the common judgment sentencing them all to death penalty. The special
leave petition of Jeeta Singh came up for heating before a Bench consisting of
Chandrachud, J. (as he then was), Krishna Iyer, J. and N.L. Untwalia, J. and it
was dismissed on April 15, 1976. Then came the special leave petition preferred
by Kashmira Singh from jail and this petition was placed for hearing before
another  Bench  consisting  of  Fazal Ali,  J.  and myself.  We  granted  leave to
Kashmira Singh limited to the question of sentence and by an Order dated April
10, 1977 we allowed his appeal and commuted his sentence of death into one of
imprisonment for life. The result was that while Kashmira Singh's death sentence
was commuted to life imprisonment by one Bench, the death sentence imposed
on  Jeeta  Singh  was confirmed  by another  Bench  and he was  executed  on
October 6, 1981, though both had played equal part in the murder of the family
and there was nothing to distinguish the case of one from that of the other. The
49

special leave petition of Harbans Singh then came up for hearing and this time, it
was  still  another  Bench  which  heard  his  special  leave  petition.  The  Bench
consisted of  Sarkaria  and Shinghal,  JJ.  and they rejected the  special  leave
petition  of  Harbans  Singh  on  October  16,  1978.  Harbans  Singh  applied for
review of this decision, but the review petition was dismissed by Sarkaria, J. and
A.P. Sen, J. on May 9, 1980. It appears that though the Registry of this Court
had mentioned in its Office Report that Kashmira Singh's death sentence was
already  commuted,  that  fact  was  not  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Court
specifically when the special leave petition of Harbans Singh and his review
petition were dismissed. Now since his special leave petition as also his review
petition were dismissed by this Court, Harbans Singh would have been executed
on October 6, 1981 along with Jeeta Singh, but fortunately for him he filed a writ
petition in this Court and on that writ petition, the Court passed an Order staying
the execution of his death sentence. When this writ petition came up for hearing
before a still another Bench consisting of Chandrachud, C.J., Desai and A.N.
Sen, JJ., it was pointed out to the Court that the death sentence imposed on
Kashmira Singh had been commuted by a Bench consisting of Fazal Ali, J. and
myself and when this fact was pointed out, the Bench directed that the case be
sent back to the President for reconsideration of the clemency petition filed by
Harbans Singh. This is a classic case which illustrates the judicial vagaries in the
imposition of death penalty and demonstrates vividly, in all its cruel and stark
reality, how the infliction of death penalty is influenced by the composition of the
Bench, even in cases governed by Section 354, sub-section (3) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. The question may well be asked by the accused : Am
I to live or die depending upon the way in which the Benches are constituted
50

from time to time ? Is that not clearly violative of the fundamental guarantees
enshrined in Articles 14 and 21 ? 
72. If we study the judicial decisions given by the courts over a number of years,
we find judges resorting to a wide variety of factors in justification of confirmation
or commutation of death sentence and these factors when analysed fail to reveal
any coherent pattern. This is the inevitable consequence of the failure of the
legislature to supply broad standards or guidelines which would structure and the
channelize the discretion of the court in the matter of imposition of death penalty.
Of course, I may make it clear that when I say this I do not wish to suggest that if
broad  standards  or  guidelines  are  supplied  by  the  legislature,  they  would
necessarily cure death penalty of the vice of arbitrariness or freakishness……..
But whether adequate standards or guidelines can be formulated or not which
would cure the aspects of arbitrariness and capriciousness, the fact remains that
no such standards or guidelines are provided by the legislature in the present
case, with the result that the court has unguided and untrammeled discretion in
choosing  between  death  and  life  imprisonment  as  penalty  for  the  crime  of
murder and this has led to considerable arbitrariness and uncertainty. This is
evident from a study of the decided cases which clearly shows that the reasons
for confirmation or commutation of death sentence relied upon by the Court in
different  cases  defy  coherent  analysis.  Dr.  Raizada has,  in  his  monumental
doctoral study entitled "Trends in sentencing; a Study of the Important Penal
Statutes  and Judicial Pronouncements of  the High Courts and the Supreme
Court" identified a large number of decisions of this Court where inconsistent
awards  of  punishment  have  been  made  and  the  judges  have  frequently
articulated  their  inability to  prescribe  or  follow consistently  any standards  or
51

guidelines. He has classified cases up to 1976 in terms of the reasons given by
the Court for awarding or refusing to award death sentence. The analysis made
by him is quite rewarding and illuminating. 
(i) One of the reasons given by the Courts in a number of cases
for imposing death penalty is that the murder is 'brutal', 'cold-
blooded',  'deliberate',  'unprovoked',  'fatal',  'gruesome',  'wicked',
'callous',  'heinous'  or  'violent'.  But  the use  of  these  labels  for
describing the nature of the murder is indicative only of the degree
of  the  Court's  aversion  for  the  nature  or  the  manner  of
commission of the crime and it is possible that different judges
may  react  differently  to  these  situations  and  moreover,  some
judges may not regard this factor as having any relevance to the
imposition of death penalty and may therefore decline to accord to
it  the  status  of  'special  reasons'.  In fact,  there  are  numerous
cases, where despite the murder being one falling within these
categories, the Court has refused to award death sentence. For
example, Janardharan whose appeal was decided along with the
appeal  of  Rajendra  Prasad  had  killed  his  innocent  wife  and
children in the secrecy of night and the murder was deliberate and
cold-blooded, attended as it was with considerable brutality, and
yet  the  majority  consisting  of  Krishna  Iyer,  J.  and  Desai,  J.
commuted his death sentence to life imprisonment. So also Dube
had  committed  triple  murder  and  still  his death  sentence  was
commuted to life imprisonment by the same two learned Judges,
namely, Krishna Iyer, J. and Desai, J. It is, therefore, clear that
52

the epithets mentioned above do not indicate any clear-cut well-
defined categories but are merely expressive of the intensity of
judicial reaction to the murder, which may not be uniform in all
judges and even if the murder falls within one of these categories,
that factor has been regarded by some judges as relevant and by
others, as irrelevant and it has not been uniformly applied as a
salient factor in determining whether or not death penalty should
be imposed. 
(ii)  There  have  been  cases  where  death  sentence  has  been
awarded on the basis of constructive or joint liability arising under
Sections 34 and 149 (vide Babu v. State of U.P. (1965) 2 SCR
771),  Mukhtiar  Singh  v. State  of  Punjab ((1972)  4 SCC 843),
Masalti v. State of U.P. ((1964)8SCR 133), and Gurcharan Singh
v. State of Punjab  ((1963) 3 SCR 585). But, there are equally a
large  number  of  cases  where  death  sentence  has  not  been
awarded because the criminal liability of the accused was only
under Section 34 or Section 149. There are no established criteria
for awarding or refusing to award death sentence to an accused
who himself did not give the fatal blow but was involved in the
commission of murder along with other assailants under Section
34 or Section 149. 
(iii) The  position as regards  mitigating  factors  also  shows the
same incoherence. One mitigating factor which has often been
relied upon for the purpose of commuting the death sentence to
53

life imprisonment is the youth of the offender. But this too has
been quite arbitrarily applied by the Supreme Court. There are
cases such as State of U.P. v. Samman Dass  ((1972) 3 SCC
201), Raghubir Singh v. State of Haryana ((1975) 3 SCC 37) and
Gurudas Singh v. State of Rajasthan ((1975) 4 SCC 490) where
the  Supreme  Court  took  into  account  the  young  age  of  the
appellant and refused to award death sentence to him. Equally
there are cases such as Bhagwan Swarup v. State of U.P. ((1971)
3 SCC 759) and Ragho Mani v. State of U.P. ((1976) 4 SCC 297)
where the Supreme Court took the view that youth is no ground
for extenuation of sentence. Moreover there is also divergence of
opinion as to what should be the age at which an offender may be
regarded as a young man deserving of commutation. The result is
that  as pointed out  by Dr.  Raizada, in some situations  young
offenders who have committed multiple murders get reduction in
life sentence whereas in others, "where neither the loss of as
many human lives nor of higher valued property" is involved, the
accused are awarded death sentence. 
(iv) One other mitigating factor which is often taken into account is
delay  in  final  sentencing.  This  factor  of  delay  after  sentence
received  great  emphasis  in  Ediga  Anamma  v.  State  of  A.P.
((1974) 4 SCC 443), Chawla v. State of Haryana ((1974) 4 SCC
579), Raghubir Singh v. State of Haryana ((1975) 3 SCC 37),
Bhoor Singh v. State of Punjab ((1974) 4 SCC 754), State of
Punjab v. Hari Singh ((1974) 4 SCC 552) and Gurudas Singh v.
54

State of Rajasthan  ((1975) 4 SCC 490) and in these cases delay
was taken into account for the purpose of awarding the lesser
punishment  of  life imprisonment.  In  fact,  in Raghubir Singh  v.
State of Haryana ((1975) 3 SCC 37) the fact that for 20 months
the spectre of death penalty must have been tormenting his soul
was held sufficient to entitle the accused to reduction in sentence.
But  equally  there  are  a  large  number  of  cases  where  death
sentences have been confirmed, even when two or more years
were taken in finally disposing of the appeal (vide Rishideo Pande
v. State of U.P. (AIR 1955 SC 331), Bharwad Mepa Dana v. State
of  Bombay ((1960) 2 SCR 172) and other cases given by Dr.
Raizada in foot-note 186 to Chapter III). These decided cases
show  that  there  is  no  way  of  predicting  the  exact  period  of
prolonged  proceeding  which may favour  an accused.  Whether
any importance should be given to the factor of delay and if so to
what extent are matters entirely within the discretion of the Court
and  it  is  not  possible  to  assert  with any  definitiveness  that  a
particular  period  of  delay  after  sentencing  will  earn  for  the
accused immunity from death penalty. It follows as a necessary
corollary from these vagaries in sentencing arising from the factor
of delay, that the imposition of capital punishments becomes more
or less a kind of cruel judicial lottery. If the case of the accused is
handled  expeditiously  by  the  prosecution,  defense  lawyer,
Sessions Court,  High  Court  and  the Supreme  Court  then this
mitigating factor of delay is not available to him for reduction to life
sentence. If, on the other hand, there has been lack of dispatch,
55

engineered or natural, then the accused may escape the gallows,
subject  of  course  to  the  judicial  vagaries  arising  from  other
causes. In other words, the more efficient the proceeding, the
more certain the death sentence and vice versa. 
(v) The embroilment of the accused in an immoral relationship has
been condoned and, in effect, treated as an extenuating factor in
Raghubir  Singh  v.  State  of  Haryana  ((1975)  3  SCC  37)  and
Vasant Laxman More v. State of Maharashtra ((1974) 4 SCC 778)
while in Lajar Masih v. State of U.P.  ((1976) 1 SCC 806), it has
been condemned and in effect treated as an aggravating factor.
There is thus no uniformity of approach even so far as this factor
is concerned. 
73. All these factors singly and cumulatively indicate not merely that there is an
enormous potential of arbitrary award of death penalty by the High Courts and
the  Supreme  Court  but  that,  in  fact,  death  sentences  have  been  awarded
arbitrarily  and  freakishly  (vide  Dr.  Upendra  Baxi's  note  on  "Arbitrariness  of
Judicial Imposition of Capital Punishment"). 
We  may have referred to the fact that where death punishment is given by
General Court Martial consisting of five officers, it can be given only if there is two-third
majority and not simple majority.  
Right of appeal to Supreme  Court
56

There are many provisions in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, which
enable the High Court to award or confirm the death sentence.  Under section 368 of
the Code, a  High Court can confirm the death sentence passed by the Court of
Session.  High Court can withdraw a case pending before a subordinate court and
can try itself and can pass death sentence (section 407, Cr.PC).     High Court  on
appeal against an order of acquittal passed by a Court of Session, can convict a
person and pass sentence of death (section 386(a), Cr.PC).  Apart from this, High
Court while exercising power of enhancing the sentence can award the sentence of
death (section 386(c ), Cr.PC)   But as of now appeal to the Supreme Court cannot
be filed  as of right in all the cases where the High Court has passed the death
sentence.  
In the following cases where the High Court passes a sentence of death, appeal to
the Supreme Court can be filed as of right:-
i) where High Court convicts a person on a trial held by it in  its extra ordinary
criminal jurisdiction.  (Section 374(1), Cr.PC)  
ii) where High Court has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court
subordinate to it and in such trial convicts the accused person and sentence
him to death. (Art. 134(1)(b) of the Constitution of India).
iii) Where High Court on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused
person  and  sentence  him  to  death.   (Art.134(1)(a),  of  the  Constitution,
section  2  of  the  Supreme  Court  (Enlargement  of  Criminal  Appellate
Jurisdiction) Act, 1970, and sec. 379 of the Cr.PC.
iv) Right to appeal to the Supreme Court is also provided where the High Court
on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentence
him to imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of 10 years or more.
(Section 379 of the Cr.PC and Sec.2 of the aforesaid Act of 1970).
However, in the following cases, a person against whom death sentence is passed
or confirmed by the High Court, no appeal to the Supreme Court as of right is
provided:-
57

i) where the High Court under section 368 of the Cr.PC confirms the sentence
of death awarded by the Court of Session, no appeal as of right may be
preferred to  the Supreme Court.  In this regard following finding of the full
bench of the Madras High Court made in  K Govindswamy vs. Govt. of
India, A.I.R. Mad. 204 (1990 Cr.LJ 1326) is also relevant,
“Hence, as against an order of confirmation of death sentence passed
under section 368 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 there is and
there can be no further right of first appeal on facts to the Supreme
Court, unless the High Court in exercise its power under Article 134(1)
(c )  grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, or, the Supreme  Court
grant special leave under Art.136(1) of the Constitution for an appeal
being preferred”.
In Chandra Mohan Tiwari vs. State of MP, AIR 1992 SC 891, the Supreme
Court has held that, in cases which are not covered by Art. 134(1)(a) and (b)
or  section  2(a)  and (b)  of  the Supreme  Court  (Enlargement  of  Criminal
Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 or by section 379 of the Cr.PC, appeal in
the Supreme Court will lie only either on a certificate granted by the High
Court under Article 134(1)(c) or by grant of Special Leave to appeal by the
Supreme Court under Art. 136 of the Constitution of India.  
That means that a person whose sentence of death awarded by the Court of
Session  is  confirmed  by  the  High  Court,  no  appeal  as  of  right  can  be
preferred to the Supreme Court.  
ii) As per section 377 of the Cr.PC, the State Govt. or the Central Govt. as the
case may be, may direct the public prosecutor to present an appeal to the
High Court against the sentence passed by a trial court on the ground of
inadequacy.  The High Court may enhance the sentence to a sentence of
death after giving an opportunity of hearing to the convict.  (Sec.386(c) (iii),
Cr.PC).
High Court can enhance the sentence passed by a trial court not only where
the State has preferred an appeal against the sentence, but also where no
appeal has been preferred by the State on the ground of  inadequacy of
sentence, in exercise of its suo-motu revisional power vested in it under
section 397 read with section 401 Cr.PC.  The Supreme Court in Nadir Khan
vs. The State (Delhi Admn.), AIR 1976 SC 2205,  has held that High Court
58

while exercising its criminal revisional jurisdiction has power to act suo-motu
to enhance the sentence in appropriate case even in absence of an appeal
against the  adequacy of sentence as provided in section 377 of  the Cr.PC. 
Again  in  Sahib  Singh  vs.  State  of  Haryana,  AIR  1990  SC  1188,  the
Supreme Court has observed that the failure on the part of the State Govt. to
prefer an appeal does not, however, preclude the High Court from exercising
suo-motu power of the revision under section 397 read with section 401 of
the Cr.PC, since High Court itself is empowered to call for the record of
proceedings  of  any  court  subordinate  to  it.   But  before  enhancing  the
sentence the High Court has to give notice and opportunity of hearing on the
question of sentence to the convict, either in person or through counsel.
(see also Surjit Singh vs. State of Punjab, AIR 1984 SC 1910(2)) 
It is evident that High Court can enhance the sentence under its suo-motu
revisional power, even without an appeal filed by the State. But where the
High Court enhances the sentence passed by trial Court and passes even
sentence of death, no appeal, as of right can be preferred in the Supreme
Court against the order of enhancement of sentence.  
As discussed, in both the circumstances mentioned above, no appeal as of
right, to the Supreme Court can be preferred against the judgment of the
High Court where it has awarded the death sentence.  Appeal can only be
filed either when a certificate under Article 134 (1)(c ) of the Constitution of
India has been granted by the High Court that the case is fit one for appeal to
the Supreme Court, or if the Supreme Court itself grants leave to appeal
under Article 136(1) of the Constitution of India.  But as of right no appeal
can be preferred to the Supreme Court in such circumstances.
Death sentence can be passed by a Court Martial constituted under the Army
Act, 1950, Air Force Act, 1950, Navy Act, 1957, and this has to be confirmed
by the Central Government or by other authorities.  But as of now, there is no
provision under which appeal against such order can be filed.  Even special
leave to appeal to Supreme Court against such order of the  Court Martial
does  not  lie  under  Article  136(1)  of  the  Constitution  in  view  of  the  bar
contained under Article 136(2) of the Constitution of India.
59

It may be mentioned that the right of appeal in civil cases was guaranteed till
1979 under pre-amended Article 133 of the Constitution when the pecuniary value of the
subject matter was more than Rs.20,000/-.  Similarly, under the Advocates Act, 1961
right of appeal to the Supreme Court is guaranteed against the decision of the Bar
Council of India as follows:-
"38. Appeal to the Supreme Court -  Any person aggrieved by an order
made by the disciplinary committee of the Bar Council of India under Section
36 or section 37 (or the Attorney-General of India or the Advocate General of
the State concerned, as the case may be) may, within sixty days of the date
on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Supreme
Court  and  the Supreme Court may pass such  order  (including  an order
varying the punishment awarded by the disciplinary committee of the Bar
Council of India) thereon as it deems fit:
Provided that no order of the disciplinary committee of the Bar Council of India
shall be varied by the Supreme court so as to prejudicially affect the person
aggrieved without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. "
So also under the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, the right of appeal is
guaranteed  as follows:-
"116A.  Appeals to Supreme court - (1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme
Court on any question (whether of law or fact) from every order made by High
Court under section 98 or section 99.
60

(2)  Every appeal under this Chapter shall be preferred within a period of thirty
days from the date of the order of the High Court under section 98 or section 99:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry
of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient
cause for not preferring the appeal within such period."
Similarly, under Section 55 of the Monopolies & Restrictive Trade Practices Act,
1969, the right to appeal to the Supreme Court is guaranted as follows:-
"55. Appeals.-- Any person aggrieved by any decision on any question referred
to in clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c)  of section  2A, or any other made by the
Central Government under Chapter III or Chapter IV, or, as the case may be, or
the Commission under section 12A or section 13 or section 36D or section
37,may, within sixty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the
Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)."
If the right of appeal to the Supreme Court is guaranteed in such matters, the
question arises as to why appeal as of right should not be granted against death penalty
imposed by the High Court, when death punishment has more serious consequences
and is qualitatively different from any other punishment and is irreversible and there is
scope for correcting an error. 
Further, the afore quoted observations of Bhagwati J. in  Bachan Singh’s case
(supra) that in every case where the death sentence is confirmed by the High Court
61

there shall be an automatic review of the death sentence by the Supreme Court sitting
as  a  whole and that  the  death  sentence  shall  not  be affirmed  or imposed  by the
Supreme Court unless it is approved unanimously by the entire court sitting en banc, are
apposite here. Accordingly, in the Consultation Paper a specific question was mooted as
to whether in the Supreme Court a Bench of not less than 5 Judges should decide
cases where death punishment has been awarded to invite the views of all concerned.
This requires the Supreme Court Rules to be amended.
There may also be cases of acquittal or sentence of imprisonment for a term or
life  sentence  given  by the  High  Court  against  which the State  may appeal  to  the
Supreme Court.  In  E.K.Chandrasenan v. State of Kerala, AIR 1995 SC 1066, the
Supreme Court held that it can suo-motu enhance the punishment to  death sentence.
There  is therefore also the need to make appropriate provision to deal with situations
where in  case the Supreme Court thinks that the acquittal is wrong and the accused
should be convicted and sentence to death; or it thinks that the sentence for a term or
life sentence is to be enhanced to a death sentence, then the Supreme Court may direct
the case to be placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for being heard by a
Bench of at least five judges.  This also requires the Supreme Court’s rules to be
amended.
62

CHAPTER-7
PROCEEDINGS OF THE SEMINAR AND PUBLIC
RESPONSES TO THE  CONSULTATION PAPER
On 9th of August 2003, the Law Commission of India organized a seminar at
IIPA,  Delhi  on its consultation  paper  (prepared  by Dr.  N.M. Ghatate)  on  “Mode  of
Execution of Death Sentence and Incidental Matters”. It was inaugurated by Shri Arun
Jaitley the Union Minister for Law and Justice.  The Minister stressed upon the need for
a debate on the Mode of Execution of Death Sentence in the light of changing times,
needs and technologies. He emphasized the need to change archaic laws which are of
no relevance now.  He focused on changing the mode of  execution of death sentence
from the existing method by hanging to a more humane mode.     Further, he said that
the debate over abolition of capital punishment was losing its sting as “we have been at
the receiving end of  cross border terrorism”.  Hanging the convict till death takes time
and is a painful process and has become anachronic.   He pointed out that the modes
suggested  by the  Commission  viz.  civilized  methods  resulting  in   instant  death  by
electric chair, or by lethal injection or by firing squad, do need consideration.   He added
“hanging of a condemned prisoner is becoming anachronic and the alternative methods
having some merits have to be debated.”  He assured that the Government  would take
a quick view on the issue after getting the results of the debate.  
After the inauguration ceremony, Dr. N.M. Ghatate, Member, Law Commission,
made  a power point  presentation  showing  the summary  of  the  Consultation Paper
followed by Analysis of Empirical Data collected through the Questionnaire. Responses
63

were received, as summarized below, from Judges of the High Courts and subordinate
courts, lawyers, human rights activists, Judge Advocates General of three services, CBI,
general public etc. The analysis of responses by way of graphical presentation as made
at the Seminar is as follows:-
64

65
Presentation on Consultation on the
mode of Execution of Death Sentence
Dr.N.M.Ghatate
Member Law Commission
Law Commission of India
Analysis of Empirical Data
collected through the
Questionnaire

66
Do you want amendment of section 354(5) of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure which provides "When any person is sentenced to death, the 
sentence shall direct that he be hanged by the neck till he is dead"
89%
11%
Yes
No

67
If you want hanging to remain, do you prefer hanging in Public or in 
Private as a mode of execution
51%49%
Public
Hanging
Hanging in
Jail

68
Should the discretion on the mode of execution be given to the convict?
70%
30% Yes No

69
Should a Right of Appeal to Supreme Court be given ?
83%
17%
Yes No

70
If you consider Death by hanging cruel what alternate method do you 
suggest for execution of death sentence ?
73%
5%
12%
10%
Lethal Injection Shooting by firing squad
Electric Chair Any other mode

71
Should the discretion on the mode of execution be given to the Court ?
38%
62%
Yes No

72
Decision on Death Sentence should it be by 5 Judge Bench of 
Supreme Court ?
99%
1%
Yes No

73
What should be the voting requirement of the Supreme Court Bench 
hearing death sentence cases ?
47%
33%
20%
Simple Majority Two- thirds Majority Rule of Unanimity

74
Lethal Injection Participants Type *
16%
16%
66% 2%
Legal Profession Judges CBI / Armed Forces General Public

75
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Lethal
Injection
Shooting Electric Chair Hanging
Category wise breakup of participants in the 
questionnaire
Legal Profession
Judges
CBI / Armed Forces
General Public
* Figures based on
responses received
only upto 9.8.2003

76


Responses and comments:
(A) Analysis of responses from the Judges
The  Commission  received  responses  from  Judges  of  the  different  High  Court  and
Subordinate courts to the consultation paper issued by the Law Commission.    Analysis
of their comments as follows:-
1) Section 354(5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides that when a
person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall be executed by hanging by neck till he
is dead.  On the question whether this section 354(5) of the Cr.PC is required to be
amended for providing another mode of execution of death sentence, 80% Judges
have responded in favour of amending the section.  It means they  are of the view that
present mode of execution of death sentence should be changed.  Only approx. 19%
Judges are satisfied with present mode of execution of death.  All of  the 80% Judges
who are in favour of amendment of sec. 354(5) have suggested that administering  the
lethal injection should be the other mode of execution of death sentence.  However, 5%
Judges have  suggested that apart from the lethal injection, ‘shooting’ may also  be
prescribed as an  alternative mode of execution of death sentence.  
2) In case another alternative mode of execution of death sentence is provided,
question arises whether discretion should be given to the Judge or to the convict to
77

select  the  mode  of  execution  of  death  sentence?   45%  Judges  have  opined  that
discretion should be given to the convict and 36% Judges are of the view that discretion
should be given to the Judge in choosing the mode of execution of death sentence.  
3) As regards the right of appeal to the Supreme Court, as of now, there is no
provision in law under which a person who has been awarded death sentence which has
been confirmed by the High Court can  as of right prefer an appeal to the Supreme
Court against such sentence of death. 92% Judges have supported the view that there
should be a statutory right to appeal to the  Supreme Court in cases where death
sentence has been confirmed by the High Court.  Only one Judge of a subordinate court
was not in favour of providing such right to appeal to the Supreme Court.
4) In the Supreme Court, the question is  should there be a bench of not less than
five Judges to hear and decide the cases relating to the death sentence?  51% of the
Judges have given their answer in the negative, while 41%  Judges are of the view that
cases relating to the death sentence should be heard and decided by a bench of not
less than five Judges.  Among them, 33% are of the view that the rule of majority should
be applicable.  6%  Judges  are in favour of applying the rule of 2/3rd majority.  3%
Judges have suggested that the rule of unanimity should be applied.
(B) Analysis of the responses from persons other than Judges.
78

The Commission has also received a large number of responses to the consultation
paper from the general public, persons from the legal profession, Doctors, officers of the
Armed Forces and officers of the CBI etc.  Analysis of their comments is as follows:-
1) It is observed that 89% persons are in favour of amendment in section 354
(5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for providing other modes of
execution of death sentence.  However, 11% persons in their responses do
not suggest amendment in section 354(5) of Cr.PC.  73% of among those
who are in favour of providing other modes of execution of death sentence
prefer that administering lethal injection should be an alternative mode of
execution of death sentence.  While 10% prefer using electric chair, 5%
prefer shooting by firing squad as an alternative mode of execution death
sentence.  However, 12% persons suggested other modes of execution of
death sentence.  
2) 51% of among those who are in favour of retaining the present mode of
execution of death sentence i.e. ‘hanging by neck till death’ are of the view
that execution of death sentence by hanging should be done in a public
place.  But 49% persons viewed that hanging should be done at a private
place like a jail.
3) On the question whether discretion should be given to the court in case
provision being made for an alternative mode of execution of death sentence,
62% have given their answer in negative and 38% are in favour of giving
discretion being given  to the court.  On the question whether discretion
should be given to the convict for choosing  mode of  execution of  death
sentence, 70% have given their answer in the positive.  However, 30% are
not in favour of such discretion being given to the convict.
79

4) 83% persons in their responses have opined that there should be a statutory
right to appeal to the Supreme Court in cases where the death sentence
awarded by the trial court is confirmed by the High Court.  However, 17% are
not in favour of providing a right of appeal to the Supreme Court in such
cases.  
5) 99% persons are of the view that in the Supreme Court, cases relating to the
death sentence should be heard and decided by a bench of not less than 5
Judges.  Among them 47% are in favour of applying a rule of simple majority
and 33% are in favour of rule of 2/3rd majority.  20% are in favour of the rule
of unanimity.  
(C ) Times of India poll:
It may be mentioned that the Times of India on July 27, 2003 conducted
an SMS Poll asking the question "Are public execution  best punishment for
heinous crimes?"  The response was 69 per cent 'Yes' and 31 per cent 'No'.
Public reaction in India against the trend of humanizing the mode of execution of
death punishment is peculiar.  
The Commission feels that the reason as to why general public is in
favour of a cruel form of executing death punishment is because of the very low
conviction  rate  which  is  only  about  6  per  cent  and  the  crime  rate  is  also
increasing in India. Investigation and judicial agencies are not able to bring the
actual persons who commit crimes before the courts of justice. The general
public feels that today, the high, the rich and the mighty are able to manipulate
delays, tamper with witnesses and able to abuse the system and they go scot
80

free.  It may also be mentioned that the Judge Advocates General of the Army,
Navy and the Air Force, who responded, favoured  amending of the Army, Navy
and Air Force Acts to replace hanging by lethal injection but they were of the
view that there should be no right of appeal to the Supreme Court against the
decision of the Court Martial.
After the inaugural, the Chairman Law Commission who presided over the said
Seminar,  opened the  discussion  to  the various  participants  which  included  mainly
advocates,  senior  Police  officials,  government  officials ,  NGOs,   representatives of
Judge Advocates  General of the Army, Navy and Air Force  and Jail Officials.
Regarding the questionnaire, the participants were asked to give their comments
on issues like alternative modes of execution of death sentence, right of appeal to the
Supreme Court,   number of Judges comprising the Bench which should hear such
matters etc.
Shri Sushil Kumar (Senior Advocate, Supreme Court) stated that there is no need to
amend section 354 (5) of Cr.PC and he thus favoured execution of death by hanging.
On the question of right of appeal, he was of the view that every case of death sentence
should go to the Supreme Court as a matter of right.  On the question of the
composition of the Bench deciding the case of death sentence, he suggested that it is
sufficient if a minimum of a 3-Judges Bench  hear it and favoured rule of unanimity in
such cases. Sh.Ajay Aggarwal, D.G. Tihar Jail favoured execution of death sentence by
hanging and he was of the view that a 5-Judges Bench should decide the sentence and
majority decision should prevail. Shri U.N.B. Rao, Joint Commissioner, Delhi Police
opined mode of death punishment by way of public hanging because of its greater
impact.  Further he said that the rule of majority in the Bench should be applicable in
81

such cases. Sh.K.P.S. Rajan, Advocate favoured mode of hanging over lethal injection,
and regarding  the mode of punishment, he said that the choice may be given to the
judge or the accused.  There should be a right of appeal and a 5-Judges Bench should
decide case of death sentence.
Ms. Pratibha Ramaswamy, Student of National Law School of India, University
Bangalore preferred death sentence by hanging. She was of the view that more modes
may be there for execution.  There should be no right of appeal and minimum 5 Judges
Bench should decide the cases of  death sentence. Sh.S.K.Sharma, (Director
Prosecution, CBI) favoured retention of death sentence.  The choice of punishment
should rest with the victim.   3 Judges Bench  should hear the matter and majority view
should prevail and there should be a right of appeal to the Supreme Court. Sh.
Balachandra representative of Commonwealth Human Right Initiative  said that death
sentence should be abolished. Sh.James, Advocate suggested that criminal justice
system requires amendments like improving the system of trial, investigation,
prosecution etc. Dr. D.P. Sharma, Director, IRAP preferred hanging in public over the
private hanging in jails. According to him single Judge Bench is enough to decide the
death sentence and simple majority rule is better.
Judge Advocates General of the Army, Navy and Air Force wrote letters to the
Law Commission suggesting that there should not be a right of appeal to the Supreme
Court  against  the  Court  Martial  verdict  of  awarding  death  punishment.   The  Law
Commission is, however, unable to accept the above suggestion.
82

The public response to the questionnaire was widespread and the Commission
got responses from within and outside India.  Several persons were of the opinion that
though the death punishment has been abolished in several countries, however the
conditions in India, a country which is affected by terrorism and by rise in crime, death
punishment should not be abolished.
CHAPTER-8
RECOMMENDATIONS
In the light of the study made in earlier chapters on the mode of execution of
death sentence and the responses which the Law Commission received to its
Consultation Paper and Questionnaire, the Law Commission recommends as follows:-
1. More than 85% persons in their responses have favoured that section 354(5) of
the Cr.PC 1973 is required to be amended for providing other mode of execution of
death sentence and approx. 76% persons are in favour that administering the lethal
injection should be a mode of execution of death sentence. 
The Commission is of the view that administering the lethal injection should be
provided as an alternative mode of execution of death sentence along with existing
mode of execution of death sentence by  ‘hanging by neck till death’ as provided in
section 354(5) of the Cr.PC, 1973.  It may not be appropriate at this juncture to wipe out
altogether the present mode of execution of death sentence i.e. ‘ hanging by neck till
death’.    We are of the view  that  the present mode of execution be retained and a
further provision be added permitting an alternative mode of execution of death
sentence by lethal injection.  
Therefore the Commission recommends that,- 
Section  354(5)  of  Cr.PC  of  1973  which  provides  “when  any person  is
sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be hanged by the neck till he
83

is dead”, needs to be amended by providing an alternative mode of execution of
death sentence by administering lethal injection until the accused is dead.
2. Whether discretion should be given to the court or to the convict in choosing the
mode of execution of death sentence, majority of responses suggest that it should be
given to the convict and not to the court.  
The Commission is of the view that discretion should be given to the Court
which can decide the mode of execution of death sentence after taking various relevant
factors into consideration.  Besides, the Commission is of the view that opportunity of
hearing should be given to the convict on the question of mode of execution of death
sentence, now that an alternative mode is recommended.  The court shall have to pass
appropriate orders after hearing the accused on the mode of execution of death
sentence. In this regard, a suitable provision for providing an opportunity of hearing to
the convict on the question of mode of execution of death sentence needs to be inserted
in section 354 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which is applicable to the trial
court as well as all appellate courts.
Therefore the Commission recommends that, - 
In order to give opportunity of hearing to the accused about
the mode of execution of death punishment, sub section (5)
of section 354 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 needs
to be amended by inserting a proviso as follows: 
“Provided that the Court shall before passing the final
order as to mode of execution of death sentence, hear
the accused on that question”.
3) As per section 166 of the Army Act, 1950, section 163 of the Air Force Act, 1950
and section 147 of the Navy Act, 1957, death sentence may be executed either by
hanging by neck till death or by being shot to death. 
 The Law Commission is of the view that in these Acts, execution of death
sentence by ‘being shot to death’ may be retained and the other mode of execution of
death sentence by ‘hanging by neck’ prescribed by these Acts should be substituted by
the words ‘administering lethal injection’.   
Therefore, the Commission recommends that -
84

 
The  words  “administering  lethal  injection  until  the  accused  is  dead”
should be substituted in place of “suffer death by being hanged by the
neck until he be dead” in section 166 of the Army Act, 1950, section 163 of
the Air Force Act, of 1950 and section 147 of the Navy Act of 1957.
4. Approx. 88% persons in their responses have suggested that in Supreme Court
appeal  should  lie  as of  right  in cases where High  Court  awards or  confirm  death
sentence passed by the Court of Sessions. 
 Therefore, the Commission  recommends that,-
There should be a statutory right of appeal to the Supreme Court against
the judgment of High Court confirming the death punishment awarded by
the Court of Session or awarding the death punishment in exercise of its
power of enhancing the sentence.  
In this regard a suitable amendment needs to be made in the Supreme
Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 by way of
addition of clause (c) in section 2 of the Act as follows:-
“(c) has confirmed the death sentence passed by the
Court of Session or awards the sentence of death in
exercise of its power of enhancing the sentence under
section 386(c) (iii) or sections 397 and 401 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973”.
5. Judge Advocates General of the Army, Navy and Air Force wrote letters to the
Law Commission suggesting that there should not be a right of appeal to the Supreme
Court against the Court Martial verdict of awarding that punishment. 
 The Law Commission  is, however, unable to accept the above suggestion. 
 The Commission, therefore recommends that,-
Regarding providing a right  of appeal to the Supreme  Court under the
Army Act, 1950; Air Force Act, 1950; and Navy Act, 1957 where the court
martial has passed the sentence of death and it has been confirmed by the
Central Government or appropriate authority, wherever required, suitable
85

amendments be made in the above said Acts so as to provide a right to
appeal to the Supreme Court against the order of confirmation of sentence
of death by the Central Government or by appropriate authority.
 
6. (A) Majority of the persons expressed the view that in the Supreme Court, a
Bench of  not  less  than  5  Judges  should  hear  and  decide the cases where  death
punishment has been awarded. The Law Commission is also of the same view. 
The Commission further recommends that,-
The Supreme Court bench while hearing the case where death punishment
has been awarded, should consist of at least five judges.  Accordingly, the
Supreme Court Rules may be amended.
(B)  The Supreme Court while hearing a case may think that the acquittal is
wrong and the accused should be convicted and sentenced to death; or it may  think
that the sentence for a term or life sentence is to be enhanced to a death sentence; in
such situations, the Bench of the Court which has heard the case, must direct the case
to be placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for being heard by a Bench of at
least five judges.  
Accordingly, a provision in this regard has to be made in the Supreme
Court Rules and we recommend accordingly.
86

We  acknowledge the extensive contributions made by Dr.S. Muralidhar, Part
time Member of the Commission in preparation of this report. We also appreciate the
contribution made by Mr. Girish Naik Thigle, a 5th year student of National Law School of
India University, Bangalore in the preparation of the consultation paper on “Mode of
execution of death sentence and incidental matters”.
We recommend accordingly.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate)
Vice-Chairman
(T.K. Vishwanathan)
Member-Secretary
Dated: 17.10.2003
87

ANNEXURE -  I
THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SUMMARY OF THE CONSULTATION PAPER
ON
MODE OF EXECUTION OF DEATH SENTENCE AND
ANCILLARY MATTERS (with Questionnaire)
April 2003
Death penalty has been a mode of punishment since time immemorial. But with
progress of civilization, death punishment has witnessed humanizing changes. 
In  the  middle  of  ages,  the  barbaric  and  torturous  method  of  death
penalty were practiced such as:
(i) Crusification where person was nailed to cross and left to die; 
(ii) Burning at the stake; 
(iii) Boiling to death in oil; 
(iv) Tying a person to a spiked wheel which was rolled till the person died;
88

(v) Throwing from the cliff,;
(vi) Crushing the skull under elephant's foot;
(vii) Stoning to death - still practiced in some countries of the Middle East;  
(viii) Guillotine; 
(ix) Strangulation to death 
The prevalent methods of executing the death penalty are: 
(a) Hanging to death by neck;
(b) Firing squad;
(c) Gas chamber; 
(d) Electrocution;
(e) Intravenous Lethal injection
Position in India:
In India, over a hundred years, the mode of death penalty has remained the same.
Section 368 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 provide as under:
"When any person is sentenced to death, the death sentence shall direct that he
be hanged by the neck till he is dead."  
This provision has been retained in Section 354 (5) of Criminal Procedure Code of 1973.
Earlier Studies:
The 35th Report of the Law Commission on Capital Punishment of 1967 dealt with
various mode of death sentence concluded:
"We find that there is a considerable body of opinion which would like hanging to
be replaced by something more humane and more painless…"  
"That a method which is certain, humane, quick and decent should be adopted,
is the general view, with which few can quarrel.  It is true that the really agonizing part is
the anticipation of impending death.  But society owes to itself that the agony at the
89

exact point of execution be kept minimum.…Progress in the science of anesthetics
and further study of the various methods, as well as experience gathered in other
countries  and  development  and  refinement  of  the  existing  methods,  would
perhaps,  in  future,  furnish  a  firm  basis  for  conclusion  on  this  controversial
subject. "
The Law commission then was not able to arrive at any firm conclusion and retained
hanging.
The Royal Commission Report on Capital Punishment 1949-53 dealt
with prevalent modes of execution of death and sated that three conditions should be
fulfilled in executing the death sentence - (a) it should be as less painful as possible; (b)
it should be as quick as possible; and (c) there should be least mutilitation of the body.
The  Royal  Commission  also  observed  that  the  question  of  judicial
execution 'should be periodically examined especially in light of progress made in the
science of anesthetics'.  
The United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in its resolution
1984/50,  annex.   General  Assembly  Resolution  29/118,  1984  provides  that  where
capital punishment occurs it shall be carried out  so as to inflict minimum possible
suffering.
The Supreme Court of India in  Deena v. Union of India (1983) 4 SCC 845
provides that the execution of death punishment to satisfy the following four tests:
(1) The act of execution should be as quick and simple and free from anything
that unnecessarily sharpens the poignancy of the prisoner's apprehension.
90

(2) The  act  of  the  execution  should  produce  immediate  unconsciousness
passing quickly into the death.
(3) It should be decent.
(4) It should not involve mutilation. 
OBJECTS:
The objects of this discussion paper are (a) the method of execution of
the death sentence; (b) the process of elimination of difference in judicial opinion among
the Judges of the Supreme Court in passing sentence of death; and (c) to see the need
to provide the right to appeal to the Supreme Court to the accused and death sentence
matters.
Comparative study of present methods of executing the death sentence:
Hanging: Hanging  by neck  is practiced  as prevalent  of  executing  death
sentence in some countries.   If the length of the drop is correct, the results in breaking
of the spinal cord and the death is instantaneous and almost painless, otherwise the
results in agonising death by strangulation.  In India, there is no provision for post-
mortem as it was in UK, before the death penalty was abolished, to ascertain whether
the convict died of breaking of the spinal cord or strangulation.  Even in UK it was found
that death was by strangulation occurred in majority of cases.   
The procedure is prolonged - the person to be executed is first kept in isolation
and not allowed to possess any material by which he can kill himself such as shaving
materials, 'nada', or even meal utensils are of earthenware.  
One  day before  the  execution, he is weighed.  Before execution  his
hands and legs are tied and black hood is put on him (Jail manual).  After the scaffold is
removed the body is kept suspended for half an hour.  Often his eyes and tongue gorge
91

out and he urinates and defecates.  The process of execution takes about forty minutes.
There is also dearth of expert hang-man in India and Jail Manual provides for Jailor,
who has no scientific knowledge, to guide the hang-man.  Hanging has been given up in
United States of America (USA) as it is inhumane and degrading.
Electrocution: The typical method of electrocution is using the electric
chair, a prisoner is strapped to a specially built chair, his head and body is shaved for
better contact of electrodes.   High voltage current of 200 wt. is passed.  The prisoner
usually leaps forward against the restraints when the switch is turned on.  The body
changes color and swells.  The prisoner often defecate, urinate and vomit blood.   The
electric chair was first used in New York as hanging was thought to be inhumane and
outdated.  
Shooting by firing stone: The convict is tied to wooden staff or chair with his
hands and legs and cloth patch is put on his heart and often is blind folded then five
persons shoot him.  The death is instantaneous but there is some mutilation of body. 
The  Army,  Navy  and  Air  Force  Acts  of  India  give  discretion  to  the
tribunals to either execute the convict by hanging or by shooting. 
This is method used also in Russia besides some European countries.  
At the Nuremberg trials, the Members of the German High Command who were
sentenced to death by hanging wanted that they should be shot to death because they
wanted military death to degrading death by hanging. 
Gas Chamber: The convict is undressed except his short and tied to a
chair in an air tight gas chamber.  Stethoscope is attached to his chest and tubes taken
out of gas-chamber to determine the convict is dead.  Hydro-Choric acid is pumped
92

through valve into a pan followed by potassium cyanide or sodium cyanide which is
dropped mechanically in the pan producing lethal gas.  The death occurs in six to eight
minutes and there  is no mutilation of  body but there are wild convulsions.    The
chamber is then neutralized with chemicals.  This method is expensive and complicated.
Nevada is the first State to use gas chamber in 1924.  Five States in USA use this
method.   
Lethal Intravenous Injection: Sodium Thiopental is injected causing the
convict to fall into deep sleep subsequently Pancuronium Bromide is injected to stop
breathing,  and finally potassium chloride is injecting  to stop the heart.   The  whole
process is completed in nine to fourteen minutes and the convict dies in a sleep without
pain and there is no mutilation of body.  37 States in USA are using this method besides
Guatemala.  China is also experimenting with this method.   Some States in USA give
choice to the convict whether he should be executed by lethal injection or by shooting. 
NOTE: To avoid this agony of guilt of killing a person two people use
intravenous injection or electric button out of which one is dummy which is as secret.
Similarly in USA fining squad consisting of five persons and only three have lives bullets
and two have dummy bullets so that no one knows who is responsible for the death.
 
Reducing Arbitrariness:
93

The European Union and UK and several countries have abolished death
penalty however, in Bachan Singh's case (AIR 1982 SC 1325), the Constitutional Bench
of the Supreme Court by majority of 4 to 1, Bhagwati J. descending has upheld the
constitutional  validity  of  death  sentence.   Nevertheless,  the  death  sentence  is
qualitatively different than any other punishment as much as if there is an error which
cannot be corrected. 
At the same time, it is true that there is arbitrariness inerrant in awarding the
death  or life  sentence  as it  depends  on the  attitude  of  a judge  as  the  Court  has
unguided discretion in choosing between death sentence and life imprisonment. 
To  reduce  the  arbitrariness,  Bhagwati  J.  in  his  descending  judgment  has
suggested  that  "There  should  be  an  automatic  review  of  death  sentence  by  the
Supreme Court sitting as a whole and the death sentence shall not be affirmed or
imposed unless it is approved unanimously by the entire Court". 
Under the Army, Navy and Air Force Acts, the General Court Martial consisting
of five officers, death punishment can be given only if two-third members agree and in a
Summary General Court Martial consisting of three officers, the death sentence can be
given only if all the three officers agree.  The simple majority rule as in the Supreme
Court or in High Court is not applicable in Court Martial. 
Right of Appeal:
94

Statutory right of appeal is given against the judgment of the High Court in
election  maters,  against  the  orders  of  Bar  Council  of  India  and  orders  of  the
Commission under MRTP Act. 
In  criminal  cases,  right  of  appeal  is  given  when  High  Court  reversed  the
judgment of trial court and given ten years or more or has given death sentence or
where  the  High  Court  has  withdrawn  the  case  from  trial  court  and  given  death
punishment.   But no right of appeal is given in case the High Court confirms the death
punishment awarded by the trial court.  
The  Consultation  Paper  raises  several  controversial  questions,  the  Law
Commission  proposes  to  elicit  public  response  and  to  this  and  the  following
questionnaire is given:
   QUESTIONNAIRE  
1. Section 354(5) of Cr.P.C. of 1973 provides as follows :-
"When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he
may be hanged by neck till he is dead."
(a) Does this section be required to be amended Yes   (   )
No  (  )
(b) and if so what other modes of execution do you suggest ? (Refer to
Discussion Paper Chapter 4  and Chapter 5).
Lethal (   )                  Shooting (   )   
Electric (   )
95

Injection  (   ) Chair (   )
2. Some States in the U.S.A. give the convict the choice whether he
wants to die by lethal injection or shooting.  While in India, the Court Martial
Tribunal, under the Army Act of 1950, Air Force Act of 1950 and Navy Act of
1957, has a discretion to give death punishment either by hanging to death or by
shooting to death.  
Should discretion be given to the Judges? Or Yes
(   )   No  (  )
Should discretion be given to the Convict Yes (   ) No
(  )
   3.  Statutory right of appeal to the Supreme Court is given against judgment
of the High Court in election matters, against the orders of the Bar Council of
India and orders of the Commission under MRTP Act, 1969. Right of appeal is
given  under  the  Supreme  Court   (Enlargement  of  Jurisdiction)  Act,  1970  in
criminal cases where High Court has reversed the trial court's judgment and has
sentenced a person for 10 years or more, or has given death punishment or
where the High Court has withdrawn the case and given death punishment.  
But  no  right  of  appeal  is  given  in  case  the  High  Court  confirms  the  death
punishment given by the trial court.
Should the person convicted of death penalty be given right of appeal to the
Supreme Court so that he has the satisfaction that his case is fully heard by the
highest  court  of  the  land,  especially when  if  there  is an error, it  cannot  be
corrected   and  death  punishment  is  qualitatively  different  than  any  other
punishment?
Yes (   ) No   (   )
96

4. In trial by Court Martial Tribunal under Army Act, 1950, Air Force Act,
1950 or Navy Act, 1957,  when a death punishment is given by the General
Court Martial consisting of five officers, death punishment can be implemented
only if two-third members give death punishment and in the Summary General
Court Martial consisting of three officers death punishment is implemented only if
all the three officers  agree.
(a) Should a Bench of not less than five Judges decide the case
in the Supreme Court.
Yes (   ) No (   )
If answer is 'Yes'
(b) Should the rule of majority, or rule of unanimity, or rule of
two-third majority be applicable?
Rule of Majority (   ) Rule of Unanimity     (   )
Rule of Two-third Majority
(c) In case of two-third majority, should death sentence be not
awarded because two other Judges did not think it a fit case
for death penalty?
Yes (   ) No     (  )
5. Any other suggestion as for the mode of execution or implementation of a
death sentence?  (Please do not write more than 100 words)
97

Note: This Consultation Paper along with the above Questionnaire is available on
Law  Commission's  website  "www.lawcommissionofindia@nic.in".
Responses can be sent by email to "ghatate@nic.in" or by post to the
Member-Secretary, Law  Commission of India, 7th Floor, Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi 110 001.
98