LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
PROPOSALS FOR CONSTITUTION OF HI-TECH
FAST – TRACK COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS IN HIGH
COURTS
DECEMBER, 2003

JUSTICE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
M.JAGANNADHA RAO SHASTRI BHAWAN
Chairman NEW DELHI – 110001
Tel. : 3384475
Fax: 3073864, 3388870
Residence:
1, JANPATH,
NEW DELHI – 110 001
TEL. 3019465
D.O.NO.6(3)/91/2003-LC(LS) December 15, 2003
Dear  Shri Arun Jaitley ji,
I have great pleasure in forwarding the 188th Report of the Law Commission on the
‘Proposals for constitution of Hi-tech Fast-Track Commercial Divisions in High Courts’.
The Commission has taken up the subject suo motu, in view of the vast changes in the
economic policies of our country from the year 1991, ushering in privatisation, liberalization and
globalisation.  It appears to the Commission that investors in India, both domestic and foreign,
must be given a clear assurance that commercial suits of high pecuniary value, shall go directly
before the Commercial Division of the High Court (rather than to a District  Court or a   Single
Judge Bench  of the  High  Court),  that  in the   Commercial  Division  of  the  High Court  the
procedure  will  be  ‘fast  track’  with  high-tech  facilities  of  video-conferencing  etc.  as  in  the
Commercial Court in New York or Singapore and that the suits will be disposed of normally
within one year or at  least within a maximum period of two years.  Our recommendation is also
that pending suits of such high value and pending appeals arising out of such high value suits
should go before the Commercial Division.    We are also recommending a statutory right of
appeal to the Supreme Court against decrees in suits passed by the Commercial Division and also
against orders of the Division falling within Order  XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
but not in the case of appellate decrees or execution matters.  The latter will  be governed by Art.
136 of the    Constitution of India.  Enforcement of  decrees should, in our opinion, be also by the
Commercial Division of the High Court and not by the subordinate Courts so far as these high-
value cases are concerned.
Once Commercial Division is established in each High Court, consisting of as many
Division Benches  as may be necessary, there will  be a clear  message that such high value
commercial disputes will be disposed of quite fast in India.  In this context, I may bring to your
kind notice that there is a recent spate of judgments of the US and UK Commercial  Courts
declaring that the Indian Court system has “collapsed” because there are delays upto twenty
years or more, and that, therefore Indian defendants can be sued in US and UK Commercial
Courts,   even if there is no cause of action in those countries, provided the Indian defendant has
a branch or local representative in that country or is trading in the stock exchange of that country.
This trend has to be immediately reversed by bringing in ‘fast-track, high-tech Commercial
Divisions’  in all the High Courts.  The Commission is of the view that the overall benefits that
may accrue by way of increased investment in India, both from domestic and foreign investors,
will be in hundreds of millions of dollars and the expense in constituting these fast-track, high-
tech Divisions in High Courts will only be a very small fraction thereof.
The Commission has proposed a wide definition of ‘commercial disputes’ which will
include not only disputes  between tradesmen but also disputes  relating to commercial property,
movable or immovable.  Of course, commercial disputes which have to be adjudicated by Courts 
2

 or  Tribunals  of  exclusive  jurisdiction  will  not  go  before  the  Commercial  Division.   The
proposed ‘definition’ also permits the High Court to further notify specific ‘commercial disputes’
from time to time, for the purpose of decision by the Commercial Division.  The Commission
proposes that where the value of the subject matter is Rs. 1 crore (or such higher minimum as
may be fixed by  the High Court but where the minimum is not in excess of Rs. 5 crores), the
commercial suits must go before the Commercial Division. This norm has been proposed in order
to avoid too many matters above Rs. 1 crore clogging the work in Commercial Divisions in some
States.  If there are too many cases above Rs. 1 crore, the High Court can fix the  minimum value
at Rs. 5 crores for purpose of disposal by the Division.
The fast track procedure as detailed in the Report will be akin to the proposed ‘fast track
arbitration’ referred to in the 176th Report on ‘Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,
2002’, subject to suitable modifications for purpose of fast-track procedure in a Civil Court.
The  Commission  has  recommended  high-tech  facilities  like  video-conferencing,
computerization etc. as in leading Commercial Courts abroad.  The National Informatics has
given a Report with an estimate of expenditure for each High Court and this is included in
Chapter VIII.
          The Commission, after an analaysis of the Constitutional position on legislative powers,
has stated in the Report that Parliament is competent to make the proposed legislation by virtue
of its legislative powers read with the relevant Entries in List I and List III of the Seventh
Schedule to  the Constitution of India.
The Government and each of the High Courts must, as stated in the Report, ensure that
the Commercial Division consists of as many Benches as are necessary and that there are always
sufficient number of Judges in position to man these Benches.  We have, for this purpose,
suggested  that  apart  from  Judges  appointed  in  the  normal  course,  retired  Judges  may  be
appointed under Art. 224A of the Constitution of India, whether they have retired from the same
High Court or from other High Courts.  These Judges in the Commericial Division must be
experienced in   civil law and commercial laws.  A programme of continuing education on
commercial laws has also to be formulated for the benefit of the Judges and Lawyers who are the
key figures in the Commercial Division.
We are sure that these recommendations will find support from the Bench and the Bar
and above all, from the vast commercial community, both within India and abroad.
We place on record the valuable contribution of Sri S. Muralidhar, Part-time Member of
our Commission in the preparation of this Report.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd./-
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Shri Arun Jaitley,
Union Minister for Law, Justice and Commerce and Industry,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
NEW DELHI.
3

I N D E X 
Chapter Pages
I. Introductory 1-5
II. Commercial cases arising in India being taken over
by US, UK Courts on ground of ‘Forum Non Conveniens’;
reasons not acceptable 6-19
III “Commercial Courts” in UK, USA and  Twelve 
other Countries           20-59
IV Commercial Division – what cases have been 
assigned in UK, USA and Delhi High Court           60-75
V Allocation of Cases to Commercial Division of High Courts
by Parliamentary Statute – Constitutionally permissible           76-99
VI Fast-track procedure for Commercial Divisions in UK
and USA        100-116
VII Commercial Division – are high-tech and follow 
on-line systems in other countries        117-126
VIII Proposals by the National Informatics for 
establishing E-Courts in India       127-137
IX Fast Track in the Commercial Division in High Courts
in India      138-158
X Summary of Recommendations      159-178
4

Chapter I
Introductory
Need for fast-track, high-tech Commercial Courts in India
The  last  decade  has  brought  about  phenomenal  changes  in  India
leading to enormous growth in our commercial and industrial sectors.  The
policies of the Government have changed radically from 1991, the year in
which our economy was opened up to foreign investment in a big way.
Privatisation, liberalization and globalisation have resulted in giving a big
boost to our economy.  At the same time, world has become very much
competitive.  
With such rapid increase in commerce and trade, commercial disputes
involving high stakes are likely to increase.  Unless, there is a new and
effective mechanism for resolving them speedily and efficiently, progress
will be retarded.   Foreign investors in India must be assured that the Indian
Courts are as fast as the courts in the most developed countries of the world
and that there are no longer any long delays in the judicial process.
With  that  in  mind,  the  Law  Commission  thought  it  necessary  to
examine the feasibility of ‘Commercial Divisions’ in the High Courts in
India on the model of the Commercial Division in the High Court in the
United Kingdom and in US and other countries.  In Chapter III of this
Report, the manner in which the ‘Commercial Divisions’ have been set up
in various countries and their functioning will be discussed.  We may state
5

that in the United Kingdom, the Commercial Division was started more than
a  hundred  years  ago  in  1895  and  gave  confidence  to  the  business
community  and  contributed  enormously  to  the  growth  of  commerce  in
London.  In the United States, Commercial Divisions have been started only
recently  in  or  around  the  year  1993.   Other  countries  too  have  or  are
following suit.
The  purpose  of  this  Report  is  to  recommend  the  creation  of
“Commercial  Division’  with  high-tech  facilities  like  video-conferencing,
on-line filing  etc. in  each  of our  High Courts  so  that  they may handle
‘commercial cases’ of a high threshold value of (say) Rs.1 crore and above,
or such higher limit as may be fixed by the High Court (but not in excess of
Rs.5  crores)  and  fast-track  basis.   A  fast-track  procedure  was  indeed
recommended in our Report on Amendments to the Indian Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 for ‘fast-track’ arbitration.  The objective is that a
commercial case of such high value should be disposed of within a period of
one year or at the most two years in all the States in India.  A maximum
period of two years is perfectly justified and is comparable to the period of
pendency in most courts abroad  and in particular in US and UK.  The
proposed Divisions should be manned by Judges of the High Court who are
well-versed in civil law and in particular, in commercial laws.  It is also
proposed that High Court Judges should be given extensive exposure to the
fast growing changes in commercial laws occurring globally and that their
knowledge levels in respect of new branches should be updated constantly
by a programme of continuing lectures.  The commercial cases above the
pecuniary limit of (say) Rs.1 crore or more as stated above must, in our
view, be taken up on the original side of the High Court by a Division
6

Bench.   Simultaneously,  pending  appeals  before  Division  Benches  in
relation to commercial cases of the high pecuniary value abovementioned
must also go to the Commercial Division straightway rather than stand in
queue along with other civil appeals pending in the High Courts.  Likewise,
the execution of decrees  passed by the Commercial Division in original
suits as well as transferred matters must also be undertaken by the same
Division.
Chapter  II  of  this  Report  discusses  another  problem  which  has
surfaced recently.  There is a recent trend in the judgments of UK and US
courts of selectively applying the principle of ‘forum non-conveniens’ and
staying actions filed by aliens and refusing to apply the same norm when
actions are filed in these countries against aliens.   To explain, where a
foreign entity is  doing  business in India with an Indian  entity, the  said
foreign entity is today being permitted by Courts in New York and London
to file claims in courts in New York or London, on the assumption that there
are extraordinary delays in Indian Courts.  This is being done even if no part
of the cause of action has arisen in those countries.  Where an Indian entity
has a branch in US or UK, it is now held by the Courts in those countries
that such entities are amenable to the jurisdiction of foreign courts though
no part of the cause of action might have arisen in those countries.  The
Courts abroad have held that UK or American courts could, in cases filed
against Indian entities in those countries, refuse stay of the cases on the
broad generalization that, if the cases were filed in India, they would take at
least “twenty-five years” for disposal.  This unfortunate attitude of US and
UK Courts in several cases is explained in Chapter II.  We are referring to
this aspect as an additional reason as to why we are proposing separate
7

Commercial Divisions in the High Courts.  While we totally disagree with
the generalized assumption of UK and US Courts that all cases in India take
nearly two decades for disposal we, however, feel that the above-said recent
trend in UK and US Courts will stop if our proposals are given legislative
shape.
 
Therefore, a separate Division in each High Court is proposed to be
constituted for dealing with high value commercial cases (say) above Rs. 1
crore, on the original side, as stated above.  These Courts will have the
benefit of on-line filing, computerization, video conferencing etc. and the
cases are proposed to be disposed of within one year or at any rate within a
period of two years.   With the expertise we have in our judiciary and in our
High Court Bar, it should not be difficult to establish these ‘Commercial
Divisions’ at an early date.
It is proposed that commercial cases of such high value, which are
referred  to  the  Commercial  Division,  decided  by  one  or  more  Division
Benches of two Judges of the High Court on the original side should be
subject to a statutory appeal to Supreme Court.  Our proposal is also that in
addition to sitting Judges, retired High Court Judges who have had a proven
record  of  efficiency  and  who  have  adequate  experience  in  civil  and
commercial laws must be appointed under Art. 224A of the Constitution of
India to man these Courts.  Under Art. 224A, such appointments can be
made even if the High Court Judges had retired from other High Courts.
8

The further discussion on the subject in the other Chapters will lay
down the foundation for the constitution and functioning of Commercial
Division in each High Court.
In Chapter II, we shall be referring in detail to the recent problems of
‘forum non conveniens’ which have emanated in other countries like US
and UK; in Chapter III, we shall deal with the establishment and functioning
of prevailing Commercial Courts in UK, US and other countries.  In Chapter
IV, we shall deal with the meaning of the words ‘commercial cases’.  In
Chapter V we shall discuss whether Art. 225 and Entry 11A of List III of
the 7th Schedule  confer adequate  power  on  Parliament  to  bring  about  a
‘Commercial Division’ within each High Court.  Chapter VI will deal with
the fast-track procedures.  Chapter VII will deal with high-tech systems in
other countries and Chapter VIII with our proposals for high-tech systems in
our commercial Courts.  Chapter IX will deal with the final proposals for
constitution of Commercial Division in the High Court.  Chapter X contains
a summary of our recommendations.
9

Chapter II
Commercial cases arising in India being taken over by US, UK Courts on
ground of ‘Forum Non Conveniens’; reasons not acceptable
It has been pointed out in Chapter I that the Commission is of the firm
view that there should be a ‘Commercial Division’ in each High Court to
decide  high  value  commercial  cases  between  Indian  parties  and  also
between Indian parties and foreign parties for purposes of their speedier
disposal on fast-track, with all high-tech facilities.  In this  Chapter, the
Commission  is  giving  an  additional  reason  for  recommending  the
constitution of the ‘Commercial Division’.  The additional reason is that it is
now imperative that we have to negate the recent judgments of US and UK
Courts  taking  up  cases  which  should  have  been  filed  in  India  on  the
specious reason that, in India, almost all cases take twenty-five years for
disposal,  a  general  assumption  for which  there  is,  in our  view,  no  real
justification.  
The Commission, with its overall view of the administration of justice
in this country can assert that thousands of cases, particularly those relating
to commercial disputes are, in fact, resolved by Indian courts much faster –
some within  even  one  year,  and  many  in  two  or  three  years,  and  that
therefore, the characterisation of the Indian justice system by the foreign
courts as being in a ‘deplorable’ state or that it has ‘collapsed’ appear to us
to be highly exaggerated.  For example, in a heavy Court like the Delhi
High Court, commercial cases involving realization of monies are under
Bank Guarantees or Letters of Credit are disposed of in one year or at the
10

most, in two  years but yet recently when the  question  arose  before  the
Supreme Court of New York, New York County in the year 2003,  Shin-
ETSU Chemical Co. Ltd vs.  ICICI Bank (and State Bank of India), the
Court took up the case on the assumption that in India even such cases
would go on for fifteen years.  That case related to a suit by a Japanese
company against Indian Banks on the basis of Letters of Credit (where no
cause of action arose, within US).  An affidavit of an Indian expert was filed
in the US Court stating that there are delays upto fifteen years in Delhi High
Court.  The action was filed in New York Commercial Court on the ground
that Indian courts take twenty five years for disposal.  The only nexus with
US was that the Indian Bank had either branch in New York or was trading
in the New York stock exchange.  We are referring to this instance only to
show that the US and UK courts have made rather very unjustifiable and
broad generalizations on the basis of affidavit evidence of Indian experts,
relying on one or two cases  and generalizing  that almost all cases take
fifteen to twenty years in the Indian Courts.  The criminal case concerning
bombing of the  Kanishka Aircraft of Air India of  the year 1985 is still
being tried in the Canadian Courts but on that basis we cannot generalize
that all criminal cases in Canada take twenty years!
Anomalies in US & UK decisions where aliens are plaintiffs and where
aliens are defendants:
Indeed, there are serious anomalies in the approach of US and UK
Courts on the application of the principle of ‘forum non-conveniens’. A
particular contrast  in  the  approach  of the  foreign courts  towards  Indian
plaintiffs as distinguished from foreign plaintiffs, needs to be referred to.
11

Mostly, if the defendants are aliens, then these foreign Courts take up the
cases immediately on the ground of delay of Courts in the country of the
alien.  If the alien is the plaintiff, the same Courts relegate the plaintiff to
the Courts in the country of the alien.  These contrasts in the judgments of
American and UK Courts have, in fact, been analysed and criticised by
several  jurists.   (See  in  this  context  (A)  ‘Forum  Non  Conveniens’  in
America  and  England:  “A  Rather  Fantastic  Fiction’  by  Dasvid  W.
Robertson,  Professor  of  Law,  Texas  University:  (1987)  Vol  103  Law
Quarterly Review p 398;  (B) Bhopal, Bouganville and O.K. Tedi: Why
Australia’s Non Conveniens approach is Better’ by Peter Prince Vol 47,
International and Comparative Quarterly, 1998, page 573); and (C) ‘Trial in
England and Abroad: The Underlying Policy Considerations, Vol. 9, Oxford
Journal of Legal Affairs, p 205).  
Robertson has, in fact, pointed out that where aliens come to US and
file cases against residents of USA or where aliens sue aliens in USA, the
US Courts tend to relegate the plaintiffs to their home country by specially
glorifying the Court systems of the aliens’ home countries; but where US
residents or foreigners sue aliens in US, the Courts apply the doctrine of
‘forum non conveniens’ and hold that the courts of the aliens’ country are
not appropriate courts as they are dogged by enormous delays or that judges
abroad do not have the same expertise as those in US. (p. 405).  We shall
refer to the typical cases which vividly expose this kind of an attitude.
(A) The  Bhopal  case is  an  example  in  point.   Thousands  of  deaths
occurred in India at Bhopal due to gas pollution by the US multinational
Union Carbide’s plant at Bhopal.   When claims were filed in US Courts by
12

or on behalf of Indian victims against Union Carbide in US, Judge Keenan
of the US District Court, South District of New York, while dismissing the
claims and relegating the victims to Indian Courts paid rich tributes to the
Indian judicial system. (See In re Union Carbide Corpn Gas Plant Disaster
at Bhopal)(1986) 634, F. Suppl 842 (S.D.N.Y). Judge Keenan observed:
“In  the  Court’s  view,  to  retain  the  litigation  in  this  forum,  as
plaintiff’s  request,  would  be  yet another  example  of imperialising
another situation in which an established sovereign inflicted its rules,
its standards and values on a developing nation.  This Court declines
to play such a role.  The Union of India is a world power in 1986 and
its courts have the proven capacity to mete out fair and equal justice.
To deprive the Indian judiciary of this opportunity to stand tall before
the world and to pass judgment on behalf of its own people, would be
to revive a history of subservience and subjugation from which India
has emerged.  India and its people can and must vindicate their claims
before the independent and legitimate judiciary created there since the
Independence of 1947”.
Equally significant are the following other observations in that judgment of
Keenan J:
“This Court is persuaded, by the example of the Bhopal Act itself and
other cases where special measures to expedite were taken by the
Indian  judiciary,  that  the  most  significant,  urgent  and  extensive
litigation ever to arise from a single event could be handled through
the judicial accommodation in India, if required.”
13

“To sum the discussion on this point, the Court determines that the
Indian Legal System provides an adequate alternative forum for the
Bhopal  litigation.   Far  from  exhibiting  a  tendency  to  be  so
‘inadequate or unsatisfactory’ as to provide ‘no remedy at all’, the
Courts of India appear to be well up the task of handling this case….
Differences  between  the  two  legal  systems,  even  if  they inure  to
plaintiff’s  detriment, do not  suggest  that  India  is not  an adequate
alternative forum.”
The learned Judge also stated that continuation of the claims in US would
add unnecessary administrative costs to the American judicial system and
that taking up such claims in US would amount to unnecessary burden upon
the time of US Courts.  He said:
“In addition to the burden on the Court system, continuation of this
litigation in the forum would tax the time and resources of citizens
directly;  …..clearly,  the  administrative  costs  of  this  litigation  are
astounding and significant.”
In the above case, Prof. Marc Galanter’s affidavit about delays in India and
as to why US courts are more appropriate to decide the claims was rejected
by Judge Keenan.
(B) Now let us compare the above eulogies of the Indian judicial system
with what the 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals had to say in  Bhatnagar vs.
Surendra Overseas Ltd. (1995) 52 F.2.d. 1220(3rd Cir).  (This case is now oft
quoted in US Courts  for the purpose of entertaining and  continuing the
14

cases  filed in US).  Lewis J referred to the  affidavit of Prof. Marc Galanter
and  of  Mr.  Shardul  Shroff  (a  lawyer  from India)  both  of  whom  made
unfortunate generalizations that the “Indian Court system was in a State of
virtual collapse.”  Lewis J accepted the affidavits and affirmed the District
Court’s reasoning for continuance of the case in US.  He said:
“The  district  court  …..  found  that  the  Indian  legal  system  has  a
tremendous  backlog of cases  – so great  that it could take  upon a
quarter of a century to resolve this litigation if it were filed in India.”
It is rather curious that in this very case the US Court relied upon the above-
said affidavit of Prof. Marc Gallanter (and of Mr. Shardul Shroff of India) to
continue the case in US, while in the  Bhopal case, a similar affidavit of
Prof. Marc Gallanter on the same lines was not accepted and the Court
refused to entertain the case filed in US on behalf of Indian victim.
In  Bhatnagar, referred to above, after quoting  Piper Aircraft (1981)
454 US 235 to the effect that there are also delays in US courts and that in
the view of the US Courts, delays upto two or two and half years could be
reasonable, Lewis J said that if the ‘remedy becomes so temporarily remote
that it is no remedy at all’, then it is not an appropriate remedy.  We may
also mention that the affidavit of Mr. Shardul Shroff in the above case,
stated that according to the view of a former Chief Justice of India the
Indian legal system was ‘almost on the verge of collapse’.  In Bhatnagar, the
District Court had rejected the application by the Indian defendant for stay
of the case filed in the US on the ground that the case could take 15-20
15

years if relegated to the Calcutta High Court and then five more years in
appeal.  The 3rd Circuit affirmed this view.  
More recently in Modi Enterprises vs. ESPN Inc (dt. 4.3.2003) Judge
Ira Gammerman of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, New York
County  observed,  while  entertaining  and  retaining  the  suit  filed  in  US
against Indian parties:
“…but  it  is  evident  that  there  are backlogs  in the  Indian  Courts,
including the Delhi High Court in which this claim would be litigated
that would be viewed as  intolerable in New York Court, sometime
involving decades.  Such delay has been viewed a factor supporting
denial of a forum non conveniens motion: see Bhatnagar vs. Surendra
Overseas Ltd. 52 F 3d 1220  (30 cir, 1995)(India not an adequate
forum due to lengthy backlogs).
Curiously, in order to justify retention of the case in US Courts, Judge Ira
Gammerman refers to the Indian plaintiffs’ pleadings in the  Bhopal case
about delays in India in mass-tort claims but does not refer to the ultimate
judgment in the Bhopal case where Keenan J of the US Court rejected the
plea based on delays in India and had, in fact, praised the Indian judicial
system.  One would have expected the judge to go by the ultimate judgment
of Keenan J of the US Court in the Bhopal case rather than rely on a plea
therein which Judge Keenan did not accept!
One  other  reason  given  by  the  Judge  Ira  Gammerman  in  Modi
Enterprises to retain the suit in the Court in US was that it was necessary to
16

protect New York as a world leader in commerce.  The Judge said the case
was being retained in New York with a view
“to protect the reputation of New York as a leader in international
Commerce  and to encourage other foreign entities to come to New
York to  do  business  without  fear  that  the  New York Courts  will
relegate their law suits against entities operating in New York, to
delay-plagued courts of the foreign entity’s own home jurisdictions”.
If Courts in other countries too think that enlarging the Court jurisdictions
would help growth of commerce in those countries, the principle of comity
between Courts of different countries would soon become a dead letter.
More recently, in Shin-ETSU Chemical Co. Ltd. vs. ICICI Bank (dt.
5.8.03) already referred to, Judge Ira Gammerman of the Supreme Court of
the State of New York, while retaining yet the case filed in the US by the
Japanese company against the Indian bank, observed:
“In  Bhatnagar (52  73d.  1220,  3rd Cir 1995),  which  is  remarkably
similar  to  this  case,  the  Third  Circuit  upheld  the  District  Court’s
denial of the motion to dismiss the forum non conveniens grounds
stating, “at some point, the prospective judicial remedy becomes so
temporarily remote that  it is no remedy at all and may render (an)
alternative forum so ‘clearly unsatisfactory’ as to be inadequate’. Id.
At 1228”
and continued as follows:
“Here,  plaintiff’s  expert  stated  that  if  the  action  were pursued  in
India, it would take between  fifteen to twenty years to be resolved.
17

Thus, plaintiff could very well be deprived of its day in Court if
required to litigate in India.”
What the US Court described as an appropriate remedy in Bhopal (viz.
remedy in Indian Courts) was treated as ‘no remedy at all’ in  Bhatnagar,
Modi and  Shin  Etsu. The difference, it appears  to us,  was only that  in
Bhopal,  the  claimants  were  Indian  victims  while  in  these  cases,  the
defendants were Indians.
At one time, US courts had indeed chauvinistically observed that to
take up a case which ought to have been filed in another country would be
‘derogatory  to  foreign  Courts’.   It  was  applied  in  Bhopal.  But  later,
ironically, the principle was given up and was not applied in  Bhatnagar,
Modi and  in Shin ETSU.
This  recent  attitude  of  US  courts  has  indeed  come  for  serious
criticism  by  other  jurists  too.   Mr.  Peter  Prince  (1998)  (Vol.  47)
(International & Comparative Law Quarterly, p 73 at p 576) notes that the
US Courts speak differently on the basis of who is the plaintiff.  He says,
the principle of ‘forum non conveniens’
“…ironically specifically worked against foreign plaintiffs trying to
recover  damages  from  Americans  or  English  defendants  in  the
defendant’s  home country”.
18

Mr.  Peter  Prince  (ibid  p  580)  refers  to  the  discrimination  against
foreign plaintiffs and says that the Bhopal case clearly shows the application
of the ‘most suitable forum’ approach against the foreign plaintiff.
This chauvinism argument “as employed by real world players in the
forum non conveniens arena…. is  purely strategic”, says Robertson (‘The
Federal Doctrine of Forum Non Conveniens’ ((1994) 29 Texas I.L.J. 353, at
372-373).  He says further that “In the Bhopal hearings in the United States,
Union  Carbide  unstintingly  praised  the  Indian  judicial  system,”  what  is
more, when  the Bhopal case shifted  to India, Union  Carbide  “wantonly
assailed the dignity and authority of the (Indian) Supreme Court’.
Apart  from  the  attitude  of  US  Courts,  the  attitude  of  US
multinationals has also come for serious criticism.  Peter Prince (ibid 580)
also  rightly  points  his  finger  at  the  unreasonable  attitude  of  US
multinationals such as Union Carbide doing business outside US.  He says:
“…it  is  not  apparent  why  –  as  in  the  Bhopal  case –  an  Indian
plaintiff’s chances of obtaining damages  from a US multinational
company should be adversely affected by the ‘respect’ of the United
States for the system of  law in India.  If ‘international respect’ is to
be regarded as a legitimate factor in forum non conveniens cases, it
would  seem  more  respectful  to  other  nations  to  ensure  that
multinational companies  based in developed countries  such as the
Union Carbide are not allowed to escape the legal standards of their
home  country  by  virtue  of  an  unnecessarily  liberal  forum  non-
conveniens doctrine’.
19

Mr. Joel R Paul too criticizes the attitudes of multinationals: (see ‘Country
in International Law’: (1991) 32 Harv. I.L.J. 14)
“By  refusing  to  exercise  jurisdiction  in  a  case  like  In  re  Union
Carbide, a Court effectively allows a US manufacturer to avoid US
tort liabilities and encourages other manufacturers to locate plants
abroad.” 
Such attitudes of US multinationals may ultimately damage US interests
abroad.  As pointed out by Miller (1991) 58 U.Chi L Rev 1369 (1386), “If
other countries believe that the United States does not care if its corporators
act abroad in a manner prohibited at home, that perception could strain
diplomatic relations and create an unflattering repudiation for US Courts.”
  Rankin also notes (see 1993, XVIII Boston College Int. & Com L
Rev  221)  that  defence  pleas  by  US  multinationals  in  actions  for
environmental damage filed in foreign countries have done much harm to
create  the  perception  that  the  law  of  the  United  States  allows  its
multinationals to avoid US legal standards when operating overseas.
The above assessment of several jurists shows that the approach of
US Courts and US multinationals has not been fair to alien plaintiffs in US
Courts.
U.K.
20

The position in England is generally no different.  At one time, the
theme was that English Courts should have regard for the Court in other
countries which have a developed system of justice: (The El America. 1981
(2) Llyods Rep. 119: This was also the view also in Maharanee of Baroda
vs. Wildenstein: 1972(2) QB 283.
But this view does not generally prevail in UK in most cases.
There have been significant recent judgments of UK Courts which
like the US Courts, have generalized about delays in Indian Courts.  In
European Asian Bank vs. Punjab & Sind Bank: (1982)2 Lloyd’s Rep. 356
(CA), it was stated that neither India nor Singapore were clearly appropriate
for trial of actions than England.  In that case, the plaintiff, a West German
Bank brought an action in England against an Indian Bank by serving a writ
on  a  branch  office  for  payment  under  a  Letter  of  Credit.   The  stay
application filed by the defendant (defendant-alien-Bank) was rejected and
the case was continued in the UK Court on the general assumption of long
delays in Indian Courts.  
A similar view was adopted in the  Vishva Abha: (1990((2) Llyod’s
Rep. 312.  In Vishwas Ajay: 1989(2) Lloyd’s Rep. 558, a generalized plea
of ‘inordinate delays’ in India of the magnitude of ten years before actions
come to trial, was accepted and it was assumed that there was denial of
justice abroad.  The matter was continued in the English Court, rejecting the
application for stay filed by the defendant.  In Jalakrishna: 1983(2) Lloyd’s
Rep 628, it was held that there are procedural advantages in UK which are
relevant. (See also The Vishva Abha: 1979(2) Llyod’ Rep 286).
21

The attitude of English Courts has also been adversely commented
upon by Prof. J.J. Fawcett (“Trial in England and Abroad: The Underlying
Policy Considerations) (Vol 9 Oxford Journal of Legal Affairs. P. 205 at
220) statingthat  in none of the cases  in which  the  House  of Lords  has
granted stay of English proceedings is the plaintiff English. It would be very
difficult to show that there is clearly a more appropriate forum abroad if the
plaintiff is English, he observes.   Significantly, Prof. Fawcett says (ibid. p
221) that even though it is accepted that English Courts are crowded and
there are delays up to three years in the commercial courts in England, still
the above attitude has continued.  He says:
“At the moment, the Commercial Court in London is facing quite
serious  problems of delay arising from the sheer number of cases
being brought before it.  It was said that if trial was sought in early
1987,  in  could  not  be  fixed  until  1990.  (See  Zakhlem  Intnl
Construction Ltd. vs. Nippon Kokan K.K 1987(2) Lloyd’s Rep. 661).
However, the English Courts have never used the fact that the Courts
are already crowded as a reason for refusing to allow trial in England.
Instead, it is pointed out that the delay here may still be less than that
abroad.”
Conclusion
The above catalogue of cases does show an anomalous situation in
US and UK courts in favour of staying actions filed by aliens in those courts
on the ground that the Court systems in the countries of aliens are quite
22

good and fast, and at the same time, in not staying actions filed against
aliens on the ground that there are extraordinary delays in court proceedings
abroad.   Only in a few exceptional and rare cases where expert evidence
was filed in rebuttal referring to the speedy disposal of the specific type of
case in question, that the presumption not been applied.  To raise a general
presumption as to delays in all cases in India and require a special rebuttal
by the alien defendant in every case is wholly unjustified.  In our view, the
initial  burden  about  delays abroad  in that  particular  type  of cases  must
always rest on the party who raises a plea of unreasonable delays in the
Courts in the alien’s country and there can be no general presumption of
delays in all types of cases in India.
The Commission  is of the  view that on  account of the  additional
reason referred to above, namely, the generalisations by US and UK Courts
about long delays in India, the constitution of a separate division called the
“Commercial  Division”  of  the  High  Court  for  disposal  of  high-value
commercial cases on fast track with high-tech facilities is necessary.  Once
that is done, there will no longer be any scope for foreign courts to make
generalisations or assumptions about delays in Indian Courts.
23

Chapter III
“Commercial Courts” in UK, USA and Twelve other Countries
We shall refer to the classification of Courts as ‘Commercial Courts’
in UK, USA and other countries.
(I) U.K.:
It is interesting to trace the history of the origin of the ‘Commercial
Courts’ in the United Kingdom. (See Mr. Lawrence, ‘The True Begetter of
English  Commercial  Courts,  (1994)  Vol.  110,  Law  Quarterly  Review,
p.292) The credit for establishment of the commercial courts in England can
be traced to what Lawrence J (humorously called ‘Long John’) did in Rose
vs.  Bank of Australia in 1891.  The learned Judge had no grounding in
commercial law and, in fact, his appointment to the High Court, which is
said to have been made because of his leaning towards the Conservative
Party, was a surprise to Lawrence himself.  While he was expecting to
become a County Court Judge, he was, it appears, “mistakenly” offered a
High Court Judge’s position and the following account thereof by Gilchrist
Gibb Mexander in ‘The Temple of the Nineties’ (1938) (pp 229-331) is very
interesting.  He states that doubts are
“even  greater  how  (i.e.  even  greater  than  that  of  Mr.  Darling’s
appointment) his name had gone up when long John Lawrence was
24

appointed.  It is said that he had modestly hoped for a County Court
Judgeship and that when, by mistake, a High Court Judgeship was
offered to him, he was so overwhelmed that he went to an old friend
in the profession and asked his advice.   ‘Take it by all means” said
his friend.  ‘But – Can I do it?’….  ‘Do it’ answered his friend.  In
Rowing Blue Language he added,  ‘Keep your ears open and your
mouth shut and you will do all right’.  “Long John” rigidly followed
this advice”.
What  Lawrence  J  did  ultimately  while  deciding  Rose is  equally
interesting.   The  case  related  to  law  of  insurance  concerning  “general
average  contribution  from  cargo-owners”  based  on  a  complicated
adjustment by adjusters in the city of London.  Lawrence J was certainly no
specialist in general average, neither at the bar nor on the bench.  Rose was
argued for 22 days in May 1891 and judgment was ‘reserved’ and delivered
six months later on Nov. 12, 1891 after Counsel reminded the Judge about
the non-delivery of the judgment.  Scrutton L J had appeared as a lawyer in
the case and he narrated before the Cambridge University Law Society in
Nov. 1920, about the manner in which Lawrence J gave judgment in Rose:
(see Scrutton, ‘The Works of the Commercial Courts’ (1923) C LJ 6 at p
14).
“Six months after the judgment was reserved, Counsel timidly took
their courage in both hands, and went to ask whether his Lordship
would be able to give the results of his consideration shortly.  And he
said he would.  He came into Court, and he said this was a case
raising questions of general average.  ‘The first question was. ‘What
25

was the first question, Mr. Cohen?’ Mr. Cohen told him what the first
question was.  He said: ‘Yes, I agree with the average stater’. ‘And
the second question, ‘Mr. Barnes, what exactly was it?’  And so with
the third question, he said ‘I agree with the average stater; judgment
for the plaintiff.’…The various businessmen concerned said: ‘What is
this system you are offering us?  Let us have Judges who understand
our dispute.  We have no desire to bring our case on as a means of
educating  people  who  have  never  heard  of  the  matter  involved
before’.
When the case in Rose went in appeal to the Court of Appeal, Lord
Esher stated:
“This has been a significantly troublesome case anyway.  If any body
ought to be paid commission, I think it is the Court’ 
and the judgment of Lawrence J was reversed.  On further appeal (see 1894
A.C. 687) the House of Lords partly modified the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.
The offshoot of Rose was a resolution of the Council of Judges on June 17,
1892, to the effect that there should be a ‘commercial court for London
cases’ arising from the ordinary transactions of merchants and traders in the
city of London.  They were established in 1885 and the first commercial
cause was argued before Mathew J as the Commercial Judge on March 1,
1895 concerning a claim for an account by a Flemish cloth manufacturer
against their London agent. (1895) 1 Com Case IX.  The establishment of
26

the commercial court was one of the most successful and enduring judicial
experiments, implemented without legislation or government assistance, to
the enormous benefit of the city of London and the international community
(See  also  ‘The  Origin  of the  Commercial  Court’  (1944)  Law Quarterly
Review, 324).
As  is  the  case  with  all  reforms,  objections  were  raised  even  in
England in regard to the formation of a separate Commercial Division in the
High Court.  In fact, in the resolution of the English Judges dated 17th June,
1892,  it  is  stated  that  five  out  of  twenty  Judges,  namely  Lord  Justice
Coleridge LCJ, Denman, Hawkins, Day and Grantham JJ dissented.  At the
late  stage  of  his  judicial  career,  Lord  Coleridge,  one  of  the  dissenting
Judges, was more than content, in the words of his obituarant, ‘to let things
slide, to take no great trouble, and to find more pleasure in his favourite
authors than in the reports and benches of his Court’. (The Times, June 15,
1894).
The Commercial Court which came to be established in UK in the
above  manner  in  1895  continues  still  to  be  part  of  the  Queen’s  Bench
Division in the High Court.  In the beginning, it was so designated by a
resolution of the Judges.  However, in 1970, by statute the ‘Commercial
Court’ was recognized as a Division of the High Court.  This was done
under the Administration of Justice Act, 1970 (see 3(1)).  This Act is now
replaced by the Administration of Justice Act, 1981.
The  first  Judge  in  the  English  Commercial  Court,   Mathew  J
envisaged  the  establishment  of  a  special  court  with  a simple  procedure
27

which  might  be  better  to  meet  the  requirement  of  the  commercial
community, and thus avoid unnecessary delay and inconvenience and the
greater expense of the ordinary procedure (see Barry vs. Peruvian Corp. Ltd.
(1896)(1)QB 208 (CA) per Lord Ester and an article in (1902) 46 Sol Jo
644).
The Commercial Court in UK sought to adapt its procedure to the
continually  changing  needs  of  the  commercial  community.   For  this
purpose,  a  Commercial  Court  Users  Liaison  Committee  was  formed  to
provide for a flow of information and suggestions between the Court and
those who appear there, either as litigants or as their professional advisers.
(see  Practice  Notice  1908  (1) All ER 399.   This  Committee has  been
replaced  by the  Commercial  Court  Committee,  to  which  representations
may be addressed through its Secretary at the Royal Courts of Justice.  (see
Halsbury’s Laws of England, Vol. 37, Practice and Procedure, para 591,
footnote 1).
Halsbury’s Laws of England points out (para 591, Vol. 37) that under
sec.  6  of  the  Administration  of  Justice  Act,  1981,  the  Judges  of  the
Commercial Court are such of the puisne Judges of the High Court as the
Lord  Chancellor  may,  from  time  to  time,  nominate,  to  be  commercial
Judges.   The  purpose  of  the  Commercial  Court  is  to  provide  for  the
mercantile community a simplified procedure with  briefer pleadings and
more  expeditious  hearings  and  trials before  experienced  Judges  in
commercial  actions.   Special  provisions  for  commercial  actions  in  the
Queen’s Bench Division was made in the rules of the Supreme Court (RSC
Order 72) since replaced by the Civil Procedure Rules (CPR).
28

U.S.A.
(A) New York:
In 1993, in the State of New York, the Supreme Court, Civil Branch,
New  York  County  established  commercial  courts  in  four  Parts  on  an
experimental  basis.   (see
http://www.courts.state.ny.us/com.div/brief_history_of_CD.htm).  The  aim
was to concentrate litigation in that Court in those Parts.  The reaction of
commercial practitioners was very favourable.  In Jan., 1995, a task force of
the Commercial and Federal Litigation Section of the New York State Bar
Association  recommended  that  these  Commercial  Parts  be  expanded.
Specifically,  it  was  proposed  that  a  Commercial  Division of  the  State
Supreme Court be established in areas of the State in which commercial
litigation was prosecuted.
Shortly  thereafter,  the  Chief  Judge,  Judith  S.  Kaye,  created  the
Commercial Courts Task Force, headed by Hon. E. Leo Milonas and Robert
L. Haig, Esq., to examine the Report of the Commercial & Federal Section
of the New York Bar Association and to make recommendations.  The Task
Force proposed that a Commercial Division be established in appropriate
jurisdictions.   The  Task  Force  also  made  various  recommendations
regarding case management, technology and the like.
29

In Nov. 1995, the Commercial Division was established in Monroe
County (Rochester) and also in the New York County, beginning with one
Justice in the former and four in the latter.
The Commercial Division was intended as a vehicle for resolution of
complicated  disputes.   Successful  resolution  of  these  disputes  required
particular expertise on the part of the Court across the broad and complex
expanse of commercial law.  Because disclosure in commercial cases could
be difficult, protracted and expensive, the Division sought to bring to bear
in each case, vigorous and efficient case management.  Deadlines were set
and enforced and discovery was managed as needed to protect the rights of
the parties to fair disclosure while minimizing expense and delay.  Motion
practice,  especially  in  the  form  of  motions  to  dismiss  or  for  summary
judgment, became more common in commercial cases than in others.  The
case-load of the Division is thus particularly demanding, requiring of the
Court scholarship, expense and wealth of energy.
The Commercial Division in New York had endeavoured to utilize
technology to assist in handling its case-load effectively.  The Division, for
instance, contributed to the development of and pioneered implementation
of case management soft-ware, now widely used in New York State.  In
Monroe  County, the  Division  operates  a  calendar  that  can  be  answered
electronically.  In New York County, decisions of the Division  Justices
bearing the County Clerk’s entry stamp are posted on the website promptly
after their issuance.  Decisions are posted on-line in other Counties as well.
30

A particularly noteworthy form of technology is the courtroom for the
New Millennium in Supreme Court, New York County.  This courtroom is
equipped  with  state-of-the-art  technology,  such  as  flat-screen  computer
monitors in the jury box on the witness stand, and at the counsel-table; an
electronic black-board; real time court reporting; an electronic projector,
computer  docking  stations  for  counsel;  video  capability,  and  the  like.
Similar court-rooms are due to be introduced in the venues across the State.
An  Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  Programme  (ADR)  was
established in New York County in early 1996.  Pursuant to the rules of this
programme, cases are referred by the Justices for mediation or any other
form of ADR the parties might wish to undergo.  Volunteer neutrals, of
whom there are some 250, handle ADR proceedings.  The Rules provide for
deadlines for the process.  A similar programme is in place in Westchester
County and is being studied in other jurisdictions. Branches of the Division
were established in Eric, Nassau and Westchester counties in 1999 and in
Albany and Suffolk counties in 2002.
As to the commercial Parts, the Bar has responded favourably to the
work of the Division, and so have leading representatives of the business
community.  For example, the Commercial and Federal Litigation Section
described  the  Division  as  ‘a  case  study  in  successful  judicial
administration’.  The Business counsel of New York State applauded the
work of the Division, describing the Court in 2000 as “the envy of business
in  other  States”.    The  American  Corporate  counsel  Association  has
expressed its  appreciation and support for the Division  and urged other
States  to  follow  New  York’s  lead.   The  American  Bar  Association’s
31

Business Law Sections described the Division in 2000 as “a model of a
specialized Court devoted to the resolution of business disputes”.
In  general,  the  Commercial  Division,  Supreme  Court,  New  York
County entertains complex commercial and business disputes in which a
party  seeks  compensatory  damages  totalling  $  125,000  (exclusive  of
interest, costs and Attorney’s fees).  Due to case load considerations, the
Justices of the Division are empowered to transfer out of the Division cases
which, in their judgment, do not fall within this category,  notwithstanding
that  a  party  has  described  the  case  as  ‘commercial’  on  the  request  for
judicial intervention.
Notwithstanding the foregoing limit of $ 125,000 commercial cases in
which compensatory damages of $ 25,000 or more are sought, will not be
transferred out of the Division, if filed in accordance with the procedures
governing the Division’s ‘Filing by Electronic Means programme’.  For this
purpose, the words ‘commercial cases’ include commercial real property
disputes and the types of matters identified, without regard to the monetary
threshold of $125,000, such as (1) suits to collect professional fees (2) cases
seeking  a declaratory judgment  as  to insurance  coverage  for  a personal
injury or property damage action, (3) proceedings to enforce a judgment
regardless of nature of underlying case, (4) first-party insurance claims and
actions by insurance claims and actions by insurers to collect premiums or
rescind policies, (5) attorney malpractice-actions, (6) breach of contract or
fiduciary  duty,  fraud,  misrepresentation,  business  tort  (e.g.  unfair
competition), or statutory violation arising out of business dealings  (e.g.
sale of assets or securities, corporate structuring, partnership, shareholders,
32

joint ventures, and other business agreements, trade secrets and restrictive
covenants;  (7)  transactions  governed  by  the  Uniform  Commercial  Code
(exclusive  of  those  concerning  individual  cop.  Units),  (8)  complicated
transactions  involving  commercial  real  property,  (9)  commercial  bank
transactions, (10) internal affairs of business organizations or liability to
third  parties  or  officials  thereof,  (11)  malpractice  by  accountants  or
actuaries, (12) complicated environmental insurance coverage litigation etc.
(see
http://www.nycourts.guv/comdiv/guidelines_for_assignment_of_casesnyc.h
tm).
In  New  York,  4  experienced  Judges  were  assigned  to  staff  the
commercial Part which led to 35% increase in the disposition of business
cases in 1993 as compared to 1992 (see Appendix B of Maryland Task
Force Report, 2002).  After 1995 Report of the ‘Commercial & Federal
Litigation Section’ of the New York State Bar Association, recommending a
‘Commercial  Court’,  the  ‘Commercial  Division’  began  hearing  cases  in
New York County, with an additional commercial division judge designated
in  Monroe  County  (Rochester).   By  the  end  of  1996,  the  Chief
Administrative Judge, New York County, reported that the business  court
resulted in a 29% reduction of the average time to dispose of cases assigned
to it.  Further there had been an 85% increase in the number of cases settled
before trial, and a 20% decrease in the volume of pending cases.  By 1998,
the Court reported a 36% reduction in the average time to dispose of cases,
reducing the average time which a case spends on the docket from 648 days
to 412.  These decreases in the number of cases on the docket allowed New
York County to re-assign one of the business court judges to the general
33

docket as the amount of business cases formerly handled by 4 Judges could
now be handled by 3.  As a result, one full Judge’s time became available to
address and dispose of other cases on New York’s civil and criminal docket
creating judicial efficiency for all cases, not simply those pending before the
business court.
New York’s ‘Commercial Division’ has been widely acclaimed by
business people throughout the country as a success.  Robert Haig, Co-
Chairperson of the Commercial Court Task Force in New York and advisor
to 9 States and 5 counties on the establishment of specialized commercial
courts to administer business litigation, testified before the Task Force that
establishment of the Commercial Division has had a positive impact on New
York’s economy and that the business community is extremely enthusiastic
about its continued operations.
The New York County branch of the Commercial Division includes a
Court-annexed alternative dispute resolution programme, in which parties
can  obtain  the services  of a mediator from a roster of specially trained
professionals experienced in Commercial matters.  By Nov., 1999, the ADR
programme had handled close to 1000 cases and achieved settlements in
about 85% of cases.  West Chester County of New York State also started
ADR programme.
The  NY  Commercial  Division  takes  advantage  of  technological
advances such as Courtroom 2000, which uses computers, display monitors
and multimedia equipment to increase the speed and effectiveness in which
attorneys can try their cases.  A digital evidence presentation system allows
34

instant retrieval and quick display of digitized documents.  Real-time Court
reporting allows parties to view the transcription of the proceedings as it is
being created e.g. evidence.  Trial time is shortened by 40%.  Now the New
York business division has extended the New York, Monroe, Nassau, West-
Chester and Eric counties.
(B) Delaware:
Of the States which have some sort of a ‘specialised Court’ to hear
complex  business  litigation,  Delaware  is  the  best-known,  most  highly
respected and long-standing.  Delaware’s Court of Chancery has existed for
over 200 years and has traditional equity justice.  Its business specialization
is  not  the  result  of  a  formal  decision  to  specialize,  but  rather  the
incorporation  of a  large  number of  ‘companies’  in  Delaware  due  to  its
favourable corporate statutes, and the applicability of principles of equity to
many of the disputes in which these companies are involved.
The  Court  of  Chancery in  Delaware  has  five  members  who  each
handle approximately 200 to 225 cases per year.  Each member of the Court
is responsible for overseeing each case assigned to him until resolution.
Members typically draft approximately 60 opinions each year, half of which
are  published.   Business  litigation  makes  up  approximately 95%  of the
County’s docket and the effectiveness of the Court, as well as of its national
reputation which is brought about by a thorough understanding of corporate
issues by the Court.  Upon request, cases may be expedited with discovery
and trial completed in as little as 3 months.  Parties may also seek appeals to
the Delaware Supreme Court.
35

(C) Philadelphia:
Philadelphia recently established ‘business division’ of its own.  This
division  went into effect  on January 2, 2000  and unlike  the New York
Commercial Division, it only accepts  new filings (no pending cases were
transferred).  Over 100 new cases were filed in one year.  The Division has
2 Judges and opinions are placed on  a  website  for  distribution  to  the
public.
(D) Maryland:
(See Maryland Business and Technology Court, Task Force Report: created
by House Bill 15.  Chapter 10 of the Maryland Acts of 2000)
In  Maryland,  the  Commercial  Court  is  called  the  ‘Business  and
Technology Court’.  The Report of the Task Force recommended:
“establishing  a statewide programme with  specially trained  judges
and  mediators  to  resolve  substantial  disputes  affecting  business
entities,  including  the  unique  and  specialized  issues  involving
technology.  The Task  Force considered a  separate court  division
within  only  certain  counties,  but  concluded  that  creating  local
specialized courts was not needed or desired by many Judges and
lawyers and  would  unfairly  discriminate  against  business  entities
located in other areas of the State.
36

The  Task  Force  reviewed  different  models  of  ‘business  courts’
implemented in other jurisdictions.  Recognizing the effectiveness of
Maryland’s  Differentiated  Case  Management  (DCM)  system,  the
Task Force concluded that a ‘programme’ based, in part, on different
models of business courts in other states would best take advantage of
the current DCM system, while providing a unique and specialized
forum for handling business and technology disputes”.  It said:
“…In the competitive national market for business, establishment of
such a programme will serve to increase Maryland’s reputation as a
place  where  disputes  involving  substantial  business  interest  are
effectively  and  efficiently  resolved,  thus  increasing  Maryland’s
reputation as a favourable forum.” 
The Task Force pointed out that in the light of significant advances brought
about  by  not  only  the  internet,  but  also  the  bioscience,  aerospace,  and
information technology industries, to name a few, the business environment
was changing at light speed.  Business models that couldn’t have even been
imagined  a few years  ago  are  now  commonplace.   These  technological
advancements  have,  however,  created  interesting  dilemmas  for  all  three
branches of federal and state governments.  It said:
“The role of the judiciary is even more problematic since its role is by
design more re-active than pro-active.  Judges will be confronted with
new and  unique issues  never before seen  as a result of emerging
technology and new business models.  Judicial decisions will have to
look forward to the potential impact of technology, as well as back to
37

established legal precedent.  The Judiciary can nevertheless take a
leadership role in the development of new rules and establishments in
its functions to adapt to these new challenges.  Just as our judicial
system created the statewide District Court system and the nationally
regarded DCM system, the pressure to change offers the Judiciary an
opportunity to forge its own adaptive institutions.”
Maryland’s General Assembly had passed House Bill 15 establishing
the  Task  Force  to  consider  the  feasibility  of  the  establishment  of  a
specialized  Court  to  function  effectively  and  to  efficiently  administer
business and technology disputes.
The Task Force recommended ADR programme, Electronic Filing,
Case management and Expedited Appeal process – by way of special rules.
The findings of the Maryland Task Force are as follows:
(1) Both  the  Maryland  business  and  legal  community  desire  an
efficient, economical and hospitable forum for the administration
of  business  and  technology  disputes  in  the  circuit  courts  of
Maryland State.  The key to this forum is to assign Judges who can
handle cases involving complex business and technology issues
competently and in a timely manner, regardless of the geographic
sites of the Court, the dispute, or even the parties.
(2) The experience of other States that have created business courts
initially began with a perception that  such cases were not being
handled satisfactorily by the general jurisdiction of courts in those
38

States.   These  deficiencies  gave  impetus  to  the  creation  of
specialised  business  courts  in  those  States  which  have  taken
various  forms.   These  specialized  courts  have  significantly
improved  the  efficiency with  which  business  cases  have  been
disposed of in those States.  None of these States, however,  have
created technology courts to specialize  in the administration of
disputes involving complex technology issues.
(3) None of the States which have created specialized business courts
had implemented a ‘differentiated case management’ (DCM) or
other system similar to that already adopted  in Maryland.  Even
the  witnesses  who  testified  before  the  Task  Force  from  other
States acknowledge the significance of Maryland’s DCM system
in which complex cases, including business and technology cases,
may be given increased attention.
(4) Although  there  is  no  crisis  in  the  handling  of  business  and
technology cases in the Circuit Courts of Maryland State, there are
significant opportunities for improvement.  The substance of that
improvement  is  more  important  than  the  form  it  might  take.
There,  the  benefits  that  have  been  documented  from  the
experience  of those  States  and  localities  which  have  instituted
‘Business  Courts’,  ‘Business  Division’  or  ‘Business  Case
Management Programme’ were  inventoried  by the Task Force
without reference to whether a division, as such, was required.
(5) Potential  Benefit  of  special  procedures   for  the  handling  of
substantive business and technology disputes include:
(a) Specialized  training  and  education  for  those  Judges  with
experience in business and technology issues, as well as the
39

application of specialized case management techniques and
technology for the handling of these cases.
(b) Greater  efficiency  resulting  from the  specialized  training
and education of Judges, clerks, and staff, as well as the
application of the most modern technology, to the filing and
processing of these cases.
(c) More  timely,  rational,  legally  correct  and  perhaps  most
importantly predictable rulings from judges who are better
trained  and  educated  in  the  relevant  subject-matter,  and
comfortable in handling these cases.
(d) A higher rate of settlement of business and technology cases
because of the increased correctness and predictability of an
identifiable group of judges whose competency is certified
by the requisite degree of judicial education and training
and whose opinions are circulated on the Internet and other
available media.
(e) Greater efficiencies in the disposition of other types of cases
within the jurisdiction of the Circuit Courts because of the
increased time available for them as a result of the removal
of time-consuming business and technology cases from the
general court docket.
(f) Instead  of  special  Courts,  it  is  sufficient  to  introduce  a
‘Business  and  Technology  Management  Programme’.
There  is  an  accelerated  trend  in  the  Bar  towards
specialization  in commercial issues  and  if the cases  they
take  up  are  before  general  trial  Judges  with  neither  the
40

knowledge  nor the time to devote  to these cases, it  will
result in a level which is not acceptable or tolerable.
(g) The  ‘Business  and  Technology  Case  Management
Programme’  will  be  introduced  by  formulating  (A)
Organisation, (B) Assignment of cases to the Business &
Technology Case Management Programme, (C) specifying
actions  not to  be  assigned  to  this  Programme,  (D)  Case
Management procedure. 
(h) Expedited appeals are part of the scheme.
(i) ADR.
(j) Electronic filing.
(k) The  Judicial Institute of Maryland, the entity charged with
educating  Judges  in  Maryland,  in  consultation  with  the
Maryland  State  Bar  Association,  MICPEL,  and  the
Universities  of  Maryland  and  Baltimore  Law  Schools,
develop  a  programme  for  the  training  and  continuing
education of Judge, clerks and staff who will have duties
assigned with the programme.
(l) The  Business  and  Technology  Case  Management
Programme to be put on the website so as to receive wide
publicity.
(E) Appendix B to the Report of Task Force (Maryland) refers to the
‘Experience of other States” in US.  It states that in US
1. Ten States have operational ‘business Court or ‘tracks’-
Delaware,  Illinois,  Massachusetts,  Wisconsin,  Nevada,  New
Jersey, New York, North Cardine, Pennsylvania and Virginia.
41

2. Two  States  have  established  ‘Complex  Litigation  Courts’
which  hear,  among  other  types  of  cases,  complex  business
litigation
- California and Connecticut
3. Fourteen  States  have  had  some  form  of  discussion  about
establishing a ‘business court’, with some states creating ‘task
forces’ to study the feasibility-
Arizona,  Crovado,  Florida,  Georgia,  Kentucky,  Maryland,
Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire,
Ohio, Oklahoma and Texas.
(Twenty four States have no current plans).
France:
(http://216.239.39.104/translate_c?hl=en&u:http://www.justice.gouv.fr/publ
icity/tclod1807.htm)
A Bill was presented to the Council of Ministers on July 18, 2000 for
‘carrying reform of the Commercial Courts’.  The reform is now in the first
phase, under the decree no. 94-659 of July 30, 1999, modifying the chart of
these jurisdictions.
These changes in the commercial courts were envisaged to come into
effect from January 1, 2002.  The Bill provided for (1) the Constitution of
mixed rooms in those jurisdictions, (2) capacities of the president of the
commercial court and (3) the statute of the elected judges.
42

The  proposal  was  that  each  commercial  court  should  have  mixed
rooms of these jurisdictions and that they will consist of a magistrate and
two elected judges as assessors.  The magistrates are appointed for 3 years.
The mixed rooms will apply collective procedures in relation to the whole
of the litigations relating to the deed of commercial partnership or economic
grouping  of  interest  to  the  commercial  object  (constitution,  operation,
liquidation, etc.) of disputes relating to financial instruments defined by the
law  of  July  2,  1996;  and  disputes  relating  to  the  application  of  the
Ordinance  of  December  1,  1986  relating  to  the  freedom  of  prices  and
competitions and Articles 81 and 82 of the treaty establishing the European
Community.
As regards corrective procedures, “functions of Judge, police chief in
whom economic dimension” is prevalent will remain exerted by an elected
judge.
The court also exercises bankruptcy jurisdiction.
The Bill modifies the  ler Title of Book IV of the Code of Legal
Organisations.  Article 2 of the Bill relating to the amendments states that
the  Commercial  Courts  are  made  up  of  jurisdictions  of  first  authority
magistrates of the seat pertaining to the legal body, the elected judges and of
a clerk.  The appeals are carried to the Court of Appeal.  As per one of the
clauses of  Art 1, the commercial courts deal with 
(1) disputes  relating  to engagements between tradesmen and credit
institutions;
(2) disputes relating to commercial companies and
43

(3) disputes  arising  out  of  commercial  transactions  between  all
people.
The Court also deals with disputes arising out of promissory notes.
However, parties can refer these disputes to referees.
Under Art 4, the judgments of commercial courts are given by the
Judges sitting in an odd number, at least three.  The Bill envisages a detailed
procedure for disposal.
(IV) Ireland:
In Ireland, the  Committee on  Court Practice  and Procedure, 2002
appointed by the Government, in its 27th Interim Report, considered the
question of a commercial court at Dublin.  (http://www.courts.ie/press.nsf).
The  High  Court  of  Ireland  is  the  jurisdiction  within  which  most
important commercial cases proceed in Ireland.  Such cases appear in a
variety  of  court  lists  of  that  jurisdiction.   Other  jurisdictions  also  hear
commercial cases.
The Committee observed that there was merit in establishing a more
specialized  approach  to  commercial  cases.   Under  the  directive  of  the
President of the relevant jurisdiction, a division of that jurisdiction could be
developed  into  a  de  facto commercial  court.   It  would  not  involve  the
development of a stand-alone court.  Rather, as is in fact done in certain
areas already, judges with a particular experience may specialize in that area
44

of the jurisdiction.  The High Court is the location for the larger and more
important cases.  Effectively, the High Court would include the commercial
court.  Specialisation  would  facilitate  the  public,  the  State,  the  major
institutions,  Irish  companies,  and  multinational  corporations.   The
convenience of the public and the efficient disposal of court cases would be
more effectively secured by such a development.
The type of cases heard by the commercial court may expand.  It may
be wise to commence with a restricted list of cases, such as those relating to
intellectual  property,  and/or  applications  under  the  Arbitration
(International  Commercial)  Act,  1998.   Consideration  may  be  given  to
including  applications  under  the Company Law Enforcement  Act, 2001.
However, if a pilot project was as extensive as to include a considerable
volume of cases, the number of Judges nominated by the President of the
High  Court  to  such  project,  should  reflect  the  estimated  number  and
complexity of cases.  As the project proceeds, it may be appropriate to
review the classes of cases included.  This would be for the President of the
High Court to determine, or his nominee judges, with the assistance of the
Courts Service, after the approximate consultation.
With the expansion of the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court, it may be
that a specialized division of that Court might also be considered in the
High Court.
The  Committee  stated  that  in  order  to  facilitate  a  ‘Pilot  Project
Commercial  Court’,  it  would  be  appropriate  if  a  separate  office  was
established  by  the  Court  Service  to  manage  the  administration  of  the
45

proposed Pilot Commercial Court.  This would enable less cases to proceed
with  speed  in  accordance  with  any  new  directions,  rules,  or  electronic
practice  and  procedures.   This  could  be  done  by  establishing  the
‘Commercial Court Service’.
In Ireland, financial and other benefits could accrue if a commercial
court were established.  Notwithstanding the past buoyancy of the Irish
economy, the current realities of international trading, both for established
domestic companies and enterprises, and the inward investment in the States
demand  an  efficient  and  relevant  legal  system  to  enable  the  speedy
resolution of commercial dispute procedures and/or arbitration.
The benefits of having a commercial court, the Committee stated, are
substantial.  They include, but are not limited to
(1) the return to the State of new business attracted by the advantages
of a jurisdiction with a functioning commercial court which offers
a court system that accommodates modern business commercial
needs.
(2) the return to the State in existing businesses which benefit in the
availability of the services of a commercial court.
(3) the  savings  to  business  which  will  flow  from  using  modern
communication  techniques  in  e-commerce  dispute  resolution
before the Court.
(4) maintaining the State’s desire to be a global leader and player in e-
commerce  through  the  provision  of  e-court  services.   The
46

attraction to other existing State initiatives that will benefit from
the existence of a commercial court are indeed obvious.
The Committee observed that the relevant factors for a Pilot Commercial
Court are:
(a) The Pilot Commercial Court would require support from the
relevant institutions.
(b) The planning of courts in the four Court complexes should
include planning to enable the development of a commercial
court with e-court infrastructure.
(c) Practice directions may be relevant.
(d) Rules relating to a e-government legislation may be made in
conjunction with the Department of Enterprise.
(e) The President of the High Court may consider requesting
some Judges to visit similar courts in other jurisdictions,
such as Scotland and England.
(f) The Courts Service may identify and train civil servants of
the  State  in  the  Court  Service  to  participate  in  such  a
project.
(g) Appropriate  resources  should  be  made  available  and
planned for such a project.
Recommendations
(1) The Committee recommends continuing support and development
of e-Courts in Ireland.
47

(2) The Committee recommends a Pilot Project Commercial Court be
developed in Dublin as a matter of urgency.
(3) The management of such project may be under the direction of the
President of the High Court and the Courts Service.
(4) Matters  which  might  be  usefully  considered  in  such  a  project
include:
(i) The  designation  of  specific  judge  to  the  Court  by  the
President of the High Court and the availability of relevant
judicial studies for the Judges.
(ii) The establishment of a separate office by the Courts Service
to  manage  the  administration  of  the  Pilot  Project
Commercial  Court  and  all  pleadings  and  proceedings
therein.  The training of the nominated civil servant of the
State.
(iii) The consideration at a later stage of implementing as part of
the  project,  a  Pilot  e-court  within  the  commercial  court.
This would require the establishment of an e-court room and
the training of all relevant personnel and may be part of the
Court’s strategy to e-courts.
(iv) The consideration of altering, by legislation, rule or practice
direction,  the  pleadings  or  proceedings  in  the   pilot
commercial court.
(v) The  development  of  links  to  arbitration  centers  and  the
consideration of any necessary legislative or rule change.
The  consideration  of  the  establishment  of  an  arbitration
centre to service the Commercial Court.
48

(vi)  The  taking  of  any  necessary  steps  to  facilitate  case  of
access from Arbitration centers to the Commercial Court.
IV) Singapore:
Setting up of Special Commercial Courts in Singapore: (To start with the
Admiralty Court.)
In line with recent national policy moves to restructure the Singapore
economy,  and  in  response  to  feedback  from  the  legal  programme,  the
Hon’ble  the  Chief  Justice  has  adopted  a  recommendation  to  set  up
specialized  commercial  courts in  the  Supreme  Court.   This  move
emphasizes the Singapore judiciary’s commitment to transform Singapore
into  a  premier  international  commercial  dispute  resolution  court  in
litigation, arbitration and mediation.
There  has  been  growth  in  commercial  dispute  resolution  and
associated  legal  services  in  Singapore  and  around  the  world.   The
worldwide market for provision of such services is highly competitive.  The
introduction of specialist commercial courts is therefore an important move
to position and promote Singapore as a leading jurisdiction of choice in both
domestic and international commercial disputes.
The first specialist court to be introduced is the Admiralty Court.  The
establishment of this new Admiralty Court will reinforce Singapore’s status
as a leading shipping hub.  Other special courts will be set up in due course.
49

(Ms.  Thian  Yee  Sze,  Asst.  Regr.,  Supreme  Court:  E  mail:  Thian-Yee-
Sze@Supcourt.gor.sg
(http://www.supcourt.sg/news/sscmediare123.pdj)  
(See http://216.239.100/search?q=cacg:
QPGLOHRt1M…/SSC mediarel 127pdf +Commercial+Courts & ht=en&ie-
UTF-) (4.2.2002).
(VI) Scotland:
(  http://www.scotcourts.gov.uk/commercial/commercial_1.htm  )  
Scotland has been having a ‘Commercial Court’ at Edinburgh for a
long time.  The initial background is that the Court of Session has had
special provisions for dealing with commercial actions for many years.  The
present much-revised arrangements have been operating since Sept. 1994.
In broad terms, their purpose is to enable specialist Judges to handle
commercial cases quickly and flexibly.  The relevant Rules and Practice
Notes for commercial actions are available in the above mentioned website.
The definition of ‘commercial action’ is broad and so a wide range of
cases may be dealt with under those arrangements.  Broadly speaking, they
include  any  transaction  or  dispute  of  a  commercial  or  business  nature.
Examples are banking and insurance transactions, contracts for the sale or
supply  of  goods  or  services  (national  or  international)  and  commercial
cases.   The  Court  also  deals  with  disputes  about  building  contracts,
partnership agreements and business property.
50

The Commercial Court at Edinburgh has three specialist Judges.  The
full time commercial Judge is Lord Mac Fadyen and there are two part time
commercial judges, Lord Eassie and Lord Clarke.
The preliminary stage of a commercial case is as follows.  The case is
initially allocated to one of the three judges.  In general, that judge will be
responsible for overseeing the progress of the case and for deciding it at
first instance.  If a change has to be made, the case will be transferred to
another commercial judge.  Very soon after its allocation to the particular
judge, the action will be brought before him for a preliminary hearing.  The
purpose of that hearing is to take stock of the dispute and to choose what
appears to be the best means of resolving it.  Sometimes, as a result of pre-
litigation discussion or otherwise, the features of the dispute are already
well-defined and, with only a little preliminary treatment, the case can be
sent for adjudication where the dispute is on a point of law, such as the
interpretation of a contract, and the Court may be able to decide it without
hearing evidence.  When there is a dispute on facts, the Court may quickly
order a hearing of evidence.  More commonly, it will be necessary to hold a
number of preliminary or similar hearings before the issues are sufficiently
focused to allow the case to be sent for debate or the hearing of evidence.
At all those preliminary stages, the Judge will take an active part in
the discussion.  His intervention may help parties to narrow the gap between
them and lead to an early settlement.  In other cases, some important issue
or issues may be singled out from the rest and dealt with separately in the
hope that, by resolving that point, the court will help to resolve the whole
51

dispute.  The Court may ask a technical expert to decide, or express a view
on some technical aspect of a case.  For example, the Court might send a
question of valuation in a building-contract dispute to a quantity surveyor
for that purpose.  Conversely, parties in an arbitration conducted by a non-
legal arbitrator may ask a commercial judge to decide a legal point which
has arisen.
The preliminary stages are essentially informal and have the character
more of a chaired discussion than of a formal court hearing.  Consistently
with that, neither the Judge nor the parties’ representatives  wear formal
court-dress at those hearings.
Pleading  the  case  is  the  next  stage.   While  written  pleadings
(summons and defences) remain the primary method by which parties set
out  their  cases, the  commercial  judges  encourage  the  use  of  alternative
techniques.  The key-note is flexibility.  Where a case, or part of it, has been
formulated in a pre-litigation document (such as in a claim document in a
building dispute), the judge may be content to use it, with only a minimal
amount of written pleading.  Likewise, expert reports are commonly referred
to  without  any  requirement  to  translate  them  into  “lawyer’s  language”.
Computer generated spreadsheets have been used successfully  to set out
complicated matters in detail, as in disputes between landlords and tenants
over the state of repair of a building.
As to the stage of the decision, the commercial judges insist on frank
and early disclosure of relevant (but only relevant) documents.  This helps
to identify the strengths  and weaknesses of the respective positions and
52

facilitates  settlements.   When  the  case  proceeds  to  a  full  hearing,  that
hearing  is  more  formal.   Detailed  legal  argument  will  be  presented  or
evidence  heard  from  witnesses.   The  emphasis,  however,  remains  on
efficient and expeditious disposal.  Parties are encouraged to agree (on)
matters which are non-contentious and to deal contentious matters without
undue elaboration.
Information technology is an important feature of the arrangements
for  commercial  actions.   The  judge’s  court-diaries  are  available  on  a
computer in the courtroom.  Accordingly, when it is necessary to fix a
further hearing, the date and time of the hearing can be fixed there and then.
The computer is also used in framing court orders and in other ways to
improve the speed and quality of information available. Most documents
required during the course of an action can be e-mailed to the commercial
court using e-mail address commercial@scotcourts.gov.uk.  Interlocutory
orders, once signed, are e-mailed to the solicitors for the parties.
A  Consultative  Committee  on  commercial  action  is  constituted
consisting of commercial judges, representatives of the legal profession and
representatives from commerce and industry.  The court encourages the free
flow of information also and of views between the Court and the business
community about the practical operation of the commercial court.
(VII) Philippines (Manila):
(http://www.manilatimes.net/national/2003/jun/26/business/20030626bus17
htmt)
53

The Supreme Court at Manila, Philippines, has issued a resolution
designating 65 lower courts in the country as Special Commercial Courts
that will try and decide cases involving violation of Intellectual Property
Rights  (IPR)  which  will  fall  within  their  jurisdiction  and  those  cases
formerly cognizable by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
In a resolution dated June 17, 2003, the Supreme Court en banc also
revoked the designation of Intellectual Property Rights in the light of its
decision to put up special courts to handle IP cases.
The resolution noted that the Special Commercial Courts (SCC) shall
have  jurisdiction  over  cases  arising  within  their  respective  territorial
jurisdiction.
“Thus, cases shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Court in
the official station of the designated SCC” the Supreme Court said.
Prior to the issuance of the new resolution, the Court, in its Nov. 2000
ruling, designated certain branches of the regional trial Courts (RTCs) to try
and decide cases formerly covered by the SEC.
Pursuant to the same resolution, the Supreme Court designated 65
regional trial courts all over the country as SEC courts.
In an Arbitration Order No. 104-96 issued in Oct. 1996, the RTCs in
the  National  Capital  Region  (NCR)  and  Regions  3,4,6,7,10  and  11,  27
Judges were designated to try and decide cases for IPR violations.
54

To ensure the speedy disposition of cases involving violations of the
Intellectual Property Code, the SC, through a resolution on Feb. 19, 2002,
designated the RTCs in Regions 1,2,5,8 and 12, with a total of seven judges,
and the Manila RTC Branch 24 as Special IP Courts. 
As of present, the special IP Courts have a total 503 pending cases.
Out of this number, 434 IP cases are pending in NCR courts.
As of present, the special IP courts were established, 15 designated
courts in various regions have not received IP cases and do not warrant their
continued designation as IP courts.  The SC resolved:
“To streamline the Court structure and to promote expediency and
efficacy to handling such special cases, the jurisdiction to hear and
decide IPC and SEC cases are best consolidated in one Court”.
The SC resolution took effect on July 1, 2003 (Joel R. San Juan, Reporter)
(VIII) Pakistan:
(http://www.dawn.com/2000/02/24/ebr3.htm) (24.2.2000)
One of the types of disputes which have been specially treated
in Pakistan concern international commercial disputes between exporters
and importers.  They may, for example, involve short supply or inferior
quality  of  goods  or  non-payment  of  commission,  non-shipment  of  the
ordered  goods  or cancellation  of orders.  Commercial courts  have been
55

provided  for  in  the  Imports  and  Exports  Control  Act,  1950,  which
empowers the Federal Government to establish as many commercial courts
as  it  considers  necessary.   In  terms  of  powers  vested  in  the  Federal
Government, two commercial courts, one each at Lahore and Karachi have
been set up to adjudicate such trade disputes.  These courts take cognizance
of trade disputes on complaints in writing made by an officer of the Export
Promotion Bureau.  The decision of the Commercial Courts is final and
cannot be questioned in any court of law.
(IX) United Arab Emirates:
(http://www.ameinfo.cam/rews/Detailed/17527.html). (22.1.2003)
The proposal here was that there should be maritime or commercial
courts in the United Arab Emirates, with properly trained judges.  This was
referred to by Mr. Mills, partner in the London based law firm Clyde & Co.
He  said,  ‘Part  of  the  problem  is  that  the  judges  who  deal  with  petty
squabbles  between  neighbours,  etc.  also  deal  with  high  value  and
complicated shipping, insurance and commercial cases.  Many of the judges
have  had  little  or  no  experience  of  these  cases  and  this  can  lead  to
misunderstanding.  There we need to ensure speedy settlement of case in the
region.   For  example,  the  consolidation  of  various  claims  against  a
particular ship would be helpful, to avoid inconsistency and delay.  He also
suggested that Courts should also have the power to order substantial legal
costs to the successful plaintiff.   Under the existing system, the winning
parties  are  only  entitled  to  recover  court  fees  and  a  nominal  sum  for
lawyer’s  fees,  leaving  them  substantially  out  of  pocket.  (see  also
www.seatiade-middleeast.com).
56

(X) Poland:
(http://www.prawo.org.pl/clcf/legal/courtprocedure.html)
‘Commercial Courts’ examine the cases connected with commercial
activity  conducted  in  a  professional  way  by  economic  entities.   The
commercial courts are also competent for company cases against economic
entities concerning the scope of determining the environment and bringing
them to the previous condition and repairing the damage connected with and
relating to monopolistic policy.
‘The proceedings in commercial cases are built in a way to lessen
antagonizement of the parties, since they often remain in cooperation.  For
that reason, the conciliation proceedings  are obligatory.  In general, the
proceedings in commercial cases do not differ from ordinary proceedings,
but are built in a way to accelerate the same.’
(XI) Russia:
(http://www.kcl.ac.uk/depsta/law/ugrad/study/course_mats/russian/ctsys.ht
ml)
It is an interesting characteristic of the Russian legal system that it
has  a  separate  system  of  effective  commercial  courts  but  there  is  no
commercial code.
The  High Arbitrazh  Court  at the top  of the court  system decides
disputes between businesses.  There are certain exceptions but bankruptcy
57

cases and shareholder suits against companies, even if they involve private
citizens,  currently  are  heard  only  by  these  courts.   Appeals  lie  to  the
Supreme Court.  Commercial cases can also go to the constitutional court, if
they involve  constitutional  issues  particularly where  legality of taxation
laws are involved. 
(see http://home.law.uiuc.edu/rpmaggs/concom.htm.) 
(XII) Romania:
(http://www.bsus.umd.edu/ecom/murrel/romania/romlaw.html)
(Peter Murrel’s Website) Demand  and  supply  in  Romanian  commercial
courts – generating Information for Institutional Reform:  
Institutional reform is much emphasized in transition countries, but
the process  of constructing  workable institutions  is not well-understood.
One element of this process which is often reflected is the generation of
empirical information that can aid in the process of institutional design.
Such information can be produced for one vital area of reform in the
transition  and  developing  economies  and  for  commercial  court  reform.
Estimates of the supply-demand model promote commercial court services
in Romania.  The model’s construction suggests methodological problems
in existing studies  and the estimates quantify the possible biases, which
would lead to erroneous conclusions on institutional design.  The results
show the simultaneous relation between congestion and caseload and the
exogenous  effects  of  resources,  legal  culture,  options  for  appeal,  and
economic  environment.   Coincidentally,  Romania  recently  implemented
58

reforms which are very pertinent.  Some failures of institutional reform are
due to lack of empirical input into institutional design.
In the Emergency Government Ordinance 138 (Sept. 14, 2000), the
Romanian  Government  announced  a  set  of procedural  reforms  affecting
litigation of commercial cases in Romania.
A detailed statistical analysis of delay in these courts has been made
by Prof. Peter Murrel (Univesity of Maryland recently).
(XIII) Ukraine:
(http://www.pwcglobal.com/servlet/printformat?url=http://pwcglobal.com/e
xtweb/pw..)
Effective from 5th July, 2001, Ukraine introduced major reforms to the
judicial system by amending the “Law of Ukraine and quot”; “On Judicial
System of Ukraine & quot”; here the new system of ‘commercial courts’ is
described.
The new hierarchy of commercial courts consists of:
(a) Local  Commercial  Courts  (previously  regional  arbitrage  courts
and the arbitrage courts of Kyiv and Sevastopol);
(b) Appeal Commercial Courts; and
(c) The  Supreme  Commercial  Court  of  Ukraine  (previously  the
Supreme Arbitrage Court).
59

Commercial  Courts  inherited  the  authority to  consider  disputes  between
legal entities, and between legal entities and state authority (including the
tax authorities), as well as to settle bankruptcy cases.
The local Commercial Court is the Court of first instance considering
any  disputes  (including  disputes  with  the  local  tax  authorities)  in  the
territory of Ukraine’s administrative regions.  Disputes with the State Tax
Administration of Ukraine and other national bodies fall under jurisdiction
of  the  Commercial  Court  of  Kyiv.   Earlier,  such  disputes  fell  under
jurisdiction of the Supreme Arbitrage Court of Ukraine.  A division of a
local Commercial Court shall come into force in ten days from the date of
its approval.
Appeal  Commercial  Court  is  the  Court  of  Appeals.   There  are  8
Appeal Courts, jurisdiction of which covers six specific territories.  The
appeal commercial court may review decisions taken by local commercial
courts located  in the  territory over which the competence  of an Appeal
Court  is  extended  and  it  can  review  its  own  decisions  due  to  newly
discovered circumstances.
The  Supreme  Commercial  Court  governs  activities  of  local  and
Appeal  Commercial  Courts  and  reviews  their  decisions  under  cassation
proceedings and it will also re-consider cases due to any newly discovered
circumstances.   The  Supreme  Commercial  Court  gives  explanations
regarding  practice  of  enforcement  of  legislation  regulating  commercial
activities.  A cassation claim can be filed with the Supreme Commercial
Court  within  one  month from the date  a decision  is  taken by the  local
60

commercial  court  or  the  date  when  a  resolution  taken  by  the  Appeal
Commercial Court comes into force.  A cassation claim shall be reviewed
within two months since the date the claim is received.
Upon consideration of a claim, the Supreme Commercial Court takes
a resolution, which shall become effective from the date of its issuance.
General prosecutor of Ukraine or the parties to a law suit may dispute
a resolution taken by the Supreme Commercial Court with the Supreme
Court,  which  is  the  highest  judicial  body  of  the  courts  of  general
jurisdiction.   A  cassation  claim  to  the  resolution  of  the  Supreme
Commercial Court may be submitted not later than a month from the date of
its issuance.  Proceedings on revision of the Supreme Commercial Court by
the Supreme Court shall be commenced with the consent of at least five
Judges and shall be considered within a month from the date of receiving a
cassation claim.  A resolution of the Supreme Court shall be final and shall
not be subject to appeal.
A commercial court may review its own decision, which has come
into force, due to newly discovered circumstances, which are substantial for
the case and were not known to the claimant.
(XIV) Kenya:
(http://www.legalbrief.co.2a/view_1.php?artnum=8703)
Kenyan courts are cracking down in inefficiency and laxity.  Head of
the High Court’s Commercial Division, Judge Tom Mbalute, has proposed
61

various steps, including the refusal to grant adjournments of cases set for
hearing.  Hearing of matters before the commercial courts could not be
delayed unless lawyers for the parties are engaged in other matters in the
Appeal  Court, he  said,  and  no  adjournments  would  be  permitted  if  the
counsel were engaged before other judges or magistrates in the High Court
or lower courts.
(XV) Ghana:
(http://www.pefghana.org/news/details_n.cfm?EmpID=824)
It has been felt that it is increasingly necessary for the establishment
of special court to deal with commercial disputes to ensure transparency,
efficiency and  also  speed  up  the  process  of dispute  settlement  between
investors as well and promote viable trade and commerce.  At a workshop
organized on 30th April to May 2nd, 2003, it was opined that commercial
courts,  when  established,  would  cater  to  the  needs  of  the  business
community and would, in particular, encourage business development and
investment  growth  by  ensuring  timely  and  efficient  processing  of
commercial disputes.  Some of the cases to be handled by the courts, as
proposed, include: 
(a) the  contractual  relationship  of  a  business  or  commercial
organization,
(b) the liability of a commercial or business organization,
(c) the  restructuring  or  payment  of  commercial  debts  by  or  to  a
business or commercial organization or person,
(d) the  winding  up  or  bankruptcy  of  a  commercial  or  business
organization or person and 
62

(e) the enforcement of commercial court award.
Summing up:
It will be seen that several countries have introduced the concept of
‘Commercial Division’ in their judicial decision making process.  There
may  be  differences  in  certain  details  but  what  is  important  is  the
introduction of the very concept of Commercial Division.  Mostly, these are
not Courts outside the existing judicial system but of a new Division in the
existing system.  They deal with cases of high pecuniary value and are
Courts at a higher level than where the actions would otherwise have been
normally filed.  These Courts in various countries are manned by Judges
with special experience in commercial matters.  The procedure is more fast.
The Courts also have state-of-the-art high-tech systems.
63

CHAPTER IV
COMMERCIAL DIVISION – WHAT CASES HAVE BEEN ASSIGNED
IN UK, USA AND DELHI HIGH COURT
The crucial question is: How is a ‘commercial case’ identified for
allocation to the Commercial Division?   There can be a variety of cases
which can fall within the meaning of the word ‘commercial’ for purposes of
allocation to the Commercial Division of the High Court.    Further, if some
of them are within the exclusive jurisdiction of some special Courts in our
country, such cases, even if they are ‘commercial’, will have to be excluded.
We shall initially refer to the mode of allotment of commercial cases in UK,
USA  to  the  Commercial  Division  and  what  cases  are  described  as
‘commercial cases’ in Delhi High Court Rules.   We shall also refer to the
Delhi High Court rules which refer to disposal of ‘commercial cases’ and
‘commercial appeals’.
UK:
In UK, according to Rule 58.1(2) of the Civil Procedure Rules, a
‘commercial claim’ is defined as follows:
“Rule 58.1(2):  In this Part and its practice direction, ‘commercial
claim’  means any claim arising out of the transaction of trade and
commerce and includes any claim relating to –
(a) a business document or contract;
(b) the export or import of goods;
(c) the carriage of goods by land, sea, air or pipeline;
64

(d) the  exploitation  of  oil  and  gas  reserves  or  other  natural
resources;
(e) insurance and reinsurance;
(f) banking and financial services;
(g) the operation of markets and exchanges;
(h) the purchase and sale of commodities;
(i) the construction of ships;
(j) business agency; and
(k) arbitration.”
USA:
(I) Supreme  Court,  Monroe  County,  NY  State:  (Nov.  20,  2000)
Guidelines applicable for assignment of cases to the Commercial Division,
Supreme Court, Civil Bench, Monroe County in the State of New York,
state that the said Division will entertain complex commercial and business
disputes in which a party seeks compensatory damages totaling $ 25,000 or
more, exclusive of punitive damages, costs, and attorney fees; and exclusive
of  any  non-commercial  claims,  non-commercial  cross-claims,  or  non-
commercial counter-claims.    It states:
“(A) Such  business  and  commercial  disputes  shall  include  the
following types of cases:
CONTRACT
1. Breach  of  contract,  fraud  or  misrepresentation  actions
involving:
65

(a) Purchase or sale of securities.
(b) Uniform Commercial Code transactions.
(c) Purchase  or  sale  of  the  assets  of  a  business,  or  merger,
consolidation or recapitalization of a business.
(d) Providing of goods or services by or to a business entity.
(e) Purchase or sale or lease of, or security interest in, commercial
real property or personal property.
(f) Partnership, shareholder or joint venture agreements.
(g) Franchise, distribution or licensing agreements.
BUSINESS CORPORATION LAW
2. Shareholder derivative actions.
3. Dissolution or liquidation of corporations.
4. Actions involving liability and indemnity of corporate directors
and officers.
5. Actions involving the internal affairs of corporations, such as
voting  and  inspection  rights  of  shareholders  of  directors,
authorization of corporate acts or interpretations of articles  or by-
laws.
PARTNERSHIP LAW
66

6. Actions  involving  general  and  limited  partners  and
partnerships.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
7. Commercial loans (including failures to pay commercial loans),
negotiable instruments, letters of credit and bank transactions.
8. Actions involving allegations of business torts, including unfair
competition,  interference  with  business  advantage  or  contractual
relations.
OTHER COMMERCIAL MATTERS
9. Actions  involving  employment  agreements  or  employee
incentive  or  retirement  plans  (not  including  qualified  retirement
plans) in which the business or commercial issues predominate.
10. Declaratory judgment actions and third party indemnification
claims against insurance companies where the underlying cause of
action  is  contractual  in  nature  or would  otherwise  fall  within  the
guidelines set forth herein.  (Specifically not included are Declaratory
Judgment Actions and third party claims relating to fire loss, motor
vehicle actions and tort claims.)
11. Commercial class actions.
67

12. Opening of default judgments where the underlying cause of
action is commercial in nature and would otherwise fall within the
monetary and jurisdictional guidelines set forth herein.
13. Actions may involve individuals, and business entities, as long
as all other criteria are met.
(B) Matters  Not Included as Commercial Court Cases include the
following:
Non-commercial landlord/tenant disputes
Matrimonial  disputes;  including  the  enforcement  of  Separation
Agreements or Divorce Decrees
Foreclosures,  even  if  they  involve  commercial  buildings  and
commercial parties
Matters falling under the provisions of the real property actions and
proceedings law
Proceedings  to  enforce  a  judgment,  including  applications  for
information subpoenas and contempt, without regard as to whether or
not the underlying action is commercial in nature
Products  liability claims, including  merchantability and  fitness  for
some particular purpose claims
68

Discharge, modification or foreclosure of mechanics’ or other liens
Declaratory judgment actions involving indemnification claims under
insurance  policies  relating  to  underlying  actions  which  are  NOT
commercial in nature, including, but not limited to, underlying claims
for fire loss, motor vehicle actions and tort claims
Opening/vacating or modifying default judgments on actions which
are NOT commercial in nature, including all matters which do not fall
within  the  monetary  and  jurisdictional  guidelines  set  forth  under
Criteria
Actions  by  or  against  Medicare,  Medicaid,  or  the  Department  of
Social Services or enforcement of legal rights under law
Discrimination cases (age, sex etc.) except when they are part of or
under the terms of a contract
Collection  matters  involving  the  collection  for  legal,  medical,
accounting, or architectural fees
Legal,  medical  or  accounting  malpractice  actions  even  where  a
contract cause of action is also stated.”
69

II Maryland, Business and Technology Court (Task Force Report)
Assignment  of  Cases  to  the  Business  and  Technology  Case
Management  Program
1. Cases subject to Business and Technology Case Management
Program
The Task Force believes that any system for determining whether a
case  should  be  assigned  to  the  Program  must  be  flexible.  It  is
recommended that the selection system be based upon a format that
establishes that some cases be presumptively included, while others
are presumptively excluded. As the legal and business worlds develop
in the face of ever emerging technology, however, it is contemplated,
and  indeed  expected, that  such  presumptions  will  be  modified by
judicial decision and/or rule.
If  both  parties  agree  to  opt  out  of  the  Program,  this  should  be
permitted. In resolving presumptions, consideration should be given
to the desire of both parties.
Assignment to the Program should be reserved for cases where there
is  a substantial  amount in controversy. This will typically include
significant monetary damages, but may also include consideration of
potential future economic loss in cases where non-monetary relief is
the primary relief being sought (i.e., injunctive or declaratory relief).
The Program should be limited primarily to cases involving business
70

entities,  including  individual  sole  proprietorships  or  individual
partners  where  the  claim  is  against  the  partnership.  Individuals,
however, should be permitted to take advantage of the benefits of the
Program if involved in a dispute appropriate for Program designation.
Cases should present commercial and/or technology issues of such a
complex nature that specialized  treatment is likely to improve the
expectation  of a fair  and reasonable  resolution  of the  controversy
because of the need for specialized knowledge or expertise in the
subject matter or familiarity with some specific law or legal principles
which may be applicable.
Thus, the Task Force recommends that notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in any Differentiated Case Management program, cases
shall be assigned to the Business and Technology Case Management
Program based on the following criteria:
a.  Only  complaints  seeking  compensatory  damages  totaling
$50,000.00 or more, or complaints  seeking primarily injunctive or
other equitable relief, will be considered eligible for assignment to
the Program if the other criteria identified below are met.
b. Actions in which the principal claims involve the following should
presumptively be assigned to the Program.
(i)  Disputes  arising  out  of  technology  development,
maintenance  and  consulting  agreements  including  software,
71

network and Internet web site development and maintenance
agreements.
(ii) Disputes arising out of the hosting of Internet web sites for
business entities.
(iii) Disputes arising out of technology licensing agreements,
including software and biotechnology licensing agreements or
any  agreement  involving  the  licensing  of  any  intellectual
property rights, including patent rights.
(iv) Actions relating to the internal affairs of businesses (i.e.,
corporations,  general  partnerships,  limited  liability
partnerships,  sole  proprietorships,  professional  associations,
real estate investment trusts, and joint ventures), including the
rights or obligations between or among shareholders, partners
and members or the liability or indemnity of officers, directors,
managers, trustees, or partners.
(v)  Actions  claiming  breach  of  contract,  fraud,
misrepresentation or statutory violations arising out of business
dealings.
(vi) Shareholder derivative and commercial class actions.
(vii) Actions arising out of commercial bank transactions.
72

(viii) Declaratory judgment and indemnification claims brought
by or against insurers where the subject insurance policy is a
business  or  commercial  policy  and  where  the  underlying
dispute would otherwise be assigned to the Program.
(ix)  Actions  relating  to  trade  secret,  non-corporate,  non-
solicitation, and confidentiality agreements.
(x)  Business  tort  actions,  including  claims  for  unfair
competition or violations of Maryland’s Trade Secret or Unfair
and Deceptive Trade Practices Acts.
(xi)  Commercial  real  property  disputes  other  than
landlord/tenant disputes.
(xii)  Disputes  involving  Maryland’s  Uniform  Computer
Information  Transactions  Act,  including  alleged  breaches  of
the warranty provisions provided in such Act.
(xiii) Professional malpractice claims in connection with the
rendering of professional services to a business entity.
(xiv) Claims arising out of violations of Maryland’s Anti-Trust
Act.
(xv) Claims arising out of violations of Maryland’s Securities
Act.
73

c. Actions in which the principal claims involve the following shall
be presumptively not assigned to the Business and Technology Case
Management Program.
(i) Personal injury, survival or wrongful death matters.
(ii) Medical malpractice matters.
(iii) Landlord/Tenant matters.
(iv) Professional fee disputes.
(v) Professional malpractice claims, other than those brought
in connection with the rendering of professional services to a
business enterprise.
(vi) Employee/employer disputes, other than those relating to
matters otherwise assigned to the Program.
(vii) Administrative agency, tax, zoning and other appeals.
(viii) Criminal matters, including computer-related crimes.
(ix) Proceedings to enforce judgments of any type.
74

Delhi High Court Rules:
So far as the Delhi High Court is concerned, there appear to be Rules
for designating certain type of cases as ‘commercial cases’.  There are Rules
applicable also to ‘Commercial Appeals’.
In Part V, Chapter III of the Rules relating to ‘jurisdiction’, there are
four parts.  Part A of Chapter III deals with ‘Rules Regulating the Practice
of the High Court in the Hearing of Causes and Other Matters’.   Part B of
Chapter III deals with ‘jurisdiction of a single judge and the Benches of the
Court’.   Part C deals with ‘powers delegated to the Registrar for disposal of
certain Judicial Matters’.   
Appeals: Part D is relevant for our purpose and it bears the title,  Appeals
from decrees in Commercial Matters.    It contains four Rules which read as
follows:
“1. “Commercial causes” include causes arising out of the ordinary
transactions of merchants, bankers and traders, such as those relating
to  the  construction  of  mercantile  documents,  export  or  import  of
merchandize,  affreightment,  carriage  of  goods  by  land,  insurance,
banking  and  mercantile  documents,  mercantile  agency,  mercantile
usage  and  infringements  of  trade  marks  and  passing  off  actions.
Suits on ordinary loans and mortgages are not “Commercial causes.”
2. The Chief Justice shall, from time to time, nominate one of the
Judges of the Court to hear “Commercial causes”.
75

3. (a)  All  cases  under  the  Companies  Act,  1956  and  cases
affecting the responsibility of a Railway Administration as carriers,
will be treated as “Commercial causes”.
(b)  The Honourable Judges may, however, mark any other case
as a “Commercial cause” either at the request of the parties or suo
motu,  if  satisfied  that  the  said  case  is  a  “Commercial  cause”  as
defined in Rule 1.
4. All appeals, which have been marked as “Commercial causes”
by order of a Judge under Rule 3 shall be brought to a hearing as
early as may be practicable, and shall, as far as possible, be set down
before the Judge appointed from time to time by the Chief Justice to
hear “Commercial causes”, or before a Bench of which such Judge is
a member.  Such causes shall be given priority on the day of hearing
over all other appeals except part-heard appeals and cases frequently
postponed.”
Original matters:
In Part VI of the Rules, we have the Delhi High Court (Original Side)
Rules, 1967 made in exercise of powers conferred under sections 122 and
129 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and sec. 7 of the Delhi High Court
Act, 1966 (Act 26 of 1966), with respect to the practice and procedure for
the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.
Chapter XVI refers to ‘Commercial Suits’.   It contains two Rules:
76

“1. Commercial  cases  defined – Commercial suits  include suit
arising out of the ordinary transactions  of merchants, bankers and
traders;  and  amongst  others  those  relating  to  the  construction  of
mercantile  documents,  export  or  import  of  merchandise,
affraightment, carriage of goods by land, sea or air insurance, banking
and mercantile agency and mercantile usages.
2. Plaint in such cases to be marked “Commercial” Suits –
Where a plaintiff, on the presentation of the plaint, applies that his
suit may be dealt with as a commercial suit, the Registrar shall if
satisfied  that  the  suit  is  a  commercial  suit  and  has  been  brought
without undue delay, cause the plaint to be marked with the words
“Commercial Suit” in addition to the usual endorsements.
Explanation – A suit which has been brought within six months of the
cause of action having arisen has been brought without undue delay.”
It  will  be  seen  that  the  Delhi  High  Court  Rules  require  special
classification of ‘commercial’ Appeals as well as ‘original side matters’.
The Rules do define the word ‘commercial’.
Our proposals are that ‘Commercial Matters’ have to be dealt with by
the  ‘Commercial  Division  of  the  High  Courts  on  the  original  side,
consisting of matters which are above a minimum pecuniary value of (say)
rupees one crore or more and there should be a ‘fast track’ procedure and
subject to one appeal to the Supreme Court of India.    Hence, it will be
necessary to make substantial legislative changes applicable not only to the
Delhi High Court but applicable to all the High Courts.  These proposals
will be stated in Chapter VIII.
77

 
Summary: The  above  discussion  and  classification  of  cases  as
‘commercial’ for purposes of allotment to the Commercial Division in UK,
USA and for classification of contractual case in the Delhi High Court give
us a brief outline of the system.  Broadly, we have to do the following:
(a) We have initially to fix a monetary limit of (say), Rs.1 crore or
more as the minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of cases which will be
listed in the Commercial Division of the High Court.
(b) We  have  next  to  list  the  type  of  cases  which  can  be  called
‘commercial’ and be allocated to the ‘Commercial Division’ of the
High Court.
(c) We may also  exclude  from the  Commercial  Division  specified
classes of cases which are not, on their face, commercial.
(d) We may exclude from the Commercial Division, specified classes
of cases which are commercial but in regard to which some other
statute has specified a separate and exclusive Court, tribunal or
authority to exercise jurisdiction (e.g. winding up of a commercial
companies, TRAI and TDSAT, SEBI, MACT etc.).
(e) We have to provide that all these cases will be dealt with on the
original side of the High Court under a ‘fast track’ procedure with
e-filing and other high-tech facilities and that there should be a
statutory appeal to the Supreme Court of India.
(f) It will be necessary to transfer pending appeals,- which have been
filed  in  the  High  Court  against  decrees  passed  by  the  Courts
subordinate to the High Court or decrees passed by learned single
Judge of the High Court,- to the Commercial Division.  In the case
78

of such appeals which are decided by the Commercial Division, it
is not necessary to provide a statutory appeal.
(g) Execution  proceedings  arising  out  of  suits  or  appeals  filed  or
transferred to the Commercial Division must also be dealt with by
the Commercial Division.
(h) There is no need to provide a statutory appeal to the Supreme
Court except to the extent provided in Order 43 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.  
  All these aspects will be dealt with in Chapter IX. 
79

Chapter V
Allocation of Cases to Commercial Division of High Courts by
Parliamentary Statute – Constitutionally permissible
As stated in the earlier chapters, Commercial cases of high pecuniary
value deserve and require to be disposed of faster.  The existing procedures
in our trial courts have to be changed to deal with such high-value cases by
providing  a  Commercial  Division  in  the  High  Court,  (Original  side)
consisting  of  Division  Benches  with  fast  track  procedure,  in  a separate
division.  These judgments of the Commercial Division would be subject to
a statutory appeal to Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court rules may provide
for appeals being listed for preliminary hearing as is done in all cases where
a statutory appeal is available at present. 
The more important question is whether Parliament can, by law create
such a ‘Commercial  Division’ in  the  High  Court,  in  the  context  of the
powers of the High Court as they exist today, in regard to formation of a
Division and powers of the Chief Justice of the High Court to constitute
Division Benches and nominate Judges to those Benches.
It  is  well  known  that  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the  High  Court  to
constitute a separate Division and the privilege of the Chief Justice of the
High Court to constitute the required number of Benches  and to assign
judicial work to the Judges in those Benches of the High Court.  As to
whether particular types of cases have to be heard by a Single Judge or a
Division Bench is generally contained in the High Court rules or is based on
resolutions of the Full  Court of the High Court.
80

In as much as it is proposed that each High Court should have a
‘Commercial Division’ within the High Court (and it is not our proposal that
separate ‘Commercial Courts’ as such have to be created de-hors the High
Court), it is necessary to take care to see that the constitutional provisions in
this behalf are complied with in letter and spirit.  As the power of creation
of Divisions is the function of the High Court and as the power of allocation
of judicial work is vested in the Chief Justice of the High Court, it is to be
absolutely assured that the present proposals do not adversely impinge on
that powers of the High Court or the powers of the Chief Justices of the
High  Courts.   Our proposals  are intended  to  advance  these  powers,  by
creation of a separate Commercial Division in the High Court, on the lines it
has been done in UK and in USA.  As will be seen, the Constitution of India
permits  Parliament  to  enact  laws  for  constitution  of  the  Commercial
Division and for laying down its procedure and as regards appeals against
decrees/orders passed by the Commercial Division.
It may be useful in this connection to refer to sec. 6 of the (UK)
Supreme Court Act, 1981.  Section 1 states that in UK, the Supreme Court
consists of the Court of Appeal as well as the High Court with its specialist
divisions  and  other  Courts  and  the  Crown  Court  headed  by  the  Lord
Chancellor; the constitution of the Court of Appeal is mentioned in sec. 2
and  the  Divisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  are  set  out  in  sec.  3.   The
Constitution of the High Court is referred to in sec. 4.  The Divisions of the
High Court are referred to in sec. 5, namely, the Chancery Division, the
Queen’s Bench Division and the Family Division.  Then comes sec. 6 which
refers to the Patents, Admiralty and Commercial Courts.  Subsection (2) of
81

sec. 6 refers to the power of the Lord Chancellor to nominate Judges of the
High Court to the Commercial Division from time to time.  It is worthwhile
extracting sec. 6:
“The Patents, Admiralty and Commercial Courts
Sec.6 (1) There shall be
(a) as part of the Chancery Division, a Patents Court; and
(b) as part of the Queen’s Division  , an Admiralty Court and
a Commercial Court.
(2) The Judges of the Patents Court, of the Admiralty Court
and of the Commercial Court shall be such of the puisne
Judges of the High Court as the Lord Chancellor may
from time to time nominate to be Judges of the Patents
Court,  Admiralty  Judges  and  Commercial  Judges
respectively.”
In India, as stated earlier, the classification of Divisions in the High
Court is done by the Rules of the High Court framed by the Full Court or by
resolutions  of the Full Court.  The power of assigning judicial  work to
different Judges of the High Court is vested in the Chief Justice of the High
Court.  In every High Court, Judges sit either single or in panels of two or
more Judges, as per the roster prepared by the Chief Justice to hear and
dispose of various types of cases.  Some Judges are required by the Chief
Justice  of  the  High  Court  to  sit  in  Writ  Jurisdiction,  some  in  Civil
jurisdiction, others in Criminal jurisdiction and so on.  In High Courts such
as  Delhi,  Bombay,  Calcutta  and  Madras,  where  the  High  Courts  have
regular  original  side  jurisdiction  where   suits  and  other  original  civil
82

proceedings are tried, the Chief Justice nominates particular judge/judges on
the original side jurisdiction, from time to time.
But, though  we do  not have  a separate  ‘Commercial  Division’ in
India as in UK, US and other countries, we find that the Rules of Delhi High
Court in Chapter IV refer to cases being classified as ‘commercial cases’ for
purposes of Appeal as also for purposes of decision on the original side.
Such a classification is not available in all the High Courts.  This system of
commercial cases being decided separately,  has to be introduced in all our
High Courts.   Our proposals are further for a “fast track” procedure on the
original side of the High Court before a Bench of two Judges where the
value of the subject-matter is (say) as high as Rs.1 crore, with a single
statutory appeal to the Supreme Court.  High Courts may fix a figure above
Rs. 1 crore as being the minimum valuation for being dealt with by the
Commercial  Division.   But,  the  High  Court  while  fixing  such  a higher
minimum limit should, in our view, not fix a figure in excess of rupees five
crores.
Our proposals  also  are that  Commercial  cases  pending  before  the
High Court on the original side and also appeals which are pending in the
High Court and are of a pecuniary value of Rs. 1 crore or more should also
be  disposed  on  ‘fast  track’  by  a  Bench  of  two  Judges.   Execution
proceedings  arising  therefrom,  should  also  go  before  the  Commercial
Division.
However,  the  crucial  question  is  whether  by  making  a  statutory
provision  to  designate  a  Division  of  the  High  Court  as  a  ‘Commercial
83

Division’ to deal with commercial cases of value of (say) more than Rs.1
crore on the original side of the High Court, or in respect of pending appeals
of that value, we would be interfering with any of the powers of the High
Court  or  the  powers  vested  in  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  High  Court  to
constitute such a division and to assign different categories of judicial work
to  different  Judges  in  a manner  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  the
Constitution.  
The Constitutional position: High Courts existing as on 26.1.50 and those
constituted thereafter 
High Courts as on 26.1.1950:
At the outset, we have to refer to Art. 225 of the Constitution of India,
which in its turn takes us back to the previous operative provision of the
law, namely, sec. 223 of the Government of India Act, 1935.  That section,
in its turn again takes us back much backwards to sections 106(1) and 108
of the Government of India Act, 1915.  We shall presently refer to these
provisions and to the decisions of the Supreme Court of India.
(a) Constitution of India  
“Art 225:  Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the
provisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of
powers  conferred  on  that  Legislature  by  this  Constitution,  the
jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court,
and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the
84

administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make
rules  of  Court  and  to  regulate  the  sittings  of  the  Court  and  of
members thereof sitting alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same
as immediately before the commencement of this Constitution:
Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original
jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter
concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the
collection thereof was subject immediately before the commencement
of this Constitution  shall no longer apply to the exercise  of such
jurisdiction.”
(b) Government of India Act, 1935:    In view of the words ‘shall be the
same as immediately before the commencement of this Constitution’
used in Art. 225, we have to refer to section 223 of the Government
of India Act, 1935.  That reads as follows:
“Sec. 223:  Subject to the provisions of this Part of this Act, to the
provisions of any order in Council made under this or any other Act,
to the provisions of any order made under the Indian Independence
Act,  1947,  and  to  the  provisions  of  any  Act  of  the  appropriate
Legislature enacted by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature
by this  Act, the  jurisdiction  of, and  the law administered  in,  any
existing High Court, and the respective powers of the judges thereof
in relation to the administration of justice in the Court, including any
power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court
and of members thereof sitting alone or in division courts, shall be the
same as immediately before the establishment of the Dominion.”
85

(1)   Until  otherwise  provided  by  Act  of  the  appropriate
Legislature, no High Court shall have any original jurisdiction in any
matter concerning the revenue, or concerning any act ordered or done
in the collection thereof according to the usage and practice of the
country or the law for the time being in force.”
(c) Government of India Act, 1915  
“Sec.106(1):  The several High Courts are courts of record and have
such  jurisdiction,  original  and  appellate,  including  admirality
jurisdiction, in respect of offences committed on the high seas, and all
such powers and authority over or in relation to the administration of
justice  including  power  to  appoint  clerks  and  other  ministerial
officers  of the  court,  and  power  to  make  rules  for  regulating  the
practice of the court, as are vested in them by letters patent, and,
subject  to  the  provisions  of  any  such  letters  patent,  all  such
jurisdictions,  powers  and  authority  as  are  vested  in  those  courts
respectively at the commencement of this Act.”
“Sec. 108:  (1)  Each high court may by its own rules provide, as it
thinks fit, for the exercise, by one or more judges, or by division
courts constituted by two or more judges, of the high court, of the
original and appellate jurisdiction vested in the court.
(2)  The Chief Justice of each high court shall determine what
judge  in  each  case  is  to  sit  alone,  and  what  judges  of the  court,
whether with or without the chief justice, are to constitute the several
division courts.”
86

What is crucial here to note is the power vested by sec. 108(1) of the
Government of India Act, 1915 in the High Court and by section 108(2) of
that Act in Chief Justice of each High Court and these powers are continued
under sec. 223 of the Government of India, Act, 1935 and further continued
by Art. 225 of the Constitution.
This  is  so  far  as  the  existing  High  Courts  (as  on  26.1.1950)  are
concerned.  On or after 1.11.56, other High Courts have been carved out of
existing High Courts by reason of the State Re-organisation Act, 1956, the
Bombay Re-organisation Act, 1960, the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966
and other State Re-organisation Acts enacted by Parliament from time to
time.  In the case of these new High Courts, the powers of the High Court
and of Chief Justice as in the parent High Courts are continued under the
respective States Re-organisation Acts.
New High Courts
Some High Courts have been separately constituted under exclusive
enactments like the Delhi High Court Act, the Karnataka High Court Act,
and the Kerala High Court Act etc.  These Acts also contain like provisions
as set out below.
For example, in the Delhi High Court Act, 1966, while sec. 4(d) states
that the Art. 225 of the Constitution shall not apply, sec. 7 refers to and
applies the ‘practice and procedure’ of the High Court of Punjab to the
87

Delhi High Court while sec. 10(2) deals with the powers of the Chief Justice
as follows:
“Sec. 10(2): Subject to the provisions of sub section (1), the law in
force immediately before the appointed day relating to the powers of
the Chief Justice, single Judge and Division Courts of the High Court
of Punjab and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of
those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation
to the High Court of Delhi.”
That  means  that  if  sec.  108  of  the  Government  of  India  Act,  1915  is
applicable to Punjab High Court, that will also apply to the Delhi High
Court.  
It is also necessary here to refer to the provision in sec. 15 of the
Delhi High Court Act which bears the heading ‘Savings’.  That section
reads as follows:
“Section 15: Savings – Save as provided in sec. 4, nothing in this Act
shall  affect  the  application  to  the  High  Court  of  Delhi  of  any
provisions of the Constitution, and this Act shall have effect subject
to any provision that may be made on or after the appointed day with
respect to that High Court by any legislative or other authority having
power to make such provision.”
88

The provisions of the Kerala High Court Act and the Karnataka High Court
Act  and  other  such  Acts  are  similar  to  the  above  provisions  and  are
therefore subject to subsequent legislation..
Summing up: 
Thus so far as the existing High Courts as on 26.1.50 and those High
Courts which have come into existence as off shoots of the existing High
Courts under the provisions of the States Re-organisation Act, 1956 or the
Punjab Re-organisation Act, or the Bombay Re-organisation Act or other re-
organisation Acts, Art. 225 governs.    Here the powers of the High Court
and of the Chief Justice can be modified by the appropriate Legislature.   So
far as High Courts governed by special Acts like the Delhi High Court,
Karnataka High Court or the Kerala High Court etc. are concerned, they
contain provisions which permit the power of the High Court  and of Chief
Justice to be modified by any legislature or other authority having power to
make such provision.
Legislative entries and entry relating to ‘administration of justice’.
It will next be necessary to refer to the provisions in the Constitution
as to which legislature can deal with the present proposals.
We  shall  also  be  referring  to  the  meaning  of  the  words
‘administration of justice’ occurring in the legislative entries.  We shall do
so a little later when we deal with Entry 1 of List II of Government of India
Act, 1935 and Entry 3 of List II of the Constitution (upto 3.1.1977) and
89

entry 11A of List III after 3.1.1977 as to which is the appropriate legislature
that can make a provision for the designation of a Division of the High
Court as a ‘Commercial Division’ of the High Court so as to enable the
Chief Justice of the High Court to nominate Judges to the ‘Commercial
Division’ from time to time.  
We shall now refer to the relevant entries in the Lists in Schedule VII
of the Constitution as on today:
Constitution of India (as amended w.e.f. 3.1.1977)
List I
(a) Entry 77: Constitution, organization, jurisdiction and powers of the
Supreme Court  (including  contempt  of  such  Court),  and  the  fees  taken
therein; persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.
(b)  Entry 78: Constitution and Organisation (including vacations) of the
High  Courts  except  provisions  as  to  officers  and  servants  of  the  High
Courts; persons entitled to practise before the High Court
(c)  Entry  95: Jurisdiction and powers of all Courts, except the Supreme
Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List; admiralty jurisdiction.
List II
(a) Entry 3: Officers and servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and
revenue courts; fees taken in all Courts except the Supreme Court.
90

(b)  Entry 65: Jurisdiction and powers of all Courts,  except the Supreme
Court, with respect to matters in this List.
List III
(a) Entry 11A: Administration of Justice; Constitution and organization of
all Courts, except the Supreme Court and High Courts.
(b)  Entry 13: Civil Procedure Code, including all matters included in the
Code  of  Civil  Procedure  at  the  commencement  of  this  Constitution,
limitations and arbitration.
(c)  Entry 46: Jurisdiction and powers of all Courts, except the Supreme
Court, with respect to any of the matters in this list.
(Earlier, ‘Administration of Justice’ was in Entry 3 of List II upto 3.1.1977).
Question is what are the relevant legislative powers of Parliament in
this behalf?   From the above Entries in the Constitution, it is clear that so
far as the legislative powers of Parliament under List I and List III vis-à-vis
the High Courts are concerned, the position is that:
(a) Under List I Entry 78, Parliament can legislate on the subject of:
‘Constitution and organization (including vacations) of the High
Courts (except provisions as to officers and servant of the High
Court); persons entitled to practise before the High Courts, under
91

Entry 95, Parliament can, in respect of any matter in List I, make
laws as to the jurisdiction and powers of all Courts.
(b) Under  List III Entry 11A, Parliament can make laws concerning
the ‘Administration of Justice’.  (It has to be noted that the words
in Entry 11A “except the Supreme Court and High Courts” which
have the effect under that Entry, of debarring the Union and State
Legislatures from dealing with the ‘Constitution and organization
of the Supreme Court and High Court’ under List III do not affect
Parliament’ powers inasmuch the power to deal with ‘constitution
and organisation of High Court’ is already vested in Parliament
under Entry 78 of List I. Therefore, the prohibition in List II is
virtually confined to barring the State Legislature from dealing
with  ‘constitution  and  organization  of  Supreme  Court  or  High
Court’).
In addition, under Entry 13, Parliament can make laws in respect of
the Civil Procedure Code (including all matters included in the Code of
Civil Procedure at the commencement of the Constitution), Limitation and
Arbitration.
Further, under Entry 95 of List I and Entry 46 of List III, Parliament
can  make  laws  relating  to  ‘jurisdiction  and  powers  of  High  Court  and
subordinate courts with respect to any of the matters in List I and admiralty
jurisdiction and List III.  As to the meaning of those words in these two
entries, the law is now well settled, as detailed below.
92

Thus, so  far  as  Parliament’s  powers  under List  I and  List  III are
concerned, if we combine Entry 78 of List I and Entry 11A and 13 of List
III,  it  pertains  to  the  following  matters:  Constitution  and  organization
(including vacations) of the High Courts (except provisions as to officers
and servants of the High Court); persons entitled to practise before High
Courts;  Administration  of Justice;  ‘jurisdiction  and  powers  of  the  High
Court with respect to any of the matters in List I and Admiralty jurisdiction
with respect to any of the matters in List III (including Entry 13 of List III
Civil Procedure Code).
We  shall  make  reference  to  some  leading  cases  decided  by  the
Supreme Court of India while interpreting these Entries in List I, II and III.  
Here one important thing to note is the omission of certain words in
Entry 3 of List II and insertion thereof in Entry 11A by the Constitution
42nd Amendment Act, 1976. Before the said 42nd Amendment (which came
into force w.e.f. 3.1.1977) the words ‘Administration of Justice, constitution
and organization of all Courts, except the Supreme Court, and High Courts’
were contained in the opening part of Entry 3 of List II.  After the judgment
of the Supreme Court in State of Bombay vs. Narootamdas  (AIR 1951 S.C.
69) and  Mohindroo O.N. vs.  Bar Council of Delhi (AIR 1968 SC 888)
Parliament felt that the above words ‘Administration of Justice……………
High  Courts’ must  be  transferred  from Entry 3 of List  II to  the  newly
inserted Entry 11A of List III.  Therefore, the judgments of the Supreme
Court interpreting the words ‘Administration of Justice, constitution and
organization of all Courts’ in Entry 3 of List I as contained therein before
3.1.77 must equally apply to the interpretation of the said words after they
were transferred to Entry 11A of List III on or after 3.1.77.
93

The  earliest  of  such  judgments,  in  fact,  deal  with  corresponding
sections  of  the  Government  of  India  Act,  1935.   The  case  in  State  of
Bombay vs.  Narootamdas (AIR 1951 SC 69) related to interpretation of
corresponding entries in the Government of India Act, 1935.  A Constitution
Bench had to deal with the vires of the Bombay Civil Court Act, 1948
passed by the Bombay Legislature.  The corresponding Entries in Entry 53
of List I, Entries 1, 2 of List II and Entry 15 of List III of Schedule VII in
the Government of India Act, 1935 came up for consideration.  Five Judges
wrote separate concurring judgments upholding the legislation passed by
the Bombay Legislature.  The Entries in the 1935 Act were as follows:
(a) Entry 53 of List I: Jurisdiction and powers of all Courts except the
Federal Court with respect to any of the matters in this List…..
(b)(i) Entry 1 of List II :  ……the  administration  of  justice,  constitution
and organization of all Courts except the Federal Court….
    (ii) Entry 2 of List II : Jurisdiction and powers of all Courts except the
Federal Court with respect to any of the matters in this List……
(c) Entry 15 of List III : Jurisdiction and powers of all Court except
the Federal Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List.
The facts in the above case were as follows:
The  Bombay Act of 1948  purported  to  create  an  additional  Civil
Court for Greater Bombay having jurisdiction to try, receive and dispose of
all suits and proceedings of a civil nature not exceeding a certain value,
subject to certain exceptions.  The case related to a suit based on promissory
notes and the question was whether in respect of such suits, the pecuniary
jurisdiction  of  the  Courts  could  be  enhanced  from  Rs.  10,000/-  to  Rs.
25,000/- by the State Legislature?
94

It was contended on behalf of respondent that the Act was ultra-vires
the powers of the Legislature of the State of Bombay, because it conferred
jurisdiction not only in respect of matters which the Provincial legislature
was competent to legislate upon under List II, schedule 7 but also in regard
to matters in respect of which only the Central or Federal Legislature can
legislate  under  List  I  (as  for  instance,  “promissory  notes”,  which  was
mentioned in Entry 28 of List I).  Three issues arose in the case:
(1) Whether the Bombay Act was ultra-vires of State Legislature?
(2) Whether, in any event, sec. 4 of the Act was ultra vires of the State
Legislature, and 
(3) Whether the Bombay High Court had jurisdiction to try the suit?
It may be noted that sec. 4 of that Act authorised the Provincial Government
to enhance the jurisdiction of the City Civil Court upto the limit of Rs.
25,000/-.  The existing jurisdiction was otherwise Rs. 10,000/-.    It is this
enhancement by the State Legislature that was questioned as ultra vires of
the powers of the State Legislature.
The High Court held on issues 1 and 3 in favour of the State but on
issue 2 it held that sec. 4 amounted to delegation of legislative powers and
was void.
Entry II of List II of the Schedule in the Government of India Act
used the words: “…administration of justice, constitution and organization
of all Courts except the Federal Court”.
But reliance was placed by the respondent, for contending that the
State Legislature had no powers, on Entry 53 of List I, which used the
words “jurisdiction and powers of all Courts except the Federal Court with
95

respect to any matters in this List”.  Argument was that promissory notes
fell under Entry 28 of List I and hence in suits or promissory notes, only the
federal legislation must legislate.
In the Supreme Court, Fazl Ali J, with whom the other four Judges
agreed, held that the words ‘administration of justice’ and ‘constitution and
organisation of Courts’ in Entry 1 of List II of the 1935 Act conferred very
wide and general legislative powers on the State legislatures (these words
are  now  shifted  to  Entry 11A  of  list  III  from 3.1.77)  to  ‘try suits  and
proceedings of a civil as well as criminal nature, irrespective of who the
parties to the suit or proceedings or what its subject matter was’.  These
powers  must  necessarily  include  the  ‘power  of  defining,  enlarging,
amending and diminishing the jurisdiction of the Courts and defining their
jurisdiction territorially and pecuniarily’.
As far as Entry 53 of List I on which the respondent relied, Fazl Ali J
observed further that it was not permissible to read the words “with respect
to any of the matters in this List” found in Entry 53 of List I, (or in Entry 2
of List II and Entry 15 of List III), into Entry 1 of List II, and contend that
the words ‘administration of justice’ in Entry 1 of List II, if it concerns (say)
promissory notes falling under Entry 28 of List I, only Parliament could
legislate.  Such an interpretation, it was held, was not correct.   The Entries
are independent.  Entry 1 of List II is wide as stated above.  The purpose of
Entry 53 of List I or (Entry 2 of List II or Entry 15 of List III) was different
– they related to jurisdiction and powers of all Courts “with respect to any
of the matters” in those Lists, thereby merely permitting to “add or bar” the
jurisdiction of Courts, with regard to any of the subjects listed in those
Lists.  For example, in respect of Civil Courts, sec. 9 granted jurisdiction to
all civil courts unless barred expressly or implicitly.  Under Entry 53 of List
96

I or Entry 2 of List II or Entry 15 of List III, additional jurisdiction on
various subject matters referred to in these Lists could be conferred on the
Civil Courts or barred from the Civil Court.
It is necessary to refer to the observations of Fazl Ali J as to the
meaning  of  the  words  ‘administration  of  justice,  constitution  and
organization  of  all  Courts’  in  Entry  1  of  List  II.   The  learned  Judge
observed:
“The expression ‘administration of justice’ has a wide meaning and
includes administration of civil as well as criminal justice, and in my
opinion Entry 1 in List II which I have quoted, is a complete and self-
contained entry.  In this entry, no reference is made to the jurisdiction
and  powers  of  Courts,  because  the  expression  “administration  of
justice” and “Constitution and organization of Courts’, which have
been used therein  without any qualification or limitation, are wide
enough to include the power and jurisdiction of Courts, for how can
justice be administered if Court have no power and jurisdiction to
administer it, and how can Courts  function  without  any power or
jurisdiction.  Once the fact is closely grasped, it follows that by virtue
of the words used in Entry 1 of List II, the Provincial Legislature can
invest the Courts constituted by it with power and jurisdiction to try
every case or matter that can be dealt with by a Court of Civil or
Criminal  jurisdiction  and  that  the  expression  ‘administration  of
justice’  must  necessarily  include  the  power  to  try  suits  and
proceedings of a civil as well as criminal nature, irrespective of who
the parties to the suit or proceedings or what its subject-matter may
be”.
97

It was held on that basis that the State Legislature could, under Entry
1  of  List  I  (administration  of  justice;  constitution  and  organization  of
Courts)  raise  the  pecuniary  limit  to  Rs.  25,000/-  even  in  respect  of
promissory notes, even though promissory note’ was covered by an entry in
List I.
“This power (i.e. administration of justice) must necessarily include
the power of defining, enlarging, altering, amending and diminishing
the jurisdiction of the Courts and defining the jurisdiction territorially
and pecuniarily.”
Fazl Ali J thus clarified that the purpose of Entry 53 of List I, Entry 2
of List II and Entry 15 of List III was merely to provide for special power
either to enlarge the jurisdiction of the Courts or to bar it, with reference to
the subject-matter of any of the Entries in Lists I, II and III and that the
words in these entries cannot be read as controlling the general jurisdiction
permitted to be created by  Entry 1 of List II; ‘administration of justice:
constitution and organization of the Courts’.
In  O.N. Mohindroo   vs.  Bar Council, Delhi: AIR 1968 SC 888 the
Supreme Court followed the above ruling as to the interpretation of the
words ‘constitution and organization of Courts’ in Entries 77, 78 of List I
and as to the meaning of the expression ‘jurisdiction and powers of Court’
in  Entry  95  of  List  I  or  Entry  65  of  List  II  or  Entry  46  of  List  III.
Incidentally, Entry 3 of List II which uses the words ‘Administration of
justice;  constitution  and  organization  of  all  Courts,  except  the  Supreme
Court  and  the  High  Court –  officers  and  servants  of  the  High  Court;
98

procedure in rent and revenue courts fees taken in all courts except Supreme
Court, ‘were interpreted’.
In Indu Bhushan vs. State of West Bengal: AIR 1986 SC 1783, the
pecuniary jurisdiction  of the  city Civil  Court  in Calcutta  was  raised  by
amendment from Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 50,000/- and later to Rs. 1 lakh.  The
Supreme Court referred to Entry 77, 78 of List I, Entry 3 of List II, Entry 65
of  List  III and  Entry 46  of List  I.  It  referred  to  State  of Bombay vs.
Narootamdas  AIR 1951 SC 69 and held that the legislation was intra-vires
of the West Bengal legislature – because of Entry 3 of List II which used the
words ‘Administration of justice, constitution and organization of all Courts
except the Supreme Court and the High Court.
In  State  of  T.N. vs.  G.N.  Venkataswamy AIR  1995  SC  21,  the
Amendment  of  1972  to  the  T.N.  Revenue  Recovery  Act  came  up  for
consideration.  The case also dealt with the 1974 Amendment.  Though
Entry 11A of List III was referred to in the judgment incidentally, the case
did not come under the Constitution ( Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976,
which introduced Entry 11A in List III.  The Amending Act of 1972, 1974
were governed by entries in List I, II, III as they stood before 1976.  In this
case too, the earlier judgment in  State of Bombay vs.  Narootamdas   AIR
1951 SC 69 was followed.  However Entry 11A was explained to be as wide
as Entry 3 of List II before the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act,
1976  and Entry 1 of List II of 1935 Act.
Interpretation of the words ‘administration of justice’ in Entry 3 of
List II of the Constitution (upto 3.1.77) and in Entry 11A of List III w.e.f.
99

3.1.77, is to be based on the above interpretation of these words by the
Supreme Court given in the context of Entry 1 of List II of Government of
India Act, 1935.
The important change that came about under the Constitution (Forty-
second  Amendment)  Act,  1976,  with  effect  from   3.1.1977,  as  already
stated, was that the above words in Entry 3 of List II ‘Administration of
justice,  constitution  and  organization  of  all  Courts  except  the  Supreme
Court and the High Court’ were deleted and transferred as Entry 11A of List
III.
The  effect  of  this  change  by  the  Constitution  (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976 (w.e.f. 3.1.77) is that the general words in Entry 3
of List II in Schedule VII of the Constitution, “administration of justice”
dealing with the power to enlarge the jurisdiction of the Courts in respect of
subject matter of all items in Lists I, II and III and in respect of territorial or
pecuniary jurisdiction got shifted to the Concurrent List III by insertion of
Entry 11A;  the  jurisdiction  remains  and  may, however,  be  subjected  to
restriction or by way of addition in relation to matters in List I, II and III
(under the entries which relate to ‘jurisdiction and powers’ of all Courts
with respect to any of the matters in the respective Lists, Entry 95 of List I,
Entry 65 of List II, Entry 46 of List III).  (In Entry 11A of List III, the latter
part which excludes the constitution and organization of High Court from
List  III,  no  doubt,  precludes  the  Parliament  and  State  Legislatures  to
legislate on that subject by virtue of List III but, as already stated, so far as
the Parliament is concerned, the power to legislate  on ‘constitution  and
100

organization of High Courts’ is already vested in it under Entry 78 of List I).
As stated earlier, by combining Entry 78 of List I and Entry 11A of List III,
Parliament can  w.e.f. 3.1.77 legislate on
“administration of justice and constitution and organization of High
Court”.
This situation is identical with what it was under Entry 1 of List II
under the Government of India Act, 1935 which was interpreted by the
Supreme Court in State of Bombay vs. Narootamdas: AIR 1951 SC 69 as
conferring the widest powers on Parliament in relation to subject matter (be
it in List I, II or III) and as to territorial and pecuniary jurisdiction.  This
general power and jurisdiction which is wide is now vested in Parliament
under  Entry  11A  of  List  III  (and  the  State  Legislatures).    The  said
legislatures can however add to or reduce or bar the same under the special
legislative powers of the corresponding legislature, in regard to the entries
in  each  of  Lists  I,  II  or  III.  (e.g.  promissory  notes  by  law  made  by
Parliament under List I).
Thus, in view of the width of the words in Entry 11A of List III;
‘administration of justice’ read with Entry 78 of List I which deals with
‘constitution  and  organization  of  High  Courts’,  the  specification  of  a
separate  division  in  the  High  Court for  ‘commercial  matters’  above  a
particular pecuniary level, (say) Rs. 1 crore can be stipulated by Parliament
and a ‘fast track’ original side procedure can be introduced by Parliament.
Simultaneously, so far as pending appeals in the High Court before a Single
Judge or a Division Bench are concerned, Parliament can provide that these
101

can also be disposed of by the Commercial Division by ‘fast-track’ appellate
procedures.  This need not be done necessarily by the High Court Rules or
by resolution of full Court.   In as much as Art. 225 of the Constitution  uses
the words “subject to law by the appropriate legislature”, this can be done
by Parliament.  Likewise, the power of allocation of Judges to this Division
by the Chief Justice can also be specified in the statute to be made by
Parliament.
From more than one point of view, there is, in our view, no doubt
that, constitutionally, Parliament can make a law under Entry 78 of List I
read with Entry 11A of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
creating a separate division as ‘Commercial Division’ in the High Court and
prescribe pecuniary limits for pending and new cases of (say) Rs.1 crore or
above on the original side with ‘fast track’ procedure and also permit the
separate Division Bench to deal with pending appeals in the High Court,
belonging to the pecuniary jurisdiction of (say) Rs.1 crore (or such higher
figure as may be fixed by the High Court) and to enable the Chief Justice of
the High Court to nominate Judges of the High Court to that Division from
time to time.  It is also  proposed that these Judges can also be Judges
appointed under Art. 224A of the Constitution of India – that is to say, they
can be High Court Judges who have retired from that High Court or any
other High Court.  If there are Judges who have retired and have exceptional
knowledge of commercial laws, they can be appointed in the same or any
other  High  Court  and  nominated  to  the  ‘Commercial  Division’.   Other
matters to be provided for have already been referred to the earlier Chapters
and the actual constitution, jurisdiction and powers of Commercial Division
will be dealt with in Chapter IX.
102

103

Chapter VI
Fast-track procedure for Commercial Divisions in UK and USA
It  is  proposed  that  we  apply  a  ‘fast-track’  procedure  for  the
‘Commercial Division’ cases in the proposed Commercial Division of the
High Courts.  The Law Commission, in its 176th Report on Amendments to
the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 proposed a ‘fast-track’
procedure for arbitration in India, where parties opt for such a procedure.
We shall keep that model as a guide for prescribing a ‘fast-track’ procedure
in Commercial cases of pecuniary value as high as Rs.1 crore or more.  
This chapter has  to be read in conjunction with the next chapter,
chapter VII which will deal with high-tech facilities, such as on-line filing,
video-conferencing and etc.
Before we go into the actual formation of the special procedure, we
shall refer to the special procedures in UK and USA.
UK: The (UK) Civil Procedure Rules supplemented by the ‘Commercial
Court Guide’ deal with the procedure in the Commercial Courts.
Way back, England had the Commercial Court practice guided by
Theobald Matthew’s Practice of the Commercial Court.  (See Scrutton’s
‘The Work of the Commercial Courts’ (1923) 1 Cambridge Law Journal 6).
There have been number of Practice Directions.  The official ‘Commercial
Court  Guide’  (5th  Ed)  was  published  in  1999  and  now  we  have  the
104

‘Admiralty and Commercial Court Guide’ (6th Ed) (Feb. 2002).  As stated in
the ‘Introduction’, this edition of the Guide was published to coincide with
the introduction of Parts 58, 61 and 62 of the Civil Procedure Rules dealing
with  commerce  and  Admiralty  Proceedings  and  proceedings  relating  to
Arbitrations respectively.   Most of the provisions which had hitherto been
contained in the practice directions made under Part 49 and the 5th edition of
the Commercial Court Guide are now to be found in these new rules and
their  associate  practice  directions,  although  the  Guide  still  contains  a
number of additional provisions which are necessary to ensure the efficient
conduct of business in the Admiralty and Commercial Courts.
The Guide is published with the approval of the Lord Chief Justice.
The Guide is not intended to be a blueprint to which all litigation
must unthinkingly conform.  As in the past, it seeks to provide a modern and
flexible framework within which litigation can be conducted efficiently and
in the interests of justice.  The Guide has still to be read in conjunction with
the Civil Procedure Rules and Practice Directions.
The (UK) Civil Procedure Rules, 1999 came into force in April 1999
with the aim of streamlining the civil justice process and resolving as many
cases as possible without resorting to court proceedings, by introducing new
‘protocols’ for the pre-issue stages of some forms of litigation.  The Civil
Procedure Rules, 1998 replace the Rules of the Supreme Court, 1965 and
the County Court Rules, 1981.
105

Proceedings  in  the  Commercial  Court  are  governed  by  the  Civil
Procedure Rules, 1998 (CPR) and Practice Directions (PD); CPR, Part 58
and the associated PDs govern the procedure.
Civil Procedure Rules (UK) Part 58, Commercial Courts
Part 58 of the Civil Procedure Rules deal with ‘Commercial Courts’
and modifies the Civil Procedure Rules, 1998 in certain respects, insofar as
Commercial Claims are concerned.
Rule  58.1,  refers  to  the  ‘scope  of this  Part  and  its  interpretation.
Clause (2) of Rule 58(1) defines ‘ Commercial Claim’ as meaning any claim
arising out of the  transactions  of trade and commerce and includes  any
claim relating to –
(a) a business document or contract;
(b) the export or import of goods;
(c) the carriage of goods by land, sea, air or pipeline;
(d) the exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural resources;
(e) insurance and re-insurance;
(f) banking and financial services;
(g) the operation of markets and exchanges;
(h) the purchase and sale of commodities;
(i) the construction of ships;
(j) business agency; and
(k) arbitration.
106

Rule 58.2 refers to the ‘specialist list’ which is a specialist list for
claims proceeding in the Commercial Court.  Clause (2) thereof says that
one  of  the  judges  of  the  Commercial  Court  shall  be  in  charge  of  the
commercial list.
Rule 58.3 states that the Rules and the practice directions apply to
claims in the commercial list unless this Part 58 or a practice direction
provides otherwise.
Rule 58.4 read with Rule 30.5(3) provides that an application for the
transfer of proceedings to or from a specialist list must be made to a judge
dealing with claims in the commercial list and that a Commercial Court
Judge may order a claim to be transferred to any other specialist list.
Rule  58.5  refers  to  the  (pre-litigation  stage)  claim  form  and  for
service of particulars of claim within 28 days of service of claim form.   In
fact, Rule 58.5(1)(a) requires the defendant to inform – on receipt of the
claim form – if he intends to defend the claim.
Rule 58.6 refers to ‘acknowledgement of service’ within particular
number of days of service of claim form.
Special procedure is prescribed for service outside (local) jurisdiction
or abroad.
Rule 58.7 refers to ‘Disputing the Courts’ Jurisdiction.    It says that
an application under Rule 11(1) must be filed by the plaintiff within 28 days
107

after filing an acknowledgement of service and if the defendant files an
acknowledgement of service indicating an intention to dispute the courts’
jurisdiction,  the claimant  need  not  serve particulars  of claim before the
hearing of the application.
Rule 58.8 refers to ‘Default Judgment’ if the defendant fails to file an
acknowledgement of service and the claimant need not serve particulars of
claim before he may obtain or apply for default judgment in accordance
with Part 12 and Rule 12.6(1) applies with the modification that para (a)
shall be read as if it referred to the ‘claim form’ instead of the ‘particulars of
claim’.
Rule 58.9 deals with ‘Admissions’.    It says that Rule 14.5 does not
apply and that if the defendant admits part of a claim for a specified amount
of money, the claimant may apply under Rule 14.3 for judgment on the
admission.  Rule 14.14(1) applies with the modification that para (a) shall
be read as if it referred to the ‘claim form’ instead of the ‘particulars of
claim’.
Rule 58.10 refers to ‘Defence and Reply’ and refers to Rule 15 which
requires defence to be filed within 14 days of service of particulars of claim.
Rule 58.10 requires that the claimant must file any reply to the defence and
serve all other parties within 21 days after service of the defence.  
Rule  58.11  permits  the  Court  to  proceed  with  the  claim  in  the
commercial list without the filing or service of statements of case.
108

Rule 58.12 states that Part 8 (alternative procedure for claims) applies
to claims in the commercial list, with the modification that a defendant to a
Part 8 claim who wishes to rely on written evidence must file and serve it
within 28 days after filing an acknowledgement of service.
‘Case-management’ in the Commercial Court is dealt with in Rule
58.13.   Sub-clause  (1)  of  Rule  58.13  states  that  all  proceedings  in  the
commercial list are treated as being allocated to the multi-track and Part 26
(Case-management) does not apply.   (Multi-track is covered by Part 29).
Sub-clause (2) of Rule 58.13 states that in Part 29 only rule 29.3(2)
(legal representative to attend case-management conferences and pre-trial
reviews) and rule 29.5 (variation of case-management time-table) with the
exception of rule 29.5(1)(c), apply.
Sub-clause (3) of Rule 58.13 states that, as soon as practicable, the
Court  will  hold  a  case-management  conference  which  must  be  fixed  in
accordance with the practice direction.
Sub-clause  (4)  of  sec.  58.13  states  that,  at  the  case-management
conference or at any hearing at which parties are represented, the Court may
give  such  directions  for  the  management  of  the  case  as  it  considers
appropriate.
Rule 58.14 refers to ‘disclosure-ships papers’.   Rule 58.15 refers to
‘judgments and orders’.
109

Commercial Courts’ Guide, 2002 (UK)
The  Guide  consists  of  sections  A  to  P  and  Appendices  1  to  16.
Section A is preliminary.
Section B deals with Commencement, Transfer and Removal; Section
C  to  Particulars  of  Claim,  defence  and  reply;  Section  D  to  ‘Case
Management in the Commercial Court; Section E to Disclosure, Section F
to Application, Section G to Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR); Section
H to Evidence for trial; Section J to trial; Section K to After Trial; Section L
to Multi-party Disputes; Section M to ‘Litigants in person’; Section N to
‘Admiralty’; Section O to Arbitration and Section P to ‘Miscellaneous’.
Section D is important as it deals with Case Management.  The pre-
trial dates for parties taking various steps are heard by a single judge on the
commercial  side.    Section  D  prescribes  ten  key  features  of  case
management in  the  Commercial  Court and  clause  D4.2  states  that  all
applications in the case, except applications for interim payment, will be
heard and the trial itself, will be headed by one or other of the designated
judges.
Clause  D5  states  that,  in  order  that  the  judge  conducting  case
management conference may be informed of the general nature of the case
and the issues which are expected to arise, after service of the defence and
any reply (if any) by solicitors, counsel for each party shall draft an agreed
case-memorandum which  must  contain  (i)  a  short  and  uncontroversial
110

description  of  what  the  case  is  about  and  (ii)  a  very  short  and
uncontroversial summary of the material preceding history of the case.  The
memorandum is only to help the judge understand the issues in the case
broadly.
Under clause D6, parties shall try to produce an agreed list of issues.
Under D7, case management bundle of various documents is to be prepared,
including  an  agreement  in  writing  made  by  the  parties  to  disclose
documents without making a list or any agreement in writing that disclosure
(or inspection or both) shall take place in stages.
Clause D8 deals with Case Management Conference and application
for that purpose.  Under clause D8.7 at the Case Management Conference,
the judge will
(i) discuss the issues in the case and the requirement of the case,
with the advocates in the case;
(ii) fix the entire pre-trial time-table, or, if that is not practicable,
fix as much of the trial time-table as possible; and
(iii) in appropriate cases, make an ADR order  .
Clause D8.8 states that Rules  3.1(2) and  58.13(4) which  enable stay of
proceedings while the parties try to settle the case by alternative means,
apply.   In appropriate cases, ADR order can be made without a stay of
proceeding at the pre-trial stage.
111

Clause D8.9 states that the pre-trial time-table will normally include
(i) a progress monitoring date and (ii) a direction that parties meet the Clerk
to the Commercial Court, to obtain a fixed date of trial.
Under clause D8.10 parties by consent can vary these dates other than
the date fixed for trial, to suit their convenience.
Under clause D10.10, Case Management Conference must take place
normally  within  6  weeks  after  service  and  the  filing  of  defendant’s
evidence.
Under clause D11, it is said that the Court will continue to take an
active role in the management of the case throughout its progress to trial.
Clause D12 refers to ‘Progress Monitoring’ for which a date will be
fixed at the Case Management Conference.
Under  clause  D16,  most  cases  will  be  given  fixed  trial  dates
immediately  after  the  pre-trial  time-table  has  been  set  at  the  Case
Management Conference.
Clause  D17  states  that  at  the  case  management  conference,  an
estimate will be made of the minimum and maximum lengths of trial.  The
estimate will appear in the pre-trial time-table and will be the basis  on
which a date for trial will be fixed.  Clause D17.2 provides for revision if
Advocates change but clause  D17.3 requires a confirmed estimate of the
112

minimum and maximum lengths of the trial, signed by the advocates who
are to appear at the trial, be attached to the pre-trial checklist.
Under clause D18.4, parties must attempt to agree upon a time-table
for the trial, providing for oral submissions, witnesses of fact and expert
evidence.  Claimant has to file a draft time-table in this behalf.
Sec. G of the Guide which deals with ADR is also important.  ADR is
not confined to mediation or conciliation.  Clause G1.2 states that ADR
(i) significantly helps parties to save costs;
(ii) saves  parties  the  delay  of  litigation  in  reaching  finality  in
disputes;
(iii) enables parties  to achieve settlement of their disputes  while
preserving their existing commercial relationships and market
reputation;
(iv) provides  parties  with  a wider  range  of solutions  than  those
offered by litigation; and
(v) is likely to make a substantial contribution to the more efficient
use of judicial resources.
As per clause G1.3, the Commercial Judge will, in appropriate cases, invite
the parties to consider if that dispute or particular issues in it, could be
resolved  by  ADR.    This  will  be  considered  at  the  case  management
conference.   Under G1.7, the judge may make appropriate orders.
113

Under G2.1, the Court will provide, without prejudice, non-binding,
early neutral evaluation of a dispute or particular issues.
Under clause G2.4, the Judge  in charge will  nominate a judge  to
conduct such evaluation but the judge who is so nominated, will take no
further part in the case, either for the purpose of hearing of applications or
as the judge at trial, unless parties agree otherwise.
Section  H  deals  with  ‘Evidence  at  Trial’.    Under  H1.1,  “the
witnesses” statements in prescribed form have to be filed.  This should be
factual and must be in the witness’s own words, should not contain lengthy
quotation from documents, should not be argumentative and must indicate
which  part  of the  statements  are  made from one’s  own  knowledge  and
which  from  other  sources,  giving  details  of  source.   It  must  contain  a
statement by the witness that he believes the matters stated in it are true;
proceedings for contempt of court may be brought against a person if he
makes,  or  causes  to  be  made, a  false  statement  in  a  witness  statement
without an honest belief in its truth (see Civil Procedure Rule 32.14(1)).
Clause H1.2 states it is improper to put pressure of any kind on a
witness to give anything other than his own account of the matter.   It is also
improper to serve a witness statement which is known to be false or which it
is known that the maker does not, in all respects, actually believe to be true.
Under  cl.  H1.5,  witness  statement  is  treated  a  chief  examination
unless the Court orders otherwise.
114

It also says that in an appropriate case, the trial judge may direct that
the whole or any part of a witness’s evidence in chief is to be given orally.
Under cl. H1.6(a), a witness who has given written statement can give
oral  evidence  to  amplify the  same or  give  evidence  in  relation  to  new
matters, subject to Court permission.   A written witness statement may be
allowed  to  be corrected  by a  supplemental  statement,  subject  to  court’s
permission.
Under  cl.  H3,  evidence  by  video-link is  permitted,  with  Court
permission.   In  granting  permission,  the  Court  will  be  concerned  in
particular to balance any potential savings of costs against the inability to
observe the witness at first hand when giving evidence.
Under  cl.  H4,  evidence  taken  abroad  may  be  given  with  Court
permission (see Civil Procedure Rules, Part 34), such as by issue of letters
of request.
Section  I  deals  with  ‘Trial’  and  provides  for  mode  of  filing
documents,  skeletal  arguments,  case  law,  oral  arguments  etc, leading  to
judgment.
Clause J12 provides for Draft Judgment to be given to counsel with
stamp as follows:
“Unapproved Judgment.  No permission is granted to copy or use in
Court”
115

and bearing the rubric 
“Confidential  to  counsel  and  solicitors, but  the  substance  may be
communicated to clients  not more than one hour before giving of
judgment”
Draft Judgment is supplied to counsel one day in advance.  Counsel can
point out ‘typographical or other errors of a similar nature’ which the judge
might wish to correct.
The  requirement  to  treat  the  text  as  confidential  must  be  strictly
observed.   Failure to do so amounts to contempt of Court.
Under J12.2, judgment is  not treated  as  delivered  till  it is  finally
pronounced in open Court.     Execution is contained in sec. K and states the
decree will go to the master in the QB Division or to a district judge.
USA:
State  of  New  York (Commercial  Division)(Supreme  Court,  New  York
County):
Rules of the Justices of the Commercial Division, Supreme Court,
New  York  County  (see  http://www.nycourts.gov/comdiv/consolidated_
Rules.htm).  For electronic filing, these Rules apply unless inconsistent with
sec. 202.5-6 of the Uniform Rules for Trial Courts.
116

Part I deals with General Rules; Rule 1 refers to ‘Appearances by
Counsel  with  knowledge  and  Authority’;  Rule  2  to  ‘Settlement  and
Discontinuances’; Rule 3 to ‘Cases Marked – Off Calendar’; Rule 4 states
Division Justices do not accept pages of any sort by fax unless indicated
otherwise by the Justice in a particular case; Rule 5 refers to ‘Information
on cases’ and Rule 6 to ‘Special Part 27 Calendar Number’.
Part 2 refers to ‘Conferences’ and starts with Rule 7.  Rule 7 deals
with ‘Preliminary Conferences’.  Such conferences have to be held within
45  days  of  assignment  of  a  case  to  the  Commercial  Division,  unless
impracticable for other reasons.  Rule 8 deals with ‘Consultation Among
Counsel  and  with  the  Client,  prior  to  Preliminary  and  Compliance
Conferences’, when counsel will discuss about (i) resolution of the case, in
whole or in part, and (ii) discovery and other issues.  Rule 9 deals with
‘Familiarity  with  outstanding  motions’,  Rule  10  with  ‘Submission  of
Information’, Rule 11 with ‘Discovery Schedule’, Rule 12 with ‘Stay of
Discoveries’, Rule 13 with ‘Non-Appearance at Conference’, Rule 14 with
‘Adherence to Discovery Schedule’ and Rule 15 to ‘Disclosure Disputes’;
Rule 16 deals with ‘Adjournment of Conferences’.  It refers to the position
before each of the particular judges for example, as follows:
“Contact Chambers by Conference Cell.
Freedman, Moskowitz, Romas JJ: No adjournment permitted.
Gammerman J: Adjournment permitted for good cause.  Contact clerk
of the Part.
Lowe  J:  One  adjournment  only  permitted  on  a  showing  of  good
cause.  The adjournment may not exceed 30 days
117

Part  III deals  with  ‘Motions” and  starts  with  Rule  17,  i.e. urgent
motions.  Rule 17 deals with Form of Motion Papers, Rule 18 with Length
of Motion Papers, Rule 19 Sun-Reply and post-submission Papers. 
Rule  19-a  deals  with  ‘Statement  of Material  Facts  on  Motion  for
Summary Judgment’.  This rule effective from 3.5.2002 reads as follows:
“Rule  19-a:  Statement  of  Material  Facts  on  Motion  for  Summary
Judgment:
(a) Upon any motion for summary judgment OTHER THAN A
MOTION PURSUANT TO CPLR 3213, there shall be annexed
to the notice of motion a separate, short and concise statement
of the material fact as to which the moving party contends there
is  no  genuine  issue  to  be  tried.   Failure  to  submit  such  a
statement may constitute grounds for denial of the motion.
(b) The papers opposing a motion for summary judgment OTHER
THAN A MOTION PURSUANT TO CPLR 3213 shall include
a separate, short and concise statement of the material facts as
to which it is contended that there exists a genuine issue to be
tried.
(c) All  material  facts  set  forth  in  the  statement  required  to  be
served by the moving party will be deemed to be admitted for
purposes of the motion unless controverted by the statement
required to be served by the opposing party.
118

(d) Each statement of material fact by a movant or opponent must
be followed by citations to evidence submitted in support of or
in opposition to the motion”.
Rule 23 refers to ‘Oral argument’.
Part IV deals with regular ‘Trials’.  Rule 26 states that once a trial
date  is  set,  counsel  are  immediately  to  determine  the  availability  of
witnesses.  If, for any reason, Counsel are not prepared to proceed on the
scheduled date, the Court is to be notified within 5 days of the date fixed,
failing  which  they  shall  be  deemed  to  have  waived  any  request  for
adjournment of the trial.
Rule 27 states that failure of the counsel to attend the trial at the time
and date scheduled will constitute waiver of the right of that attorney and
his or her client to participate in the trial for the period of counsel’s absence.
Rule 28 states that estimated length of trial will have to be furnished
by parties, after consulting their witnesses, at least 5 days before trial.
Rule 30 requires ‘Pre-marking of Exhibits’ by counsel on both sides,
to the extent of documents not in dispute.  A separate list of plaintiff’s and
defendant’s  undisputed  documents  will  be  prepared.   Another  list  will
contain disputed documents.  Such lists have to be submitted 5 days before
trial.
119

Rule 31 refers to ‘Identification of Deposition Testimony’ which is
referable to those areas of evidence which can be offered without objection
and to areas where evidence will be offered in the context of objections
raised.  This list should also be submitted 5 days in advance.  The Court will
rule upon the objections at the earliest possible time after consulting the
Counsel.
Rule  32  refers  to  ‘Pre-trial’  Memorandum.   It  requires  that,  in
complex  cases,  counsel  should  submit  Pre-trial  memorandum  as  it  will
facilitate  efficient  presentation  of proof.  It  has  to be submitted  5 days
before trial and should not exceed 25 pages.  No Memoranda in response
shall be submitted.
Rule 33 deals with scheduling of witnesses.  It says that 5 days before
trial, each party shall inform the counsel and the opposite side as to the
witnesses it wants to examine.
Rule  35 deals with ‘Pre-trial’ Conference.
Monroe County: Commercial Division, N.Y. State.
The rules are similar to the rules of New York County.  Part I is
‘General’, part II deals with ‘Conferences’, Part III with ‘Motions’, Part IV
with ‘Trials’.
India:  We shall refer to our proposals for ‘fast track’ trials in India in
Chapter IX.
120

Chapter VII
Commercial Division – are high-tech and follow on-line systems in other
countries
In this Chapter, we shall refer to high-tech systems and on-line filing
procedures,  as  are  available  in  various  countries  – Singapore,  US, UK,
Northern Ireland, etc.  We shall refer in Chapter VIII to certain proposals
placed before us by the National Informatics, India (NIC), which has all
along been installing computer and information systems in the superior and
subordinate Courts in India for well over a decade.
Singapore:
Singapore’s judicial system marked a milestone in July 1995 with the
opening of Technology Court I, one of the first Courts in the world to have
an  integrated  computer,  multimedia  and  video-conferencing  system  to
facilitate the conduct of Court proceedings.
Five years later, in the year 2000, the Technology Court II came into
being.  It is an improved version of Tech Court I and is housed in Court No.
3 of the Supreme Court of Singapore and cost about  $ 2 million.  It had
additional  features  such  as  ‘Video-marker-system’ and  ‘flat-screen  LCD
panels’ instead of 21 inch CRT monitors.
121

Sing  Tel  Aeradio,  the  leading  systems  integrator  in  Singapore
provides the audio-visual equipment and project management for the new
technology Court.  All the cameras, microphones, visualisers, projection
screens and video-players are ‘remote-controllable’ using a colour touch-
screen panel.  The Court officer is able to control the audio and lighting
level in the Court room, adjust the cameras and visualisers, preview the
images before projection, and activate the playback recording as well as
video-conferencing systems.  The control panel also allows pre-sets to be
programmed and saved, hence reducing set-up time in a trial continuing
over several days.  Court hearings can also be filmed for records.
Like its predecessor, Tech Court II has a video-conferencing system
which allows witnesses outside Singapore to testify in a court case.  This
greatly reduces the hassles of flying them in for the hearings.
There is also a separate witness-room in Tech Court 2 for vulnerable
witnesses such as children and rape-victims to give evidence ‘away’ from
the Court room.  “This saves these witnesses from any emotional trauma
they may otherwise suffer from,- having to face the accused in open court.”
Another  enhanced  feature  of  Tech  Court  2  is  the  video-marker
system, which allows the Judge, witness and examining counsel to annotate,
each in a different colour, over any image displayed on the screen.
Instead of having to mark on all the copies, the witness just needs to
mark on the screen for all to see.  The markings captured on the screen can
then be printed for distribution or recorded for future reference.
122

Singapore wants  to develop  a ‘paperless’ litigation  system and to
achieve a more efficient way of presenting cases in Court.
US: Court - room 2000 for the New Millennium:
New  York:  (http://www.courts.state.ny.us/supetmanh/courtroom_2000
htm).   The  Commercial  Division  of  the  State  of  New York  operates  a
pioneering Court-room 2000 for the New Millennium containing the latest
courtroom technology.  This Courtroom has helped the Commercial Court
to be placed in the forefront of technological innovations in the State Court
systems of U.S.
The Courtroom
(a) provides litigants with state-of-the-art technology, allowing cases
to proceed in the most efficient and effective manner.
(b) provides  the  Bar,  Judges  and  Court-staff  with  the  latest
technological options for the litigation process.
(c) serves as a technological laboratory for all Courts in the State. 
(d) provides a training ground for attorneys, Judges, court-staff, law
students and court reporting students.
Courtroom 2000 features the following:
123

Real-time Court Reporting Facilities: Allows for instantaneous voice-to-text
transcriptions, word indexing in transcripts, exhibit indexing and paperless-
transfers.
Electronic Transcripts: By means of special soft-ware, transcripts can be
delivered securely by e-mail with enhanced viewing, mouse-click searching
and indexing capabilities.
Presentation of Electronic Evidence:  Attorneys are able to present evidence
to the Judge and Jury through a wireless communicator or in the form of
digitized  evidence  on  CD-ROM  by video  monitors  conveniently  placed
around the Courtroom.  A presenting attorney can ‘zoom in’ on a portion of
an item of electronic evidence or screen.  A ‘Kill switch’ on the Bench will
permit the Judge to turn off monitors until a particular item of evidence is
admitted or if the Judge determines that certain images should not be made
available to the Jury.  Digitized video deposition will be displayable along
with  synchronization  to  real  time  transcripts,  greatly  facilitating
examination of prior deposition testimony and trial testimony.
An Interactive ‘Whiteboard’:  This replaces the conventional black-board.
Presentation of drawings or writings can be made in large formats or video
monitors in the courtroom using a sophisticated touch-sensitive screen.  An
attorney or witness can highlight aspects of a document of particular interest
by writing over or drawing on an image of it and can store the notations on a
computer.  The screen interacts with virtually any computer based material.
Hard copies of the displayed items can be obtained from a colour-laser-
printer.
124

Touch-screen-Monitor:   Located  at  the  witness  box,  this  monitor  and  a
connected  light pen can be used by a witness to make pieces of evidence
for  illustrative  purposes.   An  expert-witness,  for  instance,  can  mark
drawings on a display to explain testimony clearly and dramatically for the
Judge or Jury.
Animation: Computer-generated animation may be displayed on monitors
for the Judge and Jury.  Attorney can present animated explanations for
events, functions and the like, to supplement the testimony of expert and
fact witnesses.  Such representations can have a powerful impact in helping
findings  of  fact  to  understand  complex  events,  processes  and  bodily
functions.
Customized  Integrated  Electronic  Podium:   Replacing  the  traditional
podium, the electronic podium serves  the normal function of permitting
attorneys to test papers during examination in the course of questioning but
also  does  much  more  –  it  holds  equipment  used  to  present  evidence
electronically in the Courtroom; a light pen for annotation by Counsel on
items  of  evidence  displayed  on  monitors  to  the  Judge  and  Jury;  a  flat
monitor on which the attorney can see the item of evidence being displayed
to the Judge or the Jury; a video cassette recorder, a wireless communicator
that  projects  items of proof on  monitors;  and a visual  image printer  to
capture any frame from a video or still source for preservation purposes.
Personal  Computer  Docking  Stations:   Located  at  counsel’s  table,  the
witness  box,  the  bench  and  the  podium,  these  connections  permit  the
125

presentation or analysis of evidence by witness or counsel.  Attorneys will
be able to receive real-time transcriptions and to communicate electronically
with locations outside the court house, such as their law-offices, while the
proceedings are taking place or during recesses.
Video-cassette Recorder:  Connected to the evidence presentation system,
the recorder facilitates presentation and playback of taped evidence.
Component-Computer:  This computer is specifically designed to handle the
processing of all information and to run software needed in the courtroom.
Other Equipment:  The Courtroom is equipped with a portable acoustical
system and an LED display system.
The Courtroom accommodates Commercial Division cases and cases
outside the Division would also benefit from access to this equipment.
Manhattan Supreme Court, New York City – Courtroom 2000:
(http://www.smarttech.com/profiles/supreme.asp)
In room No. 228 of the N.Y. County Court house a groundbreaking
innovation has taken place.  Underneath the floor, wires connect computers
located around the room, to monitor screen of antique wood paneling.  Flat
screen monitors are stationed at key locations, including the Judge-Bench,
jury  box,  attorney’s  tables  and  clerks’  desks,  for  use  in  displaying
photographs,  documents  and  other  presentations.   The  Court  is  also
126

equipped  with  PC  docking  stations,  VCR,  real-time  transcription
capabilities – and a SMART BOARD which is an interactive whiteboard.
Unveiled in 1997 as a test project in Manhattan’s Supreme Court,
(Commercial  Division),  Court  2000  is  a  state-of-the-art  facility  that
harnesses the power to modern-day technology to increase efficiency of the
judicial process.  Typically, several commercial trials and many mock-trials
run by students and law associations are conducted each year.  The first of
its kind in the State, it is Courtroom of the future, housed in a Courtroom of
the past.
The SMART BOARD interactive white board is used as an electronic
blackboard.   It  enables  users  to  electronically  display  information  to
multiple viewers, accent important points with colour, saves files and print
multiple copies.  A witness can come upto the  board, pick up a pen from
the  SMART  Pen  Tray  and  write  directly  on  the  SMART  BOARD’S
interactive whiteboard’s surface.  These notes are then saved for future use.
A Courtroom is a fast-face, high-tension setting.  Because facts and
figures  appear  and  disappear  quickly,  the  evidence  needs  to  remain
available for review after it is presented.  Before the introduction of the
SMART Board interactive blackboard, “preservation of information was a
problem, as sometimes mistakenly erased from the blackboard”.  Now, with
the SMART Broad interactive whiteboard, “reproduction of the information
presented during sessions is much easier”, because anything written on the
touch-sensitive  whiteboard  is  saved  and then  printed out  for the  Judge,
juries and others for reference at anytime.  The single great advantage of the
127

SMART Board interactive whiteboard is the ability to display and preserve
information.  Once again, the evidence presents a strong case for using the
SMART Board interactive whiteboard in the courtroom.
Mississippi:  Hinds County Courtroom 2000, Jackson, Mississippi.
(http://www.cohinds.ms.us/pgs/circuit/factsheetgreen-asp)
The electronic courtroom is a trial presentation system installed with
cutting-edge, easy-to-sue technology for civil and criminal trials.
The heart of the system is a high-speed network that links television
monitors and peripheral devices.
The nerve centre is the ‘Power Podium’ which replaces the traditional
lectern with a high-tech electronic presentation platform that is networked
to large monitors located in front of the jury and smaller monitors for each
counsel’s table, the witness and the court reporter.
The system is controlled from the Judge’s Bench by a touch screen
monitor.
The Court equipment is as follows:
VCR
ELMO
Pointmaker (TM)
Videophone
Computer Input
128

400 MHZ Pentium 
TM Computer
Professionally Integrated Routing Equipmen
Hi FidelityAuto-mixer and Speakers
Annotating Capability
Judges Kill Switch
Judges Touch Screen Control Panel
Wireless Lapel Microphone
S. Video VHS Video Player
Overhead Video Projector
Annotation Light Pen
Video Conference – Hook-up
PC or Mac
SonyTM  Digital Color Printer
ElmoTM Document Camera
MarantzTM Audio Cassette 
LCD Data Projector
View-SonicTM Flat Panel Monitors
72” x 96” Parabolic Screen
In  the  Hinds  County  Atticus  Courtroom  2000,  (see
http://www.co.hinds.us/pgs/circuit/court 2000.irene.usp) the “Atticus” is a
portable multimedia and presentation unit featuring  the latest in courtroom
technology.  It is designed to make trials easier and quicker for Judges,
attorneys and most importantly, the jury.  “It is pretty well-known fact that
juries retain more information when they are shown something.  This makes
it far easier on everyone when it comes to decision time”, says Gary Lee,
129

Courtroom Technology Manager at RSI (Kansas City, MO), the makers of
Atticus.
Judge James E. Graves, Jr. spearheaded the campaign to bring Atticus
to the Hinds County Courthouse.  He had the support of the Hinds County
Law Library Committee, the Hinds County Bar Association and the Hinds
County Board of Supervisors.  “I felt strongly about this project and I’m
proud of the fact that we did not have to use tax payer’s money”, he said.
Judge Graves and Judge Green are the only Judges in Hinds County who
utilize Atticus Courtroom 2000.
RSI company has built the Hinds County Atticus to meet the vision of
Judge Green’s courtroom 2000.  It features a 72” x 96” parabolic screen for
outstanding viewing capabilities.  In addition, attorneys are able to display
documents  and  annotate  them with  a Light  pen,  utilize  a digital  colour
printer that prints video stills in the fly and play 3-D animation, video and
audio chips using state-of-the-art equipment.
RSI maintains an electronic courtroom in Jackson County Missouri.
In addition, Atticus has been installed in several courtrooms throughout the
County including US Attorneys in Charlotte, North Caroline and Salt Lake
City,  Utah,  and  two  bankruptcy  courts  in  Nevada.   RSI  is  an  applied
information management company providing an integrated approach to high
quality  efficient  products  and  services  for  legal  and  corporate  clients
nationwide. 
130

So far as the high-tech systems in the Commercial Courts in India are
concerned, we shall refer to them in the next Chapter, i.e. Chapter VIII.
Chapter VIII
Proposals by the National Informatics for establishing E-Courts in India:
In  this  Chapter  we  shall  refer  to  the  high-tech  systems  for  the
Commercial Courts which will be E-Courts, as per the scheme prepared by
the National Informatics Centre (NIC).
E-COURTS
The E.Courts systems proposed by NIC are meant for all the Courts.
It can be started as a Pilot Project for the proposed Commercial Courts.
Introduction
The  advent  of  Information  Technology  has  necessitated  many
organisations to re-look into their business processes.  The Courts are
not  an  exception  to  ignore  the  ever-changing  technological
developments.  The already implemented Management Information
Systems  (MIS)  have  given  a  clue  to  the  Courts  to  consider  the
concept of E-Courts.  Though the E-Court word is familiar to most of
the stakeholders of the judiciary, the concept need to be discussed in
detail for better clarity. 
131

E-Courts can be defined as the Courts, which take the assistance of
the  Information  Technology  and  Communication  (ITC)  Tools  for
conducting   their  routine  functions more efficiently .
Objectives
The basic objectives of E-Courts concept are: -
a. To help in conducting the court proceedings efficiently
b. To  enable  the  advocates  to  argue  their  cases  from  remote
locations
c. To record the witness’s statement from remote locations
d. To establish Electronic Filing (E-Filing)  facility
e. To make the courts as paperless as possible
Functional Components
Following are the functional components of an E-Court to achieve the
above-mentioned objectives :-
Video Conferencing
The  minimum  required  components  at  each  endpoint  of  a
videoconference are a microphone, a camera, a Coder/Decoder
(codec), a monitor and a speaker. The camera and microphone
capture the image and sound, the codec converts the video and
audio into a digital signal, encodes it and sends it out. The
132

codec at the other end decodes the signal and distributes the
video and audio to the monitor and speaker. 
A  video  conference  can  run  on  almost  any  type  of  digital
network.  ISDN  is  currently  the  most  common  network.
However, IP is  quickly becoming  widespread. As a general
rule, the higher the bandwidth used to connect the systems, the
better the audio and video quality. The people are easy to see
and hear and the picture is sharp.
Video conferencing system can be used to interact with anyone
who  has  a  standards-based  video  conferencing  system  or  a
telephone. Videoconferencing is increasingly being seen as a
mission critical technology and it can be an integral part of
functioning of a court on real time basis. 
Security
Using  encryption,  a  feature  available  with  all   video
conferencing systems, the video calls will have a high level of
security. The encryption  process  occurs  automatically at the
start of a video conference without the caller having to make
any adjustments to the system. It would be advisable to go for
standards-based equipment to ensure that the VC systems are
interoperable  regardless  of  manufacturer,  that  they  are
equipped with the latest technology, and that the  investment
continues to pay off in the long run. 
133

Connecting several sites at the same time is one of the greatest
values of videoconferencing.  One can  connect up to 4 video
sites and 1 audio site in a single call with the simple touch of a
button. With much sophisticated system one can connect up to
16 video and 16 audio sites.
Utility of Video Conferencing (VC) System in E-Court
The  VC  facility  in  the  E-Courts  can  be  used  for  the
following purposes: -
(a)  For recording Statements of witnesses from a remote  
location;
(b)      To establish a Virtual Court at remote location;
(c)       For routine  interactions between two branches of the
High Court and the Supreme Court.
VC for Witness Statement Recording
The VC facility can also be  used for recording the statements
of witnesses who, for some reason, are not in a position to
attend to the Court for recording statements.  The witness being
at the remote location on a similar VC System can get  recorded
his/her  statement.   The  same  facility  can  also  be  used  for
judicial  remand  extension  of  under-trials  lodged  in  jails,  if
applicable.  
Virtual Court
134

The Video Conferencing (VC) facility in the E-Court will get
connected  to  another  VC  unit,  which  may  be  at  remote
location.  In these remote courts the practicing advocates will
appear and argue their cases, as if they are in the High  Court,
while  the judges are sitting at the High Court. 
For this, the rules of the High Court need to be changed for
arguing/hearing cases from remote locations.  
Functioning of VC
In each E-Court, there will be  a VC System with two cameras,
one facing the Judges and the other facing the advocates. There
will be two plasma  screens in the Court, which can be viewed
by  the  Judges  and  the  Advocates.  There  will  also  be  a
Document  camera  for  projecting  paper  documents  on  the
Plasma screens, a good Public Addressing system with wireless
microphones, two 29 inch TV sets, DVD recorder for recording
the  VC  proceedings  and  a  computer   system  with  Internet
connectivity.   
This VC System will be connected  to a remote VC System
installed  either  within  or  outside   the  country.   These  two
locations can be connected using three pairs of ISDN lines,
providing  384  kpbs  connectivity.   With  this  capacity  of
connectivity, though the pictures will not be  of the quality of
usual TV pictures, but it will provide comfortable viewing of
people on the screen.  If the remote VC Unit with which the EC
135

Court’s VC is connected is not in the same city, then STD rates
of that city will be applicable as call charges, during the period
of VC Conference.  As the VC facility is easy to operate, with
little training to the Court staff it can be operated by themselves
without any difficulty.
E-Filing
The concept of Electronic Filing envisages, filing of cases in
the court by the advocates sitting at his or her office or home.
The essential format in which the advocates need to file his/her
case  will  be  pre-defined  for  eliminating  any  possible  filing
defects.  As soon as a case is electronically filed, the case will
automatically get registered when the filed case complies with
the requisite format.  The registration in the first instance will
be provisional and it will be final only when formal scrutiny
takes place.  The person electronically filing a case will also
get a receipt with the digital signature of the court authority. E-
filing should be mandatory for all cases coming before the E-
courts.
 
 Adequate security features  will have to be provided to the
process of electronic filing. The electronic filing process will
ensure that the person filing the case by electronic means will
be entitled to receive the proceedings of the court electronically
on his computer system.  This practically eliminates the person
concerned  to  go  around  the  registry  to  collect  the  required
136

information  such  as  case  nos.,  copies  of  notices,  copies  of
orders/judgments, etc.  The process of electronic  filing may
require certain changes/amendments to the existing rules and
regulations of filing process.  For this the court needs to take
appropriate action.
E-mail based Communication
The E-court will have communication from the Registry of the
High  court  to  litigants/advocates  through  E-mail
communication.  Communication  such  as  Issuing  of Notices,
Filing defects and any other correspondence that needs to be
sent  to  the  litigants  can  be  through  the  electronic
communication. This will ensure speedy and ensured delivery
with almost no cost and less manpower requirement. 
For implementing the above concept, the High Court may need
to change its rules for allowing the Registry to have alternate
communication methods with the litigants. In addition to this
the Filing Proforma also need to be changed for inclusion of E-
mail address of litigants and advocates. E-mail addresses will
have to be mandatory for the litigants to mention while filing
their cases electronically.
E-Advocacy
The  Information  Technology  based  advocacy  enables  the
advocates to explain their point of view more clearly to the
137

judges with the help of Multi-Media based presentations in the
court rooms.  This process will help the judges in following the
arguments put forward by the advocates more easily.  With the
introduction  of  the  IT  Advocacy  while  arguing  a  case,  an
advocate can either include a reference to the precedents  in
his/her IT based presentation or by accessing Internet he/she
can  get it  displayed on the large screen installed in the court.
It will avoid advocates carrying big bundles of law reference
books to the courtrooms. For achieving IT based advocacy in
the courts, the advocates and to some extent the judges, need to
have basic knowledge of  computers.  This can be achieved by
conducting special training programs for the judges and the
advocates.
 
The 'Presentation Display' that is coming on the big screen if
required, will also be made simultaneously visible on all the
computer systems available in the courtroom. The judges can
watch the display on the computer monitors installed in front of
them on the dais. The advocates can watch the display either on
the monitors installed near to them or on the big screen. 
To achieve the objective  of E-Courts concept, each courtroom
will be equipped with enough computer systems. For example:
there  will  be  two  Multi-media  systems  on  the  dais  for  the
judges (one for each judge), two systems for the advocates and
two  systems  for  the  court  masters.  In  all  there  will  be  six
computer systems in each E-court. In addition to these systems,
138

the  E-court  room  will  also  be  equipped  with  Audio-visual
equipment  such  as  projector,  Plasma  screens  etc.  These  IT
based tools will provide a better way of presenting complex
cases  involving  voluminous  documents,  which  are  often
difficult to manage and present.
While  passing  orders  the  judges  can  directly  dictate  to  the
computer  systems  through  voice  dictation  software  such  as
‘Dragon Naturally Speaking’ or ‘Via-voice’ dictation software.
As  the  technology  of  any  dictation  Software  is  not  highly
developed,  the  dictated  order  will  have  to  be  edited by the
Court Masters sitting in the Courtrooms. This will be possible
only  when  all  the  computer  systems  in  the  courtroom  are
interconnected.  This  interconnection  will  enable  the  court
masters to access the orders dictated by the judges on their
computer systems.
Facilitation Centre
As the court is going to be fully networked, the information
that has public relevance can be provided at any centralized
place, within the court complex.  For this purpose it is proposed
to create a Facilitation  Centre  for the benefit  of litigants  &
Advocates.   At  the  Facilitation  Centre  the  following
information can be provided: - 
 Pending cases information CASE-STATUS 
 Judgments
139

 Orders/Proceedings Copy
 Filing defects
 High Court Rules
 File tracing information
In the Facilitation center there will be 3-4 Information Kiosks
with touch screen facility connected to High Court’s Network.
These  Computer  systems  will  have  soft  touch  key  display
keyboards  without  attached  keyboards  so  as  to  avoid
mishandling and pilferage of computer peripherals.  Some of
the facilities available at the Facilitation Centre will also be
made available on Internet for the benefit of a wide-range of
users
Orders & Judgments on Internet
After the enactment of the Information and Technology Act,
2000, digital signatures are valid. It needs to be ensured that
Certified copies are issued  to the litigants on Internet under the
court’s Digital Signature Certificates.   This will immensely
help the litigant public in  obtaining Certified  copies with out
physically coming to the Court. 
Visual presentation of the functioning of E-Courts in other
countries will enable lawyers, Judges and Court staff to easily
understand the new E-Court procedures and systems.
                         E-Courts 
Hardware & Software requirement
140

Sl.no
.
Item Qty. Unit price
(In Rs.)
Total
I. Hardware
1. Server System One 300,000   300,000
2. Desktop Clients Seven   40,000   280,000
3. Laser Printers Two    40,000     80,000
4. Multi-Media
Projector
One 200,000   200,000
II Video-Conferencing
Equipment
1. Video-Conferencing
System
One 600,000   600,000
2. Plasma Screen 42
Inch
Two 500,000 1000,000
3. Extra Camera One 100,000   100,000
4. Document camera One 200,000   200,000
5. Public Address
system
One 100,000   100,000
6. Television sets 29
Inch
With trolley
Two 50,000   100,000
7. Cordless Micro
Phone
Four 10,000    40,000
8. DVD Recorder +
Player
One 20,000    20,000
III Software
1. Windows 2000
Advance Server
One 55000   55,000
SQL server
Enterprise
One 200000 200,000
2. Visual Studio .NET One 50000   50,000
3. Dictation Software Two 30,000   60,000
Technical manpower Thirty Six
Man months
10,000 360000
IV Network
1. Local Area Network
2. ISDN Lines 300,000
141

Grand Total 40,45,000
Chapter IX
Fast Track in the Commercial Division in High Courts in India
Towards  the  end  of  Chapter  VI  which  dealt  with  ‘Fast  Track
procedure for Commercial Division in UK and USA’, we stated that the
‘fast-track’ procedure for India would be dealt with in Chapter IX.   We
shall, accordingly, elaborate our proposals for ‘fast track’ procedure in the
proposed  Commercial  Division  in  High  Courts  in  our  country  in  this
Chapter.   It is recommended that the Bench will be of two High Court
Judges and there can be more than one such Bench in each High Court
depending upon the need.
The  purpose  of  the  proposals  in  this  Chapter  is  to  expedite
commercial  cases  of  high  pecuniary value  and  create  confidence  in  the
commercial circles, within India and outside, that our Courts are quite fast,
if not faster than Courts elsewhere.
The proposed Commercial Division will deal with high value matters
and shall be a Court of original jurisdiction.   It shall also be an appellate
Court but only in regard to appeals pending in the High Courts as on the
date of the commencement of the proposed enactment.  It shall also deal
with the  execution proceedings  arising  out  of the above said classes  of
cases.
142

The ‘fast track’ procedure must, in our view, apply to all types of
cases referred to above.  
It must apply to new commercial cases of a minimum value of Rs.1
crore or above, as may be determined and ratified by the High Court.  (This
minimum may be fixed by a High Court, at a figure between Rs. 1 crore
upto Rs. 5 crores).  It will also apply to pending commercial suits of a
minimum threshold value of Rs.1 crore or more (or such high pecuniary
value as may be determined by the High Court).   Some of these pending
suits of this value may be suits filed in the Courts of unlimited jurisdiction
being Courts subordinate to the High Court.  These have to be transferred to
the High Court and to be allocated to the Commercial Division. Some may
be suits pending on the original side of the Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and
Madras  High  Courts  or  such  other  High  Court  having  such  original
jurisdiction and these have to be allocated to the Commercial Division.
Other matters pending in the High Court which have to be allocated
to the proposed Commercial Division of the High Court are the pending
appeals from decree of courts subordinate to the High Court and pending
appeals to Division Benches from judgments of learned single Judges on the
original  side  of  the  High  Court.    Here  too,  the  cases  must  be  of  the
pecuniary value stated above.
There may also be appeals in the High Court against interlocutory
orders filed under Order LXIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or
applications under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or filed
143

under articles 226/227 of the Constitution questioning interlocutory orders
passed by the courts subordinate to the High Court or there may be Letters
Patent  Appeals  (or  similar  appeals  permitted  by  High  Court  Acts)
questioning  the validity of interlocutory orders passed by learned single
Judges of the High Court on the original side.  We are referring to these
types of matters arising out of suits of the above said pecuniary value which
are pending. These have also to be allocated to the proposed Commercial
Division.
The proposed enactment will contain a provision fixing the minimum
pecuniary value at Rs.1 crore (or more as may be determined by the High
Court) for purposes of transfer and/or allocation of the above cases to the
Commercial Division.   There will be a specific provision enabling the High
Court to increase the minimum pecuniary value above Rs.1 crore.  This
minimum cannot, in our view, be fixed at any amount in excess of Rs. 5
crores.  We are proposing delegation of the power of fixing the pecuniary
limit as stated above, inasmuch as in some States like Maharashtra, Delhi,
West Bengal and Tamil Nadu, where property or contract values are high, it
may be  necessary to  fix  a  higher  threshold  value  so  that  the  proposed
Commercial Division may not be overburdened at the threshold itself.   The
High  Court  may fix  a  minimum value  higher  than  Rs.1  crore  (but  not
exceeding a minimum of Rs. 5 crores) and at a later point of time, may even
bring it down but not below Rs.1 crore.
Counter claims filed along with written statements, even if they are
not of the prescribed value, will have to go before the Commercial Division.
144

As  stated  above,  the  proposed  Commercial  Division  shall,
notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908,  be  the
executing Court not only for original matters filed before it or transferred to
it but also in respect of suits where the regular appeals against decrees in
suits of the prescribed high pecuniary value which are transferred to the
Commercial Division as stated above.
Next, it becomes necessary to define what is meant by the words
‘commercial cases’.  In Chapter IV of this Report we have referred to the
pattern  of  cases  which  are  treated  as  ‘commercial’  in  UK  and  USA.
Incidentally, in that chapter, we have also referred to certain Rules framed
by the Delhi High Court providing for certain class of cases being treated as
‘commercial’.   As stated in Chapter IV, it is not merely sufficient to define
what we mean by the word ‘commercial’ but we should also exclude a class
of  ‘commercial  cases’  from  the  purview  of  the  proposed  Commercial
Division  if  they  are  liable  to  be  adjudicated  by  Courts  or  tribunals  of
exclusive jurisdiction – e.g. insolvency matters or winding up proceedings
or such commercial cases falling within the domain of bodies/authorities
constituted under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 or ;
Securities Exchange Board of India Act, 1993,  Debt Recovery Tribunals
dealing with debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions, Rent Tribunals,
Motor Accident Claims Tribunals  and other Courts or Tribunals  dealing
with a specific subjects.   However, it may be noted that some Acts such as
the Consumer (Protection) Act, 1986  provide that the said  enactment is
intended to provide remedies in addition to the normal remedies in civil
courts.  For example, section 3 of that Act states that the ‘provisions shall in
addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the
145

time being in force’.   In fact, in several cases, the National Consumer
Commission has refused to entertain cases for justifiable reasons such as for
example, where serious issues of fraud, cheating or conspiracy are involved.
Such cases  can  still be filed in the High  Court  and  brought before  the
proposed Commercial Division.
So far as actions for which exclusive courts or tribunals have been
constituted by statute, there can, as already stated, be a general provision in
the  above  definition  that  the  ‘commercial  disputes’  which  are  of  the
minimum pecuniary value stated above and which may be decided by the
Commercial Division, they will not include cases where the jurisdiction of
the Civil Court is barred either expressly or by implication by any Central or
State law.
Cases cognizable by a criminal court cannot obviously be filed in the
proposed Commercial Division because the Court is proposed to deal with
civil cases.
‘Commercial Dispute Cases’
We shall, initially, refer to the classification of ‘commercial cases’ by
the Delhi High Court in its Rules.   We have extracted the Rules in Chapter
VI already but we again extract that definition:
“Commercial  cases”  include  cases  arising  out  of  the  ordinary
transactions of merchants, bankers and traders, such as those relating
to  the  construction  of  mercantile  documents,  export  or  import  of
146

merchandize,  affreightment,  carriage  of  goods  by  land,  insurance,
banking  and  mercantile  documents,  mercantile  agency,  mercantile
usage and infringements of trade marks and passing off actions.  Suits
on ordinary loans and mortgages are not “Commercial cases”.”
The above definition is wide and, in fact, has to be widely construed.
However, we propose to modify it and add certain Explanations to cover
some specific type of cases referred to below.
Can disputes concerning ‘commercial property’ be brought before the
Commercial Division if they involve ‘immovable property’, such as where,
for example, it is  partnership  property or where  there is  a mortgage  or
charge  or  lien  created  on  immovable  property  as  collateral  security  for
performance  of  obligations  under  a  commercial  contract?   Take  a  case
where  the  partnership  deed  treats  immovable  property  as  partnership
property or where an equitable mortgage is created in respect of immovable
property as  collateral  security by one  businessman  in  favour of another
businessman or a commercial firm or company?   In our view, these cases
must  also  come  before  the  Commercial  Division,  provided  the  main
transaction is a commercial one.
Though it is obvious that cases of eviction from commercial property
like a premises falling within the purview of rent-control legislation, cannot
be  filed  before  the  High  Court  and  be  brought  before  the  Commercial
Division, cases of suits for eviction from immovable property covered by
the  Transfer  of  Property  Act,  can  be  brought  before  the  Commercial
Division if the value of the subject matters is of Rs.1 crore or more.  For
147

example,  in  Delhi,  tenants  paying  rent  upto  Rs.  3500  p.m.  have  the
protection of the Delhi Rent Control Act.  In some States, after expiry of ten
years from date of construction, the building comes under the rent control
law for eviction cases to be filed after the expiry of such period.  Obviously,
such eviction matters cannot be dealt with by the Civil Court nor by the
proposed Commercial Division.  In some States, where the tenants have
protection under rent control legislation, the proceedings are indeed filed in
a Civil Court as a civil suit (and not before rent control tribunals) but the
Civil Court will deal with the matter under the rent control legislation and
not  as  a  Civil  Court  dealing  with  a  normal  eviction  suits  relating  to
immovable property governed by the Transfer of Property Act.  Obviously,
such suits cannot come before the proposed Commercial Division, even if
the property is used for commercial purposes.
In the case of commercial premises not governed by the rent control
legislation,  the  tenant  may be  a  businessman  but  the  landlord  may not
necessarily be a businessman.  Still, the matter has to go to the Commercial
Division if the value of the property is of the minimum prescribed value
stated above.
Take  then  the  cases  which  arise  out  of  insurance  policies  –  life
insurance or general insurance, where the claim is Rs.1 crore or more (or
such higher figure as may be fixed by the High Court).   These cases can be
included  in  the  definition,  though  the  policy  holder  is  or  is  not  a
businessman.   In the case of general insurance covering fire or marine
insurance, the case involves indemnity for damage or injury on account of
torts  or  due  to  natural  causes  like  flood,  earthquake  or  cyclone  etc.
148

Question is whether such disputes should also go before the Commercial
Division?   In  our  view,  yes,  even  though  the  policy  holder  is  not  a
businessman.  So far as motor accident  cases  are concerned, the Motor
Accident Claims Tribunal is a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction and those
cases, even if they are of the prescribed high commercial value and contain
claims against insurance companies, they cannot obviously go before the
Commercial Division.
So far trademark disputes are concerned, sec. 83 of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999 has constituted an Appellate Board.  Section 91(1) provides for
an appeal to the Board by aggrieved parties against orders of the Registrar
and sec. 93 bars the jurisdiction of Civil Courts ‘in relation to the matters
referred to in subsection (1) of section 91’.   That would still mean that suits
for  injunction  and  damages  in  matters  relating  to  passing  off  and
infringement can still go before Civil Courts and are not barred.  Likewise,
the  other  commercial  disputes  arising  under  the  Patents  Act,  1970,  the
Copyright Act, 1957 and Designs Act, 2000 can go before the Commercial
Division except to the extent that any specific class of disputes are ousted
from the jurisdiction of Civil Courts.
We have also considered whether matters falling within the admiralty
jurisdiction of the High Court should go before the Commercial Division.
In fact, there may be other subjects of a commercial nature which according
to  the  High  Court,  may go  before  the  Commercial  Division.   For  this
purpose, we recommend that a residuary clause may be introduced in the
definition enabling the High Court to notify other disputes to be included in
the definition of ‘commercial disputes’.  
149

After  due  deliberation,  we are  inclined  to  adopt  the  definition  of
‘Commercial Cause’ as stated in Rule 1 of Part D of Chapter III (Part V) of
the Delhi High Court Rules, with modifications, as follows:
‘Commercial disputes’ mean 
disputes  arising  out  of  transactions  of  trade  or  commerce and,  in
particular, disputes arising out of ordinary transactions of merchants,
bankers  and  traders  such  as  those  relating  to:  enforcement  and
interpretation  of  mercantile  documents,  export  or  import  of
merchandise,  affreightment,  carriage  of  goods,  franchising,
distribution  and  licensing  agreements,  mercantile  agency  and
mercantile usage, partnership, technology development, maintenance
and consultancy agreements, software, hardware, networks, internet,
website and intellectual property such as trademark, copyright, patent,
design,  domain  names  and  brands,  and  such  other  commercial
disputes which the High Court may notify. 
Explanation I: A dispute which is commercial shall not cease to
be a commercial dispute merely because it also involves action:  for
recovery of immovable property or for realization of monies out of
immovable  property  given  as  security  or  for  taking  other  action
against immovable property.
Explanation II: A dispute which is not a commercial dispute shall
be deemed to be a commercial dispute if the immovable property
involved in the dispute is used in trade or put to commercial use.
150

Valuation: 
The valuation of the subject matter of dispute for purposes of fixing
the jurisdiction of the Commercial Division must, in our view, be simple.
We have looked into the principles of valuation governing the filing of civil
suits  in  Courts  under  the  Suits  Valuation  Act,  1887  and  the  State
Amendments  thereto  and  the  various  legislations  made  by  the  State
Legislatures of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala etc.  In those Acts, the
methods of valuation are quite complicated and we do not want to adopt
them.  On the other hand, we want to adopt a single method of valuation.
So far as money suits or suits relating to immovable property are concerned,
there is not much difficulty.  Even here, we are of the view that if the suit
affects movable property, whether it be one for recovery of the movable
property or not, it should be valued on the basis of the market value of the
entire movable property on date of suit.  Likewise, when we deal with suits
affecting immovable property or even rights therein, the value of the dispute
must be computed on the basis of the market value of the whole of the
immovable property.  In the case of appeals in the High Court which are to
be allocated to the Commercial Division, the value will be the value of
subject matter in dispute, as computed in the above manner as on the date of
suit.
Fast track procedure in Suits and Case Management:
So far as fresh suits that may be filed after the commencement of the
proposed  Act, those will be dealt  with keeping  in mind the  ‘fast track’
151

procedure  indicated  for  ‘fast  track’  arbitration  in  the  176th Report  on
“Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 2002” with suitable modifications, to suit
the procedure in Courts.  The recommendations in that behalf are contained
in  Schedule  IV  of  the  Bill  as  annexed  to  the  said  Report  of  the  Law
Commission.  Case management can be entrusted to a Single Judge in the
Commercial Division.
We  may,  however,  refer  to  the  fast  track  procedure  for  the
Commercial Division in a broad manner and should be on the basis of the
following guidelines.
In the Commercial Division, the plaintiff must file along with the
plaint, the relevant documents on which the plaintiff proposes to rely and
the statement of the witnesses in chief examination by way of an affidavit
and the draft issues that are likely to arise.   Copies of these have to be sent
to the opposite parties on the same date on which the plaint is filed; list of
interrogatories,  if  any,  application  for  discovery and  production,  if  any,
mentioning their relevancy, must also be sent likewise on the above said
date itself.    Plaintiff must also furnish the full address, including e-mail or
fax, telephone numbers, if any, of all claimants and of all the parties, to the
extent known to plaintiff, for the purpose of expediting communication and
correspondence.  A list of draft issues has also to be filed on the same date.
Within one month from the date of receipt of the copy of the plaint
and other annexures as stated above, the defendant must file his written
statement  in  the  Commercial  Division  along  with  all  the  relevant
documents, affidavit evidence in chief and applications referred to above as
152

in the case of the plaintiff. He must also send copies thereof to the plaintiff.
Simultaneously, if there is a counter-claim, he must file the claim along with
the written statement coupled with the various documents referred to above.
He must also file a draft of the issues that are likely to arise and send a copy
thereof to the plaintiff.
In case the plaintiff wants to file a rejoinder, leave of Court will be
necessary and he must apply within fifteen days of service of the written
statement for this purpose and if permitted, must file rejoinder within one
month of the order of the Commercial Division granting such permission.
The procedure for filing various documents and applications which
applies to plaints will apply to counter-claims.
In case discovery or production of documents is allowed, the parties
shall be permitted to file supplementary statements, within a period to be
specified  by  the  Commercial  Division  and  they  will  be  served  on  the
opposite  party,  along  with  copies  of  documents  and  relevant  affidavit
evidence, if any.
In commercial suits pending in Courts subordinate to the High Court
or on the original side of the High Court where the value of the subject
matter is of the prescribed high value (i.e. Rs.1 crore or above), which shall
stand transferred to the Commercial Division of the High Court, if pleadings
had not been completed or evidence had not been recorded in these matters,
the procedure indicated above which is applicable to fresh suits should also
153

apply to the extent applicable, having regard to the stage at which the case is
transferred or allocated to the Commercial Division. 
In our view, single Judge in the Commercial Division should hold
one or more ‘Case Management Conferences’ and fix a time schedule for
finalisation of the issues and for cross-examination, if any, of witnesses, and
also for filing written submissions and for oral submissions thereafter.   Any
conditional orders for these purposes fixing time limits, if they are likely to
result in an ex parte order or order in default, should however be passed by
the Bench of two learned Judges.  The Commercial Division may apply the
provisions of sec. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for considering
resolution of dispute by ADR methods.
It  is  also  proposed  that  evidence  in  cross-examination  or  re-
examination can be recorded by a learned single Judge in the Commercial
Division and objections as to admissibility can be recorded by him but may
be decided by the Bench of two learned Judges.
We also  propose  that  the  single  Judge  may appoint  an  Advocate
Commissioner of not less than 25 years standing or a retired judicial officer
of the rank of a District Judge or a retired senior Civil Judge, for recording
such evidence in cross-examination or re-examination.
We may also point out that normally in such high value commercial
cases, the evidence will be generally documentary and there will be very
little or no oral evidence.
154

As pointed in the previous chapter, the Commercial Division will be
equipped with all high tech systems referred to in the Chapter VIII, such as
audio  and  video  facilities,  including  video-conferencing.   But,  the
installation  of  high-tech  facilities  need  not  be  a  requirement  for  the
implementation  of  our  proposals  for  constitution  of  the   Commercial
Division.
Party  or  counsel  must  file  written  submissions  before  oral
submissions;  and  at  the  Case-Management  Conference,  all  time  limits
including those for oral submissions must be fixed in advance.
Judgment of the Commercial Division has to be pronounced within
thirty  days  of  the  conclusion  of  arguments  and  simultaneously  copies
thereof must be issued to all the parties through e-mail or otherwise.
The fast track procedure in the Commercial Division must be based
on these broad guidelines.
Statutory appeals to Supreme Court:
It is recommended that there shall be a statutory right of appeal to the
Supreme Court of India against decrees passed by the Commercial Division
and against orders passed by that Division of the specific category referred
to in Order XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure subject to such rules as
may be made by the Supreme Court including rules for listing the appeals
for preliminary hearing.  We are proposing these statutory appeals because
it is axiomatic that there should at least be one appeal against a decree in the
155

suit both on questions of fact and law, particularly when the stakes are so
high as in commercial cases.  Further, appeals against interlocutory orders
available in suits where the value of the subject matter is below Rs. 1 crore,
should also be available in the case of interlocutory matter passed by the
Commercial Division in original suits of the high pecuniary value proposed.
But, as is normally the case in all such first appeals to the Supreme Court,
the  Supreme  Court  Rules  generally  require  the  matter  to  be  listed  for
preliminary  hearing.   These  proposals  for  statutory  appeal  are  however
subject to some exceptions.
We do not statutory appeal where appeals against original decrees or
appeals/revision  applications  against  orders  are  disposed  of  by  the
Commercial Division.  We do not propose to provide a statutory appeal
against interlocutory orders or orders passed by the Commercial Division in
execution but we leave such orders to be challenged only under Art. 136 of
the Constitution of India.
Procedure in pending appeals:
In the pending appeals against decrees or orders passed by learned
single Judges in the High Court, where notices have not been served on the
respondents, the following procedure which is followed in some of High
Courts (e.g. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka) should be
followed.   If parties have been represented by counsel before the single
Judge, his name will be printed automatically in the cause-list and he must
appear.  He shall be given time to obtain necessary instructions from the
parties concerned.   This procedure saves a lot of time.  Further, if the main
156

suit is pending and the same lawyer is representing the parties in the main
suit and if he has appeared in the interlocutory matters before the learned
single Judge, notice must be served on the same counsel.   (In fact, vakalat
forms in the above High Courts contain a clause that the vakalat filed in the
High Court for appearance before a learned single Judge will enure for the
purpose of an appeal against the decree or order before a Division Bench).
This procedure is confined to pending appeals in the High Court.  So far as
the future is concerned, inasmuch as the pending appeals are to be dealt
with in the High Court by a Division Bench, this problem does not arise.
In pending appeals/revisions  transferred to the Division, necessary
paper books must be filed within the  period proposed to be fixed, say, three
months.   Written submissions must be filed soon thereafter before oral
submissions.   Time limits for oral submissions must also be fixed in Case-
Management Conferences, in advance.
Time limits for the Commercial Division to dispose of matters:
As regards the time limits for disposal by the Commercial Division,
fresh  suits  filed  after  the  commencement  of the  proposed  Act, must be
disposed of within two years from date of completion of service on opposite
party.   Existing suits transferred from lower Courts to the High Court and
allocated to the Commercial Division must also be disposed of within two
years but if they have been already pending for two years or more, they must
be disposed of within one year of allocation to the Commercial Division,
where  opposite  parties  have  already  been  served  by  the  date  of
commencement of the proposed Act.    Where the transferred suit is still at
157

the stage of service, it should be disposed of within two years of completion
of service on the opposite party.
Interlocutory  Appeals  transferred  to the  Division  must be decided
within three months from date of completion of  service or allocation to the
Commercial Division.
Execution Matters and Fast track Procedures:
As stated earlier, execution proceedings cannot be allowed to delay
the realization of fruits of the decree in such high value suits that may come
before the Commercial Division in fresh suits that may be filed before it, or
in pending suits which are either transferred to it from subordinate Courts or
allocated to it from the original side of the High Court.   All these execution
matters must be dealt with only by the Commercial Division.    
Then we have execution in the transferred matters, namely, in the
pending regular first appeals against decrees passed by Courts subordinate
to the High Courts transferred to the Commercial Division and the pending
regular first appeals against decrees passed by learned single Judges on the
original side which are allocated to the Commercial Division.   In these
matters, we recommend that the principle that the Court of first instance
should be the executing Court be departed from and that in all such regular
first  appeals  which  are  pending  in  the  High  Court  and  transferred  or
allocated  to  the  Commercial  Division,  execution  proceedings  shall  be
initiated and concluded in the Commercial Division.
158

The  execution  proceedings  will,  no  doubt,  be  governed  by  the
provision of Order XXI of the Code of  Civil Procedure, but the matters
must be disposed of within six months of the passing of the decree.
Parties must file their written submissions one month in advance of
the date of hearing of the main execution application.
Special budgetary support  needed to establish the Commercial Division and
the overall market friendly change in investment in business scenario
We  may also  state  that  the  Central  and  State  Governments  must
provide  the  necessary  funds  to  meet  the  expenditure  involved  for  the
establishment  of  the  Commercial  Division.   This  includes  the  expense
involved in appointing extra Judges in the High Court, providing supporting
staff  and  other  infrastructure.   It  also  includes  the  expense  involved  in
establishing the high-tech systems referred to in Chapter VIII.
The benefits  that may accrue to the economy of the country as a
whole by the Constitution and establishment of Commercial Division will
be enormous  in view of the expected  investment by foreign and Indian
commercial entities running into several hundreds of crores.  Investment in
India, both domestic and foreign is bound to increase tremendously if it
becomes known that the Commercial Division in the High Courts in India
will dispose of the matters within a maximum period of two years which is
comparable  to  the  period  of  pendency  in  USA  or  UK.   The  expense
involved  in  establishing  the  Commercial  Division  with  high-tech
infrastructure will, in our view, be a small fraction of the overall benefits
159

that will accrue to the economy of the country.  There will be sufficient
assurance that they need not fear about delays in Courts any longer.
High  Courts  Judges  strength  in  Commercial  Division  to  be  maintained
(including Judges under Art. 224A):
It may be that in several High Courts, the number of suits transferred
or appeals transferred along with fresh suits and appeals of the value of Rs.1
crore or above that may be filed in future may be considerable.    Having
regard to the average rate of disposal of suits/appeals and the number of
cases which fall to the Commercial Division, in our view, the Chief Justice
of the High Court must see that there are in position as many number of
Judges to man the Division Benches as may be necessary for a fair and
speedy disposal of commercial cases in the Division.   Under Art. 224A, the
Chief Justice of the High Court with the previous consent of the President,
appoint from among retired Judges of the  same or other High Courts, to
function as Judges of the High Court.     These  Judges appointed under Art.
224A Judges  can dispose  of commercial  cases  along  with other regular
Judges of the High Court.    Once the arrears have come down to a tolerable
level, the High Court may consider whether it will be able to manage with
its regular cadre of Judges.   In our view, the Chief Justice must ensure that
whatever be the number of retirements in his High Court, the number of
Judges who are required to be on the Commercial Division is maintained
throughout.     
We do not deny that other subjects jurisdictions in the High Court too
require Judges, e.g. for criminal work or writ jurisdiction and so on.   But in
160

a total of more than 600 Judges in the High Courts in the country, the fact
remains that, at any given point of time, there are always more than hundred
or hundred and fifty vacancies.    It is unfortunate that though it is required
that Chief Justices should send recommendations for appointment of High
Court Judges six months in advance of a vacancy falling, this is normally
not done.    Mostly the process of consultation with the collegium within the
High Court level is started long after the occurrence of several vacancies.
With the existing depleted strength of Judges, the huge backlog in most
High  Courts  cannot  be  cleared  unless  such  delays  in  sending
recommendations  are  eliminated.   There  was  some  thinking  that  when
regular or additional vacancies are available in the High Court, the Chief
Justice  of  the  High  Court  should  not  normally  resort  to  Art.  224A
appointments.    But, things have changed.   Speedy disposal of commercial
cases is today as important as speedy disposal of a criminal appeals.   The
Commission is of the view that in the interests of clearing arrears in the
High  Courts  in  various  types  of  cases  including  criminal  matters,  a
combination of regular newly appointed High Court Judges from the Bar
and subordinate judiciary on the one hand and appointments under Art.
224A on the other, is the grave need of the hour.
We may make some passing observations.   There are some High
Courts  where criminal appeals  are pending  for more than twenty years.
Bails are automatically granted as a matter of practice, if a criminal appeal is
pending for more than five years in the High Court.  This is a sorry state of
affairs.   The  backlog  on  the  criminal  side  can  be  cleared  easily  by
appointing a good number of retired High Court Judges under Art. 224A
who have adequate expertise in criminal law.    We must reach a stage
161

where criminal appeals are brought for disposal within three years from date
of their filing in the High Court.    Similarly, large number of appeals
relating to family disputes matters are pending in the High Courts, need to
be speedily disposed of and this can be achieved by appointing more Judges
or Judges under Art. 224A.
We are referring to this aspect of the matter because the proposals for
establishment  of  a  Commercial  Division  in  the  High  Court  in  as  many
Benches as may be necessary, will remain a dead letter if the Commercial
Division does not have the full strength of Judges required for that Division.
Inasmuch as other jurisdictions, such as criminal, writs also require Judges,
then the only solution is to undertake the following steps urgently: 
(a) to  make  recommendations  for  fresh  appointments  to  the  High
Court  from  the  Bar  and  subordinate  judiciary,  six  months  in
advance before any vacancy occurs and 
(b) to urgently appoint Judges under Art. 224A of the Constitution to
first  clear  the  heavy  backlog  and  bring  the  arrears  within
manageable  proportions  in  all  jurisdictions,  including  criminal,
commercial and family matters.
162

Chapter X
Summary of Recommendations
Our important conclusions and recommendations in this report are
summarised below:-
1. Purpose to expedite commercial cases of high pecuniary value
The purpose of the proposals in this report is to expedite commercial cases
of high pecuniary value and create confidence in the commercial circles,
within India and outside, that our Courts are quite fast, if not faster than
Courts elsewhere.
The last decade has brought about phenomenal changes leading to
enormous  growth  in  the  commerce and  industrial  sector  of  India.   The
policies of the Government have changed radically from 1991, the year in
which our economy was opened up to foreign investment in a big way.
Privatisation, liberalization and globalisation have resulted in giving a big
boost to our economy.  At the same time, world has become very much
competitive.  
163

With such rapid increase in commerce and trade, commercial disputes
involving  high  stakes  are  likely  to  increase.   Unless,  there  is  new  and
effective mechanism for resolving them speedily and efficiently, progress
will be retarded.
The overall benefits that may accrue to the economy of the country as
a  whole  by  the  establishment  of  the  Commercial  Division  will,  in  our
opinion, be in several hundreds of crores of Rupees. In view of the present
era of globalisation and liberalization, investment in India, both domestic
and foreign is bound to increase tremendously once the investors of the
world know with certainty and assurance that the Commercial Division in
the High Courts in India will dispose of the matters within a maximum
period of two years which is comparable to the period of pendency in USA
or UK.  The expense involved in establishment of the Commercial Division
will, in our view, be a small fraction of the overall benefits that will accrue
to the economy of the country. Investors will make freely investment in
business ventures without fear of blocking their substantial business capital
in undue prolonged litigation in courts. The proposed changes are likely to
render  the  overall  market  friendly  change  in  investment  in  business
scenario.
2. Method of expeditious disposal of “Commercial cases” of high
pecuniary value in NUTSHELL :
We recommend the creation of “Commercial Division’ in each of our High
Courts so that these may handle ‘commercial cases’ of a high threshold
164

value of (say) Rs. 1 crore and above, or such higher limit as may be fixed by
the High Court and on fast-track basis.  Such a procedure was recommended
in our Report on Amendments to the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 for ‘fast-track’ arbitration.  The objective is that a commercial
case of such high value should be disposed of within a period of one year or
at the most two years in all the States in India.  A maximum period of two
years is perfectly justified and is comparable to the period of pendency in
most courts abroad and in particular in US and UK.  The proposed Divisions
should be manned by Judges of the High Court who are well-versed in civil
law and in particular, commercial laws.  It is also proposed that High Court
Judges should be given extensive exposure to the fast growing changes in
commerce occurring globally and that their knowledge levels in respect of
new  branches  of  commercial  law  should  be  updated  constantly  by  a
programme  of  continuing  lectures.   The  commercial  cases  above  the
pecuniary limit of (say) Rs. 1 crore or more as stated above must, in our
view, be taken up on the original side of the High Court and to be allocated
to the Commercial Division.  Simultaneously, pending appeals before the
High Court in relation to commercial cases  of the high pecuniary value
abovementioned  must  also  to  be  allocated  to  the  Commercial  Division
straightway  rather  than  stand  in  queue  along  with  other  civil  appeals
pending in the High Courts.  Likewise, the execution of decrees passed by
the Commercial Division must also be undertaken by the same Division.
3. Creation of Commercial Division in High Courts 
165

We recommend the creation of “Commercial Division’ in each of our High
Courts. The Bench will comprise of two High Court Judges and there can be
more than one such Bench in each High Court depending upon the need.
4. Jurisdiction of Commercial Division in regard to original matters.
(1) Jurisdiction regarding the subject matter:-  
In order to set out the subject matter jurisdiction of the Commercial
Division, we adopt the definition of ‘Commercial Cause’ as stated in
Rule 1 of Part D of Chapter III (Part V) of the Delhi High Court
Rules, with slight modification as discussed below:-
The classification of “commercial cases” in the said rules lays down:
“Commercial cases” include cases arising out of the ordinary
transactions of merchants, bankers and traders, such as those relating
to  the  construction  of  mercantile  documents,  export  or  import  of
merchandize,  affreightment,  carriage  of  goods  by  land,  insurance,
banking  and  mercantile  documents,  mercantile  agency,  mercantile
usage and infringements of trade marks and passing off actions.  Suits
on ordinary loans and mortgages are not “Commercial cases”.”
166

The above definition is wide and, in fact, has to be widely construed.
In  the  light  of  our  discussion  in  Chapter  IX,  we  recommend  that
‘commercial disputes’ should be defined as follows: 
‘Commercial disputes’ mean 
disputes  arising  out  of  transactions  of  trade  or  commerce and,  in
particular, disputes arising out of ordinary transactions of merchants,
bankers  and  traders  such  as  those  relating  to:  enforcement  and
interpretation  of  mercantile  documents,  export  or  import  of
merchandise,  affreightment,  carriage  of  goods,  franchising,
distribution  and  licensing  agreements,  mercantile  agency  and
mercantile usage, partnership, technology development, maintenance
and consultancy agreements, software, hardware, networks, internet,
website and intellectual property such as trademark, copyright, patent,
design,  domain  names  and  brands,  and  such  other  commercial
disputes which the High Court may notify.
Explanation I: A dispute which is commercial shall not cease to
be a commercial dispute merely because it also involves action:  for
recovery of immovable property or for realization of monies out of
immovable  property  given  as  security  or  for  taking  other  action
against immovable property.
167

Explanation II: A dispute which is not a commercial dispute shall
be deemed to be a commercial dispute if the immovable property
involved in the dispute is used in trade or put to commercial use.
(2) Pecuniary and other jurisdictions
The Commercial Division will deal with high value matters and shall
be a Court of original jurisdiction.   It shall also be an appellate Court but
only in regard to appeals pending in the High Court as on the date of the
proposed  enactment.   It  shall  also  deal  with  the  execution  proceedings
arising out of the above said classes of cases.
The valuation of the subject matter of dispute for purposes of fixing
the jurisdiction of the Commercial Division must, in our view, be simple.
We have looked into the principles of valuation governing the filing of civil
suits  in  Courts  under  the  Suits  Valuation  Act,  1887  and  the  State
Amendments  thereto  and  the  various  legislations  made  by  the  State
Legislatures of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala etc.  In those Acts, the
methods of valuation are quite complicated and we do not want to adopt
them.  On the other hand, we want to adopt a single method of valuation.
So far as money suits or suits relating to immovable property are concerned,
there is not much difficulty.  Even here, we are of the view that if the suit
affects movable property, whether it be one for recovery of the movable
property or not, it should be valued on the basis of the market value of the
entire movable property on date of suit.  Likewise, when we deal with suits
168

affecting immovable property or even rights therein, the value of the dispute
must be computed on the basis of the market value of the whole of the
immovable property.  In the case of appeals in the High Court which are to
be allocated to the Commercial Division, the value will be the value of
subject matter in dispute, as computed in the above manner as on the date of
suit.
It must apply to new commercial cases of a minimum value of Rs. one
crore or above, as may be determined by the High Court.   It will also apply
to pending commercial suits of a minimum threshold value of Rs.1 crore or
more (or such high pecuniary value as may be determined by the High
Court).   Some of these pending suits may be suits filed in the Courts of
unlimited jurisdiction being Courts subordinate to the High Court and some
may be suits pending on the original side of the Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta
and Madras High Courts.  
The  proposed  Act  will  contain  a  provision  fixing  the  minimum
pecuniary value at Rs.1 crore or more (as may be determined by the High
Court) for purposes of transfer and/or allocation of the above cases to the
Commercial Division.   There will be a specific provision enabling the High
Court to increase the minimum pecuniary value above Rs.1 crore but the
minimum  shall  not  be  excess  of  Rs.5  crores.   We  are  proposing  this
procedure inasmuch as in some States like Maharashtra, Delhi, West Bengal
and Tamil Nadu, where transaction values in several big cities are high, it
may be necessary to fix a higher threshold value so that the Commercial
Division may not be overburdened at the threshold itself.   The High Court
169

may fix a minimum value higher than Rs.1 crore (but not higher than 5
crores) and at a later point of time, may even bring it down but not below
Rs.1 crore.
5. Nature  of  matters,  pending  in  High  Court,  which  have  to  be
allocated to the Commercial Division.
Pending matters in the High Court which have to be allocated to the
Commercial Division  are as under :-
(a) appeals from decrees passed by Courts subordinate to the
High  Court  or further  appeals  to Division  Benches  from
judgments of learned single Judges on the original side of
the  High  Court.    Here  too,  the  cases  must  be  of  the
pecuniary value as proposed in para 4 (2) above.
(b) appeals against interlocutory orders filed under Order LXIII
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or applications filed
under section  115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or
application  filed  under  articles  226  or  227  of  the
Constitution  questioning the validity of interlocutory orders
passed  by  the  courts  subordinate  to  the  High  Court  or
Letters  Patent  Appeals  (or  similar  appeals  permitted  by
High Court Acts) questioning the validity of interlocutory
170

orders passed by learned single Judges of the High Court on
the original side, in pending suits of the  pecuniary value as
proposed in para 4(2) above are proposed to be allocated to
the Commercial Division of the High Court.   
6. Fast track procedure
6.1     With regard to fresh suits:
 Fresh suits that may be filed after the establishment of the Commercial
Division of High Court would have to be dealt with on the lines  of the ‘fast
track’  procedure  indicated  for  ‘fast  track  arbitration’  subject  to  such
modifications as may be necessary to suit the procedure of a Civil Court. So
far as the ‘fast track’ procedure for arbitration is concerned, it is contained
in Schedule IV of the Bill annexed to the  176th Report on the ‘Arbitration
and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2002’.
6.2 The following are broad guidelines for fast-track procedure.
(i) Pleadings and issues 
The plaintiff must file in the Commercial Division, along with the
plaint, the relevant documents on which the plaintiff proposes to rely and
the statement of the witnesses in chief examination by way of an affidavit
and the draft issues that are likely to arise.   Copies of these have to be sent
to the opposite parties on the same date on which the plaint is filed; list of
171

interrogatories,  if  any,  application  for  discovery and  production,  if  any,
mentioning their relevancy, must also be sent likewise on the above said
date itself.    Plaintiff must also furnish the full address, including e-mail or
fax, telephone numbers, if any, of all claimants and of all the parties, to the
extent known to plaintiff, for the purpose of expediting communication and
correspondence.  A list of draft issues has also to be filed on the same date.
Within one month from the date of receipt of the copy of the plaint
and other annexures as stated above, the defendant must file his written
statement  in  the  Commercial  Division  along  with  all  the  relevant
documents, affidavit of evidence in chief and applications referred to above
as in the case of the plaintiff. He must also  send copies  thereof to the
plaintiff.   Simultaneously, if there is a counter-claim, he must file the claim
along  with  the  written  statement  coupled  with  the  various  documents
referred to above.   He must also file a draft of the issues that are likely to
arise and send a copy thereof to the plaintiff.
In case the plaintiff wants to file a rejoinder, leave of Court will be
necessary and he must apply within fifteen days of service of the written
statement for this purpose and if permitted, must file rejoinder within one
month of the order of the Commercial Division granting such permission.
The procedure for filing various documents and applications which
applies to plaints will also apply to counter-claims.
172

In case discovery or production of documents is allowed, the parties
shall be permitted to file supplementary statements, within a period to be
specified by the Commercial Division and a notice would  be served on the
opposite  party,  along  with  copies  of  documents  and  relevant  affidavit
evidence, if any.
(ii) Holding of ‘Case Management Conferences’
A single Judge in the Commercial Division shall hold one or more
‘Case Management Conferences’ and fix a time schedule for finalisation of
the issues and for cross-examination, if any, of witnesses, and also for filing
written submissions and for oral submissions thereafter.   Any conditional
orders for these purposes fixing time limits, if they are likely to result in an
ex parte order or order in default, should however be passed by the Bench of
two learned Judges.  
Party  or  counsel  must  file  written  submissions  before  oral
submissions;  and  at  the  Case-Management  Conference,  all  time  limits
including those for oral submissions must be fixed in advance.
(iii) Resort to ADR methods
The Commercial Division may apply the provisions of section 89 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for considering resolution of dispute by
Alternate Disputes Resolution methods.
173

(iv)  Manner of recording evidence
It  is  also  proposed  that  evidence  in  cross-examination  or  re-
examination can be recorded by a learned single Judge in the Commercial
Division and objections as to admissibility can be recorded by him but may
be decided by the Bench of two learned Judges.
We also recommend that the single Judge may appoint an Advocate
Commissioner of not less than 25 years standing or a retired judicial officer
of the rank of a District Judge or a retired senior Civil Judge, for recording
such evidence in cross-examination or re-examination.
We may also point out that normally in such high value commercial
cases, the evidence will be mostly documentary and there will be very little
or no oral evidence.
(v) Commercial Division equipped with all hi-tech systems and
on-line filing system
The Commercial Division will be equipped with all hi-tech systems
referred to in the Chapter VIII, such as audio and video facilities, including
video-conferencing. There should be on-line filing. The installation of hi-
tech system need not delay the constitution of the Commercial Division or
its function.
174

(vi) Time-limit for pronouncement  of judgments
Judgment of the Commercial Division has to be pronounced within
thirty  days  of  the  conclusion  of  arguments  and  simultaneously  copies
thereof must be issued to all the parties through e-mail or otherwise.
(B) Fast track procedure with regard to pending Commercial
suits transferred or allocated to Commercial Division:
In commercial suits pending in Courts subordinate to the High Court
or on the original side of the High Court where the value of the subject
matter is of the prescribed high value (i.e. Rs.1 crore or above), which shall
stand transferred to the Commercial Division of the High Court, if pleadings
had not been completed or evidence had not been recorded in these matters,
the procedure indicated above which is applicable to fresh suits should also
apply to the extent applicable, having regard to the stage at which the case is
transferred or allocated to the Commercial Division. 
 (C) Dispensing with individual service of notice to respondents
in pending appeals against decrees or orders passed by learned
single Judges in the High Court
In the pending appeals against decrees or orders passed by learned
single Judges in the High Court, where notices have not been served on the
respondents, the following procedure which is followed in some of High
Courts (e.g. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka) should be
175

followed.   If parties have been represented by counsel before the single
Judge, his name will be printed automatically in the cause-list and he must
appear.  He shall be given time to obtain necessary instructions from the
parties concerned.   This procedure saves a lot of time.  Further, if the main
suit is pending and the same lawyer is representing the parties in the main
suit and if he has appeared in the interlocutory matters before the learned
single Judge, notice must be served on the same counsel.   (In fact, vakalat
forms in the above High Courts contain a clause that the vakalat filed in the
High Court for appearance before a learned single Judge will enure for the
purpose of an appeal against the decree or order before a Division Bench).
This procedure is confined to pending appeals in the High Court.  So far as
the future is concerned, inasmuch as the pending  appeals are to be dealt
with in the High Court by a Division Bench, this problem does not arise.
(D) Filing of paper books, written submissions and adherence to
time limits
In  pending  appeals/revisions  allocated  to  the  Division,  necessary
paper books must be filed within the time proposed to be fixed, say, three
months.   Written submissions must be filed soon thereafter before oral
submissions.   Time limits for oral submissions must also be fixed in Case-
Management Conferences, in advance.
(E) Time  limits  for  the  Commercial  Division  to  dispose  of
matters:
As regards the time limits for disposal by the Commercial Division,
fresh  suits  filed  after  the  commencement  of the  proposed  Act, must be
176

disposed of within two years from date of completion of service on opposite
party.   Existing suits transferred from lower Courts to the High Court and
allocated to the Commercial Division must also be disposed of within two
years but if they have been already pending for two years or more, they must
be disposed of within one year of allocation to the Commercial Division,
where  opposite  parties  have  already  been  served  by  the  date  of
commencement of the proposed Act.    Where the transferred suit is still at
the stage of service, it should be disposed of within two years of completion
of service on the opposite party.
Interlocutory  Appeals  transferred  to the  Division  must be decided
within three months from the date of completion of  service or allocation to
the Commercial Division.
Execution proceedings must be disposed of by the Commercial Division
within six months  of the passing  of the decree.  Parties  must file their
written submissions one month in advance of the date of hearing of the main
execution application.
7. Statutory right of appeal to the Supreme Court of India against
decrees and certain orders of the Commercial Division
There shall be a  statutory right of appeal to the Supreme Court of
India subject to such rules as may be made by the Supreme Court including
rules for listing them for preliminary hearing against decrees or final orders
of Commercial Division. Statutory appeals to the Supreme Court shall also
lie against interlocutory orders passed by the Commercial Division of the
177

specific  categories  referred  to  in  Order  XLIII  of  the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure, 1908.
However,  a  statutory  appeal  will  not  be  available  against  other
interlocutory  orders  or  orders  in  execution  but  such  orders  can  be
challenged only under Art. 136 of the Constitution of India.
8. Commercial Division to be the Execution court for certain cases
Execution cannot be allowed to delay the realization of fruits of the decree
in such high value suits that may come before the Commercial Division in
fresh suits that may be filed before it, or in pending suits which are either
transferred to it from subordinate Courts or allocated to it from the original
side of the High Court.   All these execution matters must be dealt with only
by the Commercial Division.    
As  regards  the  execution  matters  which  are  transferred  matters,
namely,  in  the  pending  regular  first  appeals  against  decrees  passed  by
Courts  subordinate  to  the  High  Courts  transferred  to  the  Commercial
Division and the pending regular first appeals against decrees passed by
learned  single  Judges  on  the  original  side  which  are  allocated  to  the
Commercial Division, we recommend that the principle that the Court of
first instance should be the executing Court be departed from and that in all
such  regular  first  appeals  which  are  pending  in  the  High  Court  and
transferred or allocated to the Commercial Division, execution proceedings
shall be initiated and concluded in the Commercial Division.
178

9. Special budgetary support  needed to establish the Commercial
Division 
We recommend that the Central and State Governments must provide
the necessary funds to meet the expenditure involved for the establishment
of  the  Commercial  Division.   This  includes  the  expense  involved  in
appointing extra Judges in the High Court, providing supporting staff and
other infrastructure.  It also includes the expense involved in establishing
the high-tech systems referred to in Chapter VIII.
10. High  Courts  Judges  strength  in  Commercial  Division  to  be
maintained consistently(including Judges appointed under article
224A of the Constitution:
It may be that in several High Courts, the number of suits transferred
or appeals transferred along with fresh suits and appeals of the value of Rs.1
crore or above that may be filed in future, may be considerable in number.
Having  regard  to  the  average  rate  of  disposal  of  suits/appeals  and  the
number of cases which are allocated to the Commercial Division, in our
view, the Chief Justice of the High Court must ensure that there are in
position as many number of Judges to man the Division Benches as may be
necessary  for  a  fair  and  speedy  disposal  of  commercial  cases  in  the
Division.   
Resort to appointments under article  224A of the Constitution
necessary.
179

Under article 224A, the Chief Justice of the High Court with the
previous consent of the President, appoint from among retired Judges of the
same  or  other  High  Courts,  to  function  as  Judges  of  the  High  Court.
These  Judges appointed under article  224A of the Constitution can dispose
of commercial cases along with other regular Judges of the High Court.
Once the arrears have come down to a tolerable level, the High Court may
consider whether it will be able to manage with its regular cadre of Judges.
In our view, the Chief Justice must ensure that whatever be the number of
retirements in his High Court, the number of Judges who are required to be
on the Commercial Division is maintained throughout.     
We do not deny that other subject jurisdictions in the High Court too
require Judges, e.g. for criminal work or writ jurisdiction and so on.   But in
a total of more than 600 Judges in the High Courts in the country, the fact
remains that, at any given point of time, there are always more than hundred
or hundred and fifty vacancies.    It is quintessential that Chief Justices
should send recommendations six months in advance of a vacancy falling so
that delay in disposal of cases may not arise on account of non-filling of
vacancies. With the existing depleted strength of Judges, the huge backlog
in  most  High  Courts  cannot  be  cleared  unless  such  delays  in  sending
recommendations  are  eliminated.   There  was  some  thinking  that  when
regular or additional vacancies are available in the High Court, the Chief
Justice of the High Court should not normally resort to  appointments under
article 224A of the Constitution.    But, things have changed.   Speedy
disposal of commercial cases is today as important as speedy disposal of a
criminal appeals.   The Commission recommends that in the interests of
clearing  arrears  in  the  High  Courts  in  various  types  of cases  including
180

criminal  matters,  a combination  of  regular  newly appointed  High Court
Judges  from  the  Bar  and  subordinate  judiciary  on  the  one  hand  and
appointments under article 224A on the other, is the grave need of the hour.
Backlog of criminal appeals, appeals relating to family disputes
pending in High Courts need to be similarly tackled
Similarly, backlog  of criminal  appeals  pending  (even  pending  for
more than twenty years) in some High Courts, require to be disposed off
within three years from date of their filing in the High Court. The backlog
on the criminal side can be cleared easily by appointing a good number of
retired High Court Judges under article 224A who have adequate expertise
in criminal law.
Similarly, large number of appeals relating to family disputes matters
pending in the High Courts, need to be speedily disposed off through this
measure lest litigants may not loose faith in the protracted system.
    
We are referring to this aspect of the matter because the proposal for
establishment of a Commercial Division in the High Court will remain a
dead letter if the Commercial Division does not have the full strength of
Judges required for that Division.     Inasmuch as other jurisdictions, such as
criminal, writs also require Judges, then the only solution is to undertake the
following steps on priority:
(c) to  make  recommendations  for  fresh  appointments  to  the  High
Court  from  the  Bar  and  subordinate  judiciary,  six  months  in
advance before any vacancy occurs ; and 
181

(d) to urgently appoint Judges under article 224A of the Constitution
to  first  clear  the  heavy  backlog  and  bring  the  arrears  within
manageable  proportions  in  all  jurisdictions,  including  criminal,
commercial and family matters.
We  acknowledge  the  extensive  contribution  made  by  Dr.  S.
Muralidhar, Part time Member, in preparation of this Report. 
182

We recommend accordingly.
Sd./-
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
Sd./-
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate)
Vice-Chairman
Sd./-
(Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi)
Member – Secretary
Dated: 15.12.2003
183