LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
189TH REPORT
ON
REVISION OF COURT FEES STRUCTURE
FEBRUARY, 2004
1

JUSTICE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
M. JAGANNADHA RAO SHASTRI BHAWAN,
CHAIRMAN NEW DELHI-110 001
TEL: 3384475
FAX: 3073864, 3388870
Residence: 1, Janpath, New Delhi-1.
Tel. : 3019465
DO No.6(3)82/2002-LC(LS) February 25, 2004
Dear Shri Arun Jaitley ji,
I have great pleasure in forwarding the 189th Report of the Law Commission on
‘Revision of Court Fees Structure’.     The Commission took up the subject on a reference
received from the Dept. of Legal Affairs vide OM No.A-60011/14/2003 Admn.III.LA
dated Feb. 11, 2003.   In fact, the Dept. of Justice vide its letter No.L-11018/1/2002-Jus.
dated 29.8.2002 made a request to the Dept. of Legal Affairs for referring the matter of
‘upward revision of Court fees structure vis-à-vis the need to build financial disincentives
to discourage vexatious litigation’, to the Law Commission for consideration.  The Dept.
of Justice, as mentioned in its letter, is of the view that the Court fees in majority of cases
has not been revised for a very long time, although valuation of rupee has come down,
and currently it covers only a fraction of the administrative costs of the judicial process.
This being the first occasion for the Law Commission to give a Report exclusively
on subject of Court fees, the basic principles in regard to the collection of Court fee, have
been elaborately discussed in this Report.
The Law Commission examined the issue of Court fee in the light of the modern
concept that the right of access to justice, is a ‘basic right’ and dealt with this aspect in
Chapter II of the Report.  The Commission is of the firm view that as the right to access
to justice is now recognized as a basic human right world over, high rates of Court fee
may become a barrier to access to justice and this view is shared today in all the countries
governed by the common law and civil law systems of jurisprudence.
2

As discussed in Chapters IV and V of the Report, it is now recognized that it is
one of the primary duties of the State to provide the machinery for administration of
justice.  Administration of criminal justice is, as accepted in all countries, a sovereign
function of the State and the view is that no fee can, in fact, be levied.   So far as the
administration of civil justice is concerned, the view in all countries is that the principle
of recovery of full costs of civil justice is no longer tenable.  This is the view of various
Law Commissions, Courts and jurists.   It is their view that these costs have to be met
from general revenues of the State.   The Central and State Governments should therefore
have to meet substantial costs of the administration of justice out of general revenues
collected from the tax payers.  We may reiterate that in respect of the problem of finding
funds for meeting the costs of administration of justice, the trend, both in  common law
and civil law jurisdiction countries is that, it should be met through general appropriation
and governmental funding and not through the device of increase in Court fees.
It  has  been  suggested  in  the  reference  that  Court  fee  must  be  increased  to
discourage vexatious litigation.   In regard to discouraging vexatious litigation, the Law
Commission, in agreement with the view consistently expressed earlier by Lord Macaulay
and in the judgments of Courts, is of the view that the idea of enhancing the Court fee to
discourage vexatious  litigation  is  not correct  in principle.    Jurists  and  Courts  have
pointed out that, on the contrary, higher rates of Court fee will certainly discourage even
honest and genuine litigants, which cannot be allowed to happen.   However, in order to
curb  vexatious  or  frivolous  litigation,  the  Commission  recommends  that  a  Central
legislation may be made on the lines of the State Act of former Madras State, namely,
‘Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act, 1949 (Madras Act 8 of 1949).   Such statutes are
in force in UK, Australia etc.   Apart from this, exemplary costs may also be imposed in
cases of vexatious or frivolous litigation.
It is necessary to mention that the subject of ‘Court fee payable in any Court
except the Supreme Court’ falls under Entry 3 of List II (State List) of Schedule Seventh
to the Constitution of India.   Court fee payable in the Supreme Court falls under Entry 77
of List I (Union List).  As the Court fees payable in any Court except the Supreme Court
falls under the ‘State List’, ten States have already repealed the Court Fees Act, 1870 in
application to their respective states and have enacted their own Court fees legislation.
Most of the other States have also amended the Court Fees Act, 1870 as applicable in
these States.   Union Territory of Pondicherry has also enacted a separate Court Fees Act.
Parliament can make law only for Union Territories and the Supreme Court on the subject
of Court fee.   The Supreme Court has made Rules in this behalf.   
On a detailed survey, the Law Commission recommends that in order to eliminate
the effect of devaluation of the rupee, and increase in rates of inflation, the rates of fixed
Court fee as prescribed in Schedule 2 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 may be appropriately
revised.   However, ad valorem Court fees need not be revised inasmuch as the Court fee
will be paid in proportionate to the value of the claim which in any event would reflect
the enhanced value of the claim after inflation.
3

Therefore, the recommendation is that, in so far as the Union Territories, not
covered by any special Acts, are concerned, it will be sufficient if the rates of Court fee as
prescribed in the Court Fee Act, 1870, be enhanced keeping in mind the devaluation of
the rupee over the years.   
We place on record the valuable contributions of Dr. S. Muralidhar, Part time
Member of our Commission, in the preparation of this Report.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd./-
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Sri Arun Jaitley
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
NEW DELHI.
4

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTERS PAGE NOS.
Chapter I Introduction 01-05
Chapter II Right of access to justice 06-33
Chapter III Power of Parliament to enact or amend
a law relating to the Court fees payable
                        in High Courts and subordinate Courts                         34-54  
Chapter IV Can Court fee be enhanced to recover
cost of administration of justice? (Views
of Commissions, Committees, Courts Etc.) 55-79
Chapter V Full cost recovery: An anathema to the
concept of access to justice: The
experience in other countries 80-92
Chapter VI Whether there is a need to revise the
Court fees structure in order to build 
financial disincentives to discourage 
vexatious litigation 93-96
Chapter VII Measures available to curb frivolous or
                        vexatious litigation                                                              97-104  
Chapter VIII  Revision of Court fees owing to the
5

                        devaluation of the rupee                                          105-106  
Chapter IX Conclusions and Recommendations 107-113
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
The Reference
The Department of Legal Affairs, with approval of Hon'ble Minister of Law
& Justice, has referred to the Law Commission, the matter relating to the
‘upward revision of court fees structure vis-à-vis the need to build financial
disincentives  to  discourage  vexatious  litigation’,  vide  O.M.  No.A-
60011/14/2003/Admn.III  LA, dated  Feb.  11,  2003.   The  Department  of
Legal Affairs was requested by the Department of Justice vide its letter
No.L-11018/1/2002-Jus.  dated  29.8.2002  for  referring  this  matter  of
revision of court fees structure, to the Law Commission. 
It was suggested in the meeting of Standing Committee of Secretaries, held
on 19th July, 2002, that there is a need to build financial disincentives in
the legal system so as to discourage vexatious litigation. Accordingly, it
was decided in that meeting that this suggestion may be referred to the Law
Commission  for  its  consideration.  It  was  informed  to  the  Standing
Committee, that the court fees in majority of cases had not been revised for
a  very  long  time  and  currently  covered  only  a  fraction  of  the
administrative costs of the judicial process. The Department of Justice, in
6

its above mentioned letter has also expressed the similar view. It is stated in
the letter, that the court fees  has not been revised for a very long time,
although valuation of Rupee has came down tremendously compared to the
valuation in the year 1870 when the Court Fees Act came into force.
It is observed that it was also informed to the Standing Committee that the
Central Government is concerned with court fees payable in the Supreme
Court and other courts situated in the Union Territories. This is the view of
the Deptt. of Justice also.
Previous exercise
It is  necessary to mention here, that  the Deptt.  of Justice in 1999,  had
examined  in  detail  the  proposal  to amend the  Court  Fees  Act, 1870  in
pursuance of the recommendations of the Expert Group, appointed by the
Ministry of Home Affairs. However, the Department of Justice, with the
approval of the then Minister of Law & Justice, decided not to amend the
Act, especially in view of provisions of the Devolution Act, 1920 (Act 38 of
1920), which empowers States to amend the Court Fees Act, 1870. (The
Devolution Act, 1920 (Act 38 of 1920) has been repealed by Act 1 of 1938)
The approach of the Law Commission
The Commission is aware that it is taking up for consideration, the question
of revising court fee structure, and consequently the relevant legislation(s),
7

that has been in vogue for over 130 years. It is not safe to proceed on an
assumption  that  a  legal  regime  that  may  be  chronologically  ancient  is
necessarily irrelevant  or  an  anachronism.  In  many significant  areas,  the
contrary is true as the Commission itself realised recently when it took up
the revision of the Evidence Act, 1872. The Indian Penal Code, 1860 is an
instance  of  a  legislation  that  is  seemingly  ‘timeless’  and  of  universal
application. Therefore, the mere fact that the Court Fees Act, 1870 is a pre-
independence legislation or has survived for over a century, cannot by itself
necessitate its wholesole revision. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  reference  itself  is  premised  on  certain  other
parameters. These can be usefully delineated as under:
(i) The court fees, which has not been revised for a very long time, at
present covers only a fraction of the administrative costs of the
judicial process. This premise, in its turn, presupposes that the cost
of administration of justice have necessarily to be met from user
charges or court fees. It is proposed to closely examine such a
presupposition;
(ii) There  is  a  need  to  build  financial  disincentives  in  order  to
discourage vexatious litigation. The premise here is that court fee
can be used as a device to curb frivolous litigation. In other words,
increase in court fees would deter the frivolous/vexatious litigant.
This premise also requires to be examined and tested for its legal
tenability.
8

(iii) The steady devaluation of the rupee over the years has not been
accounted  for  in  the  present  court  fee  structure  which  has
remained  frozen  in  time.  Therefore,  notwithstanding  the
aforementioned impelling reasons, court fees would nevertheless
have to be revised to reflect the present value of the rupee.
The first and second premises throw up important constitutional and legal
issues touching upon the right of access to justice. The third issue delineated
falls in the realm of law and economics.
Questions for Consideration
Accordingly, the Commission proposes to address the following questions
that arise for consideration:
(1) What is the modern concept of ‘access to Justice’? This is dealt
with in Chapter II.
(2) Whether the Court Fees Act, 1870 can be amended by Parliament
and whether Parliament can enact a law relating to the court fees
payable  in  High  Courts  and  other  subordinate  courts?  In  what
manner has the court-fee legislation been amended from time to
time? These are addressed in Chapter III.
(3) Whether court fees structure should be revised in order to meet the
increased expenditure in civil administration of justice? This is
discussed in Chapter IV.
9

(4) What is the practice in other countries with regard to the concept
of full cost recovery? Chapter V deals with this aspect.
(5) Whether there is a need to revise the court fees structure in order
to build financial disincentives to discourage vexatious litigation?
This is taken up for consideration in Chapter VI.
(6) What are the alternatives to check frivolous litigation? Chapter
VII examines these alternatives.
(7) Whether court fees structure should be revised owing to the fall in
the value of rupee over a long period? The question of revision of
court fees consistent with the devaluation of the rupee is addressed
in Chapter VIII.
The conclusions and recommendations of the Law Commission are set out
in Chapter IX of this Report.
10

CHAPTER II
RIGHT OF ACCESS TO JUSTICE
I
History of the Common Law right of ‘access to justice’
In  England,  during  the  reign  of  Henry  II,  in  the  Twelfth  Century,  the
concepts of ‘access to justice’ and ‘rule of law’ took roots when the King
agreed for establishing a system of writs that would enable litigants of all
classes to avail themselves of the King’s justice. But soon, the abuses of
‘King’s Justice’ by King John, prompted the rebellion in 1215 that led to the
Magna Carta which became the initial source of British constitutionalism.
What it represented then and now is a social commitment to the Rule of Law
and a promise that even a King is not above the law.
As Blackstone stated later, “It is the function of the common law to protect
the weak from the insults of the stronger” (3 Blackstone Commentaries, 3).
The Magna Carta asserted not only that the King was bound by law but the
barons  too  and  this  gave  protection  to  all  ‘freemen’.  The  three  crucial
clauses of the Magna Carta which are the foundation for the basic ‘right of
access to Courts’ are in the following words:
“No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or disseised or outlawed or
exiled  or  in anyway ruined,  nor will  we go  or send  against  him,
except by the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land.
11

To no man will we sell, to no one will we deny or delay right to
justice.
Moreover, all those aforesaid customs and liberties, the observance of
which  we  have  granted  in  our  kingdom  as  far  as  pertains  to  us
towards our men, shall be observed by all our kingdom, as well clergy
as laymen, as far as pertains to them towards their men.
Wherefore,  it  is  our  will,  and  we  firmly  enjoin,  that  the  English
Church be free, and the men in our kingdom have and hold all the
aforesaid liberties, rights, and concessions, well and peaceably, freely
and quietly, fully and wholly, for themselves and their heirs, of us and
our heirs, in all aspects and in all places for ever, as is aforesaid. An
oath, moreover, has been taken, as well on our part as on the part of
the barons, that all these conditions aforesaid shall be kept in good
faith and without evil intention – Given under our hand – the above
named and many others being witnesses – in the meadow which is
called Runnymede, between Windsor and Staines, on the fifteenth day
of June, in the seventeenth year of our reign.”
In more than 500 years following the Magna Carta at Runnymede, Courts
resolved disputes, created precedents and laid down vast principles which
came to be known as the common law. The Commentaries of Sir Edward
Coke and of William Blackstone crystallized the fundamental principles of
common law that enshrine the basic rights of man. The principles relating to
these basic human rights together with experiences in France, US and other
countries entered into the Bills of Rights and the Constitutions of various
12

countries. Every right when it is breached must be provided with a right to a
remedy. Ubi Jus ibi remedium says the Roman maxim.
The latest theory is that the right to ‘access to justice’ became part of the
common  law  and  was  later  continued  and  recognized  as  part  of  the
‘Constitutional Law’. The “common law” says Justice Laws in  R v. Lord
Chancellor, ex pate Witham 1997 (2) All ER 779, “does not generally speak
in the language  of constitutional  rights, for the good reason that  in the
absence of any sovereign text, a written Constitution which is logically and
legally prior to the power of legislature, executive and judiciary alike, there
is on the face of it no hierarchy of rights such that anyone of them is more
entrenched by the law than any other. And if the concept of a constitutional
right is to have any meaning, it must surely sound in the protection which
the law affords to it. Where a written Constitution guarantees a right, there
is no conceptual difficulty. The State authorities must give way to it, save
the extent that the Constitution allows them to deny it. There may of course
be  other  difficulties,  such  as  whether  on  the  Constitution’s  true
interpretation the right claimed exists at all. Even a superficial acquaintance
with the jurisprudence of the Supreme Court of the United States shows that
such problems may be acute. But they are not in the same category as the
question arises: do we have constitutional rights at all?” 
Laws, LJ. further states “In the unwritten legal orders of the British State, at
a time when the common law continues to accord a legislative supremacy to
Parliament, the notion of a constitutional right can, in my judgment, inhere
13

only in this proposition, that the right in question cannot be abrogated by
the  State  save  by  specific  provision  in  an  Act  of  Parliament  or  by
regulations whose vires in main legislation specifically confers the power to
abrogate. General words will not suffice. Any such rights will be creatures
of the common law, since their existence would not be the consequence of
the democratic political process but would be logically prior to it.” 
Interestingly, the above decision in  Witham was given in judicial review
proceedings  challenging  the  validity  of  the  Supreme  Court  Fees
(Amendment) Order, 1996, Article 6 of which amended the Supreme Court
Fees Order, 1980 and repealed  the provision which relieved  litigants  in
person who were in receipt of income support from the obligation to pay
Court fees and permitted the Lord Chancellor to reduce or remit the fee in
any particular case on grounds of undue financial hardship in exceptional
circumstances. Striking down the amendment which had been issued by the
Lord Chancellor, acting under the powers conferred on him  by s.130 of the
Supreme Court Act, 1981, the High Court (Queen’s Bench Division) held
that the effect of the amendment was to “bar absolutely many persons from
seeking justice from the courts”. It was emphatically asserted (at page 788):
“Access to the courts is a constitutional right; it can only be denied by the
government if it persuades Parliament to pass legislation which specifically
– in effect by express provision – permits the Executive to turn people away
from the court door.”
14

Earlier, Lord Diplock, while dealing with the High Courts’ power to control
the conduct of arbitrators, incidentally referred to this aspect and said in
Bremen  Vulkan  Schiffban  and  Maschinenfabrik  v. South  India  Shipping
Corp. (1981 AC 909 – 1981 (1) All ER 289) as follows:
“The High Courts’ power to dismiss a pending action for want of
prosecution is but an instance of a general power to control its own
procedure so as to prevent its being used to achieve injustice. Such a
power is inherent in its constitutional function as a court of justice.
Every civilized system of government requires that the  State should
make available to all its citizens a means for the just and peaceful
settlement of disputes between them as to their respective legal rights.
The means provided are courts of justice to which every citizen has a
constitutional  right of access  in the role of plaintiff to obtain  the
remedy to which he claims to be entitled in consequence of an alleged
breach  of  his  legal  or equitable  rights  by some other  citizen,  the
defendant.”
Likewise, Steyn LJ in R v. Secretary of State for Home Dept, ex p Leech:
1993 (4) All ER 539 (CA), was dealing with a prisoner who complained that
correspondence  with  his  solicitor  concerning  litigation  in  which he  was
involved  or  intended  to  launch,  was  being  considered  by  the  prison
authorities under the Prisons Rules, 1964. The prisoner contended that sec.
47(1) of the Prisons Act, 1952 which authorised the framing of Rules, could
not  authorize  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  rule  which  created  an
impediment  to  the  free  flow  of  communication  between  him  and  his
15

solicitor about contemplated legal proceedings. The learned judge held as
follows:
“It  is  a  principle  of  our  law  that  every  citizen  has  a  right  of
unimpeded access to a court. In Raymond v. Honey 1983 AC 1 (1982
(1) All ER 756) Lord Wilberforce described it as a ‘basic right’. Even
in our unwritten Constitution, it ranks as a constitutional right. In
Raymond v. Honey, Lord Wilberforce said that there was nothing in
the Prisons Act, 1952 that confers power to ‘interfere’ with this right
or to ‘hinder’ its exercise. Lord Wilberforce said that rules which did
not  comply with this  principle  would be ultra  vires. Lord Elwyn-
Jones and Lord Russell of Killowan agreed… It is true that Lord
Wilberforce held that the rules, properly construed, were not ultra
vires. But that does not affect the importance of the observations.
Lord Bridge held that rules in question in that case were ultra vires…
He went further than Lord Wilberforce and said that a citizen’s right
to unimpeded access can only be taken away by express enactment…
It seems (to) us that Lord Wilberforce’s observation ranks as the ratio
decidendi of the case, and we accept that such rights can as a matter
of legal principle be taken away by necessary implication.”
In yet another case in Re Vexatious Actions Act 1896, Re Boaler (1915) (1)
KB 21, the right of a person to lay information before a magistrate was held,
could not be prohibited, as the same could not be brought within vexatious
‘legal proceedings’ which could be prevented under the 1896 statute. It was
held by Scrutton J as follows:
16

“One of the valuable rights of every subject of the King is to appeal to
the King in his courts if he alleges that a civil wrong has been done to
him, or if he alleges that a wrong punishable criminally has been done
to him, or has been committed by another subject of the King. This
right is sometimes abused and it is, of course, quite competent to
Parliament to deprive any subject of the King of it either absolutely or
in part. But the language of any statute should be jealously watched
by the court, and should not be extended beyond its least onerous
meaning  unless  clear  words  are  used  to  justify  extension…..  I
approach the consideration of a statute which is said to have this
meaning with the feeling that unless its language clearly convinces
me that this was the intention of the Legislature I shall be slow to
give effect to what is most serious interference with the liberties of
the subject”
De Smith’s Judicial Review of Administrative Action (5th Ed, 1995) was
also quoted by Sir John Laws in Witham (para 5.017) as follows:
“It is a common law presumption of legislative intent that access of
Queens’s Court in respect of justiciable issues is not to be denied save
by clear words in a statute”
Laws LJ., again reiterated in International Transport Roth Gmbitt v. Home
Secretary 2002  (3)  WLR  344,  in  his  separate  judgment,  that,  after  the
coming into force of the Human Rights Act, 1998 (w.e.f. 2.10.2000), the
British system which was once based on parliamentary supremacy has now
17

moved from that principle to the system of constitutional supremacy. He
referred to the judgment of Iacobucci J in Vriend v. Alberta 1998 (1) SCR
493 where the judge said that after the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms,  Canada  has  moved  from  parliamentary  supremacy  to
constitutional supremacy.   He said:
“When the Charter was introduced, Canada went, in the words of
former Chief Justice Brian Dickson, from a system of parliamentary
supremacy to constitutional supremacy…. Simply put, each Canadian
was given individual rights and freedoms which no government or
legislature could take away”
Laws LJ., stated that in the present state of evolution, the British system
may  be  said  to  stand  at  an  intermediate  stage  between  parliamentary
supremacy and constitutional supremacy……”
Thus, from the above decisions, the concept of access to justice, can be
understood as constituting an integral part of the constitutional and common
law  jurisdictions,  and  is  considered  sacrosanct  and  attempts  to  lightly
interfere with the right are generally viewed strictly.
18

II
International Human Rights Laws
The Universal Declaration of Rights drafted in the year 1948 gave universal
recognition to these rights including the right of ‘access to justice’ in the
following manner:
Art.6: Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person
before the law.
Art.7: All  are  equal  before  the  law  and  are  entitled  without  any
discrimination to equal protection of the law.
Art.8: Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent
national  tribunals  for  acts  violating  the  fundamental  rights
granted him by the Constitution or by law.
Art.10:Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing
by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination
of his rights and obligations, and of any criminal charge against
him.
Art.21:(1) Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his
country, directly or through freely chosen representatives.
(2) Everyone has the right of equal access to public service in
his country.
19

Similarly, clause 3  of Article  2  of International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
Political  Rights,  1966  provides  that  each  State  party  to  the  covenant
undertakes  ‘to  ensure  that  every  person  whose  rights  or  freedom  as
recognized violated, shall have an effective remedy’ and ‘to ensure that any
person claiming such a remedy shall have his right thereto determined by
competent judicial, administrative or legislative authorities, and the State
should also ensure to develop the possibilities of judicial remedies. 
There are provisions in the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,  the  European  Convention  and  other  regional  conventions  that
underscore  the  importance  of  the  right  of  access  to  impartial  and
independent  justice.  The  decision  of  the  European  Court  on  European
Convention 1950, dealt with this aspect in  Golden v. UK 1975 (1) EHRR
524 and Airey v. Ireland 1979 (2) EHRR 305 and other cases.
The position in India 
In our country, there can be no doubt that the citizens had always access to
the King, right from the time of Ramayan according to our history. When
the Indian Courts later absorbed the common law of England, the right to
access to courts became part of our constitutional law, even long before the
coming  into  force  of  our  Constitution.  That  continued  even  after  the
Constitution because of Art. 372. We wish to refer to two interesting cases
that arose in the pre-independence era which would indicate that concept of
a non-derogable right of access to justice was recognised and enforced by
the courts in this country. 
20

Among the early decisions was one rendered by the Bombay High Court in
Re: Llewelyn Evans AIR 1926 Bom 551. In that case, Evans was arrested in
Aden and brought to Bombay on the charge of criminal breach of trust. At
the stage of granting remand of the prisoner to police custody, Evans’ legal
adviser was denied access to meet the prisoner. The Magistrate who ordered
the remand held that he had no jurisdiction to grant access despite the fact
that s.40 of the Prisons Act, 1894 provided that an unconvicted prisoner
should, subject to proper restrictions, be allowed to see his legal adviser in
jail. The question that arose was whether this right extended to the stage
where the prisoner was in police custody. Justice Fawcett, who presided
over the Bench of the Bombay High Court which heard the case referred to
the report of the Rawlinson Committee in England and noted that “the days
have long since gone by, when the state deliberately put obstacles in the
way of an accused defending himself, as for instance, in the days when he
was not allowed even to have counsel to defend him on a charge of felony.”
Referring to s.340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 the Judge held
that “the right under that provision implied that the prisoner should have a
reasonable opportunity “if in custody, of getting into communication with
his legal adviser for the purposes of preparing his defence”. The other judge
on the Bench, Justice Madgavkar added that “if the end of justice is justice
and  the  spirit  of  justice  is  fairness,  then  each  side  should  have  equal
opportunity to prepare its own case and to lay its evidence fully, freely, and
fairly,  before  the  Court.  This  necessarily  involves  preparation.  Such
preparation is far more effective from the point of view of justice, if it is
made with the aid of skilled legal advice – advice so valuable that in the
gravest of criminal trials, when life or death hangs in the balance, the very
21

state which undertakes the prosecution of the prisoner, also provides him, if
poor, with such legal assistance”. 
Another  instance  of  the  courage  and  craftsmanship  of  our  Judges,
particularly  during  difficult  times  of  our  political  and  legal  history,  is
provided in the decision in P.K. Tare v. Emperor AIR 1943 Nagpur 26. The
petitioners,  who  had  participated  in  the  Quit  India  Movement  of  1942,
challenged their detention under the Defence of India Act, 1939 as being
vitiated on account of refusal of permission by the authorities to allow them
to meet their counsel to seek legal advice or approach the court in person.
The Government of the day contended that the Defence of India Act 1939
took away the right to move a habeas corpus petition under S.491 of the
Cr.PC 1898. The court rejected this  relying  on the  observation  of Lord
Hailsham in  Eshugbayi v. Officer Administering the Govt. of Nigeria  that
“such fundamental rights, safeguarded under the Constitution with elaborate
and anxious care and upheld time and again by the highest tribunals of the
realm in language of utmost vigour cannot be swept away by implication or
removed by some sweeping generality. No one doubts the right and the
power of the proper authority to remove, but the removal must be express
and unmistakable; and this applies whatever government be in power, and
whether the country is at peace or at war.” Justice Vivian Bose, giving the
leading opinion of the court, explained that the right to move the High Court
remained intact notwithstanding the Defence of India Act, 1939. Further,
although  the  courts  allow  a great  deal  of  latitude  to  the  executive  and
presumptions in favour of the liberty of the subject are weakened, “those
rights do not disappear altogether.” The court categorically ruled that the
22

“attempt to keep the applicants away from this Court under the guise of
these rules, is an abuse of power and warrants intervention.” 
Justice  Vivian  Bose,  in  the  course  of  his  judgment,  emphasised  the
importance of the right of any person to apply to the court and demand that
he be dealt with according to law. He said: “The right is prized in India no
less highly than in England, or indeed any other part of the Empire, perhaps
even more highly here than elsewhere; and it is jealously guarded by the
courts.” 
The Constitution and after
The  debates  in  the  Constituent  Assembly  preceding  the  making  of  the
Constitution  of  India  witnessed  interesting  exchanges  amongst  the
distinguished  gathering.  Article  22  (1)  was  Article  15-A  in  the  Draft
Constitution and provided that “no person who is arrested shall be detained
in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for
such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult a legal practitioner of
his choice”. Dr. Ambedkar was conscious of the criticism that had resulted
from the omission of “due process” from Article 21 (Article 15 in the Draft
Constitution).  Therefore,  when  the  debate  on  Article  15-A  was  to
commence he pointed out that it was being introduced in order to make
“compensation  for  what  was  done  then  in  passing  Article  15.  In  other
words, we are providing for the substance of the law of ‘due process’ by the
introduction of Article 15-A”. He further pointed out that “Article 15-A
merely lifts from the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code two of the
23

most  fundamental  principles  which  every  civilized  country  follows  as
principles of international justice”, viz., the right of a person arrested to be
informed of the grounds of arrest and the right to be defended by a legal
practitioner of his choice.  It may be noted that clause (a) of Art. 22 of the
Constitution creates only two exceptions and they are (a) enemy alien and
(b) persons detained under preventive detention laws.  They have no right to
consult a lawyer nor be defended by a lawyer nor produced within 24 hours
before a Magistrate.
The  Constitution  recognised  importance  of  access  to  justice  to  courts,
particularly the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The right under Article
32  to  petition  the  Supreme  Court  for  enforcement  and  protection  of  a
fundamental  right  is  itself  a fundamental  right.    In re under  Art.  143,
Constitution  of  India,  (Keshav  Singh  case) (AIR  1965  SC  745),  the
Supreme Court said “The existence of judicial power in that behalf must
necessarily and inevitably postulate the existence of a right in the citizen to
move the court in that behalf.” Kesavananda recognised judicial review as
part of the basic  structure  of the Constitution,  a position  that  has  been
reaffirmed by a bench of seven judges in  L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of
India (1997) 3 SCC 261.
Right  to  ‘access  to  Courts’  includes  right  to  legal  aid  and  engaging
counsel
Article 39-A was introduced  in the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act,
1976 and it provides that “the State shall secure that the operation of the
24

legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in
particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any
other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to
any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities”.
We need not dilate here on the major strides made in the development of the
jurisprudence surrounding the right to life under Article 21, particularly
after the landmark decision in Maneka Gandhi. The linkage between Article
21 and the right to free legal aid was forged in the decision of Hussainara
Khatoon v. State of Bihar (1980) 1 SCC 81 where the court was appalled at
the plight of thousands of undertrials languishing in the jails in Bihar for
years on end without ever being represented by a lawyer. The court declared
that “there can be no doubt that speedy trial, and by speedy trial we mean
reasonably  expeditious  trial,  is  an  integral  and  essential  part  of  the
fundamental right to life and liberty enshrined in Article 21.” The court
pointed out that Article 39-A emphasised that free legal service was an
inalienable element of ‘reasonable, fair and just’ procedure and that the right
to free legal services was implicit in the guarantee of Article 21. In his
inimitable style Justice Bhagwati declared: “legal aid is really nothing else
but equal justice in action. Legal aid is in fact the delivery system of social
justice. If free legal services are not provided to such an accused, the trial
itself may run the risk of being vitiated as contravening Article 21 and we
have  no  doubt  that  every State  Government  would  try to  avoid  such  a
possible eventuality”. He reiterated this proposition in  Suk Das v. Union
Territory  of  Arunachal  Pradesh (1986)  2  SCC  401  and  said  “It  may
therefore now be taken as settled law that free legal assistance at State cost
25

is a fundamental right of a person accused of an offence which may involve
jeopardy to his life or personal liberty and this fundamental right is implicit
in  the  requirement  of reasonable,  fair  and  just  procedure  prescribed  by
Article  21.”  This  part  of  the  narration  would  be  incomplete  without
referring to the other astute architect of human rights jurisprudence, Justice
Krishna Iyer. In M.H. Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra (1978) 3 SCC 544, he
declared: “If a prisoner sentenced to imprisonment is virtually unable to
exercise his constitutional and statutory right of appeal inclusive of special
leave to appeal for want of legal assistance, there is implicit in the Court
under Article 142 read with Articles 21 and 39-A of the Constitution, power
to  assign  counsel  for  such  imprisoned  individual  ‘for  doing  complete
justice”.
Recommendation of the Commission for Review of the Constitution on
right of access to justice
Recently the Commission for Review of the Constitution recommended that
‘access to justice’ must be incorporated as an express fundamental right as
in the South African Constitution of 1996. In the South Africa Constitution,
Art. 34 reads as follows:
“Art. 34: Access to Courts and Tribunals and speedy justice
(1) Every one has the right to have any dispute that can be resolved
by the application of law decided in a fair public hearing before a
Court or tribunal or forum or where appropriate, another independent
and impartial Court, tribunal or forum.
26

(2) The right to access to Courts shall be deemed to include right to
reasonably  speedy  and  effective  justice  in  all  matters  before  the
Courts, tribunals or other forum and the State shall take all reasonable
steps to achieve that object.”
Accordingly,  the  National  Commission  for  Review  the  Working  of
Constitution  has  recommended  insertion  of  Art.  30A  on  the  following
terms:
“30A: Access to Courts and Tribunals and speedy justice
(1) Everyone has a right to have any dispute that can be resolved
by the application of law decided in a fair public hearing before
an  independent  court  or,  where  appropriate,  another
independent and impartial tribunal or forum.
(2) The right to access to Courts shall be deemed to include the
right to reasonably speedy and effective justice in all matters
before the courts, tribunals or other fora and the State shall take
all reasonable steps to achieve the said object.”
However, the right to legal aid in India is now firmly entrenched in the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. S.12 of that Act provides that legal
aid will be available both on the means test as well as the merits test. In fact,
for a wide range of litigants with special needs [for instance, persons in
custody, children, women, complainants under the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, workmen], legal aid
is automatically available for filing or defending a case irrespective of the
27

economic  status  of  that  person.  We  have,  under  the  Act,  an  extensive
network of legal aid committees at the taluk, district and State levels. In
addition,  the  Supreme  Court  and  every  High  Court  has  its  own  legal
services committee. The task before these committees is to provide effective
and quality legal aid, that will not be restricted to legal representation in
courts but also counselling and advice, and this is an important and daunting
challenge. 
III
Constitutional Courts and Judicial Review
We would now like to dwell briefly on the scope and extent of the power of
judicial review which we have noticed is an inalienable part of the basic
structure of our Constitution. The power of the constitutional Courts to go
into the validity of the laws made by the Legislature or of the actions of the
executive was broadly laid down by Justice Marshall CJ in the famous case
in Marbury v. Madison (1803) 5 U.S. 137. He reviewed the common law,
Blackstone,  the  Federalist  papers  and  the  language  of  the  American
Constitution itself. After first deciding that Marbury, the petitioner, had a
right to a writ of mandamus, to compel the Secretary of State, Madison to
issue his Commission as a justice of the peace in the District of Columbia,
he reached the next stage of the decision. The question was 
“if he (Marbury) has a right, and that right has been violated, do the
laws of his country afford him a remedy?”
28

Marshall CJ answered as follows:
“The very essence of civil liberty certainly consists in the right of
every individual to claim the protection of the laws, whenever he
receives an injury. One of the first duties of government is to afford
that  protection.  In  Great  Britain,  the  King  himself  is  sued  in  the
respectful form of a petition, and he never fails to comply with the
judgment of his Court”
He quoted Blackstone to the following effect:
“It is settled and invariable principle in the laws of England,  that
every right, when withheld, must have a remedy  and that every
injury its  proper redress.  The government of the United Sates has
been emphatically termed a government of laws and not of men. It
will  certainly  cease  to  deserve  this  high  appellation,  if  the  laws
furnish no remedy for the violation of a vested legal right”
Public law and private law divide
Rights which are breached may belong to private law or public law. The
distinction between these two sets of rights is well known to students of
constitutional  law.  Rights  which  exist  as  between  one  individual  and
another or even against the State can be private rights such as those arising
out of contract or tort. Rights which are against the State or entities to which
the  function  of  State  are  assigned  such  as  statutory  corporations  or
29

autonomous  public sector units  are governed by the Constitution  or are
regulated by statutes which the Constitution permits to be framed so that the
rights are regulated and balance is struck between individual rights on the
one hand and public interest on the other. These are governed by public law
principles.
For breach of private rights parties approach the ordinary Courts Civil or
Criminal. There are offences which are committed by individuals against the
individuals  or the  State  or public  entities.  Barring  a few where  private
action is permissible under the criminal law, the others are taken up by the
State  through  its  prosecution  agencies  so  that  law  and  order  can  be
maintained. The State steps in because it is its duty to maintain law and
order.
As to enforcement of judgments, the superior Courts have powers under the
Constitution, and under the Contempt Laws to take penal action if their
orders  are  not  complied  with  by  the  Executive  authority.  Further,  the
Constitution provides that the Government shall act in aid of the Supreme
Court of India. Thus, it is clear that the person whose constitutional or
statutory  rights  are  violated  has  ‘access’  to  the  Constitutional  Courts,
namely, the High Court and the Supreme Court.
30

Public Interest Litigation
We shall next refer to the system of ‘public interest litigation’ that has come
to stay in our Constitutional Courts. The trend of bringing public interest
litigation in the Supreme Court and in the various High Courts by social
action  groups,  the  legal  aid  societies,  university  teachers,  advocates,
voluntary organizations and public-spirited citizens has risen in the country.
This has helped to ameliorate the miseries of thousands of persons, arising
from  repression,  governmental  omissions  or  excesses,  administrative
lethargy or arbitrariness or the non-enforcement of beneficial legislation.
Cases  of  undertrials  as  well  convicted  prisoners,  women  in  protective
homes, unorganized labourers, untouchables, miseries of scheduled castes
and tribes, landless agricultural labourers, slum-dwellers etc. are taken up in
PIL cases. The concepts of locus standi have been expanded to meet the
problems created by damage to environment or environmental pollution.
Public interest cases have also come to be filed seeking directions against
the Police or State for taking action against corrupt individuals. The result is
that  the  strict  rules  of ‘locus  standi’  which  were  applicable  in  the  writ
jurisdiction of our Constitutional Courts has, practically vanished.
In  Fertiliser Corporation Kamgar Union v. Union of India AIR 1981 SC
344, Krishna Iyer J stated:
“In  simple  terms,  locus  standi  must  be  liberalized  to  meet  the
challenges of the time.  Ubi Jus ibi remedium must be enlarged to
embrace all interests of public minded citizens or organizations with
31

serious  concerns  for  conservation  of  public  resources  and  the
direction and correction of public power so as to promote justice in
trinity facets.”
IV
Need for adequate number of Courts and financial support
We now turn to certain important aspects that affect the right of access to
justice. For  the  protection  of rights,  the  State has  to establish  adequate
number  of  Courts,  man  them  by  qualified,  competent  and  independent
Judges and provide the necessary staff and infrastructure. But today there is
an immense gap between the demand and supply. It is well-known that the
Law Commission had stated in its 120th Report that we in India have only
10.5  Judge per million population  while countries  like US and UK and
others have between 100 to 150 Judges per million population. The Union
Government and the States in India had not toned up the judicial system in
the last five decades so that today we are faced with tremendous backlog of
cases in our Courts. Every law made by Parliament or the State Legislatures
creates new civil rights and obligations and creates new criminal offences.
Before such laws are introduced, a judicial impact assessment has to be
made as to the impact of the Acts on the Courts – such as how many civil
cases the Act will generate or how many fresh criminal cases will go before
the Courts. To that extent, each Bill must, in its Financial Memorandum,
seek budgetary allocation but in the last five decades this has not been done.
We may state  that  in  US  a  statute  specifically  requires  judicial  impact
32

assessment and adequate budgetary provisions to be made. Unfortunately,
this is not done in India.   The principle here is that the expense for the
judicial branch must be met from the general taxes that are collected by the
State.
Further, the trial Courts on the civil and criminal side which are located
over the length and breadth of our country adjudicate upon civil rights or
criminal offences created by various legislations made both by Parliament
and State Legislatures. We are all aware that the Constitution in its VII
Schedule, contains three lists. The entries in List I are subjects on which the
Parliament alone can make laws, entries in List II are subjects on which the
State Legislatures alone can legislate while in respect of entries in List III
both the Parliament and State Legislatures can legislate. Today, the factual
position is that the subordinate Courts established by the State Governments
are  adjudicating  upon  the  civil  and  criminal  matters  arising  out  of
legislations made by Parliament and the State Legislatures. Bulk of the laws
like the Transfer of Property Act, the Indian Contract Act, the Sale of Goods
Act, Indian Penal Code, Civil and Criminal Codes etc. are referable to List
III. The statutes enacted by Parliament on the subjects listed in List I and
List III have the effect of leading to a large number of civil and criminal
cases.  In  other  words,  the  Central  Government  is  bringing  forward
legislation in Parliament and burdening the subordinate Courts established
by the State Governments with cases arising out of the Central legislation.
The Central Government has however not been making any contribution for
establishing the trial and appellate Courts in the States. This lacuna has been
pointed out by the Commission for Review of the Constitution. There is an
33

immediate  need  for  the  Central  Government  to  come  forward  with  a
package which will substantially increase the number of our subordinate
Courts. 
Today, more than seventy per cent of those who are detained in our jails are
undertrials whose guilt is yet to be declared. By detaining such persons for
unreasonable terms without providing adequate number of criminal Courts,
the Union and the States are in a continuing breach of the ‘right to access’ to
justice in our Criminal Courts and the right to ‘speedy justice’ guaranteed
by Art. 21. Speedy justice, the Supreme Court, has held is a fundamental
right within the meaning of the words ‘right to life’ referred to in Article 21.
Long ago, in the Federalist Paper No.78, in the 18th Century, Alexander
Hamilton, one of the architects of the American Constitution declared, in an
oft-quoted passage, that the judicial branch of the federal government is one
that  “will  always  be  the  least  dangerous  to  the  political  rights  of  the
Constitution” because the judicial branch
“has no influence over either the sword or the purse; no direction
of the strength or the wealth of the society”
Therefore, to start with, we must have an adequate number of trial and
appellate Courts, civil and criminal, established by the Central Government
and State Governments and adequate budgetary provision must be made
before  the  enactment  of  any  legislation,  by  making  a  judicial  impact
34

assessment.    The  expenditure  must  be  borne  from  the  general  taxes
collected by the Central and the State Governments.
Court Fees
Yet another aspect of ‘access to justice’ is the system of demanding ‘court-
fee’ from the parties who move the Courts. Lord Macaulay, who headed the
Law  Commission  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  declared  that  the
preamble to the Bengal Regulation of 1795 was ‘absurd’ when it stated that
high court fee was intended to drive away vexatious litigants. The reason he
gave was that such increase will also drive away honest plaintiffs who are
unable to pay court fee. Starting from the 14th Report, the Law Commission
has been repeating that the argument that court fee be increased to prevent
vexatious litigation, cannot be accepted.
In  the  Supreme  Court,  in  P.M.  Ashwathanarayana  Setty  v.  State  of
Karnataka 1989 Supp (1) SCC 696, Venkatachaliah J (as he then was),
while dealing with the issue as to whether the fixation of ad valorem Court
fees  without  any limit,  as  proposed  by legislation  in  the Rajasthan  and
Karnataka Acts, was constitutionally valid, quoted A.P. Herbert’s ‘More
Uncommon Law’, where the following words of the Judge in the fictional
case of Hogby v. Hogby were referred to:
“That if the Crown must charge for justice, at least the fee should be
like the fee for postage: that is to say, it should be the same, however
long the journey may be. For it is no fault of one litigant that his plea
35

to the King’s Judges raises questions more difficult to determine than
another’s and will require a longer hearing in Court. He is asking for
justice, not renting house property.”
The Judge in the fictional case asked the Attorney General:
“Everybody pays for the police, but some people use them more than
others. Nobody complains. You don’t have to pay a special fee every
time you have a burglary, or ask a policeman the way.”
Venkatachaliah J observed that the court fee as a limitation on ‘access to
justice’  is  inextricably  intertwined  with  a  ‘highly  emotional  and  even
evocative subject stimulative of visions of a social order in which justice
will be brought within the reach of all citizens of all ranks in society, both
those blessed with affluence and those depressed with poverty’.
Thus,  while  upholding  the  constitutionality  of  the  said  legislations,  the
Court suggested for the rationalization of the levy of Court fee by the States
and more particularly lower the fees for litigants  at lower level, on the
principle that those who have less in life should have more in law.
His Lordship, further observed:
36

“Indeed all civilized governments recognize the need for access to
justice being free.”
Alternative Dispute Resolution and Plea Bargaining
Today,  it  is  universally  recognized  that  the  Courts  may  not  merely
adjudicate in civil disputes but also persuade parties to go for arbitration,
conciliation, mediation or Lok Adalats. Courts are no longer mere centres
for adjudication of disputes but are also centres for promoting settlement.
Court-annexed  systems  can  even  compel  parties  to  try these  alternative
modes.   Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (as introduced
w.e.f. 1.7.2000) is part of such a policy. In the US, more than 90% of civil
cases are settled through mediation and do not go for trial. Lawyers who
promote mediation are the lawyers most in demand. Mediation centres are
now  coming  up  in  a  big  way  in  India,  a  start  is  made  in  Mumbai,
Ahmedabad, Chennai and other places by voluntary groups of lawyers.
Plea  bargaining  in  criminal  cases  has  been  recommended  by  the  Law
Commission in its 154th Report on Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and also
in 177th Report on ‘Law Relating to Arrest’ and the Bill, namely, “The
Criminal  Law  (Amendment)  Bill,  2003”  is  pending  in  Parliament.  This
means that those accused who confess before Court may plead for reduced
sentences.
37

In Bihar Legal Support Society v. The Chief Justice of India & Ors  (AIR
1987 SC 38), the Supreme Court observed:
“the weaker sections of Indian society have been deprived of justice
for long long years; they have had no access to justice on account of
their poverty, ignorance and illiteracy. …..The majority of the people
of our country are subjected to this denial of ‘access to justice’ and
overtaken  by  despair  and  helplessness,  they  continue  to  remain
victims  of  an  exploitative  society  where  economic  power  is
concentrated in the hands of a few and it is used for perpetuation of
domination over large masses of human beings…… The strategy of
public interest litigation has been evolved by this Court with a view
to  bringing  justice  within  the  easy  reach  of  the  poor  and
disadvantaged sections of the community.”
The famous dictum of Justice Brennan of the US Supreme Court may also
be recalled:
“Nothing rankles more in the human heart than a brooding sense of
injustice. Illness we can put up with, but injustice makes us want to
pull things down. When only the rich can enjoy the law, as a doubtful
luxury, and the poor who need it most, cannot have it because its
expense puts it beyond their reach, the threat to the existence of free
democracy is not imaginary but very real, because democracy’s very
life depends upon making the machinery of justice so effective that
every citizen shall believe in the benefit of impartiality and fairness.”
38

The right of access to justice is integral to the rule of law and administration
of  courts  in  accordance  with  the  Constitution.  It  serves  as  the  guiding
principle in regard to any measure that affects the administration of justice-
whether civil or criminal.  The socio-economic realities of our country have
thus far impacted every measure of legal reform. It assumes even greater
significance when it involves an element of economic and financial reform. 
With this essential understanding of the basic issue of access to justice, we
proceed to examine the central issues that we have posed for consideration
in Chapter I (supra).
39

CHAPTER III
POWER OF PARLIAMENT TO ENACT OR AMEND A LAW
RELATING TO THE COURT FEES PAYABLE IN HIGH COURTS
AND SUBORDINATE COURTS
(i) Legislative History of Court Fee in India
Before the advent of British rule in India, the administration of justice was
considered to be the basic function of the State as guardian of the people
without  the  levy  of  any  charge  on  the  party  approaching  the  court  for
redress of its grievances. During the Mughal rule and the period prior to
that, there was no fee payable even on administration of civil justice and the
administration of justice was totally free. It was only after the British rule
that  regulations  imposing  court  fees  were  brought  into  existence  (see
Secretary to Govt. of Madras v. P.R. Sriramulu (1996) 1 SCC 345, at para
6).
The  first  legislative  measure  in  India  on  court  fee  was  the  Madras
Regulation  III  of  1782  which  was  followed  by  subsequent  regulations.
Subsequently, in Bengal, Bengal Regulation XXXVIII of 1795 was passed,
which was also followed by subsequent regulations. In Bombay, Bombay
Regulation VIII of 1802 was passed by the British Government, which was
also  subsequently  replaced  by  other  regulations.  All  these  provincial
regulations were amalgamated into a single Act XXXVI of 1860, which was
enacted  for  whole  of  British  India.  This  Act  was  also  followed  by
40

subsequent Acts; and in last, the present Court Fees Act, namely, ‘The Court
Fees Act, 1870’ (Act VII of 1870) came into existence. This Act of 1870
has been amended from time to time.
Statement of Objects and Reasons of 1870 Act speaks of need for reduction
of Court fee:
The Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) to the Court Fees Act, 1870
indicates that prior to this legislation the rates of stamp fees leviable in
Courts  and  offices  established  beyond  the  local  limits  of  the  ordinary
original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts of Judicature at Fort William,
Madras and Bombay and in proceedings on the appellate side of such High
Courts, were fixed by Act XXVI of 1867, and this was to a great extent
tentative. Acknowledging that there was a direct nexus between increased
court  fees  and  litigation,  the  SOR  proceeded  to  state:  “The  experience
gained of their working during the two years in which they have been in
force, seems to be conclusive as to their repressive effect on the general
litigation of the country. It is, therefore,  thought expedient to make  a
general reduction in the rates now chargeable on the institution of civil
suits, and to revert to the principle of maximum fee which obtained under
the former law.” (emphasis supplied). The legislation also reduced the fee
on certain petitions filed in the criminal courts “from one rupee to eight
annas” bowing to the “strong objections entertained by the local authorities
in certain Provinces.” 
41

To make up for the loss of revenue which was expected to result from the
general reduction of fees, it was proposed to discontinue the refund of any
portion of the amount, levied on the first institution of suits, and also to
raise the fees heretofore chargeable on probates and letters of administration
granted under the Indian Succession Act, and on certificates issued under
Act XXVII of 1860, to the ad valorem rates leviable under the English law
in like cases.
The  1870  legislation  also  implicitly  recognised  the  principle  of  non-
discrimination  among  litigants  in  the  matter  of  process  fees.  The  SOR
stated: “In lieu of the existing rates of process-fees, which vary according to
the distance of the Court by which the processes are issued from the place
where they are to be served or executed, it is proposed to levy, by means of
stamps, a uniform rate in all cases.  All suitors will thus be required to
contribute in equal proportion to the maintenance of the establishment
employed in the serving of processes, without reference to the length of
time  occupied  in  each  service  and  the  consequent  amount  of  work
rendered on behalf of each person at whose instance any process is served
or executed.” (emphasis supplied)
Though, the Court Fess Act 1870 was applicable to the whole of British
India, the ‘Devolution Act 1920’ (Act XXXVIII of 1920) empowered the
‘Provinces/ States’ to amend the Court  Fees  Act, 1870 while making  it
applicable to the concerned State/Province. The Devolution Act, 1920 has
since been repealed by Act 1 of 1938.
42

Legislative  powers  of  Parliament  and  State  Legislatures  as  to  the
making of law on Court-fees
a) Position after the Government of India Act, 1935 came into force 
At the time when the Government of India Act, 1935 came into force, the
Court  Fees  Act,  1870  was  applicable  to  the  whole  of  British  India,  as
amended by provincial legislatures. It continued to be in force even after the
Government of India Act, 1935 came into force, in view of the provision
contained in the section 292 of the Government of India Act, 1935, which
read as follows:
“Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of the Government of India
Act, but subject to the other provisions of this Act, all the laws in
force in British India immediately before the commencement of Part
III of this Act, shall continue in force in British India until altered or
repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other competent
authority.”
Now we have to ascertain which was the competent legislature which was
entitled to alter, repeal or amend the Court Fees Act, 1870. The relevant
provision is contained in section 100 of the Government of India Act, 1935.
As per sub-section (1) of section 100 of the said Act of 1935, the Federal
Legislature had exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in List I of the Seventh Schedule to that Act and under
sub-section (3) thereof a provincial legislature alone had power to make
43

laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II of the said
Seventh Schedule to that Act. The relevant entry relating to court fees was
Entry 1 of List II of the Seventh Schedule, which included: “fees taken in all
courts except in Federal Court”.
In  view  of  the  above  provisions,  the  provincial  legislature  became  the
competent legislature in respect of matters relating to the court fees payable
in all courts except the Federal Court.  In this regard, the Bombay High
Court in M/s Brindalal v. M/s Gokal and Haffman Ltd., AIR 1960 Bom 96,
held (at para 5):
“Therefore, the Legislature competent to legislate in connection with
court fees was a Provincial Legislature and not the Federal or Central
Legislature because of the provisions of sub-section (3) of section
100,  “Court  fees”  was  very  clearly  with  the  exclusive  legislative
powers of a Provincial Legislature, after the coming into operation of
the Government of India Act, 1935 and the Federal Legislature did
not have any such power. It is quite clear that it was a Provincial
Legislature alone which could alter, repeal or amend the Court Fees
Act, after the coming into operation of the Government of India Act,
1935.”
b) Position after the Constitution of India came into force
When the Constitution of India came into force on 26th January, 1950, the
Court Fees Act, 1870 was already in force by virtue of section 292 of the
44

Government of India Act, 1935, as mentioned above. It continued to be in
force after the Constitution of India came into force by virtue of Art. 372 of
the Constitution of India.
Art.372  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  pre-Constitutional  laws  shall
continue to be in force, until altered or repealed or amended by a competent
Legislature, however subject to the other provisions  of the Constitution.
Clause (1) of Art.372 reads as follows:
"372. Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation. -
(1) Notwithstanding  the  repeal  by  this  Constitution  of  the
enactments  referred  to  in  Art.  395  but  subject  to  the  other
provisions  of  this  Constitution,  all  the  laws  in  force  in  the
territory of India immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution  shall  continue  in  force  therein  until  altered  or
repealed  or  amended  by  a  competent  legislature  or  other
competent authority."
Moreover, the object of the Art.372 of the Constitution is to maintain the
continuity of the pre-existing laws after the Constitution came into force till
they were repealed, altered or amended by a competent legislature or other
competent authority. (South India Corporation (P) Ltd. v. Secy., Board of
Revenue, AIR 1964 SC 207). The Court Fees Act, 1872 was an 'existing
law' within the meaning of Art.366. By virtue of Art.372, it has been a
continuing enactment even after the Constitution of India came into force.
While interpreting Art.372, the Supreme Court in the above-noted case held
as under:
45

“that  a  pre  Constitutional  law  made  by  a  competent  authority,
though  it  has  lost  its  legislative  competence  under  the
Constitution,  shall  continue  in  force,  provided  the  law  does  not
contravene  the  other  provisions  of  the  Constitution”.  (emphasis
supplied)
Pre-Constitutional law can continue to be in force only in its original form,
and can only be altered or repealed or amended by a competent legislature
or other competent authority. The following words in Art.372(1) make it
clear;  “shall  continue  in  force  therein  until  altered  or  repealed  or
amended by a competent legislature or other competent authority”.
The Bombay High Court in M/s Brindalal v. M/s Gokal and Haffman Ltd.
(supra), has stated:
“The position, therefore, is the same as that under the Government of
India Act, 1935 and it is the State Legislature alone which has the
exclusive power to legislate in respect of court fees payable in that
particular State.”
It is necessary to ascertain which is the competent legislature, which is
entitled to make laws relating to fees payable in various Courts. Similarly
whether now Parliament can amend the Court Fees Act, 1870, which was
originally enacted as a Central Act? 
46

Powers of Parliament and State Legislatures
Article 246 (1) of the Constitution of India refers to the powers of the
Parliament and the State Legislatures in respect of matters referred to in the
Seventh Schedule.   Parliament has the exclusive power to make laws with
respect to any of the matter enumerated in List I (Union List). Parliament
can also make laws with respect to any matter mentioned in List III, i.e.
Concurrent List, [Art. 246(2)]. So far as making of a law in respect to any of
matter enumerated in List II (State List) is concerned, only the legislature of
a State has the exclusive power to make laws [Art.246(3)]. However, the
Parliament can enact a law on a subject mentioned in the 'State List' only in
the following circumstances:-
(a) Law, which is applicable to any part of the territory of India not
included in a State, i.e. Union Territories [Art.246(4)]
(b) When it is necessary in national interest (Art.249)
(c) When proclamation of Emergency is in operation (Art.250)
(d) When two or more States desire and pass a resolution (Art.252) and
(e) For giving effect to international agreements etc. (Art.253)
Specific entries in the Lists I, II and III of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution  of  India  relate  to  the  subject  of  ‘Court  fees’ and  reads  as
follows:
47

List I (Union List)
Entry 77 – “Constitution, Organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the
Supreme  Court  (including  contempt  of  such  court),  and  fees  taken
therein; persons entitled to practice before the Supreme Court.
Entry 96 – “Fees in respect of any of the matters in this list,  but not
including fees taken in any Court.”
List II (State List)
Entry 3 – “Officers and servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and
revenue Courts; fees taken in all Courts except the Supreme Court.
Entry 66 – “Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List,  but not
including fees taken in any Court”.
List III (Concurrent List)
Entry 11A – “Administration of Justice; constitution and organization
of all Courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts.”
Entry 47 - “Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List,  but not
including fees taken in any Court”.
48

From the above entries, it is evident that the subject of Court fees, so far it
relates to Supreme Court, falls under Entry 77 of List I (Union List). Court
fee in High Courts and other Subordinate Courts, falls under Entry 3 of List
II (State List). 
Entry 96 of List I, entry 66 of List II and entry 47 of List III also deal with
‘fees’, but ‘fees taken in any Court' is specifically excluded in these specific
entries.
(a) Law  on Court  fees  payable  in the  High  Court  & subordinate
Courts
It is necessary to mention here that the entry relating to the ‘administration
of  justice’,  was  originally  in  Entry  3  of  List  II.  But  by  virtue  of  the
Constitution (Forty-Second) Amendment Act, 1976, the said entry has been
shifted  to  List  III  with  effect  from  3.1.1977.  Though  administration  of
justice now falls under Entry 11A of List III, the subject of ‘fees taken in
any court’, which may be said to be related to administration of justice,
does not fall under List III in view of the explicit bar under Entry 47 of List
III  mentioned  above.  The  effect  of  this  Constitutional  amendment  still
remains the same i.e. the power to legislate on matters of court fees remains
in the competence of the State Legislatures, so far as the High Courts and
Courts subordinate thereto are concerned.
49

Thus, as far as Parliament is concerned, under Art.246(1) read with Entry 77
of List  I, it can enact a law relating  to Court fees which is payable in
Supreme Court, and under Art.246(4) read with Entry 3 of List II, it can
enact a law for Court fees payable in other Courts situated in any Union
Territory.  But  for  High  Courts  and  other  subordinate  Courts  exercising
jurisdiction in any State, laws relating to Court fees can only be made by the
Legislature of State as per Art.246(3) read with Entry 3 of List II.
(b) Law on Court fees payable in the Supreme Court
As per Entry 77 of List I read with Art. 246(1) of the Constitution of India,
Parliament  is  competent  to  make  a  law  on  Court  fees  payable  in  the
Supreme Court. Subject to any law made by the Parliament, the Supreme
Court can also make rules relating to fees payable in the Supreme Court,
under sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of Art. 145 of the Constitution. 
The Supreme Court in exercise of its rule making power conferred on it by
Article 145 of the Constitution of India, has framed rules, which include
rules relating to the Court fees payable in the Supreme Court. Those rules
are known as ‘Supreme Court Rules, 1966’ and the third schedule to the
Rules provides table of Court fees payable in the Supreme Court. However,
these rules are subject to any law made by the Parliament.
50

(c) Law on Court fees payable in Courts in Union Territories
As far as Court fees payable in other Courts exercising jurisdiction over the
Union Territories are concerned, no doubt Parliament can enact any law by
virtue of power conferred on it under Article 246(4) of the Constitution of
India. Apart from Art. 246(4), the President of India may also under Art.
240 of the Constitution, make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government for the Union Territory of: 
(a) Andaman and Nicobar Island (b) Lakshadweep
(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli (d) Daman and Diu
(e) Pondicherry
However, for Union Territory of Pondicherry, any regulation can only be
made by the President when the Legislative Assembly of Union Territory of
Pondicherry is dissolved or is under suspension.
Any regulation so made by the President under Art. 240 of the Constitution,
may repeal or amend any law made by Parliament which is applicable to the
particular  Union  Territory  for  which  regulation  has  been  made  and  the
regulation so made by the President shall have the same force and effect as
an Act  of  Parliament  [see  Art.  240(2)].     A five  Judge  Bench  of  the
Supreme Court in T.M. Kanniyan v. I.T. Officer, Pondicherry AIR 1968 SC
637, while interpreting Art. 240 of the Constitution, has observed:
51

“By the express words of Art. 240, the President can make regulations
for the peace, progress and good government of the specified Union
Territories. Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act
made  by  Parliament  and  applicable  to  that  territory.  When
promulgated by the President, the regulation has the same force and
effect as an Act of Parliament applicable to that territory. This general
power of the President to make regulation extends to all matters on
which Parliament can legislate.”
At present there are only seven territories having status of Union Territory.
These are:
(1) Delhi (2) Andaman and Nicobar Island
(3) Lakshadweep (4) Dadra and Nagar Haveli
(5) Daman and Diu (6) Pondicherry
(7) Chandigarh
Among these seven Union Territories, Delhi and Pondicherry are having
their own Legislative Assemblies also. These Legislative Assemblies can
also enact any law on a subject falling in List II (State List) of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution. (See for Delhi – sub-clause (a) of clause (3) of
Article 239AA of the Constitution of India; for Pondicherry – section 18 of
the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963).   However, Parliament’s
power under Article 246(4) is unaffected and any law made by Parliament
52

will prevail over any law made by any Legislative Assembly mentioned
above. (See sub-clauses (b) and (c) of clause (3) of Article 239AA of the
Constitution of India and sections 18(2) and 21 of the Government of Union
Territories  Act,  1963).    In  fact,  Pondicherry  Legislative  Assembly has
already enacted ‘The Pondicherry Court Fees and Suit Valuation Act, 1972’.
High Courts for Union Territories
Art. 241 of the Constitution provides that Parliament may be law constitute
a High Court for a Union Territory or declare any Court in any such territory
to be a High Court for such territory. The existing position of High Courts
having jurisdiction over Union Territories is as follows:
(1) Delhi - A separate High Court has been constituted by the Delhi High
Court Act, 1966.
(2) Chandigarh – As per section 29 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act,
1966, the Punjab and Haryana Court has been conferred jurisdiction
over Chandigarh Union Territory.
(3) Andaman  and Nicobar Islands – The jurisdiction of the Calcutta
High Court has been extended over the Andaman and Nicobar Island
by the Calcutta High Court (Extension of Jurisdiction) Act, 1953.
(4) Dadra and Nagar Haveli – Jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court
has been extended to this Union Territory by section 11 of the Dadra
and Nagar Haveli Act, 1961.
53

(5) Daman and Diu – Bombay High Court is having jurisdiction over
Daman  and  Diu  (see  section  20  of  the  Goa,  Daman  and  Diu
Reorganisation Act, 1987).
(6) Lakshadweep Island – As per section 60 of the State Reorganisation
Act,  1956  the  Kerala  High  Court  is  having  jurisdiction  over
Lakshadweep Island.
(7) Pondicherry – As per section 4 of the Pondicherry (Administration)
Act, 1962, the Madras High Court is having jurisdiction over this
Union Territory.
The manner in which the Court-fee legislation was being amended from
time to time
The Court Fees Act, 1870 was originally passed as 'Central Act’ by the
Governor General in Council and was extended to the whole of then British
India. The Act continued to be in force by virtue of section 292 of the
Government of India Act, 1935. The Court Fees Act, 1870 continues to be
in force even after Constitution of India has come into force, by virtue of
Art.372 of the Constitution.
The Devolution Act, 1920 empowered then Provinces to amend the Court
Fees Act. As mentioned above, the subject of Court fees was mentioned in
item 1 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Govt. of India Act 1935 and
similarly as per Entry 3 of List II of VII Schedule to the Constitution, the
Court fees has become a State subject as per the Constitutional scheme. As
54

it had become a 'State' subject, many States have amended the Court Fees
Act, 1870. Some of the States have even repealed this Central Act in their
State and enacted a new Act for Court fees.
States which have repealed the Court Fees Act, 1870 in their territories
and enacted their own Court Fees Act
1. Andhra Pradesh – A.P. Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1956
(A.P. Act 7 of 1956).
2. Gujarat – Bombay Court Fees Act 1959 (Bombay Act 36 of 1959)
as adopted by Gujarat A.L.O., 1960.
3. Himachal Pradesh – H.P. Court Fees Act, 1968 (H.P. Act 3 of
1968).
4. Jammu and Kashmir – Jammu and Kashmir Court Fees Act, 1977
(J&K Act 7 of 1977).
5. Karnataka – Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958
(Karnataka Act 16 of 1958).
6. Kerala – Kerala Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1960 (Kerala
Act 10 of 1960).
7. Maharashtra – Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 (Bombay Act 36 of
1959).
8. Rajasthan – Rajasthan Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1961
(Rajasthan Act 23 of 1961).
55

9. Tamil Nadu – Tamil Nadu Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act,
1955 (Tamil Nadu Act 14 of 1955).
10. West Bengal – West Bengal Court Fees Act, 1970 (West Bengal
Act 10 of 1970).
11. Union Territory of Pondicherry – Pondicherry Court Fees and
Suits Valuation Act, 1972 (Pondicherry Act 6 of 1973).
The following States have amended various provisions of the Court Fees
Act, 1870 from time to time, as applicable in respective States – 
1. Assam 2. Bihar 3. Madhya Pradesh
4. Orissa 5. Punjab 6. Haryana
7. Meghalaya 8. Uttar Pradesh
Position of other States
Manipur  and  Tripura –  Manipur  and  Tripura  were  formerly  Union
Territories. As per section 2 of the Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950, the
Central Government is empowered to extend to Union Territories of Delhi,
Himachal  Pradesh  (now  State),  Manipur  (now  State)  and  Tripura  (now
State), any enactment which was in force in a State. In exercise of this
power, the Court Fees Act, 1870, as in force in the State of Assam was
extended to Manipur and Tripura with modification vide G.S.R. No. 1119-
1120 dated 29.6.1963 (w.e.f. 15.7.63) – Gazette of India 1.7.63 pt. II section
56

3(1) Extraordinary pp. 501 and 531. Manipur and Tripura have now become
States by the North Eastern Areas Reorganisation Act, 1971.
Goa – The territory of Goa was formerly part of Union Territory of Goa,
Daman and Diu. By Regulation 11 of 1963 (w.e.f. 3.9.1964) the Court Fees
Act, 1870 has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu. This Act was further
amended vide Goa Act 5 of 1966 and Act 8 of 1970. Now Goa has become
a State vide (The) Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland – The territories of all these
three States were formerly a part of the Assam State. The Court Fees Act,
1870, as applicable in the State of Assam, continues to be in force in these
States.
Nagaland was made a State vide (The) State of Nagaland Act, 1962.  As per
section 26 of the said Act, all laws which were in force in the territory of
Nagaland are continued to be in force.
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were made separate Union Territories vide
sections 6 and 7 of the North Eastern Area (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.  As
per section 77 of the said Act of 1971, all laws which were in force in these
territories are continued to be in force.
57

Arunachal Pradesh was made a ‘State’ vide the State of Arunachal Pradesh
Act, 1986.  As per section 46 of this Act of 1986, all laws which were in
force in the territory were continued to be in force.
Mizoram was made a State vide the State of Mizoram Act, 1986.  As per
section  43  of this  Act, all  laws  which were in  force in the  territory of
Mizoram were continued to be in force.
Jharkhand, Chattisgarh and Uttaranchal – These States were formerly
part of State of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh respectively. The
Court Fees Act, 1870, as applicable in these States before the reorganization
of States in the year 2000, is still continued to be in force by virtue of
section 84 of the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000, section 86 of the U.P.
Reorganisation Act, 2000 and section 78 of the M.P. Reorganisation Act,
2000, respectively.
Sikkim – By the Constitution (Thirty Sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, the
territory of Sikkim was included in the territory of India and made a ‘State’.
As per Art. 371F of the Constitution of India, the High Court and other
Courts situated in Sikkim continued to be in existence (clause (i) and (j) of
Art. 371F). Similarly, all laws which were in force at that time in Sikkim
were declared to be continued in force (clause (l) of Art. 371F).
58

Court Fees Act, 1870, as applicable in Union Territories 
1. Delhi – The Court Fees Act, 1870 as amended by Punjab Acts 4 of
1939; 31 of 1953; 19 of 1957 and 14 of 1958 and East Punjab Act
26  of 1949  have been extended  to Delhi by S.R.O. 422  dated
21.3.1951 and G.S.R. 842 of 1959 with effect from 1.8.1959 – See
Gazette of India, 25.8.1959 Pt. II section 3(i) p.1039. The Court
Fees Act, 1870, as applicable in Delhi was further amended by
Court Fees (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1967 w.e.f. 16.12. 1967.
2. Chandigarh – The territory of Chandigarh was formerly a part of
Punjab State. It became a separate union territory by virtue of the
Punjab  Reorganisation  Act,  1966.  Laws  applicable  before  the
reorganization are continued to be in force.
3. Andaman and Nicobar Island – It was a Chief Commissioner’s
province under the Government of India Act, 1935. Formerly it
was shown as a part D State in the Constitution of India and now
known  as  a  union  territory.  The  Court  Fees  Act,  1870  was
extended to the new provinces (now known as union territories) by
section 3 read with Schedule to the Merged States (Laws) Act,
1949. For the Andaman and Nicobar Island, the Court Fees Act,
1870 has been amended by the Court Fees (Andaman and Nicobar
Island Amendment) Regulation, 1957 (Regulation 2 of 1957).
4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli – The territory of the free Dadra and
Nagar  Haveli  was  made  a  Union  Territory  vide  Constitution
(Tenth  Amendment) Act,  1961.  The Court  Fees  Act, 1870  has
59

been extended to this union territory by section 3 of Regulation 6
of 1963.
5. Daman and Diu – The Court Fees Act, 1870 has been extended to
this union territory by Regulation 11 of 1963. The Court Fees Act
was further amended vide Goa Acts 5 of 1966 and 8 of 1970.
6. Lakshadweep Island – It was a part of the former madras State. It
was  made  a  Union  Territory  by  section  6  of  the  State
Reorganisation Act, 1956. Its old name was Laccadive, Minicoy
and Amindive Island. It became Lakshadweep by the Laccadive,
Minicoy and Amindivi Island (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973. The
Court Fees Act, 1870 has been extended to this Island vide section
3(1) of Regulation 8 of 1965. (see also Act 34 of 1973, mentioned
above)
7. Pondicherry – As mentioned above, the Legislative Assembly of
Pondicherry Union Territory has enacted ‘Pondicherry Court Fees
and Suits Valuation Act, 1972’. The Court Fees Act, 1870, which
was applicable in Pondicherry, has been repealed by section 72 of
the Pondicherry Act, mentioned above.
To sum up the conclusions from the above survey of extant legislation, both
Central and State:
(i) The power to legislate on matters of court fees remains in
the competence of the State Legislatures, so far as the High
Courts and Courts subordinate thereto are concerned. Many
60

States have amended the Court Fees Act, 1870. Some of the
States have even repealed the Central Act in their State and
enacted a new Act for Court fees.
(ii) As far as Parliament is concerned, under Art.246(1) read
with Entry 77 of List I, it can enact a law relating to Court
fees which is payable in Supreme Court, and under Art.246
(4) read with Entry 3 of List II, it can enact a law for Court
fees payable to other Courts situated in any Union Territory.
(iii) For High Courts  and other subordinate Courts exercising
jurisdiction in any State, laws relating to Court fees can only
be made by the Legislature of State as per Art.246(3) read
with Entry 3 of List II.
(iv) The Supreme Court Rules which include rules relating to
the Court fees payable in the Supreme Court are subject to
any law made by the Parliament.
(v) As regards Union Territories, Parliament can enact any law
under Article 246(4) and the President of India may also
make regulations under Article 240 .
Having examined the basic constitutional and legislative framework within
which laws relating to court fees are enacted and enforced, we will now
proceed to consider the legal issues that arise in the context of attempts at
altering the court fee structure through legislative measures either by the
Centre or the States.   In doing so, it is important first to understand the
61

nature of the levy and its justification in the context of the constitutional
right of access to justice.
62

CHAPTER IV
CAN COURT FEE BE ENHANCED TO RECOVER COST OF
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE? (VIEWS OF COMMISSIONS,
COMMITTEES, COURTS ETC.)
In this chapter we grapple with the central issue posed for our consideration:
Given the existing costs of administration of justice, civil and criminal, is it
advisable to revise upwards the existing court fee? But we find that such a
question  perhaps  obfuscates  several  other  supplementary  questions  that
arise.  Thus  we  propose  to  approach  the  question  posed  by raising  and
attempting to answer the following questions:
(a) Is court fee a fee or a tax? The answer to this will shape the approach
to  the  principal  question  whether  court  fees  can  and  should  be
enhanced to meet the costs of administration of justice.
(b) Can access to justice be for a price? 
(c) Does  the  issue  require  a  different  treatment  in  the  context  of
administration of criminal justice? 
(d) Does collection of court fee impede access to civil justice?
(e) Is it fair on the part of State to charge Court fee?
63

(f) Is there a need for governments providing more money for the better
administration of justice?
(g) Does the suggestion already made for total abolition of court fees
merit acceptance?
Is court fee a fee or a tax?
Levies can generally be divided into two broad categories: fees and taxes.
According to De Marco (‘First Principles of Public Finance’ at p. 78) a ‘fee’
is a “charge for a particular service of special benefit to individuals or to a
class and of general benefit to the public, or it is a charge to meet the cost of
regulation that primarily benefits society”. 
There are various pronouncements of the Supreme Court on the conceptual
distinction between ‘fee’ and ‘tax’. It emerges from these pronouncements,
that if the essential character of the impost is that some special service is
intended or envisaged as a quid pro quo to the class of citizens which is
intended to be benefited by the service and there is a broad and general
correlation  between  the  amount  so  raised  and  the  expenses  involved  in
providing the service, the impost would partake the character of a ‘fee’. But
it loses its character as such if it is intended to and does go to enrich the
general revenues of the State which are meant to be applied for general
purposes of government. A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
Govt. of Madras v. Zenith Lamps AIR 1973 SC 724 has held that ‘fees taken
in Court’ are not taxes and cannot be equated to taxes (para 30). The Law
64

Commission  in  14th Report  after  examining  the  amazing  figures  of
collection of Court fees and expenditure in the administration of civil justice
has stated that the Court fee that was being charged was, in fact, no longer a
fee and that it was a heavy tax (p. 489). This was held not permissible.
Access to justice cannot be for a price
Dicta of the Supreme Court 
In Chapter II, we have referred to the principle of ‘access to justice’. Just as
the State has to maintain a police force to maintain law and order within the
country and for which no special tax or fee is contemplated, the position
with regard to the duty of the State to provide a system for ‘administration
of justice’ is no different. We may once again refer to the dicta of the
Supreme Court.
Speaking through Krishna Iyer J., the Supreme Court in Central Coal Fields
Ltd. v Jaiswal Coal Co., AIR 1980 SC 2125 observed that effective access
to justice is one of the basic requirements of a system and high amount of
court fee may amount to sale of justice.   He said (para 2):
“(I)t  is  more  deplorable  that  the  culture  of  the  magna  carta
notwithstanding, the Ango-American forensic system and currently
free India’s court process – shall insist on payment of court fee on
such  a  profiteering  scale  without  corrective  expenditure  on  the
administration of civil justice that the levies often smack of sale of
justice  in  the Indian Republic  where  equality before  the law  is  a
65

guaranteed constitutional fundamental and the legal system has been
directed by Article 39A “to ensure that opportunities for securing
justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic……….
disabilities”. The right of effective access to justice has emerged in
the Third World countries as the first among the new social rights
what with public interest litigation, community based actions and pro
bono publico proceedings. ‘Effective access to justice’ can thus be
seen as the most basic requirement – the most basic ‘human right’ –
of a system which purports to guarantee legal rights.”
The learned Judge further observed (para 5):
“The State, and failing it some day the Court, may have to consider
from the point of view of policy and constitutionality, whether such
an inflated price for access to Court is just or legal.”
In P.M. Aswathanarayana Shetty v. State of Karnataka 1989 Suppl (1) SCC
696, Venkatachaliah J (as he then was) speaking for the Court stated that a
person who lodges a complaint before the police is not expected to pay for
the services of the police on the basis whether the subject of complaint is
big or small in terms of money. So also in the case of the system of delivery
of justice, the State is not supposed to collect fee depending on the nature of
the subject matter in dispute. The Court quoted the dictum in the fictional
Hogby  v.  Hogby.  We  have  quoted  it  in  Chapter  II  but  it  would  be
worthwhile to repeat the quotation:
66

“if the Crown must charge for justice, at least the fee should be like
the fee for postage, that is to say, it should be the same, however long
the journey may be. For it is no fault of the litigant that his plea to the
King’s  Judges  raises  questions  more  difficult  to  determine  than
another’s and will require a longer hearing in Court. He is asking for
justice, not renting house property”
Later in  Secy. to Govt. of India v P.R. Sriramulu, 1996 (1) SCC 345, the
Court pointed out that it could not be disputed that the administration of
justice is a service which the State is under an obligation to render to its
subjects.
Law Commission’s views
The  Law  Commission  in  its  14th Report  on  ‘Reform  of  Judicial
Administration’ (1958) has recommended that providing the mechanism for
the  administration  of  justice  is  the  primary  duty  of  the  State.  It  has
recommended at para 42 of Chapter 22 as follows: 
“It is one of the primary duties of the State to provide the machinery
for the administration of justice and on principle it is not proper for
the  State  to  charge  fees  from  suitors  in  courts”.  (emphasis
supplied)
The Law Commission also observed (at para 8, Chapter 22):
67

“A  modern  welfare  State  cannot  with  any  justification  sell  the
dispensation of justice at a price.”
Court fee is also a limitation and deterrent to access to justice. In the same
14th Report, the Law Commission had observed that if access to the court is
dependent upon the payment of court fee and if a person is unable to have
access to court, justice becomes unequal. It observed (at p.587):
“Equality in the administration of justice thus forms the basis of our
Constitution.  Such  equality  is  the  basis  of  all  modern  systems of
jurisprudence and administration of justice. Equality before the law
necessarily involves the concept that all the parties to a proceeding in
which justice is sought must have an equal opportunity of access to
the Court and of presenting their cases to the Court. But access to the
Courts is by law made dependent upon the payment of court fees, and
the assistance of skilled lawyers is in most cases necessary for the
proper presentation of a party’s case in a court of law. In so far as a
person is unable to obtain access to a court of law for having his
wrongs redressed or for defending himself against a criminal charge,
justice becomes unequal and laws which are meant for his protection
have no meaning and to that extent fail in their purpose.”
The  Law  Commission  again  observed  in  its  114th Report  on  ‘Gram
Nayayalaya’ (1986), that it is the fundamental duty of every government to
provide mechanism for resolution of disputes. The Commission observed (at
para 4.3):
68

“It is the fundamental obligation of every centralized governmental
administration to provide for mechanism for resolution of disputes
arising within their jurisdiction. No civilized government can escape
this responsibility. No government can afford to have their citizens
perpetually  engaged  in  finding  solution  to  their  disputes  by  an
unending  process  which  may  be  simultaneously  costly  and  open
ended. This fundamental duty can not be disowned under the pretext
of non-availability of requisite finance.”
Constitutional Provisions
We may now refer to a few provisions of the Constitution to underscore the
importance given to the obligation of the state to provide access to justice. 
The Preamble as well as Article 38 of the Constitution of India mandate that
the State shall secure and protect as effectively as it may, a social order in
which  justice  (social,  economic  and  political)  shall  be  available  to  its
citizens. For the purpose of translating this promise into reality, Article 39A
was  introduced  in  the  Constitution  in  the  year  1976  by  way  of  42nd
Amendment to the Constitution. It reads as follows: 
“39A – Equal Justice and Free Legal Aid
The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes
justice, on the basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular,
provide free legal aid, by suitable or schemes or in any other way, to
69

ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any
citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.”
It has been held by the Calcutta High Court in  United Bank of India v
Rashyan Udyog, AIR 1990 Cal. 146, that the principle enshrined in Art. 38
and 39A, like all other directive principles in Part IV of the Constitution are
fundamental in the governance of the country, and that these principles (Art.
38 and 39A) must also to be taken to be fundamental to the administration
of justice.
Article 8 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 provides that:
“Everyone  has  the  right  to  an  effective  remedy by the  competent
national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights guaranteed
him by the Constitution or by law.”
Similarly, clause (3) of Article 2 of International Covenant on Civil and
Political  Rights,  1966  provides  that  each  State  party  to  the  covenant
undertakes  ‘to  ensure  that  every  person  whose  rights  or  freedom  as
recognized violated, shall have an effective remedy’ and ‘to ensure that any
person claiming such a remedy shall have his right thereto determined by
competent judicial, administrative or legislative authorities, and the State
should also ensure to develop the possibilities of judicial remedies”. 
70

The upshot of the above discussion is that it is one of the fundamental
obligations of the State to provide effective fora for better administration of
justice. Where access to justice is made to depend on the price that a litigant
is willing to pay, it would, given the realities of our country, tantamount to
denial  of  access  to  justice.  The  state  cannot  possibly  disown  its
constitutional obligation to provide easy and affordable access to justice on
the pretext of non-availability of requisite finance.
Criminal Justice is sovereign function: no Court fee is payable
Administration of justice has two broad wings: (1)  Civil Justice and (2)
Criminal Justice. The Law Commission in its 127th Report on ‘Resource
Allocation  for  Infrastructural  Service  in  Judicial  Administration’  (1988)
discussed  distinction  between  civil  and  criminal  justice  system.  The
Commission observed at para 5.1 as follows: 
“The  distinguishing  feature  between  the  civil  justice  system  and
criminal  justice  system  lies  in  the  fact  that  civil  justice  system
provides fora for resolution of disputes between individuals, between
individuals and the State, and even between the State and the States
where a party complains of wrong being done to it and seeks redress.
Administration of criminal justice system partakes the character of a
regulatory  mechanism  of  the  society  whereby  the  State  enforces
discipline in the society by providing fora for investigation of crime
and punishment.”
71

The  obligations  of  the  State  in  respect  of  administration  of  civil  and
criminal justice materially differ.   In respect of the obligation of the State
so far as it relates to administration of criminal justice, the Law Commission
in its 128th Report on ‘Cost of Litigation’ (1988), categorically stated that
administration of criminal justice is the obligatory duty of the State as
part of its sovereign functions. It is also stated in the Report that as it is,
being part of the sovereign function of the State, no fee can be levied for
performing the same and also because the system does not render any
service to the litigant. The Commission stated at para 3.11 as follows:
“It is the State which must ensure internal peace. It is part of its duty
to adopt regulatory measures and it is equally part of its duty to set up
forum for determining whether a violation of regulatory measures has
or has not taken place and a punishment need or need not be imposed.
This  is  the  obligatory  duty  of  the  State  as  part  of  its  sovereign
functions.  This  can  be  broadly  comprehended  in  the  expression
‘administration of criminal justice’. Ordinarily this being the part of
the  sovereign  functions  of  the  State,  no  fee  can  be  levied  for
performing the same and also because the system does not render any
service to the litigant.” 
Earlier the Law Commission in 14th Report also recommended (page 508)
that the cost of the administration of public justice (criminal justice) should
be borne entirely by the State. The Law Commission in 127th Report also
stated (at para 5.1) that it is the duty and obligation of the State to set up
Courts for administration of criminal justice. The State must pay the entire
costs of administration of criminal justice.
72

Civil Justice – collection of Court fee cannot impede access to justice
This subject is discussed generally in this chapter and the question whether
in relation to civil justice, full cost recovery should be made or not, is
discussed separately in Chapter V.
In respect of administration of civil justice system, the Law Commission in
its 128th Report on Cost of Litigation (1988) has observed at para 3.12 as
follows:
“When  it  comes  to  civil  justice,  the  approach  has  to  undergo  a
change. Civil disputes include disputes between an individual and
individual, between individual  and groups  of individuals, between
group of individuals on one hand and group of individuals on the
other hand and between individuals and group of individuals on one
hand and State on the other. A writting (sic written) Constitution with
an  inbuilt  chapter  on  fundamental  rights  and  division  of  powers
amongst Federation and States provide a fruitful ground for disputes
coming into existence. These disputes have to be resolved because a
continuous  simmering  dispute  is  not  conducive  to  growth  and
development of society. However, when the disputes are between two
individuals, say an employer and an employee, a husband and a wife,
or between members of the same family, it is open to them to choose
their own forum to get the dispute resolved. An arbitrator appointed
by the parties for resolution of dispute partakes the character of the
court because parties agree to treat its decision binding. The costs of
73

such arbitrator has to be met by the parties who agree to refer the
disputes to arbitrator. The arbitrator renders service to the disputes
and charges fees. The position of the State is identical to that of an
arbitrator.  All  parties  cannot  go  continuously  in  search  of  an
arbitrator. Parties to a dispute may not agree to go for arbitration. The
State,  therefore,  sets  up  courts  for  administration  of  civil  justice
which  term  will  comprehend  all  disputes  other  than  those
comprehended in administration of criminal justice. The court would
be a readily accessible forum for a party complaining of violation of
his right or a threatened invasion of his right or denial of his right and
he may approach the court and seek redress of his right grievance.
The court enjoys the judicial power of the State and can force the
attendance of the other side to the dispute and adjudicate the dispute.
Nonetheless,  the  court  renders  service.  And  to  the  extent  this  is
service, fees, for service is chargeable.”
The Supreme Court has pointed out that while Court fee can be collected for
purposes of civil justice, this should not be confused with the obligation to
collect Court fee. There is no such obligation. In  P.M. Aswathanarayana
Shetty v. State of Karnataka (supra), it was clearly observed (at para 96):
“The power to raise funds through the fiscal tool of a ‘fee’ is not
be confused with a compulsion so to do. While ‘fee’ meant to defray
expenses of services, cannot be applied towards objects of general
public utility as part of general revenues, the converse is not valid.
General public revenues can with justification, be utilized to meet,
74

wholly or in substantial part, the expenses on the administration of
civil justice.” (emphasis supplied)
Is it fair on the part of State to charge Court fee for judicial services?
(Views of Commissions, Judicial dicta, views of Jurists)
There is considerable authority to say that the very concept of charging
Court fee for rendering judicial services is no longer acceptable today.
Law Commission’s Reports
In this regard, following recommendations of the Law Commission made in
14th Report (para 42 p. 509) are also worth mentioning:
“(1) It is  one  of  the  primary duties  of  the  State  to  provide  the
machinery for the administration of justice and on principle it is
not proper for the State to charge fees from suitors in courts.
(2) Even if court fees are charged, the revenue derived from them
should not exceed the cost of the administration of civil justice.
(3) The making of profit by the State from the administration of
justice is not justified.
(4) Steps should be taken to reduce court fees so that the revenue
from  it  is  sufficient  to  cover  the  cost  of  the  civil  judicial
establishment. Principles analogous to those applied in England
should be applied to measure the cost of such establishment.
75

The salaries of judicial officer should be charged on the general
tax payer.”
The Law Commission in its 128th Report on Cost of Litigation (1988), has
observed  that high  cost  of litigation  is  one  of the impediments  or road
blocks  in  access  to  justice.  The  court  fee  was  considered  as  the  most
important component of cost of litigation. 
Judicial dicta
The view of the Supreme Court regarding court fee as a limitation on access
to justice expressed in P.M. Aswathanarayana Shetty v. State of Karnataka
(supra), is worth recalling. The Court said:
“The  court fee as  a limitation  on  access  to justice  is  inextricably
intertwined  with  a  ‘highly  emotional  and  even  evocative  subject
stimulating visions of a social order in which justice will be brought
within the reach of all citizens of all ranks in society, both those
blessed with affluence and those depressed with their poverty’. It is, it
is said, like a clarion call to make the administration of civil justice
available to all on the basis of equality, equality and fairness with its
corollary that  no  one  should  suffer  injustice  by reason  of his  not
affording or is deterred from access to justice. The need for access to
justice, recognizes the primordial need to maintain order in society as
disincentive of inclination towards extra-judicial and violent means of
setting disputes.”
76

The Court further observed: 
“The stipulation of court fee is, undoubtedly a deterrent to free access
to justice.”
The Court also said:
“Indeed all civilized  government  recognize  the need  for access  to
justice being free.”
The Court also observed (at para 95):
“The  levy  of  court  fee  at  rates  reaching  10  per  cent  ad  valorem
operates harshly and almost tends to price justice out of the reach of
many distressed litigants. The Directive Principles of State Policy,
though not strictly enforceable in courts of law, are yet fundamental
in the governance in the country. They constitutes  fons juris in a
welfare State. The prescription of such high rates of court fees even in
small  claims,  as  also  without  an  upper  limit  in  large  claims,  is
perilously close to arbitrariness and unconstitutionality. The idea is,
of course, a state of affairs where the State is enabled to do away with
the pricing of justice in its courts of justice.”
Views of jurists
77

Need for access to justice has been described by a learned author Cappelleti
in his book “Access to Justice”, Vol. I Book 1. He says (at page 419):
“The need for access to justice may be said to be twofold; first, we
must ensure that the rights of citizens should be recognized and made
effective for otherwise they would not be real but merely illusory; and
secondly we  must  enable  legal  disputes,  conflicts  and  complaints
which inevitably arise in society to be resolved in an orderly way
according to the justice of the case, so as to promote harmony and
peace  in  society,  lest  they  foster  and  breed  discontent  and
disturbance. In truth, the phrase itself ‘access to justice’ is a profound
and powerful expression of a social need which is imperative, urgent
and more widespread than is generally acknowledged.”
Recently, V.R. Krishna Iyer J. in an article published in ‘The Hindu’ dated
October 10, 2003 has stated:
“Access to justice is basic to human rights and Directive Principles of
State Policy become ropes of sand, teasing illusion and promise of
unreality, unless there is effective means for the common people to
reach the Court, seek remedy and enjoy the fruits of law and justice.”
On high amount of Court fees in India, a former Chief Justice of Madras
observed as follows:
“They (the litigants) pay high Court fees and it is beyond question
that the aggregate amount is far more than sufficient to cover the total
78

cost of the administration of civil justice. When I came to India, I was
amazed at the high Court fees which litigants were called upon to
pay, the position being so different in England.” (Madras Law Journal
1947, Vol. I Journal)
A learned author Findlay Shirras observed in his book ‘Science of Public
Finance’, Vol. II at p. 674-675, as follows:
“Fees are levied in order to defray usually a part, in rare cases the
whole of the cost of services done in public interest and conferring
some degree of advantage as the fee payer.”
Levying high court fees is also criticised by the noted jurist H.M. Seervai, in
his book Constitutional Law of India, 3rd Ed. Vol. II p. 1958. He observed
that court fees should not be a weapon to stifle suits or proceedings and that
though in fixing the court fees regard may be given to the amount involved,
“a stage is reached when an increasing amount ceases to be justified”.
Need for providing more money by the Governments  for the better
administration of justice
(a) Views of the Supreme Court, the Law Commission and Judicial Pay
Commission
There is need that whatever amount is collected in the form of court fees,
should  be  spent  on  administration  of  justice.  The  Supreme  Court  has
79

observed that the income from court fees is more than the expenditure made
in  the  administration  of  justice,  as  per  figures  made  available  in  the
publication of the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Supreme Court in All
India  Judges  Association  v.  Union  of  India,  AIR  1992  SC  164,  after
analyzing the concept  of Court  fees  and  quoting  from a judgment  of a
Constitution Bench reported in AIR 1973 SC 724, observed as follows (at
para 51):
“We adverted to these authorities and the views of this Court to bring
support for the view that what is collected as court fee at least be
spent on the administration of justice instead of being utilized as a
source of general revenue of the States.  Undoubtedly, the income
from  court  fees  is  more  than  the  expenditure  on  the
administration of justice. This is conspicuously noticeable from the
figures  available  in  the  publication  in  the  Ministry  of  Law  and
Justice.” (emphasis supplied)
States  are  not  spending  much  on  the  administration  of  justice.  Law
Commission in 127th Report on  Resource Allocation for Infrastructural
Services in Judicial Administration (1988) has stated (at para 5.8): “it is
imperative to point out that the  State today spends precious little or, to
say the least, practically nothing on the administration of justice”. The
Commission  has  pointed  out  that  during  1981-82  barring  Manipur  and
Tripura most of the States spent only between 0.15% (A.P.) to 3.53% (M.P.)
of the total tax receipts of the State, on the administration of justice. These
figures show that administration of justice has received negligible funds for
upkeep as well as its growth. The first National Pay Judicial Commission
80

chaired by Mr. Justice K.J. Shetty, in its Report dated 11.11.1999 has stated
that the expenditure on the judiciary in India in terms of Gross National
Product  (GNP) is  relatively low. It is  not more than  0.2%. The  Justice
Shetty Commission also recommended that as the administration of justice
is  the joint  responsibility of the  Centre and the  State  Governments, the
Central Govt. must, in every State share half on the annual expenditure on
subordinate Courts. The Supreme Court in  All India Judge’s Association
case (2002) 4 SCC 247, has stated that no doubt whenever the State Govt.
will approach to the Central Govt. or Planning Commission for more funds,
such request shall be considered favourably.
(b) Views  of  National  Commission  to  Review  the  Working  of  the
Constitution
No doubt, the judiciary has been included as a plan subject by the Planning
Commission (Sawant J. in All India Judges case, 1993 (4) SCC 288 at p.
310),  but  the  manner  of  giving  grants  by  the  Central  Government  is
criticized  by  the  National  Commission  to  review  the  Working  of
Constitution (NCRWC). In a Consultation Paper on ‘Financial Autonomy of
the  Indian  Judiciary’,  the  NCRWC  after  mentioning  the  observation  of
Sawant J. in 1993 (4) SCC 288, regarding including of judiciary as a plan
subject, has stated (paras 9.15.1 – 9.15.2):
“There is no exclusive grant by the Centre for Court expenditure. All
that  we  have  is  an  insignificant  ‘centrally sponsored  scheme’  for
Courts prepared by the Planning Commission while allotting some
monies for each State on population basis.
81

Further, the present scheme has become nothing but an eye wash for
it requires the States to provide matching grant, or else the central
grants lapses. Most States are not able to provide matching grant and
the result is that the central grant lapses. To put it bluntly, the so
called inclusion of judiciary as a plan subject is no inclusion at all as
it is totally unrealistic, unplanned and unrelated to the scenario at the
grass root level and also at the level of appellate and superior courts.”
Even otherwise, there is no proper planning and adequate financial support
for  administration  of  justice  in  our  country.  In  this  regard,  National
Commission to Review the Working of Constitution in its Report (Vol. I)
has observed as follows (at para 7.6.1):
“Judicial administration in the country suffers from deficiencies due
to  lack  of  proper  planning  and  adequate  financial  support  for
establishing  more  courts  and  providing  them  with  adequate
infrastructure.  For  several  decades  the  courts  have  not  been
provided with any funds under the Five Year plans nor has the
Finance Commission been making any separate provision to serve
the financial needs of the courts.” (emphasis supplied)
The  NCRWC in  its  report  has  also  emphasized  the  need  for  providing
financial support by the Central Govt. in administration of justice. It has
recommended that (para 7.8.2):
82

“Government  of  India  should  not  throw  the  entire  burden  of
establishing the subordinate Courts and maintaining the subordinate
judiciary on the State Governments. There is a concurrent obligation
on the Union Government to meet the expenditure on subordinate
Courts.  Therefore,  the  Planning  Commission  and  the  Finance
Commission must allocate sufficient funds from national resources to
meet the demand of the State judiciary in every of the States.”
(c) Empirical Evidence that the Judiciary earns more than it spends
A  study  of  the  budgets  and  working  of  the  Supreme  Court  and  the
Allahabad High Court in 1984 revealed some interesting facts (Litigation
Explosion in India prepared by Dr.Rajeev Dhavan, published by the Indian
Law Institute). The figures for the years 1957 to 1977 (Table III at pages
67-68) showed that the Supreme Court invariably spent less than the sum it
received under the head `grant allocated’ and `other receipts’. The amount
collected as court fee virtually remained unspent. As regards the judiciary in
Uttar Pradesh (including the Allahabad High Court) (Table VI at p. 113),
the  figures  for  the  years  1961-62  to  1978-79)  showed  that  the  income
earned by the courts (from judicial stamps and fees on writs, vakalatnama
etc.)  was  always  in  excess  of  what  was  spent  on  them thus  leaving  a
substantial  surplus  in  each  year.   Dr.Dhavan  who  prepared  the  text
comments (at p.112): “The judiciary is India’s best nationalized industry. As
a whole it earns more than it spends. In that sense, it can also be described
as the `least expensive branch’.” 
83

(d) Views of the Adviser, Planning Commission – Dismal Allocation 
As per the information and data given in an article of Mr. Surendra Nath,
Adviser, Planning Commission of India, published in ‘The Hindu’ dated
July 22, 2003, the Centre’s plan investment in justice started only in the 8th
Five Year Plan (1992-97) in compliance with a Supreme Court direction of
1993-94. During the Eighth Plan, the Centre spent about 110 crores on
improving judicial infrastructure, such as constructing court rooms etc. An
equal amount was spent by the Sates. In the Ninth Plan, about Rs.385 crores
were spent by the Centre, and the States also made a matching contribution.
This was 0.071 per cent of the total Centre’s Ninth Plan expenditure of
Rs.5,41,207  crores.  During  the Tenth  Plan  (2002-07),  the allocation  for
justice is Rs.700 crores, which is 0.078 per cent of the total plan outlay of
Rs.8,91,183 crores.
(e) Fast-tracking criminal cases
Over two crore cases are pending in about 13000 district subordinate courts.
About two-third of these cases are criminal cases. And about a million are
sessions cases which involve heinous offences such as murder, rape, dacoity
etc. About 30 per cent of sessions cases have been pending for three years
or more. When trial gets delayed, witnesses lose interest. They often get
coerced and justice becomes  a casualty. The conviction  rate in offences
under the IPC fell from 65 per cent in 1970s to about 40 per cent in 2000.
Justice  delayed  is  justice  denied.  One  of  the  main  reason  for  delay  in
administering justice is that the courts have to deal with more cases than
84

their capacity. Result is that courts have no options but to give frequent
adjournments. Expeditious trial of cases require more Courts.
As mentioned above, this plan investment in the administration of justice is
totally inadequate. It was for this reason that the Dept. of Justice approached
the 11th Finance Commission for non-plan assistance to set up additional
Courts for expediting the trial of long pending sessions cases.
The  11th Finance  Commission,  after  discussing  with  Law  Secretaries  of
major States, recommended a grant of Rs.502.9 crores under Art. 275 of the
Constitution of India to set up 1,734 additional Courts known as Fast Track
Courts. These Courts are to continue till 2005. The grant covers the entire
functioning of fast track Courts. So far States have notified 1,366 fast track
Courts and the Central govt. has released about Rs.360 crores. As grants
under Art. 275 of the Constitution are a devolution to the States, the Union
Territories were left out. The Delhi High Court proposed setting up fast
track Courts in Delhi and so did the Union Territory of Chandigarh. Funds
were provided in the current financial year for setting up fast track Courts in
Delhi.
These fast track Courts have been assigned 3,14,777 cases and by June
2003, fast track Courts had disposed of 1,60,487 cases – more than half of
the total number of cases transferred to them. It is a significant progress. If
the Central Govt. continue to give adequate financial support to the States
85

for better administration of justice, obviously quality of justice will improve
and there be no need to put more monetary burden on litigant.
These fast track Courts address the problem of only sessions cases and of
cases  pending  in  the  Magistrate  Courts.  Therefore,  the  Dept.  of  Justice
approached  the  Twelveth  Finance  Commission  in  March  2003  with  a
proposal to set up fast track magisterial Courts.
In  this  scenario,  more  allocation  is  necessary  from  the  general  taxes
received by the Government. There is no justification in enhancing the court
fee  structure.  It  is  true  that  with  the  passage  of  time  the  cost  of
administration of justice is increasing but to meet this increased cost of
administration  of  justice  enhancing  the  court  fees  is  not  the  proper
approach. On the contrary, it will be a roadblock to the access to justice,
which is recognized as a basic right world over. 
Past recommendations for total abolition need reiteration
There  was,  indeed,  a  move  at  one  time,  for  abolition  of  Court  fees
altogether. The Consultative Committee attached to the Ministry of Law and
Justice, at its meeting in June 1980, set up a Sub-Committee to go into the
question of court fees in trial Courts.  The Sub-Committee in its report
recommended abolition of court fees. The exercise was again undertaken
by a Sub-Committee set  up by the Conference of Law Ministers  which
submitted  its  report  in  October  1984.  This  Sub  Committee  did  not
86

recommend abolition of court fees but recommended rationalization in the
structure  of  court  fee,  broadly  through  reduction  in  ad  valorem  fee,
exemption of certain categories of litigants and certain categories of cases
from  payment/levy  of  court  fee  and  refund  of  court  fee  under  certain
circumstances. The Law Commission in 128th Report on Cost of Litigation
(1988)  expressed  its  views  in  favour  of  abolition  of  court  fees.  The
Commission stated (para 4.6):
“However, the Law Commission would be extremely happy if the
State Governments or the Government of India, as the case may be,
view  the  court  fees  as  something  incompatible  with  a  society
governed by rule of law and would, therefore, like to abolish it.”
(emphasis supplied)
There  was  a  proposal  to  amend  the  Court  Fees  Act,  1870  which  was
examined in detail in 1999 by the Department of Justice. The exercise was
undertaken  in  pursuance  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Expert  Group
appointed by the Ministry of Home Affairs to review Acts etc. administered
by the said Ministry. However, with the approval of the then Minister of
Law and Justice, it was decided not to amend the Act.
Summation
Summarising the position, we may state that there are many other ways to
cover  the  cost  of  administration  of  justice.  As  mentioned  earlier,
administration  of  criminal  justice  system is  a  sovereign  function  of  the
87

State, hence no fee can be levied. Even for administration of civil justice, it
is not desirable (as stated in detail in Chapter V) that entire cost should be
recovered by levying court fees. State should spend a considerable amount
on administration of civil justice from its general revenue collected from the
ordinary tax payer so that entire burden will not be on the litigant. Another
way of raising the revenue is to increase the amount of fine prescribed under
the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860  and  other  penal  enactments.  Since  a  long
period of time, amounts of fines have not been increased. The amount of
fine to be imposed on commission of a crime should be increased in relation
to reduction of the value of the rupee over all these years. Once this is done,
there may be periodic re-evaluation to eliminate the effect of inflation. If it
is done, it will be helpful for the States in meeting the increased cost of
administration of justice.
88

CHAPTER V
FULL COST RECOVERY: AN ANATHEMA TO THE CONCEPT OF
ACCESS TO JUSTICE: THE EXPERIENCE IN OTHER
COUNTRIES
The  letter  of  reference  of  the  Department  of  Justice,  which  has  been
adverted to in Chapter I, appears to be premised on the concept of testing
the  economic efficiency of an organization or department (usually, of the
government) by asking whether it earns more than it spends. We have just
seen why such an approach may not only be inapposite but legally and
constitutionally  untenable  as  far  as  the  judiciary  is  concerned.  On  the
contrary, since  financial  independence  of  the  judiciary is  integral  to  its
functioning as an independent organ of state, this can and should never be
the criteria for testing its performance.  Nevertheless, as discussed in the
previous chapter, the judiciary has thus far not received the funds it requires
from the governments both at the Centre and the States. Further, available
data reveal that it invariably earns more by way of fees and judicial stamps
than what is spent on its upkeep. This prompts a questioning of the factual
basis for the reference that the court fees being levied at present covers
“only a fraction of the administrative costs of the judicial process.”
The  principle  that  the  costs  of  administration  of  justice  should  be  met
entirely through court fees levied on users is termed as `full cost recovery’.
89

In  this  chapter  it  is  proposed  to  examine  the  practice  in  some  of  the
commonwealth countries where this principle which was applied long ago,
has now been either modified or given up altogether. In fact, a survey of the
available literature reveals that the full cost recovery principle has  been
found to be wholly unsupportable and is not accepted in any country in the
Commonwealth or in Europe. 
The position in England
In the past, in England, the principle governing the levy of Court fee was
that the salaries and pensions of judges were paid by the State out of public
funds. It was being accepted that it is the obligation of the State to provide
the  machinery  for  the  dispensation  of  justice  in  all  its  Courts  –  civil,
criminal and revenue – and that only the other expenses of administration of
justice shall be borne by the litigants. (14th Report of Law Commission, p.
505)
In this regard, the Committee on Court Fees in England presided over by
Mr. Justice Macnaghten observed as follows:
“The Supreme Court is not merely engaged in the work of dispensing
justice to the private suitors who resort there; it administers public
justice not only in criminal cases but also in civil maters, such as
proceedings on the crown side of the King’s Bench. For the cost of
administration of justice, where the public itself is directly concerned,
the State ought, it is suggested to provide the necessary funds, since
90

there can be no reason why the private suitors should do so. Though it
would no doubt be difficult to calculate exactly how much of the
expenditure of the Supreme Court is attributable to the administration
of  public,  as  distinguished  from  private  justice,  the  salaries  and
pensions paid to the judges may perhaps be taken to represent fairly
that figure.” (quoted in the Second Interim Report of the Committee
on Supreme Court Practice and Procedure, p. 43)
A learned author Dr. R.M. Jackson points  out the dependence of Royal
Justice  in  England  in  part  at  least,  on  the  profits  earned  out  of  the
administration of justice:
“In the past the growth of royal justice was partly due to the profits
that accrued from exercising jurisdiction. The early inherent justice
were more concerned with safeguarding the king’s fiscal rights than
with the trial of ordinary actions. A law Court was expected to pay
for itself and show a profit for the king. It is some time since justice
has been a substantial source of income, but the old idea survives in
the idea that the Courts ought not to be run at a loss.” (see ‘Machinery
of Justice in England’, 5th Ed. p. 324) (emphasis supplied)
Lord  Chancellor’s  recent  suggestion  for  full  cost  recovery  criticized  in
England
Detailed prescription addressing the twin policies of access to justice and
recovery of full cost is given in the guide published by the Treasury of Her
91

Majesty called ‘The Fees and Charges Guide’, published by the Stationery
Office in 1993. The Lord Chancellor also announced in Parliament on 15th
November, 1998 following principles regarding fees for civil proceedings
and access to justice:
i) Fees should not prevent access to justice
ii) Protection must be provided for litigants of modest means
iii) Fees  should  match  the  cost  of  the  service  for  which  they  are
charged
iv) The pay-as-you-go system should be extended without deterring
access to justice
v) Flat rate fees reflecting the cost of the stage or application should
be paid at other charging points
vi) Issue and enforcement fees should reflect the value of the claim
vii) Flat rate fees should be set on the basis of average not actual costs
viii) Fees  should  be  paid  by  the  claimant  or  where  a  specific
application is made, by the party who made that application
ix) Fees should be paid in advance
These suggestions  have  invited  serious  criticism.  In an earlier  chapter,
reference  was  made to  the  decision  of the  High  Court  (Queen’s  Bench
Division) in  R v. Lord Chancellor ex parte Witham (1997) 2 All ER 779
where it was emphasized that the right of access to justice was a common
92

law constitutional right which could only be abrogated by specific statutory
provision  or  by  regulations  made  pursuant  to  the  legislation  which
specifically conferred the power to abrogate that right. The decision was
given in a case that challenged the 1996 amendment by the Lord Chancellor
to the Supreme Court Fees Order 1980 which had the effect of repealing a
provision which relieved litigants in person who were in receipt of income
support  from  the  obligation  to  pay  court  fees  and  permitted  the  Lord
Chancellor  to  reduce  or  remit  the  fee  in  any  particular  case  of  undue
financial  hardship  in  exceptional  circumstances.  While  declaring  the
amendment invalid, the court held that the effect of the 1996 amendment
was to “bar absolutely many persons from seeking justice from the courts.”
(at p.788)
In  September  2002,  the  Court  service  published  a  Consultation  Paper
recommending a range of increases in the setting of civil Court Fees and
seeking to ensure a balance between cost recovery and access to justice. The
policy of the Government was stated at para 1.7 of the Executive Summary
of Consultation Paper, which is as follows:
“1.7 Government  policy  is  that  fees  should  normally  be  set  to
recover the full cost of a service although there may be cases in which
Ministers agree a service should recover less than full cost. For the
provision of proceedings in the Supreme Court and County Courts
and of Family and Insolvency proceedings, allowance is made for
automatic exemption for those on mean tested benefits or tax credits;
for remission or reduction of fees where hardship would otherwise
prevent a case being brought; and for a public subsidy for Family
93

proceedings due to their special nature. These allowances act to meet
Government policy of protecting access to justice.”
Again at para 3.2 it is stated:
“Access to justice is protected by automatic exemption for litigants on
specified means tested benefits and discretionary remission (in part or
in full) for those who do not benefit from exemption but would face
exceptional hardship if required to pay fees, or required to pay them
in full. A leaflet ‘Court fees and do you have to pay them?’ telling the
public more about exemption and remission and how to apply for
them is available from any Court office.”
The above policy of the full cost recovery has been criticized by many
eminent  jurists.  Lord  Woolf in  July  2002  accused  the  Government  of
‘flawed  thinking’  over  their  proposal  that  Civil  Court  could  fund
themselves.  He said,  the policy was ‘self-evidently nonsense’.  No other
country in the world had such a policy and the effects were ‘pernicious and
dangerous’.
The Civil Justice Council which is an advisory non-departmental public
body established under the Civil Procedure Act, 1997 and chaired by the
Master of the Rolls,  Lord Phillips in November 2002 published advice to
the  Lord  Chancellor  on  the  impact  of  the  Treasury  policy  of  full  cost
recovery  on  the  Civil  Justice  System.  The  reports  provide  four  broad
94

reasons why the Government is wrong to consider that civil justice should
be largely self-financing. It says full cost recovery
a) is not possible without inappropriate cross subsidy;
b) limits arbitrarily the nature and quality of the service provided
within the civil justice system;
c) may limit access to Courts; and
d) is wrong in principle.
The Civil Justice Council concluded: “The policy of full cost recovery is
relatively recent in historical terms.  It is not the approach followed in the
major English-speaking  common law jurisdiction, nor is it the approach
followed in most, if not all, other European jurisdictions.”
“In the view of the Civil Justice Council the policy should be abandoned.
The Council accepts that litigants should be charged fees, but they should
not  be  disproportionate  in  relation  to  the  amount  claimed,  and
proportionality should be the primary factor in determining the level of fees.
While it is  of course  necessary to  forecast  fee  income as  accurately as
possible,  it  should  not  bear  any  set  relationship  to  Court  Service
expenditure.”
95

The Chairman of the Council, Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers, Master of
the Rolls, said:
“The policy of full cost recovery in the civil justice system has only
existed since the early 1980s and has never been properly debated in
Parliament.  It  is  not  the  approach  followed  in  other  major
common  law  jurisdiction,  nor  is  it  followed  in  European
jurisdiction  .  
Whilst it is not wrong to require the citizen to pay Court fees, access
to the civil courts must be seen as providing a social and collective
benefit,  as  well  as  a  service  to  the  individual.  Fees  should  be
proportionate to the amount at stake.”
In March 2003, the peers in the House of Lords amended the Courts Bill, to
require the Lord Chancellor to have regard to access to justice, when fixing
court fees. New civil court fees have come into effect from April 1, 2003,
designed to balance costs with access to justice, when fixing court fees.
We have referred to the above developments in the United Kingdom only
for the purpose showing that the concept of recovery of the expense on the
justice delivery system from the litigants has been more or less condemned.
It has  been  pointed  out  that  no  civilized  system in  any  commonwealth
country or in the continent has come forward with such a concept.
96

The above views, particularly expressed by Lord Woolf and Lord Phillips
are  on  the  same  lines  as  the  views  of  the  Law  Commission,  other
Committees, Judges and Jurists etc., to which we have elaborately referred
to above.
The position in Australia
In 1999, the Australian Law Reforms Commission  (ALRC) took up for
consideration a reference made to it that it should “give particular attention
to the causes of excessive costs in legal services  and to the need for a
simpler,  cheaper  and  more  accessible  legal  system.”  (Report  of  the
Australian Law Reforms Commission titled  Managing Justice: A review
of  the  federal  civil  justice  system Report  No.89,  Chapter  4  on  Legal
Costs,  para  4.1  –
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/alrc/publications/reports.89/) The ALRC
in this Report has pointed out that full cost recovery is not pursued because
“the judicial system has a key role in the democratic system of government
which goes well beyond the resolution of individual disputes, encompassing
progressive  development  of  the  law,  providing  the  check  on  executive
authority and protecting human rights.” It further explains why it is not easy
to correlate the payments received from the users of the court system to the
services  provided  by  the  courts.  This  is  because  “It  is  difficult  to
conceptualise  who  the  users  of the  service  are:  whether  respondents  or
applicants,  either  of  whom  may  benefit  from  the  outcome.  There  are
community benefits in the effective operation of the court system and in
precedents created  by  individual  disputes.  There  are  also  practical
difficulties in developing a court fee structure that reflects the actual costs
97

of the services provided and takes into account the complexity and cost of
different matters”.
The ALRC also repelled the suggestion that fee exemption and waivers be
more widely applied at the discretion of the court to counteract fee charges.
The  reason  was  that:  “Court  registry  staff  could  have  real  difficulties
investigating and evaluating broader discretionary categories for exemption
and waiver”.
In effect, the ALRC has also not supported the demand that there should be
full cost recovery. It has realised that “cost factors are easier to identify than
to control. The Commission’s research and consultations made clear that
there is no single, simple solution which will reduce legal costs in federal
jurisdiction, although the Commission had identified a number of strategies
for government, courts, tribunals and practitioners  which could assist to
contain costs in many cases.”
U.S.A
In the United States of America, the issues concerning the judiciary as a
whole  are  dealt  with  by  the  Judicial  Conference  of  the  United  States
(JCUS). The JCUS has recently come forward with a Long Range Plan to
guide future administrative action and policy development by the JCUS and
other  judicial  branch  authorities.  Among its  recommendations  are:  “The
Federal  courts  should  obtain  resources  adequate  to  ensure  the  proper
98

discharge of their constitutional and statutory mandates.” The JCUS notes
that “chronic failure to provide adequate resources puts federal judges in the
unfortunate position  of supplicants, constantly begging the Congress  for
funds”. Reiterating its plea to the Congress that the latter should “refrain
from enacting new legislation that adds to the workload of the federal courts
without  also  approving  sufficient  funds  for  the  judiciary  to  meet  its
obligations  under that legislation”, it also  recommends that  alternatively
“Congress should be urged to reduce the judiciary’s existing obligations
sufficiently to offset the impact of any new legislation with a quantifiable
judicial impact”. (Long Range Plan for the Federal Courts, Chapter 8
‘Resources’, p. 94)
The JCUS has unambiguously  expressed its view against increase of user
fees  to  meet  additional  costs  of  administration  of  justice.  Its
recommendation in  this  regard is  that  “the federal  courts, including  the
bankruptcy  courts,  should  obtain  funding  primarily  through  general
appropriations.”  (page  95)  This  is  how  the  JCUS  explains  its
recommendation (pages 95-96): 
“Federal  courts  are  an  indispensable  forum  for  the  protection  of
individual constitutional rights; their costs are properly borne by all
citizens. Unlike other governmental operations such as national parks,
for which substantial funding through user fees may be appropriate,
the mission of federal courts could not be performed  if users were
denied access because of an inability to pay reasonable user fees.”
99

“At  least  three  reasons  support  continued  reliance  on  general
appropriations instead of user fees. First, given that the frequency of
federal  court  filings  can  vary  substantially  from  year  to  year,
economic uncertainty about the amount of revenue that can be raised
annually  through  user  fees  makes  user  fees  an  unreliable  and,
therefore,  undesirable  source  of  funding.  Second,  with  that
uncertainty, constant fee adjustments might be necessary in order to
sustain  ongoing  judicial  programs.  Finally,  and  most  importantly,
litigants  should  not  be  so  burdened  with  fees  as  to  effectively
eliminate the access of some low and moderate income users to our
federal forum.”  
The position in the United States of America is that full cost recovery is not
a  favoured  method  of  meeting  costs  of  administration  of  justice.  The
persistent recommendation has been that these costs should be met through
general appropriations.
European jurisdictions
The position in Europe, as noted by the Civil Justice Council in its paper on
Full Costs Recovery, is also some what similar. In Spain, for instance, no
fees have been charged in civil cases since 1984. In Italy, there was no issue
fee  for  very  small  money  claims,  family  cases  or  cases  relating  to
employment and social security. In  Sweden, 6% of the total cost of civil
cases in courts was met by “registration fees” and the balance of the total
cost was paid from central funds.
100

In relation to Switzerland, the paper notes that “the proportion of costs met
from fees varied between cantons and between types of court; the highest
proportion in the sample was approximately 40% in the case of the District
Courts of the Canton of Zurich, with 10-15% being more typical”.
Summation
It is not felt necessary to multiply the instances of developments in foreign
jurisdictions in relation to the move away from full costs recovery. It can
safely be concluded that both in the common law jurisdictions or the civil
law  jurisdictions,  the  trend  is  to  find  funds  for  meeting  the  costs  of
administration of justice through general appropriations and Central/State
government funding and not through the device of increase in user fees. 
It is next proposed to examine the other premise on which the view of the
Standing  Committee  of  Secretaries,  as  expressed  in  its  letter  dated
19.7.2002 is based (this letter has been referred to in the first chapter). This
premise is that “there is a need to build financial disincentives in the legal
system so as to discourage  vexatious litigation.” Whether there is such a
need and if so whether increasing court fees is the answer thereto will be
taken up in the next chapter.
101

CHAPTER VI
WHETHER THERE IS A NEED TO REVISE THE COURT FEES
STRUCTURE IN ORDER TO BUILD FINANCIAL DISINCENTIVES
TO DISCOURAGE VEXATIOUS LITIGATION
Consistent view  – court fee not to be increased as  a disincentive to
litigation
The  Department  of  Justice  and  the  Standing  Committee  of  Secretaries
(SCOS)  has  suggested  that  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  stop  frivolous
litigation which increases the burden of arrears on the courts. It was also
suggested in the Eighth meeting of the Standing Committee of Secretaries,
held on 24th July, 2002 that there is a need to build financial disincentives in
the legal system so as to discourage vexatious litigation. It appears that, to
achieve the objective of discouragement of vexatious litigation, the revision
of court fees structure has been suggested. But, this approach has not been
accepted by the Law Commission of India or the Courts in India and abroad.
In fact, Lord Macaulay had described this concept as ‘absurd’ as long been
as 1835.
In fact when it was stated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Bengal Regulation, 1795 that the imposition of high rates of court fees is to
put a stop to groundless and frivolous and speculative cases, Lord Macaulay
in his minute dated the 25th June, 1835 described the preamble of Bengal
102

Regulation, 1795 as “the most eminently absurd preamble, that was ever
drawn”. 
The view of Lord Macaulay, has since been referred to with approval by the
Law  Commission  of  India  in  its  14th Report  on  ‘Reform  of  Judicial
Administration” (Chapter 22, para 5). Indeed, the Supreme Court in Secy. to
Govt.  of  Madras  v.  P.R.  Sriramulu,  1996(1)  SCC  345  and  P.M.
Ashwathanarayana Shetty v State of Karnataka (1989 Supp. (1) SCC 696)
also affirmed the same view. It is worthwhile to refer to this aspect in some
detail.
Lord Macaulay had said:
“It is undoubtedly a great evil that frivolous and vexatious actions
should be instituted. But it is an evil for which the Government has
only itself and its agents to blame, and for which it has the power of
providing a most sufficient remedy”.
He further stated:
“Why did dishonest plaintiffs apply to the courts before the institution
fee was imposed?  Evidently because they thought that they had a
chance of success. Does the institution of fee diminish that chance?
Not in the smallest degree. It neither makes pleadings clearer, nor the
law plain….
103

It will no doubt drive away dishonest plaintiff who cannot pay the
fee. But it will also drive away honest plaintiffs who are in the same
situations”.
The view of the Lord Macaulay has been kept at the highest pedestal. The
Law Commission, in its 14th Report (Chapter 22, para 6) has observed that
there is no substance in the argument that rates of high court fees are to be
introduced  so  as  to  prevent  frivolous  litigation.  The  Law  Commission
observed thus:
“29. The argument that it is necessary to impose high court fees to
prevent frivolous litigation, already referred to has no substance ……
These increases have been generally justified, as far as we know, on
the  ground  of  the  need  of  increased  revenue  by  reason  of  the
increased cost of the administration of justice”. (Chapter 22, para 29).
After three decades, a similar view were expressed by the Law Commission
in its 128th Report on Cost of Litigation (1988) (para 3.6).  Agreeing with
the view of Lord Macaulay and reiterating the view of the Law Commission
of  India  expressed  in  its  14th Report,  and  of  the  Supreme  Court,  the
Commission is of the view that, enhancement in the court fee to prevent
frivolous or vexatious litigation cannot and has never been accepted as a
reason in the last nearly one hundred and fifty years.
Further, the Supreme Court in Secy. to Govt. of Madras v. P.R. Sriramulu
(1996) 1 SCC 345 has also deprecated the concept of enhancement of court
fees for preventing frivolous litigation. The court observed as follows:
104

“In the beginning the imposition of the (court) fee was nominal but in
the course of time it was enhanced gradually  under the impression
that  it  would  prevent  the  institution  of  frivolous  and  groundless
litigation and as an effective deterrent to the abuse of process of the
court without causing any impediment in the institution of just claims.
However insignificant this view may be that the levy of fees would
have a tendency to put a restraint on frivolous litigation, that view at
any rate had the merit of seeking to achieve a purpose which was
believed  to  have  some  relevance  to  the  administration  of  justice.
Since about past two decades the levy of court fees on higher scales
would seem to find its justification, not in any purpose related to the
sound  administration  of  justice,  but  in  the  need  of  the  State
Government for revenue as a means for recompense”. (para 6).
It was thus pointed out that the argument that increase in Court fee was
meant to foster the due administration of justice was given a go bye very
soon when the legislatures started increases in Court-fee as a measure of
recompense of its expense.
Earlier the Privy Council in Rachappa Subrao v Shidappa Venkatrao (AIR
1918 PC 188) had also critically observed that the provisions of the Court
Fees Act, instead of arming the litigant, tended to secure revenue for the
benefit of the State.
The Commission does not find any reason to take a different view than the
one expressed by the Supreme Court and the Law Commission in its 14th
and 128th Reports that the underlying real reason for enhancement of court
fees appears to be the collection of more revenue by the States which is not
105

sound public policy. On the other hand, higher court fee will discourage the
honest and genuine poor litigant.
The  aspect  that  now  requires  to  be  addressed  is  whether  there  are
alternatives available to curb vexatious litigation without having to resort to
the device of increasing user/court fees. The next chapter addresses itself to
this.
106

CHAPTER VII
MEASURES AVAILABLE TO CURB FRIVOLOUS OR VEXATIOUS
LITIGATION
In this chapter, it is proposed to examine what alternatives to enhancement
of user costs are available to curb frivolous or vexatious litigation in courts.
Broadly, two alternatives have been tried and have been found more or less
effective.  One  is  the  imposition  of  exemplary  costs  by  the  courts  in
individual  cases.  This  serves  as  a  specific  deterrent  on  the  recalcitrant
litigant. The other device is by empowering the courts through a separate
legislation or by a specific provision in a statute. This has the effect of a
general deterrent on litigants as a whole and puts them on guard if they were
to  resort  to  abuse  of the process  of law. The  illustrations  of these  two
devices will be presently discussed.
(1) Imposition of exemplary costs
No doubt, frivolous or vexatious litigation is a serious problem and it is
required to be dealt with effectively. The Supreme Court in Dr BuddhiKota
Subbarao vs. K. Parasaran, AIR 1996 SC 2687, has criticized the practice
of frivolous petitions. The Supreme Court observed:
“No litigant has a right to unlimited drought on the Court time and
public money in order to get his affairs settled in the manner as he
wishes. Easy access to justice should not be misused as a licence to
file misconceived frivolous petition.”
107

As observed in Chapter VI, enhancing the Court fee for purpose of limiting
vexatious  litigation  is  not  an  appropriate  step  as  suggested  by  the
Department  of  Justice  and  Standing  Committee  of  Secretaries.  On  the
contrary, enhancement in the Court fees would adversely affect the rights of
genuine litigants to get justice. There are many other ways which up to
some  extent  can  curb  the  flood  of  vexatious  litigations.  One  way  is
awarding exemplary costs.   The Court can pass an order of exemplary
costs in cases of vexatious or frivolous litigation. Supreme Court and other
Courts in fact have passed an order of exemplary cost in many cases. In
Rajappa  Hanamantha  Ranoj  v. Mahadev Channabasppa, (2002)  6 SCC
120, the Supreme Court has held:
“It is distressing to note that many unscrupulous litigants in order to
circumvent orders of Courts adopt dubious ways and take recourse to
ingenious methods including filing of fraudulent litigation to defeat
the orders of Courts. Such tendency deserves to be taken serious note
of and curbed by passing appropriate orders and issuing necessary
directions including exemplary costs.”
The  Supreme Court in  this  case  passed  an order of exemplary costs  of
rupees twenty five thousand against appellant for filing of vexatious case.
In another instance in Charanlal Sahu v. Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam (2003) 1
SCC 609, the Supreme Court imposed exemplary costs of rupees twenty
108

five thousand on the petitioner for filing a frivolous petition challenging the
election  of  the  President  of  India,  Dr.  A.P.J.  Abdul  Kalam.  The  Court
observed  that  the  petitioner  who  is  an  advocate  had  earlier  filed  four
election petitions challenging the election of the returned candidates in the
President’s elections held in the years 1974, 1977, 1982 and 1997. All these
election petitions were dismissed on the ground that the petitioner had no
locus standi. The Court in  Charanlal Sahu v. Giani Zail Singh  1984 (1)
SCC 390, observed:
“In order to discourage the filing of such petitioners, we would have
been  justified  in  passing  a  heavy  order  of  costs  against  the  two
petitioners.”
In that case the Court did not pass any order as to costs it would create a
needless misconception that Supreme Court, which is the exclusive forum
for deciding election petitions relating to election of the President and the
Vice  President,  is  loathe  to  entertain  such  petitions.  Instead,  the  Court
expressed  its  disapproval  of  the  high-handed  and  indifferent  manner  in
which the petitions were drafted and filed. But when the same petitioner
again filed another election petition in 1998, the Supreme Court imposed
costs of rupees ten thousand on him (Charanlal Sahu v. K.R. Narayanan
(1998) 1 SCC 56).
There are other instances where the Supreme Court had passed order of
exemplary costs. (Sivamoorthy v. University of Madras (2001) 10 SCC 483;
State of Punjab v. Bhajan Singh (2001) 3 SCC 565.
109

Section 26 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 provides that whenever
the Dist. Forum, State Commission or the National Commission finds that
any complaint instituted before it is frivolous or vexatious, it shall dismiss
the  complaint  with  a  reasoned  order  along  with  an  order  directing  the
complainant to pay to the opposite party, costs not exceeding rupees ten
thousand as may be specified in the order.
Section  35A  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  also  provides  for
compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences. Any
party to suit or other proceeding may object to the claim or defence on the
ground that such claim or defence or any part of it is, as against the objector,
false or vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it has been put
forward. And if thereafter, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned
or withdrawn in whole or in part, the Court may hold that such claim or
defence to be false or vexatious and make an order for payment of costs to
the objector by whom such claim or defence was put forward.
In T.S. Arivandanan v. T.V. Satyapal, AIR 1977 SC 2421, Krishna Iyer J.
condemned the petitioner for the gross abuse of the process of Court to
which he resorted unrepentantly.   It was held that if the trial Court was
satisfied that litigation was inspired by vexatious motives and altogether
groundless, it should take deterrent action under sec. 35A to the CPC.
110

The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution has
also stated (para 7.11) that an award of exemplary cost should be made in
appropriate cases of abuse of process of law. 
(2) Enacting a separate legislation to curb vexatious litigation
The  other  device  to  curb  the  vexatious  litigation  is  to  enact  a  separate
legislation to deal with such cases. Though there is no Central enactment on
the subject, it is  significant  to note  that  the Legislature of the  State of
Madras  has  enacted  the  Vexatious  Litigation  (Prevention)  Act,  1949
(Madras Act VIII of 1949). This Act is similar to the English statute 16 and
17  Vict.  Ch.  30  (now  repealed  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  Judicature
(Consolidation) Act, 1925 (15 and 16 Geo V.C. 49). It is therein provided
that when the High Court on an application made to it by the Advocate
General,  is  satisfied  that  any  person  has  habitually  and  without  any
reasonable grounds has instituted vexatious civil or criminal proceeding, in
any Court or Courts, it may, after giving an opportunity of being heard to
that person,  pass  an order that  no  proceeding  civil  or criminal shall  be
instituted by him in any Court in the State without the leave of Court. In
case of the Presidency town leave may be granted by the High Court and for
elsewhere the leave may be granted by the District and Sessions Judge. The
leave could only be granted when the Court is satisfied that prima facie
ground  exists  for  such  proceedings  being  initiated.  Any  proceeding
instituted  by  such  person  without  obtaining  such  leave  is  liable  to  be
dismissed. Copy of the order is liable to be published in the Gazette. A five
Judges Bench of the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the
Madras  Act  in  P.H.  Mowle  v.  State  of  A.P.,  AIR  1965  SC  1827.
111

Hidayatullah  J. (as  he  then  was)  for  himself  and  for K. Subba  Rao  J.,
Wanchoo J. and Sikri J. held as follows:
“The  next  argument of the appellant  before  us  is  that  this  Act is
unconstitutional because it prevents some citizens from approaching
the court and obtaining relief to which every one is entitled in a State
governed by Rule of Law……….. This argument is not acceptable to
us because the litigants who are to be prevented from approaching the
Court  without  the  sanction  of  the  High  Court  are  a  class  by
themselves. They are described in the Act as persons who habitually
and without reasonable cause file vexatious action civil or criminal.
The Act is not intended to deprive such a person of his right to go to a
Court. It creates a check so that the Court may examine the bona fides
of any claim before the opposite party is harassed. Such an Act passed
in England, has been applied in several cases to prevent abuse of the
process of Court. In its object, the Act promotes public good because
it cannot be claimed that it is an inviolable right of any citizen to
bring  vexatious  actions  without  control  either  legislative  or
administrative. The Act subserves public interest and the restraint that
it  creates  is  designed  to  promote  public  good.  The  Act  does  not
prevent  a  person  declared  to  be  habitual  litigant  from  bringing
genuine and bona fide actions. It only seeks to cut short attempts to
be  vexatious.  In  our  judgment,  the  Act  cannot  be  described  as
unconstitutional or offending either Art. 19 or 14.”
A Central Act may be enacted on the same lines to curb the vexatious
litigation. Even in the absence of such a law made by the legislature, the
112

High  Court  in  exercise  of  its  rulemaking  power  relating  to  its  own
procedure and procedure of the Civil Courts, can make rules prescribing the
procedure  for dealing  with  vexatious  litigation  for  purpose  of declaring
persons as vexatious litigant. Part X of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
which consists of Sc. 121 to 131 deals with power of the High Court to
make rules regulating its own procedure and the procedure of the Civil
Courts subject to its superintendence and may by such rules annul, alter or
add  to  all  or  any  of  the  rules  in  the  First  Schedule.  Art.  225  of  the
Constitution  of  India  provides  for  making  of  rules  by  the  High  Court.
Similarly, sec. 23 of the Contempt of Court Act, 1971 also provides rule
making power of the High Court. There was a question before the Division
Bench of the Kerala High Court in Jose v. Madhu 1994 (1) KLT 855, that
whether  in  the  absence  of  any  legislation  by  the  State  Legislature  for
declaring litigants as vexatious litigants, the High Court can make rules
under its rule making power? Relying on the decision of the Australian
High Court in Jones v. Skyring (1992) 66 Aus. L.R. 810, the Kerala High
Court held that such a rule can clearly be made by the High Court under its
powers to make rules of ‘procedure’ as provided in Part X of the CPC, Art.
225 of the Constitution of India and in sec. 23 of the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971. It is not necessary that the Legislature alone should intervene.
The Kerala High Court after relying on another decision of the Australian
High Court reported in  Williams v. Spautz  (1992) 66 ALJR 585 also held
that before any such rules are made by the High Court in exercise of its rule
making power, it is permissible for the High Court to grant ‘permanent stay’
of cases amounting to abuse of process, after such cases are filed in Court.
The  High  Court  can  grant  ‘permanent  stay’ in  exercise  of  its  ‘inherent
power’ of section 151 of the Code and as a Court of record.
113

The above discussion makes it clear that problem of vexatious or frivolous
litigation can be sorted out by the abovesaid modes and there is no need to
enhance the Court fee for curbing the vexatious litigation. On the contrary,
it may adversely affect the right of a poor genuine litigant to knock at the
doors of the Court.
The question whether court fees need to be revised in order to account for
the steady decline in the value of the rupee in order to reflect the actual
costs is considered in the next chapter.
114

CHAPTER VIII
REVISION OF COURT FEES OWING TO THE DEVALUATION OF
THE RUPEE
It is stated in the minutes of the meeting of the Standing Committee of
Secretaries held on 19.7.2002 that the Court fees, in a majority of cases, had
not been revised for a very long time and currently covered only a fraction
of the administrative costs of the judicial process. Amount of Court fees
required to be paid in any judicial proceeding are prescribed in the Schedule
1 and 2 of the Courts Fees Act, 1870. Schedule 1 of the Court Fees Act,
1870 prescribe Ad Valorem Court fees, which means Court fees has to be
paid according to the value of the subject matter. Schedule 2 prescribe fixed
Court fees. It is true that value of rupee has depreciated considerably in last
four decades, but the rate of Court fees has not been revised by any Central
enactment for a very long time. However, various  States have amended
Court fees rates by State amendments to the Court Fees Act, 1870 or in their
own Court fees Acts. One of the recent changes is made in Madhya Pradesh.
The said State has amended rate of Court fees by M.P. Act 12 of 1997 w.e.f.
1.4.1997. Now, in M.P. Court fees on filing of plaint etc. have to be paid on
the basis of percentage of amount of value of subject matter. Similarly, rate
of Court fees in Maharashtra has been revised by amending Bombay Court
Fees Act, 1959, by Maharashtra Act No.33 of 1997 w.e.f. 21.2.97. Other
States have also amended rate of Court fees from time to time.
115

However, in view of the devaluation of rupee and increase in the rate of
inflation, rates of fixed Court fee as prescribed in Schedule 2 of the Court
Fees Act, 1870 may be revised so that effect of inflation may be eliminated.
The Law Commission in its 127th Report at p.5-13, has also suggested that
because of reduction of value of rupee, Court fee may be increased with
certain exceptions.
As regards ad valorem court fees, since the levy is a percentage of the value
of the claim, it may not be necessary to enhance the percentages consequent
upon the devaluation of the rupee. This is because the court fee paid will be
proportionate to the claim which in any event would be enhanced to reflect
the changed value of the rupee. However, in the context of fixed court fees
there may be a need to revise the charges to reflect the present value of the
rupee.   At the same time, it requires to be emphasised that any enhancement
of  Court  fee  should  not  adversely  affect  the  right  of  access  to  justice.
Further, the amount collected by way of Court fee should not be more than
the expenditure incurred in administration of civil justice. Subject to these
limitations, the amount of fixed Court fee prescribed under  Schedule 2 of
the Court Fees Act, 1870 may be enhanced in proportion to the extent of
devaluation of the rupee.
116

CHAPTER IX
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
On the basis of our discussion in preceding chapters, following conclusions
emerge:
1) Right to access to Courts is now recognized as a basic human right
and its origin can be traced to Art. 8 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights passed by the United Nations Organisation in
1948 and to Art. 2 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights to which India is a party.
2) The  concept  that  Court  fee  should  be  increased  to  prevent
frivolous and vexatious litigation (an aspect to which reference is
made in the Reference) has not been accepted as a basis for Court
fee increase right from the time of Lord Macaulay, as well as in
subsequent Reports of the Law Commission and in the judgments
of the Supreme Court of India. This concept is not consistent with
Arts. 21, 38 and 39A of the Constitution of India.
3) The Court Fees Act, 1870 was enacted as a Central Act and it
continued to be in force by virtue of provisions of section 292 of
117

the  Government  of  India  Act,  1935  and  Art.  372  of  the
Constitution  of  India.  But  under  the  Constitution,  it  can  be
amended or repealed only by a Legislature competent to enact a
law relating to Court fees.
4) In view of the specific entry on Court fees i.e. “fees payable in any
Court except Supreme Court”, mentioned in Entry 3 of List II
(State List) of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, the
subject of Court fees payable in all Courts (except Supreme Court)
is  a State subject and only State Legislatures  are competent to
enact or amend any law on Court fees payable in High Courts and
other Courts subordinate thereto (Art. 246(3)), having jurisdiction
in any State.
5) So far as the subject of Court fees payable in Supreme Court, it
falls under Entry 77 of List I (Union List) of Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution of India and Parliament is competent to enact or
amend any law on Court fees payable in the Supreme Court. As
per Art. 145(1)(f) of the Constitution of India, Supreme Court can
also make rules relating to fees payable in the Supreme Court,
however,  subject  to  any  law  made  by  the  Parliament.  In  fact,
Supreme Court in exercise of its powers conferred under Art. 145
of  the  Constitution,  has  made  rules  known  as  ‘Supreme Court
Rules 1966’ and the Third Schedule to the Rules provides table of
Court fees payable in the Supreme Court. In the light of the Rules
made by the Supreme Court, which that Court is competent to
modify  or  amend,  the  Law  Commission  does  not  propose  to
118

suggest  any  amendments  so  far  as  the  Supreme  Court  is
concerned.
6) So far as Union Territories are concerned, as per Art. 246(4) of the
Constitution  of  India,  Parliament  can  make  or  amend  any law
relating  to  Court  fees  payable  in  any  Court  while  exercising
jurisdiction over any Union Territory. Apart from it, the President
of India under Art. 240 of the Constitution of India can also make
Regulations  for  any  Union  Territory  except  for  Delhi  and
Chandigarh. Any Regulation so made by the President, may repeal
or amend any law made by the Parliament applicable to that Union
Territory and the regulation so made shall have the same force and
effect as an Act of Parliament. However, for the Union Territory
of  the  Pondicherry,  any  Regulation  can  be  made  only  if  the
Legislative Assembly of the Pondicherry is under dissolution or
suspension.
Union  Territories  of  Delhi  and  Pondicherry  are  also  having
separate legislative assemblies. These legislative assemblies are
competent to make any law on a subject falling in State List (List
II) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. No doubt,
Parliament  can  still  make  any  law  for  these  Union  Territories
under its power under Art. 246(4) of the Constitution, and any law
made by the Parliament may prevail over any law made by any of
those legislative assemblies mentioned above.
7) As  mentioned  above,  the  Court  fees  is  a  State  subject  as  per
constitutional scheme. Following States have repealed Court Fees
119

Act,  1870  in  application  to  their  respective  States  and  have
enacted their own Court Fees Acts. These States are:
(1) Andhra Pradesh (2) Gujarat (3) Himachal
Pradesh
(4) Jammu & Kashmir (5) Karnataka (6) Kerala
(7) Maharashtra (8) Rajasthan (9) Tamil
Nadu
(10)West Bengal (11) Union Territory of Pondicherry
Most of the other States have amended the Court Fees Act, 1870
in application to their States. These are:
(1) Assam (2) Bihar (3) Madhya
Pradesh
(4) Orissa (5) Punjab (6) Haryana
(7) Meghalaya (8) Uttar Pradesh (9) Goa
8) Since a long period of time, rates  of fine prescribed under the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 and other old penal enactments, have not
been increased, though there is considerable reduction in the value
of the rupee over all these years.
The  Law Commission  suggests  that  amount  of fine  prescribed
under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and other penal enactments
may be enhanced in proportion to reduction in the value of the
120

rupee.  It  will,  to  some  extent,  cover  the  increased  cost  of
administration of justice.
9) Administration of justice falls under the Concurrent List (Entry
11A of List III of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India).
The High Courts and other Courts subordinate are today dealing
not only with the cases relating to laws made by the States under
the State List and Concurrent List but all the bulk of the cases
relating  to laws made by the Central Legislature or Parliament
under Union List and Concurrent List. For example, the Transfer
of Property Act, Contract Act, Sale of Goods Act, Indian Penal
Code, Civil and Criminal Procedure Codes, are referable to the
Concurrent List and are Central Laws. The Negotiable Instruments
Act is referable to List I and is a Central Act. Cases arising out of
these Central Laws are now being disposed of by the subordinate
Courts established by the States. As of now Central Government is
not bearing any part of the expenditure for subordinate Courts.
The  Central  Government  is  only  bearing  the  expenses  for  the
Supreme  Court  and  other  Courts  in  the  Union  Territories.
Expenses for the High Court and subordinate Courts in States are
borne by the concerned State Government.
The  Law  Commission  is  in  total  agreement  with  the
recommendations made by the National commission to Review the
Working  of  the Constitution  (at  para  7.8.2)  that  “the Planning
Commission and the Finance Commission must allocate sufficient
funds from national resources to meet the demand of the State
judiciary in every one of the States”.
121

We also recommend accordingly.
10) So far as prevention of vexatious litigation is concerned, there is a
State Act of former composite Madras State known as ‘Vexatious
Litigation (Prevention) Act, 1949 (Madras Act VIII of 1949). It
was made on the line of English Statute 16 and 17 Vic. Ch. 30
(now repealed). The said Madras Act VIII of 1949 provides that
when the High Court on an application made to it by the Advocate
General, is satisfied that any person has habitually and without any
reasonable  grounds  instituted  vexatious  civil  or  criminal
proceeding,  in  any  Court  or  Courts,  it  may,  after  giving  an
opportunity of being heard to that person, pass an order that no
proceeding civil or criminal shall be instituted by him in any Court
without the leave of Court. A five Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court upheld the constitutional validity of the said Act in  P.H.
Mowle v. State of A.P., AIR 1965 SC 1827.
We recommend that, on the line of this above mentioned Madras
Act VIII of 1949, a Central Act may be enacted to curb vexatious
or frivolous litigation.
11) As stated in above paragraphs, power of the Central Government and
Parliament in respect of Court fees is limited to the Court fee payable
in the Supreme Court and other Courts exercising jurisdiction over
Union Territories.  Rate of Court fees as prescribed in the Court Fees
Act, 1870, wherever applicable, has not been revised by the Central
Government or Parliament since a long period of time, but the value
of the rupee has considerably come down.   Therefore, we recommend
that the fixed Court fees payable in the Courts exercising jurisdiction
122

over the Union Territories and where it is governed by Schedule 2 of
the Central Court Fee Act, 1870, should be enhanced in proportion to
the reduction in the value of the rupee.
12) As regards ad valorem court fees, since the levy is a percentage of the
value of the claim, it may not be necessary to enhance the percentages
consequent upon the devaluation of the rupee. This is because the
court fee paid will be proportionate to the claim which in any event
would  be  enhanced  to  reflect  the  changed  value  of  the  rupee.
However, in the context of fixed court fees there may be a need to
revise the charges to reflect the present value of the rupee.    At the
same time, it  requires  to  be  emphasised  that  any enhancement  of
Court fee should not adversely affect the right of access to justice.
Further, the amount collected by way of Court fee should not be more
than  the  expenditure  incurred  in  administration  of  civil  justice.
Subject to these limitations, the amount of fixed Court fee prescribed
under  Schedule 2 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 may be enhanced in
proportion to the extent of devaluation of the rupee.
We acknowledge the extensive contribution made by Dr. S. Muralidhar,
Part-time Member of the Law Commission, in preparing this Report.
We recommend accordingly.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
123

Chairman
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate)
Vice-Chairman
(Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi)
Member-Secretary
Dated: 25th February, 2004
124