LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

NINETEENTH REPORT

(THE ADMINISTRATOR GENERAL'S ACT, 1913)
May, 1961.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW

252 M. of L.—1


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION.

New Delhi—3,
June 19th, 1961.
‘Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My DEAR MINISTER,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Nineteenth
Report of the Law Commission on the Administrator-General’s Act.

2. The Administrator-General’s Act, 1913, was taken up for
revision by the previous Commission, but it was left unfinished.
‘When the present Commission was constituted, the subject was
again taken up and entrusted to Shri P. Satyanarayana Rao. A
draft Report prepared by him was considered at the meeting of
the Commission held on the 197 March, 1960. It was further
‘discussed at a meeting of full time Members on the 12th May, 1960,
and the draft Report revised. The revised draft Report was again
considered by the Commission at its’ meeting held on the 19th
August, 1960, and it was decided that the draft as revised by the
Commission should be circulated for opinion to the State Govern-
ments, High Courts, Bar Associations and other bodies and persons
interested in the subject. The comments received from them were
considered by the Commission at a meeting held on the 18th
February, 1961, and the draft Report was revised and finalised.
The Report has been drawn up in accordance with the decisions
taken at that meeting.

3. The Commission desires to express its appreciation of the
services rendered by Shri D. Basu, Joint Secretary, and by
Shri P. M. Bakshi, Deputy Draftsman, in the preparation of the
Report and the Bill.

Yours sincerely,
व. L. VENKATARAMA ATYAR.


REPORT ON THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL’S ACT, 1913

CONTENTS
PART I
, "GENERAL
PARAGRAPH PAGES
iL "Historical background . . . . . . 1
2.) Events leading to the passing of the Administrator-
General’s Act, 1913 . . I
3. “Scheme of the Administrator-General’s Act, 1913. १६
4 Grant of letters of Administration . . . . 2
5 to 11. When Administrator-General may obtain grant : 2
12, Other changes . . . . . न . “§
13. Scheme of the proposed new Act . . » . 5
PART It
PROPOSALS RELATING TO SECTIONS
14, Preamble and section 1, . . पु पु पु : 6
15 to 56. Section 2 to section 59 B . . . . . . 6-3
75 Repeal . . . . . . . . . 13
$8 to 60. Appendices . . . . . . . 3
APPENDICES
APPENDIX ~ I.—Proposals as shown in the form of a draft Bill . 18
APPENDIX ’ II.—Comparative table . ‘ . . . . 37

APPENDIX III.—Suggestions in respect of other Acts. . . 41


REPORTFON THE ADMINISTRATOR-
GENERAL’S ACT, 1913

PART I

(GENERAL

1. In the ultimate analysis the office of the Admi- Historical

nistrator-General can be traced back to the Charter béckeround.
creating the Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort
William and more particularly to the office of the
Ecclesiastical Registrar. In its present name and
form it was constituted only in 1849 by the Adminis-
trator-General’s Act! of that year. The chief purpose
in creating the office was to protect effectively the
interests of the mercantile and trading communities
of the East India Company. The functions of the said
office have been developed and regulated on the lines
which experience has shown to be sound. It is need-
Jess to narrate in detail the history of this office and
the various ‘Acts which preceded the Act of 1913.
They will be found to have been dealt with compre-
hensively by Kinney.?

2. The events leading up to the passing of the pre- Events tead-

sent Administrator-General’s Act may be_brieffy ing to the
stated. The principal Act relating to Administrators- Riss ‘
General then in force was the Act of 1874. Great ministrator
changes had taken place since that Act was enacted. Generals
Society had advanced with rapid strides and there was 4०५ 1913.
a clear need for amending the law so as to suit the
changing circumstances. Several representations had,
from time to time, been made for amending certain
provisions of the Act. Excepting for a few amen
ments not much was done to bring the Act up to date.
Even from the strictly technical point of view the Act
was felt to be out of harmony with the changed modes
of legislation. The question of passing a comprehen
sive measure was taken up by the Government of
India in the year 1911 when Mr. Sanders, who was the
Administrator-General and Official Trustee of Bombay,
was deputed to enquire and report on the whole
question. After consideration of the report and the
opinions of local Governments and various officials
the Government introduced in 1912 the Bill which
was ultimately enacted with some changes as the
Administrator-General’s Act, 1913.

3. Though the Act as originally passed was majnly Scheme of
intended to apply. to the three Presidency-towns and te Ag
to give larger protection to non-exempted persons, General's
that is Europeans, its scope has since been en! Act, 1953.
In Part II of the Act provision is made for the aj
ment of an Administrator-General for each State. Fhe

tAct 8 of 1849.
Kinney : Law relating to Administrators-General and Official
‘Trustees, ‘Part I, Introduction. p.i, et seq. -



Grant of
letters of
Administra-

tion
(ss. 6 to 8),

(58.9, 70, 11).

2

Government is also empowered to appoint a Deputy
or Deputies to assist the Administrator-General. Fol-
lowing the example of Public Trustee Act, 1906 (of
England), the Administrator-General has been consti-
tuted a corporation sole with perpetual succession and
official seal and with capacity to sue and be sued in
the corporate name.

Part III (sections 6 to 41) of the Act deals with
the rights, powers, duties and liabilities of the
Administrator-General under the following heads;
(a) grants of letters of administration and probate
(sections 6 to 14); (b) estates of persons subject to
the Army Act etc. (sections 15 to 17); (०) revoca-
tion of grants (sections 18 to 21); (d) General (sections
22 to 30); (e) Grant of certificates (sections 31 to 38);
(0 Liability (sections 39 to 41).

Part IV deals with fees (sections 42 and 43) whilst
Part V deals with audit (sections 44 to 47). Part VI
contains miscellaneous provisions (sections 48 to 60). .

4. In order to appreciate the rights and duties of
the Administrator-General to obtain letters of admi-
nistration, it is necessary to refer to the important
division under the Act of persons into two categories
(1) exempted persons, which means an Indian Chris-
tian, a Hindu, Mohammadan, Parsi or Buddhist, or a
person exempted under section 332 of the Indian Suc-
cession Act, 1865 (now section 3 of the Indian Succes-
sion Act, 1925) and (2) persons not so exempted.

Under section 6 provision is made to the effect that

the High Court shall be deemed to be a court of com-
petent jurisdiction so far as regards the Administrator-_
General for the purpose of granting probate or letters
of administration. The Administrator-General is en-
titled to priority to obtain letters of administration to
the extent provided by sections 7 and 8. “Letters of
Administration” is defined in the Act as including not
only letters of administration which could be obtained
in the case of intestate succession but also letters of
administration with a copy of the will annexed or
limited in time or otherwise. oo
5. Sections 9, 10 and 11 are very important. Sec-
tion 9 applies to persons who are not exempted, that
is primarily Europeans. Under this provision if a non-

gr exempted person dies leaving within any State assets

exceeding the value of two thousand rupees and if
no person to whom any Court would have jurisdic-
tion to commit administration of such assets has,

_within one month after his death, applied in such

State for probate of his will or for letters of adminis-
tration of his estate, the Administrator-General of the

” State in which the assets are, has to take proceedings

within a reasonable time to obtain from the High
Court letters of administration of the estate of such
person. This section, it will be noticed, is not restrict="
ed to the ordinary original jurisdiction of the High
Court, but extends to the entire State, in which the


3

assets of a deceased non-exempted person are left.
This section is closely connected with section 54.

6. Sections 10 and 11 may be considered together,
as they are closely connected with each other. They
apply to any person who dies leaving assets within
the local limits of the ordinary original civil juris-
diction of the High Court at a Presidency-town. It
may become necessary to take immediate action to
protect the assets from the danger of deterioration or
waste before the determination of the person who is
legally entitled to the properties or even where there
is doubt whether the Administrator-General is entitled
to letters of administration. In such an event the
High Court is empowered under section 11 to direct
the Administrator-General to collect and take posses-
sion of the assets. Such an order entitles the Adminis-
trator-General to take the necessary proceedings in
respect of such properties including, if he so chooses,
proceedings for obtaining letters of administration.
Section 10 also applies to any person who dies leaving
assets within the local limits of the ordinary original
civil jurisdiction of a High Court. When on the appli-
cation of the Administrator-General or of any person
interested in the assets or in the due administration
thereof, the High Court is satisfied that danger is to be
apprehended of misappropriation, deterioration or
waste of such assets, it may direct the Administrator-
General to apply for letters of administration. The
court may grant letters of administration unless the
application is in respect of the estate of an exempted
person and the court is satisfied that such grant is un-
necessary for the protection of the assets. The subs-
tantial difference between sections 10 and 11 is that
under the latter the court is empowered to direct the
Administrator-General to collect and hold assets pend-
ing the determination of the right of succession or
administration.

7. It will thus be seen, that whilst section 9 is in-
tended to apply exclusively to non-exempted persons,
sections 10 and 11 are intended to apply exclusively to
assets left within the local limits of the ordinary crigi-
nal civil jurisdiction of the High Court. It may be
pointed out in this connection that the only High
Courts which have ordinary original civil jurisdiction
are those of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay.) In short,
where the deceased is an exempted person and has not
left any assets within the limits of the ordinary original
civil jurisdiction of the three High Courts mentioned,

2The framers of the Act did not make any provision adapting the
provisions of sections 10 and 1 in respect of Provinces which the
Governor-General in Council was empowered to create by section 58
and provided in section 3 that the Provincial Government may appoint
in each Province an Administrator-General. The Adaptations of Laws
Order, 1950, introduced the new terminology of « State”? and
«State Governments”’. Sections 10 and 11 have however been left intact.

252 M of L-2.


4

the provisions of sections 9, 10 or 11 can have no appli-
cation.

8. The Indian Succession Act, 1925, contains some
provisions! for protecting the property of a deceased
person, but these are of a more restricted character and
are inadequate as they do not enable the District
Judge to administer the properties.

9. We are of the opinion that since the object of the
Administrator-General’s Act is essentially to protect
the property of a deceased person from being mis-
appropriated or wasted, the availability of the protec-
tion should not be made dependent on such considera-
tion as whether the person is an exempted person or
not or whether the property is situated in one place or
the other. In the changed context of the present set-
up of States and the constitutional provisions as to
uniformity of laws and equality of treatment, such
distinctions are not only out of tune with the present
conditions, but also liable to be attacked as discrimi-
natory. It is high time that we freed the law relating to
Administrators-General from the anomalous distinc-
tions between Presidency-towns and Muffassil, which
owe their origin to historical reasons, as also from the
discrimination in favour of the so-called “non-
exempted” persons, which has its origin in political
consideration, and determined its content solely with
reference to the need for protection and due adminis-
tration of estates of deceased persons. We accordingly
recommend that sections 9, 10 and 11 should be _ re-
drafted with a view to securing the advantages of these
provisions in all cases in which the same are necessary.

10. We recommend that in re-drafting the provisions
the gfcllowing considerations should be borne in
mind: —

(1) The apprehension of danger of misappro-
priation, deterioration or waste of the assets or the
desirability of taking proceedings for protection
of the estate should be the main consideration for
the Administrator-General to intervene.

(2) The provisions should not be applicable to
small estates in respect of which the Administra-
tor-General can issue certificates.*

(3) We should not indirectly make it obliga-
tory for persons to obtain probate or letters of
administration with the will annexed or letters of
administration in general, except in cases in which
it is made obligatory under the provisions of the
Succession Act, Part VIII. Accordingly, cases
where a person has taken other proceedings for
protection of the estate should, if the obtaining of

1Sections 192 to 201, 253 and 269.
2Under section 31, we have elsewhere recommended that the
limit may be raised from Rs. 2,000 to Rs, 5,000.


probate, etc. is not obligatory, be treated on the
same footing as if he had obtained probate, etc.

(4) Provision should be made, as under the
existing section 11, to enable the Administrator-
General to take possession of the property under
the directions of the High Court where the High
Court is satisfied that there is imminent danger of
misappropriation, deterioration or waste of such
assets requiring immediate action.

(5) Intervention by the Administrator-
General should be optional, not compulsory. This
is necessary in view of the proposed widening
of the applicability of the provisions under
consideration.

Any consequential changes which have to be made
in the other sections of the Act in view of the changes
proposed above, may also be made.

11. In passing, it may be pointed out, that under
section 6 the High Court is a competent court for the
purpose of granting letters of administration as
regards the Administrator-General, and hence in all the
cases which will come, as a result of the proposed
changes, within the purview of the Administrator-
General, he may apply to the High Court for letters of
administration. Thus the obtaining of letters of admi-
nistration will be more speedy and the protection
afforded will be complete.

12. The changes which we have proposed above are Other

of a fundamental character in as much as they modify
the basic approach of the Act. Besides, we have re-
commended a number of changes in the notes on parti-
cular sections. In view of all these changes we are of
the view that it is better that the Act is replaced by a
new Act. We recommend accordingly.

changes.

13. Parts I, II, IV, V and VI of the present Act may Scheme of

be converted into independent Chapters. Part III may

be split up into three Chapters by incorporating certifi- ‘Act.

cate-cases and liability provisions into separate
Chapters. This is because certificate cases fall into a
category of their own and the importance of the provi-
sions relating to liability justifies their being dealt with
in a separate Chapter. The rest of the provisions of
Part III will form a separate Chapter.

1868 para, 9, supra.

the pro-

new


Preamble

and section 1

Section 2.

Section 3.

PART II
ProposaLs RELATING To SECTIONS

14, The preamble should be omitted, as it merely
‘*repeats what is stated in the long title.

The title of the Act should be “Administrators-
General Act”. This will be in symmetry with the
title of the Official Trustees Act, which is a sister Act.

15. The definitions of “exempted person” and
“Indian Christian” may be omitted, as they are no
longer necessary in view of our recommendations.*
The definition of “Government” is unnecessary; the ex-
pression “State Government” should be employed in
the substantive sections (unless the context requires
otherwise)—the definition of “High Court” shoul id be
omitted, and the definition thereof in the General
Clauses Act (highest Civil Court of appeal, etc.) should
be applicable to this Act also.

16. The qualifications for the appointment of
Administrator-General require to be changed. The
mention of Barristers as a separate class has become
out of date. Section 3(2) (a) may, therefore, be
deleted.

Under section 3(2)(b), no qualification is imposed
under the Act as to the standing of the Advocates,
Attorneys, etc. This may have been due to the
paucity, at the time of passing the Act, of persons of
any standing willing to take up the post. Conditions
have changed now. In keeping with the nature of
the functions of the Administrator-General, we recom-
mend that a minimum of seven years’ standing should
be prescribed. The reference to vakils may be deleted.

Section 3(2)(c) has become superfluous, as it refers
only to persons holding the office of Deputy at the
commencement of the Act. We are of the opinion
that it is unfair to exclude altogether Deputies from
the categories of persons eligible for appointment as
Administrators-General. As the Deputy can and does
sometimes perform the functions of the Administrator-
General, we consider it reasonable to provide that a
person who has worked for a specified period as a
Deputy should be eligible for appointment as an
Administrator-General. We need hardly add that in the
ease of persons appointed as Deputies in accordance
with the qualifications recommended by us the case
is much stronger. We recommend that sub-clause (c)
of section 3(2) may be deleted and in its place a pro-

7866 para. 9, supra.


7

vision may be introduced to the effect that a person
who has worked as a Deputy for a period of five years
shall be eligible for appointment as an Administrator-
General?

Under section 3(2) (d), a person already in the
service of the Government may be appointed as Admi-
nistrator-General in a State other than West Bengal,
Madras or Bombay. This provision was. made on the
ground that it would be difficult to get persons with
legal qualifications in those States. Whatever may have
been the position in 1913, the reason cannot hold good
now. We therefore recommend that the clause may
be deleted.

A fruitful source of recruitment for filling up the
post of Administrator-General is the State judiciary.
‘We recommend that a person who has for at least
ten years been a member of the judicial service of
State may also be made eligible for appointment as
an Administrator-General.?

17. No qualifications have been prescribed for Section 4.

appointment as Deputy. Since the Deputy may, under
the Act, discharge any of the duties and exercise
any of the powers of the Administrator-General, it
is only proper that suitable qualifications should be
prescribed. We recommend that no person shall be
appointed as a Deputy unless he has for at least three
years been an Advocate or an Attorney of a High
Court or has for a like period been a member of the
Judicial service of a State.

18. No change in section 5. In section 6, it may Sections 5,
be made clear that the concurrent jurisdiction of the ५ 7
district court is not affected. In section 7, the words
“after the commencement of this Act” are unneces-
sary and may be omitted. In consequence, the words
“which are” should also be omitted.

19. We are of the opinion that the Administrator- Section 8

General should not have priority over 8. residuary
legatee or his representative. A residuary legatee
and his representative are treated as on the same
footing as a universal legatee.* If, as already provided
in clause (b) of section 8, the Administrator-General
is not entitled to priority over a universal legatee,
it is logical that he should not be given priority over
the residuary or his representative also. Clause (b)
may be modified accordingly.

This will apply to present incumbents also.

*We have made a similar recommendation regarding the office of
Official Trustee: in our Report on the Official Trustees Act—16th
Report.

*In our Report on the Official Trustees Act we have” made
similar recommendations regarding the office of Deputy Official
‘Trustee—See the 16th Report.

‘Sections. 232 and 233 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.


Sections 9,
10, 11.

Sections 12,
13.

Section 14.
Section 15.

Section 16.

Section 17.

Section 18.

Sections 19
to 23.

Section 24.

20. These may be altered in accordance with our
recommendations above.’

21. The reference to section 10 will have to be
omitted as a consequence of the changes recommended
in sections 9, 10 and 11. Further, cases where a person
has taken other proceedings for the protection of the
estate? should be treated on the same footing as if
probate, etc. had been taken. Lastly, the High Court
should not grant letters of administration to the
Administrator-General where it is satisfied that there
is no danger of misappropriation, deterioration or
waste and that such grant is not necessary for the
protection of the estate.

22. No change.

23. The proper place for this section is after section
17. It may be so transposed. The reference to the
Regimental Debts Act, 1893, may be removed as
cases under that Act are not likely to arise now.®
Reference to the Navy Act, 1957, should be added.
Both these changes should be carried out in sections
16 and 17 also.

24, The Government of West Bengal has by an
amending Act# raised the limit to Rs. 2,000. We agree
with the amendment and that may be embodied also in
section 16, i.e. for Rs. 1,000 the figure Rs. 2,000 may be
substituted.®

25. No change, except as already® discussed.

26. The language of the section requires to be
simplified, as the construction of the sentences is
rather involved. We recommend that the section
may be suitably recast for this purpose.

27. Where a will of the deceased is proved
in the State, the grant made to the Administrator-
General must be revoked. This may be made clear.

28. Section 24 as it stands at present provides that
probate or letters of administration granted by the
High Court to the Administrator-General of any State
shall have effect over the assets of the deceased
throughout one or other States, if the High Court
directs by its grant that such probate or letters should
have such effect. A suggestion has been made that
it will be more convenient to provide that a grant
made by the High Courts to the Administrator-
General of a State shall have effect over all the

iSee paragraphs 9 and 10, supra.

*Cf. para. 10(3), supra.

*The Fifth Report of the Law Commission (British Statutes ap-
plicable to India), page 57, item No. 150, has already recommended
the repeal ‘of this Act. and this has already been done by Act, 57
of 1960.

«The Administrator-General’s (Bengal Amendment) Act, 1940,

$. 5.
5966 also under s. 15 above.
*See under s. 15 above.


9

assets of the deceased throughout India, without a
certificate being required (as at present) to specify
the States wherein the grant will be effective. We
think that the suggestion is worth accepting. We
may, in this connection, draw attention to the first
proviso to section 273 of the Indian Succession Act,
1925, under which probates or letters of administra-
tion granted by the High Court shall (unless other-
wise directed by the grant) have effect throughout
the other States. We recommend that section 24 may
be amended on these lines.

29. A suggestion has been made by the Govern- Insertion»
ment of Jammu & Kashmir that grants of probate or new section
letters of administration made by the High Court for fr Jammu
that State to the Administrator-General should be jyir, sh-
effective in the other States in India also. Corres-  ~
pondingly, that Government propose to insert a
provision in its own Bill on the subject to the effect
that probate or letters of administration granted
by the High Court of States other than by the High
Court of Jammu and Kashmir shall have the
same effect as it should have if the grant had been
made by the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir. We
agree with the suggestion. Where a person leaves
properties both in Jammu & Kashmir and in the rest
of India, it will be convenient if the entire estate is
administered by the Administrator-General—either the
Administrator-General of Jammu & Kashmir or the
Administrator-General of any State in the rest of
India. The matter would be dealt with on the basis
of reciprocity, and therefore there can be no objection
to the acceptance of the suggestion. It is, of course,
not permissible to provide in our Act that a certifi-
eate granted by a High Court in India will have
effect in the State of Jammu & Kashmir; the reason
is, that the power of Parliament to legislate on the
subject is derived from Art. 245 and 246(2) read with
entry 11 in the concurrent list in the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution, and that entry is not applicable to
Jammu & Kashmir. Therefore, the provisions for
making effective the grants made by other High
Courts will have to be made in the Jammu & Kashmir
Bill. But the provision, making a grant made by the
High Court for Jammu & Kashmir effective in other
parts of India, can be made by Parliament. We may,
in this connection, invite attention to the provisions
of section 382 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (as
amended by Act 34 of 1957) read with section 380
under which, where a certificate in the prescribed
form has been granted to a resident within the State
of Jammu & Kashmir by the District Judge of that
State, etc., the certificate shall have the same effect
in India as a certificate granted under Part X of the
Succession Act. We recommend that the provisions
on the lines desired by the Government of Jammu
& Kashmir may be incorporated.


Section 25.

Section 26.

Sections 27;
and 28.

Section 29.

Section 30.

Section 31.

Section 32.

Sections 33
to 36.

10
30. No change.

31. There does not seem to be any justification for
restricting the application of the rule as to computing
the period of limitation embodied in clause (5) to
claims of creditors. We recommend that it should
be made applicable to claims by others as well.

32. No change, except that for brevity. Section 28
may be compressed.

33. The sub-sections of this section are indepen-
dent of each other, and should for that reason be
made into independent sections.

Further, in section 29(2), the reference to Deputy
is unnecessary and should be omitted.

34. We recommend that the Administrator-General
should have the same plenary powers regarding wit-
nesses, etc. as an auditor under section 46.

35. All the State Governments, excepting that of
former Saurashtra, agreed that the limit of rupees two
thousand should be raised and the suggestion is that
it may be raised to rupees four or five thousand. It
will be more expeditious to get certificates from the
Administrator-General. We recommend that the
limit may be raised to five thousand rupees. We also
recommend some verbal changes so that the time-
limit of one month may appear in a negative form.

36. Consequent on our recommendations under
sections 9—11 above,? the words commencing with
“and such deceased was not an exempted person”
and ending with “Official Gazette” will have to be
omitted.

37. In section 33, the words “either by the oath”,
etc. should be replaced by a provision for such
inquiry as the Administrator-General thinks fit, so as
to leave him some discretion. No change in section
34. In section 35, the certificate-holder should have
an opportunity of showing cause before revocation. No
change in section 36.

38. The Government of West Bengal has, by an
Amending Act, introduced a section immediately
after section 36, indemnifying payments made to the
holder of a certificate before such certificate has been
revoked. The provision is a useful one and may be
adopted.

1866 existing section 4 ; cf s. 13(2) of the Official Trustees Act
as proposed to be amended in our Report thereon.

*See paragraphs 9 and 10, supra.
gene Administrator-General’s (Bengal Amendment) Act, 1940

“See Apppendix I, clause 35.


il

39. In keeping with our recommendation under section 37,
section 31, the amount may be increased from two
thousand rupees to five thousand rupees.

40. A question has been raised whether, consequen- Section 38.
tial on the new section which we proposed to insert!
relating to a grant made by the High Court for Jammu
and Kashmir, it is necessary to amend section 38. We
have carefully considered the matter and are of the
opinion that no such amendment is necessary. Section
38 (in so far as it is relevant for Jammu and Kashmir)
provides for the transfer of surplus assets of a deceased
to the executor or administrator in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir for distribution amongst heirs of the
deceased in that State. The section is not concerned
with relations between the Administrator-General of
one State and the Administrator-General of another
State only. It contemplates the delivery of assets by
the Administrator-General or by a certificate-holder.
Further, the delivery is to be made to the executor or
the administrator in the country of domicile (and not
necessarily to the Administrator-General of the foreign
country). Therefore it is unnecessary to amend sec-
tion 38.

41. Sub-section (2) may be omitted, as it is no longer Section 39.
necessary. The words “revenues of” may be omitted

in view of the constitutional provisions regarding
Consolidated Fund.

42. In sub-section (2) of section 40, the Government Section 40.
of West Bengal has added the words “of the amount
decreed or ordered by the Court to be paid” after the
words “payment”? We accept the amendment and
recommend that it may be introduced.

43. No change. Section 41.

44. In sub-section (1), the first proviso may be Section 42.
omitted as it is no longer necessary. The second pro-
viso is also obsolete and should be omitted. In sub-
section (2), the words “revenues of” should be omitted
in view of the provisions of the Constitution relating to
Consolidated Fund.

45. No change in substance. Sections 43
and 44.

46. The Government of West Bengal has added® a Section 45+
further clause, namely “whether the accounts have
been audited in the prescribed manner” before clause
(a) and also introduced the words “so far as can be

7866 para. 29, supra.

The Administrator General’s (Bengal Amendment) Act, 1940,

s. 8.

*The Administrator-General’s (Bengal Amendment) ‘Act, 1940,
8. 9.

252 M of L—3.


Sections 46.

Sections 47
to 49.

Section so.

Sections 51
to 53.

Sections 54.

Section 55.

Section 56.

Section 57.

12

ascertained by such audit of the accounts” in place of
the word “they” in existing clause (a). By way of
abundant caution we recommend that these changes
may be adopted.

47. No changes in substance. Sub-section (1) may
be drafted on the lines of similar provisions in recent
statutes.

48. No change.

49. This section deals with the rule-making power.
It should therefore be put in the last Chapter.

50. No change in sections 51 and 52. In section 53,
the words “so much thereof as appears” are vague;
reference to the decision of the prescribed authority
should be added.

51. Section 54 of the Act provides for action by
the District Judge in respect of non-exempted persons.
Under sub-section (1), the District Judge has to report
the death of any such person without delay to the
Administrator-General, stating certain specified parti-
culars. Sub-section (2) provides that until the Admin-
istrator-General obtains letters of administration
or until some other person obtains probate or such
letters or certificate, etc., the District Judge shall retain
the assets under his charge or appoint an officer under
section 239 of the Succession Act, 1865 (now section 269
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925). Under sub-section
(3), the District Judge has also power to pay out of the
assets or proceeds sums necessary for funeral expenses,
wages for services rendered within three months before
the death, expenses for meeting immediate necessities
of the family and other acts necessary for the proper
care and management of the assets. Now, sections 192
and 269 of the Succession Act also provide that the
District Judge can take action for the preservation and
protection of the estate of the deceased. We think that
section 54 is out of place in the Administrator-General’s
Act and that if it is to be retained, its proper place
would be in the Succession Act. We, therefore, re-
commend that the section may be omitted from the
Administrator General’s Act. As and when the Indian
Succession Act is taken up for revision, the question of
incorporating a suitable provision may be considered.

52. Each of the sub-clauses of this section may be
made separate sections. The limit of Rs. 200 may be
increased to Rs. 400 in view of section 85 of the Bombay
Police Act, 1951.

53. No change.

54. No change in substance. Separate provision
may be made in respect of the power of Central Gov-
ernment to make rules.


13
55. No change. Section 59.*

. ___56. These may be omitted. The operation of section Sections 598
598 may,! however, be preserved as a saving, since it 04 59B-
may be necessary for the Central Government to have
recourse to this section for some time more for passing
ord2rs regarding property vested in one Administrator-""

General.

57. Provision may be made, by way of abundant Repeal.
caution, that the repeal of the 1913 Act shall-not-affect
the incorporation of any person holding the office of
Administrator-General at the commencement of the
proposed Act.

58. With a view to presenting a clear picture of the Appendix I.
proposals made by us in this Report, we have shown .
gur proposals in the form of draft sections in Appendix

59. In Appendix II we have given a table showing Appendix IT
the provision in the existing Act and the corresponding
provision, if any, in Appén dix L

60. Appendix III contains our suggestions in respect Appendix
of other Acts. प्रा,

1. T. L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR—Chairman.

. P. SATYANARAYANA RAO

. L. S. MISRA

. G. R. RAJAGOPAUL . Members.
. $. CHAUDHURI

. N. A. PALKHIVALA

DALWD

D. BASU,
Joint Secretary.

New DELHI ;
The 5th May, 1961.

*Section 58 has been repealed by the A.O. 1937.


INDEX TO APPENDIX I

CLAUSE SUBJECT-MATTER EXISTING
SECTION
I 2 3
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement . . » Sr
2. Definitions . . . . . . . + Ss.'2°(z), 2 (5),
2(6), 2(8).
CHAPTER II
THE OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL
3. Appointment of Administrator-General S. 3
4. Appointment and powers of Deputy Administrators-
Gen . . . 5, 4
5. Incorporation . . . . . . . » 5.5
CHAPTER III
RIGHTS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-
GENERAL
(a) Grant of letters of administration and probate
6. Jurisdiction of High Court for the whole State * 5.6
7. Administrator-General entitled to letters of administra-
tion, unless granted to next-of-kin  . . « 5.7
8. Administrator-General entitled to letters of administra-
. tion in preference to creditors, certain legatees or
friends. . 5. 8
9. Right of Administrator-General to apply for adminis-
tration of estates . . . . » 5.9
10. Power of Administrator-General to collect and hold
assets where immediate action is required S. 11
11. Grant of probate or letters of administration to person
appearing in the course of proceedings taken by
Administrator-General . . . S. 12
12. Grant of administration to Administrator-General in
certain cases. . 5. 13

14


15

CLAUSE SUBJECT-MATTER EXISTING
SECTION
I 2 3
13. Administrator-General not precluded from applying
for letters within one month after death . S. 14
(6) Revocation of grants
14. Recall of Administrator-General’s Administration and
grant of probate, etc., to executor or next-of-kin S. 18
15. Cost of obtaining administration, etc., may, on revocation,
be ordered to be paid to Administrator-General
out of estate. . S. 19
16. After revocation, letters granted to Administrator-
General to be deemed, as to hitn;.to have been void-
. able only . S. 20
17. Payments made by Administrator-General prior to
revocation S. 21
(c) General
18. Administrator-General’s petition for grant of letters of
administration : S. 22
19. Name in which probate or letters to be granted S. 23
20. Effect of probate or letters granted to Administrator-
General S. 24
21. Effect of grant by the High Court of Jammu and Kash-
mir . New
22. Transfer by private executor or administrator of interest
under probate or letters पु S. 25
23. Distribution of assets S. 26
24. Appointment of Official Trustee as trustee of assets
after completion of administration . S. 27
25. Power of High Court to give directions regarding
Administration ofestate  . बन . न $. 28
26. No security to be required from Administrator-
General . . . . . 6 नि S. 29(1) °
27. Manner in which petition to be verified by Administra-
tor-General . . . . . . . S. 29(2)
28. Entry of Administrator-General not to constitute notice

of a trust ot .

S. 29(3)


16;

i

CLAUSE SUBJEGT-MATTER EXISTING
‘ SECTION
I 2, 3
CHAPTER IV
GRANT OF CERTIFICATE
29. In what cases Administrator-General may grant certi-
ficate . . . . . . . . S. 31, main
. न para, part,
S. 31, Pro-
viso.
30. Grant of certificate to creditors and power to take
charge of certain estates .-  . : . S. 32
31. Administrator-General not bound to grant certificate
unless satisfied of claimant’s title, etc. . . S. 33
32. Effect of certificate : : 7 . : व 5. 34
33. ; Revocation of certificate ._ S. 35
34. Surrender of revoked certificate पु . . S. 36
35. Payment to holder of certificate before it is revoked New
36. Administrator-General not bound to take out adminis-
tration on account of assets for which he has gran-
. ted certificate . : . . S. 37
37. Transfer of certain assets from.any State to which this
Act extends to Executor or Administrator in coun-
try of domicile for distribution . . . S. 38
CHAPTER V
LIABILITY
38. Liability of Government . an पु 5. 39
39. Creditors’ suit against Administrator-General  . . S. 40
40. Notice of suit not required in certain cases S. 41
CHAPTER VI
FEES
बी. Fees. . . : oo : S. 42
42. Disposal of fees. . . . . . . S. 43


17

CLAUSE SuUBJECT-MATTER EXISTING
SECTION
I 2 3

CHAPTER VII

AUDIT OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL’S ACCOUNTS

43. Audit . : पु पु . . पु + S. 44
44. Auditors to examine accounts and report to Govern-

ment : S. 45
45. Power of auditors to summon and examine witnesses,

and to call for documents + . S. 46
46. Costs of audit, etc. . : पु . . . S. 47

CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS

47. General powers of administration S. 48
48. Power to summon and examine witnesses S. 30
49. Power of person beneficially interested to inspect Ad-

ministrator-General’s account, etc., and take

copies . . . . . . . S. 49
50. False evidence . . S. 51
51. Assets unclaimed for twelve years to be transferred to

Government S. 52
52. Mode of proceeding by claimant to recover principal

money so transferred S. 53
53- Succession Act or Companies Act not to affect Adminis-

trator-General . . S. 55(1)
54. Savings of provisions of Police Acts for Presidency-

हे towns . . . S. 552)

55. Order of court to be equivalent to decree . . S. 56

56. Provision for administration by Consular Officer in

case of death in certain circumstances of foreign

subject * . न S. 57, part
57. Letters of administration not necessary in respect of

small estates administered by “Administrator-

General - in accordance with certain Acts . . S. 16
58. Powers to grant Administrator-General letters limited

for purpose of dealing with assets in accordance

with the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private

Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957 $. 17
59. Act not to affect Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private
Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957 5. 15
60. Saving of provisions of Indian Registration Act, 1908 S. 59
61. Power of Central Government to make rules S. $7, part
62. Power of State Government to make rules S. 50
63. Repeal New


Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Is. 1.]

Definitions.

& 2@).]

{s.265).]

{s. 2(6).]

[s. 2(8).]

APPENDIX I

Proposals as shown in the form of a draft Bill.

[This is a tentative draft only]

[Corresponding sections of the existing Act are noted
in the margin.]

THE ADMINISTRATORS-GENERAL BILL, 1961

A
BILL

to consolidate and amend the law relating to the office
and duties of Administrator-General.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of
the Republic of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Administrators-
General Act, 19.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the
State of Jammu and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.

2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—

(a) “assets” means all the property, movable
and immovable, of a deceased person, which is
chargeable with and applicable to the payment of
his debts and legacies, or available for distribution
among his heirs and next-of-kin;

(b) “letters of administration” includes any
letters of administration whether general or with
a copy of the will annexed or limited in time or
otherwise;

(c) “next-of-kin” includes a widower or
widow of a deceased person, or any other person
who by law would be entitled to letters of adminis-
tration in preference to a creditor or legatee of the
deceased; and

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules
under this Act.

18


19
CHAPTER II

THE OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL

3. (1) The State Government shall appoint an Appoint-
Administrator-General for the State: ment of Ad-
ministrator-
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be eu .
‘deemed to bar the appointment of the same person as
Administrator-General for two or more States,

(2) No person shall be appointed to the office of
Administrator-General unless he—

(a) has for at least seven years been an
advocate; or

(b) has for at least seven years been an
attorney of a High Court; or

(c) has for at least ten years been a member
of the judicial service of a State; or

(d) has for at least five years held the office
of Deputy Administrator-General.

4. (1) The State Government may appoint a Appoint-
Deputy or Deputies to assist the Administrator-Gene- ment and
ral; and any Deputy so appointed shall, subject to the eputy of
control of the Government and the general or special Administra-
orders of the Administrator-General, be competent to tor-General.
discharge any of the duties and to exercise any of the [s. 4.]
powers of the Administrator-General, and when dis-
charging such duties or exercising such powers shall
have the same privileges and be subject to the same
liabilities as the Administrator-General,

(2) No person shall be appointed as a Deputy under
this section unless he—

(a) has for at least three years been an
advocate; or

(b) has for at least three years been an
attorney of a High Court; or

(c) has for at least three years been a member
of the judicial service of a State.

5. The Administrator-General shall be a corpora- Incorpora-
tion sole by the name of the Administrator-General of tion. 8. 5-]
the State for which he is appointed, and, as such
Administrator-General, shall have perpetual succession
and an official seal, and may sue and be sued in his
corporate name,


Jurisdiction
of High
Court for
the whole
State.

{s. 6.]

Administra-
tor-General
entitled to
letters of
administra~
tion, unless
granted to
next-of-kin.

Is. 7].
Administra-
tor-General
entitled to
letters of
administra~
tion in pre-
ference to
creditors,
certain
legatees or
friends.

[$. 8.]

Right of
Administra-
tor-General
to apply for
administra-
tion of

estates.

[s. 94]

20
CHAPTER III

Ricuts, Powers AND DuTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-
GENERAL

(a) Grant of letters of administration and probate

6. So far as regards the Administrator-General of
any State, the High Court shall be deemed to be a
court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of
granting probate or letters of administration under any
Jaw for the time being in force, wheresoever within
the State the estate to be administered is situate:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be con-
strued as affecting the jurisdiction of any district court.

7. Any letters of administration, granted by the
High Court, shall be granted to the Administrator-
General of the State unless they are granted to the
next-of-kin of the deceased.

8. The Administrator-General of the State shall be
deemed by all the courts in the State to have a right
to letters of administration other than letters pendente
lite in preference to that of—

(a) a creditor; or .

(b) a legatee, other than a universal legatee
or a residuary legatee or the representative of a
residuary legatee; or

(c) a friend of the deceased.

9 (1) Tt

(a) any person has died leaving within any
State assets exceeding rupees five thousand in
value, and

(b) (whether the obtaining of probate of his
will or letters of administration to his estate is or
is not obligatory), no person to whom any court
would have jurisdiction to commit administration
of such assets has, within one month after his
death, applied in such State for such probate, or
letters of administration, and

(c) (in cases where the obtaining of such
probate or letters of administration is not obli-
gatory under the provisions of the Indian Succes-
sion Act, 1925), no person has taken other proceed-
ings for the protection of the estate,

the Administrator-General of the State in
which such assets are, may, subject to any rules
made by the State Government, within a reason-
able time after he has had notice of the death of
such person, and of his having left such assets, take
such proceedings as may be necessary to obtain

39 of 1925.


21

from the High Court letters of administration of
the estate of such person.

(2) The Administrator-General shall not take pro-
ceedings under this section unless he is satisfied, that
there is apprehension of misappropriation, deteriora-
tion or waste of such assets if such proceedings are not
taken by him or that such proceedings are otherwise
necessary for the protection of the assets.

10. (1) Whenever any person has died leaving Power of
assets within any State exceeding rupees five thousand Administra
in value, and the High Court for that State is satisfied (O"conect
that there is imminent danger of misappropriation, and hold
deterioration or waste of such assets, requiring imme- assets where
diate action, the High Court may, upon the applica- immediate
tion of the Administrator-General or of any person required.
interested in such assets or in the due administration
thereof, forthwith direct the Administrator-General— [s. 11.]

(७) to collect and take possession of such
assets, and

(b) to hold, deposit, realise, sell or invest the
same according to the directions of the High Court,
and, in default of any such directions, according
to the provisions of this Act so far as the same are
applicable to such assets.

(2) Any order of the High Court under sub-section
(1) shall entitle the Administrator-General— पु

(a) to maintain any suit or proceeding for the
recovery of such assets;

(b) if he thinks fit, to apply for letters of
administration of the estate of such deceased
person;

(c) to retain out of the assets of the estate any
fees chargeable under rules made under this Act;
and

(d) to reimburse himself for all payments

made by him in respect of such assets which a
private administrator might lawfully have made.

11. If, in the course of proceedings to obtain letters Grant of
of administration under the provisions of section 9 or probate or

section 10,— , letters of
administra~
rson appears and establishes his tion to
cla ne any person app ind establishes his penton. ap=
pearing in
(i) to probate of the will of the deceased; or the course
of proceed-

(ii) to letters of administration as next-of-kin ings taken
of the deceased, and gives such security as may be by Ad-
required of him by law; or ministrator-

General.

(b) any person satisfies the Court that he has
taken and is prosecuting with due diligence other
proceedings for the protection of the estate, the
case being one in which the obtaining of such

[s. 12.]


Grant of
administra-
tion to Ad-
‘ministrator-
General in
certain
cases.

(s. 13.)

Administra-
tor-General
not pre-
cluded from
applying for
letters
within one
month after
death.

{s. 14.]

22

probate or letters of administration is not obli-
gatory under the provisions of the Indian Succes-
sion Act, 1925; or

(c) the court is satisfied that there is no
apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration,
or waste of the assets and that the grant of letters
of administration in such proceedings is not other-
wise necessary for the protection of the assets;

the Court shall—

(1) in the case mentioned in clause (a), grant
probate of the will or letters of administration
accordingly,

(2) in the case mentioned in clause (b) or
(c), drop the proceedings, and

(3) in all the cases award to the Administra-
tor-General the costs of any proceedings taken by
him under those sections, to be paid out of the
estate as part of the testamentary or intestate
expenses thereof.

12. If, in the course of proceedings to obtain letters
of administration under the provisions of section 9 or
section 10, and within such period as to the Court seems
reasonable, no person appears and establishes his
claim to probate of a will, or to a grant of letters of
administration as next-of-kin of the deceased, or satis-
fies the Court that he has taken and is prosecuting with
due diligence other proceedings for the protection of
the estate, the case being one in which the obtaining of
such probate or letters of administration is not obli-
gatory under the provisions of the Indian Succession
Act, 1925, and the Court is satisfied that there is no
apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration, or
waste of the assets and that the grant of letters of
administration in such proceedings is not otherwise
necessary for the protection of the assets;

or if a person who has established his claim to a
grant of letters of administration as next-of-kin of the
deceased fails to give such security as may be required
of him by law,

the Court may grant letters of administration to the
Administrator-General.

13. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to preclude
the Administrator-General from applying to the Court
for letters of administration in any case within the
period of one month from the death of the deceased.

39 of 1925,

39 of 1925.


23
(b) Revocation of grants

14. If an executor or next-of-kin of the deceased, Recall of
who has not been personally served with a citation or Administra
who has not had notice thereof in time to appear PUT~ administra-
suant thereto, establishes to the satisfaction of the tion and
Court a claim to probate of will or to letters of admin- grant of
istration in preference to the Administrator-General, Probate, लत
any letters of Administration granted in accordance or next-of-
with the provisions of this Act to the Administrator- kin. .
General— cay main

* + ls. 18, pro-
(a) shall be revoked, if a will of the deceased $- 78: P!
is proved in the State; viso, part]

(b) may be revoked, in other cases, if an appli- [s. 18; pro-
cation for that purpose is made within six months Viso, part.]
after the grant to the Administrator-General and
the Court is satisfied that there has been no unrea-
sonable delay in making the application, or in
transmitting the authority under which the appli-
cation is made;

and probate or letters of administration may be granted
to such executor or next-of-kin as the case may be.

15. If any letters of administration granted to the Gost of
Administrator-General in accordance with the provi- Saminista-
sions of this Act are revoked, the Court may order the tion, etc.,
costs of obtaining such letters of administration, and may, on
the whole or any part of any fees which would other- be teed
wise have been payable under this Act, together with to be paid
the costs of the Administrator-General in any proceed- to Adminis-
ings taken to obtain such revocation, to be paid to or trator-Ge-
retained by the Administrator-General out of the neral out of

estate:

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the [s. 19.]
provisions of clauses (९) and (d) of sub-section (2) of
section 10.

16. If any: letters of administration granted to the After revo-
Administrator-General in accordance with the provi- cation,
sions of this Act are revoked, the same shall, so far as at to
regards the Administrator-General and all persons act- Administra-
ing under his authority in pursuance thereof, be deem- tor-General
ed to have been only voidable, except as to any act पू be
done by any such Administrator-General or other per- Shim te
son as aforesaid, after notice of a will or of any other have been
fact which would render such letters void: Rojdable

Provided that no notice of a will or of any other fact [s. 20.]
which would render any such letters void shall affect
the Administrator-General or any person acting under
his authority in pursuance of such letters unless, with-
in the period of one month from the time of giving
such notice, proceedings are commenced to prove the
will, or to cause the letters to be revoked, and such.


24

proceedings are prosecuted without unreasonable
delay.

Payments 17. If any letters of administration granted to the

made by Administrator-General in accordance with the provi-

tor-General ions of this Act are revoked, upon the grant of probate

prior to of a will, or upon the grant of letters of administration

revocation. with a copy of the will annexed, all payments made

{s. 21] or acts done by or under the authority of the Adminis-
trator-General in pursuance of such letters of adminis-
tration, prior to the revocation, which would have been
valid under any letters of administration lawfully
granted to him with a copy of such will annexed, shall
be deemed valid notwithstanding such revocation.

(c) General

Administra- 18. Whenever any Administrator-General applies

tor-General’s for letters of administration in accordance with the

Brant of ‘°F provisions of this Act, it shall be sufficient if the peti-

letters of | tion required to be presented for the grant of such

administra- letters states,—

ion. .

18. 22.] (i) the time and place of the death of the
deceased to the best of the knowledge and belief
of the petitioner;

(ii) the names and addresses of the surviving
next-of-kin of the deceased, if known;

(iii) the particulars and value of the assets
likely to come into the hands of the petitioner;

(iv) particulars of the liabilities of the estate,

if known.
Name pro- 19. All probates or letters of administration granted
bate or to any Administrator-General shall be granted to him
letters to by that name.
be granted.
23.
(231 of 20. (1) Probate or letters of administration granted

probate or by the High Court to the Administrator-General of any

letters State shall have effect over all the assets of the deceas-

granted to ed throughout the territories to which this Act extends

Administra and shall be conclusive as to the representative title

8. 23.) against all debtors of the deceased and all persons hold-
ing such assets, and shall afford full indemnity to all
debtors paying their debts and all persons delivering
up such assets to such Administrator-General.

(2) Whenever a grant of probate or letters of
administration is made by a High Court to the Admin-
istrator-General, the High Court shall send to the High
Courts for the other States a certificate that such grant
has been made, and such certificate shall be filed by
the Court receiving the same.’

1The provision regarding Rangoon High Court has been omitted,
as obsolete.


25

21. Probate or letters cf administration granted by 86००६ of
the High Court for the State of Jammu and Kashmir the Tigh
to the Administrator-General of that State shall have Court of
effect over all the assets of the deceased throughout all Jem and
the States to the High Courts of which a certificate is fem
sent by the High Court for the State of Jammu and [New]
Kashmir that such grant has been made, and shall be
conclusive as to the representative title against all
debtors of the deceased and all persons holding such
assets, and shall afford full indemnity to all debtors
paying their debts and all persons delivering up such
assets to such Administrator-General.

22. (1) Any private executor or administrator may, Transfer by
with the previous consent of the Administrator-Gene- private or
ral of the State in which any of the assets of the administra-
estate, in respect of which such executor or adminis- tor of in-
trator has obtained probate or letters of administration, terest under
are situate, by an instrument in writing under his hand probate or
notified in the Official Gazette, transfer the assets of *
the estate, vested in him by virtue of such probate or [s. 25.]
letters to the Administrator-General by that name or
any other sufficient description.

(2) As from the date of such transfer the transferor
shall be exempt from all liability as such executor or
administrator, as the case may be, except in respect of
acts done before the date of such transfer, and the
Administrator-General shall have the rights which he
would have had, and be subject to the liabilities to
which he would have been subject, if the probate or
letters of administration, as the case may be, had been
granted to him by that name at the date of such
transfer.

23. (1) When the Administrator-General has given Distribution
the prescribed notice to creditors and others to send in of assets.
to him their claims against the estate of the deceased, [s. 26]
he shall, at the expiration of the time therein named ‘™ *”
for sending in claims, be at liberty to distribute the
assets or any part thereof in discharge of such lawful
claims as he has notice of.

(2) The Administrator-General shall not be liable
for the assets so distributed to any person of whose
claims he had not notice at the time of such
distribution.

(3) No notice of any claim which has been sent in
and has been rejected or disallowed in part by the
Administrator-General shall affect him, unless proceed-
ings to enforce such claim are commenced within one
month after notice of the rejection or disallowance of
such claim has been given in the prescribed manner
and unless such proceedings are prosecuted without
unreasonable delay.


+ Appoint-
ment of
Official
Trustee as
trustee of
assets after
completion
of admi-
nistration.
{s. 27-]

Power of
High Court
to give
directions
regarding
administra-
tion of
estate.

[s. 28.]

“No security
to be re-
quired from
Administra-
tor-General.

[s. 29(1).]

Manner in
which peti-
tion to be
verified by
Administra~
tor-General.
[s. 29(2).]

Entry of
Administra-
tor-General
not to
constitute
notice of a

trust.
{s. 29(3).]

26

(4) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right
of any creditor or other claimant to follow the assets or
any part thereof in the hands of the persons who may
have received the same respectively.

(5) In computing the period of limitation for any
suit, appeal or application under the provisions of any
law for the time being in force, the period between the
date of submission of the claim of a creditor or other
claimant to the Administrator-General and the date of
the final decision of the Administrator-General on such
claim shall be excluded.

24. (1) When the Administrator-General has, so far
as may be, discharged all the liabilities of an estate
administered by him, he shall notify the fact in the
Official Gazette, and he may, by an instrument in writ-
ing, with the consent of the Official Trustee and subject
to any rules made by the State Government, appoint
the Official Trustee to be the trustee of any assets then
remaining in his hands.

(2) Upon such appointment such assets shall vest
in the Official Trustee as if he had been appointed
trustee in accordance with the provisions of the Official
Trustees Act, 1913, and shall be held by him upon the
same trusts as the same were held immediately before
such appointment,

25. The High Court may, on application made to it
by the Administrator-General or any person interested
in the assets or in the due administration thereof, give
to the Administrator-General of the State any general
or special directions as to any estate in his charge or
in regard to the administration of any such estate.

26. No Administrator-General shall be required by
any Court to enter into any administration bond, or to
give other sécurity to the Court, on the grant of any
letters of administration to him by that name.

27. No Administrator-General shall be required to
verify, otherwise than by his signature, any petition
presented by him under the provisions of this Act, and,
if the facts stated in any such petition are not within
his own personal knowledge, the petition may be subs-
cribed and verified by any person competent to make
verification.

28. The entry of the Administrator-General by that
name in the books of a company shall not constitute
notice of a trust, and a company shall not be entitled
to object to entering the name of the Administrator-
General on its register by reason only that the Admin-
istrator-General is a corporation, and in dealing with
assets the fact that the person dealt with is the Admin-
istrator-General shall not of itself constitute notice of
a trust.

2 ०1913-


27
CHAPTER IV

Grant OF CERTIFICATE

29. (1) Whenever any person had died leaving In wnat
assets within any State and the Administrator-General Pitt tor.
of such State is satisfied that such assets, excluding any General may

sum of money deposited in a Government Savings grant certi-

Bank or in any provident fund to which the provisions pote: .
19 of 1925. of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, apply, did not at the para, part}

date of death exceed in the whole five thousand rupees

in value, he may grant to any person, claiming other-

wise than as a creditor to be interested in such assets

or in the due administration thereof, a certificate under

his hand entitling the claimant to receive the assets

therein mentioned left by the deceased within the

State, to a value not exceeding in the whole five

thousand rupees.

(2) No certificate under this section shall be granted [s. 31, main
before the lapse of one month from the death unless P*™ 1
before the lapse of the said one month the Administra-
tor-General is requested so to do by writing under the

hand of the executor or the widow or other person

entitled to administer the estate of the deceased and

he thinks fit to grant it.

(3) No certificate shall be granted under this छल Pro-
section, —

(i) where probate of the deceased’s will or let-
ters of administration of his estate has or have been
granted; or

(ii) in respect of any sum of money deposited
in a Government Savings Bank or in any provi-
dent fund to which the provisions of the Provident

19 of 1925 Funds Act, 1925, apply.

30. (1) If, in cases falling within section 29, no per- Grant of
son claiming to be interested otherwise than as a cre- certificate
ditor in such assets or in the due administration thereof (4 power.
obtains, within three months of the death of the to take
deceased, a certificate from the Administrator-General charge of
under that section, or probate of a will or letters of cert#in es-
administration of the estate of the deceased, the Admin-
istrator-General may administer the estate without let-[s. 32.
ters of administration, in the same manner as if such
letters had been granted to him>

(2) If the Administrator-General neglects or refuses
to administer such estate, he shall, upon the application
of a creditor, grant a certificate to him in the same
manner as if he were interested in such assets other-
wise than as a creditor; and such certificate shall have
the same effect as a certificate granted under the pro-
visions of section 29, and shall be subject to all provi-
sions of this Act which are applicable to such
certificate.


Administra-
tor-General
not bound
to grant
certificate
unless
satisfied of
claimant’s
title, etc.
{s. 33.]

Effect of
certificate.

[s. 34.]

Revocation
of certifi-
cate.

[s. 35-]

Surrender
of revoked
certificate.

[s. 36.]

28

(3) The Administrator-General may, if he thinks fit,
before granting a certificate under sub-section (2),
require the creditor to give reasonable security for the
due administration of the estate of the deceased.

31. The Administrator-General shall not be bound
to grant any certificate under section 29 or section 30
unless he is satisfied after making such inquiry as he
thinks fit of the title of the claimant and of the value
of the assets left by the deceased within the State.

32. The holder of a certificate granted in accordance
with the provisions of section 29 or section 30 shall
have in respect of the assets specified in such certificate
the same powers and duties, and be subject to the same
liabilities as he would have had or been subject to if
letters of administration had been granted to him:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deem-
ed to require any person holding such certificate,—

(a) to file accounts or inventories of the assets
of the deceased before any court or other authority;
or

(b) save as provided in section 30, to give any
bond for the due administration of the estate.

33. 0) The administrator-General may revoke a
certificate granted under the provisions of section 29 or
section 30 on any of the following grounds, namely: —

(i) that the certificate was obtained by fraud
or misrepresentation made to him;

(ii) that the certificate was obtained by means
of an untrue allegation of a fact essential in law to
justify the grant though such allegation was made
in ignorance or inadvertently.

(2) No certificate shall be revoked under this section
unless the holder of the certificate has been given a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause why the certi-
ficate should not be so revoked.

34. (1) When a certificate is revoked in accordance
with the provisions of section 33, the holder thereof
shall, on the requisition of the Administrator-General,
deliver it up to such Administrator-General, but shall
not be entitled to the refund of any fee paid thereon.

(2) If such person wilfully and without reasonable
cause omits to deliver up the certificate, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, or with both.


29

35. When a certificate is revoked in accordance with Payment to
the provisions of section 33, all payments made in good certificate
faith under such certificate to the holder thereof before before it
such revocation, shall, notwithstanding such revoca- is revoked.
tion, be a legal discharge to the person making the [New]
payment and the holder of such certificate may retain,
and reimburse himself in respect of, any pay ments
made by him which the person to whom a certificate or
probate or letters of administration may afterwards be
granted might lawfully have made."

36. The Administrator-General shall not be bound Administra:
to take out letters of administration of the estate of any pot bound
deceased person on account of the assets in respect of to take out
which he grants any certificate under section 29 or administra~
section 30, but he may do so if he revokes such certifi- gon om ac
cate under section 33, or ascertains that the value Of assets for

the estate exceeded five thousand rupees. which he
has granted
certificate.
[s. 37]

37. Where— Transfer of

assets from
(a) a person not having his domicile in any any State to
State to which this Act extends has died leaving .yo.tends
assets in any State and in the country in which he to executor
had his domicile at the time of his death, and or adminis-
trator in
country of
(b) proceedings for the administration of his domicile for
estate with respect to assets in any such State distribution.
have been taken under section 29 or section 30, {s. 38.]
and

(c) there has been a grant of administration in
the country of domicile with respect to the assets
in that country,

the holder of the certificate granted under section 29
or section 30, or the Administrator-General, as the case
may be, after having given the prescribed notice for
creditors and others to send in to him their claims
against the estate of the deceased, and after having dis-
charged, at the expiration of the time therein named,
such lawful claims as he has notice of, may, instead of
himself distributing any surplus or residue of the
deceased’s property to persons residing out of India or
in the State of Jammu and Kashmir who are entitled
thereto, transfer, with the consent of the executor or
administrator, as the case may be, in the country of
domicile, the surplus or residue to him for distribution
to those persons.

1Cf. section 36A as inserted in the existing Act by section 7 of the
Administrator-General’s (Bengal Amendment) Act, 1940 (Bengal
Act गा of 1940).


Liability of

30
CHAPTER V
LIABILITY
38. The Government shall be liable to make good

Government. all sums required to discharge any liability which the

{s. 39.]

Creditors’

suit against
Administra-
tor-General.

{s. 40.]

Notice of
suit not re-
quired in
certain
cases.

{s. 41.]

Fees.

[s. 42.]

Administrator-General, if he were a private adminis-
trator, would be personally liable to discharge,
except when the liability is one to which neither the
Administrator-General nor any of his officers has in
any way contributed, or which neither he nor any of
his officers could, by the exercise of reasonable dili-
gence, have averted, and in either of those cases the
Administrator-General shall not, nor shall the Gov-
ernment, be subject to any liability.

39. (1) If any suit be brought by a creditor against
any Administrator-General, such creditor shall be
liable to pay the costs of the suit unless he proves
that not less than one month previous to the institu-
tion of the suit he had applied in writing to the
Administrator-General, stating the amount and other
particulars of his claim, and had given such evidence
in support thereof as, in the circumstances of the
case, the Administrator-General was reasonably enti-
tled to require.

(2) If any such suit is decreed in favour of the
creditor, he shall, nevertheless, unless he is a secured
creditor, be only entitled to payment of the amount
decreed or ordered by the court to be paid* out of the
assets of the deceased equally and rateably with the
other creditors.

40. Nothing in section 80 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, shall apply to any suit against the
Administrator-General in which no relief is claimed
against him personally.

CHAPTER VI
FEES
41, (1) There shall be charged in respect of the
duties of the Administrator-General such fees, whe-

ther by way of percentage or otherwise, as may be
prescribed by the State Government.

(2) The fees under this section may be at different
rates for different estates or classes of estates or for
different duties, and shall, so far as may be, be arrang-
ed so as to produce an amount sufficient to discharge
the salaries and all other expenses incidental to the
working of this Act, (including such sum as the State
Government may determine to be required to insure
the Government against loss under this Act).

1Cf. the amendment made by section 8 of the Administrator-
General’s Bengal Amendment) Act, 1940, (Bengal Act 11 of 1940).

5 of 1908,


5 of 1908.

45 of 1860,

31 C«
CHAPTER VII
AvpiT oF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL’S ACCOUNTS

43. The accounts of every Administrator-General Audit.
shall be audited at least once annually and at any |S 44
other time if the State Government so directs, by
the prescribed person and in the prescribed manner.

44. The auditors shall examine the accounts and Auditors to
forward to the State Government a Statement there- पं: व
of in the prescribed form, together with a report report to

thereon and a certificate signed by them showing— Government.

(a) whether the accounts have been audited हि. करने
in the prescribed manner;?

(b) whether, so far as can be ascertained by
such audit, the accounts contain a full and true
account of everything which ought to be inserted
therein;

(c) whether the books which by any rules
made under this Act are directed to be kept by
the Administrator-General, have been duly and
regularly kept; and

(d) whether the assets and securities have
been duly kept and invested ‘and deposited in the
manner prescribed by this Act, or by any rules
made thereunder;

or (as the case may be) that such accounts are defi-
cient, or that the Administrator-General has failed to
comply with this Act or the rules made thereunder,
in such respect as may be specified in such certificate.

45. (1) Every auditor shall have all the powers Power of

vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Proce- auditors
to summon

dure, 1908, when trying a suit, in respect of the and examine
following matters, namely:— witnesses,
. « and to call
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance for docu-
of witnesses and examining them on oath; pene,
8. 46.

(b) discovery and inspection;

(c) compelling the production of documents;
and

(d) issuing commissions for the examination
of witnesses.

(2) Any person who when summoned refuses, or
without reasonable cause, neglects to attend or to
produce any document or thing or attends and refuses
to be sworn, or to be examined, shall be deemed to
have committed an offence within the meaning of,
and punishable under, section 188 of the Indian Penal
Code, and the auditor shall report every case of such
refusal or neglect to the State Government.

1Cf. the amendment made by section 9 of the Administrator-
General’s (Bengal Amendment) Act, 1940 (Bengal Act, 11 of 1940).


32

Costs of 46. The costs of and incidental to such audit and
audit, etc. examination shall be determined in accordance with

is. 47] rules made by the State Government, and shall be
defrayed in the prescribed manner.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
Cone oe 4%, The Administrator-General may, in addition to,
Jdministra- and not in derogation of, any other powers of expendi-
tion. ture lawfully exercisable by him, incur expenditure—
Is. 48.] (a) on such acts as may be necessary for the
proper care and management of any property
belonging to any estate in his charge; and
(b) with the sanction of the High Court, on
such religious, charitable and other objects, and
on such improvements, as may be reasonable and
proper in the case of such property.
Power to 48. (1) The Administrator-General may, whenever

seen ine He desires, for the purposes of this Act, to satisf:
witnesses, himself regarding any question of fact, exercise ail
Ls. 30.] the powers vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit, in respect 5 of 1908.
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance
of witnesses and examining them on oath;
(b) discovery and inspection;
(c) compelling the production of documents;
and
(d) issuing commissions for the examination
of witnesses,

(2) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 45
shall apply in relation to a person summoned by the
Administrator-General under this section as they
apply in relation to a person summoned under that
section.

Power of 49. Any person interested in the administration of
अकाए bene- any estate which is in the charge of the Administrator-
terested t General shall, subject to such conditions and restric-
inspect tions as may be prescribed, be entitled at all reason-
Administra- able times to inspect the accounts relating to such
tor-General’s estate and the reports and certificates of the auditor,
seo? and on payment of the prescribed fee, to copies

and take

copies. thereof and extracts therefrom.

Cs 49.]

False 50. Whoever, during any examination authorised
evidence, by this Act, makes upon oath a statement which is
fs. st] false and which he either knows or believes to be

false or does not believe to be true, shall be deemed
to have intentionally given false evidence in a stage
of a judicial proceeding.


39 of 1925.
Sof 1956.

39 of 1925.

33

51. All assets in the charge of the Administrator- Assets un-
General which have been in his custody for a period claimed for
of twelve years or upwards, whether before or after tobe tans
the commencement of this Act, without any applica- ferred to
tion for payment thereof having been made and Government.
granted by him shall be transferred, in the prescribed [8-52]
manner, to the account and credit of the Government:

Provided that this section shall not authorise the
transfer of any such assets as aforesaid, if any suit
or proceeding is pending in respect thereof in any
court.

52, (1) If any claim is hereafter made to any part Mode of
of the assets transferred to the account and’ credit of proceeding
the Government under the provisions of this Act, or by claimant
any Act hereby repealed, and if such claim is estab- principal
lished to the satisfaction of the prescribed authority, money so
the State Government shall pay to the claimant the transferred.
amount of the principal so transferred to its account |: 53-]
and credit or so much thereof as has been found by
the said authority to be due to the claimant.

(2) If the claim is not established to the satisfac-
tion of the prescribed authority, the claimant may,
without prejudice to his right to take any other
proceedings for the recovery of such assets, apply by
petition to the High Court against the State Govern-
ment and such Court, after taking such evidence as
it thinks fit, shall make such order in regard to the
payment of the whole or any part of the said prin-
cipal sum as it thinks fit, and such order shall be
binding on all parties to the proceedings.

(3) The Court may further direct by whom the
whole or any part of the costs of each party shall be
paid.

53. Nothing contained in the Indian Succession Act, Succession

0 ‘Act or Com-
1925, or the Companies Act, 1956, shall be taken to panies Aa’

supersede or affect the rights, duties and privileges of fot to affect

any Administrator-General. Administra -
tor-General.
fs. 55().]

54, Nothing contained in the Indian Succession Savings of
Act, 1925, or in this Act, shall be deemed to affect, or Provisions
to have affected, any law for the time being in force of Police
relating to the movable property under four hundred presidency-
rupees in value! of persons dying intestate within towns.
any of the Presidency-towns which shall be or has [s- 55(@2).]
been taken charge of by the police for the purpose of
safe custody.

1Compare, for example,—

@ Section 101(2) read with section ror(r1), Calcutta Police
Act, 1866, (Bengal Act 4 of 1866) Bengal Code, Vol. II, p. 207.
(et ‘mentions two hundred rupees).

(ii) Section 85 (1) (read with sections 83 and 84) of the
Bombay Police Act, 1951, (Bombay Act 22 of 1951) Bombay Code,
Vol. III, p. 3686. (It mentions four hundred rupees).


Order of
court to be
equivalent -
to decree.
[$ 56.1]

Provision for
administra-
tion by
Consular
Officer in
case of
death in
certain cir-
cumstances
of foreign
subject.

[s. 57, part]

Letters of
administra-
tion not
necessary

34

55. Any order made under this Act by any court
shall have the same effect as a decree.

56. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, or in
any other law for the time being in force, the Central
Government may, by general or special order, direct
that, where a subject of a foreign State dies in the
territories to which this Act extends, and it appears
that there is no one in the said territories, other than
the Administrator-General, entitled to apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for letters of adminis-
tration of the estate of the deceased, letters of
administration shall, on the application to such court
by any Consular Officer of such foreign State, be
granted to such Consular Officer on such terms and
conditions as the Court may, subject to any rules
made in this behalf by the Central Government, think
fit to impose.

57. It shall not be necessary for the Administrator-

General to take out letters of administration of the
estate of any deceased person which is being adminis-

in respect of tered by him in accordance with the provisions of the

small estates
administered
by Adminis-
trator-
General in
accordance
with certain
Acts.

s. 16.)

Powers to
grant Ad-
ministrator-
General
letters
limited for
purpose of
dealing with
assets in
accordance
with the
Army and
Air Force
(Disposal
of Private
Property)
Act, 1950,
or the Navy
Act, 1957.
is. 17.1
Act not to
affect Army
and Air
Force (Dis-
sal of.
Private Pro-
perty) Act,
1950, or
Navy Act,
7957.
[8. 15.]

Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property)

Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957, if the value of such 4o of 1950.
estate does not, on the date when such administration 62 of 1957.
is committed to him, exceed rupees two thousand,

but he shall have the same power in regard to such

estate as he would have had if letters of administra-

tion had been granted to him.

58. If the Administrator-General applies in accord-
ance with the provisions of the Army and Air Force
(Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950, or the 4० of 1950.
Navy Act, 1957, for letters of administration of _ the 62 of 1957.
estate of any person subject to the Army Act, 1950, 46 of 1950.
or the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957, 45 of 1950.
the Court may grant to him letters of administration
limited to the purpose of dealing with such estate in
accordance with the provisions of the Army and Air
Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950, or,
as the case may be, the Navy Act, 1957.

59. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect
the provisions of the Army and Air Force (Disposal

of Private Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957. 4० of 1950.
62 of 1957.


35

60. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect Saving of
<{ 1908. the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908. छिप
Registration
Act, 1908.
{s. 59.)

61. (1) The Central Government may, by notifica- Power of .
tion in the Official Gazette, make rules as to the Gentral
terms and conditions on which letters of administra- fovanment
tion may be granted to Consular Officers under rules.
section 56. {s. 575 part.

(2) Every rule made under this section shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in
one session or in two successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid
or the session immediately following, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modi-
fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so
however, that any such modification. or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule,

62, (1) The State Government may, by notification Power of
in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out Sates t
the purposes of this Act, and for regulating ‘the pro- Goverment
ceedings of the Administrator-General. rules,

[s. 50.]

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing Power, such rules may
provide for—

(a) the accounts to be kept by the Adminis-
trator-General and the audit and inspection
thereof;

(b) the safe custody, deposit and investment
of assets and securities which come into the hands
of the Administrator-General;

(०) the remittance of sums of money in the
hands of the Administrator-General in cases in
which such remittances are required;

(d) subject to the provisions of this Act, the
fees to be paid under this Act and the collection
and accounting for any such fees;

(e) the statements, schedules and other docu-
ments to be submitted to the State Government
or to any other authority by the Administrator-
General, and the publication thereof;

- (f) the realization of the cost of preparing any
such statements, schedules or other documents;


36

(g) the manner in which and the person by
whom the costs of and incidental to any audit
under the provisions of thjs Act are to be deter-
mined and defrayed;

(h) the manner in which summonses issued
under this Act are to be served and the payment
of the expenses of any person summoned or
examined under the provisions of this Act, and
of any expenditure incidental to such examination;
and

(i) any other matter which is required to
be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.

63. (1) The Administrator-General’s Act, 1913, is
hereby repealed.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897, relating
to the effect of repeals, the repeal effected by this
section shall not affect the incorporation of any person
holding the office of Administrator-General at the
commencement of this Act.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
section, the provisions of section 59B of the Adminis-
trator-General’s Act, 1913, shall continue to apply as
if that Act had not been repealed.

1Cf. section 656, Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956).

3 of 1913.

10 of 1897

3 of 1913.


APPENDIX IT

Table showing the provision in the existing Act and the corresponding
provision, if any, ea Appendix I.

. Corresponding
Existing provision provision, if any, in
हर Appendix I

-_ +++__+_+.....न.नब.बबन्‍नन्‍कन्‍ईकलकझल्‍ल>_झ__
I 2
_ eee

Section 1. पु . . : मु . . 8.
Section 2 (1) . . . . . . . 8. 2 (a)
Section 2(2) . . . . . . . Omitted
Section 2(3) . . . . . . . Omitted
Section 2(4) . . . . . . . Omitted
Section 2 (5) . . . . . . . 8.2 (0)
Section 2 (6) . . हे न . . . 8. 2 (०)
Section 2 (7) (Repealed) . . . . . .

Section 2 (8) . . . . . . . 8. 2 (4)
Section 2 (9) (10) and (11) (Repealed) - . न :
Section 2(12) . . . . . . . Omitted

~ Section 2(13) (Repealed) . . . . न कक

~ section 3. . पर . . न soo 8.3
Section 4. . : . . : पु . 5. 4
Section 5... . Lo, : . : . 8. 5
Section 6. . . . . . . . 8. 6
Section 7. . . पु पु पु . ‘ 8.7
Section 8. . . . पु . . . 8. 8
Section 9. . . . हि . . . . 5. 9
Section ro . . . मु : . woe Omitted

37.



. . Corresponding
Existing provision provision, if any,
in Appendix I

[ 2
Section 11. : . पु . . : पु 8. 10
Section 12. : . . . पर पु . $. IT
Section 13. पु . . पु . . . S. 12
Section 14. . . पु पु पु पु पु $. 13
Section 15.- : पु . : : : : 8. 59
Section 16 . पु . . . पु . . Ss. 57
Section 17. पु पु पं पु पु पु पु s. 58
Section 18 . पु पु पु पु . : . 8. 14
Section 19 - पु . . पु पु पु पु $, 15
Section 20 . . पु . . . . पु s. 16
Section 21. . . . . . . . 8. 17
Section 22. पु पु . . . . : s. 18
Section 23. पु . . पु . पु . 8. 19
Section 24 . . . . . . . . 8. 20
Section 25 - . . : पु . पु : 8, 22
Section 26 . पु मु . . . पु ना 8. 23
Section 27. . ‘ . पु . . पु 15, 24
Section 28. . . . . पु . पु 8. 23
Section 29 (1). . पु . . हे + 5. 26
Section 29 (2) . . . . . . . 8.27 _
Section 29 (3). - : : पु . पु पु 5, 28
Section 30 . . . . . . . . s. 48
Section 31, main para, part . . . पु 3, 29 (7)
Section 31, main para, part पु . . . 8. 29 (2)

Section 31, proviso पु . . पु 5, 29 (3)


39

Corresponding
Existing provision provision, if any,
in Appendix I
1 2

>+-+->#+--_+++-+-+_++>+-++ततत+त_++_++

Section 32. - . . . . . . . $. 30
Section 33. - : : : पु : . . 8. 31
Section 34 - . . . . . . . S. 32
Section 35. पु . . . पु . . 8. 33
Section 36 . पु पु : : : : पु 8. 34
Section 37 . + . . . . . : $. 36

Section 38 . . + . पु . . , 8. 37
Section 39 . . . . . + पु पु s. 38
Section go - . . . न . . . 5. 39

Section 41. . . पु . . पु पं 5. 40

Section 42. . . . . . . . 8. 4
Section 43. पु . . पु . . व Ss. 42
Section 44. : ‘ . . : : : 8. 43
Section 45. पु न : . - oe मर 8. 44
Section 46 . sé ; . . . . पु 5. 45
Section 47. . : . . . पु . 8. 46
Section 48 . . : पु : . : 8. 47
Section 49 - ; पु . . . . . + 8. 49
Section 50. : पु . sol : . 8. 62
Section 51. : : पु . . . : 8. 50
Section 52. . . . . . . . S. §1
Section 53. - पु न . . . . न Ss. 52
Section 54 - : . : : . : : Omitted
Section 55 (1). : : : . पु . 8. 53

Section 55 (2). पु . . . . . S. 54


40

Corresponding
Existing provision provision, if any,
in Appendix I
2
Section 56 . . पु . . 8. 55
Section 57, part . . ‘ . 8. 56
Section 57, part . . . . 8. 61
Section 58 (Repealed) . . . . .
Section 59 . . . . . 8. 60
Section 595 . . . . . Omitted
Section 59B . . . . . Omitted

Section 60 (Repealed)


APPENDIX III
SUGGESTIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER AcTS

The Indian Succession Act, 1925—The question of
incorporating a provision on the lines of section 54 of
the Administrator-General’s Act, 1913; in the Indian
Succession Act may be considered.’ ~

196९ the body of the Report, discussion relating to section 54,
Administrator-General’s Act.

41
G AGIPN D—TSWing 252 Mof Law—1-9-1961—1750