LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
190TH REPORT 
 
 
 
ON 
 
 
 
THE REVISION OF THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938 
AND 
THE INSURANCE REGULATORY AND 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 1999 
 
 
JUNE, 2004 
 
 
 1

 
JUSTICE      LAW  COMMISSION OF INDIA 
M. JAGANNADHA RAO   SHASTRI BHAWAN, 
CHAIRMAN     NEW DELHI-110 001 
      TEL: 3384475 
     FAX: 3073864, 3388870 
      Residence: 1, Janpath, New Delhi-1. 
      Tel. : 3019465 
 
D.O.No.6(3)75/2002-LC(LS)      June 1, 2004 
 
 
Dear Shri Bharadwaj ji, 
 
 I have a great pleasure in forwarding the 190 th Report of Law Com mission of 
India on ‘Revision of the Insurance Ac t, 1938 and the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999’.   The Co mmission took up the subject at the instance 
of Insurance Regulatory and Developm ent Authority (IRDA) which vide its letter dated 
9th April 2002 had requested the Com mission to make recommendations for the revision 
of the Insurance Act, 1938.   
 
2. The insurance sector has been growing steadily and is a major source of long term 
contractual funds needed for infrastructure development.   W ith the liberalisation of 
economic policy, the insurance sector is now open for private sector also along with up to 
26% of foreign equity participation.  In this changing econom ic scenario, the IRDA has 
to play a vital role for the regulation and deve lopment of insurance business.   Therefore, 
the Commission is of the view that the Insu rance Act, 1938 requires review and revision.  
But the revision of the Act has to be carried  out in such a m anner that it should not only 
promote insurance business but also protect the interests of policyholders and strengthen 
the IRDA to ensure financial stability in this sector. 
 
3. After a series of discussion held with the IRDA, the Law Commission prepared an 
exhaustive Consultation Paper in the m onth of June, 2003 which was also placed on the 
Commission’s website in the sam e m onth.   Copies thereof were also sent to the 
appropriate Ministry in the Central Governm ent, the IRDA, the public and private sector 
insurance com panies, consum er organizations and a wide range of other experts in the 
field of law and insurance.  A copy of this Consultation Paper is also appended to this 
Report as Appendix I.   A large num ber of written responses were received to the 
Consultation Paper.  Discussions were also he ld with insurance companies, actuaries etc. 
under the aegis of the FICCI.   After going through oral and written responses to the 
Consultation Paper, the Commission has prepared this Report. 
 2

 
4. Although the Consultation Paper was an e xhaustive one covering manifold issues 
on the subject as is evident from  the i ndex to Consultation Paper, the Com mission 
decided to confine its recom mendations only w ith regard to the germ ane legal issues 
arising in the Insurance Act, 1938 leaving matters relating to insurance and econom ic 
policies.   The legal issues include the se tting up of a grievance redressal m echanism, 
repudiation of life insurance policies unde r section 45 of the Insurance Act and 
provisions relating to nom ination and assignm ent and transfer of policies under sections 
39 and 38 respectively.   
 
5. To deal with the com plaints of th e policyholders, the existing system  of 
Ombudsman under the Redressal of Public Grievances Rules, 1998, is found not 
satisfactory from the point of view of po licyholder.    The rem edy under the Consum er 
Protection Act, 1986 has also not  proven to be effective in the large num ber of cases 
pending decision.   Therefore, the Co mmission has recom mended that Grievance 
Redressal Authorities (GRA) should be constitute d to deal with (a) disputes between the 
Insured and the Insurer; (b) disputes betw een Insurer and the Interm ediaries and (c) 
disputes between Insurer and Insurer.   However, the GRA shall have no jurisdiction in 
cases relating to third party m otor vehicle insurance and m arine insurance.  The GRA 
shall consist of  one judicial m ember w ho will be the Chairm an and the other two 
technical members.   Apart from  the GRA, it has been recom mended that an Insurance 
Appellate Tribunal (IAT) should also be constituted to hear the appeals from  the order of 
GRA.   The IAT shall also hear the appeal  against the orders passed by the IRDA and all 
orders passed after the adjudication by inves tigating officers appointed by the IRDA.    
There will have to be a further statutory appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of 
the IAT. 
 
6. In respect of the repudiation of life insurance policy, the existing section 45 of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 provides that within two years from the date of policy, an insurer can 
repudiate the policy on the ground that any m aterial fact in the proposal or docum ent is 
inaccurate or false.  After the expiry of two years an insurer can repudiate the policy on 
fulfilling all three conditions mentioned in second part of section 45.   The Life Insurance 
Corporation of India made an important suggestion that if a life policy had been accepted 
for about six years, its validity should not be allowed to be questioned thereafter, though 
under the present provision in section 45, the LIC could question the validity after two 
years, without any time limit. 
 
7. While balancing the interests of policyholders and the insurers and keeping in 
view the earlier recom mendations of the Law Com mission made in its 112 th Report, the 
Commission has now recom mended taking into account the suggestion of the Life 
Insurance Corporation of India, that after the expiry of five years, no policy of life 
insurance can be repudiated on any ground whatsoever.  However, an insurer can 
repudiate a policy before the expiry of five years on the ground that the insured has m ade 
a m is-statement of or suppressed a m aterial fact.   Accordingly, the Com mission has 
recommended that section 45 should be substituted. 
 
 3

8. Section 38 of the Insurance Act provide s for assignm ent and transfer of life 
insurance policies.  There are certain anom alies observed in the working of sub-sections 
(5) and (7) of section 38.   The Com mission has recommended that a clear distinction be 
made between absolute assignm ent and conditional assignm ent.  Certain safeguards are 
also recommended to curb the m isuse of the f acility of assignment.   Section 38 is also 
recommended for substitution. 
 
9. Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provides that the policyholder m ay 
nominate one or more persons to whom the money secured by the policy shall be paid in 
the event of death of the policyholder.   In view of the decision of  the Supreme Court in 
Sarbati Devi’s case  (AIR 1984 SC 346) and the Law Com mission’s earlier 
recommendation m ade in its 137 th Report (1991), the Com mission has now 
recommended that section 39 be am ended to m ake a distinction between a “beneficial” 
nominee and a “collector” nom inee.    The de tails of such categories of nom inees are 
elaborated in the Report. 
 
10. The Commission has also recom mended that certain definitions in the Insurance 
Act, 1938 be amended as mentioned in Appendix II of this Report. 
 
11. Further there are certain provisions in the Insurance Act, 1938 which are required 
to be deleted as they have becom e redundant.   It has also recom mended that provisions 
to this effect mentioned in Appendix III to this Report, be deleted. 
 
12. As of now, there are two separate legisla tions which deal with insurance, one is 
the Insurance Act, 1938 and the other is the IRDA Act, 1999.  The Com mission has 
suggested in the Consultation Paper that thes e two Acts have to be brought into a single 
statute.   This proposal was alm ost unive rsally accepted in the responses.    The 
Commission recommends in the Report that there is no justif ication to have two separate 
legislations with regard to the subject.   Therefore, it is recommended that the provisions 
of the IRDA Act, 1999 should be m erged in the Insurance Act, 1938 on the lines set out 
in the Appendix IV of the Report.  Other issues referred to in the Consultation Paper 
require policy decisions at the level of G overnment and in view of the Com mission, it 
would be premature to make recommendations to amend the law even before such policy 
decisions are taken. 
 
 I acknowledge the extensive contribution made by Dr. S. Muralidhar, Part-tim e 
Member of Law Com mission, in preparation of  the Consultation Paper as well as the 
final Report. 
 
 W ith regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Sd./- 
(M. Jagannadha Rao) 
 
 
 4

Shri H.R. Bharadwaj 
Union Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
NEW DELHI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5

I N D E X 
CHAPTERS         PAGE NOS. 
CHAPTER I  Introduction and Background     1-12 
 
CHAPTER II  Changes in definitions and deletion of 
   redundant provisions      13-18 
 
CHAPTER III  Merger of provisions of IRDA Act, 1999 with 
   the Insurance Act, 1938     19-21 
 
CHAPTER IV  Grievance Redressal Mechanism    22-36 
 
CHAPTER V  Legal Issues Requiring Reform in Insurance Laws: 
   Repudiation of Life Insurance Policy    37-59 
 
CHAPTER VI  Assignm ent and Transfer     60-69 
 
CHAPTER VII Nomination       70-77 
 
CHAPTER VIII Provisions relating to penalties and other changes  78-80 
 
CHAPTER IX  Other topics in the Consultation Paper on which the 
   Law Commission does not propose to make any 
   recommendation at this stage     81-87 
 
CHAPTER X  Sum mary of Recommendations    88-104 
 
APPENDIX I  Consultation Paper of the Law Commission of India on 
   Revision of the Insurance Act, 1938 (without appendices)  105-131 
 
APPENDIX II  Provisions that required to be amended (other than 
   those concerning powers of the IRDA)        132-143 
 
APPENDIX III Provisions that have become redundant and required 
   to be deleted           144-155 
 
APPENDIX IV  Proposals with regard to merger of provisions of the 
   IRDA Act, 1999 with the Insurance Act, 1938   156 
 
APPENDIX V  Changes in relation to the powers and functions of 
   the IRDA with regard to grant of registration and 
   refusal, cancellation, suspension, and renewal of 
   registration                 157-163 
 
APPENDIX VI  Changes in relation to the powers and functions of 
   the IRDA other than those with regard to grant of 
   registration etc. set out in Appendix V above            164-173 
 6

CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
 
1.1 Introduction 
1.1.1 The Law Com mission of India (‘Co mmission’) undertook the exercise of 
examining the Insurance Act, 1938 (Act ) at the instance of the Insurance 
Regulatory Development Authority (IR DA) which vide its letter dated 9 th April, 
2002 had requested the Commission to make recommendations for revision of the 
Act and for consequential amendments thereto. 
1.1.2 The insurance sector has been growing steadily and is a major source of long-term 
contractual funds needed for infrastr ucture developm ent. The Second Annual 
Report of the IRDA (2001-02) highlights this phenomenon. According to it, the 
size of insurance market in the country, both life and non-life, is to the extent of $ 
9.94 billion. The rate of annual growth in the year 2001-2002 was 43% in life 
insurance and 13.6% in non-life insurance.  
1.1.3 The total premium underwritten by the Life  Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) 
was Rs.498.21 billion (Rs.49,821.91 crore) in the year 2001-2002 as against 
Rs.348.92 billion (Rs.34,892.02 crore) in the prev ious year, thus registering an 
overall increase of 42.79%. Correspondingly, the incom e of LIC increased to 
Rs.737.80 billion (Rs.73,780.07 crores) as against Rs.547.66 billion 
(Rs.54,766.60 crores) in the previous years, i.e., an increase of 34.71%. At the end 
of the financial year 2001-2002, while LIC c ontinues to be the sole public sector 
enterprise in the lif e insurance business, there were as many as twelve companies 
in the private sector in each of whom  there was a foreign com pany participation 
upto the permissible limit of 26% of equity share capital.  
1.1.4 During the same period, 2001-2002, the gross direct premium income of the four 
public sector general insurance companies, viz., Oriental Insurance Corporation of 
 7

India, United India Insurance Com pany Ltd., New India Assurance Com pany 
Ltd., National Insurance Com pany Ltd. [all th ese four being the subsidiaries of 
the General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC)] was Rs.119.17 billion 
(Rs.11,917.58 crores) recording an increas e of 21.61% over the previous year. 
The general insurance business include s m otor vehicle insurance, m arine 
insurance, fire insurance, personal accident  insurance, health insurance, aviation 
insurance, rural property insurance and others. At present, GIC is the only 
reinsurer and has been placed in an oblig atory position to act for the reinsurance 
market in the country as a whole. Acco rding to the Second Annual Report of the 
IRDA for the year 2001-2002, the profitability of the general insurance companies 
continues to be under strain. In the privat e sector, there were at least 8 com panies 
with participation of foreign equity to the extent of 26%.  
1.1.5 The Second Annual Report of the IRDA furt her points out that foreign capital of 
Rs.6.24 billion (Rs.624.56 crores) has been so far invested in the new life and 
non-life insurance com panies and that th is “strengthens the belief that the 
commitment of  the new joint ventures to the developm ent of  the insurance 
business in India as a long term  strategy which will result in the growth of the 
economy.” Insurance com panies/ corporations being long-term  contractual 
savings institutions can also play a m ajor role in vitalizing the secondary debt 
market and securities as well. Expansion of  insurance business, particularly in the 
rural areas, would lead to the growth in  savings, which would significantly add to 
the GDP. W ith a view to advance a ba lanced growth of the econom y, it is 
essential to have a strong legal regim e to regulate the business enterprises in this 
field. 
 
1.2 Legislative Regime 
1.2.1 The principal legislation regulating the insurance business in India is the 
Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’). Som e other existing 
 8

legislation in the field are – the Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) Act, 1956, the 
Marine Insurance Act, 1963, the Ge neral Insurance Business (GIB) 
(Nationalization) Act, 1972 and the In surance Regulatory and Developm ent 
Authority (IRDA) Act, 1999. The provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 are 
applicable to the contracts of insurance, whether for life or non-life. Similarly, the 
provisions of the Com panies Act, 1956 are applicable to the com panies carrying 
on insurance business. 
1.2.2 The subordinate legislation includes Insurance Rules, 1939, and the Om budsman 
Rules, 1998 framed by the Central Govern ment under s.114 of the Insurance Act, 
1938 as also at least 27 sets of Regul ations made by the IRDA under s.114 A of 
the Insurance Act, 1938 and s.26 of the IRDA Act 1999. 
1.3  Background to recent legislative changes 
1.3.1 The announcement of the new industrial policy in 1991, envisaged the transition 
of the econom y from a regulated to a liber alised and deregulated regim e leading 
to the privatization of insurance sector to provide a better coverage to citizens and 
to augment the flow of long-term  financial resources. This transition also m eant 
that competition was bound to intensify in fu ture with the entry of several private 
players in the field, particularly the foreign companies in joint venture with Indian 
partners. In order to prevent m isuse by insurers of policyholders’ and 
shareholders’ funds and to ensure acc ountability, it was im perative to have in 
place an effective regulatory regim e. Insure rs being repositories of public trust, 
efficient regulation of their business b ecame necessary to ensure that they 
remained worthy custodians of this trust.  Further, insurance cash flows generated 
funds which are required for investm ent in the social sector and for the 
development of infrastructure. Therefore,  the regulation of insurance required a 
paradigm shift from just a supervisory and m onitoring role to a developm ent role 
so that the insurance business promoted economic growth. 
 
 9

Malhotra Committee Report 
1.3.2 In the backdrop of new industrial policy, the Government of India set up in 1993 a 
high-powered committee headed by Mr. R. N.  Malhotra to exam ine the structure 
of the insurance industry, to assess its strength and weaknesses in term s of the 
objective of providing high quality services to the public and serving as an 
effective instrum ent for m obilization of financial resources for developm ent, to 
review the then existing structure of regulation and supervision of insurance 
sector and to suggest reform s for st rengthening and m odernizing regulatory 
system in tune with the changing economic environment.  
1.3.3 The Malhotra Com mittee subm itted its  report in 1994. Som e of the m ajor 
recommendations made by it were as under:  
(a) the establishment of an independent regulatory authority (akin to Securities 
and Exchange Board of India); 
(b) allowing private sector to enter the insurance field; 
(c) improvement of the com mission structure for agents to m ake it an effective 
instrument for procuring business specially rural, personal and non-
obligatory lines of business;  
(d) insurance plans for econom ically backward sections and appointm ent of 
institutional agents;  
(e) setting up of an institution of professional surveyors/loss assessors; 
(f) functioning of Tariff Advisory Com mittee (TAC) as a separate statutory 
body; 
(g) investment on the pattern laid down in s.27 of the Act; 
(h) marketing of life insurance to relativ ely weaker sections of the society and 
specified proportion of business in rural areas; 
(i) provisions for co-operative societies for transacting life insurance business in 
States; 
 10

(j) the requirement of specified proportion of the general business as rural non-
traditional business to be undertaken by the new entrants;  
(k) welfare oriented schemes of general insurance; 
(l) technology driven operation of Gene ral Insurance Corporation of India 
(GIC); GIC to exclusively function as  a reinsurer and to cease to be the 
holding company; 
(m) introduction of unit-linked pension plans by the insurance companies; and 
(n) restructuring of insurance industry. 
1.4 Regulatory Legal Regime  
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (IRDA Act) 
1.4.1 On the recom mendations of the Malhotra  Com mittee, the Governm ent of India 
constituted an interim  Insurance Regulat ory Authority and later enacted the 
Insurance Regulatory and Developm ent Authority Act, 1999 to establish a 
statutory body to regulate, prom ote and en sure orderly growth of insurance and 
reinsurance business as also to protect  the interest of policy holders. The 
constitution of the Insurance Regulatory a nd Development Authority (hereinafter 
referred to as the Authority/ IRDA) is considered as one of the redeeming features 
of insurance reforms in India. 
1.4.2 The IRDA Act provides for the com position of the Authority, term s and 
conditions of the Chairperson and m embers including their tenure and rem oval; 
duties, powers and functions of the Authority including regulation m aking power 
and delegation of powers; establishm ent of Insurance Advisory Com mittee; 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Fund and powers of the Central 
Government to m ake rules, to issue dir ections to the Authority and to supersede 
the sam e, if  it is necessary; and othe r m iscellaneous provisions. The First 
Schedule appended to the IRDA Act listed out several am endments to the 
Insurance Act, 1938. The Second Schedule to  the IRDA Act inserted s.30A in the 
 11

Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 wher eby the exclusive privilege of LIC to 
carry on life insurance business in India was to cease. The Third Schedule to the 
IRDA Act inserted a sim ilar provision, s .24A, in the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalization) Act, 1972 whereby the ex clusive privilege of the GIC and its 
subsidiaries in relation to general insurance business ceased.  
1.4.3 The am endments m ade by the IRDA Act, 1999 to the Insurance Act, 1938 
prohibited insurers other than com panies registered under the Com panies Act, 
1956 to carry on insurance business in I ndia and investm ent of funds of the 
policyholders outside India. Foreign participation has been restricted to 26% of 
the paid up equity capital of an insurance com pany. The am endments provided 
for- 
(a) requirements as to paid-up equity capital for both insurers and reinsurers; 
(b) manner of divesting of excess shareholding by promoters; 
(c) manner and conditions of investment;  
(d) maintenance of required solvency margin at all times by the insurers; 
(e) issue of licence to insurance ag ents, interm ediary or insurance 
intermediary and surveyors by the Authority as also suspension and 
cancellation thereof; 
(f) obligations of insurers to com pulsorily undertake specified percentage of 
insurance business in rural and social sector; 
(g) enhanced penalties f or contravention of  and f ailure to com ply with, the 
provisions of the Act and offences by companies; and 
(h) powers of the Authority to make regulations as required by the Act. 
 
 
 12

Powers and functions of the IRDA 
1.4.4 The IRDA has the duty to regulate, prom ote and ensure orderly growth of the 
insurance and reinsurance business. The powers and functions of the IRDA 
include:  
(a) registration/ modification/ cancellation of registration of insurers;  
(b) to cause com pliance of the requi rement of capital structure of the 
companies as also solvency m argin, insurance business in rural and social 
sector, submission of their returns/reports, approval and preparation of the 
scheme of amalgamation and transfer of insurance business; 
(c) to issue licence to insurance intermediaries or agents;  
(d) control over management of insurers;  
(e) search and seizure;  
(f) protection of interest of policy holders;  
(g) promotion and regulation of pr ofessional organizations conducting 
insurance business;  
(h) regulation of investment of funds by insurance companies; 
(i) investigation and inspection of the affairs of the insurers;  
(j) adjudication of disputes between insurers and insurance intermediaries;  
(k) supervising functions of Tariff Advisory Committee; and 
(l) framing of regulations to carry out the purposes of the Insurance Act,1938.  
1.4.5 Pursuant to its powers under the IRDA Act,  the IRDA has fram ed at least 27 sets 
of Regulations on various topics like pr eparation and subm ission of actuarial 
reports, obligations of  insurers to rural a nd social sectors, registration of Indian 
insurance com panies, preparation of fina ncial statem ents and auditors report of 
 13

insurance companies, form of annual stat ements of account and record, insurance 
brokers, etc. These regulations are im portant constituents of  the Regulatory 
regime. 
1.5 Legislative developments after 1999 
The Insurance (Am endment) Act, 2002 which came to force on August 9, 2002 
permitted, by way of insertion of s.2 (8A) in the Insurance Act, 1938 insurance 
co-operative societies, registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or 
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 or under any state law relating to 
co-operative society, to carry on any cla ss of insurance business. However, the 
IRDA has been empowered to exempt an insurance co-operative society from  the 
application of any of the provisions of the Insurance Act or application of its 
provisions with exceptions, m odifications or adaptations [see proviso to 
S.94A(2)]. The Insurance (Am endment) Act, 2002 provided for insurance 
intermediaries, including insurance brokers and consultants, and provisions for 
the payment of commission, brokerage or f ee to them, thereby introducing in this 
country the business practice adopted the wo rld over in this area. Further, s.49 of 
the Act has been m odified to provide sh areholders an entitlem ent of  actuarial 
surplus. By virtue of am endment to s.64 VB of the Act, the IRDA has been 
authorized to prescribe the m ode of payment of prem ium, i.e., through credit 
cards or through the internet which in turn m ight result in an increase in the 
insurance business. Moreover, the Genera l Insurance Business (Nationalisation) 
Amendment Act, 2002 which cam e into force on August 7, 2002 m ade the 
General Insurance Corporation the only reinsurer to carry on exclusively 
reinsurance business in India. It ceased to carry on general insurance business as 
also to control the four subsidiaries. Th e Central Governm ent was authorised to 
discharge its functions in respect of these subsidiaries in future. 
 
 
 14

1.6. Law Commission’s Consultation Paper  
1.6.1 The Law Com mission prepared an exha ustive Consultation Paper which was 
placed on the Law Com mission’s website in June 2003. Copies were also sent to 
the Government at the Centre, the IRDA, the public and private sector insurance 
companies and a wide range of other expe rts in the field of law and insurance. 
Responses were invited to the recom mendations made in the Consultation Paper. 
A copy of the Consultation Paper (om itting paras 1 to 5 and the appendices) is 
annexed to this Report as Appendix-I. 
1.6.2 The Consultation Paper aim ed at an inte grated approach to the exercise of 
revision of the insurance laws in a m anner that not only prom otes insurance 
business but also protects policyholders and strengthens the Authority to ensure 
systemic f inancial stability. It was poi nted out that when the IRDA Act was 
prepared, the com prehensive revision of the Act was not possible due to paucity 
of time. It was also specifically mentioned that the present exercise of revision did 
not cover: 
(i) The Marine Insurance Act, 1963; 
(ii) Motor Vehicle Insurance;  
(iii) Fire Insurance; and 
(iv) Principles governing third party risks in general insurance business.  
Grounds of revision of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the IRDA Act, 1999 
1.6.3 The Consultation Paper identified thirteen tentative grounds of revision. Since the 
Consultation Paper itself is appended to th is Report, these grounds of revision are 
not repeated here. Nevertheless, they could be summarised as under: 
i. Deletion of provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 that are redundant; 
ii. Deletion of transitional provisions of the Act; 
 15

iii. Replacement of references in the Insurance Act, 1938 to older 
enactments by corresponding new legislations; 
iv. Reclassification of insurance businesses including changed definitions of 
the terms ‘insurance’ and ‘insurer’; 
v. Merger of relevant provisions of  IRDA Act with the Insurance Act, 
1938; 
vi. Providing for appeal against decisi ons of the IRDA to an independent 
body; 
vii. Setting up of an independent grie vance redressal m echanism with an 
appeal to an Insurance Appellate Tribunal and further appeal to the 
Supreme Court of India; 
viii. Repudiation of policies by insurers  on account of m isstatement of facts 
or failure to m ake disclosure of the m aterial inform ation which would 
render the contract void or voidable; 
ix. Provisions regarding investments, loans and management; 
x. Provisions relating to ‘solvency margin’; 
xi. Empowering IRDA to intervene wh en ‘solvency m argin’ falls below 
‘control level’; 
xii. Harmonising of the Act with rules and regulations; and 
xiii. Provisions relating to penalties. 
The process of consultation 
1.6.4 A series of discussions were held with  the IRDA in regard to the proposals m ade 
by the Com mission in the Consultation Pape r. Simultaneously, discussions were 
held with the insurance com panies under the aegis of the Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Com merce and Industry (F ICCI). W ritten responses were also 
received to the Consultation Paper from a wide range of respondents. 
 16

No detailed response from Government or IRDA. 
1.6.5 The Law Com mission of India awaited the response of the Governm ent of India 
as well as the IRDA till March 2004. A br ief letter dated January 19, 2004 was 
received from the Joint Secretary (B&I), G overnment of India in the Ministry of 
Finance, Departm ent of Econom ic Affair s, Insurance Division, indicating that 
they are in total agreem ent with th e proposals in the Consultation Paper 
concerning m erger of the provisions of the IRDA Act with the Insurance Act, 
changes in definitions, deletion of redundant provisions, constitution of an 
appellate authority to exam ine decisions of  the IRDA, enhancem ent of penalties, 
rationalizing of the powers of the IRDA and strengthening obligations of the 
insurers, provision for protection of the rights of the policyholders etc. It was 
stated that specific comments on the amendments suggested in numerous sections 
of the Act proposed in the Consultation Paper would be given only after “a new 
Insurance Act is drafted by the Law Com mission and sent to us.” There has thus 
been no specific response from  the Insura nce Departm ent to the various other 
proposals in the Consultation Paper. Since the exercise of revision of the Acts was 
started more than a year ago, it was felt th at the Report itself m ight get delayed if 
the Commission had to wait any further to  receive their responses. Accordingly, 
the Commission proceeded to finalise its recommendations based on both oral and 
written responses received to the Consultation Paper. 
1.7. Limiting the scope of the reference 
1.7.1 In the exercise of holding discussions w ith specific interest groups in relation to 
the proposals suggested in its Consultation Paper, the Com mission became aware 
that som e of the issues that had b een taken up for consideration in the 
Consultation Paper entailed policy decision-m aking at the level of the 
Government and that it would be premature to make suggestions to amend the law 
even before such policy decision was taken. Accordingly, at the stage of 
preparation of the final Report by the Commission, it was decided that the Report 
 17

should focus only on certain “legal issues” about which there was not too much of 
a controversy. 
1.7.2 Accordingly, the present Report deals with only the following issues from  
amongst those mentioned in the Consultation Paper: 
i. Changes in definitions including replacem ent of references in the 
Insurance Act, 1938 to older enactm ents by corresponding new 
legislations and reclassification of insurance businesses including changed 
definitions of the terms ‘insurance’ and ‘insurer’; (see Chapter II, infra) 
ii. Deletion of provisions of the Insu rance Act, 1938 that are redundant and 
deletion of transitional provisions of the Act; (see Chapter II, infra) 
iii. Merger of relevant provisions of IRDA Act with the Insurance Act, 1938; 
(see Chapter III, infra) 
iv. Setting up of an independent grievance redressal m echanism with an 
appeal to an Insurance Appellate Tribunal and further appeal to the 
Supreme Court of India; (see Chapter IV, infra)  
v. Repudiation of policies by insurers on account of misstatement of facts or 
failure to m ake disclosure of  the material inform ation would render the 
contract void or voidable; (see Chapter V, infra) 
vi. Assignment and transfer and nom ination of beneficiaries under insurance 
policies; (see Chapters VI and VII, infra) and 
vii. Provisions relating to penalties and other changes (see Chapter VIII, 
infra). 
 18

CHAPTER II 
CHANGES IN DEFINITIONS AND DELETION OF REDUNDANT PROVISIONS 
 
2.1.1 Towards the conclusion of Chapter I, pa ra 1.7.2, we have referred to seven item s 
which fall for discussion finally. In this Ch apter, we propose to deal with the first 
two topics among the seven, viz.,: 
(i) Changes in definitions including replacement of references in the 
Insurance Act, 1938 to older enactm ents by corresponding new legislations and 
reclassification of insurance businesse s including changed definitions of the 
terms ‘insurance’ and ‘insurer’; and 
(ii) Deletion of provisions of the In surance Act, 1938 that are redundant and 
deletion of transitional provisions of the Act. 
  
 
Changes in definitions as proposed in the Consultation Paper 
 
2.1.2 Appendix I to the Consultation Paper had set out all the proposed changes to the 
various provisions in the Insurance Act, 1938 to reflect: 
(a) the changed definition of various terms including ‘insurance’, ‘insurer’, 
‘insurance companies’ etc.; 
(b) the replacement of references to the older Companies Act with the present 
Companies Act, 1956; and 
(c) the reclassification of insurance businesses. 
 
Final recommendation of the Law Commission in relation to deletions 
2.1.3 The responses received to the change s proposed by the Law Commission of India 
as set out in Appendix-I to the Consultation Paper have been m ore or less in 
 19

acceptance of those suggestions. Law Com mission has carefully exam ined the 
responses and suggestions received and is recommending several modifications to 
those definitions. The com plete final lis t of changed definitions as recom mended 
by the Law Commission of India is set out in a separate table and appended to this 
Report as Appendix-II. The said recom mendations cover am endments to the 
following sections of the Act: 
(i) S.2(9) – Definition of Insurer,  to include Insurance Co-operative 
Society and Indian Insurance Company; 
(ii) S.2C – Prohibition of transac tion of insurance business by certain 
persons, the amendment to make clear that no insurer can begin to 
carry on any class of insurance business unless it is an Indian 
Insurance Company or an insurance co-operative society; 
(iii) S.4 – Minim um lim its f or annuities and other benef its, to be 
specified by Regulations from time to time; 
(iv) S.6A(1) – Issuance of preferen ce shares by insurers, to require 
prior permission of IRDA in accordance with IRDA’s Regulations; 
(v) S.6A(10) – Power of Central G overnment to issue directions in 
regard to capital structure and voting rights, to be now exercised by 
IRDA; 
(vi) S.6B - Securing com pliance with requirem ents relating to capital 
structure, power to issue directi ons to be entrusted to IRDA; sub-
section (4) to be omitted; 
(vii) S.6C – Conversion of com pany lim ited by shares into com pany 
limited by guarantee, approval to conversion to be given by IRDA; 
in sub-section (5) the words ‘Indian Companies Act’ to be replaced 
by ‘Companies Act’; 
(viii) S.7(1) – Deposits, am endment to  reflect the requirem ent of first 
time insurers depositing Rs.10 lakhs along with their application 
and powers of Central Governm ent to be exercised by IRDA in 
consultation with Central Governm ent; sub-section (9A) and (9B) 
to be amended to require power in the matter of sale of securities/ 
investment of deposits held by in surer to be exercised by RBI in 
consultation with IRDA; 
 20

(ix) S.9 – Refund of deposits, IRDA to be em powered to pass orders 
for refund where insurer ceases to carry on business; 
(x) S.10 – Separation of accounts and funds; proviso to sub-section (1) 
requires modification; sub-section (2 ) to be m odified to reflect the 
position that life insurers cannot carry on non-life business; 
(xi) S.11 – Accounts and balance sheet; sub-section (2) to be am ended 
to reflect bar on partnership firm s and perm itting cooperative 
societies to carry on insurance business; 
(xii) S.12 – Audit; replacement of reference to Companies Act, 1913 by 
the  Companies Act, 1956; 
(xiii) S.13 – Actuarial Report; sub-sec tion (4) to be am ended in view of 
Regulations framed by IRDA; 
(xiv) S.15 – Submission of Returns; simplified version recommended; 
(xv) S.16 – Returns by insurers outsi de India; in sub-section (2)(b) 
deletion of reference to third schedule and replacem ent by 
‘Regulations’; 
(xvi) S.28 – Statem ent of investm ent of assets; details to be left to 
Regulations framed by IRDA; 
(xvii) S.28A – Return of investm ents; details to be left to Regulations 
framed by IRDA; 
(xviii) S.29 – Prohibition of Loans; s ub-section (3) to be applicable to 
general insurance business; 
(xix) S.31 – Assets of insurer; refere nce to partners to be deleted and 
replaced by insurance cooperative society; 
(xx) S.31B – Paym ent of excessive rem uneration; limit of Rs.5,000 to 
be analysed; 
(xxi) S.32A – Prohibition of com mon officers; employment of full tim e 
managing director to be unconditional and details to be left to the 
Regulations; 
 21

(xxii) 32B & 32C – Social and rural sector; am endments to require 
insurers to contribute to develop both sectors and IRDA to be 
empowered to revise the obligation through Regulations; 
(xxiii) S.35 – Am algamation; am endment to indicate that no option to 
amalgamate under the Com panies Act should be given without 
compliance with the requirements of the Insurance Act, 1938; 
(xxiv) S.37A – Power of authority to prepare schem e of am algamation; 
details to be specified in the Regulations; 
(xxv) S.40 – Paym ent of Com mission; sub-section (2) to indicate that 
amounts payable be specified in Re gulations; sub-section (2A) to 
indicate that com mission on renewal premium to be paid to only 
one agent who assisted in effec ting a revival of the policy which 
stood lapsed due to non paym ent of the prem ium; Authority to 
frame Regulations; 
(xxvi) S.40A – Lim itation of the expenditure on Com mission; to be 
specified in Regulations of IRDA;  
(xxvii) S.40B & C – Lim itation on expenses on m anagement; terms to be 
amended to reflect present trends of business; 
(xxviii) S.41 – Prohibition of rebates;  penalty for contravention to be 
analysed; 
(xxix) S.43 – Register of insurance ag ents; to include electronic form  as 
well; 
(xxx) S.44 – Heritable Com mission; cl ause (c) of sub-section (1) be 
amended to the effect that after lapse of five years from  the date he 
ceases to be an agent, a person can solicit or procure business for 
another insurer; 
(xxxi) S.48A – Agents not to be direct ors; to extent to general insurance 
business; 
(xxxii) S.50 – Notice of options; the wo rds ‘unless these are set forth in 
the policy’ to be omitted; 
(xxxiii) S.51 – Supply of copies of proposals; fee to be specified in 
Regulations; 
 22

(xxxiv) S.52BB – Powers of Adm inistration; appeal to IRDA instead of 
‘Central Government’; 
(xxxv) S.52D – Term ination of appointm ent of adm inistrator; powers to 
vest with IRDA; 
(xxxvi) S.52E – Finality of decision a ppointing adm inistrator; powers to 
vest with IRDA; 
(xxxvii) S.53 – Winding up by court; refe rence to Companies Act, 1913 to 
be replaced by ‘Companies Act, 1956’; 
(xxxviii) S.58 – Partial winding up by c ourt; reference to Com panies Act, 
1913 to be replaced by ‘Companies Act, 1956’; 
(xxxix) S.64UL – Power to remove difficulties; power to vest with IRDA. 
2.1.4 It may be mentioned here that a larger number of amendments had been proposed 
in the Consultation Paper. For the reasons explained in Chapter X infra, the 
proposals in relation to Investm ents ( ss.27, 27A, 27B and 27C), restriction on 
dividends and bonuses (s.49), the Tariff Advisory Com mittee (ss.64UA, 64UB, 
64UE, 64UJ, 64UK and 64UL), valuation of  assets (s.64V), solvency m argin 
(s.64VA) and restriction on opening new place of business (s.64VC) have not 
been finalised and no recom mendations are being m ade in regard to these 
provisions. As regards, the provisions re lating to assignm ent and transfer of 
policies (s.38), nomination (s.39) and repudiation (s.45), these are separately dealt 
with later in this Report. 
  
Deletion of provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 that are redundant 
2.1.5 Appendix II to the Consultation Paper ha d set out the provisions which required 
to be deleted on account of their bei ng redundant. There has been no contrary 
opinion expressed in regard to this pr oposal in the responses received to the 
Consultation Paper. Accordingly, th e Law Com mission recom mends that the 
provisions that are set out in a separate table at Appendix-III to this Report be 
deleted from  the Act. The said recom mendations cover deletions in s.2(12), 
 23

s.2(13), s.2(16), s.2(17), s.2B(1), s.2C, s .3(5), s.3(4)(a), s.3(4)(ee), s.3(5), s.4, 
s.5(2) & (3) first and second proviso, s .6A(1) proviso, s.7(7), s.7(9B), s.10(1), 
s.10(2), s.10(2A), s.11(1A), s.12, s.13( 1), s.13(3), s.13(4), s.13(6), s.14, s.15, 
s.15(2), s.15(3), s.16, s.22, s.27(2)(a), (b ) and (6), s.27A, s.27B, s.28(4), s.29, 
s.31B, s.32, s.33(7), s.35(1), s.35(3), s .40, s.40A, s.44(1)-Explanation, s.48, s.49, 
s.48A, s.52, s.52H to 52N, s.53, s.59, s.62 to 64, s.64UB (3) and (4), s.64UD, 
s.64UF to UI, s.64UJ (2) to (6), s.64U M, s.64VA, s.65 to 94, s.95 to 101 and 
s.114 (f). 
***
 24

CHAPTER III 
MERGER OF PROVISIONS OF IRDA ACT, 1999 WITH THE INSURANCE 
ACT, 1938 
 
3.1.1 This topic, it will be seen, is the third item of the seven topics set out in para 
1.7.2, infra. 
3.1.2 In the Consultation Paper, the Law Com mission had suggested that there was no 
justification for continuing to have a separate legislation concerning the IRDA 
and that there was a need to m erge the provisions of the IRDA Act, 1999 with the 
Insurance Act, 1938 in order to “to bring about an integrated approach to the task 
of form ulating a legislative regim e th at can encom pass the key facets of the 
functioning of the Regulatory Authority even while strengthening the regulatory 
regime”. The rationale behind the above suggestion was explained thus:  
“With the IRDA exercising many of the key functions assigned to it under 
the Insurance Act, 1938, there is no justification for continuing to have a 
separate legislation concerning the constitution and functions of the IRDA. 
Moreover, at the tim e the IRDA Act wa s being prepared, the task of a 
comprehensive revision of the Insurance Act, 1938 was felt necessary but 
was not undertaken due to paucity of tim e. Now, with the experience of 
the functioning of the IRDA and seve ral rounds of discussion with key 
insurance personnel, a com prehensive revision of the Insurance Act, 1938 
appears possible.” 
 Accordingly, the Consultation Paper m ade detailed proposals for m erger of the 
provisions of the IRDA Act, 1999 with the Insurance Act, 1938.  
3.1.3 In view of the responses received endorsing the recom mendations m ade by the 
Law Commission in this regard, the proposal s for merger of the provisions of the 
IRDA Act, 1999 with the Insurance Act, 1938 are hereby finalised and set out in a 
 25

tabular form in Appendix-IV to this Report. Accordingly, it is recom mended that 
the following provisions of the IRDA Act, 1999, viz., s.2 (Definitions), Chapter II 
dealing with establishm ent and incidental  matters of authority (ss.3-12); Chapter 
IV dealing with duties, powers and func tions of the authority (s.14); Chapter V 
dealing with grants by Central Governm ent, IRDA fund, accounts and audit 
(ss.15– 17); Chapter VI dealing with powers of Central Government (ss.18 – 23 & 
25); s.24 providing the central governm ent with power to m ake Rules; s..26 
empowering Authority to m ake Regulations; s..27 requiring laying of Rules and 
Regulations before Parliament and s.28 ( not barring application of other laws) be 
merged with the provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 as indicated in Appendix-
IV to this Report. 
 
Powers and functions of IRDA 
3.1.4 As regards the powers and functions of  the IRDA, the Consultation Paper dealt 
with the proposal for change in the law in two parts. The first related to the 
powers of the IRDA to grant, refuse, cancel, suspend or renew registration. There 
have been several responses received in regard to the suggestion concerning 
registration and renewal. According to FICCI, when there are sufficient powers 
with the IRDA to cancel registration “it m akes little sense to require insurers to 
apply for renewal of registration”. Th e Punjab State Law Com mission suggests 
that there should be no change in thes e provisions or even reduction of the 
renewal fee. Cholam andalam General Insurance has suggested that the 
registration for life and general insurance business may be kept valid for a period 
of three years. Birla Sunlife Insurance welcomes the suggestions but is opposed to 
insisting upon all requirem ents of a fresh registration being m et at the stage of 
renewal of registration. The LIC of India also has made a suggestion on the sam e 
lines. They suggest that s.3A (5) m ay continue in its present form . The National 
Insurance Academy, Pune agrees with the suggestion that the registration m ay be 
kept valid for three years but that the fees be paid annually. 
 
 26

Final recommendations in relation to IRDA ’s powers of grant, refusal etc. of 
registration 
3.1.5 After considering these responses, the Law Com mission is of the view that the 
specific changes proposed in the Consu ltation Paper in regard to the IRDA’s 
powers in relation to grant, ref use, can cel, suspend or renew registration be 
finalised and the f inal recommendations in this regard are set out in Appendix-V 
to this Report. The sections of the Insurance Act, 1938 which are required to be 
accordingly am ended are s.3, s.3(2)(f),  s.3(2A), s.94A(2) (second proviso), 
s.3(2C), s.3(3), s.3(4), s.3A, s.3A(2), s.3A(3), s.3A(4) and s.3A(5).  
Final recommendation on IRDA’s powers of revaluation, investigation etc. 
3.1.6 The second part of these proposals con cerned the powers of the IRDA in relation 
to revaluation of the affairs of the insu rer, investigation, search and seizure, 
appointment and removal of managerial persons. The Commission has considered 
the responses received to the proposals a nd the final recommendations are set out 
in Appendix-VI to this Report. These recom mendations to cover am endments to 
the following sections of the Insurance Act, 1938: s.33(1), s.33 (4), s.33(8), s.34B 
(4), s.34C, s.34E, s.34G, s.34H, s.35(1), s.35(3), s.36, s.37A(2), s.37A(4), s.42 
(1), s.42(2), s.42(3), s.42(4), s.42(5), s.42(6), s.42(7), s.42D, s.42D (1) proviso (a), 
s.42D(8) & (9), s.64UM, s.64UM (1A) s.44, s.47A and s.53. 
 
***
 27

CHAPTER IV 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
 
Consultation Paper 
 
4.1.1 In the Consultation Paper, one of the grounds for revision was identified as the 
need to set up an effective grievance redressal m achinery to deal with the 
numerous complaints of policyholders, whic h had hitherto not been satisfactorily 
dealt with. It was pointed out that notwithstanding the appointm ent of an 
Ombudsman under the Redressal of Public Grievances Rules, 1998 in exercise of 
powers under s.114 (1) of the Insurance Act, 1938 the existing m achinery for 
addressing the grievances of policyholders  had not been found to be satisfactory. 
The remedy under the Consum er Protection Act, 1986 did also not prove to be 
effective given the large num ber of cases pending decision. It was therefore 
suggested that there should be a com posite, effective and independent grievance 
redressal m echanism m odeled on the one set up under the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (SEBI Act). 
4.1.2 The proposal of the Law Commission in the Consultation Paper was that: 
(a) The present system of having Om budsman under the 1998 Rules at the m ajor 
metropolises be replaced by Grievance Redressal Authorities (GRA) 
constituted by appropriate am endments to the Insurance Act, 1938 itself. 
These would thus be statutory authorities exercising statutory functions. 
(b) The GRA could be multi-member bodies comprising one judicial member and 
two technical members. A certain degree of transparency should be induced in 
the process of selection of such members. 
(c) The GRAs should be dispersed as ge ographically widely as possible. For 
instance, there could be GRAs in each of  the major cities in the country. This 
 28

is necessary given the large num ber of policyholders at present and the 
prospect of this growing in the future. 
(d) The powers and jurisdiction of the GRAs would include all the powers and 
functions presently performed by Ombudsman under the 1998 Rules.  
(e) In addition to the above, it could be provided that all pending disputes arising 
under the Insurance Act, 1938 before the consum er fora would be transferred 
to the GRAs for disposal in accordance with the provisions of the Insurance 
Act, 1938. To this extent an am endment m ay have to be m ade in the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to provi de that disputes arising under the 
Insurance Act, 1938 will not be entert ained under the Consum er Protection 
Act, 1986. 
(f) IRDA will appoint Adjudicating Officers to inquire/adjudicate violations of 
the Act, Rules and Regulations by insurers, insurance interm ediaries and 
insurance agents and levy penalties as provided for in the Insurance Act, 1938. 
(g) An Insurance Appellate Tribunal (IAT) on the lines of the one under the SEBI 
Act should be constituted having its sitti ng at a principal Bench in New Delhi 
and by circuit in the f our m ajor m etropolises. The IAT will hear appeals 
against decisions of the GRAs and the Adjudicating Officers. The decision of 
the IAT will be f inal. The IAT will also entertain appeals against the 
decisions/orders of the IRDA concerning insurers, insurance interm ediaries 
and insurance agents including those pertaining to registration and licensing. 
(h) There will lie a f urther statutory a ppeal to the Suprem e Court f rom the 
decision of the IAT on the lines of s.15 Z of the SEBI Act. The appeal will 
have to be filed within 60 days of the decision of the IAT. 
(i) There will be a clause expressly excl uding the jurisdiction of  civil courts in 
disputes arising under the Insurance Ac t, 1938. However, this will not include 
claims/ disputes arising under the Moto r Vehicles Act, 1988 and the Marine 
Insurance Act 1963. 
 29

(j) On the lines of sections 41 and 42 of the LIC Act, 1956, the decision of the 
GRA m ay be m ade enforceable in any ci vil court within th e local lim its of 
whose jurisdiction the decree holder actually and voluntarily resides. 
(k) With a view to encouraging alternative dispute resolution (ADR) mechanisms, 
it m ay be provided that a claim ant may be first referred to an ADR 
mechanism, which would include m ediation and/ or conciliation, and only if 
that fails, should the m atter been placed before GRA. Further, the GRA m ay 
itself refer the pending dispute before it to  an ADR process at any stage of the 
proceedings, with the consent of the parties. 
 
Response to the Consultation Paper 
4.2.1. The response to the above proposals of  the Law Com mission has been positive. 
While welcom ing these proposals, the FICCI has suggested that the proposed 
machinery “would be creative and m aintained by appropriate governm ent 
agencies and that no costs on this account will be borne by the insurance 
industry”. LIC too has welcom ed the suggestion and observed that the burden on 
the consumer fora will be reduced considerably if the proposal is im plemented. 
LIC has suggested that “a mechanism may be evolved whereby 50% expenses are 
shared by the Central/State Governm ent and 25% by the IRDA”. Om  Kotak 
Mahindra Life Insurance has suggested that the Insurance Om budsmen should 
themselves be redesignated as the GRA and that it must be clearly spelt out as to 
which of the two decisions – that of the GRA or the consum er forum – would 
prevail in event of conflict of opinions. Th is point may straight away be clarified 
by stating that the creation of the GRA w ould necessarily oust the jurisdiction of 
the consumer fora over the same subject matter. 
4.2.2 The General Insurance Corporation of India has also welcomed the constitution of 
the GRA as well as an IAT. They have m ade very specific suggestions as to what 
kinds of disputes should go before the GRA and what should be the jurisdiction of 
the IAT. GIC has suggested that the jurisdiction of the GRA should extend to: 
 30

(i) Disputes between the insured and the insurer that pertains to personal lines 
of insurance on the grounds m entioned in the Rule 12 of the Redressal of 
Public Grievance Rules; 
(ii) Disputes between Insurer and the Intermediaries; and 
(iii) Disputes between Insurer and Insurer. 
4.2.3 As regards the jurisdiction of the IAT, the suggestion of GIC is that it should hear: 
(i) Appeals from the decisions/orders of the GRA; 
(ii) Appeals against the orders passe d by the Adjudicating and Investigating 
Officers appointed by the IRDA; and 
(iii) Appeal against any order passed by the IRDA.. 
4.2.4 In addition to the above suggestions, GI C has suggested that the GRA m ust have 
its own m achinery capable of executing its orders on the lines of Recovery 
Officers of the Debt Recovery Tribuna l. However, GIC opposes the idea of 
investing the adjudicating of ficers with powers to levy penalties since crim inal 
liability should be determined only by a judicial authority. United India Insurance 
has also welcom ed the suggestion of having the GRA and IAT in place of the 
existing mechanisms. They suggest that a f ee in the nature of ‘adjudications fee’ 
commensurate with the value of the claim  may be levied to m eet the expenditure 
and deter frivolous claims. 
4.2.5 However, Birla Sunlife Insurance Co. Ltd., ICICI Prudential Life Insurance and 
HDFC Standard Life Insurance have expr essed reservations about the setting up 
of the GRA. In their view, the presen t system of Om budsman should be further 
strengthened and made accountable being placed under the overall supervision of 
the IRDA. They are of the view that the creation of one m ore tribunal for 
redressal of policyholders’ grievances will add to their expenses and not provide 
an effective or efficacious remedy. 
 31

4.2.6 The Consumer Rights Educational and Awareness Trust, Bangalore has opposed 
the proposal of ousting the jurisdiction of the consum er fora since the rem edy 
under the Consum er Protection Act is in a ddition to and not in derogation of the 
existing laws. They have also opposed the idea of an insurance appellate tribunal. 
The other consum er body, CERC Ahm edabad has preferred the continuation of 
the mechanism of Om budsman by strengthening it with m ore powers. However, 
the General Insurers (Public Sector) Association of India has welcom ed the 
suggestion and suggested that a retired High Court Judge should head the GRA. 
They also would like an adjudication fee to be levied. 
4.2.7 At this juncture, reference has to be made to an im portant suggestion by the Law 
Department of the Governm ent of W est Bengal that there should be a specific 
provision to combat insurance fraud by de scribing it as a crim e and providing for 
both civil and crim inal liabilities for pe rsons indulging in insurance fraud. The 
suggestion is that there should be a speci alized insurance fraud bureau and that 
immunity must be provided for anyone who shares inform ation about suspected 
fraud. In the Consultation Paper, th e Law Com mission had proposed that the 
power to levy penalties f or violation of  the provisions of  the Act be vested with 
the GRA itself . However, the crim inal justice m echanism would have to be 
invoked for dealing with frauds since it is  a specific offence under the penal law. 
It would be both confusing and burdensome for the GRA to also exercise criminal 
jurisdiction. The Law Com mission is also  not in favour of creating special 
offences in relation to insurance f rauds. The experience with creation of special 
offences shows that it serves to increase the burden of the judiciary without there 
being any perceptible positive change either in conviction rates or in disposal of 
such cases. The Commission is of the view that the existing provisions of the IPC, 
if strictly enforced, are sufficient to deal with the malaise. 
4.2.8 By far, the m ost detailed response that the Com mission has received is from  the 
National Insurance Academ y, Pune. They have given detailed suggestions in 
relation to the setting up of the GRA. Pr incipally, they agree with the proposal 
 32

that the present system  of Om budsman should be replaced by a statutory 
mechanism provided f or in the Act itself . They further point out that such 
mechanism should be “cost effective and should also serve the purpose of 
protecting the interest of policyholders.” The m odification that they have 
suggested to the proposal of the Law Com mission is to statutorily mandate, in the 
first instance, that every insurer shoul d have an “Apex Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism” within the organisation itself.  They suggest that the GRA should be 
presided over by a retired Judge of the High Court and that the procedure for 
selecting the two other technical m embers should be transparent. The screening 
for the appointm ents should be by a Com mittee appointed by the Insurance 
Council. The IAT should consist of a retir ed Supreme Court Judge and two other 
experts. A further appeal against the or der of the IAT should lie to the Suprem e 
Court. The idea is that every policyhol der should first exhaust the internal 
mechanism before approaching the GRA. The Com mission accepts this 
suggestion of the National Insurance Academy, Pune. 
4.2.9 There is one development that has taken place in the recent past which requires to 
be noticed. It was reported in the January 2004 issue of the IRDA Journal that the 
Central Government had set up an Appellate  Authority to review the rulings of 
the IRDA. According to the IRDA Journal,  the notification issued by the Central 
Government has set up both a single a nd a division bench of the Appellate 
Authority and the Joint Secretary, Ministry  of Finance, will constitute the single 
bench and while on the division bench he would be joined by another Joint 
Secretary of the Ministry of Law. The Law Commission is constrained to observe 
that whatever m ay be the com pulsions of the Governm ent to constitute such an 
Appellate Tribunal, the said arrangem ent is far from  satisfactory in term s of 
having an independent and impartial adjudicatory appellate body.  
 
Law Commission’s views on the responses 
 
4.3.1 The Law Com mission has carefully consid ered the wide range of responses 
received to its proposal for an independent  grievance redressal mechanism. While 
 33

the Commission is conscious that there are bound to be different points of view to 
any proposal for change, the present propos al for an independent GRA m ust be 
viewed as having received m ore or less a positive response barring a few who 
would like the status quo to continue. The Commission is of the firm view that the 
existing system  of Om budsman, who is not necessarily a person with judicial 
background, is not satisfactory from  th e point of view of consum ers and 
policyholders or even from  the point of vi ew of the insurers. The said schem e in 
the Regulations which does not perm it the insurer to question the decision of the 
Ombudsman but which perm its the insured to reject the sam e, appears to be 
contrary to the principles of equality to  access to justice. In order to instill a 
degree of confidence in the policyholders and insurers, particularly in the changed 
scenario where a num ber of private player s are in the m arket, it is im perative to 
have an independent, transparent and accountable grievance redressal m echanism 
to address the concerns of the polic yholders. The Com mission, therefore, cannot 
agree with the suggestion that the ex isting system  of Om budsman should be 
continued. 
4.3.2 The Commission accepts the suggestion that it should be statutorily mandatory for 
every insurer to put in place an in-house grievance redressal m echanism which 
should be fair and transparent and subject  to supervision by the IRDA. It is only 
after exhausting the rem edy of approaching the in-house m echanism, that a 
complaint should be entertained by the GRA. Of course, where a com plaint 
remains un-attended to by the in-house m echanism for a m aximum period to be 
spelt out in the statute itself, preferably sixty days, it will be open for such person/ 
complainant to approach the GRA. The internal mechanism, it is obvious, must be 
made to conform to the principles of natu ral justice and also to a right of personal 
hearing and a reasoned order must be made. 
4.3.3 The Commission also accepts the suggesti on that the IRDA should itself appoint 
Adjudicating/ Investigating Officers to adjudicate violations of the Act, Rules and 
Regulations by insurers, insurance interm ediaries and insurance agents and these 
officers will also have the power to levy the penalties as provided f or in the Act. 
 34

There will be an appeal f rom the deci sion of  the Adjudicating/ Investigating 
Officer to the IAT.  
4.3.4 The Commission also accepts the suggesti on that the respective scope of powers 
of GRA and IAT should be clearly spelt out. There will be one further statutory 
appeal from  the decision of the IAT to  the Suprem e Court. The GRA as the 
primary authority, as well as the IAT, whic h is the appellate authority, are dealing 
with civil rights of parties and are not adjudicating any public law issues or rights. 
If, on the other hand, the GRA or IAT are dealing with public law issues or rights, 
it would have become necessary to provide judicial review before the High Court 
as decided in L. Chandrakumar v. Union of India (1997) 3 SCC 261. Yet another 
aspect of the m atter is that though techni cally the orders of the GRA or IAT can 
be questioned under Article 226/227 of th e Constitution of India, in the High 
Court, the High Court will not ordinarily exercise its discretionary jurisdiction if  
an effective alternate remedy is provided and that is why we are recom mending a 
statutory appeal from the GRA to the IA T and then from the IAT to the Suprem e 
Court.   The decision of the GRA will be enforceable as a decree of a civil court. 
The Commission also accepts the suggestion of the levy of an adjudication fee but 
this will only apply to such of those co mplainants who are in an econom ically 
sound position and not to small policyholders.  
4.3.5 The Law Commission has also considered the question of the tenure of m embers 
of the GRA and IAT as well as the ques tion of their rem oval. The nature and 
composition of the GRA now proposed is akin  to that of the District Consum er 
Forum under the Consum er Protection Act, 1986. The other m odel of a sim ilar 
tribunal is under the Adm inistrative Tribunals Act, 1985. The Com mission is 
aware that in both these fora, the tenure of  a m ember or President is for a fixed 
term of five years and the age of retirem ent is 65 years. The Law Com mission 
would like to ensure that both the GRAs the IATs are independent and 
accordingly recommends that the appointm ents to these two bodies should not be 
for any fixed tenure but with the age of retirement fixed at 65 years. Since it is 
 35

recommended that one of the qualifications for being appointed as m ember, 
whether judicial or technical, is at least 20 years’ experience, it is only appropriate 
that such persons are not appointed for a tenure but perm itted to hold office till 
the age of 65 years.  
4.3.6 As regards, rem oval of the President and Mem bers for proven m isbehaviour or 
incapacity, the Com mission recom mends that insofar as the President and 
Members of GRA are concerned, they can  be rem oved for proven m isbehaviour 
or incapacity after an enquiry m ade by a Judge of the High Court and in which 
enquiry the President or the Mem ber concerned will be inform ed the charges and 
given a reasonable opportunity of being h eard in respect of those charges. As 
regards the President or Mem bers of the IAT, the procedure for rem oval on 
grounds of proven m isbehaviour or incapacity will be the sam e with one 
difference. The enquiry will be made by a Judge of the Supreme Court. It is hoped 
that this will ensure a sufficient degree of independence to the GRA as well as the 
IAT. 
4.3.7 The salary and other term s and conditi ons applicable to the President and 
Members of these bodies should be left  to be prescribed by the Central 
Government by way of rules. It is expected that these will correspond to the terms 
and conditions applicable to m embers of  other statutory tribunals perform ing 
similar functions.  
 
 Final recommendations of the Law Commission in regard to Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism 
 
4.3.8 The final recom mendations of the Law Commission in regard to the grievance 
redressal mechanism may be summarised thus: 
Adjudicating Officers/ Investigating Officers 
(i) The IRDA will appoint Adjudicating Officers/ Investigating Officers to 
adjudicate/investigate violations of the Act, Rules and Regulations by 
insurers, insurance interm ediaries and insurance agents and levy penalties 
 36

as provided in the Act. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the 
Adjudicating/ Investigating Officers can appeal to the Insurance Appellate 
Tribunal (IAT).  
In house mechanism 
(ii) Every insurer will set up an in-house grievance redressal mechanism under 
the overall supervision of the IRDA. It will be incumbent for every person 
seeking to file a claim before the Grievance Redressal Authority (GRA) to 
first approach the in-house mechanism. Where the decision of the in-house 
mechanism is not satisf actory to th e claim ant or where no decision is 
given within the period of 60 days from  the date of m aking such claim to 
the in-house m echanism, it will be open to the claim ant to approach the 
GRA within a period of 60 days from  the date of receipt of the decision of 
the in-house m echanism and of the expi ry of 60 days after the m aking of 
the claim whichever is later. 
 Grievance Redressal Authority (GRA) 
(iii) The present system  of having Om budsmen under the 1998 Rules at the 
major m etropolises be replaced by the GRA constituted by appropriate 
amendments to the Insurance Act, 1938 itself. These would thus be 
statutory authorities exercising stat utory f unctions. The GRA will not 
exercise any jurisdiction in relation to the levy of  f ines and penalties in 
relation to offences under the Act. 
(iv) The jurisdiction of the GRA will be to hear: 
(a) Disputes between the insured and the insurer that pertain to 
personal lines of insurance on the following matters: 
(1) any partial or total repudiation of claims by an insurer; 
(2) any dispute in regard to prem ium paid or payable in term s of 
the policy;  
(3) any dispute on the legal constr uction of the policies in so f ar 
as such disputes relate to claims; 
 37

(4) delay in settlement of claims; 
(5) non-issue of any insurance document to custom ers after 
receipt of premium; and 
(6) any other complaint against an insurer. 
(b) Disputes between Insurer and the Intermediaries;  
(c) Disputes between Insurer and Insurer; and 
(d) Disputes between the assignees of a policy as to priority of 
assignment. 
Location of GRA 
(v) The GRAs should be dispersed as ge ographically widely as possible. For 
instance, there could be GRAs in each of the m ajor cities in the country. 
This is necessary given the large num ber of policyholders at present and 
the prospect of this growing in the future. There could be m ore than one 
GRA in a State depending on the number of cases in that State.  
 Powers and jurisdiction of GRA 
(vi) The powers and jurisdiction of the GRAs would include all the powers and 
functions of the civil court and woul d involve adjudication of issues of 
fact and law.  
(vii) In addition to the above, it could be provided that all pending disputes 
arising under the Insurance Act, 1938 be fore the consumer fora would be 
transferred to the GRAs for disposal  in accordance with the provisions of 
the Insurance Act, 1938. To this extent an am endment m ay have to be 
made in the Consum er Protection Ac t, 1986 to provide that disputes 
arising under the Insurance Act, 1938 will not be entertained under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 
Exclusion of Civil Courts 
(viii) There will be a clause expressly ex cluding the jurisdiction of  civil courts 
and other tribunal/ fora in regard to such m atters that form  the subject 
 38

matter of the jurisdiction of the GRA. Every claimant before the GRA will 
be required to m ake an express declar ation that no sim ilar claim has been 
made before any other fora or tribuna l and further that he has availed the 
in-house mechanism of the insurer as indicated in para (ii) above. 
 
Alternate dispute resolution 
(ix) With a view to encouraging alte rnate dispute resolution (ADR) by way of 
mediation or conciliation, it may be provided that a claimant may have the 
choice to opt for m ediation or conciliation, in which case the GRA will 
refer the dispute for m ediation or conciliation by a person or body agreed 
upon, or were there is no agreement, by a person or body nominated by the 
GRA from a panel prepared by it. Fu rther, the GRA m ay itself refer the 
pending dispute before it to an ADR  process at any stage of the 
proceedings, with the consent of the parties. 
Powers of GRA regarding enforcement of decisions 
(x) The decision of  the GRA, or the f inal decision on appeal, will be 
enforceable by the GRA which pass th e initial order and for that purpose 
the GRA will exercise all the powers of a civil court. 
Composition of GRA 
(xi) The GRA should be a m ulti-member body com prising of one judicial 
member who will be the President and two technical m embers. The 
President and Mem bers of  the GRA will hold of fice till the age of  65 
years. The President of the GRA shoul d be a retired Judicial Officer not 
below the rank of a senior Civil Judge  or a lawyer with not less than 20 
years of experience nominated in consultation with the Chief Justice of the 
High Court. 
(xii) As regards, appointm ent of tec hnical members to the GRA is concerned, 
consultation with the Chief  Justice of  the High Court is not necessary. A 
panel of nam es of persons of not less than 15 years experience in the 
insurance industry can be prepared by the Central Governm ent and sent to 
a Selection Committee comprising the members of the Insurance Councils 
 39

constituted under s.64C of the Act. The said Selection Com mittee will 
recommend the nam es from among the panel of technical m embers to be 
appointed to the GRA. The Centra l Governm ent will m ake rules in 
relation to the salaries and allowances and other term s and conditions of 
service of the President and Members of the GRA. 
(xiii) The GRA will f ormulate rules of  procedure to cover m atters relating to 
filing of claim s, com pletion of pl eadings, evidence on affidavits or 
otherwise, passing of awards and furnishing copies. These rules of 
procedure will also deal with m atters relating to enf orcement of  the 
decisions of the GRA as finally determined in appeals therefrom. 
Removal of President and Members of GRA 
(xiv) The President or Mem bers of GR A shall not be rem oved from  office 
except by an order m ade by the President on ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after e nquiry m ade by a Judge of the High 
Court in which such President or Mem ber has been inf ormed of  the 
charges against him  and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect of  those charges. The Central Governm ent will m ake rules to 
regulate the procedure for the investigation of m isbehaviour or incapacity 
of the President and Members of the GRA.  
Insurance Appellate Tribunal (IAT) 
(xv) An appeal will lie from the decision of the GRA to an Insurance Appellate 
Tribunal (IAT) the jurisdiction of which will extend to hearing: 
(a) Appeals from the GRA; 
(b) Appeals against the orders passed by the Adjudicating/ 
Investigating Officers appointed by the IRDA;  
(c) Appeal against any order passed by the IRDA. W ith the 
constitution of  the IAT, the appe llate authority constituted by a 
notification of the Central Gove rnment (as noticed in para 4.2.9 
infra) will have to be wound up and the appeals pending before it 
will stand automatically transferred to the IAT; 
 40

(d) Making of interim  orders, conditi onal or otherwise, in relation to 
the above matters. 
Composition of IAT 
(xvi) The IAT should be a m ulti-member body of a judicial m ember as 
President and two technical members. The IAT should be presided over by 
a retired High Court Judge nom inated in consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India. A certain degree of transparency should be induced in the 
process of selection of such m embers. The appointm ents of technical 
members to the IAT should also be done in consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India. For this purpose, a panel of names of persons of not less 
than 20 years experience in the insu rance industry should be sent by the 
Insurance Councils (constituted under s .64C of the Act) to the Chief 
Justice of India. The nam es of technical members will be chosen with the 
concurrence of  the Chief  Justice of  India. The Central Governm ent will 
make rules in relation to the salaries and allowances and other term s and 
conditions of service of the President and Members of the IAT. 
 Term and removal of President and Members of IAT 
(xvii) The President and Mem bers of the IAT will hold of fice till the age of  68 
years. The rem oval of the Presiden t and the Mem bers of the IAT for 
proven misbehaviour or incapacity will be upon enquiry by a Judge of the 
Supreme Court in which such Presiden t or Member has been inform ed of 
the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
in respect of  those charges. The Central Governm ent will m ake rules to 
regulate the procedure for the investigation of m isbehaviour or incapacity 
of the President and Members of the IAT.  
 Location and Benches of IAT 
(xviii) The Principal Bench of the Insu rance Appellate Tribunal (IAT) should be 
in New Delhi. It is preferable th at there is one IAT in each State. 
However, there can be one IAT for one or m ore States as m ay be decided 
 41

by the Central Governm ent, or by ag reement between State Governm ents 
on the pattern of s.4(3) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.  
(xix) The IAT will f ormulate rules of  pr ocedure to cover m atters relating to 
filing of appeals, com pletion of plead ings, making of orders both interim  
and final and furnishing copies.  
 Expenditure of GRA and IAT 
(xx) The expenditure f or the constitution of  the GRAs and the IATs and their 
maintenance must be borne by the Central Government in as much as they 
are to adjudicate disputes arising under a central statute. 
 Further appeal to Supreme Court 
(xxi) There will be a f urther statutory appeal to the Suprem e Court f rom the 
decision of the IAT. The appeal will have  to be filed within 60 days of the 
decision of the IAT. 
 Adjudication fee 
(xxii) There should be an adjudication fee levied in respect of a claim  before the 
GRA and an appeal before the IAT. However, any individual 
policyholder, may upon showing suffici ent cause, be exem pt by the GRA 
or the IAT, as the case may be, from paying such adjudication fee.  
*** 
 
 42

CHAPTER V 
LEGAL ISSUES REQUIRING REFORM IN INSURANCE LAWS:  
REPUDIATION OF LIFE INSURANCE POLICY 
 
The existing law 
 
5.1.1 S.45 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provides th at a policy of life insurance cannot be 
called in question by an insurer af ter the expiry of two years from  the date on 
which it was effected on the ground that a statem ent m ade in the proposal for 
insurance or in any other docum ent leading to the issue of the policy was 
inaccurate or false “ unless the insurer show s that such statement w as on a 
material matter or suppressed facts which it was material to disclose and that 
it was fraudulently made by the policyh older and that the policyholder knew  
at the time of making it that the st atement w as false or that it suppressed 
facts which it was material to disclose”. 
5.1.2 The position, therefore, is that at any tim e up to two years after the date on which 
a life insurance policy is effected, an insurer can repudiate the policy if any 
material facts contained in the proposal  or docum ent on the basis of which the 
policy was issued was inaccurate or fals e; this can be done unilaterally by the 
insurer without having to prove the basis for repudiating the policy. However, 
after the expiry of a peri od of two years after the date on which a life insurance 
policy is effected such policy can be repudiated by the insurer on the ground that 
a statement made in the proposal for insurance or in any other docum ent leading 
to the issue of the policy was inaccurate or false only if all the three conditions 
enumerated in the second part of s.45 are satisfied conjointly, i.e., (a) the 
statement m ust be on a m aterial m atter, or it suppresses facts which it was 
material to disclose; (b) the suppression m ust have been fraudulently made by the 
policy-holder; and (c) the policy-holder m ust have known that it was false or it 
suppressed facts which it was material to disclose. (See Mithoolal Nayak v. LIC of 
India AIR 1962 SC 814) 
 43

The principle of uberrimae fidei 
5.1.3 The principle governing s.45 is that of uberrimae fidei  (also referred to as 
uberrima fides) which requires that the insured should fully disclose to the insurer 
at the tim e of entering into the contract of  insurance all m aterial facts within the 
knowledge of insured. This principle of com mon law, which has been adopted in 
India, has been elucidated in the judgm ent of Lord Mansfield in Carter v. Boehm 
[(1758-1774) All ER Rep 183] in the following words: 
 “Insurance is a contract upon specu lation. The special facts upon which 
the contingent chance is to be com puted lie m ore com monly in the 
knowledge of the insured only; the unde rwriter trusts to the insured’s 
representations and proceeds upon confidence that he does not keep back 
any circum stance in his knowledge to  m islead the underwriter into the 
belief that the circum stance does not exist. The keeping back such 
circumstance is a fraud and, theref ore, the policy is void. Although the 
suppression should happen through m istake without any fraudulent 
intention but still the underwriter is deceived and the policy is void; 
because the risk run is really diffe rent from risk understood and intended 
to be run at the time of the agreement… Good faith forbids the other party, 
by concealing what he privately knows, to draw the other into a bargain 
from his ignorance of the fact and his believing the contrary”. 
Decisions of Indian courts 
5.1.4 The above principle has been reiterated in the judgm ents of the High Courts as 
well as the Suprem e Court of India in th e context of challenges by the claim ants 
under a life insurance policy to the deci sion of the insurer to repudiate such 
policy. The decision in Mithoolal Nayak (supra), already referred to, has been 
followed in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Smt. G.M. Channabasamma , 
(1991) 1 SCC 357 and m ore recently in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. 
Asha Goel (2001) 2 SCC 160.  
5.1.5 What constitutes a material fact, which affects the risk sought to be undertaken by 
the insurer, would depend upon the facts a nd circumstances of a particular case 
 44

and can be established only by leading evidence. [See Seaton v. Bernard  (1900) 
AC 135] A suppression of a f act or a m isrepresentation in relation to the health 
status of the insured, it has been held, w ill enable the insurer to repudiate a policy 
[Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Sosamma Punnan  (1992) 74 Com p Cas 
218 (Ker)]. However, the misstatement of age, for instance, need not in every case 
tantamount to a material misstatement although it would be relevant for fixing the 
quantum of prem ium in relation to the sum  assured ( Life Insurance Corporation 
of India v. Vasappa AIR 1987 Kar 216).  
5.1.6 The courts in India (and the consum er fora) have been consistent in requiring the 
insurer to prove the existence of all the three conditions in the second part of s.45 
where the insurer seeks to repudiate a life insurance policy after the expiry of two 
years of its com ing into effect. [See Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Smt. 
Kusuma T. Rai  (1991) 70 Com p Cas 86 (Kar); Shanta Trivedi v. Life Insurance 
Corporation of India  AIR 1988 Del 39 and Senior Divisional Manager, LIC v. 
Smt. J. Vinaya (2003) 1 CPJ 50 (NC)] In this c ontext, the following observations 
of the Suprem e Court in th e recent decision of 2001 in Life Insurance 
Corporation of India v. Asha Goel (supra) are relevant (para 16, p.170 SCC): 
 “In course of tim e the Corporation ha s grown in size and at present it is 
one of the largest public sector financial undertakings. The public in 
general and crores of policyholders in  particular, look forward to prom pt 
and efficient service from  the Corpor ation. Therefore, the authorities in 
charge of the management of the affa irs of the Corporation should bear in 
mind that its credibility and reputation depend on its prom pt and efficient 
service. Therefore, the approach of the Corporation in the matter of 
repudiation of a policy admittedly issued by it, should be one of 
extreme care and caution. It should not be dealt w ith in a mechanical 
and routine manner.” (emphasis supplied) 
5.1.7 The decision in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Dharam Vir Anand (1998) 
7 SCC 348 underscores the distinction between  “the date of the policy” and the 
 45

“date of commencement of risk”. In that case it was held that the liability of  the 
insurer will not begin until the expiry of three years from the date of the policy, as 
specified in the policy. Since the death of the insured had occurred within three 
years of the said date of the policy (a lthough beyond three years from  the date of 
commencement of risk) the insurer was held not liable. 
Law Commission’s earlier recommendation 
5.1.8 The Law Com mission on an earlier occasion exam ined the working of s.45 and 
noted the difficulties faced by claim ants in seeking to recover the am ount due 
from the insurer under a life insurance policy. In its 112 th Report on S.45 of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 (1985) it recommended that the period after which no policy 
of life insurance could be called into question on the ground of m isstatement of 
fact be increased from  two to three years. This would be counter balanced by 
enabling the insurer to repudiate a policy at  any time within three years from  the 
date on which such policy was effected or revived on the ground that a statem ent 
material to the expectancy of the life of  the insured was incorrectly m ade in the 
proposal on the basis of which the policy was issued. This proposal was a drastic 
change from what was contained in s.45. This change, it was felt, would reconcile 
the rights of both the insurer as well as the insured. 
 
Law Commission’s Suggestion in the Consultation Paper 
5.1.9 The Consultation Paper followed the recom mendation of the Law Com mission in 
its 112th Report and proposed that a policy of life insurance shall not be called in 
question on the ground of m isstatement after the expiry of three years from  the 
date on which the policy is effected or, as it is m ay be, the date on which it is 
revived. It was accordingly proposed that  s.45 of the Insurance Act, 1938 be 
recast as under: 
“(1) No policy of life insurance shall be  called in question after the expiry of 
three years from  the date on which th e policy is effected or where the 
policy is revived after it has lapsed for any reason, from  the date on which 
it is so revived. 
 46

(2) A policy of life insurance m ay be called in question at any tim e within 
three years from  the date on which the policy is effected or, as the case 
may be, the date on which it is revived, on the ground that any statem ent 
being a statement material to the exp ectancy of the life of the insured was 
incorrectly made in the proposal or other document on the basis of which 
the policy was issued or revived.” 
5.1.10 It will be noticed that this proposal was in total variance with s.45.  
 
Response to the Proposal in the Consultation Paper 
5.1.11 The response received to the above proposal  in the Consultation Paper has been a 
mixed one. Predictably, the private insure rs have opposed the change arguing that 
it would encourage frauds and is liable to be m isused. Birla Sun Life Insurance 
Company Ltd. points out that that th e recommendation of the Law Com mission 
would “com pletely negate the uberrimae fidei  character of a life insurance 
contract.” Birla Sunlife is of the view that the courts are anyway leaning in favour 
of the claim ant. ICICI Prudential Life Insurance Ltd. suggests retention of the 
present s.45 without change. HDFC Standard  Life Insurance Ltd., while insisting 
that there should be no change, has suggest ed that a proviso be inserted to the 
effect that even within tw o years a policy can be called in question by the insurer 
only if the statem ent incorrectly m ade is material to the expectancy of life. OM 
Kotak Mahindra Life Insurance Co. suggest s retention of the provision subject to 
the condition that where the repudiation is af ter the expiry of three years after the 
coming into force of the policy, the onus of proving m ateriality of the m isstated 
fact/fraud shifts to the insurer. Aviv a Life Insurance suggests increasing the 
period of unilateral repudiation by the insure r to three years and retention of the 
second part of the present s.45. 
5.1.12 The public sector m ajor, LIC, has al so suggested retention of the existing 
provision subject to the following changes: 
 47

 “In sub-section (1) the words ‘on which the policy is effected’ m ay be 
replaced by the words ‘date on which proposal is accepted/ policy is 
revived/ reinstated’”. 
 “In clause (2) the words ‘m aterial to  the expectancy of the life insured’ 
may be substituted with ‘m aterial to the assessm ent of  risk or deciding 
premium on the life of the insured’. Further the words ‘reinstated’ m ay be 
added at the end of the clause”. 
5.1.13 LIC opposes the three year tim e limit as being “a very short period” and states 
that “ if at all this is to be provided w e may agree that if policy has been 
continuously in force for a period of 6-8 years w ithout being in question the 
insurer shall be deemed to have w aived his right to repudiate the policy on 
whatever ground ”. LIC also suggests that wher e a claim  is repudiated on the 
ground of fraud, there should be no additi onal requirem ent for the insurer to 
establish the nexus between the non-disclo sure of the m aterial fact and the 
assessment of the risk.  
5.1.14 The suggestion by the Federation of Indi an Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI) is that the present provision be re tained. FICCI suggests that the interest 
of the consum er (policy holder) be prot ected by providing a rem edy if there is a 
breach of contract by the insurer. FICCI has nevertheless pointed out that the law 
obtaining in the United Kingdom  restricts, by negative definition, the grounds on 
which an insurer can repudiate the policy. Pa ra 2 (b) of the statem ent of General 
Insurance Practice issued in 1986 in the U.K. reads thus: 
 “An insurer will not repudiate to indemnify a policy holder – 
On grounds of non-disclosure of a material fact which a policyholder 
could not reasonably be expected to have disclosed. 
 48

On grounds of m isrepresentation unless it is a deliberate or negligent 
misrepresentation of a material fact.” 
5.1.15 FICCI also points out that in the USA, a majority of the States have refused to 
apply the strict rule of disclosure to non-marine risks and therefore a failure by the 
insured to state a m aterial fact, if inno cent, does not avoid the contract but only a 
wilful concealment of fact known by the in sured to be m aterial to the risk. The 
test in both Canada and USA is that a material m isrepresentation sufficient to 
deny a claim  cannot be just any m isstatement but one that if fully and truthfully 
disclosed would have led to a refusal by th e insurer to issue the policy, at least on 
the terms and conditions on which it issued the policy. FICCI finally suggests that 
the test of ‘reasonable m an’ be adopted for determining whether a fact that has 
been suppressed is ‘m aterial’ or not. The additional safeguards it suggests from  
the point of view of the insured are: 
No repudiation of the policy to be pe rmitted on ground of m isstatement of fact 
“where the insured can prove that the st atement was true to the best of  his 
knowledge and belief.” 
That a person who solicits and negotiates a contract of insurance “should be 
deemed for the purpose of the form ation of the contract, to be the agent of the 
insurers, and that the knowledge of such  person should be deem ed to be the 
knowledge of the insurers.” 
The defence to a claim  to be disallowed if the repudiation of the policy is not 
communicated in writing by the insurer to the insured. 
5.1.16 The National Insurance Academ y views that  the proposed change is not justified 
and suggests that a policy could be called in question even after three years on the 
ground of fraud. The policy can be repudiated  within three years “if concealm ent 
or misrepresentation of material facts (materiality referring to the factors affecting 
all the risks that are being covered) is proved.” 
 49

5.1.17 The Actuarial Society of India (ASI) has also not agreed with the proposal of the 
Law Commission as contained in the Consultation Paper. It states that “from  the 
moral hazard perspective, and as a prot ection to the bonafide policyholders from  
the fraudulent ones, it is necessary that a life insurer is able to prove, anytime, that 
the incorrect inform ation given was on a m aterial m atter or suppressed facts 
which it was m aterial to disclose a nd that it was fraudulently m ade by the 
policyholder and that the policyholder kne w at the tim e of m aking it that the 
statement was false or that it suppressed f acts which it was m aterial to disclose”. 
The ASI suggests that a polic y of life insurance or a rider granted subsequent 
thereto could be called in question “at any tim e” if  the insurer shows that the 
inaccurate or false statem ent on the basis of which the policy was issued “was on 
a material matter or suppressed facts which it was material to disclose and that it 
was fraudulently made by the policy holder and that the policy holder knew at the 
time of making it that the statem ent was false or that it suppressed facts which it 
was material to disclose.” 
5.1.18 The views of the consum er groups are quite the opposite. The Consum er 
Education Research Centre, Ahm edabad has wholeheartedly welcom ed the Law 
Commission’s proposal. They point out how in  the United States even a m aterial 
misstatement would not autom atically result in repudiation of the policy but a re-
working of the sum  liable to be paid as if  the policy was issued af ter accounting 
for the changed circum stance. The C onsumer Rights Education and Awareness 
Trust, Bangalore also support the La w Com mission’s proposal but want the 
period to be retained at two years.  
5.1.19 In this context it is also necessary to notice an im portant fact highlighted in the 
response received from  the Institute of Insurance Surveyors and Adjusters which 
refers to a sensitivity survey conducted by the General Insurance Corporation of 
India to get a report on customer satisfaction and feedback from policyholders. As 
per this Report “feedback from  over 10,000 policy holders indicated that 99.8% 
were by and large satisf ied with the services of  insurers although there w as a 
 50

common complaint regarding delay in settlement of claims, w hich was rated 
as high as 65%”. 
Views of the Law Commission 
5.1.20 The responses to the proposal contained in the Consultation Paper can be broadly 
stated in the following terms: 
(a) The insurers want no d ilution of the principle of uberrimae fidei  in 
relation to insurance contracts.  
(b) The insurers by and large want rete ntion of their option of repudiating a 
policy of life insurance at any tim e on the ground of fraud subject to the 
condition that where the repudiation is af ter the expiry of two/ three years 
after the com ing into force of the policy, the onus of proving that the 
misstated fact is material to the risk shifts to the insurer. 
(c) LIC is prepared to say that if a life policy has been in force continuously 
for a period of 6-8 years no repudi ation on any ground should thereafter 
be permitted. 
(d) FICCI suggests retention of th e existing provision with im portant 
additions that would protect policyholders’ interests. 
(e) The consumers agree entirely with the proposal of the Law Commission. 
5.1.21 The Law Com mission views the present exer cise of law reform  as providing an 
opportunity to balance the competing interests of the insurers on the one hand and 
of the policyholders on the other. First it is proposed to exam ine the difficulties 
faced by the policyholders or those clai ming under them . It cannot be gainsaid 
that the consum er f ora and courts ar e increasingly being petitioned to decide 
disputes involving the legal heirs of a deceased policyholder and the insurers. By 
all accounts, it appears that the rate of settlement of claim s by insurers has not 
been satisfactory. Secondly, it is only after a claim is lodged by the fam ily of the 
 51

deceased policyholder that the insurer m akes the effort to find out about the 
misstatement made or fraud played by the policyholder (at the tim e of taking the 
policy) and by this time several years have elapsed during which the premium has 
also been paid. This is com pounded by the fact that the entire prem ium that has 
been paid also stands forfeited. Thirdly, very often the family members may not at 
all be aware of any such m isstatement by the policyholder and have no m eans to 
prove to the contrary. The insurer on th e other hand would be arm ed with the 
records unearthed by the surveyor appointed  by it. There is an unequal battle here 
with the claimant being then forced to go to the courts or consum er fora and wait 
for an uncertain result. Fourthly, there is the issue of  delay in disposal of  the 
claims by the courts with insurers bei ng known to contest an adverse order up to 
the final court. Finally, a factor that cannot be lost sight of is that there has been 
for several years now a hardselling of life insurance policies by insurers through a 
wide network of agents who go and personally collect the forms, the premium and 
arrange for the requisite m edical certifi cate for issuance of the policy. (This is 
perhaps the flip side of the adage that in India “insurance is not bought but sold”) 
The practical reality of the policyholder, in such a situation, of not being informed 
of his duties and liabilities, cannot be lost si ght of. It is in this context that the 
question of a deliberate intention on the part of the policyholder to defraud an 
insurer requires to be examined. This is even more significant when one considers 
the present moves on the part of the insu rance industry to foray into the untapped 
‘rural’ sector.  
5.1.22 From the point of view of the insurers, that an insurance policy is essentially a 
contract governed by the m andatory princi ple of true and full disclosure by the 
parties to the contract of all m aterial facts affecting the contract, cannot be 
overemphasised. The proposition that fraud vitiates all contracts is also 
unexceptionable. Nevertheless, there is  also the principle of  lim itation f or 
bringing actions both in civil and crim inal law. The LIC in its response concedes 
that where a policy has been continuously  operative for six to eight years, an 
insurer would be deem ed to have waived  its right to repudiate the policy on any 
 52

ground whatsoever. Given the fact that this response com es from  the largest 
player in the life insurance business (commanding as of January 2004 over 88% 
of the total prem iums and 94% of  the tota l policies), it could be said to ref lect a 
realistic position from the point of view of the insurer. The expectation of the role 
of the life insurer has been succinctly stated by the Supreme Court in Asha Goel’s 
case (supra) in the following words, which bear repetition:  
“The public in general and crores of polic y holders in particular, look forward to 
prompt and efficient service from  the Co rporation. Therefore, the authorities in 
charge of the m anagement of the affair s of the Corporation should bear in m ind 
that its credibility and reputation depend on its prom pt and ef ficient service. 
Therefore, the approach of the Corporat ion in the matter of repudiation of a 
policy admittedly issued by it, should be  one of extreme care and caution. It 
should not be dealt w ith in a mechanical and routine manner .” (em phasis 
supplied) 
5.1.23 While it may be argued that the present provision is best left untouched, since it is 
the view of  several insurers that the cour ts are any way inclined to interpret it in 
favour of the policyholder, it cannot be forgotten that only a sm all num ber of 
contested claim s, for reasons not hard to im agine, reach the courts. A greater 
clarity in the statute would facilitate easy and efficient disposal of the claims from 
the point of view of both the insurer a nd the claimant. The Law Commission is of 
the view that the provision requires to be  am ended in light of the experience 
gained over the years. 
5.1.24 The Law Com mission is of the firm  vi ew that there should be no unilateral 
repudiation of a life insurance policy by an  insurer. Accordingly, s.45 of the Act 
requires to be am ended to expressly state this position. Further, the Law 
Commission accepts in principle the suggesti on by the LIC that if a policy of life 
insurance has been in force conti nuously for a period, no repudiation on any 
ground should thereafter be perm itted. Although the Law Com mission in its 
Consultation Paper had suggested that th is period should be three years, taking 
 53

into account the view of LIC (which still controls nearly 90% of the life insurance 
business in this country) that this period should be 6-8 years, the Law 
Commission finally recom mends that this pe riod should be fixed at 5 years, i.e. 
five years after the com ing into force of the policy, i.e. the date of  issuance of the 
policy or the date of com mencement of the policy or the date of the revival of the 
policy or the date of the rider to the polic y whichever is later (this is to account 
for the problem  that was noticed in the Dharam Vir Anand case (para 5.1.7 
supra). In other words, no insurer should be perm itted to repudiate a life 
insurance policy on any ground whatsoever, fi ve years after the coming into force 
of the policy, i.e., the date of issuance of  policy or the date of com mencement of 
the policy or the date of the revival of th e policy or the date of  the rider to the 
policy whichever is later.  
5.1.25 The question that rem ains is about th e grounds on which an insurer should be 
permitted to repudiate a policy of life insurance any time after the commencement 
of the policy and upto the expiry of five years from that date. After considering 
the various responses received to the proposals in the Consultation Paper, the Law 
Commission finds m erit in the need to m ake a distinction, only in regard to the 
ensuing consequences, between re pudiation on the ground of fraud and 
repudiation on the ground of m isstatement or suppression of facts that were 
material to the expectancy of the life of  the insured. It is unexceptionable as a 
legal proposition that fraud vitiates all actions. A party to a contract that is vitiated 
by fraud can legitim ately repudiate it a nd the party guilty of the fraud can 
legitimately be deprived of all benefits under such contract. Further, since a policy 
of life insurance is essentially a contr act between the insurer and the insured, it 
may be useful to refer to s.17 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, which defines 
fraud thus:  
“‘Fraud’ defined – “Fraud” means and includes any of the following acts 
committed by a party to a contract, or with his connivance or by his agent 
 54

with intent to deceive another party thereto or his agent, or to induce him 
to enter into the contract –  
(1) the suggestion, as a fact, of th at which is not true, by one who 
does not believe it to be true; 
(2) the active concealm ent of a fact by one having knowledge or 
belief of the fact; 
(3) a promise made without any intention of performing it; 
(4) any other act fitted to deceive; 
(5) any such act or om ission as the law specially declares to be 
fraudulent. 
Explanation: Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness 
of a person to enter into a contract is not fraud, unless the 
circumstances of the case are such that, regard being had to them , it 
is the duty of the person keeping silence to speak, or unless his 
silence is, in itself, equivalent to speech.” (emphasis supplied) 
5.1.26 Where an insurer seeks to repudiate a po licy of insurance on the ground that it is 
vitiated by fraud, he has to discharge a great er burden of proof to show that there 
was the intention on the part of the insure d to deceive the insurer. The elem ent of 
mens rea would require to be established. The present s.45 of the Insurance Act 
requires the insurer to satisf y the existe nce of  all of  the f ollowing elem ents in 
order to repudiate a policy at any tim e after the expiry of two years from  the date 
on which it was effected: 
 55

(i) that a statem ent m ade in the pr oposal for insurance or any report of 
medical officer, or referee, or frie nd of the insured, or in any other 
document leading to the issue of the policy; 
(ii) the said statem ent was on a m aterial matter or suppressed facts which it 
was material to disclose; and 
(iii) that it was fraudulently made by the policy holder; and 
(iv) that the policy holder knew at th e tim e of m aking that the statem ent 
postpones or that it suppressed facts which it was material to dismissed. 
5.1.27 Thus, it is open under the present s.45 for the insurer at any time after the expiry 
of two years after the coming into effect of the life insurance policy, to repudiate 
such policy by showing that all the above  elements constituting fraud exist. The 
consequence that results upon the insure r so repudiating the policy is that the 
entire amount of premium paid till th en stands forfeited and no amount 
whatsoever is payable under the policy.  In other words, the claim ants under the 
policy so repudiated would get nothing. There would be many instances where the 
suppression of fact or m isstatement m ay not be to the extent of a fraud and 
actually m ay be an innocent m isstatement. In other words, such m isstatement, 
made without any intention to deceive, may fall short of fraud. However, the 
present s.45 m akes no such distinction a nd the consequences of repudiation with 
forfeiture of prem iums would result even in the case of m isstatement or 
suppression of material fact. The practical working of s.45 of the Act as is evident 
in the cases that have come before the courts is that the insurers invariably try and 
prove the existence of the param eters of s.45 and are able to deny the claim ants 
even the prem ium am ounts paid till the date of discovery of fraud. This 
compounds the hardship caused to the fam ily of the deceased policyholder. It 
bears repetition that in m any an instance,  the claim ants or the f amily of  the 
deceased policy holder m ay not even be aw are of the policy having been vitiated 
 56

on the ground of fraud. In other words, th e present s.45 is like an all or nothing 
clause. 
5.1.28 The recom mendation of the Law Com mission that an outer lim it of tim e (five 
years from the date of commencement of the policy) beyond which no repudiation 
is permissible be incorporated in s.45 is clearly in favour of the policy holders and 
the claimants and m akes a clear departur e from the present s.45. Further, it has 
been recommended that no insurer be perm itted to unilaterally repudiate a policy 
of life insurance. In addition to the above, the Law Com mission would not want 
the policyholders or their claim ants to be  deprived of the prem iums paid under a 
life policy which is sought to be repudi ated on the ground of m isstatement or 
suppression of facts, although m aterial to the expectancy of life, but not 
amounting to fraud. Thus, the policyholders  or their claim ants m ust have an 
opportunity of showing that the m isstatement or suppression of the m aterial fact 
was true to the best of the knowledge and belief of the insured or that there is no 
deliberate intention to suppress the fact or m ake the m isstatement or that such 
misstatement or suppression of a m aterial fact was within the knowledge of the 
insurer or the agent of the insurer. 
5.1.29 What really happens in a m arket where policies are sold and not bought is that an 
agent of an insurance company will approach the prospective policyholder and get 
him to sign the proposal form . The agent will also assure the policyholder that he 
will arrange for the requisite medical certificates to the approved panel of doctors. 
Very often, the proposal form  is not f illed by the policyholder him self. In the 
peculiar social circum stances in India, where an illiterate policyholder (also 
perhaps even literate ones) can hardly be expected to read the f ine print or be 
aware of the consequences of either filling up or not filling up a particular column 
in the proposal form , the knowledge of th e agent should be deem ed to be the 
knowledge of the insurer. The law should be amended to expressly provide for 
this. 
 57

5.1.30 At this juncture, it may help to illustrate the proposition. An agent of an insurance 
company approaches a prospective polic yholder, a farm er, and sells him  an 
insurance policy by getting him  to sign the proposal form  as well as m ake 
payment towards the first premium. The proposer (insured) is addicted to chewing 
tobacco but in the proposal form  the relevant colum n is left blank. The 
information in this regard is a m aterial fact, a fact that is m aterial to the 
assessment of the risk undertaken by the insurer. However, the policyholder in 
this case goes entirely by the agent who assu res him that all he has do is to sign 
the proposal form  and agree to be exam ined by a panel doctor. The agent 
organises the m edical certificate by the panel doctor and subsequently a life 
insurance policy com es to be issued. Th e policyholder dies within three years 
from the date of com mencement of the po licy after suffering from  cancer of the 
mouth. The claim ants are his fam ily members com prising the widow and two 
children who at no point in tim e were privy to the transaction between the agent, 
the policyholder and the insurance company. 
5.1.31 In the above instance, the insurance co mpany would seek to repudiate the policy 
on the ground that the fact of the polic yholder being a tobacco addict was a 
material fact; that it was deliberately suppressed; that such suppression was 
fraudulent and that the policyholder knew that it was m aterial to disclose such 
fact. Normally, in the above circumstances, the insurance company would be able 
to make good its case by showing that the relevant column in the proposal form  
was left blank. The claim ants would be hard pressed to show that this was not a 
fraudulent suppression of fact.  The Law Commission is aware of the practice in 
the U.S.A of the policy being reworked wh ere, for instance, the insurer discovers 
the m aterial f act subsequent to the issuance of  the policy. In the illustration 
narrated above, the policy prem ium would be  reworked as if the life is being 
insured after accounting for the risk and prem ium am ounts recalculated 
accordingly. Thus the repudiation of the po licy may not be autom atic. It m ay be 
open, even in India, for an insurer to do so particularly where private insurance 
 58

companies have made the business com petitive. However, that is a m atter for the 
consideration of the insurers. 
5.1.32 The Law Com mission is of the view that in cases like the above, the fam ily or 
claimants of a deceased policyholder s hould not suffer unduly by having to lose 
even the prem ium amounts. While they m ay not be able to recover the am ount 
under the policy, they should not stand to  lose the prem iums collected by the 
insurance company on the policy. Of  course, the insurance com pany will have to 
communicate in writing to the claim ants the reasons f or which it seeks to 
repudiate the policy of life insurance on the ground of m isstatement or 
suppression of a m aterial fact. This  also prom pts the Law Com mission to 
recommend that the knowledge of the agent about the facts concerning the insured 
at the tim e of subm ission of the proposal would be deem ed to be the knowledge 
of the insurer. The Law Com mission is aware that this places an extra burden on 
the insurer to ensure that its agents  perform  their duties with a sense of 
responsibility so that the ‘uberrim ae fidei’ principle is honoured. The insurer will 
have to rework its contract with the ag ent and seek to indem nify itself against 
claims brought about as a result of the neg ligence of the agent. It m ay also entail 
more serious consequences for the agent but these are matters for consideration of 
the insurer. 
5.1.33 The Law Commission accordingly recommends that in case of repudiation of the 
policy on the ground of misstatement or suppression of a material fact, and not on 
the ground of fraud, the prem iums collected on the policy till the date of 
repudiation will be liable to be returned to the insured or the legal representatives/ 
nominees/ assignees of the insured.  
5.1.34 Having said the above, by the Law Com mission wishes to reiterate that in a case 
where the insurance company is able to conclusively prove that the suppression or 
misstatement of a m aterial fact was fra udulent, i.e., where the claim ants have 
failed to show that such suppression or misstatement was not with an intent to 
deceive, the insurance com pany would be entitled to deny the claim ants even the 
 59

premium amounts since fraud vitiates the entire contract. To illustrate, there could 
be a situation where a policyholder has undergone a heart bypass surgery one year 
prior to the date of proposal and in the proposal form  in response to the question 
“have you undergone any m ajor surgery in the past two years? ” he fills up the 
column with ‘no’. In such an instance it will be im possible for the claim ants to 
argue that there was no intention on the part  of the insured to deceive the insurer. 
The insurance company will be justified, in  such instance, to repudiate the policy 
on the ground of fraud. However, the in surance com pany should disclose the 
reasons on the basis of which it has co me to such a conclusion and has to 
communicate such reasons to the claim ants under the life insurance policy which 
is sought to be repudiated. 
5.1.35 The illustrations given are only for dis tinguishing the two situations, viz., a 
misstatement or suppression of a material fact without an intention to deceive and 
one with an intention to deceive. There may be m yriad situations that cannot 
possibly be illustrated. However, the principle f or determ ining the existence of  
fraud needs to be clearly understood. 
5.1.36 Accordingly, the Law Com mission recommends that the insurer can repudiate a 
policy of life insurance at any tim e before  the expiry of a period of five years 
from the date of issuance of the policy or the date of commencement of risk or the 
date of revival of the policy or the date of the rider to the policy whichever is later 
on the ground of fraud. Where repudiation is on the ground of fraud, the insurer is 
not obliged to pay even the prem ium amounts to the claim ants under the policy. 
The insurer will have to com municate in  writing to the insured or the legal 
representatives/ nominees/ assignees of the insured the grounds and m aterials on 
which such decision is based. The Law C ommission r ecommends t hat t he 
statutory provision to give effect to the above change will also set out the 
definition of ‘fraud’, for which s.17 of the Indian Contract Act can be referred to. 
5.1.37 The practice of issuance of life insurance policies for a total period of less than 5 
years may possibly exist but no such details have been brought to the notice of the 
 60

Law Commission. It is expected that wher e the entire term  of the life insurance 
policy is as short as five years or le ss, the insurance com pany would be doubly 
careful to ensure that the antecedents of the policyholder are thoroughly checked.  
5.1.38 The above approach, it is expected, suffici ently balances the interests of both the 
policyholders as well as the insurers. It also accounts for the apprehension 
expressed by the insurer that any diluti on in the existing provision will encourage 
fraudulent practices. It requires greater de gree of diligence on the part of both the 
insurers as well as policyholders.  
 Final recommendations in regard to s.45 
5.1.39 To sum marise the final recom mendations of the Law Com mission in regard to 
s.45: 
(i) The period beyond which no repudiati on of a life insurance policy on any 
ground whatsoever be fixed at five years. This should be a sufficient 
period for an insurer to check the ve racity of the details provided by the 
insured at the time of issuance of the policy. After a period of 5 years after 
the coming into force of a life insurance policy, i.e., the date of issuance of 
the policy or the date of com mencement of such policy or the date of the 
revival of such policy or the date of the rider to such policy whichever is 
later, no insurer can repudiate a claim  thereunder on any ground 
whatsoever. 
(ii) The insurer can repudiate a policy of  life insurance at any tim e before the 
expiry of a period of five years from  the date of issuance of the policy or 
the date of com mencement of risk or the date of revival of the policy or 
the date of the rider to the policy whichever is later on the ground of fraud. 
The insurer will have to communicate in writing to the insured or the legal 
representatives/ nom inees/ assignees of the insured the grounds and 
materials on which such decision is based. The claim ants will in such 
instance not be entitled to either the policy am ount or the prem ium 
amounts. 
 61

(iii) The insurer can repudiate a policy of  life insurance at any tim e before the 
expiry of a period of five years from  the date of the policy or the date of 
commencement of risk or the date of revival of the policy or the date of 
the rider to the policy whichever is later on the ground that the insured had 
made a m isstatement of or suppressed a material fact, i.e., a fact m aterial 
to the assessm ent of the risk, either in the proposal form  or any other 
document on the basis of which the lif e insurance policy was issued or 
revived or a rider issued to it. W hile such repudiation will result in the 
claimants forfeiting the policy am ount it will not entail their forfeiting the 
premium amounts collected on the policy. Thus in case of repudiation of 
the policy on the ground of misstatement or suppression of a material fact, 
and not on the ground of fraud, the pr emiums collected on the policy till 
the date of repudiation will be liable to  be returned to the insured or the 
legal representatives/ nominees/ assignees of the insured. 
(iv) The misstatement of or suppression of fact will not be considered m aterial 
unless it has a direct bearing on the risk undertaken by the insurer. The 
onus is on the insurer to show that ha d the insurer been aware of the said 
fact no life insurance policy would have been issued to the insured.  
(v) No repudiation of the policy to be  permitted on the ground of fraud where 
the insured can prove that the suppression or m isstatement of the m aterial 
fact made was true to the best of his knowledge and belief or that there 
was no deliberate intention to suppress the fact or that such m isstatement 
of or suppression of a m aterial f act was within the knowledge of the 
insurer or the agent of the insurer. 
(vi) A person who solicits and negotiate s a contract of insurance should be 
deemed for the purpose of the form ation of the contract, to be the agent of 
the insurers, and that the knowledge of  such person should be deem ed to 
be the knowledge of the insurers. 
 62

(vii) The insurer will have to communicate in writing to the insured or the legal 
representatives/ nom inees/ assignees of the insured the grounds and 
materials on which the decision to  repudiate a policy on the ground of 
misstatement or suppression of a material fact is based. 
Suggested amendment of s.45 
5.1.40 Accordingly it is recommended that S.45 be amended as follows: 
(1) No policy of  lif e insurance sh all be called in question on any 
ground whatsoever after the expiry of  five years from  the date of 
the policy, i.e. from the date of issuance of the policy or the date of 
commencement of risk or the date of revival of the policy or the 
date of the rider to the policy whichever is later  
(2) A policy of life insurance m ay be called in question at any tim e 
within five years from the date of issuance of the policy or the date 
of commencement of risk or the date  of revival of the policy or the 
date of the rider to the policy whichever is later on the ground of 
fraud  
 Provided that the insurer will have to com municate in writing to 
the insured or the legal representatives/nom inees/assignees of  the 
insured the grounds and materials on which such decision is based  
 Explanation I: For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression 
‘fraud’ means any of  the f ollowing acts com mitted by the insured 
or by his agent, with the intent to  deceive the insurer or to induce 
the insurer to issue a life insurance policy: 
(a) the suggestion, as a fact of that  which is not true and which the 
insured does not believe to be true; 
(b) the active concealm ent of a fact by the insured having 
knowledge or belief of the fact; 
(c) any other act fitted to deceive; and 
(d) any such act or om ission as th e law specially declares to be 
fraudulent. 
Explanation II: Mere silence as to fact s likely to affect the 
assessment of the risk by the insurer is not fraud, unless the 
circumstances of the case are such that, regard being had to them , 
 63

it is the duty of the insured or hi s agent, keeping silence to speak, 
or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to speech. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) 
hereinabove, no insurer shall repudiate a life insurance policy on 
the ground of fraud if the insured can prove that the m isstatement 
of or suppression of a m aterial f act was true to the best of his 
knowledge and belief or that ther e was no deliberate intention to 
suppress the fact or that such m isstatement of or suppression of a 
material fact was within the knowle dge of the insurer or the agent 
of the insurer. 
 Explanation: A person who solicits and negotiates a contract of 
insurance should be deemed for the purpose of the formation of the 
contract, to be the agent of the insurer, and that the knowledge of 
such person should be deemed to be the knowledge of the insurer. 
(4) A policy of life insurance m ay be called in question at any tim e 
within five years from the date of issuance of the policy or the date 
of commencement of risk or the date  of revival of the policy or the 
date of the rider to the policy wh ichever is later on the ground that 
any statement of or suppression of a fact material to the expectancy 
of the life of the insured was inco rrectly made in the proposal or 
other docum ent on the basis of wh ich the policy was issued or 
revived or rider issued  
 Provided that the insurer will have to com municate in writing to 
the insured or the legal representatives/nom inees/assignees of  the 
insured the grounds and m aterials on which such decision to 
repudiate the policy of life insurance is based.  
 Provided further that in case of  repudiation of the policy on the 
ground of m isstatement or suppressi on of a m aterial fact, and not 
on the ground of fraud, the prem iums collected on the policy till 
the date of repudiation shall be pa id to the insured or the legal 
representatives/ nominees/ assignees of the insured within a period 
of ninety days from the date of such repudiation. 
 Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, the misstatement 
of or suppression of fact will not be considered m aterial unless it 
has a direct bearing on the risk undertaken by the insurer; the onus 
is on the insurer to show that had the insurer been aware of the said 
fact no life insurance policy would have been issued to the insured. 
 64

(5) Nothing in this section shall prevent the insurer f rom calling f or 
proof of age at any tim e if he is entitled to do so, and no policy 
shall be deemed to be called in question m erely because the term s 
of the policy are adjusted on subse quent proof that the age of the 
life insured was incorrectly stated in the proposal. 
 65

CHAPTER VI 
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER 
 
Existing Law 
 
6.1.1 S.38 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provides fo r assignment and transfer of insurance 
policies. S.38 provides for the transfer or  assignment of a policy of life insurance 
by an endorsement upon the policy itself or by separate instrum ent signed by the 
transferor/assignor or by any authorized agent and attested by one witness setting 
forth the fact of transferring assignm ent. The transfer/ assignment can be made in 
favour of the insurer also but shall not confer upon the transferee or assignee or 
his legal representative any right to su e for the amount secured under such policy 
until a notice in writing of  the transf er has been delivered both by the transf eror 
and transferee to the insurer. There can be  more than one transfer/ assignm ent as 
per sub-section (3) of this section. In such  cases the priority of claim s shall be 
governed in the order in which notices have been delivered. 
6.1.2 This section deals with both absolute  and conditional assignm ents, the form er 
transferring to the assignee all rights, title and interest which the assignor has in 
the policy without any defeasance clau se, and the latter being a conditional 
assignment as contem plated under sub-section (7) which creates an im mediate 
vested interest in the assignee but which is liable to be divested on the happening 
of events specified in the assignment. 
Proposals in the Consultation Paper 
6.1.3 In the Consultation Paper it was pointed out that there are certain anomalies in the 
working of sub-section (5) and sub-s ection (7) of s.38. A question was posed 
whether a conditional assignee is entitled to  obtain a loan under, or surrender, the 
policy without the concurrence of the insure d. It was pointed out that if the said 
question was answered in the affirm ative, the conditional assignment would stand 
converted into an absolute assignm ent a nd defeat the object of the form er. To 
 66

illustrate, a policyholder (A) obtains a lo an from a financier (B) upon assignm ent 
of the policy in favour of B. The assi gnment is on condition that upon repaym ent 
of the loan, B will reassign the policy to A.  Even before A can repay the loan to 
B, B borrows a loan from  C by assigning the policy in favour of C. This later 
assignment by B in favour of C renders the assignm ent by A in favour of B 
unconditional and defeats the condition attached to that assignment. 
6.1.4 While any transfer is subject to the term s and conditions specified in the 
instrument of transfer, the specific provisions in sub-section (5) of s.38 may mean 
either or both of the following: First,  under sub-section (7), the assignor m ay 
become entitled to the policy m oney if the assignment becomes inoperative (like 
when it does when the assignor repays the loan to the assignee); second, the 
insurer may not recognize the assignee as the only person entitled to benefit under 
the policy if the terms of assignment expressly or by implication do not confer on 
him any particular right or benef it and treat the insured f or such entitlem ent. For 
instance, if the insured reserves the right to receive the policy m oney on maturity, 
the assignee cannot exercise the right to surrender. Thirdly, sub-section (7) 
recognises as valid an assignm ent in fa vour of a person on condition that “the 
interest shall pass to som e other pers on on the happening of a specified event 
during the lif e time of the person whose lif e is insured”. To illustrate, A assigns 
his life insurance policy in favour of B in  consideration of B lending A a certain 
sum of m oney. One condition stipulated in the assignment is that in the event of  
the death of A, the amount payable under the policy would pass on to the wife and 
children of A. Such an assignm ent is recognised by sub-section (7) as valid. 
Likewise an assignm ent by A in favour of  his own survivors or any num ber of 
persons is also valid. The question that arises is what is the situation vis-à-vis B in 
such an event. Suppose B pre-deceases A, can the survivors of B claim  that they 
now become the assignees? The section is not clear on this. 
6.1.5 The Consultation Paper pointed out that  there was another difficulty if an 
assignment is duly executed but no notice ha s been delivered to the insurer under 
sub-section (2). The assignm ent is not i nvalid but the assignee will not have the 
 67

right to sue the insurer. It was accordi ngly suggested that, the provisions of sub-
sections (5) and (7) need reconsideration and revision so as to rem ove anomalies. 
However, a suggestion has been m ade that sub-section (7) should be dropped. 
This may, however, attract the application of s.130 of the Transfer of Property Act 
unless a proviso is m ade to exclude its application. Presently, sub-section (2) of 
s.130 which stipulates that the transferee of an actionable claim  may sue in his 
own name without obtaining the consent of the transferor has an exception to the 
effect that the said provision will not aff ect the provision of s.38 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938. The illustration under s.130 reads thus:  
 “A effects a policy on his own lif e with an Insurance Com pany and 
assigns it to a Bank for securing the paym ent of an existing or future debt. 
IF A dies, the Bank is entitled to recei ve the am ount of the policy and to 
sue on it without the concurrence of A’s executor, subject to the proviso in 
sub-section (1) of s.130 and to provisions of s.132.” 
S.132 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 s tipulates that “the transferee of an 
actionable claim shall take it subject to all the liabilities and equities and to which 
the transferor was subject in respect thereo f at the date of the transfer.” In other 
words, notwithstanding ss.130 and 132 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the 
assignment of  the insurance policy will not  be ef fective against the insurance 
company till it has notice of the assignm ent in terms of s.38 of the Act. If s.38 (7) 
of the Act is to be deleted as sugge sted, then the applicability s.130 of the 
Transfer of Property Act will also have to be excluded. 
6.1.6 The Act does not provide for partial assi gnment of policies required especially in 
case of assignm ents for collateral security  for loans, where the sum  assured is 
more than the am ount of loan. It was, th erefore, suggested that a new sub-section 
may be inserted to provide for partial assignment of policies with the rider that the 
original assignor is not allowed to further assign his residual rights to the third 
party with a view to preven t any clash of interest of several assignees at the tim e 
of making the claim. 
 68

6.1.7 The Consultation Paper noted that provisions of this section are applicable only to 
life insurance policies. It was accordingly suggested that the application of this 
provision be extended to all personal lines of non-life insurance business as well. 
6.1.8 Finally a suggestion was m ade in regard to the fee to be charged for 
acknowledgment of the notice of the transfer  of assignment. Since the fee of one 
rupee as presently indicated in s.38 (4) was wholly inadequate, it was suggested 
that the words ‘one rupee’ m ay be replaced by the words ‘not exceeding an 
amount prescribed by the Authority in the Regulations’. 
Response to the Proposal in the Consultation Paper 
6.1.9 By and large the responses received in relation to the suggestions contained in the 
Consultation Paper have been positive. Th e response of FICCI has been that s.38 
sub-section (7) should be retained. LIC and Aviva Life Insurance Com pany India 
(P) Ltd. have also made a similar suggestion. 
6.1.10 Om Kotak Mahindra Life Insurance Company Ltd., has recommended that a clear 
distinction be drawn between absolute and conditional assignm ent. They also 
suggested that the absolute assignee should step into the shoes of the policyholder 
and be entitled to deal with the policy in any manner, including obtaining a loan, 
without requiring the consent of the original policyholder. Conversely, the 
conditional assignee should be barred from  dealing with the policy without the 
consent of the original policyholder. As  regards notice of assignm ent not being 
given to the insurer, it has been suggested that in such a case the insurer should be 
permitted to proceed on the basis that no assignment has been made.  
6.1.11 The advocate M.K.P. Kannan from Madurai suggests that partial assignment of an 
insurance policy should be perm itted with a stipulation that the insured will not 
further assign the residual right in the policy.  
6.1.12 The National Insurance Academy, Pune (NIA) points out that since there does not 
appear to be any difference between the two terms ‘transfer’ and ‘assignment’, the 
word ‘transfer’ m ay be deleted. Further th e term ‘assignment’ may be defined to 
 69

mean “transfer of right, interest and title under the policy’. The NIA has agreed to 
the suggestion m ade in the Consultation Paper that the provisions of this section 
be extended to all personal lines of non-life insurance business.  
6.1.13 The HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Ltd. points out that s.38 (7) 
requires to be am ended to m ake it clear  that the conditional assignee does not 
have the sam e legal position as the abso lute assignee. The present provision in 
s.38 (7) envisages two eventualities: (i) the assignee predeceasing the insured; and 
ii) the insured surviving the term  of  the policy. To illustrate, policyholder A 
assigns a life insurance policy (for a te rm of 20 years) in favour of B. The 
stipulation is that if B pre-deceases A, the benefit under the policy will revert to 
A. Secondly, if A survives even after the period of the policy is over, then also the 
benefit under the policy would revert to A. It has been suggested this position be 
made explicit while redrafting s.38 (7). As  regards partial assignment, it has been 
suggested that the change as proposed in the Consultation Paper m ay not be 
necessary at all because in any event it is not intended to perm it the original 
assignor (insured) to further assign the residual rights. 
6.1.14 The IRDA has during its interactions with the Com mission expressed concern 
about the actual working of the provision relating to assignm ent and transfers of 
policies. It appears that there could be certain unscrupulous elem ents running a 
racket whereby even lapsed life insurance policies are purchased for a given price 
and then revived on the expectancy of  receiving the sum  on m aturity of the 
policy. However, it is feared that since the am ount becom es payable upon the 
death of the policyholder, it m ay not encourage such purchasers of policies to go 
to any length to ensure that the am ount becomes payable. Som e safeguards will 
have to be built into the provision to prevent the misuse of this facility.  
Views of the Law Commission 
6.1.15 The Law Com mission after considering the matter and the responses received is 
of the view that sub-section (7) of  s.38 should be retained, with som e 
modification for the purpose of greater clarity. 
 70

6.1.16 The Com mission also accepts the suggesti on that a clear distinction be m ade 
between absolute assignm ent and conditiona l assignment since this is leading to 
some confusion while operationalising the schem e of assignm ent and transfer. 
There is a need to clearly spell out th e contingencies under which an assignm ent 
or transfer would be treated as a cond itional one. It is proposed to retain both 
terminologies, viz., assignm ent and transfer  and use them  in the alternative to 
enable greater flexibility in the working of these provisions. It is also proposed 
that a provision be inserted for par tial assignm ent conditional upon restricting 
further assignm ents of the residual ri ghts. This would be by a necessary 
clarification. Further, the provision should be appropriately amended to extend its 
applicability to all personal lines of non-life insurance business as well.  
6.1.17 The Commission finds considerable m erit in the apprehension expressed by the 
IRDA regarding misuse of the facility of assignment and transfer and accordingly 
proposes to build in certain safeguard s like disclosure of reasons for the 
assignment, the antecedents of the a ssignee, the exact term s on which the 
assignment is being made and an obligation upon the insurer to get the credentials 
of the assignee verified at the cost of the insured. If the insurer is not satisfied that 
the assignm ent is bonafide, there would be an option to decline to register the 
assignment or transfer upon reasons in  writing to be com municated to the 
policyholder subject to such decision be ing challenged by way of petition before 
the Grievance Redressal Authority. Where there is a dispute between assignees as 
to which of  the assignm ents is prior in point of tim e for the purposes of a claim , 
the dispute should be adjudicated by the GRA. 
 Final recommendations of the Law Commission in regard to s.38 
6.1.18 The final recom mendations of the Law Commission in regard to s.38 m ay be 
summarised as under: 
(a) Sub-section (7) of s.38 should be re tained, with som e m odification for the 
purpose of greater clarity. 
 71

(b) The contingencies under which an assignm ent or transfer would be treated as 
a conditional one to be clearly spelt out. The provision be am ended to indicate 
that except where the endorsem ent of  assignm ent or transfer expressly 
indicates that the assignm ent or transf er is conditional in term s of s.38(7), 
every assignment or transf er will be deem ed to be an absolute assignm ent or 
transfer and the assignee or transf eree as the case m ay be, will be deem ed to 
be absolute assignee or transferee respectively. 
(c) Both terminologies, viz., assignment and transfer be retained in s.38 and they 
be used in the alternative to enable gr eater flexibility in the working of  these 
provisions. 
(d) A separate sub-section be inserted to indicate that in case of partial assignment 
or transfer of a policy of insurance, the liability of the insurer shall be lim ited 
to the am ount secured by the partial a ssignment or transfer and such policy 
holder shall not be entitled to further assign or transfer the residual am ount 
payable under the same policy. 
(e) The provision should be appropriately am ended to extend its applicability to 
all personal lines of non-life insurance business as well. 
(f) The provision be am ended to build in  certain safeguards. The policy holder 
will have to disclose reasons for the assignm ent, the antecedents of the 
assignee and the exact term s on which the assignment is being m ade. There 
will be an obligation upon the insurer to  get the credentials of the assignee 
verified at the cost of the insured. If  the insurer is not satisf ied that the 
assignment is bonafide, there would be an  option to decline to register the 
assignment or transfer upon reasons in  writing to be com municated to the 
policyholder subject to such decisi on being challenged by way of petition 
before the Grievance Redressal Authority. 
 
 72

Suggested amendment of s.38 
6.1.19 Accordingly the Law Commission recommends that s.38 be recast as under: 
(1) A transfer or assignm ent of a policy of insurance, wholly or in part, 
whether with or without consideration, m ay be m ade only by an 
endorsement upon the policy itself or by a separate instrum ent, signed in 
either case by the transferor or by the assignor or his duly authorized agent 
and attested by at least one witness, specifically setting forth the fact of 
transfer or assignm ent and the reasons  therefor, the antecedents of the 
assignee and the exact terms on which the assignment is made. 
 Provided that an insurer m ay decline to act upon such endorsem ent where 
it has suf ficient reason to believe that such transfer or assignm ent is not 
bonafide or is not in the interests of the policyholder or in public interest.  
Provided f urther that the insurer will record in writing such reasons f or 
refusal to act upon the endorsem ent and com municate the sam e to the 
policyholder not later than 30 days from the date of the policyholder 
giving notice of such transfer or assignment.  
Provided further that any person aggrieved by the decision of an insurer to 
decline to act upon such transfer or assignment may within a period of not 
more than 30 days from the date of receipt of the com munication from the 
insurer containing reasons for such refusal, prefer a claim to the Grievance 
Redressal Authority constituted under section __. 
(2) Subject to the provisions in sub-s ection (1), the transfer or assignm ent 
shall be complete and effectual upon the execution of such endorsement or 
instrument duly attested but except where the transfer or assignm ent is in 
favour of the insurer shall not be opera tive as against an insurer and shall 
not confer upon the transferee or assign ee, or his legal representative, any 
right to sue for the am ount of such policy or the m oneys secured thereby 
until a notice in writing of  the transf er or assignm ent and either the said 
endorsement or instrum ent itself or a copy thereof certified to be correct 
by both transferor and transferee or their duly authorized agents have been 
delivered to the insurer: 
Provided that where the insurer m aintains one or m ore places of business 
in India, such notice shall be delivered only at the place in India 
mentioned in the policy for the purpose or at the principal place of 
business of the insurer in India. 
 73

(3) The date on which the notice referred to in sub-section ( 2) is delivered to 
the insurer shall regulate the priority  of all claim s under a transfer or 
assignment as between persons interested in the policy; and where there is 
more than one instrum ent of transfer  or assignm ent the priority of  the 
claims under such instruments shall be governed by the order in which the 
notices referred to in sub-section (2) are delivered. 
 Provided that if any dispute as to pr iority of  payment arises as between 
assignees, the dispute will be ref erred to the Grievance Redressal 
Authority. 
(4) Upon the receipt of the notice referred to in sub-section ( 2), the insurer 
shall record the fact of such transfer or assignm ent together with the date 
thereof and the nam e of the transfer ee or the assignee and shall, on the 
request of the person by whom the notice was given, or of the transferee or 
assignee, on payment of such fee as may be specified by regulations, grant 
a written acknowledgem ent of the receipt  of such notice; and any such 
acknowledgement shall be conclusive evidence against the insurer that he 
has duly received the notice to which such acknowledgment relates. 
(5) Subject to the term s and conditions of the transfer or assignm ent, the 
insurer shall, from  the date of the r eceipt of the notice referred to in sub-
section (2), recognise the transferee or a ssignee named in the notice as the 
absolute transferee or assignee en titled to benefit under the policy, and 
such person shall be subject to all liabilities and equities to which the 
transferor or assignor was subject at th e date of the transfer or assignm ent 
and may institute any proceedings in relation to the policy, obtain a loan 
under the policy or surrender the policy without obtaining the consent of 
the transferor or assignor or making him a party to such proceedings. 
Explanation. Except where the endorsement referred to in sub-section (1) 
expressly indicates that the assignm ent or transf er is conditional in term s 
of sub-section (7) hereunder, every assignm ent or transfer will be deem ed 
to be an absolute assignm ent or transf er and the assignee or transferee as 
the case m ay be will be deem ed to th e absolute assignee or transf eree 
respectively. 
(6) Any rights and rem edies of an assi gnee or transferee of  a policy of life 
insurance under an assignm ent or tr ansfer effected prior to the 
commencement of this Act shall not be  affected by the provisions of this 
section. 
(7) Notwithstanding any law or custom  having the force of law to the 
contrary, an assignm ent in favour of a person m ade upon the condition 
that  
 74

(a) the proceeds under the policy will becom e payable to the 
policyholder or the nom inee or nominees in the event of 
either the assignee/ transferee predeceasing the insured; or 
(b)  the insured surviving the term of the policy; 
shall be valid. 
Provided that a conditional assignee sh all not be entitled to obtain a loan 
on the policy or surrender a policy.  
(8) In the case of the partial assignm ent or transfer of a polic y of insurance under 
sub-section ( 1), the liability of the insurer shall be lim ited to the am ount 
secured by partial assignm ent or transfer and such policyholder shall not be 
entitled to further assign or transfer the residual am ount payable under the 
same policy. 
 75

CHAPTER VII 
NOMINATION 
7.1.1 S.39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provide s that the holder of a policy of life 
insurance may nominate one or m ore persons to whom  the money secured by the 
policy shall be paid in the event of th e death of the policyholder. A nom ination 
shall get automatically cancelled as per s .39 (4) where a transfer or assignm ent of 
the policy has been m ade in term s of s.38 of the Act. As per the proviso to s.39 
(4), where an assignm ent is m ade in favour  of the insurer itself in consideration 
for a loan advanced by the insurer to the policyholder, the nom ination will not be 
cancelled but the rights of  the nom inee will be  effected only to the extent of  the 
insurer’s interest in the policy. W here the loan is repaid and the policy is 
reassigned to the policyholder, the nom ination will rem ain valid. To illustrate, 
policyholder A is entitled to an am ount of  Rs.2 lakhs upon m aturity of his life 
insurance policy. A borrows Rs.50,000/- from  the insurance company and assigns 
the policy in its favour. In the event of A’s death without repaym ent of the loan 
amount, the insurance com pany can retain only such am ount as is payable to it 
and A’s nom inees are entitled to receive  the balance am ount payable under the 
policy. The Consultation Paper has pointed out  that this provision is unclear as to 
the position where the assignee is not an insurer. The question posed was whether 
in such an event, the prepaym ent of the loan advanced by the assignee would 
automatically revive the nomination made by the policyholder.  
7.1.2 Another area, which required clarificati on, was that of a beneficial nom inee as 
distinguished from a collector nominee. Under s.38 (6) where a nom inee survives 
the insured person, the policy money would be payable to such nominee survivor. 
The question then arises whether this paym ent to the nom inee is to the exclusion 
of the legal representatives and heirs or even creditors who m ay have a legitimate 
claim against the estate of the deceased of which the m oney payable on m aturity 
of the life insurance policy forms part.  
 76

Law Commission’s earlier recommendation 
7.1.3 The Consultation Paper referred extensively to the earlier recom mendations made 
by the Law Com mission in its 82 nd Report on Effect of nomination under s.39, 
Insurance Act, 1938  (1980). The Law Com mission had in the said Report noted 
that a policyholder cannot confer on any nom inee any right higher than what he 
himself has. The Com mission recommended the insertion of certain provisions in 
s.39 to the effect that “where the holde r of a policy of life insurance on his own 
life nom inates his parents, or his spous e, or his children, or his spouse and 
children, or any of them, the nominee or nominees shall be beneficially entitled to 
the amount payable by the insurer to him or them under sub-section (6) unless it is 
proved that the holder of  the policy, having re gard to the nature of  his title to the 
policy, could not have conf erred any such  beneficial title on the nom inee”. The 
other recommendation was that where the nom inee survives the policyholder but 
dies before the amount is paid, such amount “shall be payable to the heirs or legal 
representatives of the nom inee or nom inees or the holder of a succession 
certificate, as the case m ay be, and they shall be benef icially entitled to such 
amount”. 
7.1.4 The Governm ent did not act upon the aforem entioned recom mendation. 
Meanwhile, in 1984, the Suprem e Court in Sarbati Devi v. Usha Devi  AIR 1984 
SC 346 held that the provisions of s.39 could not alter the position of succession 
under the law. It was clarified that a mere nomination made under s.39 does not 
have the effect of conferring on the nom inee any beneficial interest in the am ount 
payable under the policy on the death of the assured. The court further observed 
that the nom inee acquires no interest in the policy during the lif e tim e of  the 
policy holder, therefore, after the death of the policy holder, the amount under the 
policy becom es payable to his legal heirs, the nom inee is only the authorized 
person to collect the paym ent so that insu rer gets a valid discharge of  its liability 
under the policy. 
7.1.5 The decision in Sarbati Devi prompted the Law Commission to modify its earlier 
view while dealing with nom ination in  regard to Provident Fund. In its 137 th 
 77

Report on the “ Need for creating office of Ombudsman and for evolving 
legislative administrative measures inte r alia to relieve hardships caused by 
inordinate delays in settling Provident Fund claims of beneficiaries” (1990), the 
Commission recom mended that a statutory pr ovision be m ade to the effect that 
the amount payable will vest in the nom inee who will be called the ‘beneficiary 
nominee’ unless the policyholder names some person as a ‘collector nom inee’ for 
the purpose of collecting the am ount on behalf of the legal representatives of the 
deceased policyholder. In other words, an option would be available to the 
policyholder to express in clear term s whether the nom inee concerned is a 
beneficial nominee or a collector nominee.  
7.1.6 In the Consultation Paper, the above recom mendation made in the 137 th Report 
was reiterated. An alternative was to conf er the absolute ownership of the policy 
money on the nom inee to bring it on par with the status of a nom inee under 
s.45ZA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. It was further suggested in the 
Consultation Paper that a proviso m ay be  added that where a policyholder dies 
after the maturity of the po licy but before he can be paid the proceeds thereunder 
the nom ination m ade would continue to be effectual for receiving the m aturity 
amount on the policy. 
Responses to the Consultation Paper 
7.1.7 As far as FICCI is concerned, they have m ade a suggestion that “the proposed 
amendment to s.39 should retain the provision of nom ination for unassigned 
portion of the policy.” Birla Sun Life Insu rance Co. Ltd., has pointed out that it is 
desirable to amend s.39 to bring it on pa r with that under s.45ZA of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 so that the insurer gets a valid discharge for the policy 
monies upon paym ent to the nom inee without the insurer getting em broiled in a 
litigation between the legal heirs of the policyholder. They have however pointed 
out that there is a difference between nom ination under s.39 and that under 
s.45ZA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 in as m uch as the right under a life 
insurance contract is the right to a debt , which is m ore in the nature of  an 
actionable claim. Thus, the nom inee’s right is only to receive the policy m onies 
 78

subject to all liabilities and equities to which the policyholder him self was 
subject. 
7.1.8 The Punjab State Law Commission has communicated its support to bringing s.39 
on par with s.45ZA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
7.1.9 Om Kotak points out that there is a need for clarification in regard to the concept 
of ‘absolute nom inee’. They also suggest that there should be a full discharge of 
the insurer once the am ount is paid to the nom inee. The National Insurance 
Academy has suggested that the law be m ade clear that a nom inee does not have 
ownership rights to m oney. This suggestion has been concurred with by the 
HDFC. 
7.1.10 The Government of West Bengal has sugge sted that the provision be am ended to 
bring out the distinction between collector nominee and beneficial nominee. 
7.1.11 Life Insurance Corporation of India ha s recommended that s.39 be retained as it 
is. The General Insurers Public Sector A ssociation has agreed to the proposal of 
the Law Commission in its Consultation Paper. 
The Law Commission’s views 
7.1.12 There appears to be a consensus of sorts on the need for drawing a clear 
distinction between a beneficial nom inee and a collector nom inee. It is not 
possible to agree to the suggestion m ade by some of the insurers that in all cases 
the payment to the nom inee would tantamount to a full discharge of the insurer’s 
liability under the policy and that unless the contrary is expressed, the nom inee 
would be the beneficial nom inee. Although it is true that this is the law in USA, 
Canada and South Africa, the social rea lities of our country where the death of a 
sole breadwinner of  the f amily im mediately throws the rem aining f amily into 
hardship cannot be lost sight of. To deny, in such instance, the right of the legal 
representatives to the policy am ount on the basis that the nom inee is a different 
person seem s harsh. On the other hand, what  appears reasonable is to give an 
option to the policyholder to clearly expr ess whether the nom inee will collect the 
 79

money on behalf of the legal representatives (in other words such nominee will be 
the collector nom inee) or whether the nom inee will be the absolute owner of  the 
monies in which case such nominee will be the beneficial nominee. Public interest 
and the peculiar social realities in I ndia cannot perm it the adoption of the 
procedures followed in Canada, USA or  South Africa. The Com mission is not 
agreeable to the suggestion that a provisi on similar to s.45 ZA as in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 should be adopted. 
7.1.13 The suggestion that a proviso be added to make the nom ination effectual for the 
nominee to receive the policy m oney in  case the policyholder dies after the 
maturity of the policy but bef ore it can be encashed, has also been welcom ed by 
the responses, and is hereby recommended. 
 Final recommendations of the Law Commission in regard to s.39 
7.1.14 After considering all the responses and reexamining the entire issue, the final 
recommendations of the Law Com mission regard to s.39 m ay be sum marised as 
under: 
(a) A clear distinction be m ade in th e provision itself between a beneficial 
nominee and a collector nominee. 
(b) It is not possible to agree to the suggestion m ade by som e of the insurers 
that in all cases the paym ent to the nom inee would tantam ount to a full 
discharge of the insurer’s liability under the policy and that unless the 
contrary is expressed, the nominee would be the beneficial nominee. 
(c) An option be given to the policyhol der to clearly express whether the 
nominee will collect the m oney on behalf  of the legal representatives (in 
other words such nom inee will be the collector nominee) or whether the 
nominee will be the absolute owner of  the m onies in which case such 
nominee will be the beneficial nominee. 
 80

(d) A proviso be added to m ake the nomination effectual for the nom inee to 
receive the policy money in case the policyholder dies after the maturity of 
the policy but before it can be encashed. 
Suggested amendment of s.39 
7.1.15 To give effect to the above recommendations, the Law Commission is of the view 
that s.39 be recast as follows: 
(1) The holder of a policy of life in surance on his own life m ay, when 
effecting the policy or at any tim e before the policy m atures for payment, 
nominate the person or persons to whom  the money secured by the policy 
shall be paid in the event of his death: 
Provided that, where any nom inee is a m inor, it shall be lawful for the 
policyholder to appoint in the prescribed m anner any person to receive the 
money secured by the policy in the ev ent of his death during the m inority 
of the nominee. 
(2) Any such nom ination in order to be ef fectual shall, unless it is 
incorporated in the text of the policy itself, be m ade by an endorsement on 
the policy com municated to the insu rer and registered by him  in the 
records relating to the policy and a ny such nom ination may at any tim e 
before the policy m atures for paym ent be cancelled or changed by an 
endorsement or a further endorsem ent or a will, as the case m ay be, but 
unless notice in writing of any such  cancellation or change has been 
delivered to the insurer, the insure r shall not be liable for any paym ent 
under the policy m ade bona fide by him  to a nom inee mentioned in the 
text of the policy or registered in records of the insurer. 
(3) The insurer shall furnish to the policy-holder a written acknowledgment of 
having registered a nom ination or a cancellation or change thereof, and 
may charge such fee as m ay be speci fied by regulations for registering 
such cancellation or change. 
(4) A transfer or assignm ent of a polic y made in accordance with s.98 shall 
automatically cancel a nomination: 
Provided that the assignm ent of a polic y to the insurer who bears the risk 
on the policy at the tim e of  the assignm ent, in consideration of  a loan 
granted by that insurer on the security  of the policy within its surrender 
value, or its re-assignm ent on repaym ent of the loan shall not cancel a 
 81

nomination, but shall affect the rights of the nominee only to the extent of 
the insurer's interest in the policy.  
Provided that the transfer or assignm ent of a policy, whether wholly or in 
part, in consideration of a loan adva nced by the transferee or assignee to 
the policyholder, will not cancel the nom ination but shall affect the rights 
of the nom inee only to the extent of the interest of  the transf eree or 
assignee as the case may be in the policy. 
Provided that the nom ination, which has been autom atically cancelled 
consequent upon the transfer or assi gnment, the sam e nom ination shall 
stand automatically revived when th e policy is reassigned by the assignee 
or retransferred by the transferee in favour of the policy holder on 
repayment of loan other than on a security of policy to the insurer. 
(5) Where the policy m atures for paym ent during the lif etime of  the person 
whose life is insured or where the nom inee or, if there are m ore nominees 
than one, all the nom inees die before the policy m atures for payment, the 
amount secured by the policy shall be payable to the policy-holder or his 
heirs or legal representatives or th e holder of a succession certificate, as 
the case may be. 
(6) Where the nominee or if there are more nominees than one, a nom inee or 
nominees survive the person whose lif e is insured, the am ount secured by 
the policy shall be payable to such survivor or survivors. 
(7) Subject to the other provisions of this section, where the holder of a policy 
of insurance on his own life nom inates his parents, or his spouse, or his 
children, or his spouse and children, or any of them , the nom inee or 
nominees shall be beneficially entitled to the am ount payable by the 
insurer to him  or them  under sub-section ( 6) unless it is proved that the 
holder of the policy, having regard to the nature of  his title to the policy, 
could not have conferred any such beneficial title on the nominee. 
(8) Subject as aforesaid, where the nom inee, or if there are m ore nom inees 
than one, a nom inee or nom inees, to whom  sub-section ( 7) applies, die 
after the person whose life is insured but before the amount secured by the 
policy is paid, the amount secured by the policy, or so much of the amount 
secured by the policy as represents the share of the nom inee or nom inees 
so dying (as the case m ay be), shall be payable to the heirs or legal 
representatives of the nom inee or nom inees or the holder of a succession 
certificate, as the case m ay be, and th ey shall be benef icially entitled to 
such amount. 
 82

(9) Nothing in sub-sections ( 7) and (8) shall operate to destroy or im pede the 
right of any creditor to be paid out of the proceeds of any policy of life 
insurance. 
(10) The provisions of sub-sections (7), (8) and (9) shall apply to all policies of 
life insurance maturing for payment after the commencement of this Act. 
(11) Every policyholder shall have an option to indicate in clear term s whether 
the person or persons being nom inated by the policyholder is/ are a 
beneficiary nominee(s) or a collector nominee(s). 
 Provided where the policyholder fails to indicate whether the person being 
nominated is a benef iciary nom inee or a collector nom inee it will be 
deemed that the person nominated is a beneficiary nominee. 
 Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section the expression 
‘beneficiary nom inee’ m eans a nom inee who is entitled to receive the 
entire proceeds payable under a policy of insurance subject to other 
provisions of this Act and the expr ession ‘collector nom inee’ m eans a 
nominee other than a beneficiary nominee. 
(12) The collector nom inee shall m ake pa yment the benefits arising out of 
policy to the beneficiary nom inee or his legal heirs or representative in 
accordance with the regulations made by the Authority. 
(13) Where a policyholder dies after the maturity of the policy but the proceeds 
and benefit of his policy has not been made to him because of his death, in 
such a case, his nominee shall be entitled to the proceeds and benefit of his 
policy. 
(14) The provisions of this section sh all not apply to any policy of life 
insurance to which s.6 of the Married W omen’s Property Act, 1874, 
applies or has at any time applied: 
Provided that where a nom ination m ade whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, in favour of the wife of the person who has 
insured his life or of his wife and ch ildren or any of them  is expressed, 
whether or not on the face of the policy, as being m ade under this section, 
the said s.6 shall be deem ed not to apply or not to have applied to the 
policy. 
 
 83

CHAPTER VIII 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO PENALTIES AND OTHER CHANGES 
8.1.1 Paras 8.8 and 8.9 of the Consultation Pape r (Appendix I to this Report) discussed 
the proposed changes to the provisions of  the Act that prescribed penalties and 
other provisions in which changes were called for. The responses received have 
more or less welcom ed the proposals. Fo r want of specific response from  the 
Central Governm ent and the IRDA, the Law Com mission, however, is not 
expressing any view on the proposal in th e Consultation Paper in regard to the 
Insurance Councils (s.64C, powers of the Executive Com mittee (s.64I), and 
powers of the Executive Com mittee of th e Life Insurance Councils to hold 
examination for insurance agents (s.64UI). Likewise, no recommendation is being 
made on the proposal that a trade uni on be perm itted to carry on insurance 
business. 
Final recommendation of the Law Commissi on in regard to penalties and other 
provisions 
8.1.2 The final recom mendation of the Law Commission in regard to the other 
proposals in the Consultation Paper c oncerning penalties and certain other 
provisions are as under: 
(i) The amount of penalties prescribed in ss.102-105C be enhanced so that it 
is of a deterrent nature. A m inimum penalty be indicated in each of these 
provisions. 
(ii) The penalties will be adjudicated and levied after an enquiry by the 
Adjudicating/ Investigating Officer  to be appointed by the IRDA as 
indicated in para 4.3.8 above. The provisions will be accordingly amended 
to indicate this position. 
(iii) In relation to s.53 (2) (b) which deals with the grounds on which the IRDA 
can apply f or winding up by the court, si nce clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of  
sub-section (2) are the very grounds  on which the IRDA can cancel the 
registration of an insurance com pany under s.3 (4), these clauses m ay be 
 84

omitted. However, clause (iv) m ay be retained. In sub-section (1) of s.53, 
reference to Companies Act, 1913 be substituted by Companies Act, 1956.  
(iv) In relation to s.54 concerni ng voluntary winding up, the provision be 
amended to the effect that an insurance com pany should not be wound up 
except on the ground that by reason of its liabilities it cannot continue its 
business.  
(v) In relation to s.58 concerning the schem e for partial winding up in sub-
sections (3) and (4), reference to the Com panies Act, 1913 m ay be 
substituted by the Companies Act 1956. In sub-section (4), the words ‘s.12 
of the Indian Com panies Act, 1913’ be substituted by ‘s.15 of the 
Companies Act, 1956’ and the words ‘ss.15 and 16’ be replaced by ‘s.17’.  
(vi) In relation to ss.52A to 52G wh ich deal with the m anagement by an 
administrator, the provisions be amended to provide that if the IRDA after 
giving an opportunity to the insurer a nd after taking into consideration the 
interest of policy holders, is of the opinion that it is necessary and proper 
to appoint an administrator to manage the affairs of the insurer carrying on 
life insurance business, the IRDA m ay, by an order, do so. The 
administrator shall receive such re muneration as the IRDA m ay direct. 
The IRDA m ay appoint som e other pers on as an adm inistrator if the one 
appointed earlier is not able to m anage the affairs of the insurer. Sub-
sections (1), (2) and (3) of s.52A be am ended to give effect to the 
aforesaid recommendations.  
(vii) S.52A be am ended to provide for the period for which an adm inistrator 
will initially be appointed. It m ay be appropriate if the lim it in this regard 
is provided in the statute subject to the proposed provisions of s.52D. 
Since s.52BB (9) which vests in the adm inistrator powers of the civil 
court, s.52A be am ended to indicate that the adm inistrator so appointed 
should be qualified and competent to exercise such powers. 
(viii) S.52BB (2) be amended to provide that the appeal against the order of the 
Administrator will lie to the IRDA. 
 85

(ix) S.52D dealing with term ination of appointm ent of adm inistrator be 
amended to confer the power of cance llation of the order of appointm ent 
on the IRDA.  
(x) The punishm ent by way of fine fo r withholding docum ents of property 
from the Administrator under s.52F be enhanced to Rs.5,000/-. 
(xi) The protection of action taken in good faith, as provided for in s.52G, be 
extended to the officers of the IRDA. 
(xii) In light of the above am endments, s.52E be am ended to substitute the 
word “Central Government” with ‘IRDA’. 
(xiii) Ss.52H to 52N be deleted in view  of the changed policy whereby private 
players have been permitted to carry on insurance business.  
(xiv) The words and digits “or s.98” occurring in s.59 relating to return of 
deposits, be omitted. 
(xv) In view of the express provision that no insurer other than an Indian 
insurance company shall begin to carry on any class of insurance business 
in India, the provisions relating to external com panies, ss.62 to 64, be 
repealed. 
(xvi) S.64UL be am ended to substitute  the word “Central Governm ent” by 
“IRDA”. 
(xvii) S.113 (1) relating to acquisition of surrender values be am ended to 
indicate that the IRDA may from time to time notify the minimum amount 
of the paid up value and annuity. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 86

CHAPTER IX 
OTHER TOPICS IN THE CONSULTATION PAPER ON WHICH THE  LAW 
COMMISSION DOES NOT PROPOSE TO MAKE ANY 
RECOMMENDATION AT THIS STAGE 
 
9.1.1 In the Consultation Paper, a large number of grounds of revision had been 
indicated. However, the recom mendation marked the following issues have been 
further elaborated upon in the consulta tion exercise and final recom mendations 
have been made hereinabove: 
(a) Deletion of redundant provisions in the Insurance Act, 1938; 
(b) Deletion of transitional provisions; 
(c) Merger of provisions of the IRDA Act with the Insurance Act; 
(d) Issues of assignment, nomination and repudiation of claims; 
(e) Setting up of an independent Grievance Redressal Mechanism; 
9.1.2 However, as regards the following topics, the consultation exercise has revealed 
that they involve either policy decisi ons or deliberation by expert bodies. The 
Law Commission is not in a position to make recommendations on these topics 
unless there is further exam ination at vari ous levels in consultation with expert 
bodies. Some of these topics are briefly discussed hereunder: 
Insurance Surveyors 
9.1.3 S.64 UM of the Insurance Act, 1938 provi des for licencing of surveyors and loss 
assessors. The Consultation Paper had proposed as under: 
“The provision requires to be am ended to expressly em power the 
Authority to issue licence on the sam e grounds of qualifications and 
disqualifications as specified in s.42 (1) & (2) for insurance agents.  
 87

The ground found in Regulation 8 (4) for cancellation of licence of a 
surveyor who fails to discharge duties and responsibilities in a satisfactory 
and professional manner or violates the code of conduct prescribed by the 
Regulations requires to be incorporated in S.64 UM (1) (G). 
A provision for suspension of licence,  as provided in Regulation 8 (4) 
should be incorporated in the Act”. 
9.1.4 S.64 UM (1A) of the Act requires ever y surveyor and loss assessor to com ply 
with the code of conduct and other profe ssional requirements as may be specified 
by regulations m ade by the IRDA. Conse quent to this provision, the IRDA has 
framed regulations prescribing m inimum qualifications for licencing of surveyors 
and loss assessors. The Consultation Paper had proposed that there be in 
expression provision in regard to the func tions to be perform ed by surveyors and 
loss assessors strictly in accordance with  the code of conduct laid down in the 
regulations of  the IRDA. The power to settle claim s be exercised by an 
Adjudicating Officer to be appointed by the IRDA. It was further proposed that 
appointment and paym ent to surveyors/loss assessors should be on rotation and 
controlled by IRDA. Finally, it was proposed that the requirement of a written test 
for issuing licence to any person to act as a surveyor be done away with because 
the new trainees are well-qualified technical graduates.  
Response to the proposal 
9.1.5 Although a wide range of the responses ha ve been received to the above proposal 
contained in the Consultation Paper, the most exhaustive response has been from  
the Institute of  Insurance Surveyors and Adjusters (IISA). The principal 
suggestion is that “the Act should spell out only the Policy Fram ework. All 
regulatory issues should be within the purview of the Regulator. All operational 
and adm inistrative issues should fall unde r the purview of the self-regulating 
Chartered Institute”. Consequently, the IISA has suggested that the system  of 
licencing of surveyors should be abolished. They would like to have a system  of 
issuance of certificate of practice by a Chartered Institute of  Insurance Surveyors 
 88

and Loss Adjusters of India. The IISA s uggests that where the claim  is not less 
than Rs.20,000/-, the holding of such certif icate should be m andatory before an 
insurer can entrust the work of survey or loss assessm ent to such surveyor/ loss 
assessor. Another im portant suggestion of  the IISA is that there should be a 
provision for appointing joint surv eyor/ loss assessor depending on the 
requirement. 
9.1.6 While the Law Com mission appreciates the detailed suggestions given by the 
IISA, it realises that the issue involves a policy decision to be taken. For instance, 
the decision to abolish the system  of  licencing and to constitute a Chartered 
Institute for loss assessors has to be ta ken at a policy level. The Law Com mission 
does not consider such decisions to be within the scope of its present reference. 
Therefore, the Law Com mission is not in a position to accept the suggestion of 
the IISA in this regard. 
9.1.7 The response of the General Insurers’ (P ublic Sector) Association of India has 
been for a retention of the existing provisions where the appointment of surveyors 
is within the dom ain of  the insurer rath er than give any further powers to the 
IRDA. It is suggested that the decision to  settle a claim after a report is called for 
from a second surveyor, should be left to  the GRA. The response of the General 
Insurance Company is that there should be no interference by the regulator after a 
licence is issued to a surveyor. It suggests that the IISA m ay also be consulted in 
the m atter of appointm ent of surveyor s. Likewise, United India Insurance 
Company also opposes a change in the provi sions to give any greater role to the 
IRDA. 
9.1.8 FICCI’s suggestion is that there should be no practice of licencing of surveyors 
and that the IRDA should be em powered to  prescribe the qualifications. It has 
suggested that there should be an institute of surveyors approved by the IRDA. 
Also, it has suggested that the m onetary limit for m andating survey should done 
away with and that the IRDA should be empowered to prescribe the class of 
 89

business and m onetary lim its f or which survey by qualified surveyors is m ade 
mandatory.  
  
Law Commission’s response 
9.1.9 The Law Com mission appreciates the con cerns expressed by the respondents to 
the proposals made in regard to surveyors and loss assessors. However, it appears 
that there is no agreem ent as such on wh ether the system  of licencing should be 
continued or abolished and whether there should be a greater role for the IRDA in 
this regard. Moreover, this is essentially  a policy decision is not within the scope 
be taken by the Law Commission. 
9.1.10 The Law Com mission does not therefore c onsider it appropriate to m ake any 
recommendations in regard to the pr ovisions concerning surveyors and loss 
assessors. 
Provisions relating to investments 
9.1.11 The Consultation Paper had sought to make suggestions in regard to the 
provisions concerning investm ents, loans and management. This in turn entailed 
an understanding of what should be designated as ‘approved securities’ for the 
purposes of investm ent of funds by the insurers, what should be the “Solvency 
Margin” to be m aintained by insurers. Th e relevant provisions of the Insurance 
Act, 1938 are ss.27, 27A and 27B and s.64 VA. Although, the Com mission has 
received a variety of responses to the pr oposals made in the Consultation Paper, 
there has been no response from  either the Central Government or the IRDA. W e 
should have received a m ore detailed a nd adequate response to enable the 
Commission to make recommendation. 
Provisions relating to tariffs 
9.1.12 S.64 UA - 64ULA of the Insurance Act, 1938 contained provisions that deal with 
the Tariff Advisory Committee (TAC) including its composition and powers. The 
Consultation Paper had sought to make detailed proposals in this regard. 
9.1.13 There has been no response received either  from the Central Governm ent or the 
IRDA to these proposals. FICCI has categor ically stated that “an adm inistered 
 90

tariff regime is antithesis of  liberalisation and m arket must move to a detarif fed 
regime”. The private insurance companies would also favour a de-tariffed regime. 
In the context of liberalisation, insurance companies demand freedom to unburden 
themselves of loss m aking portf olios like m otor vehicle insurance, f or instance. 
On the other hand, the countervailing liability as presently found in the Insurance 
Act, 1938 is the obligation of insurers to rural and social sectors. These issues 
again throw up policy considerations. The questions that arise are: 
a. Do we want to detariff the entir e insurance industry or retain tariff 
structures for certain types of insurance business? 
b. Should the detariffing, even in select types of insurance business, be done 
gradually or at once? 
c. What should be the precise role of the IRDA? 
9.1.14 The above questions cannot possibly be attem pted to be answered by the Law 
Commission of India. The answers to thes e questions have to com e from  the 
Government itself in consultation with the IRDA, the industry and other experts 
in the field. The change in the law in th is regard has to be consequent upon the 
taking of such policy decision and not the other way around. Therefore, this is not 
taken up for action. 
Shareholder’s funds and policyholder’s funds 
9.1.15 S.49 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provides for restrictions of payments of dividends 
and bonuses. In the Consultation Paper, the following change was proposed: 
“An enabling provision m ay be inserted  for transfer from  shareholders 
funds to policyholders funds in case of an insurance company in the initial 
years of operation. This could be by way of a proviso to the following 
effect: 
“provided further that an am ount not exceeding the aggregate am ount, 
which was transferred from  the shareholders funds, in the previous years, 
 91

shall be transferred back to the shareholders funds, in case of surplus, prior 
to the declaration of bonus to the policyholders”.” 
9.1.16 In response to the above proposal, FICCI has suggested that where there is a 
transfer from  the shareholder’s funds to the policyholders fund for m eeting the 
cost of paym ent of new bonus to po licyholders, such am ount should not be 
allowed to be transferred back to the shareholder’s fund at any tim e. Further, 
FICCI would like a distinction to be dr awn between the temporary and permanent 
deficit in the policyholder’s funds. The National Insurance Academ y has also 
submitted a very detailed response. At the outset, the NIA states that “during all 
these years, this provision has conform ed to the requirem ents of the m arket and 
hence a review at this stage is not ca lled for.” However, according to NIA, if 
money is sought to be transferred from  the shareholder’s funds to the 
policyholder’s funds on account of deficit ar ising out of ‘new business strain’, 
several safeguards will have to be built in. NIA has accordingly suggested a draft 
amended s.49. 
9.1.17 The Subedar Com mittee Report com missioned by the Actuarial Society of India 
has also dealt with this issue extensivel y. Importantly, that Report states that as 
regards this issue “convergence of views as between the Industry, Regulator and 
actuarial profession is key to an acceptable and sustainable solution”. Ultim ately, 
the Report has suggested that there is a need for a wider debate on the issue. 
9.1.18 The Law Commission of India is of the vi ew that the specific question of the use 
of shareholder’s funds and policyholder’s funds, and transfer from  the form er to 
the latter, requires deliberations both with in the industry as well as between the 
industry and the government. The IRDA would also have to play a pro-active role 
in helping evolve a consensus on the issue. 
9.1.19 As at present, the Law Com mission does not have the benefit of the views of 
either the Governm ent or the IRDA on this  issue. Also, there does not appear to 
 92

be any agreed response from  within the industry as well. In these circum stances, 
the Law Commission is not suggesting any changes in s.49 for the present. 
 
 
Extent of foreign shareholding 
9.1.20 One issue that repeatedly surfaced dur ing discussions with the industry was 
whether the law should be am ended to permit greater foreign equity participation 
than the present lim it of 26%. There were  also questions raised about perm itting 
insurance companies to have branches outside of India and to conduct business 
outside India. The Law Com mission does not have the benefit of the views of the 
Government or the IRDA on these m atters. In the Law Com mission’s perception 
these are m atters on which a policy d ecision will have to be taken by the 
Government in consultation with the industry and the IRDA. The Law 
Commission is not making any research in this matter. 
***
 93

CHAPTER X 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
10.1.1 To summarise the recommendations in this Report,  
(i) The complete final list of changed definitions as recommended by the Law 
Commission of India is set out in a se parate table and appended to this 
Report as Appendix-II. The said recom mendations cover am endments to 
ss.2 (9), 2C, 4, 6A(1),  6A(10), 6B, 6C, 7(1), 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 28, 
28A, 29, 31, 31B, 32A, 32B, 32C, 35, 37A, 40, 40A, 40B, 40C, 43, 44, 
48A, 50, 51, 52BB, 52D, 52E, 53, 58 and 64UL of the Insurance Act, 
1938 [para 2.1.3] 
(ii) For the reasons explained in Chapter X infra, the proposals in relation to 
Investments (ss.27, 27A, 27B and 27C ), restriction on dividends and 
bonuses (s.49), the Tariff Advisory Committee (ss.64UA, 64UB, 64UE, 
64UJ, 64UK and 64UL), valuation of assets (s.64V), solvency m argin 
(s.64VA) and restriction on opening ne w place of business (s.64VC) have 
not been finalised and no recom mendations are being m ade in regard to 
these provisions [para 2.1.4] 
(iii) Provisions that are set out in a separate table at Appendix-III to this 
Report be deleted from  the Act. The said recom mendations cover 
deletions in s.2(12), s.2(13), s.2(16) , s.2(17), s.2B(1), s.2C, s.3(5), 
s.3(4)(a), s.3(4)(ee), s.3(5), s.4, s.5(2) & (3) first and second proviso, 
s.6A(1) proviso, s.7(7), s.7(9B), s.10( 1), s.10(2), s.10(2A), s.11(1A), s.12, 
s.13(1), s.13(3), s.13(4), s.13(6), s.14, s.15, s.15(2), s.15(3), s.16, s.22, 
s.27(2)(a), (b) and (6), s.27A, s .27B, s.28(4), s.29, s.31B, s.32, s.33(7), 
s.35(1), s.35(3), s.40, s.40A, s.44(1 )-Explanation, s.48, s.49, s.48A, s.52, 
s.52H to 52N, s.53, s.59, s.62 to 64, s .64UB (3) and (4), s.64UD, s.64UF 
 94

to UI, s.64UJ (2) to (6), s.64UM, s.64VA, s.65 to 94, s.95 to 101 and s.114 
(f) [para 2.1.5] 
(iv) It is recom mended that the fo llowing provisions of the IRDA Act, 1999, 
viz., s.2 (Definitions), Chapter II dealing with establishment and incidental 
matters of authority (ss.3-12); Chapte r IV dealing with duties, powers and 
functions of the authority (s.14); Chap ter V dealing with grants by central 
government, IRDA fund, accounts and audit (ss.15– 17); Chapter VI 
dealing with powers of central government (ss.18 – 23 & 25); s.24 
providing the central governm ent w ith power to m ake Rules; s..26 
empowering Authority to m ake Re gulations; s.27 requiring laying of 
Rules and Regulations before Parliam ent and s.28 (not barring application 
of other laws) be merged with the provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 as 
indicated in Appendix-IV to this Report [para 3.1.3] 
(v) The final recom mendations in relation to the changes be m ade in the 
provisions concerning the powers a nd functions of the Insurance 
Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA) are set out in Appendix-V to 
this Report. The sections of the Insurance Act, 1938 which are required to 
be accordingly am ended are s.3, s.3( 2)(f), s.3(2A), s.94A(2) (second 
proviso), s.3(2C), s.3(3), s.3(4), s.3A, s.3A(2), s.3A(3), s.3A(4) and 
s.3A(5) [para 3.1.5] 
(vi) The final recommendations concerning the powers of the IRDA in relation 
to revaluation of the affairs of th e insurer, investigation, search and 
seizure, appointm ent and rem oval of m anagerial persons are set out in 
Appendix-VI to this Report. These recom mendations to cover 
amendments to the following sections of the Insurance Act, 1938: s.33(1), 
s.33 (4), s.33(8), s.34B (4), s.34C, s.34E, s.34G, s.34H, s.35(1), s.35(3), 
s.36, s.37A(2), s.37A(4), s.42 (1), s.42(2), s.42(3), s.42(4), s.42(5), 
s.42(6), s.42(7), s.42D, s.42D (1) provi so (a), s.42D(8) & (9), s.64UM, 
s.64UM (1A) s.44, s.47A and s.53 [para 3.1.6] 
 95

 
(vii) There is one development that has taken place in the recent past which requires to 
be noticed. It was reported in the January 2004 issue of the IRDA Journal that the 
Central Government had set up an Appellate  Authority to review the rulings of 
the IRDA. According to the IRDA Journal,  the notification issued by the Central 
Government has set up both a single a nd a division bench of the Appellate 
Authority and the Joint Secretary, Ministry  of Finance, will constitute the single 
bench and while on the division bench he would be joined by another Joint 
Secretary of the Ministry of Law. The Law Commission is constrained to observe 
that whatever m ay be the com pulsions of the Governm ent to constitute such an 
Appellate Tribunal, the said arrangem ent is far from  satisfactory in term s of 
having an independent and impartial adjudicatory appellate body. [para 4.2.9] 
(viii) The f inal recom mendations of  the Law Com mission in regard to the grievance 
redressal mechanism are as under: 
(a) Adjudicating Officers/ Investig ating Officers be appointed by the 
IRDA to adjudicate/ investigate violations with the Act, Rules and 
Regulations by insurers, insurance interm ediaries and insurance 
agents and levy penalties as provided in the Act. Any person 
aggrieved by the decision of the Adjudicating/ Investigating 
Officers can appeal to the Insurance Appellate Tribunal (IAT).  
(b) Every insurance com pany will set up an in-house grievance 
redressal mechanism under the overa ll supervision of the IRDA. It 
will be incum bent for every person seeking to f ile a claim  before 
the Grievance Redressal Authority (GRA) to first approach the in-
house mechanism. Where the decision of the in-house m echanism 
is not satisf actory to the claim ant or where no decision is given 
within the period of 60 days from the date of making such claim to 
the in-house m echanism, it will be open to the claim ant to 
 96

approach the GRA within a period of 60 days from  the date of 
receipt of the decision of the in-house mechanism and of the expiry 
of 60 days after the making of the claim whichever is later. 
(c) The Grievance Redressal Authority (GRA) will replace the present 
system of having Om budsmen under the 1998 Rules  at the m ajor 
metropolises. The GRA will be a statutory authority exercising 
statutory functions. The GRA will not  exercise any jurisdiction in 
relation to the levy of  f ines and penalties in relation to of fences 
under the Act. 
(d) The jurisdiction of the GRA will be to hear: 
(I) Disputes between the insured and the insurer that pertain to 
personal lines of insurance on the following matters: 
i. any partial or total repudiation of claim s by an 
insurer; 
ii. any dispute in regard to prem ium paid or payable in 
terms of the policy;  
iii. any dispute on the legal construction of  the policies 
in so far as such disputes relate to claims; 
iv. delay in settlement of claims; 
v. non-issue of any insurance docum ent to custom ers 
after receipt of premium; and 
vi. any other complaint against an insurer. 
(II) Disputes between Insurer and the Intermediaries;  
(III) Insurer and Insurer; and 
(IV) Disputes between the assignees of a policy as to priority of 
assignment. 
 97

(e) The GRAs should be dispersed as geographically widely as 
possible. For instance, there could be GRAs in each of  the m ajor 
cities in the country. This is n ecessary given the large num ber of 
policyholders at present and the pr ospect of this growing in the 
future. There could be more than one GRA in a State depending on 
the number of cases in that State.  
(f) The powers and jurisdiction of the GRAs would include all the 
powers and functions of the ci vil court and would involve 
adjudication of issues of fact and law.  
(g) In addition to the above, it c ould be provided that all pending 
disputes arising under the Insurance Act, 1938 before the consumer 
fora would be transferred to the GRAs for disposal in accordance 
with the provisions of the Insura nce Act, 1938. To this extent an 
amendment may have to be m ade in the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 to provide that disputes arising under the Insurance Act, 1938 
will not be entertained under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 
(h) There will be a clause expressl y excluding the jurisdiction of  civil 
courts and other tribunal/ fora in regard to such m atters that form  
the subject m atter of the jurisdiction of  the GRA. Every claim ant 
before the GRA will be required to  m ake an express declaration 
that no sim ilar claim  has been m ade before any other fora or 
tribunal and further that he has availed the in-house m echanism of 
the insurer as indicated in para (ii) above. 
(i) With a view to encouraging alternate dispute resolution (ADR) by 
way of m ediation or conciliation, it m ay be provided that a 
claimant may have the choice to opt for mediation or conciliation, 
in which case the GRA will ref er the dispute f or m ediation or 
conciliation by a person or body agr eed upon, or were there is no 
agreement, by a person or body nominated by the GRA from  a 
 98

panel prepared by it. Further, the GRA may itself refer the pending 
dispute before it to an ADR process at any stage of the 
proceedings, with the consent of the parties. 
(j) The decision of  the GRA, or the f inal decision on appeal, will be 
enforceable by the GRA which pass the initial order and for that 
purpose the GRA will exercise all the powers of a civil court. 
(k) The GRA should be a m ulti-member body com prising of one 
judicial m ember who will be th e President and two technical 
members. The President and Members of the GRA will hold of fice 
till the age of 65 years. The Pres ident of the GRA should be a 
retired Judicial Officer not below the rank of a senior Civil Judge 
or a lawyer with not less than 20 years of experience nom inated in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court. 
(l) As regards, appointm ent of technical m embers to the GRA is 
concerned, consultation with the Ch ief Justice of the High Court is 
not necessary. A panel of nam es of persons of not less than 15 
years experience in the insurance industry can be prepared by the 
Central Government and sent to a Selection Committee comprising 
the members of the Insurance C ouncils constituted under s.64C of 
the Act. The said Selection Com mittee will recommend the names 
from among the panel of technical members to be appointed to the 
GRA. The Central Governm ent will make rules in relation to the 
salaries and allowances and other term s and conditions of service 
of the President and Members of the GRA. 
(m) The GRA will f ormulate rules of  procedure to cover m atters 
relating to filing of claim s, completion of pleadings, evidence on 
affidavits or otherwise, passing of awards and furnishing copies. 
These rules of  procedure will also  deal with m atters relating to 
 99

enforcement of the decisions of th e GRA as f inally determined in 
appeals therefrom. 
(n) The President or Mem bers of GRA shall not be rem oved from  
office except by an order m ade by the President on ground of 
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after enquiry m ade by a Judge 
of the High Court in which such President or Mem ber has been 
informed of the charges against him  and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. The Central 
Government will m ake rules to regulate the procedure f or the 
investigation of  m isbehaviour or incapacity of  the President and 
Members of the GRA  
(o) An appeal will lie f rom the decision of  the GRA to an Insurance 
Appellate Tribunal (IAT).  the juri sdiction of which will extend to 
hearing: 
(I) Appeals from the GRA; 
(II) Appeals against the orders  passed by the Adjudicating/ 
Investigating Officers appointed by the IRDA;  
(III) Appeal against any orde r passed by the IRDA. W ith the 
constitution of  the IAT, the appellate authority 
constituted by a notif ication of  the Central Governm ent 
(as noticed in para 4.2.9 infra) will have to be wound up 
and the appeals pending before it will stand automatically 
transferred to the IAT; 
(IV) Making of interim  orders, conditional or otherwise, in 
relation to the above matters. 
(p) The IAT should be a m ulti-member body of a judicial m ember as 
President and two technical m embers. The IAT should be presided 
over by a retired High Court Judge nom inated in consultation with 
the Chief Justice of India. A certain degree of transparency should 
be induced in the process of selection of such m embers. The 
 100

appointments of technical members to the IAT should also be done 
in consultation with the Chief  Justice of  India. For this purpose, a 
panel of nam es of persons of not less than 20 years experience in 
the insurance industry should be sent by the Insurance Councils 
(constituted under s.64C of the Act) to the Chief Justice of India. 
The nam es of  technical m embers will be chosen with the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of  India. The Central Government 
will make rules in relation to the salaries and allowances and other 
terms and conditions of service of the President and Mem bers of 
the IAT. 
(q) The President and Members of the IAT will hold of fice till the age 
of 68 years. The rem oval of the President and the Mem bers of the 
IAT for proven m isbehaviour or incapacity will be upon enquiry 
by a Judge of the Suprem e Court of India in which such President 
or Mem ber has been inform ed of the charges against him  and 
given a reasonable opportunity of be ing heard in respect of those 
charges. The Central Governm ent will m ake rules to regulate the 
procedure for the investigation of m isbehaviour or incapacity of 
the President and Members of the IAT.  
(r) The Principal Bench of the Insurance Appellate Tribunal (IAT) 
should be in New Delhi. It is pref erable that there is one IAT in 
each State. However, there can be one IAT for one or m ore States 
as m ay be decided by the Centra l Governm ent, or by agreem ent 
between State Governm ents on th e pattern of s.4(3) of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.  
(s) The IAT will formulate rules of procedure to cover matters relating 
to filing of appeals, com pletion of pleadings, m aking of orders 
both interim and final and furnishing copies.  
 101

(t) The expenditure for the constitution of the GRAs and the IATs and 
their maintenance must be borne by the Central Governm ent in as 
much as they are to adjudicate disputes arising under a central 
statute. 
(u) There will be a f urther statutory appeal to the Supreme Court from 
the decision of the IAT. The appeal  will have to be f iled within 60 
days of the decision of the IAT. 
(v) There should be an adjudication fee levied in respect of a claim  
before the GRA and an appeal before the IAT. However, any 
individual policyholder, m ay upon showing sufficient cause, be 
exempt by the GRA or the IAT, as  the case m ay be, from  paying 
such adjudication fee. 
[para 4.3.8] 
 
 
(ix) The final recommendations of the Law Commission in regard to s.45 are: 
(a) The period beyond which no repudiation of a life insurance policy on 
any ground whatsoever be fixed at five years. This should be a 
sufficient period for an insurer to check the veracity of  the details 
provided by the insured at the tim e of issuance of  the policy. Af ter a 
period of 5 years after the com ing into force of a life insurance policy, 
i.e., the date of issuance of the po licy or the date of com mencement of 
such policy or the date of the reviva l of such policy or  the date of  the 
rider to such policy whichever is later, no insurer can repudiate a claim 
thereunder on any ground whatsoever. 
(b) The insurer can repudiate a policy of  life insurance at any tim e before 
the expiry of a period of five year s from the date of issuance of the 
policy or the date of com mencement of risk or the date of revival of 
 102

the policy or the date of the rider to the policy whichever is later on the 
ground of fraud. The insurer will have to com municate in writing to 
the insured or the legal represen tatives/ nom inees/ assignees of  the 
insured the grounds and m aterials on which such decision is based. 
The claimants will in such instance not be entitled to either the policy 
amount or the premium amounts. 
(c) The insurer can repudiate a policy of  life insurance at any tim e before 
the expiry of a period of five years from the date of the policy or the 
date of com mencement of risk or th e date of revival of the policy or 
the date of the rider to the policy whichever is later on the ground that 
the insured had m ade a misstatement of or suppressed a m aterial fact, 
i.e., a fact m aterial to the assessm ent of the risk, either in the proposal 
form or any other docum ent on the basis of which the life insurance 
policy was issued or revived or a rider issued to it. W hile such 
repudiation will result in the claim ants forfeiting the policy am ount it 
will not entail their forfeiting the prem ium amounts collected on the 
policy. Thus in case of repudiation of the policy on the ground of 
misstatement or suppression of a m aterial fact, and not on the ground 
of fraud, the prem iums collected  on the policy till the date of 
repudiation will be liable to be retu rned to the insured or the legal 
representatives/ nominees/ assignees of the insured. 
(d) The m isstatement of or suppressi on of fact will not be considered 
material unless it has a direct bearing on the risk undertaken by the 
insurer. The onus is on the insurer to  show that had the insurer been 
aware of the said fact no life insura nce policy would have been issued 
to the insured.  
(e) No repudiation of the policy to  be perm itted on the ground of fraud 
where the insured can prove that the suppression or m isstatement of 
the material fact made was true to the best of his knowledge and belief 
 103

or that there was no deliberate inten tion to suppress the fact or that 
such misstatement of or suppression of  a m aterial fact was within the 
knowledge of the insurer or the agent of the insurer. 
(f) A person who solicits and negotiates a contract of insurance should be 
deemed for the purpose of the form ation of the contract, to be the 
agent of the insurers, and that th e knowledge of such person should be 
deemed to be the knowledge of the insurers. 
(g) The insurer will have to com municate in writing to the insured or the 
legal representatives/ nom inees/ assignees of the insured the grounds 
and m aterials on which the deci sion to repudiate a policy on the 
ground of misstatement or suppression of a material fact is based. 
[para 5.1.39] 
(x) S.45 be am ended to reflect the changes recom mended above. S.45 be 
recast as indicated in para 5.1.40. 
(xi) In relation to s.38 of the Insu rance Act, 1938 concerning assignm ent or 
transfer of policy, the final recommendations of the Law Commission are: 
(a) Sub-section (7) of s.38 should be  retained, with some modification 
for the purpose of greater clarity. 
(b) The contingencies under which an assignment or transfer would be 
treated as a conditional one to be  clearly spelt out. The provision 
be am ended to indicate that except where the endorsem ent of 
assignment or transfer expressly indicates that the assignm ent or 
transfer is conditional in term s of s.38 (7), every assignm ent or 
transfer will be deem ed to be an  absolute assignm ent or transf er 
 104

and the assignee or transf eree as the case m ay be, will be deem ed 
to be absolute assignee or transferee respectively. 
(c) Both term inologies, viz., assignm ent and transf er be retained in 
s.38 and they be used in the altern ative to enable greater flexibility 
in the working of these provisions. 
(d) A separate sub-section be inserted to indicate that in case of  partial 
assignment or transf er of a policy of insurance, the liability of  the 
insurer shall be lim ited to the am ount secured by the partial 
assignment or transf er and such policy holder shall not be entitled 
to further assign or transfer th e residual amount payable under the 
same policy. 
(e) The provision should be appropriately am ended to extend its 
applicability to all personal lines of non-life insurance business as 
well. 
(f) S.38 be am ended to build in certain safeguards. The policy holder 
will have to disclose reasons for the assignment, the antecedents of 
the assignee and the exact term s on which the assignm ent is being 
made. There will be an obligation upon the insurer to get the 
credentials of the assignee verified at the cost of the insured. If the 
insurer is not satisfied that the assignment is bonafide, there would 
be an option to decline to register the assignm ent or transfer upon 
reasons in writing to be com municated to the policyholder subject 
to such decision being challenged by way of  petition bef ore the 
Grievance Redressal Authority. 
[para 6.1.18] 
 105

(xii) S.38 be am ended to reflect the changes recom mended above. S.38 be 
recast as indicated in para 6.1.19. 
(xiii) In relation to s.39 concerning nom inations, the final recom mendations of 
the Law Commission are: 
(a) A clear distinction be m ade in the provision itself between a 
beneficial nominee and a collector nominee. 
(b) It is not possible to agree to the suggestion m ade by som e of the 
insurers that in all cases th e paym ent to the nom inee would 
tantamount to a full discharge of the insurer’s liability under the 
policy and that unless the contrary is expressed, the nom inee 
would be the beneficial nominee. 
(c) An option be given to the polic yholder to clearly express whether 
the nom inee will collect the m oney on behalf  of  the legal 
representatives (in other words su ch nominee will be the collector 
nominee) or whether the nominee will be the absolute owner of the 
monies in which case such nominee will be the beneficial nominee. 
(d) A proviso be added to m ake the nom ination ef fectual f or the 
nominee to receive the policy m oney in case the policyholder dies 
after the maturity of the policy but before it can be encashed. 
[para 7.1.14] 
(xiv) S.39 be am ended to reflect the changes recom mended above. S.39 be 
recast as indicated in para 7.1.15. 
(xv) The final recommendation of the Law Commission in regard to penalties 
and certain other provisions are as under: 
 106

(a) The amount of penalties prescribed in ss.102-105C be enhanced so 
that it is of a deterrent nature. A m inimum penalty be indicated in 
each of these provisions. 
(b) The penalties will be adjudicated and levied after an enquiry by the 
Adjudicating/ Investigating Offi cer to be appointed by the IRDA 
as indicated in para 4.3.8 above. The provisions will be 
accordingly amended to indicate this position. 
(c) In relation to s.53 (2) (b) wh ich deals with the grounds on which 
the IRDA can apply for winding up by the court, since clauses (i), 
(ii) and (iii) of sub-section (2 ) are the very grounds on which the 
IRDA can cancel the registration of an insurance com pany under 
s.3 (4), these clauses may be omitted. However, clause (iv) may be 
retained. In sub-section (1) of s.53, reference to Com panies Act, 
1913 be substituted by Companies Act, 1956.  
(d) In relation to s.54 concerni ng voluntary winding up, the provision 
be amended to the effect that an  insurance company should not be 
wound up except on the ground that by reason of its liabilities it 
cannot continue its business.  
(e) In relation to s.58 concerning th e scheme for partial winding up in 
sub-sections (3) and (4), reference to the Com panies Act, 1913 
may be substituted by the Com panies Act 1956. In sub-section (4), 
the words ‘s.12 of the Indian Co mpanies Act, 1913’ be substituted 
by ‘s.15 of the Companies Act, 1956’ and the words ‘ss.15 and 16’ 
be replaced by ‘s.17’.  
(f) In relation to ss.52A to 52G which deal with the m anagement by 
an administrator, the provisions be  amended to provide that if the 
IRDA after giving an opportunity to  the insurer and after taking 
 107

into consideration the interest of  policy holders, is of the opinion 
that it is necessary and proper to appoint an adm inistrator to 
manage the af fairs of  the insurer carrying on lif e insurance 
business, the IRDA m ay, by an order, do so. The adm inistrator 
shall receive such rem uneration as the IRDA m ay direct. The 
IRDA m ay appoint som e other person as an adm inistrator if the 
one appointed earlier is not able to m anage the affairs of the 
insurer. Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of s.52A be am ended to give 
effect to the aforesaid recommendations.  
(g) S.52A be am ended to provide  for the period for which an 
administrator will initially be appointed. It m ay be appropriate if 
the lim it in this regard is provided in the statute subject to the 
proposed provisions of s.52D. Since s.52BB (9) which vests in the 
administrator powers of the civ il court, s.52A be am ended to 
indicate that the administrator so appointed should be qualified and 
competent to exercise such powers. 
(h) S.52BB (2) be amended to provide that the appeal against the order 
of the Administrator will lie to the IRDA. 
(i) S.52D dealing with termination of appointment of administrator be 
amended to confer the power of  cancellation of the order of 
appointment on the IRDA.  
(j) The punishm ent by way of fine  for withholding docum ents of 
property from  the Adm inistrator under s.52F be enhanced to 
Rs.5,000/-. 
(k) The protection of action taken in good faith, as provided for in 
s.52G, be extended to the officers of the IRDA. 
 108

(l) In light of the above am endments, s.52E be am ended to substitute 
the word “Central Government” with ‘IRDA’. 
(m) Ss.52H to 52N be deleted in view of the changed policy whereby 
private players have been permitted to carry on insurance business.  
(n) The words and digits “or s.98” occurring in s.59 relating to return 
of deposits, be omitted. 
(o) In view of the express provisi on that no insurer other than an 
Indian insurance com pany shall begin to carry on any class of 
insurance business in India, the provisions relating to external 
companies, ss.62 to 64, be repealed. 
(p) S.64UL be am ended to substitute  the word “Central Governm ent” 
by “IRDA”. 
(q) S.113 (1) relating to acquisition of  surrender values be amended to 
indicate that the IRDA m ay from time to time notify the minimum 
amount of the paid up value and annuity. 
        [ para 8.1.2] 
(xvi) Given the scope of the present re ference and the nature of the issues 
involved, the Law Com mission does not c onsider it appropriate to m ake 
any recom mendations in regard to the provisions concerning surveyors 
and loss assessors; investm ents, tariffs, shareholders’ and policyholders’ 
funds and extent of foreign shareholding,  [paras 9.1.10 to 9.1.20]. 
10.1.2 We acknowledge the extensive contribution made by Dr. S. Muralidhar, Part-time 
Member of Law Commission, in preparing this Report as well as Consultation Paper. 
 
 109

 
 We recommend accordingly. 
 
 
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
(Dr. N.M. Ghatate) 
Vice-Chairman 
 
 
 
(Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi) 
Member-Secretary 
Dated:  1st June, 2004 
 110

APPENDIX-I 
CONSULTATION PAPER OF THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ON 
REVISION OF THE INSURANCE ACT 1938 
[Para 1.6.1] 
 
6. Need for and grounds of revision of the Insurance Act, 1938 
6.1 In this context, and in the changing econom ic scenario, it is felt that the IRDA 
would have to play a vital role for th e regulation and developm ent of insurance 
business. Accordingly, it is felt that the Insurance Act, 1938 would require review 
and revision. This has prom pted the present reference to the Law Com mission of 
India.  
 
6.2 .1 The revision of the Act has to be carri ed out in such a m anner that it not only 
promotes insurance business but also protects policyholders and strengthens the 
Authority to ensure f inancial stability. W hile revising the Act, the other related 
laws are also be reviewed and the rele vant provisions of the IRDA, Act, 1999 are 
required to be merged into the principal Act after necessary modifications. In fact, 
an integrated approach to revise the insurance laws is the need of the hour. 
 
6.2.2  The necessity for merging the provisions of the IRDA Act with the Insurance Act, 
1938 is to bring about an integrated a pproach to the task of form ulating a 
legislative regim e that can encom pass the key facets of th e functioning of the 
Regulatory Authority even while strengt hening the regulatory regim e. W ith the 
IRDA exercising m any of the key functi ons assigned to it under the Insurance 
Act, 1938, there is no justification for continuing to have a separate legislation 
concerning the constitution and functions of the IRDA. Moreover, at the tim e that 
the IRDA Act was being prepared, the task  of a com prehensive revision of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 was felt necessary but was not undertaken due to paucity of 
time. Now, with the experience of the functioning o the IRDA and several rounds 
of discussion with key insurance personnel, a com prehensive revision of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 appears possible. 
6.2.3 The present exercise of revision of th e Insurance Act, 1938 does not touch upon the 
following areas:  
I. The Marine Insurance Act, 1963 
II. Motor Vehicle Insurance  
III. Fire Insurance 
IV. Principles governing third party risks in general insurance business  
In other words, the present exercise of revision is confined to restructuring of 
Insurance Act, 1938 in view of the developm ents in the insurance sector referred to 
herein above and the merging of the provisions of the IRDA with the Insurance Act, 
1938. Each of the areas m entioned at (I) to  (IV) above would require an elaborate 
and separate study which, as presently advised, is not felt necessary.  
 
 
 
 111

Some tentative grounds of revision  
6.3 Some of the grounds on the basis of which the Law Com mission has undertaken 
present exercising in revising the Insurance Act, 1938 may be set out as under:  
I. The Insurance Act, 1938 being a legi slation of colonial era, contains 
provisions that are redundant a nd accordingly require deletion . For 
example, provisions regarding provide nt societies and m utual insurance 
companies as also principal agents, chief agents and special agents, or 
references thereof, are no longer requi red and such provisions need to be 
deleted. 
II. Some of the provisions  of the Act, are of transitional nature and should, 
therefore, be deleted. Further, m atters covered in the Regulations fram ed by 
the IRDA should be deleted from  the Act, in order to avoid duplication. 
Further, The IRDA Act, 1999 has inserted  some provisions in the Insurance 
Act, 1938, the effect of which was to nullify som e existing provisions. They 
have not been deleted, thus giving rise to anomalies, for example, definitions 
of the term  ‘insurance com pany’ [s.2 (8)]. Such provisions require to be 
deleted. 
III. References in the Insurance Act, 1938 to older enactments have to be replaced 
by references to the corresponding new le gislations that have replaced such 
enactments. For e.g., references to the Indian Companies Act, 1913 have to be 
replaced by the Companies Act, 1956. 
IV. The insurance sector, which earlier covered only a few areas like life and 
marine insurance, has now expanded to cover various kinds of  risk activities. 
Hence reclassification of insurance businesses  is necessary. For instance, 
insurance business m ay broadly be classifi ed as ‘life’ and ‘non-life’ or ‘short 
term’ and ‘long term ’ insurance business.  For this purpose, the definition of 
the term ‘insurance’ and ‘insurer’ would have to be amended. 
V. The IRDA exercises its powers by a nd large under the provisions of the 
principal Act. Therefore, it is appropr iate as well as necessary that the 
relevant provisions of IRDA Act be merged in the Insurance Act, 1938. 
VI. The IRDA while regulating the busine ss activities of  the insurers exercises 
quasi-judicial powers, in addition to the adm inistrative powers, e.g., issue, 
renewal and cancellation of registration cer tificate to insurers, order in regard 
to investigation of  the af fairs of the insurers, making application to the court 
for the winding up of the insurance co mpanies, grant of  licenses to the 
insurance agents etc. It is felt necessary that there m ust be a provision of 
appeal against the decisions of th e IRDA to an independent body 
constituted under the Act itself. 
VII. The insurance business has increased several fold even while policy holders 
have not been entirely satisfied with the manner of functioning of insurance 
companies, particularly in the area of settlem ent of claim s. Although at 
present, there is in place of the o ffice of an Om budsman under the Redressal 
of Public Grievances Rules, 1998, complaints nevertheless continue to be filed 
in the consumer fora constituted under the Consum er Protection Act, 1986. In 
order to provide a m ore effective grievance redressal missionary, while at the 
 112

same time, lessening the burden of the c onsumer fora, it is proposed that there 
should be a full-fledged grievance redressal mechanism. 
  
VIII. The principle of uberrimae fidei, i.e., of absolute good faith, governs both the 
parties to a contract of insurance. Though standardized insurance policies 
prohibit certain m isleading contract pr ovisions, problem s have arisen with 
misrepresentation or non-disclosure whenever personal characteristics are 
collected by insurance agents for risk cl assification. In this context, the issue 
is whether a f ailure to m ake a disclosu re of the m aterial inform ation would 
render the contract void or voidable. For this purpose, some specific statutory 
enumerations are required for protecting the interest of policyholders so 
that unintended minor mistakes in di sclosure do not lead to a loss of 
coverage. 
IX. Provisions regarding investm ents, loans and m anagement need review and 
revision. The IRDA has m ade detaile d investm ent regulations, hence 
provisions are to be revised so as to elim inate inconsistencies and duplication. 
The term “approved securities” is required to be revised in the context of 
new economic policy and business practices. 
X. At present, there is no provision in the principal Act for m otivation or 
encouragement for insurers to invest in “Research & developm ent” or 
“Technology up gradation” as regards valu ation of assets for the purpose of 
solvency m argin calculations. There is a suggestion that it is appropriate if 
such provisions for taking a portion of  the investment/ expenditure in 
areas as directed by the IRDA are incorporated in the Act for the 
purpose of “Solvency Margin” so as to encourage insurers to take up 
such investments.  
XI. The provisions regarding solvency m argin of the principal Act have been 
amended by the IRDA Act, 1999. But thes e provisions still require revision 
because they stipulate m inimum level of  solvency m argin without a control 
level, i.e.,  a position below which the Authority can get warning signals in 
respect of a particular insurer. The Principal Act is required to be amended 
so as to empow er the Authority to  intervene w henever the solvency 
margin falls below  the control level . IRDA has fram ed regulations for the 
determination of the am ount of liabilities,  solvency m argin and valuation of 
assets. But the provisions regarding solv ency margin are still to address the 
extent of appropriate matching of assets and liabilities. 
XII. The Principal Act and IRDA Act em power the Central Governm ent and the 
Authority to fram e rules and regula tions. These are to be revised and 
harmonized with the Act in the context of new regulatory regime. 
XIII. The Act provides for penalties in the m iscellaneous part of  the Act, f or 
contravention or non-compliance of the provisions of the Act or Regulation or 
rules under ss.102 to 105C. These provisions of the Act are to be review ed 
and revised as the amount of fine or penalty provided therein is not 
adequate enough to be considered now  as a fine or penalty . In addition to 
these provisions, there are other provisi ons which provide for the punishm ent 
along with the other provisions requiring m andatory com pliance. It is 
 113

appropriate that all such specific clau ses on penalty m ay be shifted to the 
chapter dealing with the penalties.  
 
7. Plan of revision of the provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 
7.1 An attempt is made here to propose amendments in the principal Act as a result of 
preliminary study of existing legal framework for the purpose of revision of the Insurance 
Act. The Law Com mission of  India initially prepared an approach paper and held 
discussions with officials of the IRDA as well as certain other key personnel in the 
Insurance sector. As a result of these discussions, it is decided that the work of revision of 
the Insurance Act, 1938 should be undertaken under the following topics: 
 
(i) Merger of the provisions of IRDA Act into the Insurance Act; 
(ii) Changes in definitions, deletions and other amendments; 
(iii) Powers of the IRDA; 
(iv) Obligations of the insurers under the Act; 
(v) Interests of the policyholders;  
(vi) Tariff Advisory Committee-composition and powers; 
(vii) Redressal of grievances/ claims and the machinery for the same; 
(viii) Penal provisions; and 
(ix) Miscellaneous provisions. 
 
8. Proposals for revision 
8.1 Merger of the provisions of IRDA Act into the Insurance Act 
8.1.2 The Authority by and large exercises all those powers which hitherto used to be 
exercised by the Controller under the principal Act, e. g., grant, suspension and 
cancellation of certificate of registration. It is to be noted that the principal Act does not 
provide for establishment of Authority but provides under s.2 B only for supersession of 
the Authority referring to the provisions of IR DA in this respect. To avoid duplication in 
this regard, the provision of s.2 B (1) of the principal Act m ay be om itted though 
retaining provisions of sub s. (2). In this backdrop, the best course would be to m erge the 
provisions relating to IRDA as provided in IRDA Act, into the principal Act. 
 
8.1.3 For this purpose, the definitions enum erated in s.2 m ay be m erged in the 
definition part of the Principal Act. Chap ter II of the Act of 1999 dealing with the 
establishment and other incidental m atters regarding Authority (SS. 3-12); Chapter IV 
dealing with the duties, powers and functions  of the Authority (S.14); Chapter V dealing 
with the grants by Central Governm ent, IRDA fund and Accounts and Audit (Ss. 15-17); 
Chapter VI dealing with powers of the Cent ral Government (Ss. 18-23 and 25) m ay be 
placed together and m erged in the Principal Act before part II of the Principal Act under 
the proposed part “Part IA” to be entitled as ‘Insurance Regulatory and Developm ent 
Authority’. S.24 providing the Central govern ment the power to m ake rules, s.26 
providing the Authority power to make regulations and S.27 providing for laying of rules 
and regulations before the Houses of Par liament may be m erged respectively in ss.114 
and 114 A of the principal Act providing for th e same. Again S.28 m ay be shifted to the 
principal Act after s.114A. 
 
 114

8.1.4 The proposed m erger would not only help facilitate the insurers and the insured, 
agents and surveyors, actuaries and audito rs, lawyers and litigants in understanding the 
role of IRDA but locating all the provisions at one place.  
 
8.1.5 For ready reference, a table showing the schem e for m erger of the provisions of 
the IRDA Act with the Insurance Act is se t out hereunder: (already appended to m ain 
Report as Appendix-IV and therefore not repeated here) 
 
8.2 Changes in definitions, deletions and other amendments 
8.2.1 The definitions of various term s are required to be am ended because of the 
legislative changes, establishm ent of  IR DA replacing the Controller and ‘controller’, 
‘general insurance’, ‘life insurance business’ and ‘insurer’. The term insurer is required to 
be defined com prehensively so as to elim inate any am biguity as regards application of 
the provisions of the Act. This term  shoul d indicate Indian insurance com panies and 
insurance cooperative society. The inclusion of governm ent organizations within this 
term may also be considered under exceptions/exemptions.  
 
8.2.2 Some of the term s are required to be  deleted from  the definition part, e.g., 
manager, officer and managing agent in clauses (12) (13) of s.2 as also private and public 
company and special agent under clauses (16) and (17). The relevant definitions of the 
IRDA Act may be merged in s.2 of the Principal Act with necessary modifications. 
 
8.2.3 For ready reference, a table showing th e changes required in the definitions and 
amendments to certain provisions (other than those relating to the powers of the IRDA) is 
annexed to this paper as Appendix-I. Provisions that are required to be deleted as having 
become irrelevant/ redundant are indicated in a separate table as Appendix II.  
 
8.2.4 There are large chunks of provisions in the Insurance Act, 1938 that are no longer 
required. Those pertaining to acquisition of undertaking of insurers as contained in s.52 H 
to s.52 N are no longer required. Likewise, th e special provisions relating to External 
Companies as contained in s.62 to 64 are also no longer relevant since the present scheme 
is not to perm it such External Com panies. The whole of Part III pertaining to Provident 
Societies and Part IV relating to Mutual Insurance Com panies and Co-operative Life 
Insurance Societies are also no longer releva nt. The provisions contained in these Parts 
need to be deleted. These deletions are also indicated in Appendix-II. 
 
8.3 Powers of the IRDA 
8.3.1 The powers of the IRDA include the power  to grant registration, to refuse the 
registration, to cancel or suspend or renew registration. In all these areas, it is proposed to 
make certain changes which are set out in the form of a table as under: (already appended 
to main Report as Appendix V and therefore not repeated here) 
8.3.2 In regard to the other powers of the IRDA in relation to revaluation of the affairs 
of the insurer, investigation, search and seiz ure, appointment and removal of managerial 
persons, the changes proposed are set out in a tabular form as under: (already appended to 
main Report as Appendix VI and therefore not repeated here) 
 115

 
8.4  Obligations of the insurers under the Act 
8.4.1 These obligations can be broadly categorised as under: 
 
(i) Restriction on the name of the user (s.5); 
a. Maintaining of deposits (s.7) 
b. Maintaining separation of accounts and funds (s.10) 
c. Preparing accounts and balance sheet (s.11) 
d. Requirements as to audit (s.12) 
e. Submission of actuarial report and abstract (s.13) 
f. Maintaining register of policies (s.14) 
g. Submission of returns (s.15) 
h. Returns by insurers outside of India (s.16) 
i. Making of investments (s.27) 
j. Investment of controlled fund (s.27A) 
k. Investment by insurers carrying on general insurance business 
(s.27B) 
l. Investments not to be made outside India (s.27C) 
m. Submission of statement of investments of assets (s.28) 
n. Submission of return of investments (s.28A & B) 
o. Prohibition on giving of loans (s.29) 
p. Maintaining of assets (s.31) 
q. Restriction on payment of excessive remuneration (s.31B) 
r. Limitation on employment of managing agents (s.32) 
s. Prohibition of common officers (s.32A) 
t. Obligations in rural and social sector (s.32B & C) 
u. Statements after amalgamation (s.37A) 
v. Prohibition of payment of commission (s.40) 
w. Payment of renewal commission [s.40 (2A)] 
x. Heritable commission (s.44) 
y. Limitation on expenses of management (s.40B & C) 
z. Prohibition on rebates (s.41) 
aa. Register of insurance agents (s.43) 
bb. Restriction on dividends and bonus (s.49) 
cc. Prohibition of business on dividing principle (s.52) 
dd. Maintenance of solvency margin (s.64V & VA) 
ee. Restriction on opening of new place of business (s.64VC) 
 
8.4.2 In relation to the above, several am endments are proposed and these are indicated 
in the table at Appendix I. In addition, there are provisions that are required to be deleted 
and these are indicated in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 116

8.5 Interests of the policyholders 
8.5.1 Supply of copies of proposal and medical reports 
 
Every insurer carrying on life insurance busine ss is under an obligation to supply to the 
policyholder under s.51 certified copies of th e questions put to him  and his answers 
thereto contained in his proposal for insure rs and in the m edical report supplied in 
connection therewith, on an application by the policyholder and payment of the fee which 
shall not exceed Re.1. The fee prescribed is too inadequate. It would be appropriate if the 
fee which is to be charged for such purpos e is prescribed in the regulations. Hence 
amendment to this effect may be made.  
 
8.5.2 Notice to given of the options on the lapsing of the policy 
 
Every insurer carrying on life insurance busin ess is required under s.50 of the principal 
Act to give notice to the holder of  life insurance policy before the expiry of three m onths 
from the date on which the prem ium in respect of a policy of life insurance were payable 
but not paid, inform ing him  of the options available unless these are set forth in the 
policy.  
 
The notice given by the lif e insurer is certainly  a notice given prior to the lapsing of the 
policy and in fact protect the interests of po licyholders. But the provisions of this section 
do not m entioned of this notice if the options  available to the assured on the lapsing of 
the policy are set forth in the policy. It is s uggested that even if the policy details about 
options, such a notice is required because lif e insurance policies are long-term  policies 
and in the ordinary course of business.  These options are seldom  noticed by the 
policyholder. Hence the words “unless these are set forth in a policy” m ay be om itted, 
which would make the notice requirement unconditional. 
8.5.3 Policy not to be called in question on  the ground of mis-statement after tw o 
years  
 
8.5.3.1 S. 45 places restrictions on the right of  the insurer to repudiate his liability under 
the policy. This section provides that a life insurance policy cannot be called in question 
after the expiry of two years from the date on which it was effected on the ground of mis-
statement in the policy unless it is shown that all the three conditions enum erated in 
second part of s.45 are satisfied, viz., (i) the statem ent m ust be on a m aterial fact, (ii) 
there has been suppression of the m aterial fact which it was m aterial to disclose or the 
facts have been fraudulently m ade by the policy holder, and (iii) the policy holder m ust 
have known at the tim e of m aking the statem ent that it was false or that it suppressed 
facts which it was material.  
 
8.5.3.2 The section was enacted to prevent im mense loss and hardships caused to the 
insured and his legal representatives because  the insurers avoided contract of life 
insurance policy due to incorrect statem ents whether material or not made by the insured 
even after the policy had been in force for several years and all the prem ium paid were 
 117

forfeited in that case by the insurer. Thus th e provision in ef fect m itigated the rule of  
uberrima fides, i.e., utmost good faith. The life insurance contracts are basically governed 
by this rule and obligation to deal fairly and honestly is upon both the parties equally. 
 
8.5.3.3 The provisions of this section does not a ffect the insurer’s right for a period of 
two years from the date of the policy, but thereafter, no policy can be challenged on the 
ground that m is-statement made in the proposal  or in any report of the m edical officer 
was inaccurate or false unless it was m aterial to disclose and it was fraudulently m ade. 
However, the provisions of this section do not confirm  any right on the insurer to 
repudiate a policy which has been in force for less than two years on the grounds as 
stated above irrespective of its materiality. 
 
8.5.3.4 In the past, problem s have arisen w ith m isrepresentation or non-disclosure 
whenever personal characteristics are collected by insurance agents for risk classification. 
The legal questions involving this characteristic usually center on the disclosure of 
material information by the insured. In this c ontext, the issue is when would f ailure to 
make such a disclosure render the contract void or voidable. There have been several 
judgments of the Hon’ble Suprem e Court in  this regard which have underscored the 
importance of the burden of proof shifting to the insurer af ter the expiry of  two years 
after the effective date of the policy, if th e insurer seeks to repudiate the claim  on the 
basis of fraud or suppression of facts whic h were m aterial be disclosed. (For e.g., 
Mithoolal Nayak v. Life Insurance Corporation of India , AIR 1962 SC 814 and Life 
Insurance Corporation of India v. Smt. G.M. Channabasamma, (1991) 1 SCC 357). 
 
8.5.3.5 In its 112th Report in 1985, the Law Com mission of India dealt with the question 
of repudiation of claim by the LIC in the context of s.45 of the Act. After considering the 
views of the insurers and policyholders, as  well as the judgment reports, the Commission 
suggested that s.45 be amended to provide that: 
 
(1) No policy of  lif e insurance shall be ca lled in question after the expiry of three 
years from the date on which the policy is effected or where the policy is revived 
after it has lapsed for any reason, from the date on which it is so revived. 
(2) A policy of life insurance may be called in question at any time within three years 
from the date on which the policy is effected or, as the case m ay be, the date on 
which it is revived, on the ground that any st atement being a statement material to 
the expectancy of the life of the insured was incorrectly m ade in the proposal or 
other document on the basis of which the policy was issued or revived.” 
 
8.5.3.6 It is proposed that the changes recom mended by the Law Commission in its 112th 
Report as stated above be once again reco mmended. This will, it is hoped, sufficiently 
protect the interests of the policyholders. 
 
8.5.4  Policyholders to elect the directors of insurers  
 
S.48 of the Act provides for election of one–f ourth of the directors of the insurance 
company by the holders of  lif e insurance policies and also as to the eligibility 
 118

requirements of policyholders for such election. This section had become irrelevant since 
the nationalization and establishm ent of LIC,  therefore should have been repealed long 
back. But in the changed econom ic scenario and private players in the field, the 
provisions again require the reconsideration, especially in the context of insurance 
cooperative society as insurers, where the di rectors are elected by not only the m embers 
of the society but even by policy holders b ecause many of them would be member-policy 
holders.  
 
The deletion of this section has been suggested  in view of the regulations relating to the 
protection of policyholder’s interest, which adequately ensure the protection of their 
interest. It m ay be noted here that the IRDA itself has a m ember to represent the 
consumers. Moreover, regulations relating to  solvency m argin and investm ents also 
secure their interest. If this section is repealed, consequently s.114 (2) (f) would be 
required to be deleted as it em powers the Central Governm ent to m ake rules for the 
purposes of s.48. Further, Rules 13, 14 and 15 of Insurance Rules would have to be 
deleted as they laid down the procedure for election of the Director by the policyholders. 
 
This suggestion m ay be considered but in  case of insurance cooperative society, the 
directors are elected by the m embers of th e society and would be elected even by 
policyholders because many of them would be member-policy holders. Hence, in view of 
this, the repeal of this section would not be appropriate. 
 
8.5.5 Life Insurance agents not to be a ppointed as directors of life insurance 
companies 
 
8.5.5.1 S. 48A prohibits life insurance agents to become or to rem ain as directors of any 
insurance company in order to protect the in terests of policyholders. The disqualification 
prescribed in this section m ay also be m ade applicable to insurance agents of  general 
insurance business. Therefore, the provisions of s.48A may be amended to that effect.  
 
8.5.5.2 The words “or general insurance busine ss” m ay be added after the words “life 
insurance business”. Consequently, m arginal note to the section would also require 
amendment. The word “Life” occurring in the marginal note may be omitted.  
 
8.5.5.3 The words “and no chief  agent or special agent” are required to be om itted. 
Similarly, the words, “carrying on life insura nce business” need deletion, so also the 
proviso to this section. 
 
8.5.6 Assignment and transfer of policies  
 
8.5.6.1 Life insurance policies are held by the policyholders to secure their future as these 
policies create a vested interest and have been  dealt as having the features of intangible 
property. S.38 therefore provides for the tran sfer or assignm ent of a policy of life 
insurance by an endorsem ent upon the policy itself or by separate instrum ent signed by 
the transferor/ assigner or by any authorized agent and attested by one witness setting 
forth the fact of transferring assignm ent. The transfer/ assignment can be made in favour 
 119

of the insurer also but shall not confer upon the transferee or assignee or his legal 
representative any right to sue for the am ount secured under such policy until a notice in 
writing of the transfer have been delivered both by this transfer and transferee to the 
insurer. There can be m ore than one transfer / assignment as per sub-section (3) of this 
section. In such cases the priority of clai ms shall be governed in the order in which 
notices have been delivered.  
 
8.5.6.2 Although s.38 resembles s.130 of the Tran sfer of Property Act, 1882, it excludes 
the operation of the latter provision from  the field since the former (s.38 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938) is a specific statutory provision. 
 
8.5.6.3 This section deals with both absolute  and conditional assignm ents, the form er 
transferring to the assignee all rights, title and interest which the assigner has in the 
policy without any defeasance clause, and th e latter being a conditional assignm ent as 
contemplated under sub-section (7) which creat es an im mediate vested interest in the 
assignee but which is liable to be divested on the happening of events specified in the 
assignment. A question arises w hether a conditional  assignee is entitled to obtain a 
loan under, or surrender, the policy without the concurrence of the insured . If it is 
answered in affirm ative, the conditional assignment would stand converted into an 
absolute assignment and defeat the object of the form er. While any transfer is subject to 
the terms and conditions specified in the instrument of transfer, the specific provisions in 
sub-section (5) of s.38 may mean either or both of the following: First, under sub-section 
(7), the assignor m ay becom e entitled to the policy m oney if the assignm ent becom es 
inoperative; second, the insurer m ay not recognize the assignee as the only person 
entitled to benefit under the policy if the term s of assignment expressly or by implication 
do not confer on him  any particular right or  benefit and treat the insured for such 
entitlement. If the insured reserves the right to receive the policy m oney on maturity, the 
assignee cannot exercise the right to surrender. 
 
8.5.6.4 The interpretation of sub-section (7) m ay create som e difficulty in view of sub-
section (5), for exam ple, a specified even t during the lif e tim e of  the insured m ay not 
refer to an event affecting the status etc of the assignee.  
 
8.5.6.5 There is another difficulty if an assignm ent is duly executed but no notice has 
been delivered to the insurer under sub-secti on (2). The assignment is not invalid but the 
assignee will not have the right to sue the insu rer. In this backdrop, the provisions of sub-
sections (5) and (7) need reconsideration and revision so as to rem ove anom alies. 
However, a suggestion has been m ade that sub-section (7) should be dropped. This m ay, 
however, attract the application of s.130 of th e Transfer of Property Act unless a proviso 
is made to exclude the application of s.130 of the Transfer of Property Act. 
 
8.5.6.6 S.38 (4) prescribes one rupee as the f ee for acknowledgement of the notice of the 
transfer of assignm ent. This am ount is who lly inadequate. Hence, the words one rupee 
may be replaced by the words “not exceeding an am ount prescribed by the Authority in 
the Regulations”. 
 
 120

8.5.7 Proposal for partial assignment of policies  
 
8.5.7.1 The Act does not provide for partial assi gnment of policies required especially in 
case of assignments for collateral security for loans, where the sum  assured is m ore than 
the amount of loan. It is, therefore, suggested that a new  sub-section may be inserted 
to provide for partial assignment of policies with the rider that the original assignor 
is not allow ed to further assign his residual rights to the third party w ith a view  to 
prevent any clash of interest of several assignees at the time of making the claim. 
 
8.5.7.2 The provisions of this section are app licable to only life insurance policies. It is 
desired that its application be extended to  all personal lines of non-life insurance 
business.  
 
8.5.8 Nomination by policyholder 
 
8.5.8.1 S.39 provides for nom ination of life insura nce policies. It enables the holder of 
the policy to nom inate the person to whom  money secured by the policy shall be paid in 
the event of death of the policyholder. Such a nomination can be made when effecting the 
policy or at any tim e before the policy m atures and can be changed or cancelled by an 
endorsement or a will. However, any change or cancellation in this regard is to be 
notified to the insurer under sub-section (2); otherwise insurer would  not be liable to 
make any payment to the nominee.  
 
8.5.8.2 Sub-section 3 prescribes fee of Re.1 to be charged for written acknowledgem ent 
in respect of registration of nom ination or any change thereof. The fee is inadequate and 
hence be enhanced. The maximum limit may be specified in regulations by the Authority. 
Accordingly, sub-section m ay be am ended. Thus the words “am ount as specified in the 
regulations by the Authority” be substituted for the words “one rupee”. 
 
8.5.8.3 Sub-section (4) contem plates autom atic cancellation of a nom ination in case of 
transfer and assignm ent of the policy except where the assignm ent is m ade in favour of 
insurer for advancem ent of loan. W hat about a situation where a policy is assigned to a 
non-insurer under s.38?  In such cases, the problem  of nom ination and related m atters 
may create dif ficulties. In order to deal with this problem  it is appropriate that the 
existing proviso to this section may be give n effect to cover this situation or another 
provision may be inserted to the effect that the nomination stands automatically 
revived when the policy is reassigned by the assignee in favour of the policyholder 
on repayment of loan other than on security of policy to the insurer.  
  
8.5.8.4 Generally, upon reassignm ent of the polic y, the policyholders forget to intim ate 
insurer of any change of nom ination or their intention to continue the sam e nomination 
which existed at the tim e of assignment of the policy. Hence an explicit provision may 
be inserted to the effect that nomination that existed at the time of assignment be 
restored or on assignment of the policy to the holder that very nomination shall be 
deemed to be in force till it is cancelled or changed as provided in sub-section (2) . 
 121

This kind of  additional provision would f acilitate insurers in discharging their liabilities 
expeditiously in respect of policy money.  
 
8.5.8.5 Sub-section (6) of the section provides that if a nom inee survives the insured 
person, the am ount of the policy m oney would be payable to such nom inee-survivor/s. 
The section does not indicate clearly as to whether the nom inee is entitled to retain the 
money so paid as the beneficial owner of the am ount or he is m erely the nominal owner 
of the m oney which form s part of the estate of the insured person so that his heirs, 
creditors, legatees may have claims on that money. 
 
8.5.8.6 The case law on this issue reveals two trends. One is that s.39 (6) confers on the 
nominee merely the right to collect and recei ve from the insurer, the policy m oney. The 
other is that the nom inee is not m erely a reci pient of the m oney but also the beneficial 
owner thereof. Various High Courts have adopt ed different approaches in interpretation 
of the provisions of sub-section (6) of s .39 giving rise to two views. The Gujarat, 
Calcutta, Karnataka, Kerala and Orissa Hi gh Courts adopted one view and the Andhra 
Pradesh and Allahabad High Courts took the other view.  
 
8.5.8.7 The Law Com mission of India in its 82 nd Report in 1980, dealt with the issue of 
the rights of the nominee, heirs, creditors, legatees of the insured of the money secured by 
the policy of life insurance after it is paid  to the nominee. The Commission surveyed the 
then existing case law and other legislative pr ecedents. It also considered the aspect of 
social justice i.e. legitim ate expectations of the near relatives, especially wom en, parents 
and children who deserve financial protecti on after the death of policy holder because 
death is like to have the deepest im pact on their personal lives and found that the existing 
provisions fail to fulfil the same. The Commission also noted that when a person makes a 
nomination, he cannot confer on any nom inee any right higher than what he him self has 
and that this would accordingly determ ine the rights of the nom inee in the sum  assured 
under the life insurance policy. Accordingly, the Com mission in its 82 nd Report (1980) 
recommended the inclusion of the following provisions:  
 
“(6A) Subject to the other provisions of this section, where the holder of a policy 
of life insurance on his own life nom inates his parents, or his spouse, or his 
children, or his spouse and children, or any of them , the nom inee or nom inees 
shall be beneficially entitled to the am ount payable by the insurer to him  or them 
under sub-section (6) unless it is proved that the holder of the policy, having 
regard to the nature of  his title to the policy, could not have conf erred any such 
beneficial title on the nominee. 
 
(6B) Subject as aforesaid, where the nom inee, or if there are m ore nom inees 
than one, a nominee or nominees, to whom sub-section (6A) applies, die after the 
person whose life is insured but before the am ount secured by the policy is paid, 
the amount secured by the policy, or so much of the amount secured by the policy 
as represents the share of the nom inee or nominees so dying (as the case m ay be), 
shall be payable to the heirs or legal representatives of the nom inee or nom inees 
 122

or the holder of a succession certificate, as the case m ay be, and they shall be 
beneficially entitled to such amount. 
 
(6C) Nothing in sub-sections (6A) and (6B) shall operate to destroy or im pede 
the right of any creditor to be paid out  of the proceeds of any policy of life 
insurance. 
 
(6D) The provisions of sub-sections (6 A), (6B) and (6C) shall apply to all 
policies of  lif e insurance m aturing f or paym ent af ter the com mencement of  the 
Insurance (Amendment) Act…..” 
 
8.5.8.8  In Sarbati Devi  v. Usha Devi, AIR 1984 SC 346, the Hon’ble Suprem e 
Court held that a mere nomination made under s.39 does not have the effect of conferring 
on the nom inee any beneficial interest in  the am ount payable under the policy on the 
death of the assured. The court further obser ved that the nom inee acquires no interest in 
the policy during the life time of the policy holder, therefore, after the death of the policy 
holder, the am ount under the policy becom es payable to his  legal heirs, the nom inee is 
only the authorized person to collect the paym ent so that insurer gets a valid discharge of  
its liability under the policy. A very im portant observation made in this case is that the 
provisions of s.39 cannot alter the course of succession under the law. The observations 
in the aforesaid case were followed by various High Courts. 
 
8.5.8.9 The above decision in Sarbati Devi’s case was taken note of by the Law 
Commission when it subm itted its 137 th Report in 1990 on the Em ployees’ Provident 
Fund Act. The Commission modified its earlier view and recommended as under: 
 
5.11 On giving anxious consideration to all th e relevant aspects, it appears possible to 
evolve a form ula which would satisfy the demands of social justice and fairness 
besides according due weightage to the desire of the em ployee concerned. The 
solution strikes as em inently satisf actory is this. A statutory provision m ay be 
made to the effect that the amount payable under the Act and the Scheme will vest 
in the nom inee who will be called th e ”benef iciary-nominee” unless the 
concerned em ployee has nam ed som e person as a “collector-nom inee” for the 
specific purpose of collecting the am ount on behalf of the m embers of the fam ily 
as defined in Para 2(g) for disbursem ent as per Para 70(ii) of the schem e. In other 
words, it would tantam ount to giving an  option to the workm en concerned who 
can nam e either a beneficiary nom inee or a collector-nom inee upon the 
significance of such nom ination being expl ained to him . He m ay be required to 
express his option in clear term s stating that the nom inees will be a benef iciary-
nominee and not a collector-nominee or vice versa. The same formula can also be 
evolved in respect of life insurance policies and the recom mendation by the Law 
Commission in its 82nd Report may be reiterated with this modification. 
5.12 Nomination under life insurance policies – While it is outside the scope of the 
subject matter of this report it may not be in appropriate that a similar formula can 
be adopted in respect of nom inations under life insurance policies in the context 
 123

of the recommendation made by the Commission in its 82nd report presented more 
than a decade ago on 2nd February, 1980. 
5.13 For, even in respect of life insurance policies, the public at large is perhaps 
unaware of the true legal position. Many of  the persons seeking the protection of 
insurance policies m ay well be labouring under the m isconception that the 
nominee would become an absolute beneficiary in his or her own right. The sam e 
would be the case with regard to t hose who are covered by the Act and the 
Scheme. It is, theref ore, essential in the interest of all concerned that the position 
of law is settled. As has been recount ed earlier, the Com mission has already 
recommended am endment of the Life Insu rance Act with a view to m aking a 
nominee a person in whom  the beneficial in terest would vest to the exclusion of 
other heirs. Since, however, no decisi ons has been taken on the recom mendation 
of the Law Com mission, the m atter is still not free from  vagueness in the sense 
that the m embers of the public m ay not be f ull aware of  the im plications of  
nominations and the im port of the decision of the Suprem e Court in Sarbati 
Devi’s case. That is why the course suggested in para 5.12 read with para 5.11 
hereinabove deserves to be adopted. 
The above recom mendation is reiterated and views are invited on whether s.39 can be 
amended accordingly. 
 
8.5.8.10 A suggestion has been m ade that, in case the policyholder dies after the 
maturity of the policy but is not able to  encash the proceeds because of his death, a 
nominee may be entitled to the sam e. To this effect, a proviso may be added to m ake the 
nomination effectual for receiving policy money.  
 
8.5.8.11 Another suggestion has com e for enabling the insured person, by way of 
an option, to make a nomination that confers absolute ownership of policy m oney on the 
nominee upon the death of the life assured. According to this suggestion, such a 
nomination will place the nom inee on the same status as that of a nom inee under s.45ZA 
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
 
8.5.9 Payment of money into court  
Many a times, it is impossible for the insurer to satisfactorily discharge any life insurance 
policy f or paym ent due to conf licting claim s, or insuf ficiency or proof  of  title, to the 
amount secured thereby. In such situations, the insurer may, under the provisions of s.47, 
with the perm ission of the court and subject to conditions specified in sub-sections (3) 
and (4) of the section, m ake payment of the sa me (deposit) into the court. The claim ants 
in such cases would certainly like to engage  lawyers and ultim ately in this process the 
claimants become the victim rather beneficiary of the amount so claimed. It is, therefore, 
suggested that insurer may, in  the circumstances as aforesaid, may deposit the 
amount with IRDA or the apparent tribunal as  the case may be. It is appropriate if 
an Insurance Lok Adalat is consti tuted for disposing of such claims . Such a 
procedure would be in the interest of the claimants because disposal by Lok Adalat would 
be speedy and without any technicalities.  
  
 
 124

8.6 Tariff Advisory Committee – composition and powers 
8.6.1  The tariff rates in respect of general insurance business are determ ined by 
a body known as Tariff Advisory Com mittee established under a principal Act in 1968 
(Insurance Amendment Act of 1968). Before its establishment, tariff committee regulated 
the rates and advantages in respect of general insurance business. 
 
8.6.2  The principal Act provides under s.64 U for the establishm ent of a Tariff 
Advisory Committee (TAC), a body corporat e having perpetual succession and com mon 
seal, to control and regulate the rates adva ntages, term s and conditions that m ay be 
offered by insurers in respect of general insurance business.  
 
8.6.3  It is an im portant body functioni ng under the control of the Authority 
since 1999. Before 1999, TAC was functioning unde r the Controller of Insurance. The 
primary objective of the com mittee is to fix the price of the insurance products 
scientifically in order to standardize decision-making choice of the consumer.  
 
8.6.4 Composition of TAC  
The Act prescribes the com position of TAC, as to consist of a Chairm an (ex-officio 
chairman of the Authority), a Vice Chairm an (a Senior Officer of the IRDA to be 
nominated by the Authority), not m ore than 10 elected representative of insurers and not 
more than four representative of insurers domiciled outside India but registered in India. 
 
8.6.5 At present the practice is that members of the Advisory Committee are not elected 
but are nominated or co-opted. In view of this practice, the provisions m ay be amended. 
The following provision may be substituted in clause (c) of s.64 UA (1): 
 
“not m ore than 10 representatives of Indian insurers and not m ore than 4 
representatives from government departments, professional bodies, etc. nominated 
by the Authority and/or the Central Government”. 
 
8.6.6 The Authority is empowered to nominate Secretary of the TAC (S.64UA (2)) who 
functions under the direction and control of the Authority (sub-section (5)) 
 
8.6.7 Powers of the TAC  
(i) Power to control rates, advantages, term s and conditions in respect of risk other 
than life (general insurance) 
 
8.6.7.1 The Act em powers TAC, under s.64 UC to control and regulate the rates, 
advantages, terms and conditions offered by the insurers in respect of any class of risk 
and it shall be binding on all insurers. However,  in certain cases it may permit any insure 
for a limited period (not exceeding 2 years) to adopt different rates from those fixed by it, 
subject to such conditions as may be imposed by TAC. 
 
8.6.7.2 Sub-section 3 provides that every decisi on of TAC would be valid only after its 
ratification by the Authority, whereas, provisi ons of sub-section (4) states that the 
 125

decisions of TAC under the provisions of this section would be final. The provisions of 
both these sub-sections reveal inconsistency, th erefore provisions need to be recast so as 
to remove the sam e. The issue is – when decisions have to be ratified by the Authority, 
then obviously those should be treated as fina l, why should the provisions of sub-section 
(4) be retained? 
 
8.6.7.3 The insurers, who commit any breach of rate/ advantage fixed by TAC, are guilty 
of the contravention of the provisions of th is Act under sub-section (5) of this section. 
Surprisingly, proviso to this sub-section allows the Authority to m ake good the 
contravention by recovering from  the insurer deficiency in the prem ium or compounding 
the offence of contravention by allowing the insurer to m ake payment to the Advisory 
committee of the fine of the amount not exceeding Rs.1000.  
 
8.6.7.4 The amount of fine is not adequate, hence should be enhanced . Again, if 
deficiency in prem ium is not rectif ied then 25% of the difference of the prem ium to be 
recovered from the insurer may be provided for. 
 
(ii) Power of TAC to require information 
 
8.6.7.5 TAC m ay require by notice under S.64 UE any insurer to supply necessary 
information within the period specif ied by it and failure to do so would be deem ed as 
contravention of the Act. This provision is similar to that of the s.44A wherein the 
Authority has been empowered to exercise similar powers. 
 
8.6.7.6 Sub-section (3) of s.64 UE empowers the Authority to depute any of its officers to 
make personal inspection of accounts, ledger etc. in order to verify accuracy of 
statements furnished by the insurer.  
 
8.6.7.7 Advisory committee is a statutory body and it is appropriate that the powers under 
this section be exercised by TAC instead of Authority because verification of whatever 
submitted by the insurers under sub-section [1] should be done by the Advisory 
committee and not by the Authority. Therefore, in sub-section (3), the word “Authority’” 
may be substituted by words ‘committee on its own or as directed by the Authority.’ 
 
8.6.7.8 TAC is also em powered to m ake arra ngements for inspection on application of 
the insurer under sub-section (4) in respect of risks, adjustment of losses etc. However, 
the proviso to it states that such inspecti on can only be made with the written perm ission 
of the organization (insurer). It is appropriate if instea d of ‘w ritten permission’ the 
words ‘prior w ritten intimation’ be substi tuted, because inspection under this sub-
section is on the application of the insu rer, hence permission of organiz ation seems 
to be irrelevant. 
 
(iii) Power of the TAC to constitute Regional committee  
 
8.6.7.9 The provisions of S.64 UJ em powers the Advisory Com mittee to constitute 
regional com mittees. As already stated, th e regional com mittees aren’t functioning 
 126

anymore, hence sub-sections (2) to (6) m ay be deleted and sub- section (1) m ay be recast 
as follows: 
 
“The Authority/ Advisory Com mittee m ay constitute such regional or other 
committees for the purpose as it deems fit.” 
 
(iv) Power to make rules  
 
8.6.7.10 The authority has been empowered under S. 64 UB to m ake regulations in 
respect of functions to be perform ed by the TAC, term s of  the of fice of  its m embers, 
procedure for election & other matters relating to the transaction of its business.  
 
8.6.7.11 Clause (b) of sub-section (2) m ay be  am ended so as to give effect to 
‘nomination’ in place of election of its members. 
 
8.6.7.12 Sub-section (3) empowers TAC to make regulations in respect of Regional 
Committees. As the Regional Com mittees are not functioning anymore, the provisions of 
this sub-section maybe deleted. 
 
8.6.7.13 Again, the provisions of sub-section (4) need om ission as they are 
transitional in nature and have become redundant long back. 
 
8.6.8 Need for repeal of certain provisions relating to TAC in part IIB of the 
principal Act 
 
8.6.8.1 Some of the provisions in pa rt IIB of the principal Act are required to be repealed 
as being transitional in nature which are as follows: 
(a) The provisions of S. 64 UD, except proviso to sub-section (1) (inserted by Act of 
1999), being transitional in nature need to be repealed as they have becom e 
redundant long back.  
(b) Proviso to sub-section (1) may also be repealed because its provisions have been 
taken care of under clause (a) of S.64 UA (1). 
(c) The provisions of  S. 64 UF providing f or assets and liabilities of  General 
Insurance Council to vest in the Adviso ry Committee after the com mencement of 
the Am endment Act, 1968 need to be rep ealed as the assets and liabilities have 
already been vested in TAC. 
(d) The provisions of S.64 UG also need to be repealed because its provisions have 
become irrelevant as all the contracts/ agreem ents m ade by the Tarif f Com mittee 
before 1968 are dealt by the Advisory co mmittee as also the suits or legal 
proceedings filed by or against Tariff committee after 1968 Am endment are being 
dealt by TAC . It is obvious that after a period of m ore than 3 decades, these 
provisions do not have any relevance. 
 127

(e) Sim ilarly, provisions of S.64UH protec ting the interest of the em ployees of 
Tariff Committee who were in em ployment before the Am endment Act 1968 need 
to be repealed because all those em ployees are now the em ployees of the Advisory 
Committee and others, who could not, should have availed the benefits m entioned 
under this section.  
(f) The provisions of S.64 UI obligates  every person, who is in possession or 
custody of the property of the Tariff Com mittee or is in possession of docum ents 
relating to such property, to deliver those to the Advisory Com mittee. Here also 
there’ is every possibility that the tran sfer of  such possession of  property and 
documents have taken place. Hence, provi sions have becom e redundant, therefore, 
to be repealed. Even if such delivery has not taken place, can it be claimed under the 
law after a period of more than 3 decades? 
 
8.7 Machinery for redressal of grievances/ claims 
The 1998 Rules 
 
8.7.1 In 1998, the central government framed the Redressal of Public Grievances Rules, 
1998 in exercise of the powers under s.114 (1 ) of the Insurance Act, 1938. Under these 
Rules, there was to be a governing body of Insurance Council which was in turn, under 
Rule 6 to appoint one or m ore persons as  Ombudsman for the purposes of these Rules. 
An Ombudsman is appointed under Rule 7 for a term  of three years and shall be eligible 
for reappointment. However, no Om budsman shall hold office after attaining the age of 
65 years. 
 
8.7.2 Under Rule 12 the powers of the Ombudsman are to receive and consider: 
(a) complaints under Rule 13 - i.e., a grievance by a person against an insurer, 
which com plaint has to be m ade after rejection of such persons 
representation by the insurer; 
(b) any partial or total repudiation of claims by an insurer; 
(c) any dispute in regard to premium paid or payable in terms of the policy; 
(d) any dispute on the legal construction of the policies in so far as such 
disputes relate to claims; 
(e) delay in settlement of claims; 
(f) non-issue of any insurance docum ent to custom ers after receipt of 
premium; 
 
8.7.3 Under Rule 12 (2) the Om budsman “shall act as counsellor and m ediator in 
matters which are within his term s of refe rence and, if requested do so in writing by 
mutual agreement by the insured person and the insurance company”. 
 128

 
8.7.4 The decision of the Om budsman is fina l. Under Rule 15 it appears that the 
insurance com pany has to com ply with the decision of the Om budsman whereas an 
option is given to the complainant whether or not he accepts the award. Where there is no 
such acceptance by the complainants, it is open to the Ombudsman pass an award “which 
he thinks fare in the facts and circumstances of the case”. 
 
The protection of policyholders interests Regulations 
8.7.5 The IRDA has, in exercise of its pow ers under s.114A (2) (zc) m ade the IRDA 
(Protection of Policyholders’ Interest) Re gulations, 2002. Regulation 5 m andates that 
every insurer “shall have in place proper pr ocedures and effective m echanism address 
complaints and grievances of policyholders efficiently and with speed and the same along 
with the inform ation in respect of Insura nce Ombudsman shall be com municated to the 
policyholder along with the policy docum ent and as m ay be found necessary.” Under 
Regulation 8 the procedure for m aintaining a nd processing a claim  in regard to a life 
insurance policy has been set out. Regulation 9 lays down a sim ilar procedure in respect 
of a general insurance policy.  
 
Other mechanisms 
 
8.7.6 Apart from the above m echanisms, at pr esent a large num ber of com plaints are 
being filed by dissatisfied policyholders under the Consum er Protection Act, 1986 
alleging deficiency of service when either a claim  is not settled or only partially settled. 
An analysis of the decisions rendered by the various consum er fora would reveal that a 
number of cases under this subject is growing by the day and the consumer fora are called 
upon frequently to interpret the provisions  of the Insurance Act 1938. However, on 
account of the large number of other cases that are pending decision before the consum er 
fora, this remedy is no longer a speedy or efficient one.  
 
8.7.7 Further, although there is som e mechanism, as spelt out in the above Rules and 
Regulations in so far as the grievances of policyholders are concerned, there is no 
effective mechanisms as regards insurers vis- à-vis the IRDA. This also will have to be 
taken into account while suggesting a suitable grievance redressal machinery. 
 
SEBI model 
 
8.7.8 The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (SEBI Act) established the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) is entrusted the functions of a regulator of 
the stock m arkets. Chapter VI A of the sa id Act provides for penalties in adjudication. 
Section 15A and 15H provide f or penalties f or contravention or f ailure to f ollow the 
regulations prescribed by the SEBI and pe nalties will be adjudicated by adjudicating 
officers appointed under section 15 I of the Act. The adjudicating officers shall be 
appointed from amongst the officers of the SE BI not below the rank of a Division Chief 
who will hold an inquiry in the prescrib ed m anner and after giving a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, im pose a penalty. S ection 15J spells out the factors to be 
taken into account by the adjudicating offi cer. Appeals from  the orders of the 
 129

Adjudicating Officers will lie to the Secur ities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) presided over 
by a sitting or a retired Judge of the Suprem e Court or a sitting or a retired Chief Justice 
of a High Court. The other Members of the Tribunal shall be appointed from persons who 
have expertise in dealing with problem s relating to securities m arket and having 
qualifications and experience of corporate law, securities law, finance, econom ics and 
accountancy. Under s.15 Z of the SEBI Act, as  amended in 2002, a further appeal to the 
Supreme Court from the decision of the SAT has been provided. 
 
8.7.9 It is proposed to adopt SEBI m odel with  certain m odifications and additions. In 
addition to redress the grievance of the polic y holders, it is proposed to provide for the 
establishment of a three -m ember Grievan ce Redressal Authority (GRA) in the m ajor 
cities to hear com plaints from policy holde rs/consumers against the insurers. The GRA 
will be presided over a by a sitting or a retired  district judge and in addition will consist 
of two members who have expertise in the field of insurance. 
 
8.7.10 Further, on similar lines as the SEBI Act, it is proposed to provide for adjudication 
in matters involving contravention of the Ac t, Rules and Regulations m ade by the IRDA 
with maximum penalties specified in the In surance Act, 1938 itself. In addition, ss. 102-
105C of the Insurance Act 1938 prescribe pena lties for contravention of or default in 
compliance with the provisions of  the Act. It  appears from the reading of the provisions 
that the penalty will be determ ined by the crim inal courts since it appears to be in the 
nature of a fine. It is proposed to modify these provisions and provide that these penalties 
will be levied after an adjudication/inquiry by adjudicating officers on the pattern of the 
SEBI Act. These adjudicating officers will be  appointed from amongst the officers of the 
IRDA above a certain level like the Adjudica ting Officers of the SEBI. The Adjudicating 
Officers will be positioned in different locations in the country to facilitate the widest 
geographical access to insurers, insurance intermediaries and insurance agents. 
 
8.7.11 It is also proposed to provide for the establishment of an Insurance Appellate 
Tribunal (IAT) to hear appeals from  the orders of the adjudicating o fficers and also from 
the decisions of the GRAs. The IAT will also hear appeals f rom the orders of  the IRDA 
on m atters involving insurers and insurance agents including registration and grant of 
licences. The IAT will have a retired or sitting judge of the Supreme Court or a retried or 
sitting Chief Justice of  a High Court as its Presiding Officer. Two other m embers of the 
IAT will be persons of  integrity, ability and standing and having requisite qualif ications 
and experience in the field of insurance. It  is proposed that there should be a further 
appeal to the Supreme Court from the decisions of the IAT sim ilar to s.15 Z of the SEBI 
Act. 
 
Recommendation 
8.7.12  The tentative proposals for a full fledge d grievance redressal m echanism are as 
under: 
 
 130

(a) The present system  of having Om budsman under the 1998 Rules at the 
major m etropolises be replaced by Grievance Redressal Authorities 
(GRA) constituted by appropriate am endments to the Insurance Act, 1938 
itself. These would thus be statut ory authorities exercising statutory 
functions. 
(b) The GRA could be m ulti-member bodies comprising one judicial m ember 
and two technical m embers. A certain degree of transparency should be 
induced in the process of selection of such members. 
(c) The GRAs should be dispersed as ge ographically widely as possible. For 
instance, that could be GRAs in each  of the m ajor cities in the country. 
This is necessary given the large num ber of policyholders at present and 
the prospect of this growing in the future. 
(d) The powers and jurisdiction of the GRAs would include all the powers and 
functions presently performed by Ombudsman under the 1998 Rules.  
(e) In addition to the above, it could be provided that all pending disputes 
arising under the Insurance Act, 1938 be fore the consumer fora would be 
transferred to the GRAs for disposal  in accordance with the provisions of 
the Insurance Act, 1938. To this extent an am endment m ay have to be 
made in the Consum er Protection Ac t, 1986 to provide that disputes 
arising under the Insurance Act, 1938 will not be entertained under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 
(f) IRDA will appoint adjudicating officers in inquire/adjudicate violations of 
the Act, Rules and Regulations by insurers, insurance interm ediaries and 
insurance agents and levy penalties as provided for in the Act. 
(g) An Insurance Appellate Tribunal (IAT) on the lines of the one under the 
SEBI Act should be constituted having its sitting as a principal bench in 
New Delhi and by circuit in the f our m ajor m etropolises. The IAT will 
hear appeals against decisions of th e GRAs and the Adjudicating Officers 
decision of  the IAT will be f inal. The IAT will also entertain appeals 
against the decisions/orders of the IRDA concerning insurers, insurance 
intermediaries and insurance agents including those pertaining to 
registration and licensing. 
(h) There will lie a f urther statutory a ppeal to the Suprem e Court f rom the 
decision of the IAT on the lines of s.15 Z of the SEBI Act. The appeal will 
have to be filed within 60 days of the decision of the IAT. 
(i) There will be a clause expressly ex cluding the jurisdiction of  civil courts 
in disputes arising under the Insura nce Act, 1938. However, this will not 
include claims/ disputes arising unde r the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and 
the Marine Insurance Act 1963. 
 131

(j) On the lines of ss.41 & 42 of the LIC Act, 1956, the decision of the GRA 
may be m ade enforceable in any civ il court within the local lim its of 
whose jurisdiction the decree holder actually and voluntarily resides. 
(k) With a view to encouraging a lternative dispute resolution (ADR) 
mechanisms, it may be provided that a claimant may be first referred to an 
ADR m echanism, which would include  m ediation and/ or conciliation, 
and only if that fails, should the m atter been placed before GRA. Further, 
the GRA may itself refer the pending dispute before it to an ADR process 
at any stage of the proceedings, with the consent of the parties. 
8.7.13  The above fram ework of a grievan ce redressal m echanism is a tentative 
one and will require to be f urther develope d and m odified af ter consultation with all 
concerned parties. 
8.8 Penal provisions  
 
8.8.1 Ss.102-105C prescribe penalties for contravention of or default in complying with 
the provisions of the Act; false statem ent in docum ent; wrongfully withholding or 
obtaining any property; offences under the Act com mitted by com panies and failure to 
comply with the provisions of ss.2B and 32C. 
 
8.8.2 S.105C prescribes a penalty for failure to com ply with s.32C. It has been 
suggested that this section be amended to indicate a minimum penalty to be imposed 
so as to make the provisions deterrent in nature . Further these penalties w ill be 
determined and levied after adjudication/i nquiry by Adjudicating Officers as stated 
in para 8.7.10. 
 
8.9 Miscellaneous provisions. 
Investments 
8.9.1.1 It requires consideration whether the details of investm ents provided in ss. 27, 
27A and 27B ought to be shifted to the Re gulations fram ed by the IRDA even while 
retaining the essential guidelines in the substantial provisions of  these sections. 
Alternatively, whether the existing provisions  relating to investm ents under ss. 27, 27A 
and 27B be retained with an additional safe guard that prior approval of RBI should be 
sought in drawing up the list of such investments by the IRDA.  
 
8.9.1.2 It requires to be consider w hether the provisions pertaining to investments 
and maintenance of solvency margin shou ld be equally applicable to the public 
sector insurance companies including Life  Insurance Corporation of India and GIC 
and its subsidiaries. 
 
Winding up by the court (S. 53) 
8.9.2 The Insurance Act provides for winding up by the court under s.53. The Act does 
not allow voluntary winding up by the in surance com pany except on the grounds 
mentioned in s.54. It also provides for partia l winding up if the schem e for the sam e is 
 132

confirmed by the court under s.58. The provisions of s.53 enables the court to pass orders 
for winding up of an insurance com pany not only as per the provisions of the Com panies 
Act but also if a petition is filed under sub-s ection 2 of this section after obtaining the 
previous sanction of the court in this behalf  by one tenth shareholders of the com pany or 
not less than fifty policy holders.  
 
8.9.3 This section also enables the Authority under clause (b) of sub-section (2) to 
apply for winding up if (i) the com pany fails to deposit or keep deposited the am ount 
required under s.7 or 98, or (ii) the com pany has continued failure to com ply with the 
requirements of this Act or contravention of  any provisions of this act for a period of 
three months after notice of such contrave ntion or non-compliance has been conveyed to 
it by the Authority, or (iii) returns f urnished by the com pany or investigations m ade 
under this Act reveal that the com pany is or is deem ed to be insolvent, or (iv) 
continuance of the com pany is prejudicial to  the interest of policy holders or public 
interest generally. 
 
8.9.4 These very grounds stated above in (i) - (iii) on which the authority has been 
empowered to apply for winding under this s ection are also som e of the grounds for 
which it can cancel the registration of a ny insurance com pany under section3(4).On 
cancellation of registration, the com pany cannot carry on insurance business. Hence 
provisions under clauses (i), (ii)and (iii) of sub-section (2) (b) may be omitted. However, 
clause (iv) may be retained. 
 
8.9.5 In sub-section (1) of s.53, reference to Com panies Act, 1913 be substituted by 
Companies Act 1956 (Act VII of 1956). 
 
8.9.6 In sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of s. 53, the words “or s.98” are to 
be omitted.  
 
Voluntary winding up (S.54) 
8.9.7 S.54 excludes voluntary winding up of in surance com panies except for the 
purpose of am algamation or reconstruction of  the com pany or it cannot continue its 
business because of its liabilities. But am algamation or reconstruction of the com pany 
does not presuppose winding up and interests of  the shareholders are considered and 
protected under the schem e approved by the Authority. While in the case of winding up, 
the process is altogether different. Therefore, s.54 may be amended to the effect that 
insurance companies should not be w ound up except on the ground that by reason 
of its liabilities it cannot continue its business.  
 
Scheme for partial winding up (S. 58) 
8.9.8 Section 58 provides for partial winding up of insurance com panies. In its sub-
sections (3) and (4), reference to the Companies Act, 1913 m ay be substituted by the 
Companies Act 1956. 
 
 133

8.9.9 In sub-section (4), reference of s.12 of the Com panies Act 1913 be substituted by 
‘15’ and sections 15 and 16 be replaced by s.17 of the Companies Act 1956.  
  
Management by administrator (Ss.52A-52G) 
 
8.9.10  Section 52A to 52G deal with the management by an administrator. These 
sections were added in 1950 in order to pr otect the interest of  policyholders of life 
insurance. 
 
8.9.11  Section 52A provides that, if the Authority has reason to believe that an 
insurer is acting in a m anner prejudicial to the interest of  holders of  lif e insurance 
policies, then the Authority m ay after giving the insurer an opportunity to be heard m ake 
a report to the Central Governm ent and the central government may after considering the 
report, appoint an administrator to manage the affairs of the insurer. 
 
8.9.12  IRDA is a high powered body and com petent to decide and act in a given 
situation. Hence, it is suggested that Authority a fter giving an opportunity to the 
insurer and after taking into consideration the interest of policy holders, is of the 
opinion that it is necessary and proper to  appoint an administrator to manage the 
affairs of the insurer carrying on life insu rance business, the Authority may, by an 
order, do so . The adm inistrator shall receive such rem uneration as the Authority m ay 
direct. The Authority m ay appoint som e othe r person as an adm inistrator if the one 
appointed earlier is not able to manage the affairs of the insurer.  
 
8.9.13  In the context of the proposed sugges tions, sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of 
s.52A may be amended to give effect to the aforesaid proposals.  
 
8.9.14  At present, the provisions of s.52A do not mention the period for which an 
administrator will initially be appointed. It may be appropriate if the limit in this regard is 
provided in the statute subject to the proposed provisions of s.52 D. 
Powers of the administrator respecting property (S. 52BB) 
8.9.15  S. 52BB (9) vests in the adm inistrator powers of the civil court. Sub-section (1) 
provides that an adm inistrator m ay, pending the institution of  proceedings against a 
person, who has rendered him self liable to be  proceeded against under s.106, by order in 
writing, prohibit him  or any other person from  transferring or disposing of any property 
which, in his opinion, would be liable to attachment.  
 
8.9.16  Sub section (2) provides for an a ppeal against such orders of the 
administrator to Central Government. It would be appropriate if the Authority is made the 
appellate authority under this sub-section. Th e words “Central Government” occurring in 
sub-sections (2) and (3) are to be replaced by the word “Authority”. 
 
8.9.17  As aforesaid, the administrator w ould be exercising pow ers of a civil 
court. He should, therefore, be w ell qua lified and competent to exercise such 
powers. A provision to this effect may be added to s.52 (A). 
 
 134

Termination of appointment of administrator (S.52 D) 
 
8.9.18  In consequence of aforem entioned suggestions proposed in sections 52A 
and 52BB, the provisions of s.52 D would have to be amended as follows: 
“If at any time, it appears to the Authority that the purpose of the order appointing 
the Administrator has been fulfilled or that, for any reason, it is undesirable that 
the order of appointm ent should rem ain in force, the Authority m ay cancel the 
order and thereupon the Administrator shall be divested of the management of the 
insurance business which shall, unless otherwise directed by the Authority, again 
vest in the person in whom  it was vested im mediately prior to the appointm ent of 
Administrator or any other person appointed by the insurer in this behalf”. 
 
Penalty for withholding documents of property from Administrator (S. 52 F) 
 
8.9.19  Section 52 F provides punishm ent of  six m onths im prisonment or fine 
extending of six m onths to Rs. 1000/- or with both for withholding docum ents of 
property of an administrator. It is desirable that punishment of  fine under this section 
may be enhanced to Rs. 5000/-. 
 
Protection of Action (S. 52G) 
8.9.20  Section 52 G provides for the prot ection of action taken by the central 
government in good faith under sections 52A, 52B or 52D and by the administrator under 
s.52A, 52B or 52B or 52C. 
 
8.9.21  It is suggested that the protectio n extended to central government, at 
present should be extended to the Authority because, as proposed the action may be 
taken under the aforesaid sections by the Authority . Therefore, am endments may be 
made in these sections. 
 
Finality of decision appointing Administrator (S. 52E) 
8.9.22  In the backdrop of the am endments suggested in s.52A, the provisions of 
s.52 E need consequent changes, viz., the words “Central Government” are to be replaced 
by the word “Authority”. 
 
Powers of the central government  to acquire the undertaking of  insurers in certain 
cases (Section 52H to 52N) 
 
8.9.23  Section 52 H provides that the central governm ent m ay acquire the 
undertaking of any insurer if the Authority repor ts to it that the insurer has persistently 
failed in com plying with the directions gi ven to it by the Authority under s.34, 34F or 
34G or any order under s.34E or is m anaging its affairs in a m anner detrimental to the 
public interest. 
 
8.9.24  Section 52-I em powers the central governm ent to prepare a schem e for 
acquisition of undertaking of any insurer and enum erates the powers for the sam e as also 
provides for the publication of such sche me if so m ade. s.52J provides for the 
 135

compensation to be paid to the acquired in surer by the Central Governm ent and if the 
amount of com pensation is not acceptable to the insurer, then it m ay request the central 
government to refer the m atter to the tri bunal, constituted under s.52K by the central 
government for this purpose, which shall ha ve the powers of civil court (s.52L) and 
regulate its own procedure (s.52M). Special  provisions for dissolution of acquired 
insurers is set out in s.52N.  
 
8.9.25  In view of the policy of perm itting privatisation and m oving away from  
nationalization, these powers of acquisition are no longer relevant and it is suggested that 
ss.52H to 52N be deleted. 
 
Return of deposits (s.59) 
8.9.26  S.59 provides for the return of depos its made under s.7 or 98 in case of 
insolvency or winding up of insurance com panies. The words and digits “or s.98” 
occurring in this section are to be omitted. 
 
Special provisions relating to external companies (Ss. 62-64) 
 
8.9.27  Ss.62 to 64 provide for non-Indian com panies/insurers established outside 
India. These provisions hade become redundant even before the enactment of IRDA Act 
1999 and Insurance (Am endment) Act 2002. Now the IRDA Act 1999 which also 
amended the Insurance Act 1938, specifically provides that no insurer other than an 
Indian insurance company shall begin to carry on any class of insurance business in India 
after the com mencement of IRDA Act (proviso to s.2C of the Act of 1938). In view of 
this provision, obviously, the aforesaid sp ecial provisions relating to non-Indian 
companies have become irrelevant and, therefore, require repeal.  
 
Insurance councils and powers of the Executive Committee (S.64-I) 
8.9.28.1 The functioning of the Insurance councils constituted under s.64C acquires 
important in view of  the changed policy of  perm itting private players in the insurance 
field. A suggestion has been m ade that the representative of the IRDA in these councils 
should not also be the chairperson of such councils. This requires some discussion.  
8.9.28.2 S.64 UI deals with the power of the executive com mittee of the Life 
Insurance Councils to hold exam inations for in surance agents. The repeal of the section 
has been suggested in the context of accreditation to Insurance Institute of India.  
 
Power to remove difficulties (S. 64 UL) 
8.9.29  In this section, the words “Central  Government” may be replaced by the 
word ‘Authority’. 
Acquisition of surrender values by policy (S.113) 
8.9.30  This sub-section provides that the s ub-sections (2) and (3) shall not apply 
in case of the paid up value or the reduced annuity falling below a minimum amount. It is 
suggested that this minimum amount of paid up value and annuity may be allow ed 
to be notified by the Authority from time to time. 
 136

8.9.31  Sub-section (4) (c) provides that the subsections (2) and (3) are not 
applicable to policies in which the surrende r value would be autom atically applied under 
the terms of the contract to m aintain the policy in force after its  lapse because of non-
payment of premium. It is suggested that a proviso be added to this sub-section to provide 
for this. 
Exemptions (s.118) 
8.9.32  It has been suggested that if insu rance business is carried on by any trade 
union registered under the Indian Trade Unions Act 1926 the same shall be brought under 
the purview of regulations. It is suggested that the scope and the manner of the 
regulation (may be linked to the siz e) – number and fund – of the Union) be 
incorporated in the insurance laws. 
 
*** 
 
 137

APPENDIX-II 
Provisions that required to be amended 
(other than those concerning powers of the IRDA) 
 
[Para 2.1.3] 
 
S.2 (9) Definition of ‘Insurer’. Has to be changed to include Insurance Co-
operative Society as defined in S.2 (8A) and an Indian Insurance Com pany 
as defined in S.2 (7A). 
The inclusion of governm ent organisations within this term  m ay be 
considered under exceptions/ exemptions. 
S.2C Prohibition of transaction of Insurance business by certain persons:- 
With the introduction of the third proviso to S.2 C in 1999, the prohibition 
spelt out in S.2C has becom e redundant. The provision m ay be recast as 
under: 
“No insurer shall begin to carry on any class of insurance business in India 
under this Act unless it is – 
(a) an Indian insurance company as defined in clause (7A) of s.2, or 
(b) an insurance cooperative society as defined in clause (8A) of s.2 : 
Provided that the Central Governm ent ……” (first proviso m ay be 
retained) 
S.4 It is proposed that m inimum limits for annuities and other benefits secured 
by policies of the insurance require upward revision and this should be 
specified by the Regulations from time to time. The section may, therefore, 
be amended accordingly. 
S.6A (1) It is proposed that S.6A (1) be am ended to perm it insurers to issue 
preference shares. However, the prio r permission of the IRDA should be 
obtained for every fresh issue of capital and in accordance with the 
Regulations issued by the IRDA in this behalf. 
 138

S.6A (10) It is proposed that the power of the Ce ntral Government to issue directions 
in regard to capital structure and voting rights should be exercised by the 
IRDA. 
S.6B It is proposed that the power of the Ce ntral Government to issue directions 
for appointing an officer to exam ine any schem e to enable an insurer to 
bring its capital structure in line with  the requirem ents of S.6A should be 
entrusted to the IRDA. 
S.6B (4) If S.6B (1) is am ended by adding the words ‘General Insurance Business’ 
after the words ‘Life Insurance Busine ss’ then there would be no need for 
S.6B (4) which may accordingly be omitted. 
S.6C At present a public com pany lim ited by shares can convert itself to a 
company lim ited by guarantee with the approval of the Central 
Government. It is proposed that the approval should instead be given by the 
IRDA and the provision amended accordingly.  
S.6C (5) The words ‘Indian Com panies Act 1913 (7 of 1913)’ m ay be replaced by 
the words ‘Companies Act 1956’. 
S.7 (1)  Deposits: 
It is proposed that there should be an amendment to S.7 (1) to clarify that 
the deposits m ade by an insurer at th e time of m aking the application for 
registration should be treated as deposits under S.7 (1).  
The form ula regarding the am ount to deposits, based on total gross 
premium, does not help insurers applyi ng for registration for the first tim e. 
A provision has to be incorporated for such first time insurers. 
Under the IRDA Regulations first tim e insurers are required to deposit a 
sum of Rs.10 lakhs along with their application. This requires to be 
reflected in S.7 (1) itself. 
S.7 (1) em powers the Central Governm ent to apply this requirem ent with 
modification in the event that an insurer does not have a Share Capital. It is 
 139

proposed that this power should be exercised by the IRDA in consultation 
with the Central Governm ent. A ccordingly, the words ‘Central 
Government’ in the second proviso to S.7 (1) may be replaced by the word 
‘Authority’ with a clarification that the authority will exercise the power in 
consultation with the Central Government. 
S.7 (9A) & 
7 (9B) 
It is proposed that the power of Reserve Bank of India, in the matter of sale 
of securities/ investm ent of deposits held by the insurer, should be 
exercised in consultation with the IRDA. The provision m ay be am ended 
accordingly. 
Further, in clause (b) of s.7(9B), the words “Central Governm ent” should 
be replaced by the word “Authority”. 
S.9 Refund of Deposits:- 
It is proposed that IRDA m ay be em powered to pass orders for refund of 
deposits to the insurer upon the Insu rer ceasing to carry on insurance 
business. W here the ceasing of business is pursuant to winding up 
proceedings in court, such order may be made by the court. 
S.10 (1) The proviso to this section which pr ohibits prescribing of certain sub-
clauses of m iscellaneous insurance business needs review and 
modification. 
S.10 (2) The requirement that all receipts due in respect of life insurance business 
“shall be carried to and shall form  a separate fund to be called the life 
insurance fund…” is irrelevant as th e life insurers cannot carry general 
insurance business. However, general insurers can be obligated to m aintain 
separate accounts and funds in respect of sub-classes of general insurance 
business, hence amendments to be made. 
S.11(2) Preparation of accounts and balance sheet: 
S.11(2) is required to be am ended because of the legislative changes 
prohibiting partnership firm s from  carrying on insurance business and 
 140

introducing cooperative societies as in surers. The part of the section 
referring about the signatory of a part nership firm should be dropped as it 
cannot transact insurance business. However, signatories in respect of 
insurance cooperative societies are be inserted. 
S.12 Liability of the auditor: 
The words “s.145 of the Indian Com panies Act 1913” m ay be substituted 
by the words “s.233 of the Companies Act 1956.” 
S.13(4) The provision of sub-section (4) need s to be recast in view of the 
Regulations made by the Authority as follows: 
“(4) There shall be appended to every such abstract a statement prepared in 
accordance with the regulations contained in Part I of the Fifth Schedule in 
respect of the accounts of the insurer, which are m ade up for the purposes 
of such abstract, in the form  and in the manner specified by the regulations 
made by the Authority.” 
S.15 Submission of returns: 
Since s.11 (2) also provides for the si gning of the docum ents, sub-sections 
(1) and (2) of s.15 need to be recast in order to simplify them which may be 
as follows: 
“15(1) The audited accounts and statem ents referred to in s.11 or sub-
section (5) of s.13 and the abstract and statements referred to in s.13 should 
be submitted in four copies within six months from the end of the financial 
year.” 
(2) The statements referred to in sub-section (1) shall be signed in the case 
of a com pany by the chairm an and two directors and by the principal 
officer of the company, and if the company has a managing director by that 
director, in case of insurance cooperative society by ____________: 
Provided that in addition to the pe rsons m entioned in sub-section (2) 
above, the statements shall be signed by auditors and the actuary who made 
 141

the valuation.” 
S.16 Returns by Insurers outside India: 
The words in s.16 (2) (b) “Third Schedule applicable to that class or sub-
class of insurance business.” m ay be  deleted and replaced by the word 
“Regulations” in view of Insurance (Amendment) Act 2002. 
S.28 Submission of statement of investment of assets: 
S. 28(1) and (2) may be recast as follows: 
“(1) Every insurer carrying the business of life insurance shall every year 
submit to the Authority a return showing as at the 31st day of March of the 
preceding year as to the assets held invested in accordance with s.27 within 
the time and in the manner as specified in the regulations in this regard. 
(2) Every such insurer shall also furnis h quarterly return of  the assets held 
invested showing at the end of June , September and Decem ber within the 
time and in the manner as specified in the Regulations.” 
S.28(3) S. 28(3) needs to be recast. The word s” August” and “June” are then to be 
replaced by the words ‘November’ and ‘September’ respectively. 
S.28 A & 
28 B 
Submission of return of investments: 
In view of the detailed Investm ent Regulations, the provisions of ss. 28A 
and 28B providing for subm ission of return of investm ents by the life 
insurers and general insurers respectiv ely to the Authority are not required 
to be provided in the principal Act, he nce, may be amended so as to m ake 
just a reference of the manner specified in the regulations. 
S.29 Prohibition on giving of loans: 
The provisions of s.29 restrict an insurer to the giving of loans or 
temporary advances to any director, manager, actuary, auditor or officer 
and partner. However, life insurers m ay advance loans or advances to 
insurance agents to facilitate carryi ng out their functions as such under 
 142

clause (b) of sub-section (3) of this section. It would be appropriate if the 
provisions of s.29(3) are also m ade applicable to insurers carrying on 
general insurance business. 
The advancement of loans etc. to its employees being the internal matter of 
the insurance com pany, som e relaxation in this regard would be 
appropriate. It is, therefore, suggested  s.29(3)(a) may be amended so as to 
replace the words “except such loan as are specified in sub-section (1) of 
s.27A” with the words “except as pe r the schem e of the insurer duly 
approved by its Board of Directors.” 
A suggestion has been m ade that the tem porary advances given to the 
employees may be exempted from the application of s.29.  
In s.29 (2), for the words “86D of the com panies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913)”, 
words, “220 of the Companies Act 1956 should be substituted. 
S.31  Maintenance of assets by insurers: 
The principal Act provides in s.31 as to in whose nam e the assets of 
company or firm or an individual are to  be kept. As the partnership firm  or 
an individual cannot carry on insurance business under this Act, their 
references in the section have becam e redundant. Hence the words “in the 
name of partners, if a firm , or in the name of proprietor, if an individual” 
may be deleted from this section and the words “in the name the society, if 
an insurance co-operative society” m ay be substituted because of  the 
introduction of insurance co-operativ e societies as insurers by the 
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2002. 
S.31B (3) Restriction on payment of excessive remuneration: 
The provisions of sub-section (3) empowers the Authority to issue notice to 
the insurer to subm it certified copies of the agreement between the insurer 
and the agent in case rem uneration exceeding Rs. 5000 has been received 
by persons other than chief agent, pr incipal agent or special agent. The 
limit of Rs. 5000 as mentioned in sub-sections (2) and (3) may be enhanced 
 143

appropriately. 
S.32A Prohibition of common officers: 
The Managing Director or other officer  of a life insurer are prohibited to 
act as such for other insurer or banking com pany under sub section (1) of 
section 32A and the insurer are under an obligation to keep whole tim e 
managing director or an officer under sub-section (2) if the insurance funds 
exceeds 50 lakh or life insurance funds  Rupees 25 lakh. Sub-section (2) 
needs review and revision as the requirement of whole tim e m anaging 
director is conditional under this sub- section. It would be appropriate if 
such em ployment is m ade unconditional, i.e., without depending on the 
amount of the funds of the insurers. It  would be m ore appropriate if the 
provisions of this section are made part of regulations. 
S.32B & 
32C 
Social and rural sector: 
The word “or” m ay be replaced with th e word ‘and’ so as to elim inate the 
choice of rural or social sector by the insurer so that insurers are obligated 
to contribute to the developm ent of  both the sectors without having an 
option to choose either of them . In consequence, the marginal note to these 
sections would also be required to be amended accordingly.  
The third proviso to the said Regul ation 3 em powers the Authority to 
revise the obligation stated in this re gulation every five years. This power 
of the Authority should find place in  the Act and m ay after necessary 
changes be m ade proviso to s.32C because Authority should derive its 
power to revise to the percentage fr om the statute otherwise exercise of 
such power would be ultra vires the principal Act. 
The provisions of s.32 C obligates every insurer to provide life insurance or 
general insurance policies including crop insurance in the social sector as 
may be specified by the regulations. Ho wever, Regulation 3 in clause (b) 
states about num ber of lives in respect  of the obligation for the first five 
years. It is suggested that for the wo rd “lives’, the word “policies” be 
 144

substituted. 
The word “official gazette” in section 32 B(1) may be replaced by the word 
“Regulations”. 
S.35 Amalgamation: 
The principal Act allows am algamation of insurance business under a 
scheme to be sanctioned by the Central Governm ent whether prepared by 
the Authority or not. W here such a schem e is sanctioned, then the insurers 
carrying on amalgamated business or the transferee insurers are required to 
furnish schem e, agreem ent, balance sheet s etc. in respect of transfer and 
amalgamation to the Authority even where the am algamation or transfer 
has not been m ade in accordance with the schem e approved by the 
Authority under clause (c). This pa rt of the section appears to be 
inconsistent with the provisions of  ss.35 and 36 whereby no am algamation 
can take place without approval of the Authority. Therefore, this 
inconsistency may be removed by way of addition of an explanation in the 
provisions. 
With a view to avoiding any duplica tion or am biguity about the operation 
of the Com panies Act, 1956 and the Insurance Act, 1938, an express 
provision has to be m ade to the eff ect that no option to am algamate under 
the Com panies Act should be given without com pliance with the 
requirements of the Insurance Act, 1938. 
S.37A Power of IRDA to prepare scheme of amalgamation: 
The details of the scheme for amalgamation set out in s.37A may be shifted 
to the Regulations. 
S.40 (2) Payment of commission to insurance agents: 
The following may be substituted in sub-section 2. 
“No insurance agents shall be paid or contracted to be paid by way of 
commission or as rem uneration in a ny form an am ount of not exceeding 
 145

the amount as specified in the regulations in respect of policies, whether 
life or non-life and as also in respect of renewal of policies.”  
S.40 (2A) Payment of renewal commission: 
S.40 (2A) be am ended to provide th at subsequent renewal com mission be 
paid to the agent other than th e agent through whom  the policy was 
effected.  
In consequence, the proviso to this sub-section m ay also be am ended to 
provide that commission on renewal prem ium to be paid to only one agent 
who assisted in effecting revival of the policy which stood lapsed due to 
non-payment of the premium. Thus the agent who procured the policy will 
be prohibited from  receiving the com mission. In this regard the Authority 
may frame regulations. 
S.40A Limitation of expenditure on commission: 
S.40A may be recast as follows: 
“40A. No insurer whether carrying on life insurance business or general 
insurance business shall pay or contract to pay to an insurance agent and no 
insurance agent shall receive or contract to receive, by way of com mission 
or remuneration in any form  in respect of any kind of policy issued except 
as specified in the regulations made in this behalf by the Authority.” 
In consequence of the proposed section, sub-section (5) may be recast.  
Again, the punishm ent for contraventi on of sub-sections (1) and (3) of 
existing s.40A is provided in sub-section (5) as fine extending to Rs.100. 
This amount is inadequate and hence it may be enhanced appropriately.  
S.40B & C Limitation on expenses of management: 
Clause (b) of the Explanation of the Section 40B explains the term  
“expenses of m anagement”. This term  further needs inclusion of other 
expenses in the context of recent tre nds of business in this century. It 
 146

would be appropriate if this term finds place in the regulations. 
Similarly, provisions of section 40C prohibits an insurer of carrying on 
general insurance business to spend as  expenses of m anagement in excess 
of the prescribed limits.  
In both the sections and the explanations attached to them , the reference of 
the word “calendar” may be replaced by the word “financial”. 
S.41 Prohibition of rebates: 
For the contravention of the provisions  of s.41, sub-section (2) of this 
section prescribes fine up to Rs.500. Th e amount of fine is inadequate and 
needs to be increased. A suggestion has com e that section 41 m ay be 
amended to enhance the penalty to  100 per cent of the prem ium or 
Rs.10000 whichever is higher. 
S.43 Register of insurance agents: 
For the word “register”, the word ‘record’ m ay be substituted which would 
encompass both the register and records in the electronic form  as well. In 
consequence, the m arginal note w ould be required to be am ended 
accordingly, i.e., ‘Record of insurance agents’.  
The section does not indicate any tim e fram e (m aximum tim e-limit) for 
maintaining records. It has been sugge sted that maximum time limit in this 
regard may be specified in the section. 
S.44 Heritable Commission: 
The am ount of Rs.50,000 and percenta ge of renewal com mission (4%) 
mentioned in clause (b) of the provi so to s.44 (1) need upward revision. 
However, it is appropriate that sam e be lef t to be determ ined by the 
Authority in the regulations. 
The condition of continuously serving for 10 years by an agent exclusively 
for one insurer under clause (c) also needs to be reviewed.  
 147

The provisions of clause (c) absolute ly prevents an agent to solicit or 
procure business for any other insurer ev en after he ceases to be an agent 
for the form er insurer. This condition appears to be unreasonable in this 
age of liberalization. The provision m ay be amended to be effect that after 
the lapse of five years from the date he ceases to be an agent, he can solicit 
or procure business for another insurer.  
The word “and exclusively” in clause s (b) and (c) m ay be dropped in view 
of the developm ent that an agent can act for one life insurer and one 
general insurer (see Regulation) 
The paym ent of renewal com mission s hould be paid only if the agent 
continues to serve the policy. S.44 should be amended accordingly. 
The word “person” occurring in s .44 (1) m ay be replaced by the word 
‘insurer’. 
S.48A The words “or general insurance busin ess” may be added after the words 
“life insurance business”. Consequently, marginal note to the section would 
also require am endment. The word “Life” occurring in the m arginal note 
may be omitted.  
S.50 Notice of options: 
The words “unless these are set forth in the policy” may be omitted. 
S.51 Supply of copies of proposals etc.: 
The words ‘a fee not exceeding one rupee’ be substituted by the words ‘a 
fee as may be prescribed in the Regulations’. 
S.52BB Powers of administrator: 
The words “Central Government” occurring in sub-sections (2) and (3) are 
to be replaced by the word “Authority”. 
S.52D Termination of appointment of administrator: 
S.52 D would have to be amended as follows:- 
 148

“If at any tim e, it appears to the Au thority that the purpose of the order 
appointing the Administrator has been fulfilled or that, for any reason, it is 
undesirable that the order of appointm ent should rem ain in force, the 
Authority may cancel the order and thereupon the Adm inistrator shall be 
divested of the m anagement of the insurance business which shall, unless 
otherwise directed by the Authority, ag ain vest in the person in whom  it 
was vested im mediately prior to the appointment of Adm inistrator or any 
other person appointed by the insurer in this behalf”. 
S.52E Finality of decision appointing administrator: 
The words “Central Governm ent” are to be replaced by the word 
“Authority”. 
S.53 Winding up by the court: 
In sub-section (1) of s.53, reference to Com panies Act, 1913 be substituted 
by Companies Act 1956 (Act VII of 1956). 
S.58 Partial winding up: 
In sub-section (4), reference of  s.12 of the Com panies Act 1913 be 
substituted by ‘15’ and sections 15 and 16 be replaced by s.17 of the 
Companies Act 1956. 
S.64 UL Power to remove difficulties: 
The words “Central Governm ent” m ay be replaced by the word 
‘Authority’. 
 
 
 149

APPENDIX-III 
Provisions that have become redundant and required to be deleted  
[Para 2.1.5] 
Provision of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 
Details 
S.2 (12) and 2 (13) Definition of Manager, Officer  and Managing Agent. These 
posts are no longer in vogue and therefore not relevant. 
S.2 (16) and 2 (17) The term s ‘Private Com pany’ and ‘Public Com pany’ are not 
relatable any longer to the Companies Act, 1913 as indicated in 
S.2 (16) of the Act. Therefore, it is proposed that this definition 
needs to be deleted. 
The concept of ‘Special Agent’  is no longer in vogue. It is 
therefore, proposed that S.2 (17) also be deleted. 
S.2B (1) In view of the proposed m erger of the provisions of the IRDA 
Act with the Insurance Act, s.2B (1) may be deleted even while 
sub-section (2) providing for appointm ent of a Controller of 
Insurance in the event of supersession of the IRDA m ay be 
retained. 
S.2C  In respect of persons who can carry on insurance business, by 
virtue of the third proviso to S.2C (1), inserted in 1999, only 
Indian Insurance Companies can carry on insurance business in 
India. Accordingly, this renders redundant S.2C (1) and the 
third and second provisos thereto. 
Accordingly, it is suggested that S.2C (1) and its first and 
second provisos be deleted and furt her that the third proviso to 
S.2C (1) be renum bered as S.2C . Further, S.2C (2) will also 
have to be repealed. 
 150

S.3 (5) The reference to S.3 (3) in sub section (5) m ay be deleted in 
view of the change proposed to s.  (3) repealed in view of the 
third proviso to S.2C (1).  
S.3 (4) (a) The m ention of the words ‘or S.98’ occurring in S.3 (4) (a) 
may be deleted in view of the pr oposed repeal of part IV of the 
Act which contains S.98. 
S.3 (4) (ee) One of the grounds for cancellation of registration is where the 
central governm ent so directs under S.33 (4). Since this 
provision is redundant, it requires to be omitted. 
S.3 (5) The mention of sub-section (3) of S.3 in S.3 (5) is no longer 
relevant and may be omitted. 
S.4 References of co-operative life insurance society and m utual 
insurance company in S.4 may be omitted as being irrelevant. 
S.5 (2) and 5 (3) 
First and second 
proviso 
The first and second proviso to s .5(2) and s.5(3) have becam e 
redundant and m ay be om itted as they provide in respect of 
insurers who carried on busin ess under the Act of 1912 or 
business carried on by provident societies.  
S.6A (1) Proviso The proviso to S.6A (1) may be omitted as being redundant. 
S.7 (7) This provision concerning deposits with the Controller of 
Currency in com pliance with the Indian Lif e Assurance 
Companies Act, 1912 has becom e redundant and m ay be 
deleted. 
S.7 (9B) In clause (a) of s.7 (9B), the words “or were sold or where the 
securities matured or were sold bef ore the 21 st day of March, 
1940, within a period of four m onths from the commencement 
of the Insurance (Am endment) Act 1940” should be deleted as 
being redundant. 
 151

S. 10(1) Maintaining separate accounts for each class of insurance 
business: 
This obligation has become irrelevant as composite business is 
not allowed. S.10 (1) can be deleted. 
S. 10(2) In s.10(2) the words “after the e xpiry of six m onths from the 
commencement of Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1946” and the 
words “under the law of the insurer’s country” should be 
deleted as being redundant. 
S.10 (2A) The provisions of s.10 (2A) stipulates a requirem ent to be 
fulfilled by an insurer carrying on lif e insurance business if  he 
wants to obtain a registration certificate for any class of 
insurance business in addition to  the lif e insurance business. 
The provisions of this sub-secti on need to be deleted as the 
composite insurance business is not allowed. 
S.11 (1) and (1A) Insurers are under an obligation to prepare the balance sheet, 
profit and loss account, separate account of receipts and 
payment and revenue account in accordance with the 
regulations contained in First,  Second and Third Schedule of 
the Act as per the provisions of  sub-section (1) of section 11. 
These schedules have been repealed by Insurance 
(Amendment) Act 2002. Hence, sub-section (1) is redundant 
and is required to be repealed. 
The amendments of 1999 inserted sub-sections (1A) and (1B) 
in this section which independently take care of  the m atters 
relating to the preparation of such docum ents. Hence, no 
further insertion/addition is required. Accordingly, the words 
in sub-s.(1A) “notwithstandi ng anything contained in sub-
section (1)” is required to be deleted. 
 152

S.12 The words “in the case of an insu rer specified in sub-clause (a) 
(ii) or sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of s.2” and the words “and in 
the case of any other insurer in respect of  the insurance 
business transacted by him in India” should be omitted. 
S.13 The words “contained in Part I of the Fourth Schedule and in 
conformity with the requirem ents of Part II of that Schedule” 
should be deleted as being redunda nt in view of the Insurance 
(Amendment) Act 2002 and Regulations m ade by the 
Authority in regard to Actuarial report and Abstract. 
 
The second, third and fourth pr oviso to s.13(1) should be 
repealed as being redundant. These provisos respectively 
provide for investigation to be made before the commencement 
of Insurance Amendment Act 1950 and IRDA Act 1999. 
S.13 (3) The provisions requiring certificate of the insurer about the 
particulars of the policy holders to be appended to every 
abstract (S.3 (3)) are required to be om itted to avoid 
duplication as these provisions are in the regulations. 
S.13 (4) In view of the proposal for recast of sub-section (4), the second 
proviso to this sub-section would obviously have to becom e 
irrelevant and to be deleted. 
S.13 (6) The provisions of sub-section (6) refer to sub-class of 
insurance business falling under the class “m iscellaneous 
insurance” as m ay be prescribed in s.10(1). However, s.10 (1) 
does not prescribe so. Hence, it is  suggested that sub-classes of 
insurance business m ay either be specified in the definition of 
the term  m iscellaneous insurance or the words “as m ay be 
prescribed under sub-section (1) of s.10” may be deleted. 
 153

S.14 Every insurer is required under s.14 to m aintain register or 
record of policies and claim s. The word “register” in clauses 
(a) and (b) of this section may be om itted because now the 
records may be kept in the electronic form  as well. The term  
“records” would cover both the register as well as e-record. 
S.15 Submission of returns: 
The proviso to s.15(1) is to be deleted as being redundant. 
S.15 (2) Sub-section (2) talks of  signatories to these docum ents if  the 
insurer is company or a firm or an individual. The references to 
a partnership firm and an indivi dual are to be deleted as being 
irrelevant in view of the recent legislative developments. 
S.15 (3) The provisions of sub-section (3) which provide for insurers 
who are dom iciled outside India or whose principal place of 
business is outside India, ha s become redundant because now 
no such insurer is allowed to tran sact business in India. Hence, 
it is required to be repealed. 
S.16 The provisions of prescribing the m anner of furnishing of 
return by the insurers established outside India, have becom e 
obsolete hence is required to be repealed. 
S.22  The reference of s.16 (2) (c) should be deleted in sub sections 
(1) and (2) of s.22 should be deleted as s.16 (2) 
(c) requires subm ission of valuation report by an insurer 
domiciled outside India, hence such reference to be omitted. 
 
S.27 (2) (a), (b) & (6) 
 
The reference of s.98 in clause (a) of s.27 (2) may be omitted. 
The provisions of s.27 (2) (b) including its proviso m ay be 
repealed as being irrelevant.  
 154

The provisions of s.27 (6) also have becom e irrelevant and 
need repeal because they deal  with the insurers dom iciled 
outside India. 
S.27 A Clause (b) of s.27A (1) should be deleted as being irrelevant as 
providing f or securities by the Governm ent of  United 
Kingdom.  
 
In s.27A (1) (n), the words “o r in any other country” m ay be 
deleted as Schedule I and Schedule II of Investm ent 
Regulations exclude expressly im movable property situated in 
other countries for the purpose of approved investm ents. This 
would remove inconsistency between the Act and Regulations. 
Moreover, such a repeal would be in consonance with the tenor 
of s.27C. 
The provisions of sub-section (12) should be repealed as it 
requires the insurer in existe nce at the com mencement of 
Insurance Act 1950 to subm it within 90 days from  such 
commencement report about investm ents m ade in 
contravention of s.27A. Such insurers are no more in existence.
S. 27 B In sub-section (16), the m eaning of the term  “assets” has been 
described for different classes of business referring to assets 
shown in the form s prescribed in  part II of the first schedule. 
The first schedule has been repealed by the Insurance 
(Amendment) Act, 2002. Hence provisions of this sub-section 
have become irrelevant. Moreover, this term  has been defined 
in Para 2 (6a) of the Regulations relating to investm ents. 
Therefore, the sub-section is required to be repealed. 
In s.27B (1) (i), the reference of the words, “or in any other 
country” may be deleted in view  of the provisions of Schedule 
 155

II of the Investm ent Regulations which exclude expressly first 
mortgage on immovable property situated out of India. 
In clause (i) of sub-section (1),  the reference of the words, “or 
in any other country where the in surer is carrying an insurance 
business” are to be deleted for the reasons assigned in respect 
of similar provision in s.27A. 
S.28 (4) Sub-section (4), which provides for insurers dom iciled outside 
India, is redundant, hence to be repealed. 
S.29 As the partnership from cannot transact insurance business, the 
reference to a firm  or partner in sub section (1) should be 
omitted. 
References to chief agent or special agent in sub-section (3)(b) 
and the ‘Explanation’ m ay be deleted, so also sub-clauses (i) 
and (ii) of clause (b) of sub- section (3) dealing exclusively 
with chief agent and special ag ent respectively. Sim ilarly, in 
sub-section (6) reference to chief agent should be omitted.  
The provisions of sub-section (4) which im poses an obligation 
on the Authority to notify about the loan or advances at the 
commencement of the Act of 1950 has obviously becom e 
obsolete, hence to be repealed. 
The provisions of sub-section (4) which im poses an obligation 
on the Authority to notify about the loan or advances at the 
commencement of the Act of 1950 has obviously becom e 
obsolete, hence to be repealed. 
S.31B The system  of chief agent, principal agent and special is no 
more in existence. Hence the possibility of  remuneration being 
paid to any person other than insurance agent or interm ediary 
does not arise. Therefore, necessary deletions are required to 
 156

be made. 
S.32 The insurers are prohibited from  em ploying the m anaging 
agents. Under the provisions of s.32 (1). Subsequent sub-
sections (2) and (3) dealing with their em ployment and 
remuneration have, obviously, becom e redundant as also 
because of their transitional nature. Hence, sub-sections (2) 
and (3) need omission. 
S.33 (7) The publication of the report in sub-section (7) envisages a 
prior notice to the insurer. Since sub-s.(6) contem plates the 
availability of  the report to the insurer and a reasonable 
opportunity to respond to it, there is no need to give any further 
notice. Therefore sub-section (7) can be deleted. 
S.35 (1) The words “any person or transferred to” in s.35 (1) seem to be 
redundant and hence should be omitted. 
S.35 (3) In the proviso to s.35 (3), th e reference of the words and 
figures “or ss.7 and 8 of the Indian Life Assurance Com panies 
Act, 1912)” are required to be omitted as being redundant. 
S.40 Reference to principal, chief or special agents in sub-section 
(1) needs deletion. The words “afte r the expiry of six m onths 
from the com mencement of  this Act.” are to be om itted as 
being irrelevant. 
The provisions of Sub-section (2) provides the lim it of  the 
commission to be paid to an agent in respect of the life 
insurance policy effected through him  before 31 st Day of 
December, 1950 in respect of life insurance policy and of 
general insurance policy before the com mencement of 
Insurance Amendment Act, 1950. Obviously, the provisions of 
this sub section have becom e redundant especially in view of 
the second proviso with this sub-section, hence to be repealed. 
 157

S.40A Provisions of sub-sections (2) and (4) providing for payment of 
commission to special agents of  lif e insurance business and 
principal agents of general business respectively have becom e 
irrelevant and redundant in view of the legislative changes 
made during the last five decad es or so. It is, therefore, 
suggested that these sub-sections may be deleted.  
S.44 (1) – Explanation “Explanation” to s.44 (1) has becom e irrelevant and redundant 
and may, therefore, be repealed. 
S.48 Policyholders to elect Directors of Insurers. 
In view of the changed scenar io permitting privatisation, it is 
proposed that this section be deleted. 
S.48A The words “and no chief agent or special agent” are required to 
be om itted. Sim ilarly, the words, “carrying on lif e insurance 
business” need deletion, so also the proviso to this section. 
S.49 In sub-section (1) the words “or to the central governm ent 
under s.11 of the Indian Life Assurance Com panies Act, 1912 
(6 of 1912)” require deletion. 
S.52 The provisions of s.52 which prohibit an insurer to carry on its 
business on the dividing princi ple are no m ore relevant. 
Moreover, som e of its provisions being of transitional nature 
have become redundant long back. Hence s.52 is required to be 
repealed. 
S.52 H to 52 N These pertain to acquisition of  undertaking of insurers as 
contained in s.52 H to s.52 N. These are no longer relevant and 
required to be deleted. 
S.53 Clauses (i) to (iii) of sub-section 2 (b) may be omitted. 
In sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of s.53, the 
words “or s.98” are to be omitted. 
 158

S.59 The words and digits “or s.98” occurring in this section are to 
be omitted. 
S.62 to 64 The special provisions relating to External Com panies as 
contained in s.62 to 64 are also  no longer relevant. Since the 
present scheme is not to permit such External Companies.  
S.64 UB (3) and (4)  Sub-section (3) empowers TAC to m ake regulations in respect 
of Regional Com mittees. As th e Regional Com mittees are not 
functioning anymore, the provisions  of this sub-section m aybe 
deleted. 
The provisions of sub-section (4 ) need om ission as they are 
transitional in nature and have become redundant long back. 
S.64 UD Except proviso to sub-section (1) (inserted by Act of 1999), 
being transitional in nature, s.64 UD needs to be repealed as it 
has become redundant long back.  
Proviso to sub-section (1) m ay also be repealed because its 
provisions have been taken care of under clause (a) of S.64 UA 
(1). 
S.64 UF to UI The provisions of S.64 UF providing for assets and liabilities 
of General Insurance Council to vest in the Advisory 
Committee after the com mencement of the Am endment Act, 
1968 need to be repealed as the assets and liabilities have 
already been vested in TAC. 
The provisions of S.64 UG also need to be repealed because its 
provisions have becom e irrelevant as all the contracts/ 
agreements m ade by the Tariff Com mittee before 1968 are 
dealt by the Advisory com mittee as also the suits or legal 
proceedings filed by or against Tariff com mittee after 1968 
Amendment are being dealt by TAC. 
 159

Similarly, provisions of S.64UH pr otecting the interest of  the 
employees of Tariff Com mittee who were in em ployment 
before the Am endment Act 1968 need to be repealed because 
all those em ployees are now th e em ployees of the Advisory 
Committee and others, who could not, should have availed the 
benefits mentioned under this section.  
The provisions of S.64 UI oblig ates every person, who is in 
possession or custody of the property of the Tariff Com mittee 
or is in possession of docum ents relating to such property, to 
deliver those to the Advisory Com mittee has becom e 
redundant and requires to be repealed. 
S.64 UJ (2) to (6)  Since the regional com mittees constituted by the TAC are not 
functioning, sub-sections (2) to (6) may be deleted. 
S.64 UM S.64 UM (1) needs to be recast.  In sub-section (1) (A), the 
words “ after the expiry of a period of one year from  the 
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968 “ are 
to be deleted as being irrelevant.  
Again, sub-section (1) (B) should be deleted as its provisions 
have become irrelevant in view of the provisions of sub-section 
(1) (BA) inserted by the IRDA Act which also takes care of the 
licenses issued to surveyor before the Act of 1999. 
Sub-section (5) needs deletion as being irrelevant 
S.64 VA The provisions of sub-section (1) are now irrelevant as 
providing for the insurers before the com mencement of the 
IRDA Act, 1999, hence m ay be deleted. In consequence, sub-
sections (2), (5) and (6) would have to be deleted.  
S.65 to 94 The whole of Part III pertaining to Provident Societies is no 
longer relevant and ss.65 to 94 contained in this Part require to 
 160

be deleted. 
S.95 to 101 The whole of Part IV relating to Mutual Insurance Com panies 
and Co-operative Life Insurance Societies are also no longer 
relevant and ss.95 to 101 contained in this Part require to be 
deleted. 
S.114 (f) In view of the proposed deletion of s.48 the corresponding rule 
making power of the central government in s.114 (f) is no 
longer relevant and accordingly may be deleted. 
Further, Rules 13, 14 and 15 of the Insurance Rules 1939 m ay 
also be deleted. 
 
 
 
 161

 
APPENDIX-IV 
Proposals with regard to merger of provisions of the IRDA Act, 1999 with the 
Insurance Act, 1938 
 
[Para 3.1.3] 
 
Provision of the IRDA Act, 1999 Provision of Insurance Act 1938 to be 
merged with  
S.2 (Definitions) Definition clause of Insurance Act 
Chapter II dealing with establishment and 
incidental matters of authority (ss.3 – 12) 
Chapter IV dealing with duties, powers 
and functions of the authority (s.14) 
Chapter V dealing with grants by central 
government, IRDA fund, accounts and 
audit (ss.15 – 17) 
Chapter VI dealing with powers of 
central government (ss.18 – 23 & 25) 
 
 
These provisions m ay be bunched together 
and placed in the Insurance Act as Part I-A to 
be titled as ‘Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority’. 
S.24 providing the central governm ent 
with power to make Rules. 
S.26 em powering Authority to m ake 
Regulations. 
S.27 requiring laying of Rules and 
Regulations before Parliament. 
 
 
These provisions m ay be m erged in ss.114 
and 114-A of the Insurance Act. 
S.28 – not barring application of other 
laws  
To be shifted to Insurance Act, 1938 after 
s.114-A. 
 
 162

APPENDIX-V 
Changes in relation to the Powers and functions of the IRDA with regard to grant of 
registration and refusal, cancellation, suspension, and renewal of registration. 
[Para 3.1.5] 
 
Provision of the Insurance 
Act, 1938 Change proposed 
S.3  Registration of Insurers:- 
The particulars of the docum ents/ statements required 
to be subm itted to the IRDA f or the purpose of  
obtaining registration, could be spelt out in the 
Regulations made by the IRDA.  
Accordingly, it is suggested that S.3 (2) be recast as 
under: 
‘Every application for registration shall be m ade in 
such a m anner as m ay be determ ined by the 
Regulations m ade by the Authority and shall be 
accompanied by such docum ents as m ay be specified 
by the Regulations.’ 
S.3 (2) (f) Under s.3 (2) (f) ever y applicant seeking registration 
as insurer of  lif e insurance business is required to 
furnish the certificate of an actuary. The Subhedar 
Committee has recom mended that this requirem ent 
may be extended for applicants for general insurance 
business as well. If this is accepted, s.3 (2) (f) has to 
be accordingly amended and then shifted to the 
Regulations. 
 
 163

S.3 (2A) Grant of Certificate of Registration:- 
Sub-section (2A) of s.3 sets out the conditions that 
have to be f ulfilled before Registration can be granted 
by IRDA. It is suggested that this should also include 
compliance with the requirem ents of S.6 and 6A. 
However, the requirem ents of S.31A and 32, which 
deal with Managers and m anaging agents are 
irrelevant and require to be om itted. The recast S.3 
(2A) (d) would read as under: 
“(d) The applicant has complied with the provisions of 
ss.2C, 5, 6 and 6A and has f ulfilled all the 
requirements of this section applicable to him .” 
(remaining portion to be retained) 
It is also proposed that there should be a tim e lim it 
within which, if  all other requirem ents/ f ormalities 
have been com plied with by the applicant, the IRDA 
should take a decision in regard to the grant/ refusal of 
the certificate of registration. It is proposed that this 
time limit should be a period of 60 days from the 
date of completion of all formalities, upon the 
expiry of w hich, the insurer w ould be deemed to 
have been granted the certificate of registration if 
no decision is taken by the IRDA within that time. 
S.94A (2) second proviso It is proposed that with a view to providing a level 
playing field with other corporate insurers, the 
proviso enabling exemption from certain provisions 
in their applicability to  cooperative societies 
carrying on insurance business should be deleted. 
 164

Alternatively, if the power has to be retained, it 
should be ensured that  it cannot be for all 
provisions of the Act . The exemption will have to be 
only in relation to select pr ovisions of the Act and that 
too for reasons and writing. 
Further, it is proposed that this pow er should be 
with the central government and not the Authority. 
 In regard to departm ents, organisations and 
associations carrying on insurance business without 
obtaining certificate of re gistration from  the IRDA 
(i.e., Army welfare associations, Postal insurance etc.), 
it is suggested that such departments or associations be 
brought within the purview of the regulatory regim e 
but requirements of capital and deposits m ay be either 
relaxed or suspended in such cases. 
S.3 (2C) Appeal against refusal of registration:- 
At present the appeal lies to the Central Governm ent. 
It is proposed that in the fi rst instance, a challenge to 
the order of refusal could be m ade by an applicant 
before the Grievance Redressal Authority, as is 
proposed later in this paper. Thereafter an appeal 
could lie to an appellate tribunal to be constituted 
under the Act itself. 
S.3 (3) Cancellation/ withholding of Registration of insurer 
having place of business outside India on the ground 
of absence of reciprocity by the other country:- 
This provision m ay not be relevant in the present 
 165

context were joint ventures are being perm itted. 
Accordingly, it is suggested that sub-section (3) of s.3 
may be modified and substituted as follows: 
“In the case of any insurer having joint venture with a 
partner having its principal place of business 
domiciled outside India, the Authority shall withhold 
registration or cancel registration already m ade if it is 
satisfied that in the country in which the foreign 
partner has principal place of business has been 
debarred by law or practice of that country to carry on 
insurance business.” 
Accordingly, the reference to  S.3 (3) in S.3 (5) is no 
longer relevant. 
S.3 (4) Cancellation of Registration:- 
One ground of cancellation should include the insurer 
being found guilty of an offence under any law in 
force in India. 
The contravention of the LIC Act and other Acts as a 
ground for cancellation is no longer relevant. On the 
other hand, a contravention of the Societies 
Registration Act/ Multi-State Co-operative 
Societies Act should be a ground for cancellation. 
An amendment to S.3 (4) has to be made 
accordingly. 
The provision that em powers IRDA to cancel 
registration “either wholly or in so far as it relates to a 
particular insurance business” m ay not be relevant 
 166

since as a m atter of policy com posite business is not 
permitted. This sub-section will have to be accordingly 
re-worded. 
 Suspension of Registration:- 
The Act does not provide for suspension of 
registration. However, regulations regarding 
registration provide in clause 23 the grounds of 
suspension of an insurance com pany. It is appropriate 
if this very clause and clau se 24 of the regulations are 
made a part of the statute and placed appropriately in 
s.3. The grounds of suspension may also include 
grounds referred to in sub-section (4) under its 
clauses (a), (aa), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j). 
 
It is to be noted that the provisions of sub-section (5C) 
of S.3 em powers the Authority to revive the 
registration cancelled on these very grounds referred 
in the clauses of sub-section (4). It is suggested that on 
these grounds, the Authority m ay suspend registration 
of the insurer. If  the insu rer f ails to com ply with 
conditions stipulated in these sections or directions of 
the Authority within six m onths, then Authority m ay 
proceed to cancel registration. 
Regulation 24 of the IRDA (Registration of 
Companies) Regulations, 2000 stipulates that no order 
of suspension or cancella tion of certificate of 
registration shall be m ade without holding an enquiry 
as specified in the Regulations. This clause (clause 
24) requires to be shifted into the Act itself. 
 167

 
S.3A Renewal of Registration:- 
This is required to be done ev ery year by an insurer. It 
is proposed that this period m ay be increased and that 
the registration may be kept valid for a period of 
three years especially in th e case of life insurance 
business, after which it could be renewed. 
The word ‘Decem ber’ m ay be replaced by the word 
‘March’ as a sim ilar change for this effect has been 
made by the 1999 Amendment. 
S.3A (2) The determination of the renewal fee for registration 
provided under s.3A (2) referring to the percentage of 
premium income as also the am ount specified in s.3A 
(2)(i) requires reconsideration. The suggestion is that 
the same should be reduced. 
S.3A (3) The provisions for m aking deposits in respect of the 
renewal fee in the Reserve Bank of India has both 
been made in s.3A (3) of the Act and regulation 21 of 
Chapter IV of the Regulations . It is suggested that the 
statutory provision may be amended so as to provide – 
“in the manner as provided in the regulations” and the 
words “the Reserve Bank of India” in the regulation 
may be replaced by the words “any Scheduled Bank.” 
S.3A (4) The provisions of sub-section (4) of s.3A provide for 
an appeal to be m ade to the Central Governm ent 
against the order of the Authority im posing a penalty 
on the insurer. Here, the penalty is in the nature of  the 
 168

late fee and the ceiling lim it has been spelt out in this 
very provision. Hence, the provision of appeal seem s 
to be irrelevant. It is suggested that am endments may 
be made in this regard. 
S.3A (5) For every renewal the compliance of all requirem ents 
for fresh registration m ust be insisted upon apart from  
compliance of S.32B and 32C  regarding insurance in 
rural and social sector. A ccordingly, S.3A (5) m ay be 
amended. 
 
 169

APPENDIX-VI 
Changes in relation to the powers and functions of the IRDA other than those with 
regard to grant of registration etc. set out in Appendix- V above 
[Para 3.1.6] 
 
Provision of the Insurance 
Act, 1938 Change proposed 
S.33 (1) – Investigation by 
IRDA into affairs of insurer 
The provisions of s.33 does not lay down standards or 
criteria (grounds) to guide the Authority to cause 
investigation judiciously. In absence of such criteria, the 
power m ay be m isused for ulterior m otive. Hence the 
provisions of sub-section (1) may be amended by 
adding the words “if it considers expedient to do so” 
in sub-section (1). 
It is to be noted that the section uses the term  
“Authority” for both the Regulating Authority and 
investigating authority though the latter is m entioned as 
investigating authority in the section. Yet such a usage 
may give rise to som e confusion. It is, therefore, 
appropriate to change the terminology from 
investigating authority to investigating officer. 
S.33 (4) – Exam ination by 
Investigating Authority of 
insurer’s officer on oath 
The section does not provide for the qualification/ 
experience/ rank of the person to be appointed as the 
investigating authority who is obligated to exam ine on 
oath the officers of the insurer under sub-section (4). 
This m ay be rectified by suitable am endments. A 
provision may also be incorporated so as to prevent 
appointment of incompetent person. 
S.33 (8) – Information to be The provisions of sub-section (8) speaks of the 
 170

maintained by insurers minimum information as specif ied in the regulations to 
be m aintained by the insurers so as to f acilitate the 
investigating authority to discharge its functions. The 
kind of inform ation which this section indicates is of 
general nature and should be m aintained by every 
insurer whether its affairs are investigated or not. Hence, 
the contents of this sub- section should be made a 
part the obligations of insurers to be especially 
framed for this purpose. 
S.34B (4) – Penalty for 
contravention of provisions 
regarding rem oval by IRDA 
of managerial persons 
The provisions of sub-section (4) of this section 
prescribes punishment for contravention of s.34B or of 
proviso under s.34B (2) in the nature of fine extendable 
to Rs. 250 per day. The amount of fine is not adequate 
enough to deter an officer from contravening the 
orders of IRDA. Therefore, the same may be 
enhanced appropriately.  
S.34C – Power of IRDA to 
appoint additional directors 
This power should be exerci se by IRDA in consultation 
with the central governm ent and particularly in case of 
insurance cooperative societies. 
S.34E – Power to caution or 
advise insurers 
In s.34 (E), the word “Controller” should be substituted 
by the word ‘Authority’ as the powers described in this 
section are now exercised by the Authority by virtue of 
the IRDA Act. 
S.34G – Power of authority to 
order closure of foreign 
branches 
This provision is no longer relevant since private 
players, now perm itted, can them selves decide on 
closure of their branches w ithout being directed by the 
IRDA. This provision may be deleted. 
 171

S.34H – Search and seizure The rank of the officer conducting search and seizure 
should be clarified.  
The words ‘Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1898’ should 
be substituted by ‘Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973’. 
S.35 (1) – Am algamation and 
transfer of insurance business 
At present, the provision applies only to life insurance 
business. It is suggested that this be made applicable 
to general insurance business as well. 
Further, a time limit may be specified w ithin w hich 
IRDA has to approve the scheme of transfer or 
amalgamation. 
The title of  the m arginal note requires m inor change in 
the context of the provisions of this section. The word 
“and” be replaced by the word “or”. 
S.35 (3) – Requirem ent of 
preparation of actuarial 
reports 
The provisions of sub-clause (c) of s.35 (3) states that 
actuarial reports are to be prepared as per the 
requirements of Part II of Fourth and Fifth Schedules. 
As the Fourth Schedule has been repealed by the 
Insurance (Amendment) Act 2002, clause (c) of s.35 (3) 
may be am ended by deleting the reference of Schedule 
IV and to provide that actuarial reports be prepared 
in conformity w ith the regulations made by the 
Authority. 
S.36 – Approval of 
amalgamation by IRDA 
The Authority is em powered under s.36 of the Act to 
approve the arrangem ent of am algamation after giving 
adequate opportunity of hearing to the directors and 
policy holders who desire so and to pass consequential 
orders to give effect to the am algamation including the 
 172

disposal of deposits made under ss. 7 or 98. S.98, which 
provides for m utual insurance com panies and co-
operative life insurance societies, has become redundant. 
Therefore, the words “or s.98” m ay be om itted. Similar 
omission is required in clause (c) of the proviso to this 
section.  
The provisions of amalgamation may be made 
applicable to general insurance business, as w ell. If 
this is done, then the word s “life policy” in s.36 (1) 
would have to be replaced by the words ‘of any kind of 
policy’. 
The word ‘and’ in the m arginal note be replaced by the 
word ‘or’. 
S.37A (2) – Power of IRDA 
to prepare schem e of 
amalgamation 
The contents of sub-section (2) w hich enumerates the 
clauses w hich the scheme should contain can be 
made part of the Regulations. 
S.37A (4) – Central 
government is specify schem e 
of am algamation sanctioned 
by it 
The following m ay be added in s.37 (A) (4) after the 
words “in this behalf”.  
“in the Official Gazette with such constitution, with such 
property, powers, rights, interests, authorities and 
privileges and with such liabilities, duties and 
obligations as may be specified in the order.” 
The following provisions may also be incorporated to 
protect the interest of policy holders or shareholders 
etc. as provided in the Companies Act: 
“(4A)  Every policyholder or shareholder or m ember of 
each of the insurers, before amalgamation, shall have the 
 173

same interest in, or rights against the insurer resulting 
from amalgamation as he ha d in the com pany of which 
he was originally a policyholder or shareholder or 
member:  
Provided that where the interests or rights of any 
shareholder or m ember are le ss than his interest in, or 
rights against, the original insurer, he shall be entitled to 
compensation, which shall be assessed by the Authority 
as may be prescribed. 
(4B) The com pensation so assessed shall be paid to 
the shareholder or m ember by the insurance com pany 
resulting from such amalgamation. 
(4C) Any m ember or shareholder aggrieved by the 
assessment of com pensation m ade by the Authority 
under sub-section (4A) (proposed) m ay within thirty 
days from the publication of such assessm ent prefer an 
appeal to the Central Government.” 
S.42 (1) – Licensing of 
insurance agents 
Consistent with the Regulations the Authority should 
itself authorise officers of  the insurers w ho can issue 
or renew licences.  
Subject to changes m ade in the Regulations in this 
behalf from time to tim e by the IRDA, the f ee limit for 
issuing of licence should be increased beyond the 
present limit of Rs.250/-. 
S.42 (2) – Num ber of insurers 
for whom a person can act as 
agent 
Consistent w ith the Regulations, sub-section (2) of 
S.42 should be amended to provide that an agent can 
act for “only one life insurer and/ or one non-life 
ins rer”
 174

insurer”. 
S.42 (3) – Licence renewal fee 
and penalty 
Licence renew al fee and penalty may be increased 
from the present limits of Rs.250/- and Rs.100/- 
respectively and be m ade subject to further changes to 
be specified in the Regulations. 
S.42 (4) – Disqualifications 
for acting as insurance agent 
The disqualification enumerated under Regulation 
(8) (j) should be incorporated in S.42 (4). 
Further, used to be considered by the nationality of  an 
insurance agent should be expressly m entioned as a 
requisite qualification. 
It m ust be provided in Regulation 3 (2) in addition to 
satisfy the requisite qualification, licence will be issued 
only if the person does not attract any of the 
disqualifications under S.42 (4). 
The provision in Regulati on 8 (j) (ii) that an 
insurance agents cannot appl y for a fresh licence for 
a period of 5 years after cancellation, should be 
incorporated in the Act, preferably in S.42 (4) itself. 
S.42 (5) – Power to cancel 
licence 
Consistent with the Regulations in this behalf , it is 
appropriate that s.42 (5) be amended to provide that a 
designated person authorised by the IRDA can 
exercise the pow er to cancel a licence . Any person so 
aggrieved m ay file an appeal against such cancellation 
to the appropriate authority. 
Regulation 9 requires to be am ended to em power the 
designated officer to cancel the licence of agent who 
 175

deliberately contravenes the provisions of the Act. 
S.42 (6) – Issue of duplicate 
licence 
The designated officer instead of the Authority m ay be 
authorized to issue duplicate licence.  
S.42 (7) – Punishm ent for 
acting as agent without 
licence 
The present fine of Rs.500/- on a person acting as agent 
without licence and Rs.1000/- on an insurer appointing a 
person to act as such are inadequate and require to be 
enhanced. 
S.42D – Licence to 
intermediary or insurance 
intermediary 
The power to issue licence should be exercised by an 
officer authorised by the IRDA and not the IRDA itself. 
S.42D (1) proviso (a)  In view of the inconsistency with 42D (5), it is proposed 
that clause (a) of the proviso to S.42D (1) may be 
amended so as to substitute words in f igures ‘(5) of this 
section’ in place of words and figures ‘(4) of s.42’. 
S.42D (8) & (9) – Fine to be 
imposed for contravention 
These required to be specified. 
S.64 UM – Issue of licence to 
surveyors/ loss assessors 
The provision requires to be amended to expressly 
empower the Authority to i ssue licence on the same 
grounds of qualifications and disqualifications as 
specified in S.42 (1) & (2) for insurance agents.  
The ground found in Regulation 8 (4) for cancellation of 
licence of a surveyor who fails discharge duties and 
responsibilities in a satisfactory and professional manner 
or violate the code of conduct prescribed by the 
Regulations requires to be incorporated in S.64 UM (1) 
(G). 
 176

A provision for suspension of licence, as provided in 
Regulation 8 (4) should be incorporated in the Act. 
S.64 UM (1A) At present there is no transparency on appointm ent of 
surveyor/ loss assessor by general insurers. Public sector 
general insurers, by and large, appoint som e privileged 
surveyors with som e understanding with respective 
department/ staff/ officer/ m anager. By an appropriate 
amendment, this should be done away with. General 
insurers should publish a list of appointed surveyors in 
notice board/Web Sites regularly indicating fees paid to 
be to the surveyor/loss assessor. 
The principal Act does not provide about the functions 
to be perform ed by a surveyors or loss assessor, but 
mandates them  to com ply w ith the code of conduct in 
respect of their duties and responsibilities as provided in 
Regulation 13 (2). Hence a provision in regard to the 
functions to be performed by a surveyors or loss 
assessor may be incorporated after sub-section (1A) 
as follows: 
“A surveyor and loss assessor shall investigate, 
survey, m anage, quantify, valuate and deal with 
losses on behalf of the insurer or insured arising 
from any contingency, carry out the work with 
objectivity and professional integrity by strictly 
adhering to the code of conduct expected of such 
surveyor and loss assessor and report thereon within 
the time specified in the regulations.” 
It is suggested that the Authority should exercise the 
 177

power under sub-section (3) to call for independent 
report from an approved surveyor upon receiving a 
complaint. There is also a suggestion for 
appointment of a second surveyor or loss assessor, 
if any com plaint is received by the Authority. It 
would be appropriate if  the power to settle the 
claims under this section are exercised by an 
adjudicating officer to be appointed by the 
Authority.  
It has been suggested that appointm ent and paym ent to 
surveyors/loss assessors should be on rotation and 
controlled by IRDA with the help of  respective State 
Chapter of Institute of  Surveyor/ Loss Assessor so that 
surveyors/loss assessors are independent of general 
insurers and need not to appease the respective 
department/ staff/ officer/ m anager for getting 
appointment and payment. 
There is a suggestion that to set aside the written test for 
issuing licence to any person to act as a surveyor 
because the new trainees are well qualified technical 
graduates. Moreover, the candidates have to go through 
one year training under a senior surveyor.  
S.44 – Power to call for 
information 
The provisions of this section is to be recast because the 
system of principal agent, ch ief agent or special agent is 
no more in existence and in consequence of which, the 
repeal of ss.42B and 42C has already been proposed. 
Hence, in this section, wherever there is a reference to 
the principal agent or special agent or chief agent, or 
references to ss.42B and 42C, such references require 
 178

omission. There is a suggestion for the deletion for the 
section itself. 
S.47A – Power of IRDA to 
decide claim s on sm all 
insurance policy 
The limit of the claim may be enhanced to Rs.5,000/-.  
Further, the IRDA may be given powers of the civil 
court for execution of the order in this regard.  
S.53 – Winding up  The power of IRDA to apply to the court for winding up 
of an insurance com pany should be extended to cover a 
situation where the insurer is a cooperative society. 
 
 179