 LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
191ST REPORT
ON
REGULATION OF FUNDS COLLECTED FOR
CALAMITY RELIEF
DECEMBER, 2004

Justice                                                                                        Law Commission of India
M. JAGANNADHA RAO                                                              Shastri Bhawan
Chairman                                                                                        New Delhi-110 001
           Tel.: 23384475
                                                                                          Fax: (011) 23073864,23388870
E-mail: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
           Residence
     1,JANPATH, New Delhi
          Tel.: 23019465
D.O.No.6(3)(80)/2002-LC(LS) December 15, 2004
Dear  Shri Bharadwaj ji,          
I have great pleasure in presenting the 191st Report of the Law Commission of
India on  Regulating Funds for Calamity Relief. This is also the sixth report of the
present Seventeenth Law Commission which came to be constituted with effect from
September 1, 2003.
The genesis of the present report was an order dated August 30, 2001 passed by
the Nagpur Bench of the Bombay High Court in  Anand Narain Poharkar v. Lokmat
Newspaper  Charitable  Trust.   This  was  a  PIL  which  highlighted  the  problem  of
contributions collected from the public by a charitable trust floated by a newspaper for
relief to victims of the Kargil conflict. The PIL alleged that the funds collected had been
either misused or misappropriated. The High Court observed that a legislation was
necessary to regulate the contributions collected and monitor their utilization so that
“the funds so collected really reach the beneficiaries.” The Ministry of Defence which
was a party to the proceedings then referred the matter to the Department of Legal
Affairs (DLA) which in its turn referred it to the Law Commission.
A Consultation Paper was initially prepared by the Law Commission and was
circulated  widely.  Responses  were received  from  a wide cross-section  of  persons
including departments and ministries of Governments, State Law Commissions, legal
experts and non-governmental organisations. The present report has been prepared after
studying all these responses. It was decided to confine the report to recommending a
regulatory  framework  to  monitor  the  collection  of  funds  by  individuals  and
organizations towards calamity relief and that it will not extend to funds collected by the
Government.   The  Commission  has  noted  that  the  collection  of  funds  by  the
Government  has  been  dealt  with  by  the  High  Powered  Committee  on  Disaster
Management (HPC) set up by the Government of India to examine various aspects of
disaster management and that the provisions of the model legislations recommended by
the HPC contain provisions which will take care of misappropriation of funds collected
by the Government. 
2

The report is divided into six chapters. After discussing the concept of legal
trusteeship, the report explains the need to enact a separate law, details the extent,
commencement and scope of the proposed law and concludes by highlighting the salient
features of the proposed enactment.  The report recommends the establishment of a
Contribution Regulatory Authority (CRA) comprising a Chairperson and other part-time
Members. The Chairperson would be ex-officio a Secretary to the Government of India.
This structure, it is felt, would subserve the need to have a mechanism to deal with
situations  as  and  when  they  occur  rather  than  have  a  permanent  body  in  place
exclusively for  the  purpose.  The  main  task  of  the  CRA  would  be  to  oversee  the
collection and distribution of contributions and donations for calamity relief and to
ensure that proper accounts are maintained by the persons and agencies collecting funds
for calamity relief.  The CRA itself will ensure that its accounts are audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.   The proposed legislation makes mandatory
the  pre-requisite  of  registration  of  any  agency  or  person  who  desires  to  collect
contributions for calamity relief.  Since there may be situations where emergency relief
measures may be required, it is proposed to empower the Collector to grant provisional
registration.   Specific  provisions  have  also  been  recommended  for  suspension  or
cancellation  of  registration  of  those  who  either  do  not  maintain  proper  accounts,
misappropriate funds.  It is also proposed that where the funds remain unutilized by
such persons or agencies, such funds will be transferred to the CRA or to the Collector
for utilization for calamity relief and other similar purposes. While it is also proposed to
empower  the  Collector  and  the  CRA  to  levy stringent  penalties  on  the  defaulting
agencies, the criminal proceedings would be before the regular criminal courts.    Civil
disputes  concerning  the  donations  and  contributions  will  go  before  civil  courts
designated for that purpose and the said courts will be governed by principles of natural
justice and not by the Code of Civil Procedure or the Indian Evidence Act.
It is hoped that the recommendations contained in the report will help addressing
the recurrent problem of misuse by private actors collecting contributions from the
public for calamity relief.  
                              With regards
Yours sincerely,
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Shri H.R. Bharadwaj
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHI.
3

INDEX
Chapter No. Title Pages
1. Introduction 03 to 21
2. Collection of contribution – Is in Trust 22
to 35
3. Need to have a special law relating to 
contributions made in the context of 
calamities 36 to 42
4. Proposed enactment – Legislative Power, 
Its Extent, Commencement and Scope 43 to 60
5. Salient features of the proposed enactment 61 to 115
6. Summary of Recommendations 116 to 137
4

CHAPTER – 1
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Reference
The Law Commission took up the subject relating to ‘misuse of
donations  collected  during  disasters  and  calamities’  on  a  reference
received  from  the  Department  of  Legal  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Law  and
Justice, Government of India.  The Department of Legal Affairs, with the
approval of Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice, on 18th March, 2002,
referred  this  subject  to  the  Law  Commission  for  recommending  an
appropriate legislation to regulate and monitor the collection of funds from
public in the name of the welfare of victims of natural calamity or welfare
and rehabilitation of bereaved families of the soldiers killed in a war.  The
reference was made by the Ministry as a consequence to the order passed
by  the  High  Court  of  Bombay  in  W.P.  No.216/2001,  Anand  Narain
Poharkar vs. Lokmat Newspaper Charitable Trust, which stated that a
legislation in this behalf is necessary.   Ministry of Defence, which is a
party before the High Court, referred the matter to the Department of Legal
Affairs for advice.   In turn, the Department of Legal Affairs referred the
matter to the Law Commission as mentioned above.   A Consultation Paper
was prepared and published, responses were received and thereafter, this
report is prepared.
5

1.2 Assistance  by  the  Individuals,  Other  organizations,
International bodies  for providing relief and rehabilitation to
the victims of calamity/war or  war like situation.
1.2.1 Whenever a calamity, natural or man-made occurs, a large number
of people, nay, thousands or lakhs can get affected.  Many people lose
their lives or limbs.  Their property also gets damaged.  Calamity destroys
not only human beings but also other living creatures, the natural habitat
and the  environment.  Soon thereafter, rescue, relief and rehabilitation
work will have to start at a massive level.  Apart from the government
machinery, other private organizations or individuals have also to step-in
to provide help in such operations.  Again, whenever a war breaks or other
war-like  situation  occurs  at  the  borders,  hundreds  or  sometimes  even
thousand of soldiers either lose their lives or become disabled.  Relief has
to  be  provided  to  the  dependants  of  the deceased  as  well  as  to  those
injured.
1.2.2 In these situations, every section of the society, be it individuals, or
the  corporate  sector,  or  NGO’s,  media,  professionals,  or  social
organizations should and , in fact, do come forward for providing relief
and rehabilitation to the persons affected by the calamity.  International
Community, organizations and Government of foreign countries also try to
provide financial and other logistic support.  The contribution that comes
through  these entities  or persons  or organizations  is extensive.  In the
absence of support from these persons and organizations, no relief and
rehabilitation work can indeed be taken up effectively and speedily.  
6

1.2.3 Views of S.L. Goel  and  Ramkumar  in their  book on ‘Disaster
Management’:
In  respect  of  the  people’s  participation  in  relief  work,  we  may
reproduce a passage from the book ‘Disaster Management’ edited by S.L.
Goel and Ramkumar. It is stated in Chapter I at page 30 as follows: 
“Whenever disasters strike, they do not discriminate or differentiate
between men and nations, poor or rich, young or old.  They do not
negotiate or listen and they do not wait, they simply come, kill and
destroy,  cause  irreparable  losses,  which  are  irrecoverable.   And
when these hazards strike, it is the communities who are first to
react, it is the communities irrespective of their profession, status,
caste or culture who need to react.  Therefore, it is important that
capacities  of  communities  are  built  to  observe,  understand  and
prepare themselves for the worst impact.”
1.2.4 D.M. Dharmadhikari C.J. (as he then was) of Gujarat High Court
in Bipin Chandra J.  Diwan  v. State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 Guj. 99, has
referred to the help provided by various persons and organizations, in the
aftermath of the massive earthquake that hit Gujarat in the year 2001.  His
Lordship observed:
“In  such  calamity  and  adversity,  the  entire  Nation  has  shown
compassion and co-operation by extending help and providing relief
material in kind and cash to the victims.  It is a divine wrath, but
turned into blessing, in the sense that in facing the calamity the
helping hands extended by people all over the world in the shape of
7

help and support has united the people and brought to surface the
inherent virtues and qualities of human being.  There has been an
exemplary display of fellowship, co-operation, mutual help and love
from all over the world regardless of class, caste, creed and cultural
differences.  Not only from within the nation, but from all over the
world  from  different  countries,  Government,  social  service
organizations  and  individuals  with  relief material  in the form of
tents,  clothes,  medicines,  construction  items  for  erecting  homes,
rescue machines etc. have landed by ship, airplanes and other modes
of transport.  All kinds of relief material is throughout pouring in
from different parts of the world.” (Para 2)
His Lordship further observed:
“Calamity is a leveler of rich and poor, strong and weak, all are
suffering  alike.  The  fall-out  of  the  earthquake  is  the  flow  of
generosity for help to the victims from within the country and all
over the world.  So much of relief material and money has been
received that its management and distribution pose an uphill task to
the  Government.   In the  past  few days,  after  the  earthquake  hit
Gujarat on the morning of 26.1.2001, everyone in the country has
witnessed  the  power  of  the  people.   Selfless  service  of  several
religious  and  social  organizations  have  shown  what  benevolent
effect religion can have on the lives of common men.  The selfless
service, without desire  for appreciation  or publicity, by religious
groups and social activists have given great comfort to the victims
and satisfaction to all right thinking men.” (Para 3)
8

1.2.5 Monetary contributions by these persons or organizations is one of
the most important facets of the relief operations Apart from money, the
following other items or services are also provided:-
(a) food; (b) clothes; (c)  medicines  and  other  medical
relief and first aid; (d) drinking water; (e) shelter;
(f)   removing  the  persons  from  affected  area  and
relocating them elsewhere.
1.3 Categories of Donors and Collection Agencies.
1.3.1 Categories of Donors – 
Persons and organisations, which donate for the relief and rescue
operations, may be classified into three sub-categories.  
i) In the first sub-category of donors, there are persons, organizations
or agencies, who donate money or other items.  But in this category, the
above-said entities do not personally go to the affected site or region, but
instead, they donate money or items to the Central or State Governments or
to any fund set up by the Central or State Government like the Prime
Minister’s National Relief Fund, National Defence Fund, Chief Minister’s
Relief  Fund  etc.   These  are  donors  who  send  their  donations  directly
without the intervention of any intermediary and they do not participate in
the  actual  work  of  disbursement  of  moneys  or  in  the  relief  and
rehabilitation.
9

ii) In the second sub-category of donors are persons or organizations or
agencies who contribute in cash or kind to intermediaries such as non-
governmental bodies,  like NGOs or individuals,  trusts, etc. and in this
second sub-category too the donors are entities who do not undertake the
responsibility of distributing the monies or items amongst the victims of
the calamity.
iii) In  the  third  sub-category  of  donors  are  non-governmental
intermediaries, being persons or organizations who, apart from giving their
contributions,  also  provide  their  services  personally  at  the  place  of
calamity.
1.3.2 Categories of agencies which collect the items  in cash or kind
from donors.
In the class of the intermediaries who take up a role of service, there
are various individuals, organizations, trusts, groups, NGOs etc. who start
collecting  funds  and  donations  from  the  public  for  the  purpose  of
providing relief and rehabilitation to the victims of the calamity.  These
entities can be sub-categorized into two groups:
i) In the  first  group,  there  are  persons  or organizations,  who  only
collect the donations in cash or kind from the individuals or organizations
and after collecting them, they send the said items to the  Government or
other agency which provide the actual relief.  For example, newspaper
publishers and other agencies of electronic media start collections of funds
10

whenever a calamity occurs.  The funds so collected are usually sent to a
relief fund set up by the Government or other agencies.  Similarly, trusts,
educational institutions, public or private sector organizations, clubs etc.
also collect the donations in cash or kind from their students, staff, workers
or members of the public.  Thereafter, they deposit them in one or other of
the funds mentioned above.
ii) In the second group of intermediaries are persons, NGOs, trusts or
other organizations or agencies, which not only collect the contributions
and donations from the public or other organizations, but also who, instead
of sending them to Governmental agencies, themselves  provide service
personally  at  the  place  of  calamity  instead  of  sending  the  monies  to
Governmental  Funds  or  agencies.   Some  of  these  entities  also  get
donations  or grants from the Government or from funds set up by the
Governments or from International Community and Organizations.
1.4 Contribution from Foreign Source: The Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976
Contribution for providing relief to the victims of calamity is not
only raised within the country but from foreign and International sources
also.  The enactment which regulates  the acceptance and utilization of
foreign contributions is the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.
Section 6(1) of this Act provides that any association (other than an
organization  of  a  political  nature),  which  is  having  definite  culture,
economic, educational,  religious  or  social  programme, shall  not  accept
11

contribution  in  cash  or  in  kind  from a foreign  source  unless  (a) such
association  is  registered  with  Central  Government,  and  (b)  agrees  to
receive such foreign contribution only through such of the branches of a
bank as specified in its application for registration.  Apart from this, after
receiving  the  foreign  contribution,  every  registered  association  is  also
required to give an intimation to the Central Government as to the amount
of each foreign contribution received by it, source and manner in which
foreign contribution was received, and also the purpose for which and the
manner in which such foreign contribution was utilized.  Moreover, where
such association (a) obtains any foreign contribution through any bank
branch  other  than  through  which  it  has  agreed  to  receive  foreign
contribution,  (b)  fails  to  give  intimation  or  gives  false  intimation,  the
Central Government may by notification direct that such association shall
not accept any foreign contribution without prior permission of the Central
Government.  Even  otherwise, the  Central  Government  may in  certain
circumstances, require any association to obtain prior permission. (sec. 10)
As per sub-section (1A) of section 6, every association of the nature
referred to above, if it is not registered with the Central Government may,
also accept foreign contribution, however, after obtaining prior permission
of the Central Government.  Such association, after receiving the foreign
contribution shall also be required to give intimation referred to above, to
the Central Government.
‘Foreign  source’,  according  to  clause  (e)  of  sub-section  (1)  of
section 2, includes, the Government of any foreign country and any agency
of such Government, any international agency, a foreign company, any
12

corporation incorporated in a foreign country, a multinational corporation,
any trust, society or other associations of individuals, formed or registered
in a foreign country, a trade union in any foreign country, a citizen of a
foreign  country,  but  does  not  include  United  Nations  or  any  of  its
specialized agencies, the world Bank, International Monetary Fund or such
other agency as may be notified by the Central Government.  It also does
not include any foreign institution which has been permitted by the Central
Government to carry on its activities in India.
In certain circumstances, the Central Government may require any
person or association to furnish the intimation mentioned above. (sec. 10)
As per section 13, every association referred to in section 6, shall
maintain (a) an account of any foreign contribution received by it; and (b)
a record as to the manner in which such contribution, as well as any record
may be inspected  by an officer who has been authorized by the order of
the Central Government.  Their accounts and records may be seized and
produced before the Court (sec. 14).  If necessary, the Central Government
may by order, ask any officer to audit such accounts.
The Central Government, under section 31 has power to exempt any
association, organization or individual from the operation of all or any of
the provisions of the Act, if it is necessary or expedient in the interests of
justice.
1.5 Misuse,  misappropriation,  mismanagement  and  diversion  of
donations and contributions
13

We  shall  next  refer  to  misappropriation,  mismanagement  or
diversion of donations. As mentioned earlier, whenever there is a natural
or other calamity or war or war like situation some public and private
organizations, institutions, individuals etc. start collecting funds and other
items in cash and kind from the public, for the ostensible purpose of the
welfare and  rehabilitation of the victims of such calamity though in fact,
they do not intend to do so.  The funds or material collected do not reach
the  actual  victims  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  and  instead,  are
misappropriated or misused. In some cases persons, NGOs, organizations,
groups start collecting the donations from the public or other institutions
for the purpose of sending them to the Government or any fund set up by
the  Government  like  Prime  Minister,  National  Relief  Fund  (PMNRF),
Chief Minister’s Relief Fund, National Defence etc. but they do not send
them to the Government fund either wholly or in part, and instead, they
misuse or misappropriate such donations.  
This  conduct  clearly  amounts  to  breach  of  trust.   People  and
organizations who give contributions wholeheartedly and generously in the
belief that the contributions will be helpful for the welfare of the persons
affected  by  the  calamity,  have  thereafter  no  idea  as  to  whether  the
contributions in cash or in kind has reached the affected party or whether
the  contributions  have  been  misappropriated  or  mismanaged  by  the
persons or agencies who have collected them.
1.6 Donations  collected  for  victims  of  Kargil  conflict  and  Gujarat
earthquake.
14

1.6.1 Lokmat Newspaper Trust case:
We  shall  refer  to  a  few  cases  where  serious  allegations  of
misappropriation have been made and are under investigation. 
One  of  such  recent  cases  of  alleged  misappropriation  and
mismanagement  of public  contributions  is  the  subject  matter  of a  writ
petition in the Bombay High Court (at Nagpur Bench) No. 216 of 2001
(Anand  Narayan  Rao  Poharkar  v.  Lokmat  Newspaper  Charitable
Trust, Nagpur).  It  has  been  stated  in  the  petition  that  a trust  called
‘Lokmat Newspaper  Charitable Trust, Nagpur’ has collected donations
from the public approximately amounting to two crore rupees in the name
and style of ‘Lokmat Kargil Shahid Nidhi’ during the Kargil conflict in
1999 and even later, for taking care of victims of the Gujarat earthquake.
It is alleged in the writ petition that the funds collected from the public
have not been utilized for the purpose for which they were contributed but
have been misused or misappropriated. Petitioners in the said writ petition
had,  in  fact,  also  made  donations  to  the  said  trust.   In  respect  of the
allegation  of  misappropriation   of funds,   the   Division  Bench  of the
Bombay High Court, in its order dated 30.8.2001, observed thus:
“but we fail to understand why the Government i.e. Central as well
as State Government  has not regulated the collection of such funds
from the public at large.  It has now become a common feature that
in case of any calamity man- made or natural, organizations spring
up like mushrooms and appeal to the public at large by invoking
15

their sentiments and emotions which facilitate them to collect huge
funds and appropriate in the manner they feel it proper. There is no
Government Agency to regulate the collection of such funds and to
monitor that the funds so collected really reach the beneficiaries”. 
1.6.2 Tema Sugar Factory Scam
It was reported in ‘The Indian Express’, New Delhi dated 1st June,
2004 that the Justice Sawant Commission of Enquiry is probing into the
charges levelled by a social activist Anna Hazare against a State Minister
from Maharashtra..  These charges include various irregularities in Tema
Sugar Cooperative Factory in Osmanabad (Maharashtra).  It was alleged
that Rs. 51.97 lakhs were collected from the farmer shareholders of the
society in the name of ‘Kargil’ and ‘Gujarat earthquake’, but were diverted
for reviving a sinking sugar factory.  As reported in the newspaper, Kargil
Funds of  Rs. 1,505,153/- were not submitted to the authority concerned.
Similarly,  Gujarat  Flood  Victim  Relief  Fund  of  Rs.  10,60,708/-  and
Gujarat  Earthquake  Relief  Fund  of  Rs.  10,36,336/-  were  also  not
submitted.
1.6.3 Mismanagement  of  contribution  during  Gujarat  Earthquake
(Bipinchandra case (2002)).
As observed by the Gujarat High Court in Bipin Chandra Diwan v.
State of Gujarat AIR 2002 Gujarat 99, after the earthquake in Gujarat, on
26.1.2001, a lot of relief material in cash and kind was provided by various
16

sections  of society within  the nation  and  relief  came from outside  the
country.  There were certain reports in the newspapers and other media
that  the  Government  had  failed  to  meet  the  challenges  posed  by  the
calamity and had not adequate infrastructure to satisfactorily discharge the
stupendous task of providing relief and rehabilitation to the quake victims.
On the basis of these reports, a Public Interest Petition was filed by five
prominent  citizens  representing  different  walks  of  life  (a  retired  Chief
Justice of the Gujarat High Court, an eminent lawyer, an industrialist, an
artist and a social activist) seeking intervention of the Court to ensure
speedy   and  effective  relief  to  quake  victims.   In  the  petition,
apprehensions were raised and doubts were also expressed as to how the
large quantities of relief material and money received or were likely to be
received in future would be dealt with.  It was stated that the collections
were or are likely to be misappropriated, leaving the victims high and dry.
It  was  prayed  in  the  petition  that  relief  fund  and  material  should  be
entrusted to an independent committee or commission manned by experts
from different fields, to ensure proper utilization of the material and fund
for the benefit of the victims and to avoid their diversion, misappropriation
and loss. 
1.7 Reference to the Law Commission.
1.7.1 The observations of the Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No.
216  of  2001,  (Anand  Narain  Poharkar vs.  Lokmat  Newspaper
Charitable  Trust)  referred  to  above,  and  the  absence  of  a  Central
legislation  or  Authority  to  regulate  and  monitor  the  collection  and
utilization of contribution and  funds, prompted the Central Government to
17

refer this matter to the Law Commission for recommending appropriate
legislation to regulate and monitor the funds collected from the public in
the  name of  the welfare  and  rehabilitation  of  victims of calamities  or
welfare  and  rehabilitation  of  the  bereaved  families  of  the  soldiers
killed/injured in war.
1.7.2 The Law Commission has examined the issues relating to collection
and utilization of the funds as well as other items received in kind, in the
name of providing relief etc. to the victims of calamity and the welfare of
bereaved  families  of  the  soldiers  killed  or  injured  in  war  or  other
operations.  The Commission was of the tentative view that there was an
urgent need to bring into force a Central enactment specifically intended to
regulate  the  collection  of  contributions  to  compel  the  maintenance  of
proper  accounts  and  to  monitor  the  distribution  of  contributions  so
collected with a view to subserve the purpose for which the donations were
made and for their proper utilization and distribution.
1.8 Law Commission’s Consultation paper
1.8.1 In order to obtain the views of the Government at the Centre and
States, and also of the media, NGO’s, and all sections of the society, the
Law Commission  prepared  and  circulated  a Consultation  Paper on  the
subject, in May, 2003 suggesting various proposals for drafting a Central
enactment  which  would  refer  to  the  main  features  of  the  proposed
legislation.  Copies of the Consultation Paper were sent to the concerned
Departments  and  Ministries  of  the  Central  Government,  all  State
Governments,  Union  Territories,  Bar  associations,  NGOs  and  other
18

concerned  persons  and  institutions.   The  consultation  paper  was  also
placed  on  the  Law  Commission’s  website  namely:
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
1.8.2 Suggestions made in the Consultation Paper.
Following were the important suggestions made in the consultation paper:
i) A law may be made by the Parliament to regulate the collection and
utilization of contributions.
ii) All contributions and donations collected or received by any person,
organization or agency from any other person, organization or from any
Government including Government of a foreign country, for the purpose of
providing relief and rehabilitation to the victims of any natural or other
calamity or the welfare and rehabilitation of soldiers killed or injured in
war or war like situation, shall come under the purview of the proposed
enactment.
iii) In order to regulate the collection and distribution of the funds or
other  items  received  in  kind,  a  Regulatory  Authority  known  as
‘Contribution Regulatory Authority’ (CRA) should be constituted by the
Central Government.
iv) The Regulatory Authority should consist of a Chairperson, Member
Secretary,  3  Members  chosen  amongst  the  officials  of  the  Central
19

Government  and  one  Member  from  the  Indian  Audit  and  Accounts
Service, and five Members from the general public.
v) There should be compulsory registration of those who receive the
contributions, under the name, ‘authorized person or agency’.  The District
Collector could be the Registering Authority.  He could be authorized to
register such persons or agencies who are making the collections..  The
procedure of registration and the grounds for refusal of registration were
suggested in the Consultation Paper.  It was also suggested that any order
of refusal of registration be appealable.  Another suggestion was that in
case of urgency, provisional registration could also be granted.
vi) It was proposed that retrospective operation shall be given to the
proposed legislation to the extent practicable.
vii) The  authorized  persons  and  agencies  should  maintain  proper
accounts of all contributions collected and about their utilization. Details
of  such  accounts  should  be  furnished  to  the  Collector  and  Regulatory
Authority.
viii) Funds and other items received in kind should be used only for the
purpose for which they were collected or received.
ix) Collections shall not be made without issuing proper receipts.
x) While providing relief or rehabilitation, there shall no discrimination
on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex etc. 
20

xi) The Regulatory Authority and the Collector shall be in-charge of the
overall supervision of distribution and management of the contributions.
In case of violation by any persons or agencies, the Regulatory Authority
and  the  Collector  should  take  appropriate  action,  which  action  shall
include seizure of the contributions.  He could initiate civil or criminal
proceedings against any person or agency.
xii) The  District  Judge  of every district  should  be  designated  as  the
Judicial  Authority  under  the  Act  for  the  receipt  or  disposal  of  any
complaint  filed  against  any  authorized  person  or  agency  and  to  pass
appropriate orders on the complaint.
xiii) The Judicial Authority, after making such inquiry as it deems fit,
should pass appropriate orders.  The Judicial Authority should have some
of the powers of a civil court.
xiv) Responses were to be given on the question whether contributions
made  from Government’s  funds,  like  Prime Minister’s  National  Relief
Fund, CM Relief Fund and other calamity funds set up by the Government,
should also be dealt with by the proposed enactment for the purpose of
introducing a measure of accountability.
1.8.3 Responses to the consultation paper.
The overall response to the Consultation Paper was positive.   Most
of the State Governments (except the Government of Madhya Pradesh) had
21

welcomed the proposal for enacting a legislation on the subject.  Detailed
response  from  the  Maharashtra  State  Law  Commission  and  the
Government  of  West  Bengal  have  been  received.   These  suggestions
would  be discussed  at  the  appropriate  place  in the Report.  So far as
Central  Government  Ministries  and  Departments  are  concerned,  the
Ministry of Defence and  the Department of Personnel and Training and
the Department of Rural Development have responded on some particular
issues.  The  Governments  of  Uttar  Pradesh,  Orrisa,  Himachal  Pradesh,
Kerala and Pondicherry briefly responded and were in total agreement with
the Law Commission’s proposals.  The Government of Haryana forwarded
the  responses  of   the  various  Deputy  Commissioners  of  the  Districts.
There  were  no responses  from the  NGOs except   the  Citizen  Welfare
Council, Rup Nagar, Punjab which agreed with the proposals.
1.9 Present Report
The  present  Report  is  based  on  further  study  on  the  questions
involved, after taking into account the suggestions made in the responses
received to the Consultation Paper.  Though, the management of a calamity
or disaster is a much wider subject, the present Report deals only with a
particular aspect i.e. regulation of collection and utilization of contribution
collected or received for the purposes of providing relief and rehabilitation
to the victims of any calamity or for the welfare and rehabilitation to the
soldiers  killed  or  disabled  in  war  or  other  similar  operations.   In  the
subsequent Chapters of this Report the following issues are discussed:
22

i) Whether a person making the collection or receiving the funds is
in the position of the trustee?
ii) Whether  a  new  law  is  really  required  to  regulate  such
contributions?    Legislative  competence  of  the  Parliament  to
enact such a law.
iii) Which are the kinds of contributions which should be subjected
to the proposed law?
iv) In  what  manner  could  the  collection  and  utilization  of  such
contributions be regulated?
v) Constitution, powers, and functions of Regulatory Authority and
other officials.
vi) Duties  of  persons,  bodies  or  agencies  authorized  to  collect
contributions, including the manner of collection and utilization
thereof.
vii) Territorial extent, commencement and scope of the proposed law.
viii) Designated Court, its procedure and power.
23

CHAPTER-II
Collection of Contributions – is in trust.
2.1 Legal status of contributions
As stated earlier, whenever a calamity occurs or a war or war like
operation commences, large amounts of contributions and donations in the
form of cash and other items in kind are contributed or donated by various
individuals  organizations,  corporate  sector  etc.  for  the  purpose  of
providing  relief  and  rehabilitation  to  the  victims  of  such  calamity  or
welfare and rehabilitation of soldiers  and their family members killed or
disabled.  These contributions are made to the Government as well as to
other NGOs, trusts, other bodies and individuals.  They may be in cash or
kind.    In the hands of Government or NGOs, or other organization or
individuals, who receive them for the particular charitable purpose, the
collections are in the nature of a ‘trust’.    Those who donate to these
NGOs or individuals, do so out of faith, trust and confidence that  the
amounts will reach the victims of the disaster.  The recipient, in each case,
is a trustee and the victims of the disaster are the beneficiaries.  There is
obviously a fiduciary relationship of ‘trusteeship’.
2.2   Indian Trust Act, 1882:  applies only to private trusts: hence,
general principles of English law apply here.
24

The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 applies only to private trusts and not to
public trusts.  Sec. 1 of the Act states that the Act does not apply to public
or private charitable “endowments”.
As per section 3 of the Act, “A trust is an obligation annexed to the
ownership of property, and arising out of the confidence reposed in and
accepted by the owner; or declared and accepted by him, for the benefit of
another, or of another and the owner.” 
The person who reposes or declares  the confidence is called the
‘author of the trust’; the person who accepts the confidence is called the
‘trustee’; the person for whose benefit the confidence is accepted is called
the ‘beneficiary’.     Sec. 3 also defines a ‘breach of trust’:  it says that ‘a
breach of any duty imposed on a trustee, as such, by any law for the time
being in force is a ‘breach of trust’.  Sections 11 to 30 of the Act deal with
the ‘Duties and Liabilities of Trustees’ and sections 31 to 45 deal with the
‘Rights and Powers of Trustees’.  Sections 46 to 54 refer to the disabilities
of trustees while ss. 55 to 69 refer to the rights of the beneficiary.   Sec. 23
of the Act refers to the ‘Liability for breach of trust’ and sec. 51 states that
a trustee may not use or deal with the trust property for his own benefit or
for any other purpose unconnected with the trust.
The Bombay High Court pointed out in  Shivramdas v.  Nerurkar
AIR 1937 Bom 374 that we should not also apply the provisions of the Act
as guidelines in the matter of private trusts.  The correct position is that in
matters  relating  to  public charitable  trusts,  Courts  in  India  have  to  be
governed by the general principles and rules of English law and practice,
25

unless that law or practice is inconsistent with the rule or practice of the
Courts in India.  It is true that many provisions of the Trust Act reproduce
the general law of trust as administered by the equity Courts in England,
but that does not mean that the provisions of the Act should be applied.
Thus,  a  trust  is  an  obligation  whereby  the  trustee  is  bound  to
perform or forbear some act for the beneficiary.  This obligation must
relate exclusively to property and the obligation must also arise out of
confidence which the author of the trust reposes in the trustee.  It is a
fiduciary obligation voluntarily accepted by the trustee.
2.3 Trust – its meaning under the general law.
2.3.1 A trust, as per  Salmond’s jurispendence by Glanville Williams
(11th Edn.  Page  297),  “is  an  encumbrance  in  which  the  ownership  of
property is limited by an equitable obligation to deal with it for the benefit
of some one else.  The owner of the encumbered property is the trustee; the
owner of the encumbrance is the beneficiary.”
2.3.2 Meaning of trust as given in Halsbury’s Laws of England (Vol. 48,
reissue 4th Edn. para 501) is as follows:-
“Where a person has property or rights which he holds or is bound
to  exercise  for  or  on  behalf  of   another  or  others,  or  for  the
accomplishment of some particular purpose or particular purposes,
he is said to hold the property or rights in trust for that other or those
others  or  for that  purpose or those  purposes, and  he  is  called  a
26

trustee.  A trust is a purely equitable obligation and is enforceable
only in a court in which equity is administered.”
2.3.3 As per a leading jurist Underhill, ‘A trust is an equitable obligation,
binding a person (who is called a trustee) to deal with property over which
he  has  control  (which  is  called  the  trust  property),  for  the  benefit  of
persons (who are called the beneficiaries or cestuisque  trust), of whom he
may himself be one, and any of whom may enforce the obligation’.  Any
act or neglect on the part of a trustee which is not authorized or excused by
the terms of the trust instrument, or by law is called a breach of trust.
(Underhill’s Law of Trust and Trusteeship 10th Edn. at Page 3)
2.4 Purpose of Trusteeship.
As per ‘Salmond’ on Jurisprudence (11th Edn. By Glanvile William, at
page 308), the purpose of trusteeship is to protect the rights and interests
of persons who for any reason are unable effectively to protect them for
themselves.  It is further stated  that the chief classes of persons in whose
behalf  the  protection  of  trusteeship  is  called  for  are  four  in  number.
According  to  the  learned  author,  among  these  four  classes  of  persons
which are as follows:-
“In the first place, property may belong to persons who are not yet
born;  and  in  order  that  it  may  be  adequately  safeguarded  and
administered.”
27

“In the second place, similar protection is required for the property of
those who live under some incapacity in respect of the administration
of it, such as infinity, lunacy, or absence.”
“Thirdly,  it  is  expedient  that  property  in  which  large  numbers  of
persons are interested in common should be vested in trustees.”
“Fourthly,  when  persons  have  conflicting  interests  in  the  same
property it is often advisable that the property should be vested in
trustees.”
Here we can say that collection for benefit of the victims of the
calamity fall under the third category.
2.5Concept of Trust in collection of contribution.
2.5.1 This concept of ‘trust’ can very well be found in the collection of
funds and other items for the purpose of providing relief to the victims of
calamities.  Person who donates or contributes the funds can be said to be
‘author of the trust’.  The donor declares or reposes confidence in the
collector or receiver of such donations and such collector or receiver of the
fund is, therefore, in the position of a ‘trustee’.  The donor or in other
words, the author of the trust, donates the contribution in cash or in kind to
the  NGOs or individual with the intention that such contribution shall be
used for the purposes of providing relief and rehabilitation to the victims
of the  calamity.    The  NGOs or individual  accept  and  undertake  the
obligation and responsibility of distributing the money or item received,
28

amongst the victims of calamity.  These ‘victims’ are the beneficiaries of
the trust.  Contributions in cash and kind are trust property.  Therefore,
whenever a contribution in cash or kind is given  to any individual, NGO
or  other  organization  or  even  to  the  Government,  for  the  purpose  of
providing relief and rehabilitation of victims of calamity or (say) for the
welfare  and  rehabilitation  of  the  soldiers  and  their  families,  who  are
victims of war or war like operations, a ‘trust’ is always created.  
2.5.2 Judicial pronouncements
There are judicial pronouncements which suggest that collection of
contribution  and  donations  for  the  purpose  of  providing  relief  to  the
victims of calamity, comes under purview of ‘trust’.  In this regard, the
following  observations  of  the  Gujarat  High  Court  in  Bipinchandra  J
Diwan case, already referred to, can be quoted:
“The  donations  and  contributions  in  cash  and  kind  have  been
received by the Government wholeheartedly and spontaneously from
various  sections  of  the  society  and  people  in  India  and  abroad.
These donations and contributions in cash and kind are not parts of
the  recognized  Revenue  or  Fund  of  the  State  or  the  Centre  as
envisaged in the Constitution.   These contributions and donations
constitute a fund raised by people all over the world with specific
aim to extend help and support to the quake victims. Such donations
and contributions are in the hands of Government in the nature of a
trust” (Para 18).
29

Similarly it can be said that when such contributions or donations
are given to any private individual or NGO, they become trustees of the
money or items received.
There is an English case which we would like to refer.  That is, Re
North Devon and West Somersat Relief Fund Trusts  v. Wright 1953
(2) All. ER 1032.  Facts of the case were as follows:-
On August 15, 1952, torrential rain fell over a wide area in north
Devonshire and West Somersetshire, causing disastrous floods and
great damage and devastation.  On 18th August, 1952, an appeal by
the Lords lieutenant was issued in these terms, “We invite not only
the people of the west country, but everyone who has known and
loved Lynmouth and the quiet villages of north Devon and west
Somerst,  which  have  suffered  so  grievously  in  this  disaster,  to
contribute  to a fund for the relief of all who have suffered”…  The
response to  the appeal was very great.  In addition to donations sent
direct to the treasurer, large sums were collected in streets from the
passers  by, from collecting  boxes  placed  in  hotels  and  boarding
houses, and at stations and other public places, and by means of
collection  in  churches.  Local  authorities  made  collections,  and
organizations such as the  Red  Cross contributed.  The fund so
collected was in excess of the amount necessary to meet claims in
respect of distinct personal loss by persons mentioned in the appeal.
The question arose whether the ‘trust’ fund was charitable and whether the
surplus should be applied cy-press or be payable to donors to the fund in
30

proportion to their donation.  Wynn Parry J. held that fund so collected
falls in the category of valid charitable trust and surplus funds must be
applied cy-pres.
2.6 Obligations  and  duties  of  persons  and  agencies  who  collect
contribution.
When contributions and donations  are collected by NGOs or some
other people, they keep such contributions in the nature of trust and when
there is a trust, obviously there are obligations and duties on the trustees to
execute the wishes of the authors of the trust i.e. the  donors.  These
donations and contributions should reach the beneficiaries i.e. victims of
the calamity or war, as the case may be. Obligation of the trustee towards
the beneficiary, as  per  Salmond, is known  as  ‘innominate  obligation’,
failure to perform duties or obligation will amount to breach of trust, civil
or criminal.
As stated above, the donors of contribution are authors of the trust and
as such they have the right to execute the trust.  On the other hand, the
collectors  of  such  contribution  are  trustees,  and  they  have  obligations
towards the author of the trust i.e. donors.  In this regard, the observations
of  the  Gujarat  High  Court  in  Bipinchandra  J.  Diwan  Case,  already
referred to, can be quoted.   It was observed:
“In our opinion, therefore, all those donors and contributors who
have extended help in cash and kind to the victims have enforceable
right,  in  a  representative  capacity  to  seek  directions  to  the
31

Government  to  ensure  that  the  relief  and  rehabilitation  material
meant for quake victims reaches them in time and hour of need.  For
the same purpose they have claimed a right to demand account of
receipt and expenditure of such relief and rehabilitation material in
cash and kind”.
The beneficiaries have also a right to demand that the trustees implement
the purposes of the trust effectively.
2.7 Violation of obligations by trustee amounts to breach of trust:
civil action.
2.7.1 Whenever contributions or donations are collected by individuals,
bodies or other NGOs, necessarily a trust is created and the trustees who
violate the obligations cast on them by the authors of the trust, become
liable for the breach of trust.   If the trustees have not utilized the money,
or misutilised the money, or diverted the money or misappropriated the
money, there is a clear breach of trust.  A civil action can be in a Court of
law for taking  over the moneys  and  vesting  them in  Court  Receivers.
Section 92 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 can also be invoked.
 
2.7.2 Criminal  breach  of  trust:  sec.  405  Indian  Penal  Code  –
technicalities of creation of trust do not apply:
The Supreme Court in Jaswantrai v. State of Bombay AIR 1956
SC 575, while considering a case of criminal breach of trust as defined in
Section 405 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 has observed:
32

“But when S. 405 which defines ‘criminal breach of trust’ speaks of
a person being in any manner entrusted with property, it  does not
contemplate the creation of a trust with all the technicalities of the
law of trust. 
It contemplates the creation of a relationship whereby the owner of
property makes it over to another person to be retained by him until
a certain contingency arises or to be disposed of by him on the
happening a certain event”. (Para 13)
From the  above  observations,  it  is  clear  that  for the  purpose  of
‘criminal breach of trust’, it is not necessary that ‘trust’ has to be created
with  all  legal  technicalities  required  under  the  law  of trust.    For  the
purpose of ‘trust’, there should be entrustment of property and the owner
of the property should repose confidence in the person taking the property.
The Supreme Court in  State of Gujarat v. Jaswant Lal, AIR 1968 SC
700, has held:
“Before there can be any entrustment there must be a trust, meaning
thereby, an obligation annexed to the ownership of property and a
confidence reposed in  and accepted by the owner or declared and
accepted by him for the benefit of another or of another and the
owner. But that does not mean that such an entrustment need
conform to all the technicalities of the law of trust….. Further, the
person  handing  over  the  property  must  have  confidence  in  the
33

person taking the  property so  as to create a judicial relationship
between them.”
The rights of the persons to whom property is entrusted is explained
by the Supreme Court in  Jaswant Rai vs. State of Bombay AIR 1956
SC575 in the following words:
“The person who transfers possession of the property to the second
party still remains the legal owner of the property and the person in
whose favour possession is so transferred has only the custody of
the property to be kept or disposed of by him for the benefit of the
other party, the person so put in possession only obtaining a special
interest by way of a claim for money advanced or spent upon the
safe keeping of the thing or such other incidental expenses as may
have been incurred by him”.   (Para 13)
2.8 Special legislations relating to trusts:
2.8.1 There are various special legislations, both Central and State, which
deal with the law relating to trusts, apart from the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.
That Act, as stated earlier, applies only to private trusts and it does not
apply to charitable endowments, public or private.
(1) The Charitable Endowments Act, 1890.  It was enacted to provide
for the vesting and administration of property held in trust – for charitable
purpose.  As per section 2 of the Act, ‘Charitable purposes includes relief
of the poor, education, medical relief and the advancement of any other
34

object of general public utility, but does not include a purpose which relate
exclusively to religious teaching or worship.
(2) ‘The Charitable and Religious Trusts Act, 1920’.  The object of
this  Act  is  to  secure more effectual  control over the administration  of
Charitable and Religious Trusts.
As  per  sec.  3,  any  person  having  an  interest  in  any  express  or
constructive trust, created for a public purpose of a charitable or religious
nature, can file a petition in a Court for obtaining an order for any of the
following directions, namely
(1) directing  the  trustee  to  furnish  the  petitions,
with particulars as to the nature and objects of
the  trust,  and  of  the  value,  condition,
management  and  application  of  the  subject
matter of the trust, and of the income belonging
thereto;
(2) directing that the accounts of the trust shall be
examined and audited.
Any trustee of a trust of a kind mentioned above, under sec. 7 may
apply to the court for the opinion, advice or direction of the court on any
question affecting the management of the trust property and the court shall
give its opinion, advice or direction as the case may be.
(3) Section 92 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908:  It deals with the
Trusts.  This section 92 authorizes the filing of suit in respect of breach of
35

any  express  or  constructive  trust  created  for  the  public  purposes  of  a
charitable or religious nature by the Advocate General or by two or more
persons with the leave of court.
(4) Income  Tax  Act,  1961 grants  exemptions  in  respect  of  any
contribution  or  donations  given  to  a  trust   created  for  charitable  or
religious purposes (section 80G). Again, income from such trusts is also
exempted in certain circumstances (section 11,12,12A and 13).
(5) Indian Penal Code 1860:  It deals with offences relating to trusts
and punishment for such offence.  Sections 405 to 409 deals with criminal
breach of trusts.
(6) State legislations:  Apart  from the Central legislations  there are
certain legislation of State legislature regarding Charitable trusts.  
2.9 Existing special legislations do not specifically cover the present
issue:
The Central legislation and a large  number of State legislations that
at  present  govern  the  functioning  of  trusts,  are  premised  on  the  legal
principle of trusteeship and of trusts having to expend the funds at their
disposal in a manner permitted by these laws.   However, some of these
legislations apply only to express trusts and some to implied trusts but they
are too general in nature and cover all types of trusts.   The present Report,
however,  has  a  specific  purpose  in  relation  to  funds  collected  during
Disasters  and  Calamities.    It  is  felt  that  the  principle  of constructive
36

trusteeship must govern these other organizations and individuals who or
which  may  not  be  express  trusts.    It  is  proposed  to  make  detailed
regulations to govern all agencies in relation to funds collected specifically
for Disaster or Calamity Relief.   The need for a special detailed legislation
on the subject need not be overemphasized.
We have here to address two main issues (i) how to regulate the
collection of contribution and (ii) how to check the misappropriation and
diversion of funds so collected, so that funds reach the real victims of
calamity or victims of war, in time.   In case of any violation of or breach
of trust a special and fast mechanism has to be provided so that the victims
as well as donors are able to make an immediate complaint before an
appropriate authority and such complaint is heard and disposed of quickly.
37

CHAPTER – III
Need to have a special law relating to contributions 
made in the context of calamities
3.1 Need  for  comprehensive  law  on  calamity  collections  and
prevention of misappropriation thereof.
  As  stated  in  the  earlier  Chapters,  as  of  now  there  is  no
comprehensive law either made by Parliament or the State legislatures to
regulate collections made by persons or organizations in times of calamity
or disaster.  Hence, the need for a special comprehensive law.
3.2 The  High  Powered  Committee  Recommendation:   Calamity
management law:
The  High  Powered  Committee  (HPC)  on  Disaster  Management,
appointed by the Government of India felt that there is a need for having a
Disaster  Management  Legislation.   Consequently,  HPC  prepared  a
‘National Calamity Management Act’.  Draft of the said Act was circulated
to all the States as well as all the concerned Ministries of Government of
India for their comments.  The suggested Act aimed at ensuring efficiency
and effective management of natural and other calamities, for achieving
greater coordination and responsiveness  with respect to prevention  and
mitigation of disasters, so as to provide better relief and rehabilitation of
victims of disasters.  The HPC also constituted a committee to prepare a
‘Model State Disaster Management Act.’  The said committee finalized the
38

draft of the Model State Disaster Management Act.  A copy of this draft
Act  was  also  circulated  to  the  State  Chief  Secretaries  and  Relief
Commissioners of all States and DGs of all State Administrative Training
Institute  for their  comments,  suggestion  and  further  follow  up  actions.
These drafts were submitted as a part of Interim Report I of the HPC, and
were  accepted  by the  Central  Government,  and  circulated  to  all  Chief
Ministers.  The  drafts  of  the  ‘National  Calamity Management  Act’ and
‘Model State Disaster Management Act’ are annexed in the final Report of
the HPC (October, 2001) as Annexure 5 and Annexure 8 respectively.
3.3Need  for  separate  law  on  prevention  of  misappropriation  of
collections and speedier remedies:
3.3.1 Although  as  mentioned  above,  various  drafts  have  been
recommended and suggested by various committees and individuals, still
on the specific issue of collection and distribution of funds and other items
in the form of donations or contributions by various persons and bodies
and  the  prevention  of  misappropriation  or  remedies  in  case  of
misappropriation, have not been addressed in any of these drafts.  It is not
provided in any of these drafts  as to how the collection of contributions
can  be  regulated  and  how  the  malpractices,  and  misappropriation  of
monies or other items can be curbed, so that contributions may reach the
victims and  also  in time.   The draft legislations referred above only deal
with the management of calamity.  
3.3.2 Our present purpose is to deal not only with the contributions and
donations received for providing the relief and rehabilitation to the victims
39

of calamity but also in regard to the collections received for the welfare
and rehabilitation of the soldiers and their families who have been killed or
disabled in a war or other operations, such as the Kargil conflict, which
issue is pending before the Bombay High Court.  Therefore, there is a need
of a separate law which deals with the issue of regulation and monitoring
the  collection  of  funds  and  other  items  in  the  form  of   donation  or
contribution  by  individuals,  NGOs  other  organization  or  trust  for  the
purpose of providing relief and rehabilitation of the victims of natural or
other calamity and for welfare and rehabilitation of the soldiers and their
family killed or disabled in a war or war like other operation.
3.3.3 The Bombay High Court in Lokmat Trust case (supra) out of which
the present reference arises, has felt the need to have a law to regulate
collection of contributions.  In that case, the Division bench of the High
Court in its order passed on 30.8.2001 observed thus:
“…but we fail to understand why the Government i.e. Central as
well as State Government has not regulated the collection of such
funds from the public at large.  It has now become a common feature
that in  case  of any calamity man made or natural, organizations
spring  up  like  mushrooms  and  appeal  to  the  public  at  large  by
involving  their  sentiments  and  emotions  which facilitate  them to
collect huge funds and  appropriate in the manner they feel it proper.
There is no Government Agency to regulate the collection of such
funds  and  to  monitor  that  fund  so  collected   really  reaches  the
beneficiaries”.  (para 2)
40

The court further observed:
“..In our opinion, collection of funds for such causes  by person,
Institutions,  Trusts,  Corporate  houses  and  NGO’s  should  not  be
allowed  without  having  control  over  it  by  the  State,  which  is
necessary in public interest.  Otherwise, its misappropriation would
go unchecked leaving the donor helpless as after one donates, it is
left  to  the  sweet  choice  of  the  collector  of  such  funds  how  to
appropriate it”.  (para 5)
3.4Law Commission’s view in the Consultation Paper
The Law Commission in its consultation paper on this subject (at
para 3.1) had suggested that there is urgent need to bring into being a
Central  enactment  specifically  intended  to  regulate  the  collection  and
proper  accounts  of  contribution  and  donations  and  to  monitor
contributions so collected with a view to see that they are properly utilized
and distributed.  
3.5Responses to the Consultation Paper
The suggestions of the Law Commission made in the Consultation
Paper have been widely accepted and welcomed in every response which
the Commission has received.  
(i) The Ministry of Defence in its letter dated 30 September, 2004 has
agreed with most of the proposed provisions but suggested that so far as
41

the  regulatory  authority  is  concerned,  a  representative  of  the  Defence
Forces of the level of Adjutant General or equivalent may be included, to
oversee the interests of the defence personnel and their families.  It is also
for its view that a representative of the concerned State Government also
be co-opted.  With regard to judicial authority, one Judge Adjutant General
from Army  may also be included.
(ii) The Government of Orissa is of the view that the proposals of the
Law Commission  are wholesome and  indeed  it  will  curb  unauthorized
collection of contributions by non-government agencies under self-styled
Relief Fund or War Fund.  It will also help in monitoring the distribution
of the contribution so that the fund/materials so collected would reach the
real beneficiaries. 
(iii) The  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh is  of  the  view  that  the
proposed enactment has become need of the hour, keeping in view the
experience gained in dealing with disasters, both natural  and men made,
over a considerable period of time.
(iv) Maharashtra State Law  Commission has stated that there can be no
two opinions as to the dire necessity of the proposed Central legislation.
The background and necessity of such legislation make it obvious that
such legislation is in fact overdue.  
(v) The Government of Uttar Pradesh is of the view that the proposed
legislation will definitely curb the malpractices.  It also stated that the
42

legislation  is  in  public  interest  and  the  State  Government  accords  its
approval for enacting such a law.  
(vi) The Government of Pondicherry has stated that the proposal of the
Law Commission for a enacting a law, is agreed to.
(vii) The Government of West Bengal has also agreed to the proposal of
enacting a law.  
(viii) The  Government  of  Haryana through  its  various  Deputy
Commissioner, has also welcomes the suggestion of enacting law. 
(ix) The Government of Kerala has welcomed the proposals.  However,
it is suggested that instead of a Regulatory Authority, the same functions
can be performed by a Special Audit Team, in the Finance Department.
The  discretion  not  being  a  regular  feature,  a  permanent  regulatory
authority may lead to waste of money.  For some reasons there is no need
to have a separate judicial authority.  The role of the Red Cross or Bharat
Sevak Samaj may be kept separate.
(x) NGOs, like Citizen Welfare Council (Regd.) Rup Nagar (Punjab),
are also of the view that inasmuch as there is no legislation to regulate and
monitor  collections  of  these  funds/assets  by
persons/institutions/trusts/NGOs,  legislation  is  absolutely  necessary  to
prevent misappropriation of these funds.  
43

(xi) The Department of Rural Development, under the Ministry of Rural
Development,  Government  of  India  has  stated  that  so  far  as  the
Department of Rural Development is concerned, it agrees with the views
expressed in the consultation paper.
(xii) However, the Government of Madhya Pradesh has sent a short reply
stating that it has not accepted the suggestions for enacting a special law.
No reasons have been assigned for the view so expressed.
3.6Conclusions
In the light of the above responses, the Commission recommends
that  a  law  should  be  enacted  to  regulate  the  collection  of  funds
including contributions and donations in cash and kind, collected or
raised for the purposes of providing relief and rehabilitation to the
victims  of  natural  and  man-made  calamity  or  for  welfare  and
rehabilitation to soldiers or their family members who are killed or
have  become  disabled  in  war  or  war  like  operations  and  also  to
monitor the proper utilization and distribution of such contribution so
collected.   The details of the proposed law are mentioned in Chapter
V.
44

CHAPTER – IV
45

PROPOSED ENACTMENT – LEGISLATIVE POWER, ITS
EXTENT, COMMENCEMENT AND SCOPE
4.1 In Chapter III, we have recommended that a law should be enacted
to regulate the collection of contributions and donations in cash and kind,
which  are  collected  or  raised  for  the  purposes  of  providing  relief  and
rehabilitation to the victims of natural or other man-made calamities or for
welfare and rehabilitation of the soldiers and their family who are killed or
disabled in war or war-like other operations and also to monitor the proper
utilization and distribution of contributions so collected.  
In this chapter, we will discuss certain preliminary issues concerning
legislative  competence  of  Parliament  to  enact  law  on  this  subject,  its
territorial extent, commencement and scope of the enactment.
4.2 The evil of misappropriation of collections or contributions is not
confined to a particular State or locality.    It pervades the whole nation.
Whenever any person or body starts collection of contributions, generally
he may collect them from every part of the country and even outside the
country.   A calamity may, in fact, affect people in more than one State.  It
is necessary to prevent misappropriation and therefore there is need to
have a uniform law to regulate the contributions and such a law must be
applicable to the whole nation.    We are, therefore, of the view that there
should be a Central legislation to regulate the collection and utilization of
contributions covering collections or misappropriations thereof anywhere
in the country.
46

4.3 Legislative Power of Parliament to enact law on the subject.
4.3.1 It  is  necessary  to  go  into  the  question  whether  Parliament  has
legislative competence to enact a law on the subject matter now under
discussion.  
4.3.2 Entries in the Concurrent List: Entry 10 and 28 of List III:
Object of the law is the main criterion to ascertain the legislative
power of any particular legislature.
The object sought to be achieved by the proposed law is to curb the
misappropriation, and misuse of the contributions and donations collected
or  raised  for  the  purposes  of providing  relief  and  rehabilitation  to  the
victims of any natural or other man-made calamity, as well as, for welfare
and rehabilitation of soldiers and their families who are killed or disabled
in war or war-like other operation.  In order to achieve the above object it
is necessary:
i) To regulate the collection of contributions and donations in
cash and kind; and
ii) To monitor the utilization of contributions and donations so
collected.
The subject of Trusts and Trustees is contained in Entry 10 of List III of
the  Seventh  Schedule  of  the  Constitution  of  India.   In  view  of  the
Commission, the present subject falls within this entry.  As explained in
Chapter  II,  whenever  any  contribution  or  donation  is  given  for  such
47

charitable  purpose,  the  person  or  body,  to  whom such  contribution  is
given, keeps such contribution in the nature of trust. In addition we may
state that the subject of Charities and Charitable Institutions, Charitable
and Religious Endowment falls under Entry 28 of the List III (Concurrent
List) of the Seventh schedule to the Constitution of India.  The proposed
law incidentally also deals with aspect of relief and rehabilitation process
of  the  victims of calamity.  Hence,  it  is  clear  that  Parliament  has  the
legislative power on the subject under discussion.
In any  event,  apart  from Entry  10  of  List  III, which  is  directly
relevant, the Parliament has residuary power to legislate as stated in Entry
97 of List I read with Art 248 of the Constitution of India.
 
In fact, there is a need to have a ‘non-obstante’ clause to override all
existing legislations relating to trusts, to the extent of inconsistency.
4.4 Territorial extent of the proposed law.
4.4.1 In the Consultation Paper (at para 3.2.1), it was suggested that the
proposed  law  should  extend  to  the  whole  of  India.   As  discussed  in
preceding  paragraphs,  there  is  need  for  having  a  uniform  law  on  the
subject which will be applicable to the whole of the territory of India.
4.4.2 Position in regard to Jammu and Kashmir
When we say whole of India, it certainly includes State of Jammu
and  Kashmir  also.   But,  we  have  to  keep  in  mind  the  Constitutional
48

provisions relating to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  As per Article 370
(1)(b) of the Constitution, the power of the Parliament to make laws for the
State of Jammu and Kashmir is limited to those matters of Union list and
Concurrent  list  which  are  declared  by  the  President  of  India  as
corresponding  to the Instrument of Accession.  The President with the
concurrence of the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir can add and
declare other matters on which the Parliament can enact the law, which
may be applicable to Jammu and Kashmir. 
4.4.3 As discussed above, the subject matter of the proposed law falls
under entry 10 and 28 of list III, and in any event, under residuary powers
of the Parliament under entry 97 of list I  read with Article 248 of the
Constitution.
In  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  by  Article  370  (1)  of  the
Constitution, the President with the concurrence of the State Government
of  Jammu  and  Kashmir,  has  made  the  ‘Constitution  (Applicability  to
Jammu and Kashmir) Order 1954, (CO48).   As per section 2 (22) (c ) of
this Order, entries 10 and 28 of the Concurrent List are not applicable to
Jammu and Kashmir. Provisions of Article 248 and entry 97 of the Union
list which deals with residuary of the Parliament, have been substituted for
the Jammu and Kashmir vide sections 2(6)(b) and 2(22) (a) (iv) of the
Constitution Order 1954.  It means the provisions of Article 248 and entry
97  of  the  Union  List,  as  applicable  to  the  rest  of  the  India,  are  not
applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  Therefore, the law made by
Parliament under its residuary powers, are not applicable to Jammu and
Kashmir.  
49

4.4.4 In view of the special provisions applicable to Jammu and Kashmir
and  in  order  to  avoid  controversy  it  will  be  more  appropriate  if  the
proposed Central enactment  be not  made applicable to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.  As this enactment relating to prevention of misappropriation
of  funds  collected  during  calamities  and  destruction  is  in  the  public
interest, it may be more appropriate that State Legislature of Jammu and
Kashmir itself enacts such a legislation in this behalf for that State.
4.4.5 On  the  basis  of  discussion  above  we  recommend  that  the
proposed law shall be applicable to entire territory of India except the
State of Jammu and Kashmir.
4.5 Operation of the proposed law- prospective or retrospective.
4.5.1 Proposals in Consultation Paper. Parliament  can  make  a  law
with  prospective  or retrospective  effect.   On  the  question  whether  the
proposed law should be prospective or retrospective, in the light of the
complaint procedure proposed, it was suggested in the Consultation Paper
that  the  proposed  law  should  necessarily  have  to  come  into  force
prospectively.  But in view of the present reference and with a view to
cover the contributions already collected between 1.5.1999 (the tentative
date when the Kargil conflict began) and the date from which the proposed
enactment would come into force, it was proposed in the Consultation
Paper  that  such  persons  or  agencies  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been
provisionally registered.  It was further proposed that a formal application
for registration has to be given within one month from the date of coming
50

into  force  of  this  proposed  enactment.   It  was  proposed  that  if  the
registration is refused by the Collector,  all the unutilized contributions
shall be taken over by the Regulatory Authority or by the Collector from
such person or body as stated above and thereafter the Authority and the
Collector will have a right to transfer it to some other authorized person or
agency.  We shall discuss the responses to this proposal.  But, at this stage,
we may state that our final view is that the proposed Act need not be
retrospective.
4.5.2 Response of Govt. of Pondicherry.
On  this  issue  Government  of  Pondicherry  through  its  Law
Department in its response to the Consultation Paper has stated that the
proposal to have retrospective operation for the enactment may not stand
the  test  of  law  and  may  not  be  acceptable  to  the  courts.   The  Law
Department has expressed its reservations for such retrospective operation
of the proposal enactment.
4.5.3 Law permits retrospective legislation but in the present context,
it is felt that the proposed law by prospective only.
There are considerable authorities in support of a settled principle of
law that in India, because of plenary powers, the Parliament as well as
State  Legislatures  can   enact  legislations  prospectively  as  well  as
retrospectively, however, subject to Constitutional restrictions.  (see M/s.
Nanumal  Girdharilal v. State of UP AIR 1992 SC 2084,  Govt. of AP v.
Hindustan Machine Tools, AIR 1975 SC 2037, JK Jute Mills Co. v. State
51

of  UP,  AIR  1961  SC  1534,  Jadao  Bahuji  v.  Municipal  Committee
Khandwa, AIR 1961SC 1486, MPV Sundaramnier and Co. v. State of AP,
AIR 1958 SC 468).  Competence to make a law for past period on a
subject depends upon present competence to legislate on that subject. (see.
A- Hajee Abdul Shukoor and Co. Vs. State of Madras AIR 1964 SC 1724).
The Courts have applied Art 14 to strike down certain laws which are
retrospective.
Now,  we  analyze  the  proposal  made  in  the  Consultation  Paper.
Three major points were made in the consultation paper.  These are: (i) in
general, the proposed law shall be prospective in nature;( ii) persons or
agencies who had collected contributions in past shall be deemed to have
provisionally registered under the new law, however, they will be required
to make a formal application for registration within a prescribed period,
and (iii) if registration is refused, all unutilized contribution shall be taken
over by the Regulatory Authority or Collector and the contribution  so
recovered may be handed over to some other person or agency.
The net effect of the proposal made in the Consultation Paper was
that the persons or organizations who had collected contributions in past
are required to apply for registration.  If their application is accepted, they
will  be  eligible  to  collect  contribution  in  future  also.   And  if  their
application for registration is rejected, all unutilized contributions kept by
them shall be taken over by the Regulatory Authority or Collector.  After
all, the collections are not their personal property, but belong to public.
52

These  persons  or  organizations  cannot  claim  that  they  are  losing  any
interest in the property.
The  only  question  which  now  arises  is  that  whether  it  can  be
contended that the taking over of such unutilized contributions by
the Regulatory Authority or Collector amounts  to  punishment or
penalty  falling  within  the  prohibition  of  Article  20(1)  of  the
contribution? If so, such provision will, of course, be liable to be
held ultra vires.  The answer to this question may be traced in the
judgment of the Five Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in State of
West Bengal v. S.K. Ghosh, AIR 1963 SC 255.  
The Supreme Court held:
“We are, therefore, of opinion that forfeiture provided in section 13
(3)  in  case  of  offences  which  involve  the  embezzlement  etc.  of
Government  money  or  property  is  really  a  speedier  method  of
realizing government money or property as compared to a suit which
it  is  not  disputed  the  Government  could  bring  for  realizing  the
money  or  property  &  is  not  punishment  or  penalty  within  the
meaning of Article 20(1)”.(Para 14)
4.5.4 Final  view  of  the  Law  Commission  :  Proposed  Act  to  be
prospective:
When the Law Commission  suggested  in the  Consultation  Paper
about giving retrospective operation of the proposed enactments, it was
53

felt  that  there  are  allegations  of  misuse  and  misappropriation  of
contributions which had been made during ‘Kargil conflict’ (May, 1999)
and  ‘Gujarat  Earthquake  2001’,  and  that  the  proposed  law  should  be
retrospective.  It was felt that large amounts of contributions  could be
recovered if they were not utilized.  It was in those circumstances that such
a provision was suggested.  But since then (1999 and 2001), a lot of time
has already passed and it may take further time before any law is finally
enacted  and  is  brought  into  existence.   By  that  time  the  unutilized
contributions  may  not  even  be  traceable.   Moreover  certain  technical
difficulties may also arise, in searching for the unutilized contributions.  In
regard to such past  collections, the existing  law can, if so desired,  be
always resorted to, though the remedies are different from the special and
speedy remedies proposed in this Report.
In these circumstances, now the Law Commission is of the view that
the proposal relating to giving retrospective operation to the proposed
law  need  not  be  pursue.   We  recommend  that  the  whole  of  the
proposed enactment should be made prospective only.
4.6 Scope of the proposed law – whether contributions received by
the Government to any fund should also be brought into purview of
the enactment.
4.6.1 Contributions  and  donations  are  collected  or  raised  by  the
Government  or  their  agencies  as  well  as  by  private  individuals,
organizations, NGOs, trusts, etc.    The issue is whether the proposed law
should be applicable to all contributions or donations or whether it should
54

be applicable only to those contributions or donations which have been
collected by private individuals, bodies or agencies.
4.6.2 Proposals in the Consultation Paper as to Government funds.
In the Consultation Paper, it was proposed that all contributions or
donations collected or received either in cash or in kind, by any person,
association, agency, body corporate or non corporate, institution, firm or
other  organizations  should  come  under  the  purview  of  the  proposed
enactment (para 3.2.1).  In the Consultation Paper, contributions collected
or raised by the Government or their agencies were kept out of the purview
of the proposed enactment, but suggestions were invited on the question.   
4.6.3 Responses to the Consultation Paper.
4.6.3.1Some of the responses suggested that contributions made out of the
State funds, (like Prime Minister’s Relief Fund, Chief Minister’s Relief
Fund, and other calamity Relief Funds set up by the Government) should
also  be  dealt  with  by  the  proposed  enactment  for  the  purpose  of
introducing a measure of accountability in the administration of the above
funds.  Of course, some other responses suggested that such funds need not
be covered by the proposed law, as there were other safeguards.
4.6.3.2The Pondicherry Government in its response has stated that  Chief
Minister’s Welfare Fund of Pondicherry, need not be brought within the
purview of the proposed enactment.  It also stated that adequate safeguards
have been provided for the proper administration of this fund by virtue of
55

rules and scheme framed under the Charitable and Endowments Act, 1890.
Provisions  have also been made for proper accounting and auditing of
utilization of the funds under the said scheme.  
4.6.3.3The  Maharashtra  State  Law  Commission is  of  the  view  that
Prime Minister’s Fund and Chief Minister’s fund should not be brought
within the purview of this Act.
4.6.3.4The  Department  of  Rural  Development,  Ministry  of  Rural
Development, Government of India, has brought in the notice of the Law
Commission  about  a  centrally  sponsored  scheme,  namely  “Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) of that Ministry.  Under the scheme, no
funds are released to any Institution, person or organization for the welfare
of victims of natural and other calamities or war like emergent situations.
However,  in  the  wake  of  natural  calamities,  additional  assistance  is
provided to the affected State Governments in the form of food grains
under the special component of the SGRY.  This assistance is provided
only on the basis of the decision of a Task Force headed by the Deputy
Prime Minister.  In addition to this, 5 per cent of total allocation is kept
reserved for calamity affected areas under the SGRY and Indira Awas
Yojana.
4.6.3.5The Secretary, Rajya Sainik Board, Haryana in its response has
also stated about another fund namely ‘Haryana Chief Minister War Relief
Fund’ which was set up by the Haryana Government.  It is stated that this
fund  is  meant  for  providing  financial  assistance  to  the  next  of  kin  of
martyrs  or to  the  disabled,  at once,  without  any delay.  The  fund  got
56

registered under the Societies Registration Act with the Registrar of Firms
and Societies, Haryana as a Society.  The fund was collected through the
Deputy Commissioners in the shape of cheques and Bank drafts and proper
receipts  were  give  to  the  donors.   To  monitor  the  fund,  a  high  level
committee  in  which  Chief  Minister,  Chief  Secretary,  Financial
Commissioners of Finance and Home Departments, Director Resettlement,
Secretary, Rajya Sainik Board, are members, had been constituted.  The
accounts of the Funds are audited by the Auditors of Local Fund and a
Chartered Accountant.
4.6.3.6On the other hand, the  Government of West Bengal (Legislative
Department) has opined that contributions made out of the State Funds
should also be dealt with by the proposed enactment for the purpose of
introducing a measure of accountability in the above funds and ensure
transparency in the system, as also in view of the increasing recognition of
a citizen’s right to information by the State.
4.6.3.7The Deputy Commissioner Panchkula (Haryana) is also of the view
that State Funds should be covered under the proposed enactment for the
purpose of avoiding misappropriation of funds collected in this regard.
4.6.4 Our Discussion.   At the Government level, various kind of funds
are  set  up  to  provide  help  and  assistance.   Some  of  these  funds  are
permanent in nature and do not relate to a particular situation, calamity or
war  – For  example,  Prime Minster’s  National  Relief   Funds,  National
Defence  Fund,  Army  Central  Welfare  Fund,  Indian  Naval  Benevolent
Fund or National Calamity Contingency Fund, Chief Minster’s  Relief
57

Fund  of different States.  Apart from these, sometime a particular fund is
set  up  to  deal  with   a  particular  calamity or  other  eventualities.   For
example Chief Minister Earth Quake Relief Fund of Maharashtra, was set
up to deal Latur earthquake.  We also have Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister
Cyclone Relief Fund, Prime Minister Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund,
Prime Minster Drought Relief Fund, Pondicherry Chief Minister Cyclone
Relief Fund, Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation and Construction  Fund.
Donations and Contributions from general public are accepted in most of
these  funds,  however, in  some funds,  Government  itself contributes  to
these funds.  Sometimes surcharge is also levied to cover the budgetary
provisions.   Other  government  agencies  also  raise  contributions  and
donations.   It  is  one  of  the  functions  of  the  Gujarat  State  Disaster
Management  Authority,  which  is  constituted  by  the  Government  of
Gujarat, to obtain funds in the form of grant, aid, assistance, from the
Government, Central as well as State, World Bank, ADB, USAID, DFID,
IFRC,  and  donors,  NGOs  and  from  financial  institutions,  Public  and
Private Trust or any other organization.  These funds are normally being
managed by a committee.  Proper accounts are maintained, proper receipt
are given and these funds are subject to audit as well.
The  Prime Minister’s National  Relief  Funds  depends  entirely on
voluntary donations received from the public.  The Fund renders assistance
to individuals facing distress situations.  Its resources are utilized for the
provision  of immediate relief to the families  of those killed  in natural
calamities.   It  also  grants  assistance  to  families  affected  by  major
disturbances, riots and accidents.  Besides, the Funds extend assistance to
indigent  persons  to  defray  the  cost  of  expensive  medical  treatment.
58

Contributions to the fund can be deposited in select Bank branches through
cheques and bank draft.  A formal receipt for the contribution is issued
from the Fund.  The Fund does not accept any contributions in kind.
The National Defence Fund is intended to take charge of voluntary
donations in cash and kind received for the national Defence effort, and to
decide  on  their  utilization.   The  Fund  is  being  used  for  all  purposes
connected with defences including welfare of the members of the Armed
Forces  and  Para  Military  Forces  and  their  dependants.   The  fund  is
administered by an Executive Committee consisting of the Prime Minister
as Chairman, and the Defence, Finance and Home Ministers as Members,
Joint Secretary to the Prime Minister is the Secretary of the Executive
Committee. Disbursement from the fund are made after obtaining approval
of all members.  This is a Public Fund, and the account and balance are
kept with the Reserve Bank of India.  Its accounts are audited by the
Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  of India.  (http://pmindia.nic.in/funds
dated 1.8.2002).
Government  of  India  has  constituted  a  ‘National  Calamity
Contingency Fund (NCCF) for the purpose of dealing natural calamity of
severe  nature.  The  Fund  is  classified  in  the  public  account  of  the
Government of India.  The Central Government provided initial corpus of
Rs. 500 crores.  A National Center for Calamity Management (NCCM) has
been constituted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, which will assess how
much of the fund be utilized for immediate relief and rehabilitation.  The
above recommendation of NCCM is required to be considered by the High
Level Committee on  Calamity Relief constituted by the Ministry of Home
59

Affairs.  As per the decision of the High Level Committee, the Fund is
released to the State Government.  The Ministry of Home Affairs shall
oversee  that  the  money  drawn  from  NCCF  is  applied  by  the  State
Government for the purpose for which the Fund was set up.  The account
of NCCF is maintained by the Chief Controller of Accounts, Ministry of
Finance, and audited annually by the  Comptroller and Auditor General
As stated above, the Chief Minister’s Welfare Fund of Pondicherry
is being administered under a scheme notified under the Charitable and
Endowments Acts, 1890.  The said scheme contains provisions for proper
accounting and auditing of the utilization of the funds.
The above discussion makes it clear that so far as contributions and
donations collected by the Government or their agencies are concerned,
there are provisions for proper accounting and auditing of those collections
and utilization.  Still, in the light of Freedom of Information Act, 2002,
(when it becomes effective on framing Rules), citizens may be able to
obtain  necessary  information  regarding  amount  of  collection  and
utilization of these funds.  It is also possible that even otherwise, a large
amount  of information may be available  on the internet in the official
website of the Government or their agencies.  Some of the Funds set up by
the  Government  are  general  funds  which  can  be  used  in  case  of  any
eventuality.  
However, there may still be cases of misappropriation of moneys by
officials or non-officials.  But for that purpose, there are provisions in the
Penal Code and other anti corruption  laws.  The HPC in its Draft of
60

National Calamity Management Act (Clause 14) and Model State Disaster
Management Act (clause 21) has already suggested provisions for civil
liability for misuse of funds by the official functionaries who are entrusted
with or engage in any relief or rescue operation.  Penalty can be imposed
equivalent to 150 per cent of the total loss of public money or damages to
public property caused by such officials.  This penalty is apart from the
criminal prosecution that may be launched against him.  Such a law, if
enacted, will, in our view, sufficiently take care of misappropriation of
funds, if any, by the government officials.  
In Bipin Chandra Diwan Case (Supra), the Gujarat High Court has
observed that it should be ensured that funds raised by the Government
should be safe and subject to periodical audit to ensure proper utilization
of funds and materials.  Further, in our view, an exhaustive audit cannot be
done hurriedly and especially when the relief and rescue operations are
going on.   Therefore, if funds collected by Government or its agencies are
to be omitted from the applicability of the proposed law, it can be treated
as  a  reasonable  basis  of  classification  between  two  classes,  namely,
collections  and  utilization  of  contributions  and  donations  by  the
Government   and  its  agencies,  and  by  the  private  individuals  bodies,
NGOs,  trusts etc.  The apex court in various judgments has held that, in
certain  circumstances,  one  law  may  apply  to  non-state  entities  and  a
different law may be made for the State (see Sagir Ahmed v. State of UP,
AIR 1954 SC 728, Kondala Rao v. A.P.S.R.T.C., AIR 1961  SC 82, Nav
Rattamal v. State of  Rajasthan, AIR 1961 SC 1704.
61

Final view of the Law Commission
4.6.5 In these circumstances, the Law Commission is of the view that the
proposed enactment should be made applicable only to those contributions
and  donations  which  are  received  or  collected  by  private  individuals,
bodies,  organizations,  trust  or  NGOs  or  other  private  entities.    The
contributions or donations collected or received by the Government or its
agencies or bodies establish by the Government or for any fund set up by
the  Government  should  be  kept  out  of  the  purview  of  the  proposed
enactment.  
Therefore, we recommend that the proposed enactment should
be made applicable to all those contributions or donations collected or
received, either in cash or kind, by any person, association, agency,
body, institution, firm, NGO, trust or other organization.  The purpose
of  the  proposals  is  to  regulate  collections  and  provide  relief  and
rehabilitation to the victims of any natural or man made calamity or
for welfare and rehabilitation to the soldiers and their family who are
killed or disabled in a war or war like other operation, whenever such
collections  and  relief  work  is  taken  up  by  non-governmental
organizations.  It is further recommended that contributions received
by the private parties referred to above from the Government or any
fund set up by the Government, shall be brought into the purview of
the  enactment.   However,  any  contribution  received  by  the
Government,  or  any  fund  set  up  by  any  government,  or  by  any
authority  or  agency  established  by  any  government  shall  not  be
brought into the purview of the proposed enactment.
62

Discussion and final recommendation of the Commission made in
this chapter may be summarized as follows:
1) Parliament has legislative competence to enact law
on the subject.
2) The proposed law should be made applicable to the
whole  of  India  except  the  State  of  Jammu  and
Kashmir.
3) The  proposed  law  should  be  prospective  in
operation  and  there  should  be  no  retrospective
operation of the law.
4) Contribution  and  donations  received  by any
Government or its agencies for any fund set up by
any Government shall be kept out of the purview of
the  proposed  enactment.    However,  where  such
contributions  are  received  by  non-governmental
bodies, the proposed law shall apply to them.
63

CHAPTER V
SALIENT FEATURES OF PROPOSED LAW
5.1 In this chapter, we shall discuss the manner in which collection of
contributions and donations can be regulated and also the manner in which
utilization of such contributions can be monitored and action taken. As
stated in the previous chapters, the main purpose of regulation is to ensure
that no contribution is misappropriated or misutilised and to ensure that it
reaches to the actual needy person or persons in time and provides speedy
and efficacious remedies.
5.2 Establishment of Regulatory Authority
5.2.1 In order to achieve the above object, it is desirable that there
should be a Regulatory Authority to regulate the collections and utilization
of the contributions.    It has been suggested that the said Regulatory
Authority should be independent and impartial, and has to be established
by  the  Central  Government,  and  should  consist  of  persons  of  high
integrity,  semi  or  government  officials  and  non-governmental
representatives of good reputation also. 
5.2.2 A  question  arises  as  to  whether  such  non-governmental
representative  must  be included  in  the proposed  Regulatory Authority.
Obviously, these NGOs should be of repute and other than those connected
with even remotely with the present subject.  In our view, in such kind of
Authority  there  is  always  a  need  that  it  should  also  consist  of  non-
64

government  members.  For  example,  there  was  ‘District  level  Natural
Calamities Committee’ for the Districts of Kalahandi and Koraput in the
State of Orissa, consisting of the District Collector, other officials and
local MPs and MLAs of districts. The Committee was required to review
the progress of relief work and the measures taken to meet the drought
conditions from time to time.  In  Kishen Pattnayak v.  State of Orissa,
A.I.R. 1989 SC p.677, the Supreme Court directed the Orissa Government
to nominate at least  five persons belonging to the recognized voluntary
organisations as members of the said Natural Calamities Committees of
these  districts.  The  Court  also  directed  that  the  functions  of  the  said
Committees be not confined only to the cases of starvation deaths, but it
shall also be responsible for looking after the welfare of the people to the
district. The Committee shall also keep watch over the working of the
social  welfare  measures  which  were being  taken and  may be  taken in
future.  It is on the basis of the above decision that the Commission had
recommended  for  inclusion  of  representatives  of  reputed  NGOs  to  be
included in the Regulatory Authority in the Consultation Paper.
5.2.3 Proposals  in  the  Consultation  Paper:  Regulatory  Authority’s
constitution:  It was accordingly suggested in the Consultation Paper that
a Regulatory Authority be established by the Central Government, which
shall consist of representatives of NGOs and others also.  The constitution
suggested was:
a) A  Full  time  Chairperson,  having  special  knowledge  or  practical
experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilitation with adequate
65

knowledge  of  accounting  and  management  of  funds  or  grants,  to  be
appointed by the Central Government.
b) A  Full  time  Member  Secretary,  having  special  knowledge  or
practical experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilitation with
adequate knowledge of accounting and management of funds or grants, to
be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the officials of its
Ministries, not below the rank of Joint Secretary.
c) Three  members  nominated  by  the  Central  Government  from
amongst the officials of its ministries or departments, who have practical
experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilitation with adequate
knowledge of accounting and management not below the rank of Joint
Secretary.
d) One member from the Indian Audit and Accounts service not below
the rank of Accountant General.
e) Five members nominated by the Central Government to represent
the interests of the general public. These may belong to NGOs, media
(print and electronic), legal or medical profession, chartered accountants.
5.2.4 Responses to the Consultation Paper
5.2.4.1Department  of  Personnel  &  Training: In  response  to  the
Consultation Paper, the Department  of Personnel and Training (DoPT),
Government of India has drawn our attention on one O.M. No.3115/99-
Estt. dated 18.11.1999 of the said Department, which provides that any
Chairperson and Member(s) of Regulatory Authority, Statutory bodies and
Tribunals, who, on the date of his appointment to such Authority or body
was in the service of the Central/State Government shall be deemed to
66

have retired from such service with effect from the date of his respective
appointment as such Chairman/Member.  However, this provision will not
apply to the cases where the provisions in the statutes under which the
body is constituted contain a provision contrary to the aforesaid OM.  The
DoPT  has  stated  that  prerequisite  and  other  terms  and  conditions  of
Chairperson and other members should be strictly as per the above O.M.
The  O.M.  further  provides  that  pay  upon  such  appointment  as
Chairman/Member, will  be regulated  in accordance with the prevailing
orders of Govt. of India applicable to the reemployed pensioners, i.e. pay
minus pension.
5.2.4.2Maharashtra State Law Commission has expressed its view that in
the proposed Regulatory Authority, majority of members are bureaucrats.
It is stated that though they may be in a better position to regulate and
monitor the functioning of the collections and distributions with necessary
integrity and ability, still  they suffer from certain problems like delay,
technicality, lack of proper approach etc.  The State Law Commission has
proposed and suggested that for maintaining balance and equilibrium, an
equal number of members both from the bureaucrats and others like social
workers  etc.  should  be  taken.   State  Law  Commission  has  further
suggested that there should be one post of Joint Secretary, to be filled in
from those social workers or NGOs etc.
5.2.4.3The Ministry of Defence, Government of India has suggested that a
representative of the Defence Forces of the level of Adjutant General or
equivalent  may  be  included  in  the  proposed  Regulatory  Authority  to
oversee the interests of the defence personnel and their families.   It is
67

further suggested that a representative of the concerned State Government
may also be co-opted.
5.2.4.4Department of Power, Government of West Bengal has suggested
that apart from the Central Regulatory Authority, there should also be a
State Level Regulatory Authority.
5.2.4.5Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, Haryana in his response has made
a suggestion that in the proposed Regulatory Authority, higher officials of
State level should also be included.
5.2.4.6Government of Kerala, however, has not agreed to the proposal of
having  a  Regulatory  Authority.    It  is  stated  in  their  response  that
calamities are not a continuous  phenomenon.    There are of sporadic
occurrence and for that purpose there is no need to set up a permanent
machinery.
5.2.5 Our Discussion
5.2.5.1Past Experience:
In the past various Regulatory Authorities have been established by
the Central  Government under different  statutes. For  example, there is
Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority  (IRDA)  established
under  the  IRDA  Act  1999,  Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  under  the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act 1997, Electricity Authority and
Electricity  Regulatory  Commission  under  the  Electricity  Act  2003,
68

Security and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) under the SEBI Act 1992,
Central Pollution Control Board under the Water (P&Co) Pollution Act
1974.  
These Authorities generally consist of (a) Chairman (b) Full Time
Members (c) Part-Time Members, appointed or nominated by the Central
Government.  These members may be officials of the Government or non-
officials  also.  Full  time  members  and  Chairman  get  salary  and  other
benefits while part-time members normally get allowances and fees.
5.2.5.2In view of the O.M. of DoPT, Govt. of India, it is now proposed that
the Regulatory Authorities should consist of (a) Chairman; (b) One Part-
time member who is expert in matters relating to rehabilitation who shall
be from the Central Government not below the rank of Joint Secretary; (c)
One Part-time member who must be from the Indian Audit and Accounts
Service not below the rank of Accountant General; (d) Three Part-time
non-official  members to  represent  general public.  This  would  make a
committee of six members of whom three are non-governmental members.
5.2.5.3In respect of suggestion made by the Ministry of Defence, that in
the Regulatory Authority a representative of the Defence Force should be
included, we are not proposing that when the calamity in regard to which
collections are made relates  or concern to Defence Forces, a Part-time
Member  from  the  Defence  Force  of  the  level  of  Adjutant  General  or
equivalent may be co-opted.
69

5.2.5.4The view of the Maharashtra State Law Commission that in the
proposed  Regulatory  Authority, majority  of  the  members  are  from the
bureaucracy, has been taken into consideration, though the said statement
is not wholly correct.  In the Consultation Paper, it was proposed that five
members  including  Member-Secretary, will come from the bureaucracy
and five members were proposed from the general public.  In the final
recommendation, we are now proposing six members and at least three
will be non-officials as stated earlier.  
5.2.5.5In respect of suggestions  of the Department  of Power, Govt. of
West  Bengal  that  a  State  level  Regulatory  Authority  should  also  be
established, we are of the view that if any State Government deems it fit, it
may establish a State level Regulatory Authority by issuing an executive
order.  Even a State law can be enacted for that purpose.  It is upto the
State Government to take appropriate decision in this regard.
5.2.5.6We do not agree with the view of the Kerala Government that a
Regulatory Authority is not necessary.   It appears that they only meant
that there is no need for a permanent Regulatory Authority with a large
number of permanent members.  We agree calamities occur only once in a
few years.   But now, we are proposing one Chairman (ex officio) and the
rest will be Part-time Members.    Hence, expenses can be saved.
5.2.6 Therefore,  we  recommend  that  the  Central  Government  shall
establish  a  Regulatory  Authority  to  be  described  as  'Contribution
Regulatory Authority' consisting of --
70

(a) A Chairperson, having special knowledge or practical experience
in  respect  of  matters  relating  to  relief  and  rehabilitation  of
victims  of  calamities  with  adequate  knowledge  of  law,
accounting and management of funds or grants, to be nominated
by the Central Government.  The Chairperson will be a person
holding a post not below the rank of Secretary to the Government
of India.  The Chairperson shall hold this office in addition to the
post he is holding. 
(b) One  part-time  member  having  special  knowledge  or  practical
experience  in  respect  of  matters  relating  to  relief,  welfare  or
rehabilitation  with  adequate  knowledge  of  accounting  and
management of funds or grants to be nominated by the Central
Government.   He shall be a person who is holding a post not
below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Central Government.
(c) One  part-time  member  to  be  nominated  by  the  Central
Government from the members of Indian Audit and Accounts
Service not below the rank of Accountant General.
(d) Three  part-time  members  to  be  nominated  by  the  Central
Government to represent  the interest of general public. These
may be  NGOs, media,  legal  or medical  profession,  Chartered
Accountants, social workers.
(e) If the calamity in regard to which collections are made, relates or
concerns Defence Forces, a part-time Member from the Defence
Forces not below the rank of Adjutant General or equivalent may
be co-opted by the Regulatory Authority.
5.2.7 Place of sitting  : 
71

The place of the head office of the Regulatory Authority may be
such as may be notified by the Central Government.  However, under the
Act, the Regulatory Authority is to be empowered to hold its sittings in the
form of a camp or circuit at the place where the natural or other man made
calamity has occurred and also at such other place where substantial part
of contributions or donations are collected or are being distributed.  The
Central Government shall also prescribe rules of procedure which will be
followed  by  the  Regulatory  Authority  in  regard  to  the  transaction  of
business  at its  meeting  including  quorum.  But  the  time and  place  of
meeting shall be decided by the Chairman.
5.2.8  Finances:
It is obvious that the Regulatory Authority will require necessary
funds to meet various expenditure, which includes payment of allowances,
other administrative expenditure and miscellaneous expenses.   Therefore,
it is recommended that the Central Government shall provide necessary
funds required, so that the Regulatory Authority may perform its functions
effectively.
The Regulatory Authority shall deposit all monies received by it
including those received from the Central Government or by way of any
fees or otherwise in an account in a nationalised bank. This account of the
Authority shall be applied for the purpose of meeting all its expenditure.
5.2.9  Maintenance of accounts by the Authority
72

5.2.9.1As mentioned earlier, the main task of the Regulatory Authority is
to  work  as  watchdog  over  the  collection  and  distribution  of  the
contributions  and  donations  and  to  oversee  that  proper  accounts  are
maintained by the persons and agencies who have collected the funds.
It has also to see that there is no misuse of the contributions, and,
therefore  it  becomes  imperative  that  the  funds  and  accounts  of  the
Authority  itself  are  maintained  properly  and  in  transparent  manner.
Therefore, we recommend that the Regulatory Authority shall maintain
proper  accounts  and  other relevant  records  of its  funds  and  shall  also
prepare  an  annual  statement  of  accounts,  in  such  form which  may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.  The accounts  of the Authority shall be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5.2.9.2In subsequent paragraphs, we shall be referring to a proposal that
the Regulatory Authority shall have power to seize any contribution in
case  it  finds  that  any  person  or  agency  is  found  misusing  or
misappropriating the contributions and donations.  
5.2.9.3All these contributions and donations and amount recovered by the
Regulatory Authority should not be mixed with the other amounts of the
Regulatory Authority and should be kept separate by the Authority.  It is
public money, it cannot be used by the Authority for the expenditure of the
Authority.   In  fact,  if  the  collectors  of  the  monies  were  trustees,  the
moneys received from the collectors, will, in the hands of the Regulatory
73

Authority be of the same character and will be trust money.  Therefore, we
recommend  that  the  Regulatory  Authority  shall  keep  and  maintain  a
separate account of all the contributions or donations received, seized, or
recovered  by  it.  The  Regulatory  Authority  shall   be  empowered  to
distribute this contribution to any other authorised person or agency, or to
victims of calamity in connection with the similar calamity or disaster,
natural or man-made.  In case there is any surplus, it must deposit it in any
fund set up by the Central Government or handed over to some other
authorized person, body or agency.  A statement of all the receipts and
distribution under this head has to be prepared by the Authority. Such
statements of accounts shall also have to be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.
5.3 Registration as Authorised Person or Agency
5.3.1 In order to regulate the collection of contributions and donations, it
is necessary that they should be collected only by those who are authorised
to collect it.  We find that under some State enactments, such as the one in
force in Maharashtra, every charity is required to be registered.  No doubt,
some State Acts contain provisions for action if a person or organization
does not register and still indulges in collections and misappropriation.
But, it must be noted that the present effort is to make a special law to deal
speedily with collections  and  donations  made to  private  individuals  or
organisations during calamities and disasters.  As of now, in the wake of
any  calamity  or  disaster  anybody  can  start  collection  of  contributions
without any kind of authorization. There is no check which ensure that
only genuine persons or agency can collect.  It is proposed that collections
74

made by any unauthorized agency or persons will be an offence.  In order
to save delays, we are providing for provisional registration also. Absence
of  any  kind  of  mechanism  to  check  may  lead  to  allow  misuse  and
misappropriation of contributions so collected.
5.3.2 That was why, therefore, it was proposed in the Consultation Paper
that after the coming into force of the proposed enactment, no person or
agency shall be entitled to collect contributions unless it is get registered
itself as 'Authorised person or agency', either provisionally or finally.
5.3.3 As the office of the proposed Regulatory Authority shall be only at
one place, we felt that it will cause great inconvenience to the persons if
we require that all applications for registration have to be made to the
Regulatory Authority.  It is more appropriate that place of registration as
Authorised person, body or agency must be easily accessible to the persons
in the local area, where the calamity or disaster occurred or to places near
about.  It should also be accessible easily for any person or organization to
start collections, at places where there is likelihood of large donations or
contributions.  Therefore, in the Consultation Paper it was proposed that
application for registration can be submitted to the 'District Collector' of
any District  where the person applying actually resides or body or agency
applying  has  its  place  of work.  Applications  can  also  be  made  to  the
District Collector of such District where the contribution is proposed to be
collected and where relief or rehabilitation is proposed to be provided.
5.3.4 The Collector after inquiry and verifying the facts narrated in the
application and seeing the documents filed in support of the application,
75

may either register the person or body or refuse to register.  Procedure
required to be followed by the Collector for deciding the application, was
also mentioned in the Consultation Paper.  It was also proposed that in
case the Collector rejects the application for registration, aggrieved party
can  prefer  an  appeal  to  the  Regulatory  Authority.   Provision  for
provisional registration was also mentioned in the Consultation Paper.
5.3.5 It is necessary that only those persons or bodies should be allowed
to collect contributions who have some kind of experience in the field of
social service.  Therefore, it was proposed that in respect of eligibility to
obtain registration, such person or body or agency should have at least
three years experience in social service.
At the same time it is also necessary that persons or bodies whose
track record is not sound, should not be allowed to raise the contributions.
To  achieve  this  purpose, it  was  proposed  that  a person  should  not  be
registered, (a) if he was adjudged as insolvent under the Insolvency law or
(b) if he is a person against whom either charges have been framed by the
court or (c) if he is a person who has been convicted by a court for an
offence involving moral turpitude or (d) if he is a person or body who is
already debarred or banned under any law or under order issued by the
government,  such  person  or  organization  shall  not  be  entitled  for
registration.
5.3.6 Responses to Consultation Paper
76

In  response  to  the  Consultation  Paper,  there  were  only  few
suggestions  made  in  respect  of  provisions  relating  to  registration  of
authorised person or agency.
5.3.6.1Legislative Department, Govt. of West Bengal, is not in favour of
laying down the requirement of three years experience in social service for
registration because according to them it is likely to frustrate the object of
providing relief to disaster victims, as this requirement of experience will
exclude well-meaning organisations, bodies or persons who may otherwise
be ready and willing to generously contribute towards relief work.
5.3.6.2We  would  like  to  make  it  clear  that  we  never  intended  that
registration  is  necessary for all persons  doing all types of social work
during  calamities.   We only  stated  that  for  collecting  contributions  or
donations  for  providing  relief  to  disaster  victims,  at  least  three  years
experience  in social  work  is  necessary.  If any person  or organisation
wants  to  engage  in  relief  work  without  any  kind  of  collection  of
contribution, it can certainly do it without any registration.  But when such
person or organisation intends to collect contribution, it is in the interest of
the general public that such person or organisation should be screened and
for that purpose, he should have at least three years of experience in the
field of social service.
5.3.6.3In respect of the Commission's proposal in the Consultation Paper
that when a person is provisionally registered, he can collect contributions
but  cannot  disburse it till final  decision  is  taken  by the Collector,  the
Legislative  Department  of  Govt.  of   West  Bengal  has  stated  that  this
77

proposal may prove to be self defeating in as much as this will unduly
delay  the  whole  process  of  providing  relief  and  distribution  of  relief
materials to the victims, which is opposed to the very object of raising
such relief fund. It was urged that such provision either may be omitted or
relaxed in some genuine cases.
5.3.6.4The main purpose for allowing provisional registration is to allow
the  collection  of  contribution  without  awaiting  final  orders  on  the
application for registration, in case of urgency.  The Collector is supposed
to  take  final  decision  expeditiously.   Persons  or  bodies  who  are
provisionally  registered,  and  accordingly  have  started  collection  of
contributions are supposed to wait only for a short period, for distribution
of such contributions so collected.  Moreover, we have to maintain some
distinction  between  those  who  have  been  provisionally  registered  and
those who have got registration finally.  A person or organization, once
registered need not apply again and again.  If persons or organisations who
are provisionally registered, are allowed to distribute the contribution, and
ultimately if their application for registration is rejected, then the main
object of making a provision for mandatory registration for collection of
contributions would certainly be defeated and it may also encourage back
door  entry  of  non-eligible  persons  or  organisations.  As  stated  above,
registration is required only at one time.  It is not necessary that for every
calamity,  fresh  registration  is  needed.   When  once  any  person  or
organisation is registered, and is maintaining proper accounts and is filing
the required returns regularly, he or it can collect contributions whenever
there is a calamity or disaster and distribute the contributions.  The result is
that the views of the Govt. of West Bengal are, in our view, not tenable.
78

5.3.6.5The  Maharashtra  State  Law  Commission  has  suggested  that
registration shall be for a period of three to five years.  It is also suggested
that  there  should  also  be  special  registration  for  a  short  period  for  a
particular calamity.
5.3.6.6We have considered this suggestion closely, but we are of the view
that there is no need to prescribe a period during which the registration
shall be in force.  Once a person or organisation is registered (unless the
registration is suspended or cancelled), it can collect the contributions and
distribute  it,  subject  to  the  procedure  followed  by  such  person  or
organisation, in regard to maintaining the proper accounts and filing of
required  returns.  Similarly, registration  for a shorter period is  also not
required  because  there  cannot  be  two  sets  of  duties  required  to  be
performed, one by those who are registered for shorter period and one by
those  who  are  registered  for  longer  period.   When  the  duties  and
obligations are same, it will not serve any purpose for providing two kinds
of registration.
5.3.6.7It has also been urged by the Maharashtra Law Commission that
upon receiving the application for registration, the Collector should make
an enquiry to verify the correctness of facts stated in the application and
ascertain  the  eligibility  and  fitness  of  applicant  for  registration.  These
measures have already been suggested in the Consultation Paper itself.  An
application can be rejected on such enquiry and the provisional registration
shall automatically come to an end.
79

5.3.6.8In  regard  to  Commission's  proposal  for  appeal  before  the
Regulatory  Authority  against  the  order  of  refusal  of  registration  or
cancellation of registration by the Collectors, it has been suggested by the
Maharashtra Law Commission that the said appeal should lie before the
proposed  Judicial  Authority  and  a  revision  may  be  provided  to  the
Regulatory  Authority. Reason  behind  this  suggestion,  as  stated,  is  the
office of the Regulatory Authority is likely to be at Delhi, and it would be
very  difficult,  expensive  and  time  consuming  specially  for  small  and
sincere agencies to prefer appeal at Delhi.
5.3.6.9The function of the proposed Judicial Authority (as proposed in the
Consultation Paper) was to entertain and dispose off complaints against
any person or agency in relation to alleged misappropriation, misuse or not
utilisation  of any contribution  collected  or received  by such  person  or
agency.  The Commission’s view was that proposed Judicial Authority is
not  to  deal  with  the  cases  relating  to  the  administrative  functions  of
Collector.   Order  of  refusal  or  cancellation  of  registration  is  an
administrative function, however, subject to the principle of natural justice
being followed.  Therefore, it is not desirable to suggest appeal before the
Judicial Authority against the order of Collector regarding registration and
cancellation  of  registration.  Further,  providing  revision  before  the
Regulatory Authority against the order of Judicial Authority, as suggested
by the State Commission cannot be said to be appropriate.  Therefore, we
propose to retain the proposal of an appeal to the Regulatory Authority
5.3.6.10The Department of Power, Govt. of West Bengal is of the view
that  the  procedure  for  registration  is  cumbersome  and  needs  to  be
80

simplified.  We do not see how it can be made more simpler, without
sacrificing public interest.   Procedure for registration suggested by us is a
simple one.  In fact, the above Department has not come forward with a
simpler procedure.
5.3.6.11In another response, the Deputy Commissioner, Yamuna Nagar
(Haryana) has requested that some modalities may be worked out, such as
where  once  application  of  a  person  for  registration  is  rejected  by the
Collector, he should not be able to get himself registered in the office of
any other Collector in the country. This idea has already been suggested in
the Consultation Paper at para 3.3.1.  We reiterate our proposal in the
Consultation Paper and recommend accordingly.
5.3.7 In view of the above discussion, final recommendations of the Law
Commission in regard to registration are as follows:
Final recommendations as to Registration: mandatory registration & other
procedures
i) From the date of commencement of the proposed  legislation, no
person,  or  body  or  agency  shall  collect  or  receive  contributions  or
donations  for  the  purpose  of  providing  relief  or  rehabilitation  to  the
victims of any natural or other man-made  calamity or for welfare  and
rehabilitation  of  soldiers  and  their  family  members  who  are  killed  or
disabled in a war or other similar operation, unless such person or body or
agency is registered or provisionally registered as Authorised person or
agency  under  the  proposed  legislation.   Any  person,  body  or  agency
81

making collections contrary to the prohibition shall be guilty of an offence
of collection without such registration punishable with imprisonment upto
3  years  or  fine  upto  Rs.50,000  but  not  less  than  Rs.25,000  and  the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 will apply.   In the
case of such offence by non-individuals, the punishment shall be inflicted
on the persons mentioned hereinbelow.     
When an offence mentioned above is committed by any agency or
body, every person who at the time of commission of the offence, was in
charge of and was responsible for the conduct of business of such agency
or body, and the person who had collected the contribution as well as who
had made appeal for contribution, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence  and  shall  be  liable  to  be  proceeded  against  and  punished
accordingly.   However, any of the persons mentioned above shall not be
liable to  any punishment  if he proves  that  the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
For  the  removal  of  doubts,  it  is  made  it  clear  that  though  an
organisation, body or agency might be registered or recognized under any
other law, like, the Companies Act, 1956, Society Registration Act, Trust
Act or any other law applicable to charitable institutions, still registration
under  the  proposed  law,  as  Authorised  person,  body  or  agency  is
necessary, if the collections are proposed in the context of a calamity or
disaster.  Excepted categories are Government and Government agencies.
82

ii) Any  person,  body,  organisation  or  agency  may  apply  for
registration, to the Collector of any district in whose jurisdiction either,
(a) the person applying for registration actually resides or agency or
body applying has its principal office  or place of work; or
(b) the contribution or donations is proposed to be collected; or
(c) the relief or rehabilitation work is to be done.
Provided  that  only  one  application  shall  be  made  and  no  second
application will be maintainable unless the first application has been
rejected on technical grounds.
iii) Application for registration has to be made in the form and manner
prescribed by the Central Government.  However, it will be necessary for
every applicant to state the facts by way of an affidavit including details as
to whether any previous application for registration has been rejected by
any Collector, and if so, for what reasons.
iv) (a) A  person  or  body  or  agency  shall  not  be  eligible  for
registration unless he or it has three years experience in the field of
social service.
(b) A person or body or agency shall not be registered if such
person, body or agency has already been debarred or blacklisted or
banned under any law or instrument having force of law or under
any order issued by the Collector or the Government.
(c) A  person  shall  not  be  registered  if  (a)  he  is  adjudged  as
insolvent under Insolvency laws; or (b) against whom either charges
have been framed by the court or if he has been convicted by any
court, for an offence involving moral turpitude.
83

v) (a) Upon receiving the application for registration, the Collector
shall enquire and verify the correctness of the facts mentioned in the
application along with documents filed in support of application and
the  affidavit.   On  the  basis  of  the  findings  of such  inquiry, the
Collector  shall  either  register  such  person,  body,  or  agency;  or
refuse  to register as  Authorised  person  or agency and  reject  the
application.   However,  before  rejecting  any  application,  the
Collector shall give opportunity of hearing to the applicant and also
give reasons for rejecting the application.  Copy of the order of
rejection shall be given to the applicant.
(b) The  Collector  shall  decide  the  application  for  registration
within 15 days unless there are sufficient reasons to be recorded in
writing for not deciding the application in that period.
vi) Whenever there is an urgent need of collection of contributions, the
Collector  may  provisionally  register any  person  or  agency,  after  due
verification of particulars and fitness of such person or agency as the case
may be.  Provisional registration shall be valid till the final decision is
taken on the application, by the Collector.
vii) A person, body or agency who is provisionally registered, shall be
entitled to collect the contribution, but cannot distribute or utilize it till the
final decision on registration is taken and communicated.   No contribution
in cash or kind shall be collected without granting stamped receipts to the
donors.  All the monies collected shall be deposited in a nationalized bank
and proper account of all such collections has to be maintained.  In case
84

registration  of  such  person  or  agency  is  finally  refused,  all  the
contributions collected by such person or agency shall vest in the Collector
and he may make appropriate orders for attachment of such contributions
and their seizure and their distribution.
Suspension or Cancellation of Registration
viii) I.  Registration  of  any  person  or  agency  or  organisation  can  be
cancelled by the Collector – 
(a) If such person is adjudged as insolvent under Insolvency law
applicable to him; or
(b) If charges have been framed by any court against such person
for alleged involvement in an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(c) If such  person  is  convicted  by any  court  for  committing  an
offence involving moral turpitude; or
(d) If  such  person,  body  or  agency  does  not  comply  with  the
directions issued by the Regulatory Authority or Collector; or
(e) If such person, body or agency violates any provision of the
proposed enactment or any rules made thereunder.
Provided,  no  registration  shall  be  cancelled,  unless  an
opportunity of being heard is given to such person or agency.
II. During  the  pendency  of  the  inquiry  proposing  cancellation,  the
Collector may suspend the registration or the provisional registration.
85

III. The  Collector  shall  communicate  his  decision  on  registration,
provisional registration, suspension or cancellation of registration along
with reasons to such person, body or agency. 
IV. The Collector shall make public announcement of every decision on
the  question  of  registration,  provisional  registration,  suspension  or
cancellation  of  registration  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  Central
Government.  The  Collector  shall  forthwith  also  communicate  all  these
decisions  to  the  Regulatory  Authority  and  the  said  Authority  shall
immediately publish the information on website so that the applicant may
not apply before any Collector, by furnishing incorrect or misleading facts.
V. Whenever the registration of a person, body or agency is cancelled,
all unutilized contributions, possessed  by such  person, body or agency
shall stand vested in the Collector inasmuch as it is difficult to identify the
individual donors in relation to the unspent money.   The Collector shall
use the said sum only for matters connected with disaster relief.
(ix) Any  person  or  agency  aggrieved  by  the  order  of  the  Collector
rejecting the application for registration, or cancelling the registration, may
prefer an appeal to the Regulatory Authority within 30 days of the receipt
of the order.
(x) The Regulatory Authority shall maintain and update the data of all
registered persons and agencies and details of those in respect of whom
applications  of registration have been  rejected  by the Collector  and  in
respect of those whose registrations have been cancelled and put them on
86

its website so that all District Collectors may check the same to see if a
person or body whose application has been rejected is making application
elsewhere.
(xi) Once a person or agency is registered at any place, it shall be lawful
for it to collect or receive contribution from any part of the country or even
from outside  the  country and  distribute  the  same but  those  who  have
provisionally  registered  shall  not  be  entitled  to  disburse  the  same.
However, collections from outside the country shall be in accordance with
the laws governing remittances of monies from abroad.
(xii) Any person, body or agency whose application for registration is
rejected by the Collector of any district, he or it shall not be eligible to get
it registered at any other district.  However, this rule will not be applicable
where a registration is refused for want of some technical formalities or
want of sufficient experience in social work.
5.4 No collections to be made without passing receipts:
5.4.1 There is a need to maintain financial discipline, in collecting the
contributions.   Apart  from the mandatory registration  for collection  of
contributions, it is equally necessary that the authorised person or agency
while receiving any contribution in cash or kind, should give a proper
receipt to the donor.  Such receipt shall be valid proof of donation, in the
hands of donors.  The Authorised person, body or agency who or which
has  collected  such  contribution  can  be  held  accountable  for  such
contribution on the basis of the above receipt.  
87

5.4.2 In the Consultation Paper, it was proposed that every authorised
person or agency while collecting any contribution, shall issue a stamped
receipt of its collection to the donor.  
5.4.3 The  Commission  has received  few suggestions  for making  this
provision  more  stringent.  Deputy  Commissioner,  Yamuna  Nagar
(Haryana) has  suggested  that receipt books  shall be submitted in the
office of Collector and authenticated by the Collector, so that authorised
person or agency may not misuse the receipt books.   Similar kind of
suggestion has been made by the Maharashtra State Law Commission,
which states that these receipts should be used only from the authorised
book and which are to be distributed from the government office only.
Citizen  Welfare  Council,  Rup  Nagar  (Punjab),  which  is  a  registered
body,  has  stated  that  there  should  be  no  printed  receipts  by  any
individual, club or society without the permission of the government and
the printing press involved in the printing of such receipt books should
also be made answerable under the law. Some of these above suggestions
are certainly good and can be accepted.
5.4.4 We recommend  that,  every authorised  person  or agency, while
receiving any contribution in cash or kind, shall issue a stamped receipt
for receiving  such contribution,  and the receipt shall be given to the
donor of such contributions. Receipt shall be given from a receipt book,
authenticated by the Collector in the manner prescribed by the Central
Government under the Rules. Such receipt should clearly mention the
88

name and full address of authorised person or agency, name and full
address of donor, details in regard to the contributions, such as the total
amount of cash or cheque or demand draft and details of other items in
kind and the purpose for which such donations are given, date and place
of receiving the contributions, name, address and signature of the person
who has received such contributions.  The receipt book must be a printed
one  and  the  name  and  address  of  the  printing  press  should  also  be
indicated in the receipt.  A duplicate copy or counterfoil of receipt should
be kept by authorised person, body or agency.  The receipt must be a
receipt duly stamped according to the law application for collection of
such stamp-duty in that locality.     The person collecting can use a
rubber stamp to indicate his or its name, at the appropriate place in the
receipt.
No printing press shall print the receipts for the aforesaid purpose,
without the written authority of the Collector.
5.5 Maintenance of proper accounts.
5.5.1 A number of suggestions  were made in the Consultation Paper
regarding maintenance of proper accounts by authorized person, body or
agency.  Each agency must nominate a person to be called ‘authorised
person’ who will be in charge of maintenance of accounts.  One of the
main objects of recommending suitable legislation is to curb malpractices
on the part of persons or body, who collect the donations.  These persons
and agencies should therefore be obligated to maintain a fair and proper
account and record of collections.  
89

5.5.2 The Maharashtra State Law Commission in its response has stated
that the contributions should be deposited in the name of the agency in
the  Schedule  Bank  on  a  day  to  day  basis.   But  its  withdrawal  and
disbursement  should  be  under  the  direction  of  the   Collector  in  the
manner stated and consistent with the special and general directions of
the Regulatory Authority.
5.5.3 The Govt. of West Bengal, Deptt. of Power has suggested that
Receipt Heads can be created in the District Treasuries, in which cheques
collected  by  authorised  person  or  agency  have  to  be  compulsorily
deposited.   The Treasury Officer may issue cheque against bills drawn
by the Collector on account of specific schemes.  The scheme should be
vetted  by  the  Regulatory  Authority  on  the  recommendations  of  a
committee  formed  by  the  District  Magistrate  from  among  the
representatives of the authorised persons or agencies and Govt. officials,
who will remain responsible for selection of beneficiaries and scheme. In
the Metropolitan cities, the branches of the Reserve Bank of India may
be involved.
5.5.4 We  have  considered  these  suggestions.   As  stated  above,  the
purpose of regulating the contribution is to curb the misuse of funds.  At
the same time, if there are too many procedures prescribing restrictions
or controls, the very purpose of speedy aid to the victims of disaster, will
be frustrated.  We do not want to take away the right of the person or
agency to provide speedy relief to the victims.  All that is required is
regulation of the whole process of collection and distribution.  Too much
90

of  involvement  of  government  and  administrative  machinery  in  the
process of providing relief will lead to red-tapism and delay.
5.5.5 For the purpose of maintaining proper accounts, we recommend
that the proposed legislation should contain provisions to the following
effect:
i) Every authorised person or body or agency should maintain an
account  with  a  nationalized  bank,  where  all  monetary
contributions shall be deposited forthwith, i.e. to say immediately
after receiving the same.
ii) Every authorised person or body or agency should also maintain
proper accounts of all contributions collected and distributed or
spent by it, in accounts books maintained in the ordinary course.  
iii) The legislation may permit rules in regard to the following:  (a) A
register  must  be  maintained  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the
donations are distributed.   The account book shall be maintained
on a day-to-day basis.  (b) There should be correlation between
the accounts and the Register.  (c) The details of the distribution
must be such that there can, if need be, proper verification of the
distributions.  (d) Where the money is utilised for purchase of
clothes, utensils or food items or other articles or goods, the bills
must be preserved for verification.  (e) Monthly returns of the
account have to be furnished to the Collector in-charge of the
area  where  the office  of the  authorized  person,  body, agency
which has collected the donation, is located.
91

iv) Every authorised person or body or agency should inform the
Collector immediately about the receipt of money or item in kind,
the name of the donors, and other details as may be prescribed.
v) Annual audit of the accounts has to be conducted by a qualified
chartered accountant and the audit report should also be sent to
the Collector as well as to the Regulatory Authority within such
time as may be prescribed.
vi) The concerned nationalized Bank where the deposits are made
shall also submit monthly statements of account of the authorised
person,  body  or  agency  to  the  Collector  and  the  Regulatory
Authority.    This is for the purpose of verifying the information
that may have been furnished by the authorized person or body or
agency to the Collector.
vii) The person, body or agency should submit a half-yearly report of
its  activities  and  accounts  to  the  Collector  and  Regulatory
Authority.
5.6 Other duties of authorised person or agency
Apart from the regulation of the collections of these contributions, it
is equally necessary that the utilisation of such contributions should also
be monitored and regulated.  In this regard, certain duties of authorised
persons or bodies or agencies were proposed in the consultation paper.
5.6.1 These were as follows:  (a) there should not be any kind of diversion
of the contributions to other purposes.  The contribution should be utilized
by authorised person or agency only for the purpose for which it was
92

collected or received.  Any kind of diversion of fund will amount to breach
of trust;  (b) no authorised person or body or agency shall, in the matter of
distribution of the donations discriminate against any person on the ground
of caste, religion, rank, language or sex; (c) after providing relief, if any,
the contributions is left unutilized in the hands of any authorised person,
body or agency, such person or agency should hand over such unutilized
contribution to any fund set up by the Central or State Government or to
the Regulatory Authority or Collector; (d) every Authorised person, body
or  agency  shall  co-oporate  and  give  full  assistance  to  the  Regulatory
Authority and the Collector while discharging their duties prescribed under
the law.
5.6.2 On the question  of prohibition  of diversion of contributions, the
Govt. of West Bengal, Legislative Deptt. has opined that absolute and total
prohibition on diversion of contributions is not desirable in as much as
such  total  and  absolute  restriction  will  prevent  the  well  meaning
organisation etc. from using or applying the unutilized funds toward the
welfare and relief of disaster victims.  Therefore, it was suggested by the
Govt. of West Bengal that instead of imposing a total ban on diversion of
unutilized contribution, a relaxation may be provided by incorporating a
provision to the effect that such diversion may be allowed subject to prior
permission of the Regulatory Authority.
5.6.3 We may clarify that when we stated in the Consultation Paper that
diversion of funds  must be prohibited, we meant  that funds  should be
utilized only for the  purpose for which they were collected.  It should not
be utilized for any other purposes.  For example, if a fund was collected for
93

providing  relief  to  the  victims  of  a  particular  disaster  such  as  an
earthquake, the donations should be spent and utilized for giving relief to
the victims of that particular earthquake.  It should not be utilized for some
other relief operation, say for construction of a school building at another
place which is not affected by earthquake.  Otherwise, it will be a violation
of the purpose of the collection and also of the wishes of the donors.  It is
the paramount duty of the authorised person, body or agency which has
made the collection that it should honour the wishes of the donors.  They
should utilise and distribute the collections in terms of the wishes of the
donors.   After  providing  total  relief  and  rehabilitation  in  terms of the
wishes  of  the  donors,  if  any  amount  or  other  items  in  kind  are  left
unutilized, it will be necessary, in our view, that such funds and items be
handed over to the Collector or the Regulatory Authority for utilization for
relief in other calamities or disasters.
5.6.4 Cypres Doctrine
5.6.4.1In this connection we would like to refer to the ‘Cypres Doctrine’ as
applicable to trusts.  It literally means ‘as near to’.  It is a rule in equity
which  may be  stated  thus:  ‘when  a  definite  function  or  duty  is  to  be
performed, and it can not be done in exact conformity with the scheme of
the person or persons who have provided for it, the duty may be performed
with  as  close  an  approximation  to  that  scheme  as  is  reasonably
practicable.’  (see The Law Lexicon by P.R. Aiyar).
In England, the law distinguishes between the charitable intention
and the mode of executing it.  The particular mode of application indicated
94

by the donor is not considered to be of the essence of the gift and the law
make provision for charitable intention to be carried into effect.  ‘Cypres’,
that is to say, by substituting for the mode indicated by the donor, by
another mode as similar as possible to the mode indicated.  (see Tudor on
Charities – Published by Sweet & Maxwell (1967) page 215).
5.6.4.2 Cases in UK
Arden M. R. in Attorney Genl. Vs. Bourtbec (1876) 2vs 380 (387)
has  held  that  in  cases  where  the  execution  of  a  trust  cannot  be  done
literally as intended by the author of the trust, another mode of execution
may be adopted, considered with the general intention of the author.  If the
mode  prescribed  by  the  instrument  of  trust  becomes,  by  subsequent
circumstances, impossible, the general object is not to be defeated if it can
be attained by other means consistent with the object of the trust.
In ReWelsh Hospital (Netley) Fund (1921) 1 Ch.655, there had been
a generous response by large and small subscribers to an appeal to the
public in Wales, launched in 1914, to give money to establish a hospital
for  sick and wounded Welsh soldiers.  The hospital was built, equipped
and  maintained  by voluntary subscription  and  donations  until  the  year
1919.  When it was closed, its staff was disbanded and its assets were sold
to the war office.  The trustees of the fund had a large surplus in their
hands.   P.O. Lawrence J. held that it must be applied cypress under a
scheme.  The learned Judge held that subscribers had intended to part with
their  money  out  and  out  and  they  had  intention  to  benefit  sick  and
wounded Welshmen.  Similarly, in  Re North Devon and  West Somerset
95

Relief Fund Trusts (1953) (2) ALLER 1032 (already referred to) the public
had  responded  generously  to  an  appeal  for  funds  for the  relief  of  the
victims of a flood disaster.  After all the victims had been relatively a large
surplus was left in the hands of the trustees of the fund.   Wynn Parry J.
held that this surplus must be applied cypres for other charitable purposes.
He said that the main underlying object of the appeal was to benefit the
people of ‘the district’ in question.
5.6.4.3 Indian Cases
The Supreme Court of India in  Ratilal vs.  State of Bombay, AIR
1954 SC 388, considered the provisions of ss.55 and 56 of the Bombay
Public Trusts Act, 1950.  These sections purport to lay down how the
doctrine of cypres is to be applied in regard to the administration of public
trust of a religious or charitable character.  The Supreme Court held:
“The  doctrine  of ‘Cypres’ as developed  by the Equity Courts  in
England, has been adopted by our Indian Courts since a long time
past”.
The Supreme Court also said:
“When the particular purpose for which a charitable trust is created,
fails or by reason of certain circumstances the trust cannot be carried
into effect either in whole or in part, or where there is a surplus left
after  exhausting  the  purposes  specified  by the  settler,  the  Court
96

would not, when there is a general charitable intention expressed by
the settler, allow the trust to fail but would execute it ‘cypres’ that is
to say, in some way as nearly as possible to that which the author of
thel trust intended.” (page 19).
5.6.4.4Section  83  of  the  Indian  Trusts  Act,  1882,  provides  that  if  for
certain  reasons  the  trust  is  incapable  of  being  executed,  or  where  the
purpose  of  the  trust  is  fulfilled  without  exhausting  the  trust  properly
completely, the trustees must hold the trust property as a whole or the
residuary as the case may be, for the benefit of the settler of the trust.  In
State of U.P. vs. Bansi Dhar, AIR 1974 SC 1084, Kirhna Iyer J held that
though public charitable trusts are expressly excluded from the application
of the Indian Public Trusts Act, 1882, but certainly there is a common area
of legal principle which covers all trusts private and public.  The Supreme
Court ordered refund of the donation money made by the father of the
respondent for the purpose of establishment of the hospital, which could
not be built up.
5.6.4.5We are of the view, therefore, that a provision should be made in
the  proposed  law  that  if  any  amount  or  other  items  in  kind  are  left
unutilized in the hands of any authorized person, body or agency, it should
be handed over to the collector or Regulatory Authority, who or which as
per the ‘cypres’ doctrine shall transfer it to some other authorized person,
body or agency or to any fund set up by the Central or State Government,
to be used for the purpose of the calamities or disaster covered by the
proposed Act.
97

The first priority should thus be to utilize the collection only for the
purpose for which it was collected.  Any kind of relaxation to this rule as
suggested by the Govt. of West Bengal cannot be accepted.
5.6.5 Therefore, we recommend that, apart from the maintaining proper
accounts etc., every authorised person, body or agency should perform the
following other duties:
i) Every  authorised  person,  body  or  agency  should  utilize  the
contribution  exclusively  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was
collected.  There should not be any kind of diversion of such
contribution for a different purpose.
ii) Every  authorised  person,  body  or  agency  shall  utilize  the
contribution in the manner best suitable for the purpose for which
it was collected.
iii) Every  authorised  person,  body  or  agency,  shall  not  while
providing  relief  and  rehabilitation,  discriminate  against  any
victim  of  calamity  on  the  ground  of  religion,  race,  caste,
language sex, place of birth or residence.
iv) After providing total relief and rehabilitation to the victims of
calamity or war, if any contribution is left unutilized in the hands
of any authorised person, body or agency it shall hand over, such
unutilized  contribution  either  to  the  Collector  or  to  the
Regulatory  Authority  for  being  used  for  relief  in  any  other
calamity or disaster.  
v) Every authorised person or agency shall provide full cooperation
and assistance to the Regulatory Authority and the Collector in
the discharge of their functions and duties under the law.   Every
98

authorised person and agency shall also follow their directions
and instructions.
5.7Other powers,  functions  and duties of the Regulatory Authority
and the Collector
Apart from the powers relating to registration and cancellation of
registration and recovering the unutilized contributions from the person,
body or agency, the Regulatory Authority and the Collector shall have all
other powers to achieve the objects of the proposed law.  In this regard,
certain proposals were suggested in the Consultation Paper.
5.7.1 Earlier, we have recommended that the contributions can only be
collected  by  those  persons,  bodies  or  agencies  who  are  registered  as
authorised person, body or agency, either finally or provisionally.  When
registration is mandatory, it becomes necessary to see that no person or
agency shall collect contributions without registration.  And if collections
are made without such registration, the contributions collected by them
have to be recovered and appropriate action has also to be taken.  Every
person interested on the utilization of the collection, including a donor,
should be entitled to make a complaint to the Regulatory Authority or the
Collector  in  respect  of  collection  of  contribution  by  an  unregistered
person, body or agency.  As the Regulatory Authority and the Collector are
the main functionaries under the law, they should be authorised to deal
with such cases.  
99

Therefore, it is recommended that any person interested, as stated
above,  who  has  any  information  that  any  other  person  or  agency  is
collecting  or  receiving  contributions  without  registration  (final  or
provisional),  he  may  complain  to  the  Regulatory  Authority  or  the
Collector.  
The Regulatory Authority and  the Collector shall have power to
inquire  suo  motu or  upon  receiving  any  complaint  as  to  whether  any
person, body or agency which is not registered, is collecting or receiving
contribution.  If the  Regulatory Authority or the Collector, as the case may
be,  finds  that  any  person,  body  or  agency  is  collecting  contributions
without registration, it shall have power to attach, seize and recover such
contributions.  The Regulatory Authority or the Collector shall also have
power to attach, seize and recover other ancillary documents which are in
possession of such unregistered persons or agency.  
5.7.2 As mentioned in the earlier chapters, there can be allegations  of
misappropriation, diversion and misutilisation of contributions on the part
of  the  persons,  bodies  or  agencies  collecting  the  donations.   Such
misappropriation, diversion or misutilisation of contribution may be done
by person, body or agency who are registered and authorised to collect.  
 
Therefore, it is also recommended that it will open to any person
interested,  as  stated  above,  to  make  a  complaint  to  the  Regulatory
Authority  or  the  Collector  in  respect  of  any  misappropriation,
misutilisation or diversion by any person, body or agency.  The Regulatory
Authority or the Collector shall have power to inquire suo motu or upon
100

receiving any complaint, as  to whether any authorised person, body or
agency  is  misutilising,  misappropriating  or  diverting;  or  has
misappropriated, misutilised or diverted such contribution collected.    If
the  information  or  complaint  contains  prima  facie  material  or  basis
suggesting misutilisation or misappropriation, the Regulatory Authority or
the  Collector  can  suspend  the  registration  before  conducting  a  regular
inquiry, and exercise powers of attachment of the monies or contribution.
If the contributions relate to perishable items (such as fruits, cooked
food etc.) and the inquiry is likely to take time, the Collector or Regulatory
Authority may give possession thereof to some other registered person,
body or agency for distribution or sell them and keep the money in deposit.
If after enquiry, the Regulatory Authority or the Collector finds that
any authorised person, body or agency is misutilising or misappropriating
or diverting the contribution, any of these authorities shall have powers to
do following:
a) to direct the bank in which such person, body or agency is
maintaining his account to forthwith stop withdrawals of
any amount therefrom and to further direct the bank to
transfer  such  amount   to  the  account  of  some  other
authorised  person  or  agency,  or  to  any  fund  of  the
Centre/State Government;
b) to attach and seize the contributions, books of account or
other material from such persons, bodies or agencies and
for that purpose, enter the premises of such person, body
or agency with or without assistance of police;
101

c) to direct such authorised person or body or agency that any
contribution be handed over to the donor or to some other
authorised person or body or agency;
d) to direct such authorised person, body or agency to stop
further  collection  of contributions  and  to  stop  them for
distribution or utilization.
5.7.3 In order to regulate  the collection, distribution and utilisation  of
contribution,  we  recommend  that  the  Regulatory  Authority  and  the
Collector shall also have following powers:
a) to take such measures as they deem fit and expedient for
the  purpose  of  regulating  contributions  by  authorised
persons, bodies or agencies;
b) to ensure that the distribution  and the providing of relief
and  rehabilitation  by  any  authorised  person,  body  or
agency  is   accomplished  in  an  equitable  and  impartial
manner without any discrimination on the ground of race,
religion, caste, sex, language, residence, place of birth;
c) to call for any information about the collection and receipt
of  any  contribution  and  also  the  management  and
utilisation  of  such  contribution  from  any  authorised
person, body or agency;
d) to  issue  directions  to  any  authorised  person,  body  or
agency, about the manner of collection, management and
utilisation of contributions;
102

e) to  issue  directions  to  officials  of  the  Central  or  State
Government  engaged  in  relief  and  rehabilitation  work
related to natural and other calamities;
f) to collect or receive contributions and transfer them to any
Fund or authorised person, body or agency in the manner
prescribed;
g) to take appropriate proceedings, civil or criminal, in any
court or Tribunal against the authorised person, body or
agency  or  against  any  person  or  agency  which  is  not
registered or provisionally registered under the proposed
legislation; 
h) to do any other act for effectual discharge of the functions
of the said Regulatory Authority and the Collector; and
i) to take the assistance from govt. officials in the discharge
of their official functions.
5.8 Criminal and civil liability 
When any person, body or agency misappropriates or misuses any
contribution, civil as well as criminal action can be taken against such
person, body or agency under the existing laws, as stated below.
5.8.1 Remedy under criminal law
5.8.1.1 Misappropriation of contributions amounts to offence of criminal
breach of trust, which is defined in sec. 405 of the Indian Penal Code,
103

1860 and is punishable under sec. 406 to 409 of the IPC.   Sec. 405 of the
IPC is as follows:
“405. Criminal  breach  of  trust.-  Whoever,  being  in  any  manner
entrusted  with  property,  or  with  any  dominion  over  property,
dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property,
or dishonestly uses  or disposes  that  property in violation  of any
direction of law prescribing the mode in which is such trust is to be
discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied which he has
made touching the discharge of such trust, or willfully suffers any
other person so to do, commits “criminal breach of trust”.
Explanation 1………..
Explanation 2………..”
As stated earlier, whenever contributions are collected, necessarily a
trust is created and the trustees who violate the obligations cast upon them
by the authors of the trust (donor) become liable for breach of trust.  If the
trustees have not utilized the money, or have misutilised or diverted the
money or misappropriated the money, they are liable for criminal breach of
trust.  Offence of criminal breach of trust is punishable under sec. 406 of
the IPC, therefore there is no need to create a separate offence under this
proposed enactment.
Further, on the basis of the same or connected facts, there may be
forgery or wrong information being sent to the Collector or Regulatory
Authority, or other related offence – all in connection with the collection
104

and  distribution  of  contributions,  there  is  no  need  to  create  separate
offences.
But, in all such cases, we are proposing a special procedure as stated
below.
We have  already recommended  that  the Regulatory Authority as
well as the Collector can enquire into any allegation either suo motu or
upon any complaint made to it by any interested person that a person, body
or  agency  has  misappropriated  or  misused  the  contributions.    Any
interested person can make a complaint to the Regulatory Authority or the
Collector.  After conducting inquiry, if the Regulatory Authority or the
Collector finds that there are substances in the allegations, it can initiate
criminal proceedings against such person, body or agency.    ‘Interested
person’ means any person interested in seeing that the contributions are
not misused or misutilised and include donors.
5.8.1.2 The Regulatory Authority or the Collector can file a complaint
before  a  Judicial  Magistrate  First  Class  or  Metropolitan  Magistrate.
When a complaint is filed, it will have to be tried in accordance with the
procedure  prescribed  under  chapter  XIX  of  Criminal  Procedure  Code,
1973.    In this chapter, procedure for trial of warrant cases by magistrates
is  provided.   This  chapter  is  sub-divided  into  three  parts  –  Part  A
(governing the cases instituted on a police report), Part B (governing the
cases instituted otherwise than as police report and Part C (relating to
conclusion of trial).    The main difference between the procedure in Part A
and Part B is that in cases governed by Part A, the magistrate can frame
105

charges straightaway after perusing the police report and accompanying
documents.  Whereas in cases governed by Part B (i.e. in cases instituted
otherwise than as police report), the procedure is different and elaborate.
In such cases, the magistrate has to first hear the prosecution and take all
such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution and on
consideration of such evidence, he may either discharge the accused or
frame charges.    Thereafter, the accused is asked whether he pleads guilty
and if he denies the charge he will be asked to cross-examine the witnesses
and then the trial proceeds.    The reason behind the distinction is that, a
police report is filed pursuant to and as a result of investigation done by
the police or other independent agency, whereas in case of complaint, such
an investigation is absent.
But when the Regulatory Authority or the Collector while acting
under the proposed law, files complaint for criminal breach of trust or
related offences, necessarily they will inquire prior to filing the complaint
before the magistrate.  We are of the view that such complaint should be
proceeded with under Part A of chapter XIX of the CrPC 1973, as per our
recommendation stated below.
5.8.1.3  In  fact,  the  Law  Commission  in  its  178th Report  on
‘Recommendations  for  Amending  various  Enactments,  both  Civil  and
Criminal’  (2001)  considered  the  issue  of  procedure  followed  in  cases
where the authorities under the various enactments like Income-tax Act,
Central Excise Act, Customs Act, FERA/FEMA, ESI Act, 1948 and the
Companies Act, 1956, file complaints before the Criminal Court.   The
Law Commission recommended that such cases should be proceeded with
106

under Part A of chapter XIX of the CrPC.  The Law Commission observed
in the Report:
“It  must  be  provided  that  where  a  complaint  is  filed  by  the
appropriate  authority  under  any  of  the  aforesaid  enactments  or
similar enactment, it should be proceeded with Part A.   This is for
the reason that appropriate authorities under these enactments also
file complaints after a good amount of investigation, inquiry and
verification.”
It is further stated in the Report:
“Treating the complaints filed after such elaborate enquiry ought not
to be equated with the complaints filed by private individuals and
should not be subjected to the procedure in Part B of chapter XIX.
Applying Part B is resulting in inordinate delay in processing these
complaints, which in fact relate to economic offences, which must
be given priority over the ordinary law and order crimes.   It is just
and  appropriate  that  the  complaints  filed  by  the  appropriate
authorities under taxing enactments and other enactments mentioned
hereinabove, should be governed by the procedure contained in Part
A of chapter XIX.”
Consequently,  the  Commission  recommended  amendment  in
sections 190, 238, 239, 244, 249, 256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.  Further, substitution of heading of Part A and Part B under chapter
XIX  and  insertion  of  new  section  207A  was  also  recommended.   As
107

mentioned above, the purpose of recommending these amendments was
that “complaint made by a public servant acting or purporting to act in
discharge of his official duties”, should be governed by Part A of chapter
XIX of the CrPC, 1973.
5.8.1.4  Offence  of  criminal  breach  of  trust  and  related  offences  like
forgery,  wrong  information  etc.,  all  connected  with  collection  and
distribution  of  contributions,  when  committed  by  persons,  bodies  or
agencies, relate to contribution, is certainly an economic offence.  And
when  the  Collector  or  the  Regulatory  Authority  are  public  authorities
acting in discharge of their official duties prescribed under the proposed
law, and they file a complaint before a criminal court, it should, in our
view, be governed by Part A of chapter XIX of the CrPC.   Unfortunately,
the above mentioned recommendations made in its 178th Report (2001) has
not been implemented so far.  We reiterate the recommendations made in
its 178th Report.
For  the  purpose of the present  proposed  enactment, and  without
waiting for the implementation of the 178th Report, we are of the view that
provision can be made in the proposed enactment that for complaint made
by  the  Collector  or  the  Regulatory  Authority  shall  be  governed  and
proceeded with under Part A, along with a non-obstante clause.
5.8.1.5 Section 4(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides that
all offences under the IPC shall be investigated, inquired into and tried,
according to the provisions of the Code.   However, as per sec. 5 of the
108

Code, special form of procedure may be prescribed by any law.  Sec. 5
reads as follows:
“5. Saving.- Nothing contained in this Code shall, in the absence
of a specific provision to the contrary, affect any special or local law
for the time being  in force, or any special  jurisdiction  or power
conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other
law for the time being in force.”
A  different  procedure  can  therefore  be  prescribed  under  the
proposed law, and such law prescribing different procedure can be saved
under sec. 5 of the CrPC.  When a different procedure is prescribed, under
a special law, that procedure will prevail over the procedure prescribed by
the CrPC.
In  Bhagat Singh v.  Foran Singh, 1988 Cr LJ 72 (All) there was a
question  before  the  Allahabad  High  Court,  as  to  whether  in  a  case
governed by the provisions of the UP Dacoity Affected Areas Act, 1983,
the  provisions  of  sections  200  and  202  of  the  CrPC  (which  provides
examination of complainant and his witnesses) would apply.  That case
was under sec. 395 of the IPC, which was a scheduled offence under the
UP Act.  Section 7 of the UP Act provided the procedure and powers of
special Courts.  The High Court held:
“Offence of dacoity under sec. 395 IPC being a scheduled offence,
procedure for taking cognizance, issuing process would be governed
by sec. 7 of the Act, consequently, the provisions of sec. 200 and
109

202  of  the  Code  providing  procedure  in  a  complaint  case  to  a
Magistrate would not apply.”
A Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Ram Gopal v. State
1977 Cr LJ 1048, has held that the special procedure laid down in sec. 5(1)
of the West Bengal Criminal Law Amendment (Special Courts) Act, 1949,
would prevail in view of sec. 5(2) of the CrPC, 1898.   That case also
related to offences under the IPC under sec. 467/471.
5.8.1.6 In view of ss. 5 and 4(2) of the CrPC, 1973, the special procedure
prescribed under any law, would prevail over the procedure prescribed
under the CrPC.  Therefore, we recommend that a provision should be
made  in  the  proposed  law  that,  when  under  the  proposed  law  the
Regulatory Authority or the Collector files any complaint in the criminal
Court for an offence of criminal breach of trust or other related offences
stated  above,  such  a  complaint  shall  be  governed  and  proceeded  with
under Part A of chapter XIX of the CrPC, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
Further,  a provision  should  also  be  made  that  in  such  cases  the
Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy
of the complaint and other documents referred to therein.
5.8.2 Remedy under civil law
110

5.8.2.1 A breach of trust may lead to civil action also.   CROSS & JONES
(in their book Introduction to Criminal Law 9th Ed para 1.3 at page 2) have
stated:
“A breach of trust occurs where someone who holds property as
trustee for another fails  to carry out the duties of his  office, for
example  by  making  an  important  investment  or  wrongfully
converting the trust property to his own use.    He is than civilly
liable to make good the loss occasioned to those on whose behalf the
property was held.”
The Supreme Court in  Jaswant Rai v. State of Bombay, AIR 1956
SC 575 has stated that the same set of facts may give rise to both a civil
liability and a criminal prosecution.    But if there is no mens rea or if the
other essential ingredients of an offence are lacking, the same facts may
not sustain a criminal prosecution, though a civil action may lie (see also
Madhavrao J. Scindia v. S.C. Angrey, AIR 1988 SC 709).
Every offence of criminal breach of trust involves a civil wrong in
respect of which complainant may seek a civil redress for damages in civil
Court.   (see L. Dhanga Naik v. State, 1977 CrLJ 654)
When any person, body or agency misappropriates or misuses any
contribution collected by them, civil action may be taken for recovery of
the  sum  misappropriated.   There  is  a  need  that  such  civil  action  be
disposed of expeditiously.   The Civil Court may be specially designated.
111

5.8.2.2 The Law Commission in its Consultation Paper has suggested that
there should be ‘judicial authority’ in each district to entertain, enquire into
allegations of misappropriation and misuse of contributions, by persons,
bodies  or  agencies  who  or  which  have  collected  such  contributions.
Proposals regarding powers and the procedures of the judicial authority
were  referred  to  in  the  Consultation  Paper.    It was  proposed  in  the
Consultation Paper that the judicial authority after inquiry can pass orders
directing the person, body or agency who is found guilty, deposit with the
Regulatory Authority or the Collector, the amount misappropriated.   The
Judicial Authority may also direct the police to register a case against such
person or agency under the penal law.     Certain powers of the civil Court
were also proposed to be given to the Judicial Authority.
5.8.2.3 But we find that the above procedure can be shortened.   Hence,
now we are of the view that so far as criminal cases are concerned, they
can  straightaway  be  dealt  with  by  the  regular  Criminal  Courts  but
according to the procedure indicated above.   The Regulatory Authority
and the Collector can make complaint before the Criminal Court and these
complaints shall be governed and proceeded with under Part A of Chapter
XIX of the CrPC, as recommended earlier.   Likewise, instead of a separate
Judicial Authority, a Civil Court of the rank of a Senior Civil Judge may
be designated to deal with civil cases in respect of alleged breach of trust
or related issues.
Since this type of work is not  likely to come up frequently, we
recommend that such Courts be designated in each district, to try civil
cases of breach of trust and related issues arising out of the proposed law.
112

There are many advantages in designating serving judicial officers
in the designated Courts.   They are under the disciplinary control of the
High  Court.   There  will  be  no  need  to  provide  a  separate  mode  of
appointment of members nor to provide fresh staff.   This procedure will
also save time.  In Bipinchandra case (supra) the Gujarat High Court gave
a direction to the District Judge of each District, that he shall act as an
‘Ombudsman’  for  rectifying  complaints  made  by  individuals  and
organizations with regard to contributions received during calamities.
We, therefore, recommend that High Court shall designate a senior
Civil Judge in the District to act as designated Courts for dealing with
Civil disputes arising under the proposed law.   These designated Courts
shall have unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction.
5.8.2.4 Jurisdiction of the designated Courts
The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to try all cases of  civil
nature  in  respect  of  alleged  misappropriation  and  misutilisation  and
diversions of contribution by any person, body or agency who or which
have collected such contributions or other related issues.
All  cases  irrespective  of  pecuniary  value  can  be  tried  by  the
designated Court.    We recommend accordingly.
5.8.2.5 Procedure before the Designated Court
113

So far as procedure in the designated Court is concerned, we are of
the view that it should be simple.   Principles of natural justice, however,
have to be followed.  The Regulatory Authority or the Collector, either suo
motu or upon receiving a complaint from any interested person may file a
petition before the designated Court for any relief of a kind of civil nature.
Any other interested person shall also be entitled to file a petition before
the Designated Court.  However, order for recovery of money or other item
in  kind  shall  be  made  in  favour  of  the  Collector  or  the  Regulatory
Authority.   ‘Interested person’ shall be defined as mentioned earlier.
In respect of procedure, the Law Commission in its 186th Report on
‘Proposal  to  Constitute  Environment  Courts’  (2003)  made  certain
recommendations regarding procedures of proposed Environment Courts.
Recommendation No.6 is relevant, which is as follows:
“6(a) The  proposed  Court  shall  not  be  bound  to  follow  the
procedure prescribed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but
will be guided by the principles of natural justice.  The Court shall
also not be bound by the rules of evidence contained in the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872”
On the same analogy, we recommend that the proposed Designated
Courts shall not be bound to follow the procedure prescribed under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but will be guided by the principles of
natural justice.   Further, the said Court shall also not be bound by the rules
of evidence contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
114

5.8.2.6 Powers of the Designated Court
It was proposed in the Consultation Paper that the Judicial Authority
shall have certain powers of the Civil Court.  But, now we are of the view
that the Designated Court, as proposed, should have all the powers of a
Civil  Court.   In  186th Report  referred  above,  the  Law  Commission
recommended  that  proposed  Environment  Court  should  have  all  the
powers of a Civil Court.  The Law Commission’s recommendation was as
follows:
“(b) The  proposed  Court  shall  have  all  powers  of  Civil  Court
including power to punish for contempt, as discussed in Chapter IX”
On the same analogy, we recommend that the Designated Courts
shall  have all  powers  of Civil  Court  including  power  to take  steps  to
punish for contempt as provided by the law at present.
5.9 Penalties
We have earlier recommended that no person, body or agency can
start  collection  of  contribution  without  registration  or  provisional
registration and any such collection would be an offence.  There are other
aspects which must be taken care of.     The authorized person or agency
are required to open an account with nationalized bank, and further to
deposit all the monies in that bank account.  They are also required to
maintain proper account books, registers, and also file periodical returns to
the Collector and the Regulatory Authority.  Accounts are also required to
115

be audited by a qualified chartered accountant.   At the time of receiving
the contribution, stamped receipt is also required to be given to the donors.
A penalty provision  is  necessary in case  if any of these  conditions  is
violated.  The Collector can impose penalty.  Provisions for penalty can be
found  in  many  statutes  like  the  Income-tax  Act,  1961  (chapter  XXI,
sections 270 to 275), the SEBI Act, 1992 (chapter VIA sections 15A to
15J), the FEMA, 1999 (section 15).
Therefore, we recommend that 
When any person, body or agency –
i) does not give receipt of the contribution in the form and manner
as prescribed in the enactment;
ii) makes any kind of discrimination on the ground of religion, race,
language, sex, caste, place of birth or residence in distribution of
contribution;
iii) does not deposit the monetary contribution in the nationalised
bank, as prescribed in the enactment;
iv) does not maintain account books and register as prescribed in the
rules;
v) fails to file returns to the Collector or the Regulatory Authority in
time, as prescribed in the enactment and rules;
vi) fails  to  get  audited  the  accounts  from  a  qualified  Chartered
Accountant; or
vii) violates any other provision of the proposed Act (which is not an
offence); 
116

such person, body or agency shall be liable to a penalty as stated below.
The Collector or the Regulatory Authority, after giving opportunity
of hearing, may impose penalty on such person, body or agency, which
shall not be less than Rs.10,000/- (rupees ten thousand) but may extend to
Rs.25,000/- (rupees twentyfive thousand).
5.10 Rule making powers of the Central Government.
In the preceding paragraph of this chapter, we have recommended
that certain things will be as “prescribed” i.e. as prescribed by the Central
Government.   Therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  the  Central  Government
should have rule making powers under the Act.  We recommend that the
Central Government shall by notification in the official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
These Rules may, in particular, provide for following matters:
A) Manner  in  which  registers  and  account  books  shall  be
maintained by authorized person, body or agency. 
B) The procedure to be followed by the Regulatory Authority
at meeting including the quorum necessary for transaction
of business.
C) The  manner  in  which  the  Regulatory  Authority  shall
maintain proper account and other relevant records of its
fund.
117

D) The manner and form in which application for registration
has to be submitted.
E) The  manner  in  which  the  Collector  shall  impart
information  in  respect  of  registration,  provisional
registration or suspension and cancellation of registration
of any authorised person, body or agency.
F) Manner  in  which  the  Collector  shall  authenticate  the
receipt book.
Every rule made by the Central Government under the Act, shall be
laid, as soon as after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
5.11 Overriding effect of the proposed enactment.
As the proposed enactment is a special law, we recommend that the
proposed enactment shall have overriding effect over any other law or
scheme, so far as such law or scheme is inconsistent with the proposed
enactment.
We recommend accordingly.
118

CHAPTER VI
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Following is the summary of recommendations made in this Report:
1. The  Commission  recommends  that  a  law  should  be  enacted  to
regulate the collection of funds including contributions and donations in
cash and kind, collected or raised for the purposes of providing relief and
rehabilitation  to  the  victims  of  natural  and  man-made  calamity  or  for
welfare and rehabilitation to soldiers or their family members who are
killed or have become disabled in war or war like operations and also to
monitor  the  proper  utilization  and  distribution  of  such  contribution  so
collected.   The details of the proposed law are mentioned in Chapter V.
(para 3.6)
2. We recommend that the proposed law shall be applicable to entire
territory of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(para 4.4.5)
3. We recommend that the whole of the proposed enactment should be
made prospective only.
(para 4.5.4)
4. We  recommend  that  the  proposed  enactment  should  be  made
applicable to all those contributions or donations collected or received,
either in cash or kind, by any person, association, agency, body, institution,
119

firm, NGO, trust or other organization.  The purpose of the proposals is to
regulate collections and provide relief and rehabilitation to the victims of
any natural or man made calamity or for welfare and rehabilitation to the
soldiers and their family who are killed or disabled in a war or war like
other operation, whenever such collections and relief work is taken up by
non-governmental  organizations.   It  is  further  recommended  that
contributions received by the private parties referred to above  from the
Government or any fund set up by the Government, shall be brought into
the purview of the enactment.  However, any contribution received by the
Government, or any fund set up by any government, or by any authority or
agency  established  by  any  government  shall  not  be  brought  into  the
purview of the proposed enactment.
(para 4.6.5)
5. We  recommend  that  the  Central  Government  shall  establish  a
Regulatory  Authority  to  be  described  as  'Contribution  Regulatory
Authority' consisting of --
(a) A Chairperson, having special knowledge or practical experience in
respect of matters relating to relief and rehabilitation of victims of
calamities  with  adequate  knowledge  of  law,  accounting  and
management  of funds  or grants,  to  be nominated  by the  Central
Government.  The Chairperson will be a person holding a post not
below  the  rank  of  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India.   The
Chairperson  shall  hold  this  office  in  addition  to  the  post  he  is
holding. 
120

(b) One  part-time  member  having  special  knowledge  or  practical
experience  in  respect  of  matters  relating  to  relief,  welfare  or
rehabilitation  with  adequate  knowledge  of  accounting  and
management  of  funds  or  grants  to  be  nominated  by  the  Central
Government.   He shall be a person who is holding a post not below
the rank of Joint Secretary in the Central Government.
(c) One part-time member to be nominated by the Central Government
from the members of Indian Audit and Accounts Service not below
the rank of Accountant General.
(d) Three  part-time  members  to  be  nominated  by  the  Central
Government to represent the interest of general public. These may
be  NGOs,  media,  legal  or  medical  profession,  Chartered
Accountants, social workers.
(e) If the calamity in regard to which collections are made, relates or
concerns  Defence  Forces,  a part-time Member from the Defence
Forces not below the rank of Adjutant General or equivalent may be
co-opted by the Regulatory Authority.
(para 5.2.6)
6. The place of the head office of the Regulatory Authority may be
such as may be notified by the Central Government.  However, under the
Act, the Regulatory Authority is to be empowered to hold its sittings in the
form of a camp or circuit at the place where the natural or other man made
calamity has occurred and also at such other place where substantial part
of contributions or donations are collected or are being distributed.  The
Central Government shall also prescribe rules of procedure which will be
followed  by  the  Regulatory  Authority  in  regard  to  the  transaction  of
121

business  at its  meeting  including  quorum.  But  the  time and  place  of
meeting shall be decided by the Chairman.
(para 5.2.7)
7. It  is  recommended  that  the  Central  Government  shall  provide
necessary funds required, so that the Regulatory Authority may perform its
functions effectively.
The Regulatory Authority shall deposit all monies received by it
including those received from the Central Government or by way of any
fees or otherwise in an account in a nationalised bank. This account of the
Authority shall be applied for the purpose of meeting all its expenditure.
(para 5.2.8)
8. We recommend that the Regulatory Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records of its funds and shall also prepare an
annual statement of accounts, in such form which may be prescribed by the
Central  Government  in  consultation  with  the  Comptroller  and  Auditor
General of India.  The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(para 5.2.9.1)
9. We  recommend  that  the  Regulatory  Authority  shall  keep  and
maintain a separate account of all the contributions or donations received,
seized, or recovered by it. The Regulatory Authority shall  be empowered
to distribute this contribution to any other authorised person or agency, or
to victims of calamity in connection with the similar calamity or disaster,
122

natural or man-made.  In case there is any surplus, it must deposit it in any
fund set up by the Central Government or handed over to some other
authorized person, body or agency.  A statement of all the receipts and
distribution under this head has to be prepared by the Authority. Such
statements of accounts shall also have to be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.
(para 5.2.9.3)
10. Final recommendations as to Registration: mandatory registration &
other procedures
i) From the date of commencement of the proposed  legislation, no
person,  or  body  or  agency  shall  collect  or  receive  contributions  or
donations  for  the  purpose  of  providing  relief  or  rehabilitation  to  the
victims of any natural or other man-made  calamity or for welfare  and
rehabilitation  of  soldiers  and  their  family  members  who  are  killed  or
disabled in a war or other similar operation, unless such person or body or
agency is registered or provisionally registered as Authorised person or
agency  under  the  proposed  legislation.   Any  person,  body  or  agency
making collections contrary to the prohibition shall be guilty of an offence
of collection without such registration punishable with imprisonment upto
3  years  or  fine  upto  Rs.50,000  but  not  less  than  Rs.25,000  and  the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 will apply.   In the
case of such offence by non-individuals, the punishment shall be inflicted
on the persons mentioned hereinbelow.     
123

When an offence mentioned above is committed by any agency or
body, every person who at the time of commission of the offence, was in
charge of and was responsible for the conduct of business of such agency
or body, and the person who had collected the contribution as well as who
had made appeal for contribution, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence  and  shall  be  liable  to  be  proceeded  against  and  punished
accordingly.   However, any of the persons mentioned above shall not be
liable to  any punishment  if he proves  that  the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
For  the  removal  of  doubts,  it  is  made  it  clear  that  though  an
organisation, body or agency might be registered or recognized under any
other law, like, the Companies Act, 1956, Society Registration Act, Trust
Act or any other law applicable to charitable institutions, still registration
under  the  proposed  law,  as  Authorised  person,  body  or  agency  is
necessary, if the collections are proposed in the context of a calamity or
disaster.  Excepted categories are Government and Government agencies.
ii) Any  person,  body,  organisation  or  agency  may  apply  for
registration, to the Collector of any district in whose jurisdiction either,
a. the person applying for registration actually resides or agency
or body applying has its principal office  or place of work; or
b. the contribution or donations is proposed to be collected; or
c. the relief or rehabilitation work is to be done.
124

Provided  that  only  one  application  shall  be  made  and  no  second
application will be maintainable unless the first application has been
rejected on technical grounds.
iii) Application for registration has to be made in the form and manner
prescribed by the Central Government.  However, it will be necessary for
every applicant to state the facts by way of an affidavit including details as
to whether any previous application for registration has been rejected by
any Collector, and if so, for what reasons.
iv) (a) A  person  or  body  or  agency  shall  not  be  eligible  for
registration unless he or it has three years experience in the field of
social service.
(b) A person or body or agency shall not be registered if such
person, body or agency has already been debarred or blacklisted or
banned under any law or instrument having force of law or under
any order issued by the Collector or the Government.
(c) A  person  shall  not  be  registered  if  (a)  he  is  adjudged  as
insolvent under Insolvency laws; or (b) against whom either charges
have been framed by the court or if he has been convicted by any
court, for an offence involving moral turpitude.
v) (a) Upon receiving the application for registration, the Collector
shall enquire and verify the correctness of the facts mentioned in the
application along with documents filed in support of application and
the  affidavit.   On  the  basis  of  the  findings  of such  inquiry, the
Collector  shall  either  register  such  person,  body,  or  agency;  or
125

refuse  to register as  Authorised  person  or agency and  reject  the
application.   However,  before  rejecting  any  application,  the
Collector shall give opportunity of hearing to the applicant and also
give reasons for rejecting the application.  Copy of the order of
rejection shall be given to the applicant.
(b) The  Collector  shall  decide  the  application  for  registration
within 15 days unless there are sufficient reasons to be recorded in
writing for not deciding the application in that period.
vi) Whenever there is an urgent need of collection of contributions, the
Collector  may  provisionally  register any  person  or  agency,  after  due
verification of particulars and fitness of such person or agency as the case
may be.  Provisional registration shall be valid till the final decision is
taken on the application, by the Collector.
vii) A person, body or agency who is provisionally registered, shall be
entitled to collect the contribution, but cannot distribute or utilize it till the
final decision on registration is taken and communicated.   No contribution
in cash or kind shall be collected without granting stamped receipts to the
donors.  All the monies collected shall be deposited in a nationalized bank
and proper account of all such collections has to be maintained.  In case
registration  of  such  person  or  agency  is  finally  refused,  all  the
contributions collected by such person or agency shall vest in the Collector
and he may make appropriate orders for attachment of such contributions
and their seizure and their distribution.
126

Suspension or Cancellation of Registration
viii) I.  Registration  of  any  person  or  agency  or  organisation  can  be
cancelled by the Collector – 
(a) If such person is adjudged as insolvent under Insolvency law
applicable to him; or
(b) If charges have been framed by any court against such person
for alleged involvement in an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(c) If such  person  is  convicted  by any  court  for  committing  an
offence involving moral turpitude; or
(d) If  such  person,  body  or  agency  does  not  comply  with  the
directions issued by the Regulatory Authority or Collector; or
(e) If such person, body or agency violates any provision of the
proposed enactment or any rules made thereunder.
Provided,  no  registration  shall  be  cancelled,  unless  an
opportunity of being heard is given to such person or agency.
II. During  the  pendency  of  the  inquiry  proposing  cancellation,  the
Collector may suspend the registration or the provisional registration.
III. The  Collector  shall  communicate  his  decision  on  registration,
provisional registration, suspension or cancellation of registration along
with reasons to such person, body or agency. 
IV. The Collector shall make public announcement of every decision on
the  question  of  registration,  provisional  registration,  suspension  or
cancellation  of  registration  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  Central
127

Government.  The  Collector  shall  forthwith  also  communicate  all  these
decisions  to  the  Regulatory  Authority  and  the  said  Authority  shall
immediately publish the information on website so that the applicant may
not apply before any Collector, by furnishing incorrect or misleading facts.
V. Whenever the registration of a person, body or agency is cancelled,
all unutilized contributions, possessed  by such  person, body or agency
shall stand vested in the Collector inasmuch as it is difficult to identify the
individual donors in relation to the unspent money.   The Collector shall
use the said sum only for matters connected with disaster relief.
(ix) Any  person  or  agency  aggrieved  by  the  order  of  the  Collector
rejecting the application for registration, or cancelling the registration, may
prefer an appeal to the Regulatory Authority within 30 days of the receipt
of the order.
(x) The Regulatory Authority shall maintain and update the data of all
registered persons and agencies and details of those in respect of whom
applications  of registration have been  rejected  by the Collector  and  in
respect of those whose registrations have been cancelled and put them on
its website so that all District Collectors may check the same to see if a
person or body whose application has been rejected is making application
elsewhere.
(xi) Once a person or agency is registered at any place, it shall be lawful
for it to collect or receive contribution from any part of the country or even
from outside  the  country and  distribute  the  same but  those  who  have
128

provisionally  registered  shall  not  be  entitled  to  disburse  the  same.
However, collections from outside the country shall be in accordance with
the laws governing remittances of monies from abroad.
(xii) Any person, body or agency whose application for registration is
rejected by the Collector of any district, he or it shall not be eligible to get
it registered at any other district.  However, this rule will not be applicable
where a registration is refused for want of some technical formalities or
want of sufficient experience in social work.
(para 5.3.7)
11. We  recommend  that,  every  authorised  person  or  agency,  while
receiving any contribution in cash or kind, shall issue a stamped receipt for
receiving such contribution, and the receipt shall be given to the donor of
such  contributions.  Receipt  shall  be  given  from  a  receipt  book,
authenticated by the Collector in the manner prescribed by the Central
Government  under  the  Rules.  Such  receipt  should  clearly mention  the
name  and  full  address  of  authorised  person  or  agency, name  and  full
address of donor, details in regard to the contributions, such as the total
amount of cash or cheque or demand draft and details of other items in
kind and the purpose for which such donations are given, date and place of
receiving the contributions, name, address and signature of the person who
has received such contributions.  The receipt book must be a printed one
and the name and address of the printing press should also be indicated in
the receipt.  A duplicate copy or counterfoil of receipt should be kept by
authorised person, body or agency.  The receipt must be a receipt duly
stamped according to the law applicable for collection of such stamp-duty
129

in that locality.     The person collecting can use a rubber stamp to indicate
his or its name, at the appropriate place in the receipt.
No printing press shall print the receipts for the aforesaid purpose,
without the written authority of the Collector.
(para 5.4.4)
12. We  recommend  that  the  proposed  legislation  should  contain
provisions to the following effect:
i) Every  authorised  person  or  body  or  agency  should
maintain an account with a nationalized bank, where all
monetary contributions shall be deposited forthwith, i.e. to
say immediately after receiving the same.
ii) Every authorised person or body or agency should  also
maintain proper accounts of all contributions collected and
distributed or spent by it, in accounts books maintained in
the ordinary course.
iii) The legislation may permit rules in regard to the following:
(a)  A register  must  be  maintained  as  to  the  manner  in
which the donations are distributed.   The account book
shall  be  maintained  on  a day-to-day  basis.    (b)  There
should  be  correlation  between  the  accounts  and  the
Register.  (c) The details of the distribution must be such
that  there  can,  if  need  be,  proper  verification  of  the
distributions.    (d)  Where  the  money  is  utilised  for
purchase of clothes, utensils or food items or other articles
or goods, the bills must be preserved for verification.  (e)
130

Monthly returns of the account have to be furnished to the
Collector  in-charge  of  the  area  where  the  office  of  the
authorized person, body, agency which has collected the
donation, is located.
iv) Every authorised person or body or agency should inform
the Collector immediately about the receipt of money or
item in kind, the name of the donors, and other details as
may be prescribed.
v) Annual audit of the accounts  has to be conducted by a
qualified chartered accountant and the audit report should
also be sent to the Collector as well as to the Regulatory
Authority within such time as may be prescribed.
vi) The concerned nationalized Bank where the deposits are
made shall also submit monthly statements of account of
the authorised person, body or agency to the Collector and
the Regulatory Authority.    This is for the purpose of
verifying the information that may have been furnished by
the authorized person or body or agency to the Collector.
vii) The person, body or agency should submit a half-yearly
report of its activities and accounts to the Collector and
Regulatory Authority.
(para 5.5.5)
13. We recommend that, apart from the maintaining proper accounts
etc., every authorised person, body or agency should perform the following
other duties:
131

i) Every authorised person, body or agency should utilize the
contribution exclusively for the purpose for which it was collected.
There should not be any kind of diversion of such contribution for a
different purpose.
ii) Every  authorised  person,  body  or  agency  shall  utilize  the
contribution in the manner best suitable for the purpose for which it
was collected.
iii) Every  authorised  person,  body  or  agency,  shall  not  while
providing relief and rehabilitation, discriminate against any victim
of calamity on the ground of religion, race, caste, language sex,
place of birth or residence.
iv) After providing total relief and rehabilitation to the victims of
calamity or war, if any contribution is left unutilized in the hands of
any  authorised  person,  body  or  agency  it  shall  hand  over,  such
unutilized contribution either to the Collector or to the Regulatory
Authority for being used for relief in any other calamity or disaster.  
v) Every  authorised  person  or  agency  shall  provide  full
cooperation  and  assistance  to  the  Regulatory  Authority  and  the
Collector in the discharge of their functions and duties under the
law.   Every authorised person and agency shall also follow their
directions and instructions.
(para 5.6.5)
14. It is recommended that any person interested, as stated above, who
has  any  information  that  any  other  person  or  agency  is  collecting  or
receiving contributions without registration (final or provisional), he may
complain to the Regulatory Authority or the Collector.  
132

The Regulatory Authority and  the Collector shall have power to
inquire  suo  motu or  upon  receiving  any  complaint  as  to  whether  any
person, body or agency which is not registered, is collecting or receiving
contribution.  If the  Regulatory Authority or the Collector, as the case may
be,  finds  that  any  person,  body  or  agency  is  collecting  contributions
without registration, it shall have power to attach, seize and recover such
contributions.  The Regulatory Authority or the Collector shall also have
power to attach, seize and recover other ancillary documents which are in
possession of such unregistered persons or agency.  
(para 5.7.1)
15. It is also recommended that it will open to any person interested, as
stated  above,  to  make  a  complaint  to  the  Regulatory Authority or the
Collector in respect of any misappropriation, misutilisation or diversion by
any person, body or agency.  The Regulatory Authority or the Collector
shall have power to inquire suo motu or upon receiving any complaint, as
to  whether  any  authorised  person,  body  or  agency  is  misutilising,
misappropriating  or  diverting;  or  has  misappropriated,  misutilised  or
diverted such contribution collected.    If the information or complaint
contains  prima  facie  material  or  basis  suggesting  misutilisation  or
misappropriation, the Regulatory Authority or the Collector can suspend
the registration before conducting a regular inquiry, and exercise powers
of attachment of the monies or contribution.
If the contributions relate to perishable items (such as fruits, cooked
food etc.) and the inquiry is likely to take time, the Collector or Regulatory
133

Authority may give possession thereof to some other registered person,
body or agency for distribution or sell them and keep the money in deposit.
If after enquiry, the Regulatory Authority or the Collector finds that
any authorised person, body or agency is misutilising or misappropriating
or diverting the contribution, any of these authorities shall have powers to
do following:
a) to direct the bank in which such person, body or agency is
maintaining his account to forthwith stop withdrawals of any
amount therefrom and to further direct the bank to transfer
such amount  to the account of some other authorised person
or agency, or to any fund of the Centre/State Government;
b) to  attach  and  seize  the  contributions,  books  of account  or
other material from such persons, bodies or agencies and for
that  purpose,  enter  the  premises  of  such  person,  body  or
agency with or without assistance of police;
c) to direct such authorised person or body or agency that any
contribution be handed over to the donor or to some other
authorised person or body or agency;
d) to  direct  such  authorised  person,  body  or  agency  to  stop
further  collection  of  contributions  and  to  stop  them  for
distribution or utilization.
(para 5.7.2)
16. In order to regulate  the collection, distribution and utilisation  of
contribution,  we  recommend  that  the  Regulatory  Authority  and  the
Collector shall also have following powers:
134

a) to take such measures as they deem fit and expedient for the
purpose  of  regulating  contributions  by  authorised  persons,
bodies or agencies;
b) to ensure that the distribution  and the providing of relief and
rehabilitation  by any authorised  person, body or agency is
accomplished in an equitable and impartial manner without
any discrimination on the ground of race, religion, caste, sex,
language, residence, place of birth;
c) to call for any information about the collection and receipt of
any contribution and also the management and utilisation of
such  contribution  from  any  authorised  person,  body  or
agency;
d) to issue directions to any authorised person, body or agency,
about the manner of collection, management and utilisation of
contributions;
e) to  issue  directions  to  officials  of  the  Central  or  State
Government engaged in relief and rehabilitation work related
to natural and other calamities;
f) to collect or receive contributions and transfer them to any
Fund  or  authorised  person,  body or  agency in  the  manner
prescribed;
g) to take appropriate proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court
or Tribunal against the authorised person, body or agency or
against  any  person  or  agency  which  is  not  registered  or
provisionally registered under the proposed legislation; 
h) to do any other act for effectual discharge of the functions of
the said Regulatory Authority and the Collector; and
135

i) to take the assistance from govt. officials in the discharge of
their official functions.
(para 5.7.3)
17. We recommend that a provision should be made in the proposed law
that,  when  under  the  proposed  law  the  Regulatory  Authority  or  the
Collector  files  any  complaint  in  the  criminal  Court  for  an  offence  of
criminal breach  of trust  or other related  offences  stated  above, such  a
complaint shall be governed and proceeded with under Part A of chapter
XIX of the CrPC, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
Further,  a provision  should  also  be  made  that  in  such  cases  the
Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy
of the complaint and other documents referred to therein.
(para 5.8.1.6)
18. We are of the view that so far as criminal cases are concerned, they
can  straightaway  be  dealt  with  by  the  regular  Criminal  Courts  but
according to the procedure indicated above.   The Regulatory Authority
and the Collector can make complaint before the criminal Court and these
complaints shall be governed and proceeded with under Part A of Chapter
XIX of the CrPC, as recommended earlier.   Likewise, instead of a separate
Judicial Authority, a Civil Court of the rank of a Senior Civil Judge may
be designated to deal with civil cases in respect of alleged breach of trust
or related issues.
136

Since this type of work is not  likely to come up frequently, we
recommend that such Courts be designated in each district, to try civil
cases of breach of trust and related issues arising out of the proposed law.
We, therefore, recommend that High Court shall designate a senior
Civil Judge in the District to act as designated Courts for dealing with
Civil disputes arising under the proposed law.   These designated Courts
shall have unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction.
(para 5.8.2.3)
19. The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to try all cases of  civil
nature  in  respect  of  alleged  misappropriation  and  misutilisation  and
diversions of contribution by any person, body or agency who or which
have collected such contributions or other related issues.
All  cases  irrespective  of  pecuniary  value  can  be  tried  by  the
designated Court.    We recommend accordingly.
(para 5.8.2.4)
20. We recommend that the proposed Designated Courts shall not be
bound  to  follow  the  procedure  prescribed  under  the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure, 1908, but will be guided by the principles of natural justice.
Further, the said Court shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence
contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(para 5.8.2.5)
137

21. We recommend that the Designated Courts shall have all powers of
Civil  Court  including  power  to  take  steps  to  punish  for  contempt  as
provided by the law at present.
(para 5.8.2.6)
22. We recommend that 
When any person, body or agency –
i) does  not  give  receipt  of  the  contribution  in  the  form  and
manner as prescribed in the enactment;
ii) makes any kind of discrimination on the ground of religion,
race,  language,  sex,  caste,  place  of  birth  or  residence  in
distribution of contribution;
iii) does not deposit the monetary contribution in the nationalised
bank, as prescribed in the enactment;
iv) does not maintain account books and register as prescribed in
the rules;
v) fails  to  file  returns  to  the  Collector  or  the  Regulatory
Authority in time, as prescribed in the enactment and rules;
vi) fails to get audited the accounts from a qualified Chartered
Accountant; or
vii) violates any other provision of the proposed Act (which is not
an offence);
such person, body or agency shall be liable to a penalty as stated
below.
138

The Collector or the Regulatory Authority, after giving opportunity
of hearing, may impose penalty on such person, body or agency, which
shall not be less than Rs.10,000/- (rupees ten thousand) but may extend to
Rs.25,000/- (rupees twentyfive thousand).
(para 5.9)
23. We recommend that the Central Government shall by notification in
the official Gazette make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
These Rules may, in particular, provide for following matters:
A) Manner in which registers and account books shall be
maintained by authorized person, body or agency. 
B) The  procedure  to  be  followed  by  the  Regulatory
Authority at meeting including the quorum necessary
for transaction of business.
C) The manner in which the Regulatory Authority shall
maintain proper account and other relevant records of
its fund.
D) The  manner  and  form  in  which  application  for
registration has to be submitted.
E) The  manner  in  which  the  Collector  shall  impart
information  in  respect  of  registration,  provisional
registration  or  suspension  and  cancellation  of
registration of any authorised person, body or agency.
F) Manner in which the Collector shall authenticate the
receipt book.
139

Every rule made by the Central Government under the Act, shall be
laid, as soon as after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
(para 5.10)
24. We recommend that the proposed enactment shall have overriding
effect over any other law or scheme, so far as such law or scheme is
inconsistent with the proposed enactment.
(para 5.11)
We recommend accordingly.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
(Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi)
Member-Secretary
(Dr. S. Muralidhar)
Part-time Member
Dated:  15th December, 2004
140

141