LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
193RD REPORT 
ON
TRANSNATIONAL LITIGATION –
CONFLICT OF LAWS –
LAW OF LIMITATION
JUNE 2005

Justice                                                                                          LAW COMMMISSION OF INDIA
M. JAGANNADHA RAO                                                                SHASTRI BHAWAN
Chairman                                                                                           NEW DELHI-110 001
                                                                                                                                                                   TEL : 23384475
                                                                                                                                                         FAX : (O11)23073864,23388870
                                                                                                                                                              E-mail : ch.ic@sb.nic.in
                                                                                                                                                                       Residence :
                                                                                                                                                                       1, JANPATH
                                                                                                                                                                       NEW DELHI
                                                                                                                                                                 TEL : 23019465
D.O.No. 6(3)/107/2005-LC(LS)         June 7,
2005
Dear Shri Bhradwaj ji,
I  have  great  pleasure  in  forwarding  the  193rd Report  of  the  Law
Commission  on  ‘Transnational  Litigation  -  Conflict  of  Laws  -  Law  of
Limitation’.
In the context of expansion of international trade and liberalization in
the economic policies of our country, it has become necessary to take notice
of the fundamental changes in the law of limitation in all common law
countries. Traditionally, all the common-law countries have been treating
the laws of limitation, even in the context of International Litigation as
‘procedural’ whereas in the civil law systems limitation laws are treated as
‘substantive’.  In the countries treating the limitation law as ‘procedural’,
the legal remedy gets barred after the expiry of the period of limitation, gets
barred while the right still remains notionally.  But in the countries which
treat  the  limitation  law  as  ‘substantive’  the  substantive  right  also  gets
extinguished in addition to the extinguishment of the judicial remedy.
In the international sphere where a contract is entered into or any
other kind of legal obligations arises in a foreign country, and the judicial
remedies are resorted to in another country, the distinction as to whether the
law of limitation is ‘procedural’ or ‘substantive’ becomes important.  For
example, if the period of limitation applicable for vindicating a right in a
2

foreign country is substantive and the foreign party files an action in India,
the lex fori will apply to the ‘procedure’ in India while the substantive rights
will be governed by the substantive law of the foreign country in relation to
that  right.   In  as  much  as  Indian  law  treats  the  law  of  limitation  as
procedural, the foreign party can, in case the judicial remedy has become
barred  in  the  foreign  country,  file  an  action  in  India,  if  the  period  of
limitation is longer in India than in the foreign country.  The only exception
as contained in sec 11, where the Indian courts can refuse relief is where the
foreign law has extinguished the contract and, in addition, all the parties
were domiciled in the foreign country during the relevant period.
If the law of limitation remains ‘procedural’ as in India, it gives scope
for  ‘forum shopping’.   Over  a  period  of  fifty  years,  almost  all  leading
writers  on  Private  International  Law  including  Cheshire  and  North
emphasized the advantages that would accrue if the foreign law of limitation
is treated as substantive, for then the foreign limitation period will apply
even if an action is filed in another country.  Forum shopping would stop.
In fact, in UK and other common-law countries, the law has been amended
by  treating  the  foreign  limitation  law  as  substantive  under  the  Foreign
Limitation Periods Act, 1984.  In Australia, today we have the Choice of
Law  (Limitation  Periods)  Act  1993  (Victoria),  the  Choice  of  Law
(Limitation Periods) Act, 1993 (NSW), Choice of Law (Limitation Periods)
Act, 1996 (Queensland) etc.  The above statutes in Australia have accepted
the view of the minority judgment of Mason CJ in McKain vs. R.W. Miller
& Co (South Australia) Pty Ltd. (1992) 174 CLR page 1.  New Zealand has
also amended its Limitation Act, 1950 in 1996 by adding ss 28A to 28C
treating the foreign law of limitation as substantive.  The law in Canada was
changed by Judge-made law in Tolofson vs. Jenson 1994(3) SC R 1022.  In
the  United  States,  the  Uniform  Conflict  of  Laws  Limitation  Act,  1982
proposed that the foreign law of limitation be treated as substantive in the
forum country and accordingly statutes were enacted in Arkansas, Colorado,
Montana, North Dakota, Oregon and Washington.  In some other States in
US, the law was changed by judgments of Courts.
In view of the changes brought about in all common law jurisdictions
bringing the law on par with civil law countries, the Law Commission has
thought it necessary to omit the existing sec 11 of the 1963 Act and replace
it by a new section.  Further, the existing sec 11 deals only with law of
limitation concerning contracts entered into abroad and leading authors in
India have said that the Act must provide rules of limitation for all other
3

obligations  arising  abroad,  such  as  those  arising  under  torts.  We  have
accepted this suggestion.  Again the Indian law, in its sole exception, says
under sec 11(2) that if the foreign ‘contract gets extinguished’ under the
foreign law, and all parties are domiciled in the foreign country during the
relevant period, the Indian Courts will not grant relief to the foreigner who
files his suit here.  Indian commentators have said that the requirement of
domicile  abroad  is  an anachronism and  should  be deleted.     We have
accepted  this suggestion also.  In fact, no  country presently has  such a
provision.  We are of the view that the foreign period of limitation should
apply  in  India  as  substantive  law  and  if  that  law  says  that  the  rights
themselves are extinguished, that will also apply.  We, however, propose to
allow this subject to the provisions of ss 4 to 24 of the Indian Limitation
Act.  The proposed new sec 11 will apply to periods of limitation governing
rights arising out of contracts entered in or any other kind of obligation
arising in the State of Jammu & Kashmir or in any foreign country.
So far as execution of foreign decrees  is concerned, in India, the
principle underlying sec 11 has been applied as there is no specific section
or  article  dealing  with  the  subject.   Hence  a  separate  section  is  being
introduced as sec 11A which will apply the principles underlying sec 11
(i.e. ss 4 to 12 too) and a new Art 136A is being proposed to be introduced
under which in respect of execution of foreign decrees, (i.e. decrees passed
by superior courts in ‘reciprocating territories’ as stated in sec 44A of Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908), the period of limitation as stated in the foreign
law  for  execution  of  its  domestic  decrees  will  apply  in  India  and  the
commencement of the period  will be the date of filing a certified copy
thereof in the District Court as per sec 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.  So far as decrees passed within Jammu & Kashmir are concerned, the
subject is covered by sec 43 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 according
to  decided  cases  and  we do  not  propose  to  disturb  that  position.   The
proposed Art. 136A will apply for execution of decrees passed by superior
courts in ‘reciprocating countries’ as stated in the Explanation to sec 44A of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  Hence, decrees passed in he State of
Jammu & Kashmir do not fall under proposed sec 11A.
We  have  also  taken  care  to  see  that  the  proposed  changes  are
prospective in the sense that the proposed sec 11, which applies to suits
filed in India in respect of causes of action arising in the State of Jammu &
Kashmir or in any foreign country, will not apply to causes of action which
would  have  arisen  before  the  date  of  commencement  of  the  proposed
4

amending Act.  Likewise, we have provided that the proposed sec 11A and
new  Art 136A  will  not apply to execution  of decrees  passed  abroad  in
‘reciprocating  territories’  (as  stated  in  sec  44A  of  the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure,  1908)  before  the  date  of  commencement  of  the  proposed
amending Act.
With  this  important  report,  we  propose  to  bring  Indian  law  of
limitation in relation to Transnational Disputes on par with the law in civil
law countries and on par with the recent changes in UK and other common-
law countries.
                       With regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Sri H.R. Bhardwaj
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHI.
5

I N D E X
Chapter Title Page Nos.
I Introductory 3 to 9
II Sec. 11 of the Limitation Act (Suits on contracts
entered into outside the territories to which the
Act extends) 10 to
13
III Recent developments in Private International 
Law in Common law countries: From
Procedural to Substantive 14 to
41
IV Problems in Indian Limitation Law and
Recommendations for change 42 to 55
Annexure I A Draft of the Limitation (Amendment) Bill,
2005 56 to 59
6

                                               Chapter I
Introductory
Since the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 was passed by Parliament over
nearly forty-two years ago, there have been changes in the law of limitation
concerning choice of law issues in Private International Law in all common
law  jurisdictions  across  the  world.   There  has  also  been  a  tremendous
momentum in international trade.  With the opening up of our economy in
1991, different laws in force in India are being reviewed so as to conform to
international  trade  practices  and  the  changes  in  the  law.   The  Indian
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 among others is one such important
piece of legislation.
A particular but very important aspect of the laws governing disputes
arising in Transnational litigation is about the applicability of the law of
limitation and the choice of law.
Brief History of the Indian Limitation statutes:
The Third Report of the Law Commission of India on ‘Limitation
Act, 1908’ (1956) resulted in the repeal of the Limitation Act of 1908 and in
the enactment  of the present  Act of 1963 which  came into  force  w.e.f.
1.1.1964.
Going back into history briefly, we may state that before the year
1862, there was no law of limitation applicable to the whole of India.  The
7

English law of limitation, as contained in 21 James I C and 4 Anne c 16(1)
was adopted when the British established the Supreme Court of Judicature
at Calcutta.  So far as the Provincial Courts were concerned, they were
initially governed  by certain  Regulations  like  the  Bengal  Regulation  III
(1793), which was extended to certain other provinces by Regulation VII
(1795), Regulation II (1803) and Regulation II, 1805; the Regulation II of
1802 applied to Madras and Regulation I of 1800 and Regulation V of 1827
applied to Bombay.  They were replaced by the Limitation Act I of 1845,
then by Act XIII of 1848 and Act XI of 1859.
Then in 1871, the Limitation Act IX of 1871 was passed providing
for the limitation of suits, appeals and certain applications to Courts and
also providing for the  acquisition of easements and the  extinguishment of
rights to land and hereditary offices.  The Act IX of 1871 was replaced by
Act XV of 1877 which provided for the extinguishment of rights not only to
land and hereditary offices but also to any property including moveable
property.  It also defined ‘easement’ as including ‘profits a prendre’.  That
Act was replaced by the Act of 1908.  The 1908 Act was amended from
time to time.
The Third Report of the Law Commission of India resulted, as stated
earlier, in the present Limitation Act of 1963, repealing the Act of 1908.
Prescription, acquisition and barring of remedies:
In the Law of Limitation, there are generally three distinct concepts,
namely, prescription, acquisition and barring of judicial remedies.
8

Prescription:
 The Act of 1963 deals with prescription, among other matters.   It is
well  known  that  a  law  which  prescribes  a  period  of  prescription
extinguishes the title to the property at the end of a specified period rather
than  merely  barring  the  judicial  remedy.   Such  a  provision  so  far  as
property, moveable and immoveable is concerned, is contained in sec 27 of
the Act which reads as follows:
“Section 27.  Extinguishment of right to property:
At the determination of the period hereby limited to any person for
instituting  a suit for possession of  any property, his right to such
property shall be extinguished.”
 
In as much as there is to be no hiatus in the right to ownership of
property, when the title to property of the previous owner is extinguished, it
passes on to the possessor and his right to possession gets transformed into
ownership.   Section  27  applies  to  movable  as  well  as  to  immovable
property.  Under Art 65 in the Schedule to the Act, a person in  adverse
possession of immovable property acquires title to the property.   Such
possession must be open and continuous and in defiance of the title of the
real owner for twelve years so that the person can prescribe title by adverse
possession.     So  far  as  Government  property  is  concerned,  Art.  112
prescribes  a  requirement  of thirty  years  for  prescribing  title  by adverse
possession.
9

The principles of law evolved by the Courts also permits acquisition
of limited rights by adverse possession.   For example, where a person
enters into possession as a usufructuary mortgagee under an unregistered
mortgage  deed,  he  will  acquire  the  limited  rights  of  a  usufructuary
mortgagee at the end of twelve years possession.
Acquisition of easementary rights:
So far as acquisition of easementary rights is concerned, sec 25 refers
to the acquisition of such rights by prescription. Sec 25 states that where
“the  access  and  use  of  light  or  air  to  and  for  any  building  have  been
peaceably  enjoyed  therewith  as  an  easement,  and  as  of  right,  without
interruption and for twenty years”, the said user acquires an easementary
right  on  the  property  of  another  person.    So  far  as  acquisition  of
easementary right  over  property of Government  is  concerned, sec  25(3)
requires thirty years enjoyment.
Barring of judicial remedies:
The  Schedule  to  the  Limitation  Act,  1963  lists  various  Articles
providing periods of limitation for suits and applications, as stated in the
First Division (Parts I to X), Second Division and the Third Division (Parts
I and II).    At the expiry of the periods mentioned therein, the judicial
remedy gets barred while the right still remains.   However, the right cannot
be enforced in a court of law after  the expiry of the  period.  The sole
exceptions are (i) sec 27 of the Act where the right itself gets extinguished
10

in regard to property, moveable and immoveable and (ii) sec 25, where a
right of easement is acquired over another’s property.
Section 3 of the Act states that, subject to the provisions contained in
ss.  4  to  24  (inclusive),  every  suit  instituted  or  appeal  preferred  and
applications made after the prescribed period shall be dismissed, although
limitation has not been set up as a defence.  The effect of sec 3 (excluding
the  cases  of  acquisition  of  easementary  rights  under  sec  25  and
extinguishment of title to property under sec 27), is that at the expiry of the
period  mentioned  in  the  Schedule  in  respect  of  the  particular  class  of
proceeding, the judicial remedy gets barred but the right still exists.   The
position was similar in England before 1984.
Distinction between extinguishing a right and barring the remedy:
That takes us to the well known distinction in common law between
the barring of a remedy and the extinguishment of a right.  If sec 3 bars the
right to the remedy in the manner stated above, what happens at the end of
the period is that the right does not get extinguished but the remedy to take
legal proceedings in respect of that right becomes barred.  But in the case of
‘property’ falling within sec 27 because of the express provisions, not only
does the remedy to recover the property gets barred but the right or title in
the property itself of the owner gets extinguished.  Under sec 25 a right to
easement is a right acquired in another person’s property.  But, though
under sec 3 the judicial remedy gets barred, still a defence based on the right
so barred is not precluded by sec 3 and hence a defence based on the right
can still be set up.
11

Yet another significance of sec 3 is that the Court has to apply the law
of limitation as  provided  in the  Schedule  taking  judicial  notice thereof,
irrespective of whether a plea of limitation is raised by the defendant or
opposite party in the defence or not.
Procedural law or substantive law:
We shall now refer to another important but well-known principle
which is crucial to the subject matter of this Report.  In England and in
India and in several common law countries, for a long time the law of
limitation has been treated as procedural law and not as substantive law.   A
‘procedural law’ is one which deals with the procedure in Courts which has
to be followed by the parties to seek vindication of their rights.   The rights
which they seek to vindicate in the Court through the said procedure are the
substantive rights.   We shall be elaborating these aspects in the succeeding
chapters.    A  procedural  law  whenever  made,  applies  to  all  pending
proceedings unless its application is restricted to apply prospectively.   On
the other hand, a substantive law is always prospective in its application
unless the legislature gives it retrospective effect.  While it is a general
principle of law that no statute shall be construed so as to have retrospective
effect unless its language is such as plainly to require such a construction,
that principle has not been applied to procedural statutes.  The reason is that
while  substantive  rights  vested  in  persons  cannot  be  interfered  with  by
legislation  except  by  clear  language  or  by  necessary  implication,  the
position with regard to procedural law, is different. This is because nobody
12

can have a vested right in any particular form, much less in an older form, of
procedure.
It is in the above context that sec 11 of the Limitation Act, 1963,
makes special provision in respect of suits based in contracts entered into in
Jammu and Kashmir or outside the territories of India and we shall refer to
it in Chapter II and will be later making our proposals in Chapter IV for
substituting  new  provisions  in  the  light  of  contemporary  developments
which we will refer in Chapter III.
13

Chapter II
Section 11 of the Limitation Act (Suits on contracts entered into outside the
territories to which the Act extends)
The Limitation Act, 1963 extends to the whole of India except the
State of Jammu and Kashmir.  But, sec 11 makes special provision for ‘suits
on contracts entered into outside the territories to which the Act extends’.
Section 11 reads as follows:
“Section 11: (1) Suits  instituted  in  the  territories  to  which
this Act extends on contracts entered into in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir  or  in  a  foreign  country  shall  be  subject  to  the  rules  of
limitation contained in this Act.
(2) No  rule  of  limitation  in  force  in  the  State  of  Jammu  and
Kashmir or in a foreign country shall be a defence to a suit instituted
in the said territories on a contract entered into in that State or in a
foreign country unless -
(a) the rule has extinguished the contract; and 
(b) the parties were domiciled in that State or in the foreign
country during the period prescribed by such rule.”
Section 11(1) and 2(a) embody the principles in vogue in England at the
time of passing of this Act in 1963.  At that time, the law in England was
that in respect of actions filed in England on the basis of contracts entered
into abroad (i.e. outside England), the law of limitation being procedural,
14

the English Law of Limitation applied and not the law of limitation of the
country where the contract was entered into.  There was, however, one
significant exception, namely, that if the foreign law of limitation had itself
extinguished the right in the foreign country, then English Courts would
apply the foreign law and hold that the right was also extinguished even if
the action was filed in England within the period of limitation prescribed by
English law.  This exception applied in India also. 
In  Huber vs.  Steiner (1835)2 Bing (NC) 202 (210-212), Tyndal CJ
observed as follows:
“So much of the law as affects the rights and merit of the contract, all
that relates ‘ad litis deisionem’ is adopted from the foreign country,
so much of the law as affects the remedy only all that relates ‘ad litis
ordinationem’, is taken from the ‘lex fori’ of that country where the
action is brought; and that in the interpretation of this rule, the time of
limitation of the action falls within the latter division and is governed
by the law of the country where the action is brought and not by the
lex loci contractus is evident  from many authorities  ……..  Such
being the general rule of law, a  distinction has been sought to be
engrafted on it by the learned counsel for the defendant that ‘where
the statutes of limitation of a particular country not only extinguish
the right of action, but the claim or title itself, ipso facto, and declare
it a nullity after the lapse of the prescribed period, that in such cases
the statute may be set up in any other country to which the parties
remove,  by  way  of  extinguishment’.   It  does  indeed  appear  but
reasonable that the part of the lex loci contractus which declares the
15

contract to be absolutely void at a certain limited time, without any
intervening suit, should be equally regarded by the foreign country as
the part of the lex loci contractus which gives life to and regulates the
construction of the contract.”
In the above case in Huber vs. Steiner, an action was instituted in the
English Court of Common Pleas on a promissory note governed by French
law and the defence was that the action was barred by the French law of
prescription.  The Court held that the effect of the French rule was only to
bar the remedy and that the French rule was no defence to the English
action.  The position, according to the exception laid down by Tyndal CJ
would be that the English Courts would refuse relief if the French law went
further and extinguished the claim or title itself or declared the contract a
nullity after the prescribed period.
The above decision has been followed in several cases in India, see
for example: Muthukanni v. Andappa: AIR 1955 Mad 96 (FB).
Section  11  lays  down  the  same principle  as  in  Huber v.  Steiner.
Subsection (1) of sec 11 states that in respect of contracts entered into either
in  Jammu and  Kashmir or in  a  foreign  country, if an action  by suit  is
brought  in  India  (i.e.  other  than  Jammu  &  Kashmir),  then  the  law  of
limitation that is applicable  to the case is not the law applicable in the
country where the contract is entered into but the law that applies is the
Indian Limitation Act.  Under subsection (2) of sec 11, the defendant cannot
rely on the law of limitation applicable in Jammu & Kashmir or applicable
in the foreign country except – (1) where the rule of Jammu & Kashmir or
16

of the foreign country extinguished the contract  and (2) the parties were
domiciled in that State or in the foreign country during the period prescribed
by such rule.
It has been accepted that though the section applies to suits only, the
principle on which it is based is applicable to execution applications also for
enforcing a foreign judgment.    In other words, the period of limitation
applicable according to Indian Limitation Act, 1963 will apply unless the
exception in sec. 11(2)(b) is attracted. 
It  appears  that,  till  recently,  in  all  the  Commonwealth  countries
governed by the common law, the law of limitation has been treated as
procedural and if an action is filed in a country on the basis of a cause
which occurred in another country, the law of limitation that is applicable is
the law of the country of the forum and the law of the country of the cause is
not applied, unless that law stated that at the expiry of the period, the right
itself got extinguished.   But, in civil law countries, the law has been that
limitation statutes are substantive and the right as well as the remedy would
get extinguished at the end of the period and hence the law of limitation of
the  lex fori would not apply and the limitation law of the country of the
cause would apply.
We shall be discussing in Chapter III how the common law countries
have recently brought about a change by treating the law of limitation as
substantive in relation to transnational litigation which involves more than
one country, thus making the foreign law applicable to actions instituted in
common law countries.    
17

Chapter III
Recent developments in Private International Law in 
Common law countries: 
From Procedural to Substantive
According to Cheshire and North’s Private Institutional Law (13th Ed.
1999)(pp 67-68), in any action involving the application of a foreign law,
the characterization of rules of law as substantive or procedural is crucial.
They say:
“One of the eternal truths of every system of private international law
is  that  the  distinction  must  be  made  between  the  substance  and
procedure, between the right and remedy.  The substantive rights of
the parties to an action may be governed by a foreign law, but all
matters appertaining to procedure are governed exclusively by the
law of the forum’.  (Huber vs. Steiner (1835) Bing NC 202; Chaplin
vs. Boys: 1971. A.C. 356).
The reason for the distinction between substantive and procedural law is
that the forum Court cannot be expected to apply every procedural rule of
the foreign state whose law it wishes to apply.  The forum’s procedural rules
exist for the convenience of the Court, and forum judges understand them.
They aid the forum court to “administer (its)  machinery as distinguished
from its product”.  (Poyser vs. Minors (1881) 7 Q.B.D. 329 (at p 333)) per
Lusl L.J.)
18

Chestire  and  North  also  say (ibid  p  68):  “The field  of  procedure
constitutes  perhaps  the  most  technical  part  of  any  legal  system,  and  it
comprises many rules that would be unintelligible to a foreign judge and
certainly unworkable by a machinery designed on different lines.  A party to
litigation in England must take the law of procedure as he finds it.  He
cannot by virtue of some rule in his own country enjoy greater advantages
than other parties here; neither must he be deprived of any advantages that
English law may confer upon a litigant in the particular forum of action”.
Chestire and North (ibid pp 70-72) further discuss the views of jurists
as to the manner in which the distinction between procedure and substance
has to be made and point out that the matter must be examined on a case by
case basis and in relation to particular matters of procedure.  So far as
routine matters like service of process,  form that the action must take and
whether any special procedure is permissible, the title of the action (e.g. by
what person and against what persons it should be brought); the competency
of witnesses and question as to the admissibility of evidence, the respective
functions of Judge and Jury; the right of appeal, and (according to some
writers) the burden of proof – these are clearly procedural matters.  The
authors then discuss various other specific matters to find out if they belong
to the sphere of procedural or substantive law under different headings (A)
to (H).  Under heading (A), they deal with the law of limitation with which
we are presently concerned. 
19

How English law changed in 1984:
Until 1984, English law stated that the statutes of limitation, if they
merely specified a certain time after which rights could not be enforced by
action, they affected procedure and not substance.  Hence, the forum law
would apply the local law of limitation.   (Black-Clawson International Ltd.
vs.  Papierwerke Waldhof – Aschaffenburg AG) (1975 AC 591 at 630).  M
Chestire and North (ibid p 73) then refer to the only exception in the pre-
1984 law as follows:
“Where, however, it could be shown that the effect of a statute of
limitation if the foreign applicable law was not just to bar the other
plaintiff’s  remedy  but  also  to  extinguish  his  cause  of  action,
(examples are provided by acquisitive prescription under the English
Prescription Act, 1832 or express extinction of the former owners’
title under the UK Limitation Act 1980 ss 3 & 17), then the English
Courts would be prepared to regard the foreign rule as substantive
and to be applied here”.  (Harris vs.  Quine) (1869) LR 4.Q.B. 653)
(656).
The  above  exception  was  also  contained  in  Huber v.  Steiner,  already
referred to.    Then the authors state that the common law rule has been
criticised  in  a  number  of  common  law  jurisdictions  (British  Law
Commission Report No. 114 (1982) paras 3.3 to 3.8), and that the said rule
tends  to  have  no   counterpart  in  civil  law  systems  which  usually treat
statutes of limitation as substantive.  (British Law Commission Working
Paper  No.  75  (1980)  (paras  25-26)).   They  say  that  furthermore,  the
20

Contracts  (Applicable  Law)  Act,  1990,  implementing  the  European
Community Convention on the Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations
(1980)  provide  that  the  law  which  governs  the  essential  validity  of  a
contract is to govern “the various ways of extinguishing obligations, and
prescription and limitation of actions”.  In 1982, in its Report No.114, the
British Law Commission concluded that “there is a clear case for the reform
of the present English rule”, and their recommendations formed the basis of
the  Foreign  Limitation  Periods  Act,  1984  (see  Carter  (1985),  101  Law
Quarterly Review 68 and Stone (1985) LMCLQ. 497).  
The general principle adopted in the 1984 Act is that it abandons the
common law approach which prefers the application of the domestic law of
limitation.  Now, the English Courts have to apply the law which governs
the substantive issue according to English choice of law rules, and this new
approach  is  applied  to  both  actions  and  arbitrations  in  England.   The
authors, Cheshire and North welcome the change stating as follows: (ibid
p.74)
“There is, of course, a significant difference between a rule under
which a claim is to be held to be statute-barred in England if statute
barred under the governing law, a reform which seems widely to be
welcomed and a further rule that, if the claim is not statute barred
abroad, it must be allowed in England.”
Of course, if the foreign period is too long, then the statute of 1984 permits
such a period not to be applied on grounds of public policy.
21

In  the  article  ‘The  Foreign  Limitation  Periods  Act,  1984’  above
referred to by Mr. P.B. Carter (1985)(101 Law Quarterly Review pp 68-78),
the author states (p.68):
“The tradition of English private international law is that issues of
limitation of actions are to be classified as procedural.  Thus the rules
of English domestic law limiting the time within which a remedy may
be sought in an English Court have been applicable even though the
law governing substantive issues in a case has been the law of some
foreign  country.   Conversely,  actions  have  been  entertained  in
England although statute-barred under the law governing substantive
issues,  provided  they  were  not  also  statute-barred  under  English
domestic law.”
He says that in adopting the above approach, the tradition of the common
law has been in marked contrast to that of many civil law countries, and few
judges or jurists have been able (or seemingly have even tried) to justify it.
After referring to Tindal CJ’s observations in  Huber vs.  Steiner (1835) 2
Bing N.C. 202 (already referred to) and after stating that the distinction of
the law of limitation as procedural is not based on any clear logic, Carter
says: ‘An action, which is statute-barred (whether by way of extinction of
the right or by way of extinction of the remedy) under the  lex causae (of
another country), ought not to be entertained in England’.  Or else, we
would be inviting ‘forum shopping’ by plaintiff seeking to bring statute-
barred foreign actions into England.  The law, therefore, needs reform and
he says that that has been achieved by the (UK) Foreign Limitation Periods
Act, 1984.
22

We find that several jurists and judges have stated that in the matter
of transnational litigation, there is need to change the common law concepts
so that “forum shopping” may be eliminated.  In some countries, the Courts
have stepped in to alter the principle by judge-made law while in some other
countries where the Courts differed or were stuck with the common law
position,  legislatures  intervened to  change  the  applicable  principles.
Among common law countries, the UK Act of 1984 is perhaps one of the
earliest to change the position mandating the limitation law of the country
where the cause of action accrued to be applied, when an action was filed in
United Kingdom.
The relevant provisions of the English Act of 1984, as contained in
sec. 1 thereof, read as follows:
“Application of foreign limitation law
1.- (1) Subject to the following provisions of this Act, where in any
action or proceedings in a court in England and Wales the law of any
other country falls (in accordance with rules of private international
law applicable by any such court) to be taken into account in the
determination of any matter-
(a) the  law  of that  other  country  relating  to  limitation  shall
apply in respect of that matter for the purposes of the action
or proceedings; and
(b) except where that matter falls within subsection (2) below,
the law of England and Wales relating to limitation shall not
so apply.
23

(2) A matter falls within this subsection if it is a matter in the
determination of which both the law of England and Wales and the
law of some other country fall to be taken into account.
(3) The law of England and Wales shall determine for the purposes
of any law applicable by virtue of subsection (1)(a) above whether,
and the time at which, proceedings have been commenced in respect
of any matter; “and, accordingly”, section 35 of the Limitation Act
1980 (new claims in pending proceedings) shall apply in relation to
time  limits  applicable  by  virtue  of  subsection  (1)(a)  above  as  it
applies in relation to time limits under that Act.
(4) A court in England and Wales, in exercising in pursuance of
subsection (1)(a) above any discretion conferred by the law of any
other country, shall so far as practicable exercise that discretion in the
manner in which it is exercised in comparable cases by the courts of
that other country.
(5) In  this  section  “law”,  in  relation  to  any  country,  shall  not
include rules of private international law applicable by the courts of
that country or, in the case of England and Wales, this Act.”
We are not referring to the provisions of ss. 2 to 7 as they are not
necessary for our purpose.
Australia: Mckain v. R.W. Miller & Co (South Australia) Pty Ltd:  (1992)
174 CLRI:
In Australia, in  Breavington vs.  Godleman (1988) 169 CLR 41, the
majority of the Judges who decided the case, deviated from common law
24

and held that the forum law was not applicable to determine liability for
torts committed in Australia.  This view, however, suffered reversal at the
hands of the majority in Mckain vs. R.W.Miller and Co. (South Australia)
Pty Ltd (1992)  Vol.  174  CLR  1.     In that  case,  a tort  was  allegedly
committed in South Australia, but an action was filed in New South Wales
because the action stood barred in the former State and was alive in the
latter.    The  majority  retained  the  common  law  rule  and  held,  in  a
conservative ruling, that the  lex fori in New South Wales applied and the
defendant could not plead that the action was barred in South Australia.  (In
order to rectify this position, most of the States in Australia have since
brought about statutes on lines with the English Act of 1984).  The minority
judgment of Mason CJ in the above case which sought to apply the  lex
causae is illuminating.  After stating that matters of substance should be
governed by the lex causae and not the original common law principle that
limitation  statutes  bar the  remedy and do  not extinguish  the  underlying
right, Mason CJ stated that the common law ‘distinction has been described
as both artificial and semantic’.    He observed:
“The distinction has been described as both artificial and semantic.
Cheshire and North, Private International Law, 11th ed (1987) p 80;
Mcleod,  The  Conflict  of  Laws  (1983),  p  215;  Sykes  and  Pryles
(Australian Private International Law, 3rd ed, 1991, p 258) where it is
said that the distinction is not meaningful.  Leflar observes that ‘a
right for which the legal remedy is barred is not much of a right’
(Leflar, McDougal and Felix, American Conflicts Law 4th ed., 1986, p
349).   To  a similar effect  is  Lorenzen’s  observation  that  ‘a right
which can be enforced no longer by an action at law is shorn of its
25

most valuable attribute’.   (1919) 28 Yale Law Journal, p 492 at p
496)”.
Mason CJ referred to the law in the United States, where the Supreme Court
took the position that with the remedy which became barred, the underlying
right too vanished.   In The Harrisburg (1886) 119 US 199 (p 214) it said:
“The  time  within  which  the  suit  must  be  brought  operates  as  a
limitation  of the  liability itself  as  created,  and  not  of the  remedy
alone.  It is a condition attached to the right to sue at all…. Time has
been made of the essence of the right, and the right is lost if the time
is disregarded.  The liability and the remedy are created by the same
statutes, and the limitations of the remedy are, therefore, to be treated
as limitations of the right.”
While the historical preference to the  lex fori was based on the need to
enable judges to decide cases in accordance with the law of the country
where the action was initiated, because they were more familiar with the
procedure of their own country rather than the intricacies of the procedure
in  the  country  where  the  cause  of  action  accrued,-  a  principle  quite
pragmatic, the real issue here is whether to treat the law of limitation of
another country as procedural and ignore it.  That has become the central
issue  for  jurists  and  Judges.   According  to  Mason  CJ,  treating  several
matters  as  ‘procedural’  in  its  widest  sense  was  a  matter  of  history  in
England and was the relic of times where ‘the importance of international
judicial comity may not have been given the same recognition it now-a-days
commends and where the notion of “forum-shopping” was not considered as
26

objectionable a practice as it now is’.     He points out that in contrast to the
first edition of Dicey and Morris, Conflict of Laws, (1890) (p 712) where
the  crude  meaning  to  the  word  ‘procedure’  was  advocated,  the  change
became discernible in the eleventh edition (1987, Vol 1 p. 173) of that book
where it was acknowledged that the practice of giving a broad scope to
‘procedure’ has fallen into disfavour because of its tendency to frustrate the
purposes of choice of law rules. Evidence of this change was recognized by
the British Law Commission in its Report No. 114 (1982) on ‘Classification
of Limitation in Private International Law’, pp 6-11.   This came also to be
recognized  in the English Foreign Limitation Periods Act 1984 (UK), sec
23A of the Prescription and Limitation (Scotland) Act, 1973 (Scot) and Art
10(1)(d)  of  the  EEC Convention  on  the  Law Applicable to Contractual
Obligations.  The  basis  of the rule  was  that the  choice of rules  should
prevail and not be frustrated by forum shopping. Stale claims have to be
prevented and there is need to relieve the defendants from the uncertainty
that such claims may be brought against them.  Injustice may result where,
in the circumstances of a case, the limitation period of the forum is longer
than that allowed by the law of the cause (Wolff, Private International Law,
2nd ed. (1950) p 232-233; British Law Commission, (op. cit. p 18).  Mason
CJ says that several matters relating to heads of damages, limiting damages
etc. are now treated as substantive and not procedural.  The principles are
expanding the change from procedural to substantive law.  It follows that,
even  if  it  is  correct  to  say  that  a  statute  of  limitation  only  affects  the
availability or otherwise of the remedy, that circumstance, of itself, should
not dictate that statutes of limitation should be treated as procedural.  Logic
based on remedy has been criticized by Falconbridge in his ‘Essays on the
Conflicting Laws’, 2nd ed. (1954)( p 308) as follows:
27

“On principle, it is difficult to understand why a rule of law which
denies a right of action should be construed as procedural.  Even if a
right of action is sometimes regarded as in the nature of a remedy,
remedy is a wider concept than procedure.”
Mere distinction between barring the remedy and extinguishing the right
should not lead to law of limitation being classified as procedural.  Mason
CJ quotes the reservation of Story (Conflict and Laws 7th ed. 1872) wherein
that jurist, in spite of his leaning towards characterizing limitation as part of
procedure, agrees with Baldous that the statute of limitation or prescription
‘does go to the decision of the cause’.   But that limitation does not go to
‘original merits’.    This logic ignores the problems of ‘forum shopping’.
Mason CJ observed:
“A dividing line between substance and procedure which lends itself
to manipulations in this way is not in harmony with the concerted
effort demonstrated by Courts in other areas to guard against forum
shopping.”
Mason CJ refers to a statement by Prof. Cook (‘Substance and Procedure’ in
Conflict  of  Laws) (1933),  42  Yale  Law  Journal  333  (pp  343-344)  that
indeed  the  line  between  substance  and  procedure  does  not  exist,  to  be
discovered merely by logic or analysis but the difference has to be drawn by
answer to the question: “How far can the Court of the forum go in applying
the rules taken from the foreign system of law without unduly hindering or
inconveniencing itself?’ The learned Judge says that ‘in the case of statutes
28

of limitation, it is difficult to see what inconvenience or hindrance would be
caused to a forum Court in giving effect to the limitation period prescribed
by the law of the cause.  He says further that: “If a statute of limitation
forming part of the law of the cause is classified as ‘substantive’, the forum
Court will apply to it  in any event”.  Thus, there is no inconvenience in
applying the foreign limitation period or the foreign substantive limitation
law.     Indeed,  that  is  the  reason  why  several  jurists  have  said  that
‘procedure’ is more appropriately described by the words ‘machinery of
litigation’ or ‘mechanism of litigation’.
We are in agreement with the views so strongly expressed by Mason
CJ in Mckain.
In Australia, the Queensland Law Reform Commission in its Report
on Review of the Limitation of Actions Act 1974 (QLD) (Report No.52)
(Sept., 1998) (Chapter 3), after stating that limitation statutes are treated as
procedural in some countries, refers to the principle of substantive law as
follows:
“Substantive
Some limitation provisions generally operate to automatically
extinguish the right on which a claim is based, once the limitation
period for bringing proceedings to enforce the right has expired.
The reason for enacting legislation which has this effect is that,
given that the purpose of a limitation statute is to prevent claimants
from suing after the specified period of time has elapsed, it is “both
more realistic and theoretically sound” for the legislation to provide
29

that the right no longer exists after the limitation period has expired,
rather  than  to  merely  ban  the  remedy  (Ontario  Law  Reform
Commission, Report on Limitation of Actions (1969) p.126-127).   It
is considered undesirable, by leaving a claim in existence without the
support  of a Court  ordered  remedy, “to leave  settled  expectations
open  for  ever  afterwards  to  disturbance  by  accident  or  by
contrivance” (New South Wales Law Reform Commission, Report
No.3: Report on the Limitation of Actions, Oct. 1967, para 14).”
In regard to the choice of law Rules, the Queensland Commission
referred to the following statutes where in respect of action in the forum
countries in Australian States and Territories, the limitation law of the other
jurisdiction will apply and will be treated as part of the substantive law of
the country where the cause of action arose:
(1) Sec. 5 of Limitation Act, 1985 (ACT);
(2) Sec. 5 of Choice of Law (Limitation Periods) Act 1993 (NSW);
(3) Sec. 78(2) of the Limitation Act, 1969 (NSW);
(4) Sec.  5  of  the  Choice  of  Law  (Limitation  Periods)  Act,  1994
(Northern Territory);
(5) Sec.  5  of  the  Choice  of  Law  (Limitation  Periods)  Act,  1996
(Queensland) and sec. 43A(2) of the Limitation of Actions Act,
1974 (Queensland);
(6) Sec. 38A of the Limitation of Actions Act, 1936 (South Australia);
(7) Sec. 32C of the Limitation Act, 1974 (Tasmania);
(8) Sec.  5  of  the  Choice  of  Law  (Limitation  Periods)  Act,  1993
(Victoria);
30

(9) Sec.  5  of  the  Choice  of  Law  (Limitation  Periods)  Act,  1994
(Western Australia).
The Qld Law Reform Commission says:
“In  disputes  involving  interjurisdictional  elements,  the  Court
determining the dispute will apply its own procedural law, but will
apply the substantive law which governs the dispute according to the
principles of private international law.  As a result, there has been
extensive  litigation in  relation  to  the  classification  of  potentially
applicable limitation law.
The question of choice of law rules has now been dealt with by a
cooperative approach involving all Australian jurisdictions.   Each
State and Territory agreed to enact legislation providing that, if the
substantive law of another Australian jurisdiction  governs  a claim
before a Court within the enacting jurisdiction, a limitation law of
that other jurisdiction is to be regarded as part of that jurisdiction’s
substantive law and applied accordingly.”
As an example, we shall refer to the provisions of the Choice of Law
(Limitation Periods) Act (Victoria) 1993:
“Sec.1:  Purpose:  The purpose of this Act is to make provision about
limitation periods for choice of law purposes.
Sec.2:  Commencement:  This Act comes into operation on the day on
which it receives the Royal Assent.
Sec.3:  Definitions:  
31

In this Act –
‘Court’ includes arbitrator;
‘  limitation law’   means a law that provides for the limitation of
any liability or the barring of a right of action in respect of a
claim by reference to the time when a proceeding on or the
arbitration of, the claim is commenced.
Sec.4:  Application:
This Act extends to a cause of action that arose before the
commencement of this section but does not apply to proceeding
instituted before the commencement of this section.
Sec.5:  Characterisation of limitation laws:
If the substantive law of another place being another State, a
Territory or New Zealand, is to govern a claim before a Court
of this State, a limitation law of that place is to be regarded as
part of that  substantive  law and  applied  accordingly by the
Court.
Sec.6:  Exercise of discretion under limitation law:
If a Court of the State exercises a discretion conferred under a
limitation law of a place being another State, a Territory or
New Zealand, that discretion, as far as practicable, is to be
exercised in comparable cases by the Courts of that place.”
It is clear that these Australian statutes have accepted the minority
view of Mason CJ and other Judges who agreed with him in the case of
McKain v.  R.W.  Miller  and  Company  (South  Australia)  Pty,  Limited
(1992): 174 CLR1.
32

So  far as  provisions  of the  limitation  provisions  other  than  those
relating to choice of law are concerned, the Queensland Law Commission in
its Report 53 (1998) recommended that the statutory law must reflect the
common law rules only and must only bar the remedy and not extinguish the
right itself.
New Zealand:
In New Zealand, the foreign law of limitation is treated as substantive
since 1996.    The N.Z. Limitation Act, 1950 has been amended in 1996 and
Part 2A consisting of ss. 28A, 28B, 28C, under the heading ‘Application of
limitation law of overseas countries’, has been inserted.  We shall refer to
the  new  section  in  this  Part  2A  in  detail.    Section  28A deals  with
‘Interpretation’.   It says that in that Part (i.e. Part 2A), the word ‘country’
includes a State, territory, province or other part of a country.  The word
‘Limitation Law’ is defined, in relation to a matter, as ‘a law that limits or
excludes liability or bars a right to bring proceedings or to have the matter
determined by arbitration by reference to the time when proceedings or an
arbitration in respect of the matter are commenced; and includes a law that
provides  that  proceedings  in  respect  of  the  matter  may be  commenced
within an indefinite period’.    Sec. 28B and 28C read as follows:
“Section 28B: Application of this Part of this Act:
(1) This Part of this Act applies to the Commonwealth of Australia or
any State or Territory of Australia, the United Kingdom, and to
33

any country to which this Part of this Act is declared to apply by
an Order in Council made under subsection (2) of this section.
(2) The  Governor-General  may  from  time  to  time,  by  Order  in
Council, declare that this Part  of this Act applies to a country
specified in the Order.
(3) In the case of a country that is responsible for the international
relations of a territory, an Order in Council under subsection (2) of
this section may apply to the country and all or some of those
territories.
Section 28C: Characterisation of Limitation Law:
(1) Where the substantive law of a country to which this Part of the
Act applies, is to be applied in proceedings before a New Zealand
Court or in an arbitration, the limitation law of that country is part
of  the  substantive  law  of  that  country  and  must  be  applied
accordingly.
(2) If, in any case to which subsection (1) of this section applies, a
New Zealand Court or an arbitrator exercises a discretion under
the limitation law of another country, that discretion, so far as
practicable,  must  be  exercised  in  the  manner  in  which  it  is
exercised in that other country.”
This legislation is on the same lines as in UK and Australia.
34

Canada:  Tolofson v. Jensen: (1994) (3) SCR 1022:
The  Canadian  Supreme Court  did  not  wait for the  change  by the
legislature and in the leading judgment, in Tolofson vs. Jensen 1994(3) SCR
1022, the Court made strides in the direction of treating the law of limitation
of the foreign country as part of the substantive law thereby requiring the
Court in which the action is filed to apply the law of limitation of the
country of the cause.
La Forest J starts stating that the distinction between substantive and
procedural laws no doubt remains in private international law.  While ‘The
substantive rights of the parties may be governed by the foreign law but all
matters appertaining to procedure are governed exclusively by the law of
the forum’.     The crucial question is how do we distinguish a substantive
law from a procedural one.  When does the question of inconvenience in
applying the foreign law come in?  After referring to the historical origins of
the rule in England from 1686 treating statutes of limitation as procedural
and barring the remedy while keeping the right alive, La Forest J states that
this is a ‘mystified view’.  The learned Judge states:
“Such reasoning mystified continental writers such as M. Jean Michel
(La  Prescription  Liberatoire  en  Droit  International  Prive,  Thesis,
University of Paris, 1911, paraphrased in Ailes, (1933) 31 Mich L
Rev 474 or 494) who contended that the ‘distinction is a specious
one,  turning  upon  the  language  rather  than  upon  the  sense  of
limitation acts…’  In the continental view, all statutes of limitation
destroy substantive rights.”
35

The learned Judge, while welcoming the continental approach stated that
Canadian courts have begun to shatter the ‘mystique’ which rested upon the
notion that statutes of limitation are directed against the remedy and not the
right.   He  pointed  out  that  the  Privy  Council  in  the  judgment  of  Lord
Brightman in Yew Bon Tew vs. Kenderaan Bas Mara: 1983(1) AC 553 (PC)
at 563 had, in fact, accepted that at the termination of the limitation period,
the defendant acquires a vested right  even though it arises under an act
which is procedural but that the Privy Council “continued to cling to the old
English view that statutes of limitation are procedural.  Nonetheless, the
case seems to me to demonstrate the lack of substance in the approach.  The
British Parliament obviously thought so.  The following year, the rule was
swept away by legislation:  The Foreign Limitation Periods Act, 1984 (UK)
c. 16, declared that foreign limitation periods are substantive.”
La  Forest  J  than  declared  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  wait  for
legislation.  He said:
“I do not think it is necessary to await legislation to do away with the
rule in conflict of laws cases.  The principal justification for the rule,
preferring the  lex fori over the  lex loci delicti, we saw, has been
displaced in this case.  So far as the technical distinction between
right and remedy, Canadian courts have been chipping away at it for
sometime on the basis of relevant policy considerations.  I think this
court  should  continue  this  trend.   It  seems  to  be  particularly
appropriate to do so in the conflict of laws field where, as I stated
earlier,  the  purpose  of  substantive/procedural  classification  is  to
36

determine  which  rules  will  make  the  machinery of  the Court  run
smoothly as distinguished from those determination of the rights of
both parties.”
The Supreme Court approved the trend started by Stratton CJ NB in Clerk
vs. Naqvi (1990)99 N.B.R. (2nd) 271(CA) where, after referring to Yew Ban
Tew (PC), the judge had held (p 275) that the limitation period of Nova
Scotia which was one year was substantive and the action commenced in
New  Brunswick  beyond  one  year  was  barred  as  the  Nova  Scotia  rule
applied.  La Forest J concluded that ‘if this is not the law, the courts would
be inviting “forum shopping” that is to be avoided if we are to attain the
consistency of result in an effective system of conflict of laws should seek
to foster’.  
USA:
We have already referred to the decision of the US Supreme Court in
The Harrisburg (1886) 119 US 199 (214) (see discussion under Australia
above).
As to American law, we shall refer to an article by Prof. William
Tetley,  Q.C.  (Faculty  of  Law,  McGill  University,  Montreal,  Quebec,
Canada) who has, in fact, written several articles on the subject.  In the
article ‘A Canadian looks at American conflict of law Theory and Practice,
Especially in the light of American Legal and Social Systems’ (1999) 38
Col.  J.  Transnational  Law  299-373),  he  states  that  the  American  Law
‘remains uncertain’ and he concludes:
37

“By comparison, a Canadian Court deciding a similar case arising in
Canada, under the Canadian Conflict Rule laid down by the Supreme
Court of Canada in Tolofson vs. Jensen, would almost apply the lex
loci delicti, including the time limitation of the province where the
tort occurred, regardless of the resulting outcome.  Such an approach
would not assist the plaintiff, but would promote greater certainty of
law than is presently formed in some American conflict cases.  On the
other hand, the need to implement corrective justice is not as urgent a
matter  in  Canada  as  in  United  States,  because  Canada,  with  its
stronger social security net, affords injured parties more opportunities
for indemnification under legislation reflecting a distributive justice
model.”
He finally sums up:
“It is noteworthy that among the major developments in US Conflict
of Laws in 1997 was the abandonment by three US State Supreme
Courts(those in Michigan, Rhode Island and West Virginia)  of the
traditional  position  that  statutes  of limitation  are  procedural.   Six
other States (Arkansas, Colarado, Montana, North Dakota, Oregon
and  Washington)  have  enacted  the  Uniform  Conflict  of  Laws-
Limitation Act.  Eight other States have done so by other legislation
or judicial decisions in recent years”.
In other words, 17 States had, by 1999, distanced themselves from
treating limitation laws as procedural.  The judgments of the State Supreme
38

Courts referred to by Prof. Tetley in the above passage are Sutherland vs.
Kennington Truck Service Ltd: 562 N.W. 2d 466 (Mich, 1997); McKinney
vs.  Fairchild  International  Inc   487  S.E.  2d  913)(West  Va);  Cribb vs.
Augustin  696 A 2d 285 (Rh I.1997).  The last ‘eight other States’ referred
to by him are Arizona, California, Florida, Idaho, Louisiana, Massachusetts,
Nebraska and New Jersey.  (quoting the article of S. Symeonides ‘Choice of
Law in American Courts in 1997, 46 AmJ. Comp. L 234, at pp.272-273).
That brings us to the Uniform Conflict of Laws Limitation Act, 1982
evolved by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State
Laws in preparing the Uniform Conflict of Laws-Limitation Act which has
been enacted in several States in US.  In their prefatory Note, they said:
“Traditionally,  statutes  of  limitations  have  been  characterized  as
‘procedural’ laws, for conflict of laws purposes, so that the limitation
periods prescribed by the forum states’ laws were applied.  This result
was reached despite its substantive effect of determining which party
won the law-suit.  Forum shopping by delay-prone plaintiffs, or by
their attorneys, with suits filed in States with long limitation periods,
inevitably occurred.
One consequence was that the Courts developed some rather
inexact ‘exceptions’ to the ‘general rule’.  These included one that
treated as ‘substantive’ any limitation period that was “built into” the
very statute, such as a Wrongful Death Act, that created the cause of
action  sued  on;  another  called  the  ‘specificity  test’  that  treated  a
limitations statute as ‘substantive’ if it was directed specifically to the
sort of claim sued on; and possibly others less commonly employed.
39

(See  Grenmen,  States  of  Limitations  and  the  Conflict  of  Laws,
Modern analysis. 1980 Ariz St LJ 1).
Another consequence was that about three-fourths of the States
enacted  so-called  “borrowing  statutes”  which  followed  no  regular
pattern but required application of a limitation period other than the
forum states’ if some stated aspect of the cause of action occurred in
or was connected with another state.  These borrowing statutes are
often difficult to interpret and apply.  They have been the source of
considerable judicial confusion.………”
The  Uniform  Conflict  of  Laws  Limitation  Act,  1982  as  drafted
provided  definitions  in  sec  1  while  sec  2  dealt  with  ‘conflict  of  laws;
limitation of periods’ and read as follows:
“Section 2: (a) Except  as  provided  by  sec  4,  if  a  claim  is
substantively based:
(1) upon the law of one other state, the limitation period of
that state applies; or
(2) upon the law of more than one state, the limitation period
of one of those states chosen by the law of conflicts of
laws of this State, applies.
(b) The limitation period of this State applies to all other claims.”
Section  3  dealt  with  other  rules  applicable  to  computation  of
Limitation Period and read as under:
40

“Section 3: If the statute of limitations of another state applies to the
assertion of a claim in this State, the other States’ relevant statutes
and  other  rules  of  law  governing  tolling  and  accrual  apply  in
computing the limitation period, but its statutes and other rules of law
governing conflict of laws do not apply.”
Section 4 referred to ‘unfairness’ and reads as follows:
“Sec.4: If the Court determines that the limitation period of another
State applicable under sections 2 and 3 is substantially different from
the  limitation  period  of  this  State  and  has  not  afforded  a  fair
opportunity to sue upon, or imposes an unfair burden in defending
against, the claim, the limitation period of the State applies.”
Section 5 refers to ‘Existing and future claims’ and says:
“Sec.5: This Act applies to claims
(1) accruing after the effective date of this Act; or
(2) asserted in a civil action or proceeding more than one year after
the effective date of this Act, but it does not revive a claim
barred before the effective date of this Act.”
The  Note  further  says  that  sec.  2  treats  limitation  period  as
substantive, to be governed by the limitations law of a State whose law
governs other substantive issues inherent in the claim.   This is true whether
the limitation period of the substantively governing law is larger or shorter
than that of the forum’s law.  This is based on the judicial trend: Heavner v.
41

Uniroyal Inc: 63 NJ 130, 305 A.2d 412 (1973); Air Products & Chemicals
Inc v. Fairbanks Morse Inc: 58 Wis 2d. 193, 206 NW (2d) 414 (1973) and
Henry v.  Richardson – Merrel Inc: 508, F 2d. 28 (3d Cir. 1975).   In all
these cases the forum State applied the other State substantive law even
though  the  consequence  would  be  to  apply  the  other  States’  limitation
period.
In sec. 3,  the  words  ‘governing  conflict  of  laws’ applies  both  to
‘statutes’ and ‘rules of law’.   This section treats all tolling and accrued
provisions as substantive parts of the limitation law of any State whose law
may be held applicable.   They are part of that State’s law as that State
would apply it.   The limitation period of another State, however, does not
include its rules as to when an action is commenced.   These rules are part of
the  procedural  law  of  each  forum  State.    The  final  clause  in  sec.  3
constitutes the standard means of avoiding renvoi problems.
Section 4 provides an ‘escape clause’ that will enable a Court, in
extreme cases, to do openly what has sometimes been done by indirection,
to avoid injustice in particular cases.   It is not enough that the forum States’
limitation period is different from that of the State whose substantive law is
governing; the difference must be ‘substantive’, and the ‘fair opportunity’
provision constitutes a separate and additional requirement.
In the year 2004, a Study Committee headed by Prof. Robert Pushaw
submitted a Memorandum on the 1982 Act which the National Conference
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (NCCUSL) withdrew in 1999.
42

The Memorandum refers  to the fact  that under the 1982 Act, the
substantive law would be substantive law of the State whose  law governs
the underlying claim.    But in 1988, the American Law Institute rejected the
above approach by providing that the substantive law should be determined
by  the  law  of  the  State  with  the  most  significant  relationship  to  the
limitation issue, regardless of which State’s substantive law controls and
then sets forth very specific rules that presumptively favour applying the
substantive laws of the forum State, unless the shorter limit of another State
would make more sense.
Conclusion:
The principle that a forum country applies the procedural law of the
forum country  and  the  substantive  law  of  the  country of  cause  is  well
settled.  So far as the law of limitation is concerned, the following is the
result of the above discussion.
In civil law countries, the law of limitation is treated as ‘substantive’
in the sense that on the expiry of the period of limitation, not merely the
judicial remedy is barred but the right itself gets extinguished.   In common
law countries (including India), the right remains but the judicial remedy
gets barred.  This continues to be the position in India even today, subject to
the special provisions (like sec. 11 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1963) in
respect of transnational problems, which were governed by special rules.
In the matter of transnational situations, if an action is instituted in a
forum country which followed the common law system, then in respect of a
43

cause arising outside the common law country,  the position previously was
that the procedural law of the forum country applied, including the law of
limitation of the forum country.   The sole exception, as stated in the earliest
case Huber v. Steiner: (1835) 2 Bing (NC) 202, by Tyndal CJ, was that if in
the country where the cause occurred, the law was that the right itself stood
extinguished, then the forum country would not  grant relief even if the
action was filed in the forum country within the period of limitation as
prescribed by the law of limitation of the forum country.
As commerce increased and new notions of justice were developed,
the principle that Courts should not allow ‘forum shopping’ became quite
prominent and some common law Courts, as a matter of judicial decision, as
in Canada and some Courts in USA, moved towards treating the law of the
country of the cause as substantive law and applying the same in the forum
country.   If the period was shorter in the country of the cause, then the right
would, as a matter of substantive law, stand extinguished, precluding the
party from instituting the action in another country where the period of
limitation  was  longer.    Incidentally, when  the  case  law  moved  in  this
direction, the period of limitation in the country of cause even if it was
longer than that in the forum country, was necessarily applied.
One of the reasons for the Courts to change the law was to prevent
‘forum shopping’.    The second reason was to remove ‘uncertainty’.     The
third was that there was no ‘inconvenience’ in applying the law of the other
State.    The fourth was that the principle of comity among countries had
greater recognition today.
44

In States or countries in which the case law did not move in the
direction as in Canada and some US States, as stated above, the legislature
made laws specifically treating the law of limitation of the State or country
of the cause as substantive law and thereby, the Courts in the forum country
were compelled to apply the law of limitation of the country of cause.   The
English Act of 1984 and the various Acts in the States in Australia, the
amendments to the New Zealand Act and the statutes of some of the States
in US which followed the Uniform Conflict of Laws, Limitation Act, 1982,
are examples.
In this background, we shall proceed to deal with the position in India
in the next Chapter.
45

Chapter IV
Problems in Indian limitation law and recommendations for change
The subject of foreign law of limitation and its applicability is dealt
with in the Limitation Act of 1963 in sec. 11.    Before the present Act of
1963  was  enacted,  this  matter  was  also  contained  in  sec.  11  of  the
Limitation Act of 1908.    The provision in the 1908 Act referred only to
‘foreign’ contracts  while  the  one  in  the  1963  Act  referred  to  Contracts
entered into in a ‘foreign’ country or in the ‘State of Jammu and Kashmir’.
Otherwise, in substance, there is no difference between both the Acts.   In
fact, the Third Report of the Law Commission (1956) on the basis of which
the 1963 Act was enacted, states very briefly that sec. 11 does not call for
any change.
As we are dealing with sec. 11 in detail, we shall extract it once
again:
“Sec.11:  Suits  on  contracts  entered  into  outside  the  territories  to
which the Act extends:
(1) Suits instituted in the territories to which this Act extends
on contracts entered into in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
or  in  a  foreign  country  shall  be  subject  to  the  rules  of
limitation contained in this Act.
(2) No rule of limitation in force in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir or in al foreign country shall be a defence to a suit
46

instituted in the said territories on a contract entered into in
that State or in a foreign country unless –
(a) the rule has extinguished the contract; and
(b) the parties  were domiciled in that State or in the
foreign  country  during  the  period  prescribed  by
such rule.”
It will  be  seen  that  sec.  11  requires  the  provisions  of  the  Indian
Limitation Act, 1963 to be applied in cases where a suit is filed in India in
respect of a cause of action on a contract entered into in a foreign country or
Jammu and Kashmir.   The only exception contained in subsection (2) is
that the foreign law will apply only if it has extinguished the contract and
another condition is that the parties were domiciled in the foreign country
during the period prescribed by the law of the foreign country.
In the commentary on the old Limitation Act of 1908 by U.N. Mitra
of 1949 edited by Prof. S. Venkataraman, it is stated that the section 11 was
based on the principles laid down in English cases.   According to English
law, remedies, as distinguished from rights, are to be pursued according to
the law of the place where the action is instituted.    (Darby and Bosanquet,
2nd Ed, pp.15, 58, 59)     The reason for the rule is as stated in  Huber v.
Steiner (1835) 2 Bing (NC) 202 which has been referred to in Chapter I.
That decision was cited with approval by the Privy Council in Ruckmaboye
v.  Lulloobhoy Mottichand (1835) 5 Moore’s Ind App. 234 (268) where it
was stated as follows:  “Courts of law being instituted by every nation for its
own convenience, the nature of the remedies available therein and the time
and modes of proceeding therein are regulated by the nation’s own views, of
47

what is just and proper and expedient and it is not obliged out of any comity
to the countries to depart (in the matter of procedure) from its own opinions
of what is just and proper and expedient”.     The principle contained in sec.
11 based on the previous state of English law in Commonwealth countries
has, as stated in the previous chapters, undergone a revolutionary change
bringing the law in common law countries on par with the law in civil law
countries  whereby  limitation  law  of  a  foreign  country  is  treated  as
substantive law and results in extinguishing the right itself and not merely
the judicial remedy and such law has to be applied by the forum countries in
preference to the law of limitation in the forum country which may, except
for transnational cases, still remain procedural.
A crucial mistake in the drafting of subsection (2) of sec. 11 both in
the 1908 Act and 1963 Act requires mention.    The word ‘extinguished the
contract’ in sec. 11(2)(a) as has been pointed by Stokes in his Anglo-Indian
Codes (Vol 2, p.965) really means ‘extinguished the right resulting from the
contract’.   Stokes has been quoted by Prof. S. Venkataraman editing the
commentary of U.N. Mitra (7th Ed, 1949, p.131) and also by Rustomji in his
commentary (7th Ed, 1992 edited by S.P. Sen Gupta, p.28 quoting Stokes at
p.955, Vol.2).
So far as the exception with two clauses (a) and (b) stated in sec. 11
(2)  under  the  1908  and  1963  Acts  is  concerned,  it  is  stated  by  Prof.
Venkataraman that it was drawn from Story’s Conflict of Laws, sec. 582
where the twin conditions now mentioned in sec. 11(2) were stated.
48

We have already referred in the previous Chapters to the changes in
law in UK, Australia and other countries and nowhere we find the second
condition laid down in sec. 11(2)(b) that, “and the parties were domiciled in
that State or in the foreign country during the period prescribed by such
rule”.
As rightly pointed by Sri V.R. Manohar and W.W. Chitaley in their
Commentary  (6th Ed,  1991)  at  p.280  on  the  Limitation  Act,  1963,  this
condition in sec. 11(2)(b) does not fit into the present times and requires to
be deleted.   The authors say:
“Moreover, the insistence on domicile of the parties (sec. 11(2)(b)) in
the Foreign State as a necessary prerequisite to the availability of the
defence based on foreign period of limitation, appears, in the present
submission  to be at odds with contemporary realities of our times
which  have  witnessed  an  enormous  expansion  in  the  growth  of
international  trade with advances in means of communication and
transport.     Further, the claim of domicile being used as a connecting
factor for the ascertainment of the applicable (law) to a contract of a
purely commercial nature has little merit to commend it.    It is hoped
that when the revision of the law is undertaken, this and the other
aspects discussed earlier will receive due attention.”
We agree that for the reasons stated by the authors, sec. 11(2)(b)
condition must be deleted.
49

The Full Bench decision of the Madras High Court in Muthukanni v.
Andappa (AIR 1955 Mad 96) considered sec. 11 of the 1908 Act.   No
doubt it was also concerned with sec. 13 of that Act, which corresponds to
sec. 15(5) of the 1963 Act.   Sec. 13 of the old Act stated that “In computing
the period of limitation for any suit, the time during which the defendant has
been absent from the Provinces of India and from the territories beyond the
Provinces  of India  under the administration  of the Central  Government,
shall be excluded”.      Rajamannar CJ, in the course of discussion of the law
under sec. 11 referred to the general principle as follows:
“the  general  principle  is  also  well-settled  that  in  regard  to  such
actions all matters of procedure are governed by the ‘lex fori’, the law
of the country in which the action is brought.   Statutes of limitation,
unless affecting immovable property, in so far as they bar the remedy
of  a  plaintiff,  are  always  considered  to  be  statutes  relating  to
procedure.   So, the statute of limitation in force in the country in
which the action is brought, will be applicable and not the statute of
limitation which might obtain in the place where the cause of action
arose, or the contract was made.   There is, however, one exception to
this general rule, namely, where, by the proper law governing the
transaction in respect of which an action is brought, the statute of
limitation in force in the country in which the cause of action arose or
the contract was made operates not only to bar the remedy but also to
extinguish that right, the rules of limitation in the country in which
the  suit  is  brought  have  no  application.     (Halsbury’s  Laws  of
England, Vol VI, p.355)”
50

Reference was also made to Huber v. Steiner (1835) 2 Bing NC 202 and to
Ruckmaboye v. Lullabhoy Mottichand (1851-54) 5 Moore’s Ind App 234.
The Madras High Court also referred to sec. 11(2)(b).
The general principle was also stated by Bachawat J in Dickie & Co
v. Municipal Board (AIR 1956 Cal 216 at 219) as follows:
“It is well settled that so much of the law as affects the remedy and
the procedure only is governed by the law of the country in which the
action is brought and not by foreign law.   The Court will not apply a
foreign  law  of  limitation  which  affects  the  remedy  only  and  is
therefore a matter of mere procedure.    The foreign law of limitation
will be applied where it extinguishes the right or creates the title so
that it ceases to be a matter of mere procedure.
Sec. 11 of the Act is a plain recognition of this principle.”
It will be seen that sec. 11 applies only to foreign contracts.  But this
principle must be extended to all obligations or substantive rights arising in
a foreign country with reference to which suits are filed in India.   Prof.
Venkataraman says that Dr. Stokes in his Anglo-Indian Codes, Vol II page
950 suggested that sec. 11 should be expressly extended to all obligations.
Where the remedy only is barred by a foreign law of limitation, a suit may
be instituted in India provided it is not barred by the Indian law (Nalla
Thambi v. Ponnuswami (1879) ILR 2 Mad 400; Harris v. Quine (1869) LR
4 QB 653.    That will be the position even after the proposed change,
namely, that the foreign law of limitation would apply in India in respect of
the period.
51

There is one other aspect which we have to refer in the matter of
applicability of foreign law of limitation.    It will be seen  that in the
Australian, New Zealand and UK statutes, it is said that in the matter of
exercising discretion while applying the foreign law of limitation, the law of
that country would be applicable.  For example, in the Indian Act of 1963,
there are ss. 4 to 24 in some of which there is provision for Court passing
orders in excluding certain periods – see for example sec. 14, where the
period spent in filing the suit in a wrong Court has to be excluded if that
Court was approached bona fide and in good faith.  We also have provision
where  minors  are  given  extended  period  of  time.   Sec.  12  deals  with
exclusion of time taken in obtaining certified copies of judgments etc.
We are not  in  favour  of applying  rules  of the foreign  law  which
correspond to ss. 4 to 24 of the Indian law.  That would be compelling
Indian Courts to identify various other provisions of the law of limitation or
procedure in a number of countries.  We, therefore, recommend that all that
applies is the foreign period of limitation together with any declaration in
that  law  that  it  is  substantive  or  that  the  right  does  or  does  not  get
extinguished.    The foreign period applies whether it is shorter or longer.
But if a question corresponding to ss. 4 to 24 arises, the provisions of ss. 4
to 24 of the Indian Act apply.
As regards execution of foreign decrees, sec. 11 did not refer to the
aspect expressly but Courts have held that the same principle which applies
to  suits  should  be  applicable  to  execution  proceedings,  i.e.  Indian
procedural law, including Indian Limitation Act, will apply.    In Dickie &
52

Co,  above  referred  to,  the  Calcutta  High  Court  said:  “sec.  11  of  the
Limitation Act is, however, not exhaustive.   Thus it was held in Nabibhati
Vazirbhai v. Dayabhai Amulukh, AIR 1916 Bom p.200, a decree passed by
the Native  State  of Baroda  could  not  be executed  in  India  because  the
application  for  execution  was  barred  by  the  Indian  Law  of  Limitation
although it was clearly not barred by the law of limitation of Baroda State”.
To a like effect is the principle laid down in Srinivasa v. Narayana:
AIR 1923 Mad 72 and Hukumchand Aswal v. Gyanendar (1887) ILR 6 Cal
570.   It was laid down in these cases that the law of limitation for the
execution of a decree transferred to an Indian Court for execution is that law
which prevails in the latter Court.
But  the  legislature  may  expressly  enact  that  a  foreign  rule  of
limitation shall be applicable to particular suits, although such rule has not
extinguished the substantive right.    For instance, see sec. 8 of Act XII of
1886,  relating  to  the  cession  of  Jhansi.    (Prof. Venkataraman  in  U.N.
Mitra’s Commentary, ibid, p.132)
So far as the execution of foreign decrees is concerned, there being no
specific  article  in the Schedule to Limitation  Act, 1963, there has been
conflict of decisions.   A Full Bench of the Madras  High Court in Sheik Ali
v. Sheik Mohammed: AIR 1967 Mad 45 (FB) took the view that Art. 182
applies only to execution of decrees passed by Courts in India and that
hence the residuary Article 181 applies.   It further held that under the third
column, the starting point is the date on which the ‘right to apply accrues’
and it held that time commences from the date on which a certified copy of
53

the foreign decree is filed in the District Court in India.   However, the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Lakhpat Rai Sharma v. Atma Singh: AIR
1971 Punjab & Haryana 476 held that Art. 182 which applies to execution
of decree also applies to execution of foreign decrees.
Instead of leaving the matters indefinite, we are of the view that some
provisions are required to be made.   Firstly the ‘foreign country’ here must
be a ‘reciprocating country’ under sec. 44A of the CPC.    Only then is a
foreign decree executable in India.   Of course, sec. 44A of CPC does not
apply to decrees passed in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.   The decrees
passed in that State can be executed in other parts of India as per sec. 43.
Hitherto under the 1963 Act, limitation law being procedural, the Indian Act
was applied in regard to execution of decrees of foreign courts, the only
dispute was whether Art. 181 or 182 of the 1908 Act (now 137, 136 of the
1963 Act) would apply.    Now that we are proposing under the new sec. 11
that the foreign period of limitation will apply to suits, this principle must
also be reflected in the proposed amendments in respect of execution of
foreign decrees.    This is reflected in sec. 11A as proposed.     
We have examined the question whether the period for execution of a
domestic decree as prescribed in the foreign law should apply or whether
the period for execution of a foreign decree as prescribed in the foreign law
should apply.   It is possible that in some countries, as in ours, there is no
specific article dealing with execution of foreign decrees.   In order to avoid
uncertainty, we are of the view that the period for execution of a foreign
decree in Indian Courts must be the period fixed in the foreign country for
execution of its domestic decrees.   Now that a certified copy thereof will be
54

filed  in  the  Indian  District  Court  under  sec.  44A  of  the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure, 1908, the time for commencement, in our view, should be the
date on which the certified copy of the foreign decree is filed here.   As the
proposed sec. 11A applies, principles stated in proposed sec. 11 apply.     As
sec. 11(2) as proposed uses the words ‘subject to the provision of this Act’,
it is obvious that for purposes of proposed Art. 136A, ss. 4 to 24 of the Act
shall also apply.    The following provisions are proposed for the new sec.
11A.
The proposed sec. 11A will relate to the execution in India in the
Courts to which the Act extends, of decrees passed in foreign countries
which are ‘reciprocating countries’ as stated in the Explanation below sec.
44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.   (Sec. 11A does not deal with
execution of decrees passed by Court in Jammu and Kashmir, in the Courts
in other parts of India for the law is settled by judicial decisions that sec. 43
CPC applies).    In respect of such decrees passed in reciprocating foreign
countries, which are sought to be executed in the Court to which the Act
extends, in view of proposed sec. 11A, the principle of limitation stated in
sec.  11  shall  apply,  namely,  period  of  limitation  and  the  principle  of
extinguishment of rights as may be stated in the law of limitation of the said
foreign country.   Further, the period of limitation of the foreign law that
applies for execution in such Indian Courts as stated above, will be the
period prescribed by the foreign law for execution of the decrees passed by
its domestic Courts.    The commencement of the period will be from the
date of filing a certified copy of the decree of the foreign Court in the Indian
Court as stated in sec. 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  By virtue
of sec. 11A attracting the principles of the proposed sec. 11, the provisions
55

of ss. 4 to 24 shall also apply to such applications for execution filed in
India.
Prospective operation:
We further recommend that the provision of ss. 11 and 11A and Art.
136A  shall  apply  only  in  relation  to  causes  of  action  arising  after  the
commencement  of  the  proposed  amendment  Act.     Hence,  the  new
proposals will not apply to pending proceedings or even to causes of action
which have already arisen before the commencement of the amending Act.
Summarising the recommendations, the position is as follows:
(1) The provision in sec.11 of the 1963 Act is confined to contracts
entered into in a foreign country but does extend to other matters
like torts etc.  As pointed above, the proposed section must deal
with the applicability of the foreign law of limitation as regards
rights and obligations arising out of contracts entered into in the
foreign country or in respect of any other kind of legal rights and
obligations arising in the foreign country.   The same will be the
position in respect of such rights  and obligations  in respect of
J & K.
(2) The existing provision in the 1963 Act, namely, sec. 11 does not
conform to the changes made in the statutes in other common law
countries and, in view of the latest trends in other countries, the
proposed sec. 11 must apply the law of limitation of the foreign
country, treating it as substantive law.  In that case whether the
right  gets  extinguished  there  or  whether  the  period  under  the
56

foreign law is larger or shorter than the corresponding period in
India, the foreign period will apply.     If the foreign law states that
the right is extinguished after the period, Indian Courts will refuse
relief.
(3) The condition  in sec. 11(2)(b) that the  parties  must have been
domiciled in the foreign country during the relevant period, must
be deleted.
(4) So far as the provision of ss. 4 to 24 of the Indian Limitation are
concerned, we are of the view that those sections must continue to
apply to suits filed on the basis of obligations arising abroad and
the  only thing  that  applies  from  the  foreign  law  is  the  period
prescribed thereon or the declaration that the right is extinguished.
In the matter of applicability of ss. 4 to 24 of the Indian Act, 1963,
the Indian law will apply.   Here, we have deviated from the UK
Act of 1984 as well as the Australian enactments.    The reason is
that otherwise, Indian Courts will have to delve into the various
other provisions of the foreign law relating to the manner in which
discretion has to be exercised.     Sec. 11 will apply to cause of
action arising in the State of Jammu and Kashmir and in regard to
which suits are filed in India, outside Jammu and Kashmir.
(5) So far as execution of foreign decrees is concerned, there is no
need to disturb the present state of case law that for execution of
decrees passed in the State of Jammu & Kashmir in Courts in
other parts of India, sec. 43 of CPC applies.   In respect of decrees
passed in foreign countries referred to in the Explanation to sec.
57

44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (called reciprocating
countries), the period for execution of such foreign decrees shall
be the period as stated in the foreign law, for execution of the
decrees passed in the Courts in that country, i.e. domestic decrees.
That period will be applicable for execution of foreign decrees in
the Courts in India to which the Indian Act of 1963 extends.  The
commencement of the period shall be the date on which a certified
copy of the decree of the foreign Court in the reciprocating foreign
country is filed in the District Court in India as stated in sec. 44A
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.   The computation of the
period shall be in accordance with the provisions of ss. 4 to 24.
(6) It is also proposed that the period of limitation in the State of
Jammu and Kashmir or a foreign country that is applicable in India
will be for the purpose of the institution of suits in the Courts to
which  the  1963  Act  extends  and  not  for  purposes  of  further
proceedings  arising  therefrom.     Likewise,  the  proposal  for
applying the foreign period for execution of foreign decrees in
India is only for purposes of filing an application for execution in
such Indian Courts and not for purpose of the further proceedings
arising therefrom.
(7) The proposed changes will be prospective in operation in the sense
that they will apply only to causes of action arising after the date
of commencement of the proposed legislation.    That would mean
that the proposed changes will not apply to pending proceedings
or to causes of action that have not arisen.   This is so far as suits
58

to be filed in the Courts in India to which the 1963 Act applies,
which are based on foreign causes of action as provided in new
sec. 11.
(8) So far as the execution of decrees of Courts of a foreign country is
concerned, execution application filed for that purpose in Indians
courts under the 1963 Act, the proposed provisions in sections11A
and Art. 136A, shall not apply to applications for execution of
foreign decrees, which were passed before the commencement of
the proposed amending Act.
We recommend accordingly.
In order to concretize our  recommendations  in legislative form, a
Draft  Bill,  namely,  Limitation  (Amendment)  Bill,  2005,  is  appended  as
Annexure I to this Report.
We  place  on  record  the  valuable  assistance  rendered  by  Dr.  S.
Muralidhar, Part-time Member of the Law Commission.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
59

(Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi)
Member-Secretary
Dated: 7th June, 2005
60

Annexure I
The Limitation (Amendment) Bill, 2005
A
BILL
to amend the Limitation Act, 1963
BE it enacted by Parliament in the fifty-sixth Year of the Republic:-
Short Title and Commencement:
1. (1) This Act may be called the Limitation (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Substitution of new section 11 for section 11:
2. For  section  11  of  the  Limitation  Act,  1963  (Act  36  of  1963)
(hereinafter  called  the  Principal  Act),  the  following  section  shall  be
substituted, namely:-
Suits on contracts entered into or legal rights and obligations arising
outside the territories to which this Act extends:
61

“11(1) Suits  instituted  in  the  territories  to  which  this  Act
extends, on the basis of:
(i) rights and obligations  arising out of contracts entered in,
or
(ii) rights and obligations of any other kind arising in 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir or in a foreign country, shall be
subject to the rules of limitation contained in subsection (2).
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, where the substantive law
applicable in the State of Jammu & Kashmir or in a foreign country is
to govern a suit before a Court to which this Act extends, the period
of  limitation  and  the  principle  of  extinguishment  of  the  right  as
provided in the law of limitation of the said State or country, shall
apply for institution of such suits and shall be regarded as part of the
substantive law of the said State or country.
Insertion of new section 11A:
3. After section 11 of the principal Act as substituted by section 2 of this
Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
Execution  of  decrees  passed  by  Courts  in  reciprocating  foreign
countries:
“11A   Where  a  decree  is  passed  by  a  superior  Court  in  any
reciprocating territory as defined in the Explanation to sec 44A of the
Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908,  and  an  application  is  filed  for
execution thereof in any Court to which this Act extends, then the
rules of limitation referred to in sec. 11 shall apply for the filing of
62

such applications but the date of commencement of the period for
execution of such decrees shall be the date specified in the Schedule.
Insertion of Art 136A in the Schedule:
4. In the Schedule to the principal Act, after Art 136, the following
Article shall be inserted:
“Art 136A Execution of a Period as applicable   Date on 
decree passed under the law of      which a
by the limitation in the      
certified
superior reciprocating territory copy of the 
Court of a for execution     said decree
reciprocating of a decree     is filed in
territory as per passed in that the District
Explanation territory. Court in 
below sec. 44A accordance  
of the Code of with
the 
Civil Procedure, provisions
1908. of sec. 44A
of the Code 
of Civil 
Procedure,
1908.”
63

Transitional Provision:
Provisions of the Amending Act to be prospective in operation:
5. (1) The provisions of the principal Act, as amended by sec. 2 of this Act,
shall be prospective in operation and shall not apply to causes of
action which have arisen in the State of Jammu & Kashmir or in a
foreign country, before the commencement of this Act.
    (2) The provisions of the principal Act, as amended by sec. 3 and 4 of
this Act shall be prospective in operation and shall not apply to the
execution of decrees as stated in the said sections, where such decrees
are passed in the said territories before the commencement of this
Act.
64