LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
194TH REPORT
ON
VERIFICATION OF STAMP DUTIES 
AND
REGISTRATION OF ARBITRAL AWARDS
JUNE 2005

JUSTICE
M. JAGANNADHA RAO LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Chairman SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI 110 001
Tel: 23384475
Fax (011)23073864, 23388870
Email: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
Res: 1 Janpath, New Delhi 110 001
Tel: 23019465
DO No.6(3)108/2005-LC(LS)                  June 7, 2005
Dear Shri Bhardwaj Ji,
I  have  great  pleasure  in  forwarding  the  194th Report  of the  Law
Commission on ‘Verification of Stamp Duties and Registration  of
Arbitral Awards’.
2

The subject was taken up suo motu pursuant to the communication of
the Judgment of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in O.P.D.
27597/02  dated  17.12.2003  (modified  on  30.1.2004)  to  the  Law
Commission  and  pursuant  to  the  observations  therein  that  the  Law
Commission may consider a legislative amendment.
We may state that under the new Arbitration & Conciliation  Act,
1996, sec 31(5) states that the arbitral tribunal shall communicate a ‘signed’
copy of the arbitral award to the parties.  Thereafter, the parties are entitled
to  file  applications  for  setting  aside  the  award  under  sec  34(1)  or  for
enforcement of the award under section 36, as the case may be, by annexing
the copy of the arbitral award communicated to them.  If only a copy of the
award is to be filed along with the said applications under the new Act of
1996, the Court will not be in a position to know whether the original award
is duly stamped or, where it requires compulsory registration, whether it is
duly registered.  The Madras High Court, in the above Judgment, while
observing that a legislative amendment is necessary, formulated an interim
working  solution  under  which  the  applicant  could  be  directed  by  the
Registry of the Court to file fresh stamp papers in the Court of the required
value or to deposit the money-value of the required stamp duty, along with
the application under sec 34(1) or sec 36, with a right to obtain refund
thereof, in case the original is thereafter found by the Court to have been
duly stamped.  This solution, in our view, is not satisfactory as it can cause
serious hardship to the parties where the stamp duty is a heavy amount.
Further,  the  above  solution  suggested  by  the  Court  does  not  solve  the
problem relating to registration.  Under sec 35 of the Stamp Act, 1899, an
award which is unstamped or is insufficiently stamped is inadmissible for
any purpose and under sec 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 an award, if it
affects  immoveable  property in the manner mentioned  in  the  section,  it
requires compulsory registration, and will be invalid if it is not registered.
Under the Act of 1940, the problem of verifying the original did not arise in
as much as section 14(2) of that Act required the original award to be filed
into Court  and hence the Court was able to verify whether the original
award  was  duly  stamped  or  was  duly  registered,  where  it  required
compulsory registration. 
3

The  Commission,  in  the  present  Report,  has  examined  several
alternatives  solutions  and  compared  their  advantages  and  disadvantages.
The Commission found solutions (3) and (5) (referred to in Chapter IV) as
acceptable.  Solution (3) would require the original award to be filed into
Court as under section 14(2) of the old Act, while solution (5) would require
the arbitral tribunal to make an endorsement on the photocopy of the award
(which  is  sent  to  the  parties)  as  to  whether  the  original  award  is  duly
stamped (and specifying the value of the stamp duty paid) and specifying
whether the original award is duly registered (where it requires compulsory
registration).  Either of these two solutions would, in the opinion of the
Commission, meet the problem posed by the Madras High Court, being a
problem that is being faced by the Courts whenever applications under sec
34(1) or under sec 36 are filed.  A Draft of the Amendments suggested is
also enclosed.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Sri H.R. Bhardwaj
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHI.
4

INDEX
Chapter Title Page Nos.
I Introductory 3 – 5
II Issues arising out of requirement of stamp duty
and registration of the arbitral awards 6 – 12
III The interim working solution found by the
Madras High Court 13 – 16
IV Comparison of different solutions and our
Recommendations 17 – 26
Annexure 27 – 28
5

CHAPTER I
Introductory
1.1 Preliminary: 
The subject of this Report, namely, “Verification of Stamp Duties and
Registration  of  Arbitral  Awards”  is  taken  up  by  the  Law  Commission,
pursuant to the judgment of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in
The Commissioner Corporation of Chennai v.  K. Ramdass & Co. (O.P.D.
No.27597/02)  dated  17.12.2003  (modified  on  30.1.2004)  which  was
forwarded by the Registrar (Management), Madras High Court in his R.O.C.
517/2004, O.S. dated 17.2.2004.   The High Court, in its above judgment,
requested the Law Commission to consider the proposals for amendment
made in the judgment.
1.2 Effect of non-filing of original awards in Court: 
After an award is passed by the arbitral tribunal, the question arises
whether the original arbitral award passed by the arbitral tribunal under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as new Act)
has been duly stamped or duly registered.    The reason why the question
has arisen is because the 1996 Act does not require the original award to be
filed in Court.   Sec. 31(5) of the Act merely states that the arbitral tribunal
shall  communicate  a ‘signed  copy’ of the  original  arbitral  award  to the
parties.   The ‘signed copy’ of the award does not reveal whether or not the
original arbitral award is duly stamped or registered.  There is no provision
6

in the new Act which states that the original award shall be filed in the
Court  nor  a  provision  which  speaks  about  what  the  arbitral  tribunal  is
supposed to do with the original award passed by it.  Several arbitrators
have been finding difficulty as to what they should do with the original
award and the arbitration papers – including the papers containing the oral
and documentary evidence.
In the existing situation, if only a signed copy of the award is to be
sent to the parties and the party who receives it wants to file an application
under sec. 34(1) of the new Act for setting aside the award in a Court of law
or if a party wants to file an application for enforcement of the award in a
Court of law, the said Court is not in a position to know whether or not the
original award has been duly stamped or registered.    In the abovesaid
judgment of the Madras High Court it was held that in such circumstances
where the Court is not sure if the award was duly stamped, the Court could
direct the applicant to deposit the necessary stamp papers or the money
value thereof into Court along with the application so that in case it was
later discovered that the stamp duty had been paid, the Court could return
the stamp papers or refund the amount.     However, such a course could, in
our view, cause serious inconvenience and hardship to the parties if the
stamp duty payable on the award was substantial.   Nor is the Court able, at
the stage of these applications, to determine whether the original award has
been  duly  registered,  where  it  is  compulsorily  registrable  under  the
provisions of section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908.
7

1.3 Position under the Arbitration Act, 1940:
It may be pointed out that there was no such difficulty under the
Arbitration Act, 1940 (since repealed) inasmuch as the original award had
to be filed in Court under section 14(2) of that Act so that a decree could be
passed on the basis  of the award.   But, under the new Act, the award
becomes enforceable as a decree straightaway after the period for filing an
application to set aside the award has expired.     Thus, while there was no
difficulty for the Court to look into and verify the original award under the
1940 Act, the difficulty has arisen in regard to awards passed under the new
Act for the simple reason that under the new Act, an arbitral tribunal is
required to send only signed copies of the award to the parties.
1.4 We shall deal with the matter in detail in the ensuing chapters on
issues  arising  out  of  the  requirement  of  payment of  stamp  duty on  the
arbitral award and their compulsory registration.
8

CHAPTER II
Issues arising out of requirement of stamp duty and
registration of the arbitral awards
Preliminary:
2.1 We shall initially refer to the issues presented by the laws relating to
stamp duties and registration in respect of arbitral awards.   So far as stamp
duties  are  concerned,  the  Indian  Stamp Act,  1899  applies  in  respect  to
arbitral  awards  throughout  India,  but  some  States  have  passed  separate
Stamp Acts to govern stamp duties in their States.   So far as registration of
awards is concerned, the Registration Act, 1908 deals with registration of
documents.  In some States, there are brief State amendments to this Act.
The issues of requirements of stamp duty and registration of arbitral awards
are  discussed  under  two  separate  headings:  (A)  Stamp  Duties  and  (B)
Registration.
2.2 (A) Stamp Duties:  
Section  35  of  the  Indian  Stamp  Act,  1899  (and  corresponding
provision in the State Acts) says that documents which are required to be
stamped, if they are not stamped, or are inadequately stamped, will not be
admissible  in  evidence  ‘for  any  purpose’.     Section  33  deals  with
impounding  of  documents  presented  before  a  public  authority  who  is
entitled to record evidence.   Stamp duty that is leviable and Penalties for
non-payment or insufficient payment of stamp duties can be collected as
9

provided  in  section 35.    The  Schedule to  the Indian Stamp Act, 1899
contains  a  specific  provision  in  Article  12  mentioning  the  stamp  duty
payable on ‘arbitration awards’.    Sections 33 and 35 of the Stamp Act are
thus attracted if the award is not stamped or is insufficiently stamped.
It will be appropriate, in this connection, to refer to the judgment of
the Madras High Court dated 17.12.2003 (modified on 30.1.2004) to which
reference has been made in Chapter I.    The question that arose there was in
relation to stamp duties, namely, whether the Registry of the High Court
would be justified in impounding the copy of the arbitral award where it
was filed along with the application under section 34(1) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 (a like question will arise if an application is
filed under section 36 of the new Act for enforcement of the award).
Earlier, in M/s Wilson & Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. K.S. Loka Vinayagam: AIR
1992 Madras 100 (in a case decided under the 1940 Act), the Madras High
Court had held that in view of section 35 of the Stamp Act, 1899, the award
could  not  have  been  admitted  in  evidence  and  it  gave  a  direction  for
impounding the award as prescribed in section 33 of the Stamp Act.    It
relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Rikhabdas v. Vallabhdas:
AIR 1962 SC 551.    Subsequently, a different view was taken by the High
Court  in  cases  decided  under  the  new  Act  (D.No.25215/2001  and
D.No.6108/2002) that inasmuch as the 1996 Act does not compel the parties
to file the original award into Court, the above principle of M/s Wilson &
Co. Pvt. Ltd. does not apply.
10

The conflict in judgments led to a reference to a Division Bench for
resolving  the  difference.    The  Division  Bench  in  its  judgment  dated
17.12.2003 has held that a signed copy of the award was not the same thing
as the original award.   The Court said that Rikhabdas case decided by the
Supreme Court merely held that the remittal of the defective award (passed
under the 1940 Act) by the High Court to the arbitrators for rewriting the
award on stamp paper was not correct and the proper remedy was to direct
parties to take steps to cure the defect by paying the stamp duty along with
such penalties as may be levied.   In fact, in Srinivasa Rao v. V. Narasimha
Rao AIR  1963  AP  193,  the  Andhra  Pradesh  High  Court  held  that  the
arbitrators become functus officio as soon as the award is signed and hence
they cannot “rewrite” the award on stamp paper for presentation before the
registration authorities.   In M. Venkataratnam v. M. Chelamayya AIR 1967
AP 257 (FB), a Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court held that if
the original award was unstamped and a copy of the award written on stamp
papers was filed along with the original award, though the original award
could not be regarded as duly stamped, the stamps on the copy of the award
might be treated as intended to serve as payment of stamp duty so as to
enable the original award to be admitted in evidence under section 35 of the
Stamp Act.   It treated the original award and copy thereof as a single
document.   The Supreme Court in  M. Chelamayya v.  M. Venkataratnam
AIR 1972 SC 1121 accepted the above view of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court.   In Jupudi v. Pulavarthi AIR 1970 SC 1070, the Supreme Court had
held that section 35 of the Stamp Act imposes a bar on the reception of any
document  except  the  original  and  forbids  the  reception  of  secondary
evidence and section 36 of the Stamp Act lifts the bar imposed by section 35
11

only  in  a  case  where  the  original  unstamped  or  insufficiently  stamped
document was admitted into evidence without objection.
The Madras High Court in its judgment dated 17.12.2003 held that in
view of section 31(5), the copy of the award signed by the arbitrators could
be treated as a counterpart as done in  Jayarama Iyer v.  Ramanatha Iyer
(1976 (1) MLJ 135) within section 62 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and that
the copy does not fall within section 63 of that Act and hence a copy is
chargeable to stamp duty under Art. 25 of Sch. I of the Stamp Act.    The
Madras High Court observed that in view of Art. 25, if a counterpart of any
instrument is sought to be produced in evidence, it is open to the Court to
require the original to be produced unless it bears an endorsement showing
that duty has been paid on the original.
The Madras High Court pointed out that there may be a situation
where a party feels it necessary to file an urgent application for stay of
enforcement of award and if the Court insists on production of the original
award which may indeed be not available with the applicant, it can cause
serious and grave hardship which sometimes cannot even be compensated in
restitution proceedings if the award be later set aside.   Though section 36 of
the new Act of 1996  states  that enforcement of the award is  not to be
permitted  if  an application  for setting  aside the  award  is  pending,  it  is
possible that the opposite party may well nigh contend that there is no valid
application  under section  34  as  the  signed  copy of the  award does  not
disclose that the original award bears the required stamp or that it is duly
registered.
12

Likewise, when an application is filed under section 36 of the new
Act (without there being an application under sec. 34 by the losing party),
the losing party may contend that the award is inexecutable because only a
signed copy of the award is filed and that either the original award be filed
or there must be proof that the original award is properly stamped and duly
registered.
The Madras High Court, therefore, gave an interim working solution
that  the  applicant  will  have  to  deposit  the  requisite  stamp  papers  or
equivalent value in cash in the Court, with a right to refund after the original
award is called for and produced.    We shall discuss this aspect in detail in
the next Chapter.
Having  referred  to  the  problems  that  can  arise  in  the  light  of
provisions  relating  to stamp duties, we shall  next refer to the problems
arising under the registration laws.
2.3 (B) Registration:
Every  non-testamentary  document  is  required  to  be  registered
compulsorily under section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, if the value of
the immovable property is one hundred rupees or more and if the document
“purports or operates to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether
in the present or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or
contingent”.   This is provided in section 17(1)(b) of the Act.  Section 17(2)
deals with exemptions.  In M. Venkataratnam v. M. Chelamayya: AIR 1967
AP 257 (FB) the Andhra Pradesh High Court held that the ‘absence of any
13

provision to indicate that an award need not be registered after the coming
into force of the Arbitration Act of 1940 seems to point to the conclusion
that  the  legislature  considered  that  an  award  should  be  registered  if  it
purported to affect immovable property as contemplated by section 17(1)(b)
of the Registration Act.    To say that an award to be enforceable will have
to be rendered a rule of the Court under sec. 17 of the (Arbitration Act,
1940) is not tantamount to saying that no other requirement of law needs to
be complied with for making an award valid’.   The Full Bench held that
such an award, if it affects immovable property, must be registered in the
manner mentioned in sec. 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act, otherwise it will
be invalid.  Both the Registration Act, 1908 and the Arbitration Act, 1940
had to be read together, it was observed.
The above view of the Andhra Pradesh High Court was upheld by the
Supreme Court in  M. Chelamayya v.  M. Venkataratnam (AIR  1972  SC
1121).
In the light of the above judgments, when an application is filed for
enforcement of an award on the basis of a signed copy thereof, it is open to
the opposite party to contend that, on facts, the original award is required to
be registered and as there is no proof that the original award is registered,
the execution application is not maintainable.     The Court has no material
at  that  stage  to  verify  if  the  provisions  of  the  section  17(1)(b)  of  the
Registration Act, 1908 have been complied with.
14

2.4 Conclusion:
In view of the provisions of section 35 of the Stamp Act, 1899, the
award  which  requires  to  be  stamped  is  not  stamped  or  is  inadequately
stamped, is inadmissible for “all purposes” and an award which requires to
be registered, if it falls within section 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act, 1908
and if it is not registered, is not a valid document and cannot be treated as
affecting immovable property.
Whenever such problems arise in applications under section 34(1) or
application under section 36 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996,
initially the Court has no material before it to verify whether the original
award  has  been  duly  stamped.    Hence,  it  cannot  issue  notice  on  the
applications.   This problem has arisen under the  new Act in view of the
fact that section 31(5) requires the arbitrators to send only signed copies of
the award to the parties.    These problems did not arise under the 1940 Act
because section 14(2) of that Act required the filing of the original award in
the  Court  and  the  parties  could  also  apply  to  the  Court  to  direct  the
arbitrators to file the original award into Court.
That is why the Madras High Court in its judgment dated 17.12.2003
(modified on 30.1.2004) felt that this is a matter for a legislative amendment
and referred the matter to the Law Commission.   In Chapter III, we shall
deal in detail with the interim working solution found by the Madras High
Court to which we have already made reference.
15

CHAPTER III
The interim working solution found by the Madras High Court
3.1 The first Order of the Madras High Court dated 17  th   December, 2003:   
In the initial judgment of the Division Bench of the Madras High
Court dated 17.12.2003 in OPD 27597/02 (as modified on 30.1.2004), as
stated earlier, an  interim solution was found but the Court obviously felt
that a permanent solution was feasible only by a legislative amendment.  We
shall now refer to the interim working solution found by the Madras High
Court in the above decision. 
In its initial judgment dated 17.12.2003, the Division Bench held that
it will be open to the Registry, when an application to set aside the arbitral
award is filed under sec. 34(1) of the new Act or when an application is
filed to enforce the arbitral award under sec. 36 of the new Act, to examine
whether  the  copy  of  the  award  produced  by  the  applicant  contains  an
endorsement  to  the  effect  that  the  arbitral  tribunal  had  collected  the
necessary stamps and the award had been engrossed on stamp papers and
when such an endorsement by the arbitral tribunal appears on the award, it
will be open to the Registry to act on such an endorsement and process the
application filed under sec. 34(1) or sec. 36.   
The High Court further held that where there is no such endorsement
on the copy of the award filed along with the said applications, then the
16

Registry will be entitled to direct the party moving the application to pay -
the necessary stamp duty (i.e. filing the stamp papers) payable on the award
and take the application on file subject to the condition that the applicant,
whether he has filed the application to set aside the award or to enforce the
award, should satisfy the Court before the first date of hearing fixed for the
appearance of the other side, that necessary stamp duty has been paid on the
award and the original award has been engrossed on stamp papers. If the
party is able to establish that the stamp duty has been paid and the original
award has been engrossed on necessary stamp papers, then the stamp duty,
if any, paid on the copy produced before the Court, shall be refunded to the
party who paid the stamp duty (i.e. the stamp papers filed will be given
back).  If the party is not able to establish before the first date of hearing for
appearance of the other side that the award is  duly stamped, the applicant
will have to face necessary consequences of payment of stamp duty and
penalty and impounding of the document.  If the party does not pay the
stamp duty and penalty within the time stipulated by the Court, the award
shall be impounded and consequently, the copy of the award cannot be
taken on record resulting in the dismissal of the application. This procedure
the Court held should apply in applications filed whether under section 34
or section 36 of the new Act. 
In para 25 of the judgment, the Madras High Court  proposed the
following amendment to section 31 (1) of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996.  It stated as follows: 
17

"We are of the view that  the difficulty faced to find out whether
stamp duty has been collected or not can be resolved by a simple
amendment to section 31 (1)."
The present provision in section 31 (1) reads:
"31  (1). An arbitral  award  shall  be made in writing and  shall be
signed by the members of the arbitral tribunal."
The proposal by the Madras High Court is to substitute the following
sub-section for the present section 31 (1).  It was proposed by the Court as
follows:
"31 (1). An arbitral award shall be made in writing, duly stamped and
shall be signed by the members of the arbitral tribunal."
The  Court  specifically  observed  that  the  Law  Commission  may
consider the above proposal and make appropriate recommendations.  The
Court directed the Registry to send a copy of the judgment to the Law
Commission.
3.2 The second Order of the Madras High Court dated 30  th   January, 2004:  
By a  subsequent  order  dated  30.1.2004,  the  Court  stated  that  the
earlier directions given by them for deposit of the stamp duty (i.e. filing of
stamp papers and later returning them back) may create hardship and result
in problems in granting refund if required stamp papers are deposited into
18

Court for the purpose of the award.  This problem arises because there is a
separate procedure under the Stamp Act, 1899 in section 54 for seeking
refund if stamp papers  which are already purchased for a purpose are not
used.  The High Court, therefore, slightly modified its earlier order dated
17.12.2003 to the following effect, permitting cash deposit: 
"We, therefore, make it clear that it is open to the party either to pay
necessary stamp duty  or to deposit the sum of money equivalent to
the value of the stamp duty, in the Registry and it is also open to the
Registry to recover the amount in cash."
This  is  the interim working  solution  offered  by the  Madras  High
Court.   But, the Court felt that the whole issue be examined by the Law
Commission.
3.3 In the next Chapter IV, we shall examine the above solution given by
the Madras High Court and the problems that the said solution may still
create.
19

CHAPTER IV
Comparison of different solutions and our recommendations
4.1 Preliminary:  
In the last Chapter, we referred to the interim working solution found
by the Madras High Court (supra) in relation to the payment of stamp duty
on award and its draft for amendment of sec. 31(1) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation  Act, 1996.   As stated earlier, in our view, the solution of
directing deposit of stamp papers or deposit of money equivalent, can create
serious problems or hardship for the parties.
4.2 Analysis of possible solutions and their merits:
In this  Chapter, we shall  examine various  possible  solutions  and the
comparative merits thereof.    We shall point out various possible solutions
and shall refer to the advantages or shortcomings of each of these solutions.
We shall first deal with the interim solution given by the Madras High Court
in para (1) below.
(1) Firstly, the proposal of the Madras High Court deals only with the
question  whether  the  original  award  is  'duly stamped'  and  not
whether the award is ‘duly registered’.
Secondly, the  Madras  High  Court  does  not  require  that  the
signed  copy  of  the  award  which  is  sent  to  the  parties  should
20

contain an endorsement of the arbitrator, under their signature, that
the original award has been duly stamped and registered. 
Thirdly, the view of the Madras High Court as to deposit of the
requisite stamp papers or payment of cash equivalent of the stamp
duty payable on the original award, can cause serious hardship in
several cases.  If the parties had already provided the necessary
stamp papers to the arbitrator for engrossing the award on stamp
papers,  to  ask  them  to  deposit  fresh  stamp  papers  or  cash
equivalent would, in our view, amount to an unnecessary burden.
For example, in a case where an award was passed in Delhi in a
claim of Rs.500 crores, the parties deposited stamp papers worth
Rs.50 lakhs and the award was indeed engrossed on such papers.
If in such a case, the original award is retained with the arbitrators
and one of the parties files an application under section 34 or 36 of
the new Act of 1996, to direct that party to again deposit cash of
Rs.50  lakhs  would  be  a  great  hardship.   Hence,  this  interim
working  solution  may,  in  a  large  number  of  cases,  be  not  a
satisfactory solution.
(2) We shall now refer to another solution of signing more than one
original award so that each party can be given one original award.
There may be a situation where the stamp duty payable on the
award may not be large and if it is a case where the award is not
compulsorily  registrable  (e.g.  where  it  is  only  an  award  for
money), parties may be prepared to deposit the requisite stamp
papers for more than one original award, so that one can file a
section 34 application and the other, a section 36 application.  Or
21

where the award is partly in favour of one party and partly in
favour of another party, and each feels aggrieved, they may indeed
file separate applications annexing the stamped originals.  
But, in our view, a problem can still arise whether there can be
more than one original award for, once the first of the original
awards  is  signed  on  stamp  papers,  it  may  be  said  that  the
arbitrators  have  become  ‘functus  officio’ and  that  the  second
original award signed by them is  invalid.    It may indeed be
difficult to find out which of the two awards was signed first.  This
solution is thus not helpful. 
(3) Yet another solution could be that after the award is passed, an
amendment by introducing a new provision in the 1996 Act may
lay down that that the original award should be filed in the Court,
within whose jurisdiction the award is passed, i.e. just as it was
being done under the 1940 Act.    This, in our view, can be one of
the  possible  solutions  because  the  Court  will  then  have  in  its
possession, the original award itself and it can verify whether or
not  the requirements  of stamp duty and  registration  have been
complied with by the arbitrators.    There is sufficient  merit in
this solution.
In fact, several Arbitrators appointed under the new Act, including
retired Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, have raised the
question as to –
22

(a) How  long  they  should  keep  the  original  award  with  them,
particularly, if no party files an application under section 34 or
section 36?
(b) How  long  they  should  keep  the  records  of  the  arbitration
proceedings, the pleading, evidence, etc., with them? and
(c) As  to  the  point  of  time  at  which  they  could  return  the
documents to the respective parties who had filed them.  After
all,  the  parties  may  require  the  original  title  deeds  and
documents for various purposes – e.g. raising loan on security
or for mortgage the property or sale thereof.
These problems will be solved if the newAct is amended to say that
the original award will be filed by the arbitrators in a Court of law.
(4) We shall now refer to another possible solution of handing over
original award to the parties.   But then, the question arises, to
which party should the original be given.    There can be a variety
of situations:
(a) If a claim is simply dismissed, the original award could
be  given  to  the  claimant  so  that  he  may  file  an
application under sec. 34(1).  When a claim is dismissed,
there  is  no  question  of  the  opposite  party  filing  any
application for enforcement of the award in a Court of
law.   Here, there is not much of a problem.
23

(b) But, where the claim is allowed wholly in favour of the
claimant, the opposite party may want the original award
for filing an application under section 34(1) for setting
aside the award while the successful party may like to
have the original award for the purpose of applying for
enforcement  of  the  award  under  section  36.   With  a
single original award it is not possible to accede to the
requests of both sides for the original award to be given
to them.
(c) Let us assume that a claim is partly allowed and the rest
of the claim is dismissed.  Then too, to the extent the
claim is allowed, the claimant might want two originals,
one  original  award  for  enforcement  and  another  for
setting aside the award (insofar as the claim is rejected),
and the opposite party too might want one original award
for setting  aside  the  award  to the extent  the  claim is
allowed.
(d) Take  a case  where  a  claim is  partly allowed  and  the
counter-claim is partly allowed.  The position will be the
same as under clauses (b) and (c) above.
These are the various difficulties arising out of this solution.
24

(5) Yet another solution can be that the arbitral tribunal while signing the
copy of award, should make an endorsement that the original award is
duly  stamped  and  duly  registered,  if  it  requires  compulsory
registration.    This, in our view, is also a good solution.
4.2 Preference for Solution Nos. (3) and (5):  
Analyzing  these  different  solutions,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  best
solution could be solution (3) by making an amendment for the filing of the
original award in the Court of appropriate jurisdiction as was laid down
under section 14(2) of the old Act of 1940 so that the Court has the original
award before it to verify its features whenever any application is filed under
section 34 or section 36.  If it is further provided that the records could also
be filed before the said Court, the arbitrators could be relieved of the burden
of keeping them.    
The other solution could be solution (5), that the copy must contain
an endorsement that the original award has been duly stamped and, where it
requires compulsory registration, that it has been registered.
But  then,  it  has  been  argued  that  solution  (3)  would  be  unduly
burdening the Court to receive the original award and other documents.  An
immediate answer  to this  argument  could be that there  is  no additional
burden on the Courts arising out of such an amendment to the new Act of
1996 because this was the position under the old Act of 1940 under section
14(2) where the original was being filed in Court.
25

Thus, in our view, solution (3) or (5) requires to be accepted.
4.4 176  th   Report of the Law Commission – Suggestions to insert a new  
section 33A:
In the 176th Report of the Law Commission, it was recommended that
a new section should be incorporated in the Act of 1996 enabling a copy of
the award be filed into the Court along with the records so that parties could
even obtain copies.  This proposal is now contained in section 33A in the
new Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003 (Bill No.LXXXV
of 2003).  The Bill is pending before the Standing Committee of Parliament.
(Another provision in the Bill of 2003 is the one contained in section 34
(1A) that the application for setting aside the award shall be accompanied
by  the  original  award  or  where  it  is  not  given  to  the  applicant,  by  a
photocopy of the award signed by the arbitrators.)
But, in the present Report, we do not propose to revise that proposal
as stated in the 176th Report for incorporating a new section 33A in the 1996
Act.  We are here confronted with a different problem posed to us by the
Madras High Court while implementing the existing provisions of the new
Act of 1996 insofar as verifying whether the original arbitration award is
duly stamped or is registered, if it required compulsory registration.
Even if the proposal for a new section 33A as contained in the Bill
referred to above is not acceptable or is not accepted, still a solution has to
be found for the problem posed before the Madras High Court.
26

4.5 Our Recommendations: 
First Alternative:
A new provision sec. 31(1) can be inserted on the lines of section 14
(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1940 which would steer clear of all problems.
Second Alternative:
A second alternative solution could be to amend section 31(1) and
section 31(5) to state that the arbitral tribunal shall have to get the award
duly stamped and in addition provide that if the award requires compulsory
registration under section 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act, 1908, to have it
duly registered.  A provision is necessary that the photocopies of the award
shall be sent to the parties  with  an endorsement that  the award  is  duly
stamped and wherever it requires compulsory registration, that it has been
so registered.     Further, the word ‘duly stamped’ can create some doubts
and it will be difficult for the Court in which the copy is filed by the parties
with such an endorsement, to find out if the stamp papers on which the
original is engrossed are sufficient in value according to the law applicable.
Therefore, the new provision must further require that the arbitral tribunal
should specify in that endorsement, the value of the stamp duty paid on the
original award.
Our above  alternative  recommendations  are presented  in  the  draft
amendments annexed to this Report.  (see Annexure)
27

4.6 Summary of Recommendations for Amendment (Two Alternatives):
(A) As stated above, we finally recommend two alternative amendments.
The first one will be for filing the original arbitral award into the Court of
appropriate jurisdiction so that the Court can verify whether the award is
duly  stamped  or  whether,  it  is  duly  registered,  wherever  it  requires
compulsory registration.
This  amendment  can  be  in  section  31(1)  of  the  new  Act  leaving
existing section 31(5) of the new Act as it is, so that parties will still get
signed copies of the award.
(B) The second alternative will be to amend section 31(1) to say that the
award shall be duly stamped and, if it requires compulsory registration, it
shall be duly registered; and also to amend section 31(5) which deals with
sending signed photocopies of the award to the parties.   
Section 31(5) will have to be amended by stating that the arbitral
tribunal  shall  send  signed  photocopies  of  the  award,  after  making  an
endorsement  on  the  copy  of  the  award  that  the  original  award  is  duly
stamped and specifying the stamp duty paid and where necessary, that the
original award is duly registered.
4.7 We recommend accordingly.
28

We  place  on  record  the  valuable  assistance  rendered  by  Dr.  S.
Muralidhar, Part-time Member of the Law Commission.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
 (Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi)
Member-Secretary
Dated:  7th  June, 2005
29

Annexure
The  following  are  the  draft  amendments  for  the  two  alternative
recommendations:
First Alternative: (substitution of section 31(1))
“(1)(a)An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be signed
by the members of the arbitral tribunal after having the award
duly stamped and duly registered, where it requires compulsory
registration.
(b) The arbitral tribunal shall, at the request of any party to the
arbitration agreement or any persons claiming under such party,
or if so directed by the Court and upon payment of the fees and
charges  due in respect of the arbitration and award and the
costs and charges of filing the award, cause the award, together
with  the  record  of  the  arbitral  proceedings,  including  any
depositions and documents which may have been taken and
proved before the tribunal, to be filed in Court, and the Court
shall thereupon give notice to the parties of the filing of the
award.”
Second Alternative:
Section 31(1) of the new Act will be replaced by the following:
30

“(1)  An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be signed
by the members of the arbitral tribunal after having the award duly
stamped and having it duly registered, where it requires compulsory
registration.”
Section 31(5) of the new Act will be replaced by the following:
“(5)  After the arbitral award is made, a signed photocopy  thereof
shall be delivered to each party with an endorsement signed by the
members  of  the  arbitral  tribunal  that  the  original  award  is  duly
stamped and mentioning the value of the stamp duty paid, and where
it compulsorily requires registration, that it has been duly registered.”
………
31