LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
195TH REPORT 
ON 
THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL, 2005
January, 2006
1

Justice                                                                                           LAW COMMISSION OF
INDIA
M. JAGANNADHA RAO                                                  SHASTRI  BHAWAN
Chairman                                                                                            NEW DELHI-110
001
                                                                                                                                                                      TEL: 23384475
                                                                                                                                                          FAX: (001) 23073864, 23388870
                                                                                                                                                           E-mail: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                          Residence:
                                                                                                                                                                         1, JANPATH
                                                                                                                                                                  NEW DELHI – 110 011
                                                                                                                                                                       TEL: 23019465
F. No. 6(3)112/2005-LC(LS)                                                         31st January,
2006
Dear Shri Bharadwaj ji,
Perhaps, it is not an exaggeration to state that no other earlier reference to the Law
Commission in the last fifty years has been as important as the reference by the Hon’ble
Minister of Law and Justice dated 2nd November, 2005 asking the Commission to make a
study and give its suggestions on the proposed draft of the “Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005”
(hereinafter referred to as the Bill of 2005) prepared by the Law Ministry which deals with
procedures for removal of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts.   It is my
pleasure to forward this voluminous 195th Report on `Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005’ which, it
gives me some degree of satisfaction to say, was prepared in less than 90 days.
I may briefly explain, by way of a background to the present Report,
the procedure for removal of a Judge of the superior Courts under the Judges
(Inquiry) Act, 1968, the Motion and the judgments of the Supreme Court and
the procedure in the proposed draft Bill of 2005.
2

Procedure under the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968
A procedure  for removal of Judges of the High Court and Supreme
Court by way of address of the Houses of Parliament to the President is
contained in Art. 124(4) of the Constitution of India, read with proviso (b) to
Art.  124(2)  and  proviso  (b) to  Art.  217(1),  for  ‘proved  misbehaviour  or
incapacity’.   
Earlier, the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 1964 was formulated laying down
the procedure as contemplated by Art. 124(5) and the Bill was referred to a
Joint Committee of the Houses.    After a very elaborate discussion before the
Committee in which eminent Members of Parliament and the then Attorney
General, Sri C.K. Daphtary and Sri M.C. Setalvad, former Attorney General,
gave their evidence, the Joint Committee gave its Report on 13th May, 1966.
The recommendations of the Committee were taken into account and the
Judges  (Inquiry)  Act,  1968  was  passed  providing  for  procedure  for  the
investigation  and  proof  of  misbehaviour  and  incapacity of Judges  of  the
Supreme Court (including the Chief Justice of India), the Chief Justices and
Judges of the High Courts, where reference is made by the Speaker or the
Chairman to a three-Member Committee after admitting a Motion initiated by
a specified number of Members. This is the ‘reference procedure’.   
Motion and Case law under the 1968 Act:
The first case which went up to the Supreme Court in connection with
an inquiry under that Act was the case of Justice V. Ramaswami, former
3

Judge of the Supreme Court.    In that case, there was a Motion in the House
of the People (Lok Sabha) on 28th February, 1991 and the Speaker of the
House appointed Justice P.B. Sawant Committee on 12th March, 1991 after
admitting the Motion.   The Committee gave its Report on 20th July, 1992,
holding some charges proved.    Before the Committee started functioning,
the 9th Lok Sabha was dissolved and it was contended that the Motion in the
House  lapsed.   This  plea  was  rejected  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Sub-
Committee of Judicial Accountability v. Union of India, 1991 (4) SCC 689.
After the Committee prepared the Report, a plea was raised that the Judge
was entitled to a copy of the Report before it was submitted to the House.
This was  rejected by the Supreme Court  in  Mrs. Sarojini  Ramaswami v.
Union of India, 1992 (4) SCC 506.    It was held that the Judge can question
the Report only in case an order of removal was passed by the President.
Thereafter,  there  were  two  other  judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
connection with the same learned Judge as reported in  Krishna Swami v.
Union of India, 1992 (4) SCC 605 and  Ms. Lily Thomas v.  Speaker, Lok
Sabha, 1993 (4) SCC 434.   However, when the Report of the Justice Sawant
Committee came up finally for discussion and voting in the House of the
People (Lok Sabha), the Motion for removal did not secure the requisite
majority and, therefore, it failed.
Subsequently, in the case of certain allegations against Justice A.M.
Bhattacharjee, the then Chief Justice of Bombay High Court, the Supreme
Court held, in a public interest litigation case, that In-House “peer review”
4

procedure can be laid down by the judiciary for correcting misbehaviour or
deviant behaviour and that where the allegations do not warrant removal of a
Judge by address of the Houses, it is permissible for the in-house mechanism
to  impose  “minor  measures”  (C.  Ravichandran  Iyer v.  Justice  A.M.
Bhattacharjee, 1995 (5) SCC 457).  In this very decision, the Supreme Court
underscored the need for imposition of certain minor measures in the event of
the proved misbehaviour or incapacity not warranting removal.
The Law Commission has examined the proposed draft of the Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2005 in light of the law declared by the Supreme Court in its
judgments in relation to Arts. 121, 124 and 217 of the Constitution of India,
the Justice Sawant Committee Report and the comparative statutory as well
as precedent law in several countries.
Procedure under Draft Bill of 2005
The  present  Bill  of  2005  proposes  introduction  of  ‘complaint
procedure’ in addition to the earlier ‘reference procedure’ contained in the
1968 Act.   In a ‘complaint procedure’ a complaint can be made by any
person to Judicial Council against Judges of the Supreme Court (except the
Chief Justice of India), Chief Justices and Judges of High Courts.   In the
‘reference procedure’, if there is a Motion by Members of Parliament in
either House, the Speaker/Chairman can make a reference to Judicial Council
for inquiry not only against the above Judges  but also  against the Chief
Justice of India.   There is provision for preliminary scrutiny and verification
5

by  the  Judicial  Council  in  the  ‘complaint  procedure’  though  not  in  the
‘reference procedure’.   In the place of the three-Member Committee under
the 1968 Act, the Bill of 2005 proposes the constitution of a Judicial Council
of five Judges consisting of the Chief Justice of India, two seniormost Judges
of the Supreme Court and two seniormost Chief Justices of the High Court
and  they  will  investigate  and  inquire  into  allegations  arising  out  of  a
complaint or a reference.    Where the allegations are proved, in the case of a
‘complaint procedure’, the Council shall submit its report to the President of
India  who  has  to  forward  the  same  to  Parliament  and  in  the  case  of  a
‘reference  procedure’,  the  Council  shall  submit  its  report  to  the
Speaker/Chairman who made the reference.
Some importance issues which require to be dealt with in the Bill of 2005:
(A) Absence of power in Council to impose ‘minor measures’ under the
‘complaint procedure’: 
In the view of the Law Commission, one of the serious omissions in
the Bill of 2005 is the absence of a power in the Council to impose ‘minor
measures’ under the ‘complaint procedure’, where the charges which have
been  proved  do  not  warrant  removal  but  amount  to  “deviant  or  bad
behaviour” which warrant only ‘minor measures’.   (Of course, in the case of
a reference by the Speaker/Chairman on a Motion for removal, the Judicial
Council cannot impose or recommend any ‘minor measures’)  In such cases,
in UK, USA, Canada and Germany, the Judicial Council or similar bodies
6

have been empowered to impose a variety of ‘minor measures’ such as (i)
issuing advisories, (ii) request for retirement, (iii) stoppage of assignment of
judicial  work  for a  limited  time (iv)  warning, (v)  censure  or  admonition
(public or private).  
‘Minor measures’ were also advocated in the Report of 2001 by the
National Commission for Review of the Constitution  of India headed  by
former Chief Justice of India, Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah.
Imposition of ‘minor measures’ held constitutional in other countries even
though not provided in the Constitution: 
A question has arisen in the U.S and Canada whether in the absence of
a  constitutional  provision  permitting  imposition  of  ‘minor  measures’,
imposition of such measures by a Judicial Council would be constitutionally
valid?   The federal judiciaries in US and Canada in their judgments have
upheld  the  imposition  of  such  ‘minor  measures’  by  a  Judicial  Council
(notwithstanding the absence of any express provision therefor in the US or
Canadian Federal Constitutions) as part of a general power of the Judiciary
for ‘self regulation’. They have also held that entrustment of such a power to
the  Judicial  Councils  does  not  amount  to  abdication  of  any  part  of
impeachment  power  of  the  federal  legislature,  inasmuch  as  the  Judicial
Councils can impose only ‘minor measures’ but cannot direct removal. They
can only recommend removal.  
7

In Chandler v. Judicial Council, (1970) 398 US 74, Harlan J laid the
legal foundation for upholding the validity of minor measures (in that case, it
was withdrawal of judicial work under the provisions of the U.S. Act of
1939).   He laid down that judicial self-regulation or in-house measures were
part of the  “administration  of justice”  and  derive  force  from the  general
power  of  the  Judicial  Branch  to  improve  its  efficiency.    Any  statute
permitting such action is therefore valid, though there is no express provision
for imposing such minor measures in the US Constitution.   The US Act of
1939 was replaced by US Act of 1980 and this was again replaced by the US
Act of 2002.   The 1980 and 2002 statutes of US contain express provisions
for imposing ‘minor measures’.  So far as removal is concerned, the Judicial
Council of the circuit and the Judicial Conference of U.S. can only make a
recommendation. (The UK Act of 2005 and the Canadian Bye laws issued
under the Canadian Act of 1985 and the German Constitution, also provide
for imposing minor measures).      
In John H. McBryde v. Committee to Review Circuit Council Conduct
and Disability Orders of the Judicial Conference of US, (2001) 264 F. 3d. 52,
in a very elaborate judgment, it was held by the US Court of Appeals that, in
spite of absence of express provisions in the Constitution, such in-house or
intra-judicial correctional  mechanisms for imposition  of ‘minor  measures’
were valid and could be imposed by a Judicial Council, even though there is
no such provision for imposing ‘minor measures’ in the U.S. Constitution. In
this connection, the judgments in  Hastings v.  Judicial Conference of US,
8

(1987) 829 F. 2d 91 and  In the Matter of Complaints under Investigation,
(1980) 783 F 2d. 1988; Mackeigan v. Hickman, 1989 (2) SCR 796, Justice
Paul Cosgrove v. AG of Ontario, 2005 FC 1954; Gratton v. Canadian Indian
Council, 1994 (2) FC 769 are relevant.    
No  doubt,  in  several  States  in  U.S.,  such  as  California,  Idaho,
Connecticut  and  Texas  etc.,  the  State  Constitutions  which  provide  for
impeachment or Address, have been amended to provide for an additional
procedure of removal by the Judicial Council itself or by the State Supreme
Court, without reference to a parliamentary procedure. Surely, such a power
of removal, if it were to be vested straightaway in the State Judicial Councils
or  in  the  State  Supreme  Courts,  it  required  amendment  to  the  State
Constitutions. No doubt, in the same amendments to the State Constitutions,
the Judicial Councils have also been empowered to impose ‘minor measures’
but it is clear, in view of the law laid down in Chandler upto Mcbryde  by the
U.S. federal judiciary that the amendments of the State Constitutions became
necessary because of the vesting of the additional power of removal on the
State Judicial  Councils  or the  State Supreme Courts  but  not because  the
vesting of such power to impose ‘minor measures’ required  amendment of
the said Constitutions. 
For  all  these  reasons,  elaborated  in  the  Report,  the  Law  Commission
recommends that there should be a provision in the proposed Bill of 2005
9

investing the Judicial Council  with power, in a complaint procedure, to itself
impose minor measures where the proved misbehaviour or incapacity does
not  warrant  removal.  Such  minor  measures  would  include   (i)  issuing
advisories, (ii) request for retirement, (iii) stoppage of assignment of judicial
work for a limited time (iv) warning, (v) censure or admonition (public or
private). Of course, in the case of a reference by the Speaker/Chairman on a
Motion for removal, the Judicial Council cannot impose or recommend any
‘minor measures’. 
(B) Judicial Council consisting only of Judges, as in the Bill of 2005, is a
norm in most countries:
The Law Commission is of the view that the draft Bill of 2005, in
proposing in s.3 that the National Judicial Council should consist of five
senior members of the judiciary takes the correct and proper stand. There is
abundant authority and precedent globally that the body must comprise only
of Judges.   Peer review is the international norm and is covered by several
resolutions of international bodies and is supported by the views of eminent
jurists.    In this connection, the Law Commission has referred in this Report
to the fact that such Judicial Councils or similar bodies consisting only of
Judges have been constituted in several countries such as USA, UK, Canada
(federal) and States, Hong Kong, Germany, Sweden, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Malaysia,  Singapore,  Israel,  Zambia,  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  New  South
10

Wales,  Victoria,  etc.    The  National  Commission  for  Review  of  the
Constitution  in  its  Report  (2001)  also  suggested  a  Judicial  Commission
consisting  only  of  senior  Judges  for  the  purpose  of  imposing  ‘minor
measures’.
(C) Composition of Judicial Council to be modified in certain cases:
When the Judicial Council is conducting investigation or inquiry into
allegations  against  the  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  (in  a  complaint
procedure) or against  the said Judges or the Chief Justice  of India  (in  a
reference procedure), the Judicial Council should not consist of the senior
Chief Justices of the High Courts. All the members of the Council should be
Judges of the Supreme Court.
(D) Withdrawal of judicial work pending proceedings (validity of section
21 of the Bill) and withdrawal as a ‘minor measure’(distinction): 
Withdrawal  of  Judicial  work  can  be  of  two  types,  (i)  withdrawal
pending proceedings and (ii) withdrawal of work as ‘minor measure’ at the
end of the inquiry.
(i) The Law Commission has given reasons as to why sec. 21 of the
Bill  of  2005  which  permits  withdrawal  of  judicial  work,  pending
investigation or inquiry, is constitutionally valid.   It has explained certain
observations  of  the  Supreme Court  in  Justice  V.  Ramaswami’s  case  and
pointed out that a provision like sec. 21 did not fall for consideration in
Justice  V. Ramaswami’s case.   Sec. 21 would be valid as it serves  the
11

purposes of achieving the objects of investigation and proof of misbehaviour
much better. 
(ii) On the question of suspension or withdrawal of judicial work of
a  Judge  as  a  ‘minor  measure’,  if  it  is  for  an  indefinite  period,  several
judgments  including  that  of Lord Slynn  in the Privy Council  in  Rees v.
Crane, 1994 (1) All ER 833 have held that it may amount to removal and the
Judicial Council by itself cannot impose ‘removal’. However, in the U.S.
both in the federal as well as States, the withdrawal of the work by the
Judicial  Council  is  only  for a  limited  period.  The  Law  Commission  has
therefore recommended that one of the minor measures that can be imposed
by the Council is ‘withdrawal of judicial work for a limited period’. That will
be valid.
(E) Appeal to Supreme Court to be provided: 
As laid down by the Supreme Court in  Justice V. Ramaswami’s cases, the
order of removal of a Judge, if passed under the 1968 Act by the President
after reference to the Judges’ Committee and its recommendation, can be
challenged on the judicial side. In order to preclude such a challenge under
Article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court and in view of the judgment
of the Supreme Court in  L.Chandra Kumar’s case that Article 226 is part of
the  basic  structure  of  the  Constitution,  it  is  necessary  to  incorporate  a
provision for appeal to the Supreme Court against (i) the  orders of removal
passed by the President in the case of a complaint procedure or reference
12

procedure and (ii) the orders of Judicial Council imposing ‘minor measures’
in a complaint procedure.
Other recommendations made by the Law Commission on a clause by clause
analysis of the proposed Bill of 2005:
The Law Commission has recommended in the Report that there are several
other clauses in the proposed Bill of 2005 which require to be either amended
or incorporated. Important among these are:
(i) A clear distinction has to be drawn between a ‘reference procedure’
as envisaged  in  the  1968  Act  and  the  ‘complaint  procedure’ as
recommended in the Bill of 2005. A new definition of these terms
has been proposed.
(ii) The Bill of 2005 uses the word `investigation, `scrutiny’ while the
title of the 1968 Act uses the word `inquiry’. Art. 124 (4) uses the
words `investigation  and proof’. The Law Commission is of the
view that there should be a clear delineation of the different stages
of  the  entire  process  of  removal  of  a  judge  on  a  ‘complaint
procedure’.  The  procedure  being  quasi-criminal  as  held  by  the
Justice  Sawant  Committee,  the  different  stages  viz.,  the
complaint/allegations,  preliminary  investigation  by  the  Judicial
Council, framing of charges on the basis of the allegations, and
inquiry should be clearly spelt out in the proposed Bill of 2005.
13

The manner in which this should be done has been indicated in
detail in our Report. 
(iii) (a)There  is  need  to  incorporate  a  definition  of  the  words
‘misbehaviour’ and ‘incapacity’ so as to take in serious types of
misbehaviour as also deviant or bad behaviour. In all countries, a
Judge cannot be guilty of misbehaviour if the allegations relate to
the merits of a judgment or order. In the case of Justice Chase of
U.S. in 1805, even impeachment failed on this ground. (b)Violation
of the Code of Conduct should also be treated as misbehaviour. So
far as publication of Code of Conduct is concerned, the Judicial
Council should publish the same in the Gazette of India and until
such publication the ‘Restatement of Values of Judicial Life’ as per
the Resolution of the Supreme Court dated May 7, 1997 shall hold
good. The Council should also be delegated with power to amend
the Code of Conduct from time to time.
(iv) There should be a definition of the word `proved’ as `proof beyond
reasonable doubt’ (as observed by the Justice Sawant Committee).
In this context the word `substantiated’ used in the Bill has to be
omitted.
(v) As regards the complaint procedure, a `whistleblower’s provision’
has  to  be  incorporated  in  the  proposed  Bill  of  2005.  If  a
complainant  under  the  ‘complaint  procedure’ is  apprehensive  of
reprisals, he should have the right to request the Counsel that his
name to be kept confidential. The recommendations made by the
14

Law Commission for protection of ‘whistle blowers’ in its 179th
Report, are relevant in this context and may be adopted.
(vi) There should be confidentiality of the entire complaint proceedings,
starting from the complaint,  till ‘minor measures’ are imposed by
the Council  or in  case  the Council  recommends  removal till  its
recommendation as  to  removal  is  placed  in the Parliament. The
complainant  and  the  witnesses  should  also   be  prohibited  from
giving publicity about the allegations in the complaint, name of the
complainant or witness or the name of the Judge. Any breach of
confidentiality  should  amount  to  an  offence.  It  is  further
recommended that the above provisions as to confidentiality, shall
be notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information
Act, 2005.
(vii) The  proposed  Bill  of  2005  should  be  allowed  to  take  into
consideration  allegations  of  `misbehaviour’  which  would  have
occurred  before  the  commencement  of  the  new  law  but  that  it
should not relate to a period beyond two years from the date of
commencement of the new law.
(viii) There  are  several  other  amendments  recommended  by  the  Law
Commission in its report. In all, there are 33 recommendations.
The Report considers exhaustively a variety of legal and constitutional
issues and, in fact, starts on the premise that while judicial independence is
15

one of the basic fundamentals of our Constitution but that it is not absolute
and both judicial independence and judicial accountability are inseparable.
Chapter I is Introductory, Chapter II deals with the formulation of points for
discussion, Chapter III deals with Judicial Accountability and Limitations on
Judicial Independence, Chapter IV with International Traditions with regard
to  Judicial  Independence  and  Accountability,  Chapter  V  with  Joint
Committee of Parliament and Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 and Chapter VI
with Constitutional Principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Justice V.
Ramaswami’s case.   Chapter VII deals  with Removal Procedure in UK,
Chapter VIII with difference between Impeachment and Address Procedure,
Chapter IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII with the Procedures in
Canada, Australia, Hong Kong, Germany, Sweden, Trinidad  and Tobago,
Singapore, New Zealand, Israel, Zambia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Malaysia, US
Federal  and  State  Courts.  Chapter  XVIII  deals  with  Supreme  Court
Resolution  of  1997  on  Restatement  of  Judicial  Values  and  In-House
Procedure; Chapter XIX with A.M. Bhattacharjee’s case. 
Chapter XX contains an elaborate discussion on the points listed in
Chapter  II and  the  recommendations  thereon.   Chapter  XXI contains the
summary of recommendations (33 in number).
The Law Commission earnestly believes that the 33 recommendations
made by it will be found useful in making the necessary changes in the draft
Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005.
16

We place on record our appreciation for the extensive research and
help rendered by Dr. S. Muralidhar, Part-time Member, in the preparation of
this Report and in particular in regard to Chapters II, XX and XXI.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd./-
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Shri H.R. Bharadwaj
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi.
17

Justice                                                                                           LAW COMMISSION OF
INDIA
M. JAGANNADHA RAO                                                               SHASTRI
BHAWAN
Chairman                                                                                            NEW DELHI-110
001
                                                                                                                                                                      TEL: 23384475
                                                                                                                                                          FAX: (001) 23073864, 23388870
                                                                                                                                                           E-mail: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                          Residence:
                                                                                                                                                                         1, JANPATH
                                                                                                                                                                  NEW DELHI – 110 011
                                                                                                                                                                       TEL: 23019465
F.No.6(3)112/2005-LC(LS) February 8, 2006
Dear  Shri Bharadwaj ji,           
Reference:- 195th Report on “Judges(Inquiry) Bill, 2005”
We are thankful to you for having referred the above subject to the
Law Commission for its views. We are also grateful to you for having given
us an hour’s  time to discuss our recommendations contained in Chapter XXI
of our report.
With regard to recommendation No. 32 in Chapter XXI, though we
have  stated  that  the  proposed  Act  should  be  made  applicable  to
‘misbehaviour’ which occurred two years before the commencement of the
Act, this is a matter of governmental policy on which you may take final view
before the Bill is finalized. As mentioned by me during our meeting, it would
perhaps be appropriate to make the Act apply prospectively only to such
‘misbehaviour’ which might have occurred after the commencement of the
Act.
Another  aspect  about  which  we discussed  was  about the period  of
limitation for making a complaint as to ‘misbehaviour’. On this, we did not
make any recommendation and therefore, you may take a policy decision
whether a complaint should be limited so that a complaint cannot be allowed
to refer to a ‘misbehaviour’ which occurred beyond six months from the date
of the making of the complaint. 
18

You may kindly take a policy decision on these matters without being
in any way inhibited by what is recommended in the Report.
This letter has the concurrence of the Member Secretary, Dr. K.N.
Chaturvedi.
                                 With regards,
Yours sincerely,
                                                                                                                    Sd./-
                                                                                               (Justice M.
Jagannadha Rao)
Sri H.R. Bharadwaj
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi.
19

INDEX TO CONTENTS
  Chapter             Title   
 I         Introduction   4-11
 II Salient points that arise for discussion in this study.  12-26
III Judicial accountability and limitations on 
Judicial independence   27-37
IV International  Traditions  with  regard  to  Judicial
independence and Judicial Accountability.   
38-63
V Section 220(2)(b) of the Government of India Act,
1935 & Joint Committee of Parliament on Judges  
(Inquiry) Bill, 1964.    64-
79
VI Constitutional Principles laid down by Supreme 
Court of India in Justice V.Ramaswami’s cases.  80-
120
VII Removal Procedure in the United Kingdom.          121-140
VIII Impeachment and Address procedures are 
different.          141-149
IX Removal Procedures in Canada (Federal) &
in its States. 
150-164
X Procedures in Australia ( Federal) & State Courts 
And Justice Murphy’s case.          165-196
20

XI Procedures  in  Hong  Kong,  Germany, and  Sweden.197-
203
XII Procedure in Trinidad and Tobago and Privy 
Council Judgment ( 1994)         204-219
XIII Procedure in Singapore, New Zealand, Israel and
Zambia.         220-235
XIV Procedures in Bangladesh, Pakistan, 
and Malaysia         236-245
XV Procedures  in United States Of America Federal Judges
( 1939, 1980, and 2002 Acts)         246-265
       
XVI Three important issues decided by U.S. 
Federal Judiciary.           266-274 
XVII Procedure in U.S.State Courts; California, Idaho,
 Connecticut, Texas and Wisconsin .         275-313
XVIII Supreme Court of India:
 Restatements of Value of Judicial 
Life and In House Procedure.  (1997)        314-326
XIX Supreme Court of India: In-House procedure
in Justice A.M.Bhattacharjee’s case.        327-335
 
XX Discussion, Views & Recommendations on points
 referred to in Chapter II.  
336-477
XXI Summary of Recommendations and views of the Law
 Commission on the draft 
Judges (Inquiry ) Bill 2005        478-491
21

                                                                            
Annexure I – The Judges (Inquiry) Bill 2005       (1-
13)
 Annexure II – The Judges (Inquiry) Act 1968     (1- 4)
22

CHAPTER- I 
INTRODUCTION
By letter dated November 2nd, 2005, the Hon’ble Minister for Law and
Justice, Sri H.R.Bhardwaj, sent the draft of the proposed Judges (Inquiry)
Bill,  2005  (Annexure  I  to  this  Report)  for  the  ‘examination  and
suggestions’ of the Law Commission.  It was requested that a study be made
and suggestions forwarded at an early date.
It may at the outset be stated that proviso (b) to Article 124(2) and
Article 124(4) of the Constitution of India deal with the removal of a Judge
of the Supreme Court  and proviso (b) to Art.217(1) with removal of Judges
of the  High Court for ‘proved misbehavior or incapacity’  by  orders of the
President passed after ‘an address by each House of Parliament’ supported by
a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less
than two-thirds of members of the House present and voting.  Article 124(5)
requires Parliament to make a law in this behalf.  Such a law was made  in
1968,  by enactment  of the  Judges  (Inquiry) Act, 1968  (Act  51  of  1968)
(Annexure II to this Report).   Rules were also made under the said Act
called the Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969.
23

The long-title of the 1968 Act reads as follows:
“ An Act to regulate the procedure for the investigation and proof of
the misbehavior or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a
High Court and for the presentation of an address by Parliament to the
President and for matters connected therewith”        
PROCEDURE UNDER THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) ACT, 1968:  
The  1968  Act  contains  seven  sections.   Section  3  lays  down  the
procedure  for  “Investigation  into  misbehavior  or  incapacity  of  Judge  by
Committee”.    ‘Judge’ here means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court, including the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of a High
Court.  The procedure is by way of a notice of Motion in either House of
Parliament for presenting an address to the President praying for  removal of
a Judge, signed by a certain number of Members of the House of Parliament
where  the  notice  of  Motion  is  given.   Thereafter,  the  Speaker  or  the
Chairman, as the case may be, may, after consulting such persons, ‘as he
thinks fit’, admit the motion and if it is so admitted, he shall refer the matter
to a Committee consisting of three members, one each from the categories of
(a) Chief Justice and other Judges of the Supreme Court,   
(b) Chief Justices of High Courts, and  
(c) a distinguished jurist. 
24

That  Committee  would  frame  definite  charges  on  which  an
investigation  could  be held  during  which  the Judge  concerned  would  be
heard.    In case of allegations of incapacity, physical or mental, which are
said to render him unable to discharge the duties of his office effectively, and
where the Judge denies the allegations, the Act provides a procedure for
medical examination of the Judge.
The  Committee,  after  investigation,  would  send  a  Report  to  the
Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, stating its findings. The Report
is then laid in both Houses.   Section 6 provides for consideration of the
Report and refers to the procedure for presentation of an address for removal
of the Judge.  Section 7 enables the making of Rules by a Joint Committee of
both Houses. 
It will thus be seen that the procedure under the 1968 Act was  for the
“removal”  of  a  Judge  by  address  of  the  Houses  to  the  President  after
receiving the Report of a Committee of three members of whom two are
Judges and one is a Jurist.
The Rules made under the 1968 Act provide for other details in the
said procedure. 
25

PROCEDURE UNDER THE PROPOSED JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL, 2005
The  present  draft  Bill  of  2005,  like  the  1968  Act,   contemplates
procedure for investigation and ‘removal’ by address of the Houses to the
President.  However, in addition to a reference on a Motion, it also envisages
the procedure of filing of a “complaint” by any person against a Judge and
refers to the  procedure for investigation by the National Judicial Council
(NJC) in pursuance to that complaint.  It is proposed that the Council will
consist of five Judges.
(For convenience, instead of using the word ‘clause’ of the Bill, we
shall use the word ‘section’).
  Sec.3(1) of the draft Bill states that the NJC shall consist of 
(a) Chief Justice of India (Chairperson)
(b) Two Senior most Judges of the Supreme Court, to be nominated by
Chief Justice of India (Members)
(c) Two  Senior  most  Chief  Justices  of  the  High  Courts,  to  be
nominated by Chief Justice of India (Members) 
Section 2(d) defines ‘Judge’ and makes it clear that the investigation
may be against a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court and includes
the Chief Justice of a High Court.  In this ‘complaint procedure’, the Bill
26

does not expressly include the ‘Chief Justice of India’ in this definition of
‘Judge’ but this is subject to the proviso to Sec 3(2) where it is provided that
a ‘reference’ from the Speaker or Chairman  to the Judicial Council may
concern allegations against the Chief Justice of India also.
Section 5 refers to ‘complaint’ against the Judge, ( i.e, other than the
Chief Justice of India) by any person.   Section 6 refers to the power of the
Council to conduct investigation into the complaint against any other person
other than a Judge, in certain cases.  Section 7 refers to preliminary scrutiny
and section 8 to procedure for inquiry before the Council on the basis of the
complaint or reference.
Sections 9 and 10 are on the same lines as section 3 of the 1968 Act
and retains the procedure by motion in either of the Houses of Parliament
with the difference that the investigation will be now before five Judges of
the  Council  rather  than  before  a  three  Member  Committee  contemplated
under sec.3(1) of the 1968 Act.   
Section 11 deals with the physical or mental incapacity of a Judge and
corresponds to Section 3(5) to 3(8) of the 1968 Act with the difference that
the investigation will be  now by the Judicial  Council instead of by the
Committee contemplated under Section 3(5) of the 1968 Act. 
27

Section 12(1) provides that every investigation shall be conducted in
camera by the Chairperson and the Members sitting jointly.
Section 13 says that the Judicial Council shall have power to regulate
its  own  procedure  in  making  the  investigation.  However,  the  Judge
concerned  shall  be  given  reasonable  opportunity  to  cross  examine  the
witnesses  and  shall  be  allowed  to  adduce  evidence  in  his  defence.  This
corresponds to section 4(1) of the 1968 Act.
Section 15 gives power to the Judicial Council to authorize any officer
to conduct search and seizure.
Sections 16 says that if it is proved  before the Judicial Council that
there is no substance in the complaint, the Judicial Council shall inform the
President accordingly and the President may close the case.   If all or any of
the  allegations  are  substantiated,  then  the  Judicial  Council   shall
communicate  its  findings  and  recommendations  to  the  President,  to  the
complainant and to the Judge concerned, the President shall place the same
before both Houses of Parliament. 
Section  17  deals  with  the  disposal  of  a  reference  from  the
Speaker/Chairman and submission of findings by the Judicial Council to the
Speaker/Chairman.   Section 18 deals with  impeachment by address and
corresponds to Section 6(3) of the 1968 Act.  
28

Section 21 proposes that during the pendency of the investigation or
impeachment, the Judicial Council may recommend stoppage of assigning
Judicial work to the Judge concerned if it appears to the Judicial Council that
it is necessary in the interest of fair and impartial investigation.  Section 24
states that any investigation before the Judicial Council will not affect the
criminal  liability  of  the  Judge  in  respect  of  the  allegations  under
investigation.  
Section 22 empowers the Judicial Council to designate one or more of
its Members to constitute an investigation  Committee, for the purpose of
conducting investigation into the matter.
Section 28(1) refers to the power for the Judicial Council to issue a
Code of Conduct for Judges, and Section 28(2) deals with the need for Judge
to declare assets and liabilities. 
Section 29 refers to rule making by Joint Committee of both Houses
and corresponds to Section 7 of the 1968 Act.
 
The Law Commission proposes to examine the draft Bill of 2005 and
offer its suggestions which include the deficiencies in the Bill, the need to
delete certain provisions and the need to add some more provisions. The
various points that arise for consideration are set out in Chapter II.
29

We place on record our appreciation for the extensive research and
help rendered by Dr. S. Muralidhar, Part-time Member, in the preparation of
this Report and in particular in regard to Chapters II, XX and XXI.
30

CHAPTER II
SALIENT POINTS THAT ARISE FOR DISCUSSION 
IN THIS STUDY 
The Law Commission finds that under the Draft Bill of 2005, the only
remedy available for any kind of ‘misbehavior’ is one of ‘removal’.  The only
difference  is  that  instead  of  a  3-Member  Committee  contemplated  under
Section 3(1) of the 1968 Act, the present draft Bill of 2005 contemplates
investigation by a 5-Judge National Judicial Council.  If the Investigation is
made pursuant to a complaint, the Chief Justice of India is not included but if
it is by way of reference from the Speaker/ Chairman, the Judicial Council
has to inquire into the misbehavior, or incapacity if any, of the Chief Justice
of India also. 
 There are  various aspects on which the Law Commission would offer
its suggestions.  In this Chapter, we shall make a brief reference to these
aspects. They will be discussed in detail after reference to the comparative
law in other countries.  The following are the salient features which require
study:
(I) Is judicial independence absolute and are not judges accountable  ? 
31

This  question  gains  importance  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the
provisions of the Bill of 2005 directly impinge on the doctrine of
checks and balances enshrined in the Constitution and if the balance
is  not  maintained  as  envisaged  it  might  directly  impact  on  the
concept of judicial independence. At the same time the concept of
judicial accountability, which has been implicitly recognized in the
pronouncements of our Supreme Court has also to be kept in view.
The 1968 Act provides for an inquiry by a three-member committee
on  a  reference  from  the  Speaker/Chairman  upon  a  Motion  by  a
requisite number of Members of Parliament seeking removal of a
judge for alleged misbehaviour or incapacity. The present Bill of
2005 provides for an additional procedure by which any person can
file a complaint before a Judicial Council comprising five senior
judges including the Chief Justice of India and enables the Council
to  recommend  to  the  House  that  the  proved  misbehaviour  or
incapacity warrants removal. 
A  question  arises  whether  apart  from  removal  by  address  as
provided at present under our Constitution it is constitutionally and
legally  permissible  for  Parliament  to  make  a  law  to  enable  the
Judicial Council to recommend removal on a complaint to it by any
person. Further, in view of the proposals the Law Commission to
enable the Judicial Council to itself impose minor measures where
32

the charges do not warrant removal, the question naturally arises
whether the proposals in the Bill of 2005 as well other proposals
recommended  by  the  Law  Commission  for  imposition  of  minor
measures by the Judicial Council are in any way inconsistent with
judicial  independence  or in excess  of any measures  to make the
judiciary accountable?
This aspect is considered in a separate Chapter, viz., Chapter III and
also as the first item in Chapter XX.
(II) What  are  the  principles  of  Constitutional  law  laid  down  by  the
Supreme Court in the cases relating to Justice V. Ramaswami?
The  second  aspect  is  the  need  to  summarise  the  principles  of
Constitutional law as laid by the Supreme Court in the various cases
relating to Justice V. Ramaswami as to the interpretation of Articles
121, 124, 125 and 217 of the Constitution of India and their impact on
the provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968. 
(III) What are the  points arising out of the Report of the Justice Sawant
Committee?
         
It may be noticed that in the case of Justice V. Ramaswami a Motion
was  moved  by  a  requisite  number  of  Members  of  Parliament  and
33

consequent thereto the Speaker appointed an Inquiry Committee under
the Chairmanship of Justice P.B. Sawant under section 3 of the 1968
Act to inquire into the allegations contained in the Motion. The Inquiry
Committee  in  its  Report  explained  several  important  constitutional
principles. In that context, it is necessary to refer to the said principles
which  have  a  bearing  on  the  validity  of  several  provisions  of  the
proposed Bill of 2005. In addition it is necessary to refer to the views
of the Joint Committee of Parliament (1966) on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 1964 which led to the Act of 1968.  
(IV) Are the proposed  provisions  in the Bill of 2005 for  establishing  a
National Judicial Council consisting only of Judges consistent with the
concept of judicial accountability?
It  is  necessary  to  point  out  that  there  is  adequate  support  for  the
method of  ‘peer review’ by Judges as provided in the Draft Bill, 2005.
In fact, there is no controversy on this issue because the 1968 Act
contemplates investigation by a Committee consisting of two Judges
and a Jurist and the Draft Bill of 2005 contemplates investigation by a
National  Judicial  Council  of  five  Judges.   In  a  large  number  of
countries including U.K, U.S. Federal Judiciary, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Germany, Sweden etc., the disciplinary inquiry against the judges of
superior courts is conducted only by a committee of Judges.  This
aspect will be dealt with in detail. 
34

(V) Should the Chief Justice of India be excluded from the inquiry on a
‘complaint’ under the proposed ‘complaint procedure’ ? 
(VI) What should happen when a Supreme Court Judge against whom a
complaint has been filed and is pending, becomes the Chief Justice of
India  during  the  pendency  of  the  investigation.  A  related  question
arises with regard to High Court judges also.
(VII) Whether the remedy of ‘removal’ of a judge by address is sufficient
and whether other ‘minor measures’ such as:  advisories, warnings,
corrective steps, request for retirement, withdrawal of cases from the
Judge’s  List,  censure  or  admonition  (public  or  private),  should  be
included in the Bill of 2005 – in cases coming before the Judicial
Council under the ‘complaint’ procedure?
If  the  misbehaviour  that  is  proved  before  the  Judicial  Council  is
serious  enough  to  warrant  removal  then  the  Council  will  make  a
recommendation to the House in that behalf. But it is common experience
that there are other types of `deviant behaviour’ known otherwise also as `bad
behaviour’ as distinct from `good behaviour’. This has been noticed in the
Report of the National Commission for the review of the Constitution. In
several countries law has been made empowering Judicial Councils or other
bodies to impose such minor measures such as in U.K, U.S.A, Germany and
the  various  States  in  the  U.S.  It  is  in  this  background  that  the  Law
35

Commission is proposing the inclusion of such measures even though there is
no such provision in the Bill of 2005. 
(VIII) Constitutional validity of a law by Parliament providing for imposition
of ‘minor measures’ by the Judicial Council
(IX)   Whether in the case of a `reference’ by Speaker/Chairman pursuant to a
Motion for removal by address under Art. 124, the Judicial Council is
bound to report that the charges warranting removal are proved or are
not proved or whether if such charges do not warrant removal it could
either impose minor measures itself or whether or it could recommend
to Parliament that it is a fit case warranting minor measures?
(X) Tenability  of  an  argument  based  on  California  and  other  State
Constitutional  Amendments  to  contend  that  imposition  of  `minor
measure’ requires amendment of the Constitution.
(XI) Tenability of an argument that the ‘complaint’ procedure before the
Judicial Council is ultra-vires the Constitution because the allegations
are not by way of a Motion in the House.
(XII)  Can a Chief Justice of a High Court be part of the Judicial Council in
the case of an inquiry against a Judge of the Supreme Court?
36

(XIII) Is there a need for a recusal provision to be incorporated in the Bill of
2005?
(XIV) Should the process of investigation precede framing of charges and the
inquiry  commence  only  after  the  framing  of  charges?   Should  the
investigating  judges  be  different  from  the  Judges  in  the  Judicial
Council  who  conduct  the  inquiry?  Should  the  investigating  judge
invariably report his findings to the Judicial Council without finally
disposing of the complaint at his level?
(XV) Whether  the  National  Judicial  Council  can  itself  conduct  the
preliminary investigation, frame charges and then conduct the inquiry?
The  wording  of  Art.  124  (4)  of  the  Constitution  which  talks  of
`investigation and proof’ has not been properly enacted into the 1968
Act and the Rules of 1969 leading to ambiguity and confusion as to
where the preliminary investigation ends and the final inquiry begins.
In fact argument was addressed by Sri Kapil Sibal, Counsel for Justice
V.Ramaswami  in  his  submissions  before  the  Joint  session  of
Parliament  on  10th May,  1993  that  there  should  be  ‘investigation’
before the charges are framed. After charges are framed, there could be
a regular inquiry into the charges.  The Law Commission has found
that in several countries, the investigation is done by a smaller group of
37

judges which is a different from the Commission which later conducts
the regular inquiry.
(XVI) Should the Judge be given an opportunity at the stage of ‘preliminary
investigation’  before the Judicial Council on a complaint to clarify the
facts, even if, in the event of the charges being framed, he will have a
full-fledged opportunity before the Judicial Council (or in case of a
recommendation for  removal, he may have yet another opportunity
before the Houses)?
Sec. 7 of the Bill of 2005 uses the words `scrutiny’ and `verification’
and is silent on the question whether, in the case of a complaint, at the
stage of preliminary investigation before charges are framed, the Judge
concerned  should  be  given  an  opportunity.   While  it  is  accepted
generally that at the stage of such preliminary inquiries, normally, it is
not necessary to give an opportunity to the affected person, the Privy
Council, in a recent case speaking through Lord Slynn in Rees v Crane
1994(1) All ER 833, has held that in the case of Judges, it is desirable,
if  not  necessary,  to  afford  such  an  opportunity  at  the  stage  of
preliminary investigation in the interest of the reputation of the Judge
and so that the fair name of the Judiciary on the whole may not be
tarnished  as  will  be  the  case  if  every  complaint  is  mechanically
allowed to result in  charges and inquiry.   In the States in the U.S. the
statutes mandate an opportunity to be given to the judge to submit his
38

response even before charges are framed. This aspect will require a
detailed examination.
(XVII) Whether the provisions of sec 21 permitting stoppage of assignment
of Judicial work to the Judge pending a motion or investigation into a
complaint or reference is constitutionally valid?  What is the proper
interpretation of Art 124(5) read with Art 225 of the Constitution?
S.21 provides  for stoppage  of assigning  judicial work to the judge
against  whom the investigation has  commenced, where the Judicial
Council considers  it necessary in the interests of fair and impartial
investigation. The Supreme Court of India has said in Sub-Committee
on Judicial Accountability v. Union of India: 1991 (4) SCC 699, that
this  is  not  permissible  in  the  absence  of  a  provision  either  in  the
Constitution  or in the 1968  Act. A related  question  is  whether the
Chief Justice could withdraw listing of cases from the Judge’s list or
direct  no  cases  be  listed  before  him  during  the  pendency  of
investigation or inquiry . This necessitates examining the distinction
between stoppage of judicial work and temporary suspension of the
judge.
(XVIII)(A) Whether there should be some provision to prevent frivolous and
vexatious ‘complaints’ being filed and provide for some sanctions as in
the various Lok Pal Bills or as in the State laws on Lok Ayuktas.     
39

(B) Whether the complaint must be in the form of a petition with a
verification of contents giving the source of information and whether it
should or should not be supported by an affidavit?
(XIX)  Should the words ‘misbehaviour’ or ‘incapacity’ be defined in the
Act?   If so, in what manner?
It may be mentioned here that there can be various kinds of `deviant’
behaviour some serious and some not so serious. It is necessary to
differentiate between these various kinds of behaviour and consider
whether the definition of the words ‘misbehaviour’ or ‘incapacity’ be
inserted in the proposed Act.
(XX) Whether a complaint which relates solely to the merits of a judgment
or order ought to be entertained?
In several countries, complainants against Judges on the basis of the
decision on merits of the Judgments are excluded from the scope of
disciplinary inquiries.  In fact  is  has  been  found  that  a majority  of
complaints against judges relate to the merits of a decision to which the
complainant has been a party. The weeding out of such complaints is
necessary since the proposed Judicial Council is to comprise of the
senior-most  judges  who  even  otherwise  would  be  tied  down  with
pending judicial  work. It, however, requires  to be  provided that in
relation  to  a  pending  or  decided  case  there  are  other  connected
40

allegations  of misbehaviour like bribery etc., the complaint will be
maintainable.   
(XXI) Whether a provision protecting complainant’s identity – as in the case
of Whistleblowers’ laws – is necessary?
In various Whistleblowers laws and as per the procedure indicated in
the  179th Report  of  the  Law  Commission  on  “Public  Interest
(Disclosure) Protection Act” the name and identity of the complainant
has  been  recommended  to  be  kept  confidential.   This  is  because
individual  complainants  such as  lawyers or litigants  may not come
forward boldly to expose wrong doings of Judges if there is likelihood
of  their  professional  work  being  imperilled  before  the  High
Court/Supreme Court, as the case may be, in other matters in which
they are engaged before the same Judge or other Judges of the same
court.  Simultaneously, it is necessary to consider whether the Judicial
Council may take action  suo-motu, if it comes to its knowledge that
there  is  `misbehavior’  which  has  not  come before  it  by way of  a
complaint or from any other source.
(XXII) Is there a need for preserving the confidentiality of the Complaint, the
investigation and the inquiry process? Should the Bill of 2005 contain
a  provision  that  such  confidentiality  will  be  maintained
notwithstanding the provisions of the Right to Information Act 2005?
41

An important aspect that requires to be dealt with is the need to require
the complainant  and others  including  witnesses  participating  in the
investigation and inquiry to maintain strict confidentiality regarding
the  documents  and  proceedings  in  relation  to  the  complaint,  the
investigation and the consequential inquiry, if any. This is because the
matters  are  of  a  sensitive  nature  involving  a  high  constitutional
functionary and any disclosure of such information at any stage may
not only endanger a fair conduct of investigation and inquiry but also
irredeemably tarnish the image of a judge even before the conclusion
of the statutory and constitutional processes.
(XXIII) Should an appeal to Supreme Court for judicial review against orders
awarding minor measures or removal be provided?
It requires to be considered whether a specific provision should be
made  permitting  Judicial  review  before  the  Supreme Court  against
award of ‘minor measures’ by the Judicial Council or in case an order
of ‘removal’ is passed by the President after the address procedure is
completed.   Incidentally,  a  question  would  arise  whether  judicial
review under Art. 226 has to be expressly barred at all stages before
the final order is passed by the Judicial Council in the case of ‘minor
measures’  or  before  the  final  order  of  removal  is  passed  by  the
President.   Should an appeal be provided to the Supreme Court after
42

the final order of the Judicial Council (in case of minor measures or of
removal passed by the President)?  Yet another question  is whether
resort to courts even after the final orders of the Judicial Council or the
President should be barred by statute?
(XXIV)  What is the ‘standard of proof’ before the Judicial Council as well
before the Houses of Parliament?  Is it ‘preponderance of probabilities’
or is it ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’? What are the standards in a
‘quasi-criminal’ inquiry?
Another aspect is as to the “standard of proof” that has to be followed
by the Judicial Council. Question is whether it should decide upon the
charges on the basis of ‘preponderance of probabilities’ or whether it
should hold that the charges are proved ‘beyond reasonable doubt’?
Are the proceedings quasi-criminal in nature, if so what protections are
available to the Judge?  
(XXV) What should be the procedure in case one of the members of the
Judicial Council is elevated as the Chief Justice of India or is elevated
to  the  Supreme Court,  or  where  there  is  a  vacancy  on  account  of
natural causes or the Judge’s services are not available due to other
causes,  so  as  to  make  it  clear  that  de-novo  proceedings  are  not
contemplated?
43

(XXVI) What should  happen if the Judge against whom investigation  or
inquiry  is  initiated  reaches  the  age  of  superannuation  during  the
pendency of the proceedings before the Judicial Council?
(XXVII) Where removal is recommended by the Judicial Council, should it
also recommend that in case the recommendation is accepted by the
Houses and the removal order is passed by the President, the judge
should be barred from holding any public or judicial, quasi-judicial
office  nor  can  he  have  chamber  practice  or  be  an  arbitrator  in
arbitration proceedings?
(XXVIII) Should the Judicial Council frame a statutory Code of Conduct
(subject  to  modification  by  Council  by  notification)?   Should  the
breach of such Code should be treated as misbehaviour? Should the
extant Code of Conduct approved by the Supreme Court in 1997 be
adopted as the statutory Code till such time the Judicial Council frames
a Code of Conduct?
(XXIX)  Whether the proposed Bill should apply to complaints relating to
misbehaviour  which  occurred  before  the  commencement  of  the
proposed Act or in some cases to such conduct which occurred while a
person was functioning as a High Court Judge before being elevated as
a Chief Justice of the High Court or a Judge of the Supreme Court?
(XXX)   What other amendments are required to be carried out to the Bill of
44

       2005?  
There are certain other amendments which are required to be carried
out in the Bill of 2005. These are dealt with towards the end of Chapter XX.
In Chapter XX, these and other issues are proposed to be studied in
detail because this is the first time that the Law Commission of India is
dealing with such important issues which are of great concern/ relevance to
the  Judicial  Branch.   In  this  context,  we have  also  to  bear  in  mind  the
principles  of  Judicial  Independence  and  Judicial  Accountability.    We,
therefore, propose to make a detailed survey of all aspects relating to Judicial
Discipline and Removal in other countries.           
45

CHAPTER-III
JUDICIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND LIMITATIONS ON 
JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE
Judiciary  is  one  of  the  three  important  pillars  of  any  democracy
governed by the rule of law.   The Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary
are  all  creatures  of  our  Constitution.    The  view  that  the  Legislature  is
supreme  is  no  longer  recognized  even  in  England  where  the  theory  of
parliamentary supremacy as propounded by Professor Dicey, was in vogue
for a long time.   Recent Judgments of Courts in England have declared that it
is the Constitution that is supreme and that each of the three wings have their
respective jurisdictions and powers to the extent allocated to them in the
Constitution.    If  there  is  no  written  Constitution,  the  constitutional
conventions govern.   In our country, the Supreme Court of India laid down
more than forty years ago in Special Reference No.1 of 1964 case (Keshav
Singh’s case) (1965 (1) SCR 413) as follows:
“…………though our legislatures have plenary powers, they function
within the limits prescribed by the material and relevant provisions of
the Constitution……..”
and
46

“In a democratic country governed by a written constitution, it is the
Constitution which is supreme and sovereign”.
This has been reiterated in Peoples’ Union for Civil Liberties v. Union
of India AIR 2003 SC 2363, para 53.
In UK, in  International  Transport  Roth  Gmbth vs.  Home Secretary
2002(3) WLR 344, Laws J stated that after the coming into force of the (UK)
Human  Rights  Act,  1998,  the  British  system  which  was  once  based  on
parliamentary supremacy has now moved from that principle to the system of
Constitutional supremacy.
In Canada, in Vriend vs. Alberta 1998(1) SCR 493, Iacobucci J stated
that after the Canadian Charter of Rights & Freedoms, Canada has moved
from Parliamentary supremacy to constitutional supremacy.  He said:
“When the Charter was introduced, Canada went, in the words of Chief
Justice Brian Dickson, from a system of Parliamentary supremacy to
constitutional supremacy.”
Our Constitution contains checks and balances which require all the
three wings to work harmoniously.   It has created a separation of powers
between all the three branches or wings though the separation, it is now well
accepted, is not as rigid as it is under the American Constitution.   The
legislature and the executive must act within their powers as declared by the
Constitution and whenever they exceed their powers or jurisdiction, they can
47

be corrected by the Judiciary.   The Indian Judiciary’s powers of judicial
review  to  declare  Parliamentary  and  executive  action  ultra vires of  the
Constitution  has been recognized ever since 1950, when the Constitution
came into force.   Art. 50 of the Directive Principles of the Constitution states
that the State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in
the public services of the State.
The  fact  that  the  Judiciary  safeguards  fundamental  rights  and  the
Constitution and can strike down any law or executive action that is contrary
to the fundamental rights or other provisions of the Constitution does not,
however, make the judiciary supreme.    It too has to act within its powers
and jurisdiction as envisaged by the Constitution.    
Judicial Independence refers to the independence of the Judge as well
as  the  independence  of  the  Judiciary  as  an  institution.    Individual
independence means that the Judge is free to decide a case according to law
and he cannot be interfered with by anybody without process. The Indian
Judiciary  is  independent  and  the  Constitution  has  insulated  it  from
interference both by legislature or executive.    
There are several provisions in the Constitution which safeguard the
independence of the Judiciary and the Judges.    Judges of the High Courts
and Supreme Court have their tenure guaranteed by the Constitution till they
48

attain the age of superannuation.     Their salaries and allowances are charged
on the Consolidated Fund of the State or Union, as the case may be, and are
not subject to a vote by the State  Legislatures or Parliament.   Their pensions
are also charged on the Consolidated Fund.   The Constitution also states that
the salaries and allowances of any Judge of the High Court and Supreme
Court cannot be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.    Article 121
and 211 prohibit any discussion in the Parliament or State Legislatures on the
conduct of a Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court in the discharge of
their respective duties.    The High Courts and Supreme Court are Courts of
record  and  have  powers  to  punish  for  contempt.   Under  Art.  144,  all
authorities, civil and Judicial, in the territory of India shall act in aid of the
Supreme Court.   Judges are also immune under various laws like Judges
(Protection) Act, 1985 from civil or criminal action for their acts, speech etc.,
in the course of or while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of their
official or judicial duties or functions.    However, Judges have to abide by
the  oath  they  have  taken,  namely,  that  “they  will  bear  true  faith  and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established”, that they will
uphold  the  sovereignty  and  integrity  of  India,  that  they  will  “duly  and
faithfully” and to the best of their” ability, knowledge and judgment, perform
the duties of the office  without fear or favour, affection or illwill and that
they will uphold the Constitution and the laws’. 
49

It is accepted that the independence of the Judges in their individual
capacity or of the Judiciary as an institution is, however, not absolute.   The
fact that the powers of Judges are very wide is in itself an indication that the
powers  cannot  be  allowed  to  be  absolute.     Among  the  constitutional
limitations  on  the  Judges,  the  most  important  one  is  the  provision  for
‘removal’ of Judges of the High Courts/Supreme Court by address of the
Houses of Parliament to the President on the ground of ‘proved misbehaviour
or incapacity’.   This is provided in Art. 124 (2) and (4) in respect of Judges
of the Supreme Court and in view of Art. 217, that procedure is attracted to
the ‘removal’ of Judges of the High Court also.
Dato  ‘Param  Cumarasamy  as  Vice-President  of  the  International
Commission  of  Jurists  and  as  Former  UN  Special  Rapporteur  on
Independence of the Judiciary, in his speech in Nov. 2004 at Chennai on
‘Judicial Accountability’ sated that:
“Accountability and transparency are the very essence of democracy.
No one  single  public  institution  or  for  that  matter,  even  a  private
institution  dealing  with  the  public,  is  exempt  from  accountability.
Hence, the Judicial arm of the government too is accountable”.
As Stephen B. Burbank, in his recent book on ‘Judicial Independence’ says, a
‘completely independent court in this sense would also be intolerable because
they would render impossible the orderly conduct of the social and economic
50

affairs of a society’, ‘Courts are institutions run by human beings.   Human
beings are subject to selfish or venal motives and even moral paragons differ
in the quality of their mental faculties and in their capacity for judgment and
wisdom’.   ‘Wholly unaccountable Judges are likely to deviate from what the
law might demand’.   But, limitations must be realistic.    He is also of the
view that, in practice, impeachment is a difficult procedure and has become
almost a dead letter.   Polity should not treat Judicial independence  and
Judicial accountability as dichotomous but rather as different sides of the
same coin.   That is not just because a denial of independence necessarily
entails  accountability  but  also  because  a  modern  polity’s  goals  for  its
judiciary  will  almost  surely  include  functions  that  require  a  measure  of
accountability, just as they do a measure of independence.
H. Franklin, in the same book, says: ‘to say that court in general should
not be held accountable by the public and by the other branches is to ask for a
protection no democratic country should grant’.   Lee Epstein says in the
same book that ‘Too little independence can undermine the separation of
powers, too much independence can undermine the democratic basis of a
political order’.
In the book ‘Judges and Judicial Accountability’ edited by Cyrus Das
(2004),  Rt.  Hon  Justice  Tun  Mohd  Dzaiddin  Abdullah,  Chief  Justice  of
Malaysia said:
51

“To  be  faithful  to  his  oath  is  the  test  of  his  integrity  as  a Judge.
Implicit  in  this  is  that  he  must  resist  any  influence  or  temptation.
Indeed, independence is a vital component of a judge’s accountability,
since  a  judiciary  which  is  not  truly  independent,  competent  or
possessed of integrity would not be able to give any account of itself.”
“Thus judicial accountability is an indispensable counterbalance to the
judicial independence, for an unaccountable judge would be free to
disregard the ends that independence is supposed to serve.”
“In that connection, accountability is fostered through the processes for
selection, discipline and removal found in the Constitution and statutes
in various judicial systems.    As the justice system involves complete
inter-relationships among the three branches of the Government, the
demand for openness and transparency cannot shield the judiciary from
scrutiny.   Thus Judges, as trustees, must be imbued with the sense they
act in the environment and must be able to give an account for their
conduct in that trust.”
Archbald Cox, the Special Prosecutor who began legal proceedings
against the then President Nixon in the Watergate crisis in the early 1970’s
recounted  an  experience  he  had  which  is  relevant  to  the  issue  of
52

accountability of Judges.   This is how he described a conversation he had
one day with Judge Learned Hand:
“Learned Hand, one of the great federal Judges who never reached the
Supreme Court, once put the point for me, a young law clerk, from a
Judge’s perspective.   ‘Sonny’, he asked, ‘to whom am I responsible ?
No one can fire me.   No one can dock my pay.   Even those nine bozos
in Washington, who sometimes reverse me, can't make me decide as
they wish. Then the Judge turned and pointed out to the shelves of his
law  library.‘To  those  books  about  us.  That’s  to  whom  I  am
responsible”. (Archbald Cox, the Court  and the Constitution, 1987,
P.20)
What he meant was that Judges’ accountability is to the Constitution
and the laws, to the precedents and to the Code of Ethics that govern all
judicial powers and conduct.
In March  2001,  an  article, ‘Strengthening  Judicial  Integrity against
Corruption’ was released under the auspices of the UN Global Programme
against Corruption by the Centre for International Crime Prevention, vennfer
for CIJL Yearbook.  It gives details of surveys in various countries.
Various types of misbehaviour or deviant behaviour of Judges in Italy
have been listed out exhaustively by Judge Giaacomo Oberto, Judge of Turin
53

& Dy. Secreary of he International Association of Judges, and the list is so
extensive  that  the  real  instances  referred  to  there  that  happened  in  Italy
appear to be common in most countries.
The  literature  on  the  subject  of  Judicial  Independence  and
Accountability is voluminous.   A large number of books and articles have
been written by Judges, lawyers, jurists, social activists and public figures on
the subject.    Professor Shimon Shetreet’s classical work on the subject
‘Judges on Trial’ and ‘Judicial Independence’ are considered among the best.
It may, however, be said without any fear of any contradiction that none has
supported  the  theory  of  absolute  independence  of  the  Judges  and  the
Judiciary or that they are not accountable.    Judges and the Judiciary are
accountable to the people.   Lack of accountability is bound to shake the
confidence of the public in the Judiciary as an institution and that, in its turn,
can lead to disastrous consequences to the rule of law and democracy.  
The  Judges  (Inquiry)  Act,  1968  was  enacted  to  achieve  laudable
objectives  one  of  which  was  to  make  the  Judges  accountable  for  their
behaviour as envisaged in the Constitution.   That Act has been in the statute
book for more than three decades.   
The present draft Bill of 2005 proposes to provide additional means of
inquiry into the behaviour and conduct of Judges.   While the 1968 Act
provided for an inquiry by an ad hoc committee of two Judges and a Jurist to
54

be appointed  every time when a motion for an address is admitted by the
Speaker  or  Chairman,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  present  Bill  proposes  a
permanent mechanism by way of a statutory Judicial Council of five Judges.
The present draft Bill of 2005 also provides that the said Judicial Council
shall  also  investigate  and  inquire  into  allegations  of  misbehaviour  or
incapacity of a Judge made in a complaint sent by any person.  Consistent
with Judgments of the Supreme Court in  Justice V. Ramaswami’s cases, the
proposed  Bill  of  2005  provides  for  a  non-Parliamentary  procedure  to  be
followed upto the stage when Motion for an address for removal is finally
taken up by the House for discussion.   In the above cases, it was held by the
Supreme Court that the reference to the Committee of Judges under the 1968
Act  and the  inquiry by the Committee are not  part  of the  Parliamentary
process but are part of the judicial process to ascertain facts.    The actual
Parliamentary process starts only after the ‘misbehaviour is proved’ in an
outside  body constituted  for  investigation  and  inquiry.     If  the  Judicial
Council finds substance in the allegations after a regular inquiry in which the
judge is heard and is of the view that the misbehaviour warrants ‘removal’,
then it has to send its report with findings of guilt to the Speaker/Chairman,
as the case may be.    Till such time the Motion that has been initially moved
is kept pending and is taken up for consideration and discussion, after receipt
of  the  Report  finding  the  Judge  guilty.   If  the  Report  says  that  the
misbehaviour is not moved, the matter ends there.  The Parliament cannot
take up the Motion again because, its jurisdiction to consider the Motion
arises only if the misbehaviour or incapacity is ‘proved’ outside Parliament.
55

The Law Commission is aware that the present draft Bill proposes only
‘removal’ and no other minor measures.   In the years after 1968, it has been
the experience that there are various types of ‘misbehavior’ of Judges not all
of which might warrant ‘removal’.  Other countries have also faced such
situations.   In the federal system in USA, the legislature enacted an Act in
1980 which is now replaced by the Judicial Improvement Act 2002, which
enables the Judicial Council, as part of an ‘inhouse’ mechanism, to pass  final
orders short of removal, such as , request for retirement, withdrawal of cases,
public or private censure or admonition and where the Judge is removed, for
disqualifying from holding any other public office etc.  the UK Act of 2005,
the Canadian Bye laws, Federal Germany’s Disciplinary Rules and all the
States in US provide for ‘minor measures’.  We will be referring to the laws
in Idaho, Connecticut, Texas, etc. in this connection.
The Law Commission will also examine whether a law permitting the
Judicial Council to impose ‘minor measures’ other than ‘removal’ will be
within the Legislature power of Parliament and whether, it will be necessary. 
The  Law Commission  will  examine,  in  the  chapters  to follow,  the
comparative  law   in  other  countries,  and  all  aspect  of  the  problem  and
provide a very comprehensive study.
56

57

CHAPTER IV
INTERNATIONAL TRADITIONS WITH REGARD TO JUDICIAL
INDEPENDENCE
AND JUDICIAL ACCOUNTABILITY
There are several instruments approved by the UN General Assembly
which deal with independence of the judiciary as well as its accountability.
There are also some other non-UN resolutions dealing with the same subject.
U.N. Basic Principles On Judicial Independence: 1985
We shall initially refer to the relevant instruments approved by the UN
General Assembly.  The first such instrument which deals with “UN Basic
Principles  on  the  Independence  of  the  Judiciary”  is  contained  in  the
resolution of the UN General Assembly dated 29th November, 1985 which
endorsed the proceedings of the 7th UN Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders passed at Milan, Italy during the period 26th
August to 6th September, 1985.   The UN adopted the Basic principles on the
independence of the judiciary by consensus.   The UN General Assembly
subsequently welcomed the principles and invited Governments “to respect
them and  take  them into  account  within  the  framework  of their  national
legislation and practice”, by its proceedings dated 13th December, 1985.  As
58

regards independence of the judiciary, the following seven principles were
laid down:
“1. The independence of the judiciary shall be guaranteed by the
State and enshrined in the Constitution or the laws of the country. It is
the  duty  of  all  governmental  and  other  institutions  to  respect  and
observe the independence of the judiciary.
2. The judiciary shall decide matters before it impartially, on the
basis of facts and in accordance with the law, without any restrictions,
improper influences, inducements, pressures, threats or interferences,
direct or indirect, from any quarter or for any reason.
3. The judiciary shall have jurisdiction over all issues of a judicial
nature and shall have exclusive authority to decide whether an issue
submitted for its decision is within its competence as defined by law.
4. There shall not be any inappropriate or unwarranted interference
with the judicial process, nor shall judicial decisions by the courts be
subject to revision.   This principle is without prejudice to judicial
review or to mitigation or commutation by competent authorities of
sentences imposed by the judiciary, in accordance with the law.
5. Everyone shall have the right to be tried by ordinary courts or
tribunals using established legal procedures.  Tribunals that do not use
the duly established procedures of the legal process shall not be created
to displace the jurisdiction belonging to the ordinary courts or judicial
tribunals.
59

6. The principle of the independence of the judiciary entitles and
requires the judiciary to ensure that judicial proceedings are conducted
fairly and that the rights of the parties are respected.
7. It  is  the  duty  of  each  Member  State  to  provide  adequate
resources to enable the judiciary to properly perform its functions.”
Paras  8  and  9  of  the  said  resolution  deal  with  the  freedom  of
expression and association of judges, paras 10 to 14 deal with qualifications,
selection  and  training,  para  11  states  that  the  term  of  judges,  their
independence,  security,  adequate  remuneration,  conditions  of  service,
pension and the age of retirement shall be adequately secured by law.   Para
12  states  that  judges  whether appointed  or elected  shall have  guaranteed
tenure until a mandatory retirement age or the expiry of their term of office,
where such exists.   Paras 15 and 16 deal with professional secrecy and
immunity, para 16 states that judges should enjoy personal immunity from
civil  suits  for  monetary  damages  for  improper  acts  or  omissions  in  the
exercise of their judicial functions.   
Under  the  heading  of  ‘Discipline,  suspension  and  removal’,  the
following principles were stated in paras 17 to 20:
“17. A charge or complaint made against a judge in his/her judicial
and professional capacity shall be processed expeditiously and fairly
under an appropriate procedure.  The judge shall have the right to a fair
60

hearing.  The examination of the matter at its initial stage shall be kept
confidential unless otherwise requested by the judge.
18. Judges  shall  be  subject  to  suspension  or  removal  only  for
reasons of incapacity or behaviour that renders them unfit to discharge
their duties.
19. All  disciplinary,  suspension  or  removal  proceedings  shall  be
determined  in  accordance  with  established  standards  of  judicial
conduct.
20. Decisions  in  disciplinary,  suspension  or removal  proceedings
should be subject to an independent review.  This principle may not
apply to the decisions of the highest court and those of the legislature
in impeachment or similar proceedings.”
U.N. Resolution on Procedures (1989):
The second instrument approved by the UN General Assembly relates
to “Procedures for the Effective Implementation of the Basic Principles on
the Independence of the Judiciary”, adopted by the Economic and Social
Council in Resolution 1989/60 and endorsed by the General Assembly in
Resolution 44/162 of 15th December, 1989.   Procedure 7 requires all Member
States to inform the Secretary General every five years beginning from 1988,
of the progress achieved in the implementation of the basic principles, their
incorporation into national legislation, the problems faced and difficulties or
obstacles encountered in their implementation at the national level.
61

The third instrument approved by the UN General Assembly refers to
the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers.   We are not presently
concerned with this question.
Dr. Singhvi Declaration on Independence of Judiciary (1985):
Among the other UN instruments, we shall first refer to the Singhvi
Declaration contained in the UN Draft Declaration on the Independence of
Justice.  By a decision of the UN Economic and Social Council, the UN Sub-
Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
entrusted Dr. L.M. Singhvi of India with the preparation of a report on the
independence and impartiality of the judiciary, jurors and assessors and the
independence of lawyers.   The Special Rapporteur accordingly submitted
preliminary and progress reports in 1980, 1981 and 1982 and an additional
report.   At the 38th session of the Sub-Commission, Dr. Singhvi introduced
his final report on the subject and drew attention in particular to his draft
declaration on the Independence and Impartiality of the Judiciary, Jurors and
Assessors and the Independence of Lawyers.   The study was circulated for
comments which was submitted in the 39th session, thereafter Dr. Singhvi
submitted his comments and suggestions and gave a revised version of the
draft declaration in the 40th session of the Sub-Commission.
62

Dr. L.M. Singhvi’s Final Report 1985:
We shall then  refer to Dr. L.M. Singhvi’s  final  report  to  the Sub-
Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Participation of Minorities
of 1985.   This report in paras 17 to 20 deals with discipline, suspension and
removal and read as follows:
“17. A charge or complaint made against a judge in his/her judicial
and professional capacity shall be processed expeditiously and fairly
under an appropriate procedure.  The judge shall have the right to a fair
hearing.  The examination of the matter at its initial stage shall be kept
confidential unless otherwise requested by the judge.
18.Judges shall be subject to suspension or removal only for reasons of
incapacity  or  behaviour  that  renders  them  unfit  to  discharge  their
duties.
19.All  disciplinary,  suspension  or  removal  proceedings  shall  be
determined  in  accordance  with  established  standards  of  judicial
conduct.
20.Decisions  in  disciplinary,  suspension  or  removal  proceedings
should be subject to an independent review.   This principle may not
apply to the decisions of the highest court and those of the legislature
in impeachment or similar proceedings.”
63

UN Requests Governments To Take Into Account Dr.Singhvi’s Draft (1988):
In the 40th session, the UN Sub-Commission in its Resolution 1988/25
appreciated  the  draft  and  thereafter,  in  the  45th session  of  the  Sub-
Commission invited Governments to take into account the principles set forth
in  Dr.  Singhvi’s  draft  in  implementing  the  UN  Basic  Principles  on  the
Independence of the Judiciary, approved in 1985.
Paras 2 to 8 of the draft declaration deal with the independence of the
judiciary and read as follows:
“2. Judges individually shall be free, and it shall be their duty, to
decide  matters  before  them  impartially  in  accordance  with  their
assessment of the facts and their understanding of law without any
restrictions,  influences,  inducements,  pressures,  threats  or
interferences, direct or indirect, for any quarter or for any reason.
3. In the decision-making process, judges shall be independent vis-
à-vis their  judicial  colleagues  and  superiors.   Any  hierarchical
organization of the judiciary and any difference in grade or rank shall,
in  no  way, interfere  with  the  right  of  the  judge  to  pronounce  his
judgment freely.   Judges, on their part, individually and collectively,
shall exercise their functions with full responsibility of the discipline
of law in their legal system.
64

4. The  Judiciary  shall  be  independent  of  the  Executive  and
Legislature.
5. (a) The  judiciary  shall  have  jurisdiction,  directly  or  by  way  of
review, over all issues of a judicial nature, including issues of its
own jurisdiction and competence.
(b) No ad hoc tribunals shall be established to displace jurisdiction
properly vested in the courts.
(c) Everyone shall have the right to be tried with all due expedition
and  without  undue  delay  by  the  ordinary  courts  or  judicial
tribunals under law subject to review by the courts.
(d) Some derogations  may be permitted in times of grave public
emergency which threatens the life of the nation but only under
conditions  prescribed  by  law,  only  to  the  extent  strictly
consistent  with internationally recognized  minimum standards
and subject to review by the courts.
(e) In such times of emergency, the State shall endeavour to provide
that civilians charged with criminal offences of any kind shall be
tried  by  ordinary  civilian  courts,  and,  detention  of  persons
administratively without charge shall be subject to review by
courts or other independent authority by way of habeas corpus or
similar procedures so as to ensure that the detention is lawful
and to inquire into any allegations of ill-treatment.
(f) The  jurisdiction  of  military  tribunals  shall  be  confined  to
military offences.  There shall always be a right of appeal from
65

such tribunals to a legally qualified appellate court or tribunal or
a remedy by way of an application for annulment.
(g) No power shall be so exercised as to interfere with the judicial
process.
(h) The Executive shall not have control over the judicial functions
of the courts in the administration of justice.
(i) The  Executive  shall  not  have  the  power  to  close  down  or
suspend the operation of the courts.
(j) The Executive shall refrain from any act or omission which pre-
empts the judicial resolution of a dispute or frustrates the proper
execution of a court decision.
6. No legislation or executive decree shall attempt retroactively to
reverse specific court decisions or to change the composition of the
court to affect its decision-making.
7. Judges shall be entitled to take collective action to protect their
judicial independence.
8. Judges shall always conduct themselves in such a manner as to
preserve  the  dignity  and  responsibilities  of  their  office  and  the
impartiality  and  independence  of  the  judiciary.    Subject  to  this
principle, judges shall be entitled to freedom of thought, belief, speech,
expression, professional association, assembly and movement.”
66

Paras 9 to 12 deal with qualifications, selection and training, paras 13
to 15 deal with posting, promotion and transfer, paras 16 to 19 which deal
with tenure of Judges, read as follows:
“16.(a)The term of office of the judges, their independence, security,
adequate  remuneration  and  conditions  of  service  shall  be
secured by law and shall not be altered to their disadvantage.
(b) Subject to the provisions relating to discipline and removal set
forth herein, judges, whether appointed or elected, shall have
guaranteed tenure until a mandatory retirement age or expiry of
their legal term of office.
17. There may be probationary periods for judges following their
initial appointment but in such cases the probationary tenure and the
conferment of permanent tenure shall be substantially under the control
of the judiciary or a superior council of the judiciary.
18.(a) During their terms of office, judges shall receive salaries and
after retirement, they shall receive pensions.
(b) The  salaries  and  pensions  of  judges  shall  be  adequate,
commensurate with the status, dignity and responsibility of their
office,  and  shall  be  periodically  reviewed  to  overcome  or
minimize the effect of inflation.
(c) Retirement age shall not be altered for judges in office without
their consent.
67

19. The executive authorities shall at all times ensure the security
and physical protection of judges and their families.”
Paras 20 and 21 deal with immunity and privileges, paras 22 to 25 deal
with disqualifications, while paras 26 to 31 deal with discipline and removal.
They read as follows:
“26.(a)A complaint against a judge shall be processed expeditiously
and fairly under an appropriate practice and the judge shall have
the opportunity to comment on the complaint at the initial stage.
The examination of the complaint at its initial stage shall be kept
confidential, unless otherwise requested by the judge.
(b) The proceedings for judicial removal or discipline when such are
initiated shall be held before a Court or a Board predominantly
composed of members of the judiciary.  The power of removal
may, however, be vested in the Legislature by impeachment or
joint address, preferably upon a recommendation of such a Court
or Board.
27. All disciplinary action shall be based upon established standards
of judicial conduct.
28. The proceedings for discipline of judges shall ensure fairness to
the judge and the opportunity of a full hearing.
29. Judgment in disciplinary proceedings instituted against judges,
whether held in camera or in public, shall be published.
68

30. A  judge  shall  not  be  subject  to  removal  except  on  proved
grounds of incapacity or misbehaviour rendering him unfit to continue
in office.
31. In the event a court is abolished, judges serving on that court,
except those who are elected for a specified term, shall not be affected,
but they may be transferred to another court of the same status.”
International Commission of Jurists: 1981 (Siracusa Principles):
We shall next refer to the instruments promoted by the International
Commission of Jurists.   These are contained in the draft principles on the
Independence of the Judiciary (Siracusa Principles), which were formulated
during  25-29  May,  1981.    These  principles  also  refer  to  the  judicial
independence, qualification, Selection, postings, transfer, promotion etc., but
we shall refer only to those relating to discipline and removal, namely, Art.
13 to 16.   They are as follows:
“Discipline:
Art. 13. Any disciplinary proceedings concerning judges should be
before a court or a board composed of and selected by members of the
judiciary.
Art. 14. All disciplinary action should be based upon standards of
judicial conduct promulgated by law or in established rules of court.
69

Art. 15. The decision of a disciplinary board should be subject to
appeal to a court.
[Note:   Opinion  was  divided  as  to  whether  the  disciplinary  board
should also include a minority of non-judges.
Disciplinary sanctions may include a variety of options ranging from
censure or reprimand to the most drastic action of removal.
A  common  law  judge  who  was  unable  to  attend  the  meeting  has
suggested that articles 13 and 15 should be amended to read as follows:  
“13. Disciplinary proceedings against a judge shall be taken formally
where it is desired that the judge be, for serious reason, removed from
his office.   Such disciplinary proceedings shall be taken in the  first
instance before a board composed of members of the judiciary selected
by their peers and there shall be a right of appeal from the decision of
such a board to a court.
15. Where the conduct of a judge does not warrant removal from his
office,  disciplinary  or  other  procedures  in  relation  to  that  conduct
should be taken privately in accordance with the powers vested in the
Chief Judge of his court.”]
Removal
Art. 16. A  judge  should  not  be  subject  to  removal  unless,  by
reason  of  a  criminal  act  or  through  gross  or  repeated  neglect  or
70

physical or mental incapacity, he has shown himself manifestly unfit to
hold the position of judge.”
International Bar Association Minimum standards of judicial independence,
New Delhi (1982)
We  shall  next  refer  to  the  Minimum  Standards  of  Judicial
Independence laid down by the International Bar Association.   These were
adopted by the 19th Biennial Conference held in New Delhi in October 1982.
They  deal  with  judicial  independence,  the  terms  and  nature  of  judicial
appointments.    So far as the subject of discipline and removal of judges is
concerned, these are contained in paras 27 to 32 and read as follows:
“27. The proceedings  for discipline  and removal of judges  should
ensure  fairness  to  the  judge,  and  adequate  opportunity  for
hearing.
28. The procedure for discipline should be held   in camera  .  The judge
may however request that the hearing be held in public, subject
to  final  and  reasoned  disposition  of  this  request  by  the
disciplinary tribunal.   Judgments in disciplinary proceedings,
whether held   in camera   or in public, may be published  .
29. The grounds for removal of judges shall be fixed by law and
shall be clearly defined.
71

30.     All disciplinary actions shall be based upon standards of judicial 
conduct promulgated by law or in established rules of court.
31. A judge shall not be  subject to removal unless, by reason of a
criminal act or through gross or repeated neglect or physical or
mental incapacity, he has shown himself manifestly unfit to hold
the position of judge.
32. In systems where the power to discipline and remove judges is
vested in an institution other than the Legislature,  the tribunal
for discipline and removal of judges shall be permanent and be
composed predominantly of members of the Judiciary.
33. The head of the court may legitimately have supervisory powers
to control judges on administrative matters.”
World Conference of Independence of Judiciary, Montreal : 1983
           We shall next refer to the World Conference on the Independence of
Judiciary held at Montreal in 1983.  The resolution related to the Universal
Declaration  on  the  Independence  of  Judges.    After  dealing  with  the
independence and accountability of international judges, it dealt with national
judges separately.   Para 2 of Part II after referring to independence of the
judiciary; para 3 refers to the qualifications, selection and training; para 4
relates to posting, promotion and transfer and para 5 to the tenure.   Para 6
deals with immunities and privileges and para 7 with disqualifications.   Para
8 deals with discipline and removal and they read as follows:
72

“VIII Discipline and removal
2.32 A complaint against a judge shall be processed expeditiously
and fairly under an appropriate practice and  the judge shall have the
opportunity to comment on the complaint at the initial stage.  The
examination  of  the  complaint  at  its  initial  stage  shall  be  kept
confidential, unless otherwise requested by the judge.
2.33(a) The proceedings for judicial removal or discipline when
such  are  initiated,  shall  be  held  before  a  Court or  a  Board
predominantly  composed  of  members  of  the  judiciary  and
selected by the judiciary;
(b) However,  the  power  of  removal  may  be  vested  in  the
Legislature by impeachment or joint address, preferably upon a
recommendation of a Court or Board referred to in 2.33(a).
2.34 All disciplinary action shall be based upon established standards
of judicial conduct.
2.35 The proceedings for discipline of judges shall ensure fairness to
the judge and the opportunity of a full hearing.
2.36 With the exception of proceedings before the Legislature, the
proceedings of discipline and removal shall be held in camera.
The judge may, however, request that the hearing be held in
public, subject to final and reasoned disposition of this request
by  the  disciplinary  Tribunal.    Judgments  in  disciplinary
73

proceedings,  whether  held  in  camera  or  in  public,  may  be
published.
2.37 With the exception of proceedings before the Legislature or in
connection with them, the decision of a disciplinary Tribunal
shall be subject to appeal to a court.
2.38 A  judge  shall  not  be  subject  to  removal  except  on  proved
grounds of incapacity or misbehaviour rendering him unfit to
continue in office.
2.39 In the event a court is abolished, judges serving on the court
shall not be affected, except for their transfer to another court of
the same status.”
Lusaka Seminar: 1986
We shall next refer to the Lusaka Seminar on the Independence of
Judges and Lawyers which was held from 10 to 14 November, 1986.  This
was sponsored by the Centre for Independence of Judges and Lawyers and
the International Commission of Jurists.   Paras 33 to 42 referred to the
conditions  of  service  and  tenure,  while  para  45  dealt  with  discipline,
suspension and removal.    That para reads as follows:
“45. Principles 17 to 20 of the UN Basic Principles, guaranteeing a
judge  a  fair  confidential  disciplinary  hearing  in  accordance  with
74

established standards of judicial conduct, providing that suspension or
removal shall only be imposed for incapacity or misbehaviour, and
providing for independent review of disciplinary decisions, should be
implemented at the national level.”
Caracas Conference: 1999
Another  Conference  on  Independence  of  Judges  and  Lawyers  was
organized  at  Caracas,  Venezuela  during  16-18  January,  1999  by  the
International Commission of Jurists.   The Conference passed a plan of action
upholding the principles of rule of law, independence of the judiciary and
human rights.
Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct: 2002
We shall next refer to the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct,
2002, which after referring to the UN Basic Principles on the Independence
of the Judiciary, set out earlier formulated various principles relating to the
independence of the judiciary.   On the question of independence, paras 1.1 to
1.6 read as follows:
“  Value 1:  Independence     Principle:  
Judicial  independence  is  a  pre-requisite  to  the  rule  of  law  and  a
fundamental guarantee of a fair trial.   A judge shall therefore uphold
75

and  exemplify  judicial  independence  in  both  its  individual  and
institutional aspects.
1.1 A judge shall exercise the judicial function independently on the
basis of the judge’s assessment of the facts and in accordance
with  a  conscientious  understanding  of  the  law,  free  of  any
extraneous  influences,  inducements,  pressures,  threats  or
interference,  direct  or  indirect,  from  any  quarter  or  for  any
reason.
1.2 A judge shall be independent in relation to society in general and
in relation to the particular parties to a dispute which the judge
has to adjudicate.
1.3 A judge shall not only be free from inappropriate connections
with,  and  influence  by,  the  executive  and  Parliamentary
branches of government, but must also appear to a reasonable
observer to be free therefrom.
1.4 In performing judicial duties, a judge shall be independent of
judicial colleagues in respect of decisions which the judge is
obliged to make independently.
1.5 A judge shall encourage and uphold safeguards for the discharge
of  judicial  duties  in  order  to  maintain  and  enhance  the
institutional and operational independence of the judiciary.
1.6 A judge  shall  exhibit and promote high standards  of judicial
conduct in order to reinforce public confidence in the judiciary
76

which  is  fundamental  to  the  maintenance  of  judicial
independence.”
The Bangalore Principles mainly deal with the principles of judicial
conduct, impartiality etc. in paras 2.1 to 2.5, with integrity in paras 3.1 and
3.2, with propriety in paras 4.1 to 4.16, with equality in paras 5.1 to 5.5, with
competence and diligence in paras 6.1 to 6.7.    The declaration does not deal
with the procedure for discipline.
Latimer House Principles and Guidelines for the Commonwealth, 1998:
The  Latimer  guidelines  were  formulated  in  a  colloquium  on
“Parliamentary  Supremacy,  Judicial  Independence…towards  a
Commonwealth Model”, jointly sponsored by the Commonwealth Lawyers
Association, Commonwealth Legal Education Association, Commonwealth
Magistrates  and  Judges  Association  and  Commonwealth  Parliamentary
Association.   The Conference was held at Latimer House, UK between 15-19
June, 1998.   So far as judicial accountability is concerned, it is stated in para
VI(1) under the heading of Judicial Accountability, (a) Discipline, as follows:
“(i) In cases where a judge is at risk of removal, the judge must have
the right to be fully informed of the charges, to be represented at a
hearing, to make a full defence, and  to be judged by an independent
77

and impartial  tribunal.  Grounds  for removal of a judge should  be
limited to:
(A) inability to perform judicial duties; and
(B) serious misconduct.
(ii) In all other matters, the process should be conducted by the chief
judge of the courts;
(iii) Disciplinary  procedures  should  not  include  the  public
admonition  of  judges.    Any  admonitions  should  be  delivered  in
private, by the chief judge.”
Beijing Statement of Principles of Independence of the Judiciary (1995):
Beijing Statement of Principles of Independence of the Judiciary was
prepared on 19th August, 1995.   The preamble refers to the charter of the UN,
the Universal Declaration, the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights.     It then refers to the 6th UN Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and  the  Treatment  of  Offenders  which  dealt  with  the  question  of
independence of the judges.    It then refers to the 7th UN Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders held at Milan, Italy from
26th August  to  6th September,  1985  adopting  the  basic  principles  on  the
independence  of  the  judiciary  and  then  to  the  7th UN  Congress  on  the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders which recommended the
basic  principles  above-stated  at  national,  regional  and  interregional
78

implementation.   It also refers to the “Tokyo Principles” passed by the Law
Asia Human Rights Standing Committee on 17-18 July, 1982, and to the 5th
Conference of Chief Justices of Asia and the Pacific at Colombo, Sri Lanka
on 13-15 September, 1993.    It was found that the Tokyo principles should
be  revised.    On  that  basis  the  fresh  principles  of  independence  of  the
judiciary were formulated at Beijing on 19th August, 1995.  Principles 3 to 9
deal with independence of the judiciary and principles 18 to 30 refer to the
principles applicable to the tenure and disciplinary action.   They read as
follows:
“3. Independence of the Judiciary requires that;
(a) the Judiciary shall decide matters before it in accordance with its
impartial assessment of the facts and its understanding of the law
without improper influences, direct or indirect, from any source;
and 
(b) the Judiciary has jurisdiction, directly or by way of review, over all
issues of a justiciable nature.
4. The  maintenance  of  the  independence  of  the  Judiciary  is
essential to the attainment of its objects and the proper performance of
its functions in a free society observing the Rule of Law.  It is essential
that such independence be guaranteed by the State and enshrined in the
Constitution or the law.
5. It is the duty of the Judiciary to respect and observe the proper
objectives and functions of the other institutions of government.  It is
79

the  duty  of  those  institutions  to  respect  and  observe  the  proper
objectives and functions of the Judiciary.
6. In the decision-making process, any hierarchical organization of
the Judiciary and  any difference  in  grade  or rank  shall  in  no  way
interfere with the duty of the judge exercising jurisdiction individually
or  judges  acting  collectively  to  pronounce  judgment  in  accordance
with  article  3(a).   The  Judiciary,  on  its  part,  individually  and
collectively,  shall  exercise  its  functions  in  accordance  with  the
Constitution and the law.
7. Judges  shall  uphold  the  integrity  and  independence  of  the
Judiciary by avoiding impropriety and the appearance of impropriety in
all their activities.
8. To the extent consistent  with their duties as  members of the
Judiciary,  judges,  like  other  citizens,  are  entitled  to  freedom  of
expression, belief, association and assembly.
9. Judges shall be free subject to any applicable law to form and
join an association of judges to represent their interests and promote
their professional training and to take such other action to protect their
independence as may be appropriate.”
Principles Applicable to the tenure and disciplinary action:
“18. Judges must have security of tenure.
80

19. It is recognized that, in some countries, the tenure of judges is
subject to confirmation from time to time by vote of the people of other
formal procedure.
20. However, it is recommended that all judges exercising the same
jurisdiction be appointed for a period to expire upon the attainment of
a particular age.
21. A judge’s tenure must not be altered to the disadvantage of the
judge during her or his term of office.
22. Judges should be subject to removal from office only for proved
incapacity, conviction of a crime, or conduct which makes the judge
unfit to be a judge.
23. It is  recognized  that, by reason  of differences  in history and
culture, the procedures adopted for the removal of judges may differ in
different  societies.   Removal  by  parliamentary  procedures  has
traditionally been adopted in some societies.   In other societies, that
procedure is unsuitable: it is not appropriate for dealing with some
grounds for removal; it is rarely if every used; and its use other than for
the most serious of reasons is apt to lead to misuse.
24. Where parliamentary procedures or procedures for the removal
of a judge by vote  of the people do  not apply, procedures  for the
removal of judges must be under the control of the judiciary.
25. Where parliamentary procedures or procedures for the removal
of a judge by vote of the people do not apply and it is proposed to take
steps  to  secure  the  removal  of  a  judge,  there  should,  in  the  first
81

instance, be an examination of the reasons suggested for the removal,
for the purpose of determining whether formal proceedings should be
commenced.  Formal proceedings should be  commenced only  if the
preliminary examination indicates that there are adequate reasons for
taking them.
26. In any event, the judge who is sought to be removed must have
the right to a fair hearing.
27. All  disciplinary,  suspension  or  removal  proceedings  must  be
determined  in  accordance  with  established  standards  of  judicial
conduct.
28. Judgments in disciplinary proceedings,  whether held in camera
or in public, should be published.
29. The abolition of the court of which a judge is a member must not
be accepted as a reason or an occasion for the removal of a judge.
Where a court is abolished or restructured, all existing members of the
court must be reappointed to its replacement or appointed to another
judicial office of equivalent status and tenure.  Members of the court
for  whom  no  alternative  position  can  be  found  must  be  fully
compensated.
30. Judges  must  not  be  transferred  by  the  Executive  from  one
jurisdiction or function to another without their consent, but when a
transfer  is  in  pursuance  of  a  uniform  policy  formulated  by  the
Executive after due consultation with the Judiciary, such consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld by an individual judge.”
82

It appears that 20 Chief Justices first adopted the Beijing Statement in
August, 1997 and this statement was further refined during seven conferences
of Chief Justices held at Manila in August 1997 and signed by 32 Chief
Justices throughout the Asia Pacific region.   So far as principles relating to
judicial  independence  and  tenure  and  disciplinary  action,  they  are
substantially the same as those passed at Beijing referred to above.  Among
those who signed at Beijing on 19th August, 1995, was Justice S.C. Agarwal,
Judge, Supreme Court of India representing the then Chief Justice of India,
Justice A.M. Ahmadi.
83

CHAPTER V
Section 220(2)(b) of the Government of India Act,
1935 & Joint Committee of Parliament on Judges  
(Inquiry) Bill, 1964
Government of India Act, 1935 & Justice S.P. Sinha’s case (1948)
The case of Justice S.P. Sinha, Judge of the Allahabad High Court was
the only case prior to the commencement of the Constitution where a Judge
was removed pursuant to a reference under sec 220(2)(b) of the Government
of India Act, 1935.
On 20th July, 1948,  pursuant  to  a  petition  by  the  Govt.  of United
Provinces, a reference was made by the Governor General of India, under sec
220(2)(b)  of  the  Government  of  India  Act,  1935.   the  complaint  was
forwarded to the Federal Court of India.  earlier, the procedure was to refer
such cases to the Privy Council.  But, the present reference came before the
Federal Court because of the India (Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947
and the India (Provisional Constitutional) Amendment Order, 1948.
The Federal Court, on receipt of the reference, directed a copy of the
charges to the Judge seeking his reply.  Thereafter, the Governor-General
filed affidavits in support of the facts and allegations in the petition of the
Governor  and  served  on  the  Judge.   He  filed  affidavits  in  reply.   The
84

Governor-General filed affidavits in rejoinder.  The Judge requested that the
deponent who filed affidavits be summoned.  This was allowed.  Thereafter
evidence, which included cross-examination on behalf of the Judge, came on
record in an inquiry which lasted three full weeks.  Evidence was concluded
by 22nd March, 1949.
The proceedings took place in camera before the Federal Court which,
however,  stated  that  this  should  not  be  regarded  as  a  precedent.   After
considering the material on five charges, the Federal Court held that one
charge relating to his conduct concerning two cases was proved.  As two
instances  of misbehaviour were proved the Federal Court opined that his
continuance in office will be prejudicial to the administration of justice and
to public interest.  The Court recommended removal.
By  order  dated  22nd April,  1949,  the  Governor-General  Sri  C.
Rajagopalachari passed an order of removal under sec 220(2) of the Govt. of
India Act 1935, citing that it was the only case in the history of Indian High
Courts.
85

The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 1964 & the Report  of the Joint Committee of
Parliament (1966)
The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 became law after the report of the Joint
Committee of Parliament which discussed the report on Judges (Inquiry) Bill,
1964 during January 1966.  The main reason for bringing about the Bill 1964
was  that  a  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  who  was  unwell  was,
according to some persons, not in a position to perform his judicial duties in
the Supreme Court.  Question arose as to whether and in what manner he
could be asked not to function. The Bill of 1964 was referred to the Joint
Committee of Parliament.
The report of the Committee was finally presented on 17th May, 1966
and thereafter the Bill which was originally introduced in Lok Sabha in 1964
was modified in the light of the report of the Committee and was passed by
the Parliament in 1968.
Though the defects in the Bill were proposed  in 1966 by the joint
committee,  the  Bill,   as  corrected  was  ultimately  passed  in  1968  by
Parliament.
On January 15th, 17th, February 14th, 1966, evidence was given before
the Committee was given before the Joint Committee by leading personalities
like  Shri  C.K.  Daphtary,  the  then  Attorney  General  of  India,  Shri  M.C.
86

Setalvad, Dr. L.M. Singhvi, Shri N.C. Chatterjee, Shri G.S. Pathak, Shri K.
K.Shah, Shri R.C.S. Sarkar, Shri P.N. Sapru, Shri M.P. Kamath and Shri
M.N. Kaul.  That evidence throws a flood of light on the interpretation of
Arts 124 and 125 of the Constitution of India.  The discussion was mainly
based  upon  certain  provisions  of  the  1965  Bill  which,  according  to  the
Committee, violated the  provisions of the Constitution.  
 
 Some of  the  issues  discussed  before  the  Joint  Committee  in  1966
concerned  the  interpretations  of  Articles  121,124,125  and  217  of  the
Constitution and are relevant in the present context.  In fact, some of these
points have since been thrashed out before the Supreme Court in Justice V.
Ramaswamy’s cases.  That is why we feel that a brief reference is necessary
to the discussion before the said Joint Committee.  
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 1964
(For convenience, instead of the word ‘clause’ of the Bill, we are using
the word ‘section’).
Section 2 of the Bill contained definitions and sec 2(c) stated that the
word Judge meant Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, including
the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of High Courts.
87

Section 3 of the Bill deals with “investigation into misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge by the Committee” to be constituted by the Speaker and
Chairman. 
 Sub section (1) of sec 3 refers to the manner in which a motion has to be
brought in the House of the People.  The Motion should be brought by not
less  than  100  Members  of that  House  of  People  or  by not  less  than  50
Members  of  the  Council  of  States.   In  that  event,  the  Speaker  or  the
Chairman, as the case may be, may after consulting such persons, if any, as
he thinks fit and after considering such materials, if any, as may be available
to him, either admit the motion or refuse to admit the same.
Sub  section  (2)  of  sec 3 states  that  if  the  motion  is  admitted,  the
Speaker or as the case may be, the Parliament shall keep the motion pending
and constitute,  as much as may be, for purpose of making an investigation
into the grounds on which the removal of a Judge is prayed for, a committee
consisting of 3 members.  The manner in which the members have to be
chosen was mentioned as follows:
“(a) One member shall be chosen from among he Chief Justice and the
other  Judges  of the  Supreme  Court;  (b)  one  shall  be  chosen  from
among  the  Chief Justices  of the  High  Courts  and  (c) one shall  be
chosen from among the persons who are, in the opinion of the Speaker,
or as the case may be, the Chairman, distinguished jurists.”
88

Sub  section  (3)  of  sec  3  provides  that  the  Committee  shall  frame
definite charges against the Judge on the basis of which the investigation is
proposed  to  be  held.   Subsection  (4)  of sec  3  provides  that  the  charges
together with a statement of grounds, shall be communicated to the Judge and
he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of filing his written statement.
Subsection (5) of sec 3 provides for medical examination of a Judge, if the
allegation is that he was unable to discharge his duties effectively due to
physical or mental incapacity.  The Medical board shall have to submit its
report to the Committee.
Under subsection (7), the Judge has to be given a further opportunity to
state his case in regard to the Medical report and the charges can be amended,
if necessary, if they are amended, the Judge is given a further opportunity.
Subsection (8) of sec 3 permits the Central Government to appoint an
advocate to conduct the case against the Judge if so required by the Speaker
or the Chairman.
Section 4 states that the Committee may regulate its own procedure in
making the investigation and shall give reasonable opportunity to the Judge
for cross examining witnesses or adducing evidence.  After the investigation,
the Committee has to submit its report to the Speaker or, as the case may be,
to the Chairman or to both, if it was jointly constituted by both.  The report
will then be laid in both the Houses.
89

Section 5 of the Bill dealt with the power of the Committee to issue
summons, require delivery and production of a document, receive evidence
on oath, issue summons for examination of witnesses or documents etc.
Section 6 provided that if the report finds the Judge not guilty or not
suffering from any incapacity, the motion has to be rejected.  On the other
hand, if the report is against the Judge the motion and the report will be taken
up by the House in which it is pending.  If the motion is adopted by the each
House  according  to  Art  124(4),  or  Art  218  than  the  misbehaviour  or
incapacity shall be deemed to be proved and an address for removal of the
Judge shall be presented by each House in the same way in which the motion
has been adopted.
Subsection 7 enables a Joint Committee of both Houses to make rules.
The joint committee will consist of 15 members nominated by the Speaker.
These were the salient provisions of the Bill of 1964 which came up
for discussion before the Joint Committee.
Discussion before the Joint Committee
The evidence given by Shri C.K. Daphtary, Attorney General for India
related to Art 124(4).  He said that  a motion is presented in one of the
90

Houses  of Parliament, question  was  whether there can be any discussion
about he conduct of a Judge under art. 121.  That article prohibits discussion
except upon a motion “for presenting an address to the President”.  Shri G.S.
Pathak pointed that at the initial stage of initiating the motion, the motion is
in the nature of a complaint or petition.  It is only after the misbehaviour or
incapacity is proved, that an address is actually made to the President under
art 124(4).  Therefore, at the stage of initiating the motion there can be no
discussion.  He emphasized that if there is discussion at the initial stage there
can be character assassination.  Shri P.N. Sapru suggested that stage when the
motion is initiated, discussion should be avoided.  Shri G.S. Pathak pointed
out Art 121 uses the words “except upon a motion for presenting an address
to  the  President  praying  for  the  removal  of  the  Judge  as  thereinafter
provided” and that meant that the motion is to be supported only after the
proof of misbehaviour or incapacity.  He pointed out that under art 124(4),
first the misbehaviour or incapacity has to be proved and only thereafter the
motion has to be supported by a majority of the total members of the House.
Art 124(4) does not require a majority of the House at the stage of initiation
of the motion which leads  to the appointment of a committee before the
allegations have to be proved.  Shri P.N. Sapru pointed out that at the stage
when the motion is initiated,  Parliaments in UK and the Commonwealth
countries  like  Canada  and  Australia  do  not  permit  any  discussion.   He
suggested that Parliament could sit in camera at the stage of initiation, but
Shri G.S. Pathak suggested that instead the law that is to be made could state
that there should be no discussion.  The discussion in Parliament could take
91

place  only  after  a  judicial  tribunal  decides  that  the  misbehaviour  and
incapacity have been proved.
However,  initially  Shri  C.K.  Daphtary  did  not  accept  this  view.
According  to  him  once  a  motion  was  initiated  under  art  124(4),  the
prohibition for discussion under art 121 was lifted.  He said that we need not
consider that there are two stages and that the discussion about the conduct of
Judge is permitted only later on.  Later, C.K. Daphtary changed his opinion
and stated that there could be discussion only after proof of misbehaviour or
incapacity.   Shri  P.N.  Sapru  also  suggested  that  there  are  two  stages.
According  to  Mr.  P.  Barman,  at  the  stage  of  initiation  of  Motion,  the
Speaker/Chairman would decide whether to refer to a Committee.  There
could be discussion at that stage also because Art. 121 lifts the bar against
discussion at that stage also.  According to Shri G.S. Pathak, the motion is
kept  pending  and  after  proof  before  a  Judicial  Tribunal,  there  could  be
discussion.   According to Mr. P. Barman, there are two stages of the same
motion.   He was supported by Sri D.L. Sen Gupta.   He also said Parliament
may acquit  the  Judge  even  if  the  Committee  held  him  guilty.    But,  if
Committee  held  the  Judge  not  guilty,  the  matter  ends  since  there  is  no
‘proved misbehaviour’.   Several members opined that there must be ‘proof of
misbehaviour’ before the Address.   Art. 121 speaks of Motion but Art. 124
(4) does not speak of Motion, according to Sri K.K. Shah.   Address can be
only after a Motion.  But, there should be no character assassination before
‘proof’.   Dr. Singhvi quoted from Robert McGregor Davison that there is a
92

joint address in Canada.   Mr. P. Barman said: ‘It is very dangerous to define
‘misbehaviour’.   Mr. Debabrata Mookerjee agreed.   Then members said that
the Committee may even say that the complaint is ‘frivolous’.  
Another point discussed was whether any motion could be initiated
under Art. 124(4) before a law was made under art 124(5).  Dr. Singhvi
quoted the view of Todd of Australia.  He also quoted Jefferson’s Manual as
regards the procedure in the Senate in US.
Yet another question was whether the President could act on his own,
after the address, made and whether he would have discretion in the matter of
accepting  the  motion  or  whether  he  should  abide  by  the  view  of  the
Executive.  Shri C.K. Daphtary observed that the advice of the Cabinet would
be binding on the President.  So far as the Parliament was concerned, it was
not bound by the report of the Committee.  
Shri M.N. Kaul, formerly Secretary General of the House of Lok Sabha
and later Director of the Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies,
New Delhi, gave elaborate evidence.   He suggested that the trial of the Judge
should be judicial in character.  He also stated that whenever a member raised
a  complaint  against  a  sitting  Judge,  it  was  necessary  for  the
Speaker/Chairman to consider whether any prima facie case was made out.
After the Constitution came into force, the first case that arose was in relation
to a complaint made by an eminent scientist Dr. Meghnath Saha against a
93

Judge.  The notice came before the Speaker Shri Mavlankar who scrutinized
the same and he felt that it was necessary to first find out if there was a prima
facie case to admit the notice.  He said “this power I can use to settle matters
without the thing every coming on the order paper”.   The notings on the
important matters remained in the personal custody of the Secretary General
himself.   Mr. Mavlankar also said “my first duty is to send for the member”.
Such complaints against high constitutional functionaries should, therefore,
be first examined by the Speaker to find out if there was a prima facie case.
It seems he told Dr. Meghnath Saha “look here, you have given notice; you
are an eminent member and I know that you may have some prima facie
evidence but it is my duty as a Speaker, to satisfy myself …….. initially it is
my power and responsibility to admit it or not to admit it.   I think that I
should view it with an extremely critical eye; that is to say if I have no
recourse left, then in those circumstances alone I will place this on the order
paper”.    If a member makes a complaint without justification, he may incur
the displeasure of the Speaker.    The Speaker will have to check and verify
the allegations initially.   He must ask the member if the member had made
some verification and satisfied himself.   The complaint in that case appears
to be that three Judges of a High Court were delaying pronouncements of the
judgments for a long time and one was about to retire.   But Mr. Mavlankar
said that before admitting the motion, he would write to the Chief Justice of
the High Court concerned.    He also brought it to the notice of the Home
Minister and the Chief Justice of India.   The Chief Justice replied that he
was taking appropriate action in the matter.   But the Home Minister and the
94

Chief Justice appreciated the manner in which the Speaker dealt with the
matter without straightaway admitting the motion.   The then Prime Minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru also supported what the Speaker did.   The threat of a
motion ultimately worked and the problem was solved.   The cases were
disposed of and the judgments were delivered.   Dr. Saha who made the
complaint was also satisfied.  Mr. M.N. Kaul referred to two other complaints
from another High Court and that was also resolved in the above manner
when the Judges came to know that the Speaker was holding up a complaint
so that the matter could be sorted out with the help of the Chief Justice of the
High Court.   The third case related to Justice Imam of the Supreme Court
who was not keeping good health and who ultimately resigned in similar
circumstances.    It was thereafter that the Government realised that law
should be made under Art. 124 clause (5) of the Constitution.   According to
him, the motion referred to in Art. 121 and 124(4) meant a proposal for the
consideration  of the House  which is in the  mind of the sponsors.   The
Speaker could dismiss the motion if it was frivolous.   If he finds a prima
facie, case he would admit the motion.    Merely because the motion is
admitted under Art. 124(4) did not mean that the allegation against the Judge
was proved.  It still remains the view of the sponsors.    He stated that it
should not be for the executive to move the Speaker but it should only be for
the Members of Parliament to move the Speaker by way of a motion.   It is
not permissible to bring the executive into the picture at that stage.   Notice
on the motion by the Speaker does not amount to investigation and proof.
Admission  of  the  motion  by  the  Speaker  does  not  also  amount  to
95

investigation and proof.   Putting the motion on paper is not part of the
investigation and proof.   Parliament does not come into the picture till the
report of the Committee is laid on the Table.   It is, therefore, competent in
Parliament to make a law in relation to the antecedent stages.   No Member of
Parliament  should  think  that  when  he  moves  a  motion,  the  charges  are
proved.   He has only started the machinery to go into action.   At that stage if
the  member  does  not  satisfy  the  Speaker  about  a  prima  facie  case,  the
Speaker may say that he is not satisfied or that there is no basis.    According
to  Mr. K.K. Shah  the  words  “as hereinafter  provided  in  Art. 121  in the
sentence “except upon a motion for presenting an address to the President
praying for the removal of the Judge as hereinafter provided”, referred only
to the later stage of address and not to the stage of the motion.    But,
according to Mr. Kaul it referred to both the stages.  Under both stages, there
could be discussion.   But Mr. Shah pointed out that 124(4) deals with the
removal  “after  an address  supported by a majority” and voting  has  been
presented to the President.  Otherwise at the initial stages when the motion is
initiated there could be a character assassination.  But according to Mr. Kaul
there should be not be much discussion at the initial stage and a convention
should be established that there should be no discussion.   If the House of
representatives makes an address to the President, it will request the Rajya
Sabha to present a similar address to the President for the removal of a Judge.
The Houses can move independently or they can have a joint session.  If
anybody  sends  a  petition  to  the  President,  he  could  forward  it  to  the
concerned  Minister  who  could  make  some  preliminary  inquiry  before
96

referring it to the Speaker or before a motion is made in the House.  It is also
open to the President to have the complaint sent to the Chief Justice of India
through the Minister.   The President should not have the power to appoint a
tribunal because the President acts on the advice of the executive.   The
tribunal must be appointed by the House.
It was pointed out that the accused Judge has to be given the right to
engage a counsel, right of hearing, right of cross-examination and right of
using evidence etc. before the body which investigates the allegations.  Mr.
Debabrata  Mukerjee  repeatedly  asked  Mr.  Kaul  whether  at  the  stage  of
initiation of the motion there could be a speech by the sponsor or by other
members in support of it or whether Art. 121 would be a bar but Mr. Kaul
was of the view that Art. 121 lifted the bar even at the stage of initiation of
the motion but Mr. Mukerjee did not agree.   However, Mr. Kaul pointed out
that a member could waive his right of speech at that stage but Mr. Mukerjee
pointed out that if the Speaker should be first satisfied about the prima facie
case before referring the matter to a Committee, then the problem can be
easily solved and at the initial stage it becomes a statutory procedure rather
than a preliminary procedure.
Mr. M.C. Setalvad, representing the Indian Jurists Commission and the
Institute  of  Constitutional  and  Parliamentary  Studies,  agreed  that  the
Government should have no place in initiating a motion and it should be only
for the Members of Parliament.   He agreed that legislation may provide that
97

Parliament could  appoint  a body to conduct  an inquiry.    Mr. Setalvad
suggested that the Rule Committee of Parliament could provide that there
could be no speech and discussion at the stage when the motion was initially
moved in the House.    At any rate, he was of the opinion that at the initial
stage discussion about the conduct of the Judge should be avoided.   He was
also of the view that clause (5) of Art.124 was only an enabling provision.
He was also of the opinion that a retired Judge should not be a member of the
tribunal.   Thereafter, the Joint Committee submitted its report dated 13th
May, 1966 (some members dissented).
The  Joint  Committee  recommended  that  in  order  to  ensure  and
maintain the independence of the judiciary, the executive should be excluded
from every stage of the procedure for investigation and that initiative should
only be with Parliament.   Before admission of the motion, the Speaker or the
Chairman may consult  such  persons  as  he may deem fit  or gather  other
material and either admit or reject the motion.   If he admits the motion, he
should keep the motion pending and constitute a committee consisting of
three members, one each to be chosen from amongst the Chief Justice and
other Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of the High Courts and the
distinguished jurists.   The report of the committee must be submitted to the
Speaker or the Chairman or to both so as to be laid before both Houses.
The Joint Committee also felt that if the investigating body exonerates
the Judge no further action should be taken on the motion.   If, however, the
98

report  is  against  the  Judge  then  the  motion  should  be  taken  up  for
consideration in the House or Houses in which it is pending.   If the motion is
adopted by each House in accordance with Art. 124(4) read with Art. 218,
then the misbehaviour or incapacity should be “deemed” to have been proved
and then an address should be presented to the President by each House.  The
rule making should be given to a Joint Committee of the Parliament and not
to the Government.
As a result of the said suggestions, the Bill of 1964, was amended and
ultimately the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 was passed.
99

CHAPTER VI
CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLES LAID DOWN BY SUPREME
COURT  OF INDIA IN JUSTICE V.RAMASWAMI’S CASES 
(In regard to  Articles, 121,124,125 of the Constitution and Judges (Inquiry)
Act, 1968)
In  this  Chapter  we  shall  deal  with  the  interpretation  of  various
provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 and the constitutional principles
dealing with the ‘removal’ of Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme
Court.
       Several principles have been laid down by the Supreme Court in a series
of judgments in connection with the inquiry for removal, initiated against
Justice  V.  Ramaswami,  formerly  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court.   These
judgments  are  four  and  are  contained  in  (i)  Sub-Committee  on  Judicial
Accountability vs.  Union  of  India,  1991(4)  SCC  699;  (ii)  Sarojini
Ramaswami (Mrs.) vs. Union of India, 1992(4) 506; (iii)  Krishnaswami vs.
Union of India, 1992(4) SCC 605 and (iv)  Lily Thomas   vs  Speaker Lok
Sabha, 1995(4) SCC 234 .
100

Brief Chronology of facts and Judgments  in Justice V.Ramaswami’s cases: 
Before we proceed to refer to the principles laid down in the above
judgments, we propose to set out the background of facts which led to the
above judgments.  
         Justice V. Ramaswami was appointed Chief Justice of the High Court
of  Punjab  and  Haryama  and  there  were  certain  allegations  of  financial
impropriety and other irregularities against him while he was working as
Chief Justice of that High Court  at Chandigarh.  By the time of the inquiry,
he had been elevated to the Supreme Court.  The then Chief Justice of India,
Justice Sabyasachi Mukharji, took note of the allegations and advised Justice
Ramaswami, to  abstain  from judicial  functions  until  the  allegations  were
cleared.  On 18th July, 1990, upon receipt of the letter, Justice V. Ramaswami
applied for leave for six weeks in the first instance w.e.f. 23rd July, 1990.
The Chief Justice directed the office to process his application for leave.
These facts are contained in statement of the Chief Justice of India to the Bar
dated 20th July, 1990.
The Chief Justice of India then appointed a Committee consisting of
three  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  (B.C.  Ray,  K.J.  Shetty  and
M.N.Venkatachaliah JJ), presided over by Justice B.C. Ray, to go into the
facts to find out whether there was any prima facie truth in the allegations
requiring the judge not to exercise judicial functions.  The said Committee
101

was not a Committee of Inquiry into the charges, but was constituted only to
ascertain the facts in a prima facie manner. After some inquiries, it expressed
the view that charges of improper conduct involving moral turpitude were not
established.    It  then  considered  whether,  before  a  regular  inquiry  is
instituted, Justice V. Ramaswami could be asked to desist functioning as a
judge.    It  was  of  the  view  that  as  long  as  the  constitutional  warrant
appointing him as Judge of the Supreme Court was in force, he could not be
asked not to  exercise his judicial functions.  It stated :  
“In the result, till the matters are finally examined at the appropriate
levels, it is difficult to hold that the Judge should consider himself
disentitled to discharge the judicial functions of his office.  However,
(only if ) upon a careful analysis of all the material, the appropriate
authorities  find  facts  from  which  an  inference  of  moral  turpitude
becomes inescapable and if the Chief Justice of India agrees that those
assessments are bona fide and the facts proved reasonably justify or
admit of such inferences, then and then alone, could it be said that it
will be an embarrassment for the Judge to discharge judicial functions.
Till then, it is perhaps inappropriate to say anything – apart from what
we have indicated by way of financial reimbursements – which may
have  the  effect  of  interdicting  the  legal  incidence  of  constitutional
warrant of the appointment of the Judge.”
102

           Thus, the B.C. Ray Committee thought that, at the stage when the
allegations were not yet inquired into, there was no justification to interdict
the Judge’s right to function as per the warrant of appointment.
Thereafter, on 28th February, 1991, 108 Members of the Lok Sabha
presented a Motion to the Speaker of the 9th Lok Sabha for Address to the
President  for the  removal  of the  learned  Judge  under Art.  124(4) of  the
Constitution read with the provisions  of Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.  On
March 12, 1991, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha in purported exercise of his
general powers as well as of his powers under sec. 3 of the said Act, admitted
the Motion and constituted a three member committee consisting of Justice
P.B. Sawant, Judge of the Supreme Court, Justice P.D. Desai, Chief Justice of
Bombay High Court and Justice O. Chinnappa Reddi, a Jurist who was also
former Judge of the Supreme Court, to investigate into the grounds on which
the removal was prayed for.  This Committee was thus one under section 3 of
the 1968 Act.  
Soon  after  the  decision  of  the  Speaker  to  admit  the  Motion  and
constitute the Committee as aforesaid, the term of the 9th Lok Sabha came to
a premature end upon its dissolution.  The Supreme Court by its judgment
dated October 29, 1991 declared that the Motion as well as the decision of
the Speaker have not lapsed and that the Committee can conduct the inquiry.
(Sub Committee of Judicial Accountability vs. Union of India 1991(4) SCC
103

699).   We shall  refer  to  the  various  constitutional  issues  decided  in  the
judgment separately.
After the said judgment, the Committee started the inquiry and framed
14 charges on the basis of the allegations.  Justice V. Ramaswami did not
participate in the inquiry in spite of notice.  The Committee took evidence
and prepared an elaborate report in regard to 14 charges, on July 20, 1992.
They held Charge numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13 and 14 have been proved,
that Charge No. 5 was not proved  (subject to the finding on Charge No. 7),
Charge Nos.  6 and 10 were also not proved.   It held that Charge No. 12 was
partly proved.
        At that stage, Justice Ramaswami’s wife Mrs. Sarojini Ramaswami filed
writ petition 514 of 1992 requesting for a direction that the Committee hand
over a copy of the Report to Justice Ramaswami before it was submitted to
the Speaker of the Lok Sabha in order to enable Justice V. Ramaswami to
question the findings of the Committee in judicial review proceedings in a
court of law.  By another elaborate judgment the Supreme Court dismissed
the writ petition on 27th October, 1992 (vide Sarojini Ramaswami vs. Union
of India 1992(4) SCC 506.  Several important constitutional principles were
again laid down by the Supreme Court in this judgment to which we shall be
referring in detail.  
104

Thereafter, one Mr. Krishnaswamy who was a Member of Parliament
filed a writ petition ( WP. 149 of 1992) seeking  a review of the earlier
judgment of the Supreme Court in Sub Committee on Judicial Accountability
vs. Union of India 1991(4) SCC 699.  Another person Mr. Raj Kanwar filed a
writ  petition  140  of  1992  contending  that  the  notice  of  Motion  and  its
admission by the Speaker were unconstitutional.  Both these writ petitions
were dismissed by the Supreme Court by its third judgment in Krishnaswamy
vs. Union of India 1992(4) SCC 605 on 27th October, 1992.
After the Report of the Committee was tabled in Parliament, Justice V.
Ramaswami was given a copy of the Report and he, in fact, filed a written
memorandum before the Parliament.   In Parliament, he was represented by
Mr. Kapil Sibal, Senior Advocate.   Several Members having abstained, the
Motion for removal did not ultimately succeed.
Thereafter one Ms. Lily Thomas filed a Writ Petition stating that those
Members of Parliament who abstained from voting, must be deemed to have
accepted the findings of the Committee.   This Writ Petition was dismissed. 
These  four    judgments  laid  down  several  important  principles
regarding interpretation of Art. 121,124,125 of the Constitution and of the
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 which are quite relevant for an analysis of the
provisions of the present Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005.  These principles will
be referred to in detail in this Chapter.
105

Before we deal with the above judgments, we shall refer to the points
arising  out  of  the  Report  of  Justice  P.B.  Sawant  Committee,  which  was
appointed by the Speaker.
The Sawant Committee Report (20  th   July, 1992  ):
 We have already stated that after admitting a Motion, the Hon’ble
Speaker of the Lok Sabha appointed Justice Sawant Committee under Section
3 of the Act.    
The above Committee stated that under section 4 of the High Court’s
Act, 1861  and under section 102 of the Government of India Act, 1915,
Judges of the High Courts in India held office during the “pleasure” of Her or
His Majesty.  However, under proviso (b)  to sec 220(2) of the Government
of India Act, 1935 it was provided that a Judge cannot be removed from his
office unless the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on a reference
being made by his or her Majesty, recommended that the Judge be removed,
on the ground of misbehaviour or of infirmity of mind or body.  
Under the provisions of the Constitution of India while providing for a
tenure of 60 years (later amended as 62 years) for High Court Judges and 65
years for Supreme Court Judges, it was stated in clause (b) of the 2nd Proviso
to Art 124(2) that a Supreme Court Judge may be removed from his office in
106

the manner provided in clause (4) of Art 124.  Clause (4) of Art 124 stated
that a Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office
except by an order of the President passed after an Address in each House of
Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and
by a majority of not less than the 2/3rd of the Members of that House present
and voting, has been presented to the President in the same session for such
removal on the ground of “proved misbehaviour or incapacity”.   Sub clause
(5) of Art 124 provided that Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure
for the presentation of an Address and for the investigation and proof of the
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4).  Art 217 provided
that in the case of the Judges of the High Courts, they may be removed from
their office by the President in the manner provided in clause (4) of Art. 124.
The Committee then referred to the provisions of the Judges (Inquiry)
Act, 1968 and the Judges  (Inquiry) Rules, 1969 and pointed out that the
Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Court exercise vast powers under
the Constitution and the laws and that the very vastness of the powers and the
immunity  granted  to  them  required,  that  Judges  should  be  fearless  and
independent, but  they should adopt  a high standard of rectitude  so  as to
inspire confidence in the public  who may seek and who may want to seek
redress in the Court.   While it was necessary to protect the Judges from false
and malicious attacks, it was also necessary to protect the fair image of the
institution of judiciary from those Judges who conducted themselves in a
manner as to blur that image.   
107

The Committee then referred to the word “misbehaviour” used in Art.
124(4) and incidentally referred to the meaning of the word “misconduct”
which,  according  to  the  Committee,  appeared  to  be  a  stronger  word  but
narrower than the word “misbehaviour”.   It then considered the meaning of
the word “proved misbehaviour” used  in the Constitution  and stated that
these  words  were  perhaps  borrowed  from  sec.  72(ii)  of  the  Australian
Constitution.   They referred to the opinions of Dr. Griffith, Solicitor General
and  of Mr. C.W. Pupincus  QC, which  were  placed  before  the  Senate  in
Australia  in  the  case  of  alleged  misbehaviour  of  Justice  Murphy.   The
Committee then referred to an article by Wrisley Brown (vol. 26 Harvard
Law Review, p.684) as to what conduct would warrant impeachment of a
Judge of the Federal Judiciary in USA.   The Committee also referred to the
cases in USA of Judge Steward F. La Motte Jr (FLA) 341 Southern Reporter
(2d series 513), to the case of  Judge Harry E. Claiborne (Report 99 – 688,
99th Congress 2nd Session) and to the cases of Judge Walter L Nicson Jr (101
– 36 or 101st Congress First Session), Judge Alcee L. Hastings (Report 100 –
810, 110th Congress 2nd Session) and of Judge Richard A Napolitano (317 F.
Supp. 79 (1970)) and finally to the case of  Stephen Chandler v.  Judicial
Council of 10  th   Circuit   of the US (398 US 74).
One  of  the  important  propositions  laid  down  by the  Committee  is
related to the “standard of proof” required in impeachment proceedings.   The
Committee referred to an article by Chief Justice  Ben F. Overton  of the
108

Supreme Court of Florida, in the Chicago-Kent Law Review.   In the US,  the
standard of proof was higher than preponderance of probabilities, namely, the
standard  required  was  “clear and  convincing  evidence”  and that  was the
standard  required  in the  case  of ‘misbehaviour’ which  was  treated  as  an
impeachable offence.  The Committee felt that the standard in our country
should be “proof beyond reasonable doubt”.   It said: 
“We  think  that  the  concept  of  clear  and  convincing  evidence,
delectable though it may be, introduces needless  sophistication  and
refinement.   The impeachment proceeding is, in the strict sense, sui
generis, neither civil nor criminal, in nature.  The gravity of the charge
against a judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, the uniqueness
of impeachment proceedings, and the forbidding consequence if the
charges are held proved, make it practical, safe and necessary to insist
upon a high degree of proof.  That degree of proof is, in our view,
proof beyond reasonable doubt without any further refinement”.   
They further added as follows:   
“The Constitution, the Judges (Inquiry) Act and the Judges (Inquiry)
Rules, give us an indication, however slight it may be, that an inquiry
into  the  Act  is  thought  to  share  the  nature  of  quasi  criminal
proceedings.    The  word  “investigation”  usually  associated  with
criminal cases is used both in Art. 124(4) of the Constitution and the
109

Judges (Inquiry) Act.   The Committee is required by section 3(3) of
the Act to frame definite ‘charges’ against the judge on the basis of
which the investigation is proposed to be held.  Section 6 uses the
words ‘guilty’ and ‘not guilty’.  Rule 7 of the Judges (Inquiry) Rules
talks of ‘plea of judge’ and again uses the words ‘guilty’ and ‘not
guilty’.   In our view, the use of the words ‘investigation’, ‘charge’,
‘plea’, ‘guilty’ and ‘not guilty’, all of which are ordinarily associated
with criminal proceedings, do inform us of the quasi criminal nature of
the proceedings”.     
“In fact, as far back as 1870, the Privy Council issued a Memorandum
of the removal of Colonial judges where it described the proceeding
for removal as quasi criminal”.    
Finally,  the  Committee  laid  down  the  following  propositions  as
applicable for inquiry under Art. 124(4):
“(1) The  word  “misbehaviour”  as  applicable  to  judges  of  the
Supreme Court and the High Courts, in the context of Articles 124(4)
and  (5)  and  other  relevant  provisions  of  the  Constitution,  means
conduct or a course of conduct on the part of a judge which brings
dishonour  or  disrepute  to  the  judiciary  as  to  shake  the  faith  and
confidence which the public reposes in the judiciary.  It is not confined
to criminal acts or to acts prohibited by law.  It is not confined to acts
110

which are contrary to law.  It is not confined to acts connected with the
judicial office.   It extends to all activities of a judge, public or private.
(2) The act or omission must be wilful.   The wilful element may be
supplied by culpable recklessness, negligence, disregard for rules or an
established code of conduct.  Even though a single act may not be
wilful, series of acts may lead to the inference of wilfulness.
(3) Monetary  recompense  would  not  render  an  act  or  omission
anytheless  ‘misbehaviour’  if  the  person  intentionally committed
serious and grave wrongs of a clearly unredeeming nature and offered
recompense when discovered.
(4) ‘Misbehaviour’  is  not  confined  to  conduct  since  the  judge
assumes charge of the present judicial office.  It may extend to acts or
omissions while holding prior judicial office, if such act or omissions
makes him unworthy of holding the present judicial office.
(5) The standard of proof is proof beyond reasonable doubt and not
a balance of probabilities.
(6) The  ‘misbehaviour’  must  be  held  proved accordingly  by  the
Inquiry Committee constituted under the Judges (Inquiry) Act.
(7) The judge against whom an inquiry is being held is under a
constitutional obligation to cooperate with the inquiring authority and
not to raise petty-fogging objections to obstruct the inquiry in which
case an adverse inference may be legitimately drawn against him.”
111

Thus, the above discussion from the Report of the Sawant Committee
sufficient light on the importance of judicial independence, its vastness and
hence  the  need  for  accountability  and  as  regards  to  what  amounts  to
‘misbehaviour’ and as  to the ‘standard  of proof’ required  in proceedings
which are quasi-criminal in nature and the proof must be the ‘proof beyond
reasonable doubt’.
(A) The  first  judgment:  Sub-Committee  on  Judicial  Accountability  v.
Union of India, 1991 (4) SCC 699:  effect of dissolution of Lok Sabha: 
The first judgment was rendered on October 29, 1991 by a Constitution
Bench  consisting  of  B.C.  Ray,  L.M.  Sharma,  M.N.  Venkatachaliah,  J.S.
Verma and S.C. Agrawal, JJ.    We have already mentioned that the main
issue in this case filed by the Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability was
whether on the dissolution of the 9th Lok Sabha, the motion introduced in that
Lok Sabha by 108 Members of Parliament and the admission of the Motion,
lapsed.
     B.C.Ray J, speaking for the Supreme Court laid down the following broad
principles.  He stated that the parliamentary proceeding starts only after the
report is submitted by the Committee appointed by the Speaker pursuant to
the Motion, that the earlier Acts of admitting the Motion, the reference to the
Committee and the proceedings before the Committee were not part of the
parliamentary proceeding and hence they would not lapse.  The Supreme
112

Court also pointed out that use of the word ‘Motion’ at the stage of admission
of Motion used in sec. 3 of the 1968 Act was not to be confused with a
regular Motion within parliamentary procedure and, at the initial stage before
the  report  was  submitted,  a  Motion  only  meant  a  “complaint  or  an
allegation”.   The  Court   stated  that  the  1968  Act  and  the  Rules  framed
thereunder supersede any rules made under Art. 118 of the Constitution and
that the latter Article deals with the rules of procedure framed by each House
of Parliament. 
 The above are the broad conclusions arrived by the Supreme Court.
We shall now refer to the relevant discussion in this case.
In the above Judgment, the Supreme Court referred (see para 16) to the
fact that the rule of law was a basic feature of the Constitution, and that the
independence of judiciary was an essential attribute to the rule of law.  Art.
124(2) and 217(1), required, in the matter of appointment of judges of the
High Court and Supreme Court consultation with the Chief Justice of India
and Chief Justice of the High Court.    These provisions also ensured fixity of
tenure of office of the judge.   The Constitution protects the salaries of the
judges.  Art. 121 provides that no discussion shall take place in Parliament
with respect to the conduct of any judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court in the discharge of his duties except on a motion for presenting the
address to the President praying for the removal of a judge.   Art. 124(4) and
124(5) afford protection against premature determination of the tenure.   Art.
113

124(4) says that a judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his
office except on the ground of “proved misbehaviour or incapacity”.  All
these provisions should be harmoniously construed.   While so construing,
the law and procedure for removal of judges in other countries could provide
the background and the position in comparative view, but the solution must
be found within our constitutional scheme.   No doubt, a comparative idea
was  good  for  providing  a  proper  perspective  for  the  understanding  and
interpretation of the constitutional scheme.  The Supreme Court then referred
to the procedure in UK and in Canada and Australia.   It referred to the case
of inquiry against Justice Leo Landreville of the Supreme Court of Ontario,
Justice  Murphy  in  Australia  and  Justice  Vasta  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
Queensland.   The Court referred to the views of Justice L.J. King, Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of South Australia (in “Minimum Standards of
Judicial Independence”, 1984 (58) ALJ 340) to the effect that removal by
address  by  Parliament  was  extremely  rare  because  in  most  cases  the
concerned judge would resign.    Further, as the standards of judicial conduct
that have been set out generally are very high, the removal by the Legislature
was a rarity.  The Supreme court also referred to an article by Justice M.H.
Mclelland  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  New  South  Wales  (‘Disciplining
Australian Judges’, 1990 (64) ALJ 388) wherein it was suggested that there
should be legislation  laying down the procedure before a tribunal, that a
tribunal constituted should be under the supervisory jurisdiction of the High
Court and that there should be an appeal from the tribunal to the High Court.
The  Supreme  Court  also  pointed  out  that  in  Australia,  a  Constitution
114

Commission was set up for suggesting reforms and that that Commission
suggested the establishing of a National Judicial Tribunal to determine what
type of acts found by the Tribunal, would be amounting to ‘misbehaviour or
incapacity’ warranting removal (see “From the Other Side of the Bar Table:
An Advocate’s View of the Judiciary”, 1987 10 University of New South
Wales Law Journal 179).
B.C.Ray J, then referred to the removal procedure in the United States
for impeachment on the ground of “conviction for treason, bribery or other
high crimes or misdemeanors” in the federal system.   The majority of the
States also have similar provisions for removal of judges of States.  In some
States, provision was made for removal by an address of the Governor to
both Houses of Legislatures or by a Joint Resolution of the Legislatures.  In
some States the removal power was vested in the State Supreme Court while
in some States special courts were provided to hear removal charges.  In the
State of New York, the Court was known as the “Court on the Judiciary” (see
Henry J Abraham, the Judicial Process, 3rd Ed, p. 45).   A federal law was
passed in 1932 (incorporated in Title 28 of the US Code) and that law was
replaced by another Act in 1939 which made provision for Judicial Councils.
That law was replaced by the Judicial Councils Reform and Judicial Conduct
and Disability Act, 1980.   In this Act, Judicial Councils were empowered to
receive complaints against judicial conduct which was “prejudicial to the
effective  and  expeditious  administration  of the business  of the  courts,  or
alleging that such a judge or magistrate is unable to discharge all the duties of
115

office by reason of mental or physical disability”.    That Act prescribed an
elaborate judicialised procedure for processing such complaints within the
administration system of the Judicial Councils concerned and the Judicial
Conference of US.   So far as States were concerned, 50 States had laws for
disciplining their judges and in each, a variously constituted commission was
organized  in  either  a  single  tier  or  in  many  tiers  depending  upon  the
perceived  desirability  of  separating  fact  finding  from  judgment  and
recommendation  tasks.    The  Commission’s  recommendations  would  be
transmitted  to  the  State  Supreme  Court  for  its  authoritative  imprimatur,
except  in  States  where  they were  to  be  received  by the  legislatures  that
retained judicial removal power (see Robert J. Janosik, Encyclopedia of the
American Judicial System, Vol. II., p. 575-78).
B.C. Ray J then referred (paras 27 to 32) to the directive regarding
“judicial removal and discipline” contained in the Minimum Standards of
Judicial Independence,  passed  in the  Conference  of the International  Bar
Association at its 19th Biennial Conference at New Delhi in October 1982 to
the following effect:
“27. The proceedings  for discipline  and removal of judges  should
ensure fairness to the judge, and adequate opportunity for hearing.
28. The proceedings for discipline should be held in camera.   The
judge may however request that the hearing be held in public, subject
to final and reasoned disposition of this request by the Disciplinary
116

Tribunal.   Judgments in  disciplinary  proceedings  whether  held  in
camera or in public, may be published.
29.(a) The grounds for removal of judges should be fixed by law and
shall be clearly defined.
(b) All disciplinary action shall be based upon standards of judicial
conduct promulgated by law or in established rules of court.
30. A judge shall not be subject to removal unless, by reason of a
criminal act or through gross or repeated neglect or physical or mental
incapacity, he has shown himself manifestly unfit to hold the position
of judge.
31. In systems where the power to discipline and removal of  judges
is vested in an institution other than the legislature, the tribunal for
discipline and removal of judges shall be permanent and be composed
predominantly of members of the Judiciary.
32. The head of the court may legitimately have supervisory powers
to control judges on administrative matters.”
(emphasis supplied)
B.C.  Ray  J  then  referred  to  the  First  World  Conference  on  the
Independence  of Judges  held  at  Montreal  on  10th June,  1983  and  to  the
following  clauses  in  the  Universal  Declaration  on  the  Independence  of
Justice which concerned “discipline and removal of national judges”:
117

“2.32 A complaint against a judge shall be processed expeditiously
and fairly under an appropriate practice, and the judge shall have the
opportunity to comment on the complaint at the initial stage.  The
examination  of  the  complaint  at  its  initial  stage  shall  be  kept
confidential, unless otherwise requested by the judge.
2.33(a) The proceedings for judicial removal or discipline, when such
are  initiated,  shall  beheld  before  a  court  or a board  predominantly
composed of members of the judiciary and Selected by the judiciary.
(b) However, the power of removal may be vested in the legislature
by impeachment or joint address, preferably upon a recommendation of
a court or board as referred to in 2.33(a)…...
2.34 All disciplinary action shall be based upon established standards
of judicial conduct.
2.35 The proceedings for discipline of judges shall ensure fairness to
the judge and the opportunity of a full hearing.
2.36 With the exception  of proceedings  before  the legislature, the
proceedings for discipline and removal  shall be held in camera.  The
judge may, however, request that the hearing be held in public, subject
to a final and reasoned disposition of this request by the disciplinary
Tribunal.   Judgments in disciplinary proceedings, whether held  in
camera or in public, may be published.
2.37 With the exception of proceedings before the legislature or in
connection with them, the decision of a disciplinary Tribunal shall be
subject to appeal to a court.
118

2.38 A  judge  shall  not  be  subject  to  removal  except  on  proved
grounds of incapacity or misbehaviour, rendering him unfit to continue
in office.
2.39 In the event that a court is abolished, judges serving in this court
shall not be affected, except for their transfer to another court of the
same status.”       (emphasis supplied)
B.C. Ray J then referred to para 17 to 20 of the Basic Principles on the
Independence  of  the  Judiciary,  insofar  as  they  related  to  discipline,
suspension and removal, passed by the 37th UN Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and Treatment of Offenders held at Milan during August 26 to
September 6, 1985:
“17. A charge or complaint made against a judge in his/her judicial
and professional capacity shall be processed expeditiously and fairly
under an appropriate procedure.  The judge shall have the right to a fair
hearing.  The examination of the matter at its initial stage shall be kept
confidential, unless otherwise requested by the judge.
18. Judges  shall  be  subject  to  suspension  or  removal only  for
reasons of incapacity or behaviour that renders them unfit to discharge
their duties.
19. All  disciplinary,  suspension  or  removal  proceedings  shall  be
determined  in  accordance  with  established  standards  of  judicial
conduct.
119

20. Decisions  in  disciplinary, suspension  or  removal proceedings
should be subject to an  independent review.  This principle may not
apply to the decisions of the highest court and those of the legislature
in impeachment or similar proceedings.”
The above resolution was endorsed by the UN General Assembly on
November 9, 1985 and 13th December, 1985.
The Supreme Court pointed out that prior to the commencement of the
Constitution  of India, sec. 200(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935
required a decision of the disciplinary Committee of the Privy Council on the
question of removal of a judge.  That would mean that the decision was to be
by a judicial body.
The Supreme Court then went into a further  important aspect as to
whether in India the process of removal was purely a  political process or
whether it was a judicious blend of the political and judicial process of the
removal of judges.   B.C. Ray J pointed out, after referring  to views of
Wrisley  Brown  (the  Impeachment  of  the  Federal  Judiciary,  (1912-1913),
(Harvard Law Review 684) and of Prof. Mauro Cappelletti in his book “The
Judicial Process in Comparative Perspective”, (1989) that the procedure in
US was political but that in India, it was a blend of political and judicial
processes.   It observed “but the  constitutional  scheme in India seeks to
achieve  a  judicious  blend  of  the  political  and  judicial  processes  for  the
120

removal of judges.  Though it appears at the first sight that the proceedings of
the Constituent Assembly relating to the adoption of clauses (4) and (5) of
Art. 124 seem to point to the contrary and evince an intention to exclude
determination by a judicial process of the correctness of the allegations of
misbehaviour or incapacity on a more careful examination this is not the
correct conclusion……..”    
In this  context,  B.C.  Ray  J  referred  to  the  speeches  of  Sir  Alladi
Krishnaswamy Ayyar in the Constituent Assembly of 29th July, 1947, of Mr.
K. Santhanam and of the proposal of Mr. M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar only
for a judicial tribunal (which was rejected because Sir Alladi proposed a
combination  of  judicial  and  political  process).   The  proceeding  was not,
therefore, exclusively judicial.   In other words, the inquiry part of it could be
judicial while the removal part would be Parliamentary.
The Supreme Court referred to the procedure for issue of notice of
motion and as to whom the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, may
consult  before  admitting  the  Motion.   Sec.  3  permits  consultation  with
‘persons’.    If the motion is admitted, the Speaker/Chairman shall have to
keep the motion pending and then constitute the Committee.    Under sec. 6
(2), if the Report of the Committee contains a finding that the judge is guilty
of any misbehaviour or suffers from any incapacity, then, the motion referred
to  in  subsection  (1)  of  section  3, shall,  together  with  the  Report  of  the
Committee, be taken up for consideration by the House or the Houses of
121

Parliament in which it is pending.   The Supreme Court pointed out that the
effect of sec. 3 and sec. 6(2) is as follows:   
“The effect of these provisions is that the motion shall be kept pending
till the Committee submits its report and if the Committee finds the
judge guilty, the motion shall be taken up for consideration.   Only one
motion  is  envisaged  which  will  remain  pending.    No  words  of
limitation that the motion shall be kept pending subject to the usual
effect of dissolution of the House can or should be imported”.    
The Supreme Court further pointed out that the procedure indicated in
the 1968 Act overrides any rules made by the House under Art. 118.   While
the latter article may enable the motion to lapse on dissolution, no such thing
was contemplated by the Act of 1968 which law was passed under Art. 124
(5).  In  India,  the  notion  of  parliamentary  sovereignty  was  no  longer
applicable.    This it said was clear from the observations of the Supreme
Court in Special Reference No.1 of 1964 case (Keshav Singh’s case, 1965 (1)
SCR 413) where Gajendragadkar CJ observed:   
“… though our legislatures have plenary powers, they function within
the limits prescribed by the material and relevant provisions  of the
Constitution”.   
and
122

“In a democratic country governed by a written Constitution, it is the
Constitution which is supreme and sovereign”.      (emphasis supplied)
The Supreme Court then considered the meaning of the word “proved”
in the clause “proved misbehaviour and incapacity” which occur in Art. 124
(4).   The Court explained that no motion for presenting the address referred
to  the  Art. 121  or 124(4)  can  be  made “until  the  allegations  relating  to
misbehaviour or incapacity have first been found to be proved in some forum
outside either Houses of Parliament”.   No motion for removal of a judge
would be permissible under Art. 124(4) and the Houses of Parliament would
not be brought into the picture “till some authority outside the two Houses of
Parliament has recorded a finding of misbehaviour or incapacity”.    This it
said  would  mean  that  both  judicial  and  parliamentary  procedures  are
harmonized and blended.  Art. 121 suggests that the bar on discussion in
Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Supreme Court judge is lifted
“upon a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the
removal of a judge as hereinafter provided”.    The word motion and the
clause as hereinafter provided are obvious reference to the motion referred to
in clause (4) of Art. 124 which in turn, imports the concept of Motion in
regard  to  “proved”  misbehaviour  or incapacity,  i.e.  after  it  was  ‘proved’
outside the Legislature.
123

The  provision  in  Art.  124(5)  for  the  making  of a  law  was not  an
enabling provision but incorporated a condition precedent on the power of
removal by Parliament.   The Supreme Court then held 
“…..in this connection, the parliamentary procedure commences only
after proof of misbehaviour or incapacity in accordance with the law
enacted under clause (5), the machinery for investigation and finding
of proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity being statutory, is governed
entirely by provisions of the law enacted under clause (5).   This also
harmonises Art. 121.    The position would be that an allegation of
misbehaviour or incapacity by a judge has to be made, investigated and
found proved in accordance with the law enacted by Parliament under
Art. 124(5) without the Parliament being involved up to that stage; on
the misbehaviour or incapacity of a judge being found proved in the
manner provided by that law, a motion for presenting an address to the
President for removal of the judge on that ground would be moved in
each House under Art. 124(4); on the motion being so moved after the
proof of misbehaviour or incapacity and  it being  for presenting  an
address to the President praying for removal of the judge,  the bar on
discussion contained in Art. 121 is lifted and discussion can take place
in the Parliament with respect to the conduct of the judge; and the
further consequence would ensue depending on the outcome of the
motion in a House of Parliament.  If, however, the finding reached by
the machinery provided in the enacted law is that the allegation is not
124

proved, the matter ends and there is no occasion to move the motion in
accordance with Art. 124(4)”.                 (emphasis supplied)
The Supreme Court further pointed out that the word “proved” also
denotes proof in the manner understood in our legal system, i.e. as a result of
a judicial process.   The policy appears to be that the entire stage upto the
proof  of  “misbehaviour  or  incapacity”,  beginning  with  the  initiation  of
investigation on the allegation being made, is governed by the law enacted
under Art. 124(5) and in view of the restrictions provided in Art. 121, that
machinery has to be outside the Parliament and not within it.   If this be so, it
is  a  clear  pointer  that  the  Parliament  neither  has  any  role  to  play  till
misconduct or incapacity is found proved nor has it any control over the
machinery provided in the law is enacted under Art. 124(5).   The Parliament
comes in the picture only when a finding is reached by that machinery that
the  alleged  misbehaviour  or  incapacity  has  been  proved.     The  initial
allegation has been described as a motion because it is a complaint made to
the Speaker or Chairman and is made by specified number of Members of
Parliament.   On receiving a complaint under sec. 3, if the Speaker/Chairman
forms an opinion  that there is a prima facie case for investigation, he will
constitute the judicial Committee as prescribed; if parliamentary process and
the judicial process are separate, the Parliament process starts only after the
judicial body records a finding of proved misbehaviour or incapacity and
reports it to the Speaker/Chairman.   This is clear when clause (4) of Art. 124
is construed with Art. 317 in relation to the removal of members of the Public
125

Service Commission where the word ‘proved’ is not used.   The use of the
word motion in sec. 3 to indicate the process of investigation and proof does
not  make it  a motion  in the  House notwithstanding  with  the use of that
expression in sec. 3 and 6.   If the allegation is not proved, the Speaker need
not commence the process under clause (4) of Art. 124.   The Speaker is,
therefore, a  statutory authority under the Act, chosen because the  further
process is parliamentary and the authority to make the initial complaint being
given to the Members of Parliament, the  complaint is described as motion.
The Court then observed as follows:    
“Indeed,  the  Act  reflects  the  constitutional  philosophy  of  both  the
judicial and political elements of the process of removal.   The ultimate
authority remains with the Parliament in the  sense that even if the
Committee for investigation records a finding that the judge is guilty of
the charges it is yet open to the Parliament to decide not to present an
address to the President for removal.  But if the Committee records a
finding that the judge is  not guilty, then the political element in the
process  of  removal  has  no  further  option.    The  law  is,  indeed,  a
civilized piece of legislation reconciling the concept of accountability
of judges and the values of judicial independence.
The  Speaker,  while  was  admitting  the  motion  on  constituting  a
Committee  to  investigate  on   alleged  grounds  of  misbehaviour  or
126

incapacity does not act as part of the House.  The House does not come
into the picture at that stage.”                  (emphasis supplied)
The Supreme Court then referred to the principles of natural justice at
the stage of admitting motion as follows:  It stated that at the stage under sec.
3 when the Speakers admits a motion, a  judge is not, as a matter of right
entitled to such notice.   But this does not prevent the Speaker if the facts and
circumstances place before him indicate that hearing is appropriate and he
may give a hearing.   
The Court then referred to an argument that by resort to a judicial
remedy (under Art. 226 or Art. 32) such as the one filed in this case by the
Sub-Committee  on  Judicial  Accountability,  the  judge  who  is  being
investigated can  be  restrained  from  exercising  judicial  functions.    The
Supreme Court pointed out that the ‘judiciary by itself’ could not do so.   It
may be that as a matter of propriety the judge may voluntarily not function.
While, under Art. 317(2), there was specific provision in the Constitution for
‘suspension’ which precluded a Member of the Public Service Commission
from functioning while inquiry was going on,  there was no such power of
suspension in Art. 124(4).    The Court observed: 
“the absence of a legal provision as under Art. 317(2)……. to interdict
the judge ………. till  the  process  of removal under Art.  124(4)  is
completed does not necessarily indicate that the judge shall continue to
127

function during that period.   That area is to be covered by the sense of
propriety of  the  learned  judge  himself  and  the  judicial  tradition
symbolized by the views of the Chief Justice of India.  It should be
expected that the learned judge would be guided in such a situation by
the advice of the Chief Justice of India, as a matter of  convention
unless  he  himself  decides  as  an  act  of  propriety  to  abstain  from
discharging  judicial  functions  during  the  interregnum….   The
Constitution while providing for the suspension of a Member of the
Public Service Commission in Art. 317(2) in a similar situation has
deliberately abstained from making such a provision in case of higher
constitutional  functionaries,  namely,  the  Superior  Judges  and  the
President and the Vice-President of India, facing impeachment.   It is
reasonable to assume that the framers of the Constitution had assumed
that  a  desirable  convention  would  be followed  by a Judge  in  that
situation  which  would  not  require  the  exercise  of  a  power  of
suspension.”          (emphasis supplied)
(The Court did not have to deal with a law, if any made under Art 124(5)
which may permit non-listing of cases).
The  above  discussion  shows  that  several  important  principles  of
constitutional law were laid down by the Supreme Court in the first case in
the context of Art. 124, 121, 217 of the Constitution and the Judges (Inquiry)
Act,  1968.    These  principles  are  extremely  relevant  in  the  matter  of
discussion of the provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005.
128

(B) The Second Judgment:  Mrs. Sarojini Ramaswami vs.  Union of India
(1992)4 SCC 506.   
We have already set out the circumstances under which and the relief
for which this petition was filed by Mrs. Sarojini Ramaswami.  She mainly
sought a direction that a copy of the Report of the Sawant Committee may be
furnished to Justice V. Ramaswami, even before it is discussed in Parliament.
The Supreme Court, after referring to the constitutional scheme and the
provisions of the 1968 Act observed that the copy of the report could not be
furnished till the report was placed for consideration by Parliament and an
order  of  removal  was  passed  by  the  President.   In  the  course  of  the
discussion, the Supreme Court laid down various legal principles.  We shall
refer to them presently.
At the stage of admitting the motion under sec 3(1) of the Act, the
section contemplated that the Speaker/Chairman may either admit or refuse to
admit the motion “after consulting such persons, if any, as may be available
to him”.  Interpreting these words, the Supreme Court observed that in this
process of consultation it was reasonable to assume that one such person to
be consulted would be the Chief Justice of India, who apart from being the
head of the Indian judiciary,  would also be the authority involved in the
choice and availability of a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court and a sitting
129

Chief Justice of a High Court as members of the Committee constituted under
sec 3(2) of the Act, in case the motion is admitted by the Speaker/Chairman.
The Supreme Court referred to Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969 and in
particular  to  Rule  9  and  stated  that  where  a  finding  was  given  by  the
Committee  that  the  Judge  was  “not  guilty’,  in  case  one  member  gave
dissenting note that the Judge was “guilty”, then that finding need not be
placed before the House whereas in a situation where a finding of “guilt” was
given by two members and one member gave a finding of “not guilty”, then
both the findings must be placed before the House.  This was the effect of the
Rules.
Where a finding of “not guilty” is given by the Committee, the entire
process of removal comes to an end and it will not be permissible to start the
Parliamentary procedure for removal against the Judge.  It is only where a
finding of “guilt” is given by the Committee and the report is placed before
the  House  that  the  Parliamentary  process  starts.   This  indicates  that  the
finding of “guilt”, if any, made by the Committee is “inchoate” until the
motion, if it is based on the findings of guilt, is allowed as contemplated by
Art 124. Even thereafter till the President issues an order of removal, no
proceeding for judicial review can be initiated in a court of law before the
order of removal, if any, passed.  The reason is that even though there is a
finding of “guilt” in the Report, Parliament may still not pass the motion for
removal.  The proceedings are statutory and judicial in nature before the
130

Committee  till  the  report  is  placed  in  Parliament  and  only  then  the
parliamentary or political procedure starts.
The  procedure,  as  pointed  out  in  the  earlier  judgment  in  Sub
Committee on Judicial Accountability vs. Union of India (1991)4 SCC 699 is
“a judicious blend of the political and judicial processes for the removal of
Judges”.  The different schemes for removal of Judges in other countries do
not  provide  the  answer  to  the  problem in  India  though  they  may be  of
precedential value.  They may be of some guidance.
Parliament  does  not  substitute  its  finding  for  that  of  the  Inquiry
Committee.   In  case  it  decides  not  to  adopt  the  motion  by the  requisite
majority the motion for removal fails and the proceedings terminate.  But in
doing  so, Parliament does  not take the decision  not  to  adopt  the motion
because it declines to accept and act on the finding of “guilt” recorded by the
Committee.  This Parliament does after debating the issues on the basis of the
material before it (i.e. Report and matter referred to therein).  It is at that
stage, i.e. the stage of consideration of the Report and materials, that the
Judge concerned will be given a copy of the report and an opportunity to
submit his case as to why the finding should not be accepted.
In this context, the Supreme Court referred to the procedure followed
by the Parliament in Australia in the case of Mr. Justice Vasta of the Supreme
Court of Queensland.  In that case, the Australian Prime Minister made it
131

clear that the Judge had to be given an opportunity during the proceedings in
Parliament  and  that  the  Judge  could  appear  personally  or  by  his  legal
representative before Parliament, if he so wished.  The relevant passage from
the statement of the Prime Minister of Australia reads as follows:
“I believe that Mr. Justice Vasta has the right – and we have the duty to
allow  him  –  to  address  us,  either  personally  or  by  his  legal
representatives, should he so wish”.
The  Supreme  Court  further  pointed  out  that  it  was  only  after  the
motion was passed that the misbehaviour is “deemed to be proved” as stated
in sec 6(3) of the Act and till such time the findings of the Committee are
inchoate.
While reiterating that the finding of “guilt” made by the Committee is
not binding on Parliament, the Supreme Court also stated that while voting
on the motion Parliament is not required to give any reasons if it chooses not
to adopt the motion.  Following are the relevant observations: (at page 553)
“Even though judicial review of the finding of “guilty” made by the
Inquiry Committee may be permissible on limited grounds pertaining
only to legality, yet the power of Parliament would not be so limited
while considering the motion for removal in as much as the Parliament
is concerned to not adopt the motion in spite of the finding of “guilty”
132

made by the Committee on a consideration of the entire material before
it which enables it to go even into probative value of the material on
which the finding is based and to decide the desirability of adopting
the motion in a given case the Parliament decides by voting on the
motion and is  not required to give any reason for its decision if it
chooses not to adopt the motion.”  (emphasis supplied)
From the  above  passage, it  is  clear that  according  to  the  Supreme
Court, while the scope of judicial review is limited to legality of reasons in
the Report, the scope of jurisdiction of Parliament, while considering the
report is wider and is not confined to the legality of the reasons but can
extend  even  to  examine  the  probative  value  of  the  evidence,  with  the
additional  advantage  that  Parliament  need  not  give  any  reason  for  not
accepting the motion.  This is in contrast to any challenge to the report in a
court of law where the Court has to give reasons.  This was one more reason
why it should be in the interest of the Judge not to challenge the Report in a
Court soon after it was made and it would be more advantageous to him to
account the outcome of the parliamentary process and, in case it goes against
him, he can challenge the removal after the President passes the order of
removal.  This is so even though the Committee may have the trappings of a
Court but still its decision was an inchoate one.  If the Committee decided
that a Judge is “not guilty” that decision would be final and where it is so
decided,  it  would  be  conclusive  and  then  the  entire  process  of  inquiry
terminates and the parliamentary process does not start and has to be closed.  
133

The Report of a Committee being inchoate, the Inquiry Committee
cannot  be  treated  as  a  “Tribunal”  for  the  purpose  of  Art  136  of  the
Constitution.  The Report of the Committee holding the Judge guilty cannot
be challenged at that stage before it is submitted to the  Speaker/Chairman
and the Act and the rules deliberately do not provide for a copy of the Report
to be given to the Judge as soon as the report was filed by the Committee.
The Supreme Court explained that the submission of the Judge that
judicial  review  should  be  given  at  the  stage  of  the  report  before  it  is
submitted  to  the  Speaker/Chairman  and  not  after  the  removal  order  was
passed because once it was accepted by Parliament, it becomes a political
question, cannot be accepted.  The submission is not correct in as much as
under Art 124 read with the 1968 Act the procedure is partly judicial under
the statute and partly political in Parliament, after the report.  In the United
States, judicial review after impeachment was barred because the procedure
in the Senate is treated as political, Senate being the sole authority and the
inquiry being made under the rules made by the Senate.  There the inquiry by
the committee is treated as part of the a political process.  Such a situation
was not contemplated by Art 124 read with the provisions of the 1968 Act.  
The Supreme Court observed  that currently the trend was that even
political  questions  can  be debated  in courts  in some circumstances.  But
134

where it is partly judicial by force of statute and therefore political, there was
no difficulty in accepting judicial review after the removal.  It stated (p. 569):
“The above discussion indicates the modern trend to accept judicial
review in certain situations with the circumscribed limits even where
the entire process is political since the “political question doctrine” as
discussed in Powell (395 US 486 (1969) permits this course.  In such
cases where the entire process is political, judicial review to the extent
permissible  on  conclusion  of  the  political  process  is  not  in  doubt.
There appears to be no reason in principle why judicial review at the
end of the entire process of removal of a Judge in India, where it is a
composite process of which the political process is only a part, cannot
be  exercised  after  conclusion  of  the  entire  process  including  the
political process.”
The Supreme Court then referred to Art. 122 of the Constitution which
prohibits  the  courts  from  inquiring  into  proceedings  of  Parliament  but
pointed out that in view of the provisions of Art. 124(4) and (5) read with the
provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, and the Judges (Inquiry) Rules,
1969, the prohibition is lifted and the Judge has to be given an opportunity
before the Houses  of Parliament.  A violation of the above principle  (of
natural justice) would constitute illegality and would not be immune from
judicial scrutiny.   This is in accord with the principles laid down in Keshav
Singh’s  case,  1965  (1)  SCR  413.  In  Sub-Committee  on  Judicial
135

Accountability v. Union of India, 1991 (4) SCC 699 the observations are to
the following effect:  “A law made under Art. 124(5) will override the rules
made under Art. 118 and shall be binding on both the Houses of Parliament.
A  violation  of  such  a  law  would  constitute  illegality  and  could  not  be
immune from judicial scrutiny under Art. 122(1)”.   
But the proceedings can be questioned only if and after the President passes
an order for removal.   Verma J (as he then was) summarized the law as
follows (p.572-3):
“95. In sum, the position is this: Every Judge of the Supreme Court
and the High Courts on his appointment is irremovable from office
during his tenure except in the manner provided in clauses (4) and (5)
of  Art.  124  of  the  Constitution  of  India.   The  law  made  by  the
Parliament under Art. 124(5), namely, the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968
and the Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969 framed thereunder, is to be read
along with Art. 124(4) to find out the constitutional scheme adopted in
India for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court.
The law so enacted under Art. 124(5) provides that any accusation
made against a sitting judge to enable initiation of the process of his
removal from office has  to be only by not less  than  the minimum
number  of  Members  of  Parliament  specified  in  the  Act,  all  other
methods being excluded.  On initiation of the process in the prescribed
manner,  the  Speaker/Chairman  is  to  decide  whether  the  accusation
136

requires investigation.   If he chooses not to act on the accusation made
in the form of motion by the specified minimum number of Members
of  Parliament,  the  matter  ends  there.   On  the  other  hand,  if  the
Speaker/Chairman, on a consideration of the materials available and
after consulting such persons as he thinks fit, forms the opinion that a
prima facie case for investigation into the accusation against the Judge
is made out, he constitutes a Committee of judicial functionaries in
accordance with section 3(2) of the Act.  If the Inquiry Committee at
the conclusion of the investigation made by it records a finding that the
Judge  is  ‘not  guilty’,  the  process  ends  with  no  one,  not  even  the
Parliament,  being  empowered  to  consider  much  less  question  the
finding  of  ‘not  guilty’ recorded  by the  Inquiry  Committee.   If  the
finding made by the Inquiry Committee is that the Judge is ‘guilty’,
then the Parliament considers  the motion for removal of the Judge
along  with  the  Committee’s  report  and  other  available  materials
including the cause, if any, shown by the Judge concerned against his
removal for which he has to be given an opportunity after submission
of the report to the Speaker/Chairman under section 4(2) of the Act.
To be effective, this opportunity must include supply of a copy of the
report to the Judge concerned by the Speaker/Chairman while causing
it to be laid before the Parliament under section 4(3).   If the Parliament
does not adopt the motion for removal of the Judge, the process ends
there with no challenge available to any one.  If the motion for removal
of the Judge is adopted by the requisite majority by the Parliament
137

culminating in the order of removal by the President of India under
Art. 124(4) of the Constitution, then only the Judge concerned would
have  the  remedy  of  judicial  review  available  on  the  permissible
grounds  against  the  order  of  removal.   The  statutory  part  of  the
process,  by  which  a  finding  of  guilty  is  made  by  the  Inquiry
Committee, is subject to judicial review as held in Sub-Committee on
Judicial Accountability but in the manner indicated herein, that is, only
in the event of an order of removal being made and then at the instance
of the aggrieved Judge alone.   The Inquiry Committee is statutory in
character  but  is  not  a Tribunal  for the  purpose of Art.  136 of the
Constitution.”
(emphasis supplied)
After stating so, the learned judge observed that the above view is in
complete  accord  with  the  opinion  of  the  majority  in  Sub-Committee  on
Judicial Accountability v. Union of India that the statutory part of the process
of removal of a judge is subject to judicial review.
The third Judgment :   Krishnaswamy v. UOI: 1992 (4) SCC 605
We  have  already  pointed  out  that  one  Krishnaswamy  who  was  a
Member of Parliament filed Writ Petition 149 of 1992 in the Supreme Court
praying  for  quashing  the  proceedings  of  the  Justice  Sawant  Committee.
138

Simultaneously, one Raj Kanwar also filed WP 140 of 1992 stating that the
Justice Sawant Committee violated Art. 145(3) of the Constitution.
Both  the  writ  petitions  challenged  the  earlier  judgments  on  Sub-
Committee on Judicial Accountability and sought a fresh consideration of the
points decided in that case.
The Supreme Court rejected these contentions on preliminary grounds
that the petitioners have no locus standi.   This was the view of the majority.
There was also a minority judgment but it is not necessary to deal with it in
view of the opinion of the majority.
The Fourth judgment:  Lily Thomas vs Speaker Lok Sabha, (1993) 4 SCC
234: 
    The petitioner Ms. Lily Thomas moved the Supreme Court under Art.
32 seeking a declaration that the Motion of Impeachment against Justice V.
Ramaswami of the Court moved in the Lok Sabha for his removal from the
office of Judge, should be deemed to have been carried by construing the
expression, ‘supported by a majority’ in Art.124(4) in such a manner that any
member who abstained from voting should be deemed to have supported the
Motion.  It was also claimed that the Supreme Court may recommended for
repeal of Art. 124(4) as it had been rendered unworkable and non-functional
and that it should be substituted by an appropriate provision. 
139

The petition was dismissed and, in that context, the  Supreme Court
held that the proceedings for address are partly judicial and partly political in
character.   The statutory process appears to start when the Speaker acts
under  the  1968  Act  and  comes  to  an  end  when  the  Judges  Committee
appointed by the Speaker submits its report to the Speaker.  The debate on
the Motion thereafter in Parliament and discussion and the voting is political
in nature.   The right to vote implies a right also to remain neutral.   Hence
those Members who abstained cannot be considered to have voted in favour
of the motion for removal.
These  are  the  Constitutional  principles  laid  down  by  the
Supreme Court in the four cases relating to Justice V. Ramaswami and have
to be borne in mind while dealing with the provisions of the Bill of 2005.
140

CHAPTER  VII
REMOVAL PROCEDURE IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
The provisions concerning removal of Judges in relation to England
and Wales are somewhat different from those applicable for Scotland.  So far
as the Judges of superior courts in England and Wales are concerned, the
relevant provisions are contained in sec 11(3) of the Supreme Court Act,
1981.   Section  11(3)  provides  that  a  person  appointed  as  Judge  of  the
Supreme Court “shall hold that office during ‘good behaviour’, subject to a
power of removal by Her Majesty on an address presented to Her by both
Houses of Parliament”.  A similar provision  applicable to Judges in the
House of Lords (Lords of Appeal in Ordinary) is contained in sec 6 of the
Administrative Jurisdiction Act, 1876.  (There is an extensive discussion by
Prof. Shimon Shetreet in ‘Judges on Trial’, (1976) Ch. IV, Part III p. 87). 
Presently  the  Constitutional  Reform  Act,  2005  makes  provisions
relating to discipline of Judges of the superior Courts upto the Judges of the
Court of Appeal.  This Act will be referred to in detail in the latter part of this
chapter.
At  Common  Law:  impeachment,  writ  of  scire  facias,  and  address  by
Parliament
141

At  Common  Law,  the  grant  of  an  office  during  ‘good  behaviour’
created an office for life which could be terminated only by the death of the
grantee or upon breach of ‘good behaviour’ (see Coke on Littleton, para 42a).
The grantee held the office under the condition that he behaved well.  Upon
breach of this condition, the grantor was entitled to terminate the office.  The
removal of persons holding office during ‘good behaviour’ could be effected
by judicial proceedings commenced by a writ of scire facias or upon criminal
conviction.  Further under sec 12 of the Administration of Justice Act, 1973
the office of a Judge who was incapacitated from resigning, may be vacated
by the Lord Chancellor upon medical certificate.
Prior to the Act of Settlement, 1700, under the Common Law a judicial
office held during ‘good behaviour’ could be terminated by impeachment by
judicial proceedings commenced by a writ to repeal the Letters Patent or
upon criminal conviction (see vol. 8 Halsbury, Laws of England, page 680,
4th Ed. 1974).  However, the Act of Settlement made a change and established
the security of judicial tenure and provided that Judges held office during
good behaviour, “but upon the Address of both Houses of Parliament there
may be leave to remove them”, that is, upon an Address for the removal of a
Judge, passed  by each  House of Parliament  and  presented  to  the  Crown
whereupon the Crown may lawfully remove the Judge.
        The effect of this provision of the Act of Settlement, 1700, according to
Prof. Shelrat, remained controversial for three centuries.  One view was that
142

the  Act  of  1700,  by  establishing  security  of  judicial  tenure  and  a  new
mechanism of removal by address, excluded all other methods of removal
existing prior to the Act such as impeachment and that only the Chancellor
can take initiative.  The other view was that the Act established an additional
remedy  by  Address  which  could  be  invoked  when  the  misbehaviour
complained of did not constitute a legal breach of the conditions on which
the office was held, (requiring a writ of scire facias).
The Preamble to the Act of Settlement, 1700 stated that the Act  was
“an Act for the further limitation of the Crown”.  This gave the meaning that
the Act of Settlement did not exclude the power of impeachment which was
in  existence  earlier.   Prior  to  the  Act,  the  Crown  could  have  proceeded
against Judges by filing a writ of scire facias to repeal the Letters Patent or
by  criminal  information.   However,  according  to  Prof.  Shimon  Shetreet
(pages 90-115) the generally accepted interpretation of the Act was that while
Judges should hold office during ‘good behaviour’ and cannot be removed by
the Crown except for breach of good behaviour, established in  scire facias
proceedings, the Parliament enjoyed an unqualified power of removal.  The
wording of the Act shows that the first part of the section provides for tenure
during ‘good behaviour’ while the second part begins with the word “but”
and  establishes  the  power  of  removal  by  Address.   This  word  ‘but’
disconnects ‘good behaviour’ and ‘Address’. This wording points strongly
against regarding the ‘power of removal by Address’ as an incident to the
tenure  during  “good  behaviour”.   The  interpretation  is  that  there  is  a
143

permanent independent and unqualified power of removal.  Thus Parliament
is not limited to considerations of “good behaviour” in its technical sense.  
         This view, according to Prof. Shetreet, is supported by the debates in
Parliament.  Thus, after the Act of Settlement, 1700, judges would hold office
during  good  behaviour  but  can  be  removed  by  Address  in  Parliament,
impeachment, scire facias or criminal conviction.  
Even so, it is not clear whether today judicial removal by scire facias
or by other judicial proceedings is still possible, the generally accepted view
today is and probably has been for over centuries, that Judges cannot be
removed except upon an Address.  Prof.  Shetreet states that in the 140 years
preceding the publication of his book in 1976, it has been generally accepted
that the Address is the exclusive mechanism of removal.  This is based on
constitutional practice.  Prof. Hood Phillips was of the view that now it was
mandatory for the Crown to be go by the convention of an Address.   While
Judges hold office during good behabiour, Parliament enjoys the unqualified
power of removal not only for misconduct but for any other reason.  Thus
Parliament’s power is not subject to any statutory limitations.
It is also the view in United Kingdom that an action of Parliament
upon a motion for an Address ousted the jurisdiction of the Courts. (Merricks
vs. Heathcoat – Amory (1955(1) Chancery p. 567).
144

Parliament  has  not  intervened  when  complaints  against  a  Judge
concerning matters of court practice and procedure or when the decision was
reversed in the Appellate Court.  Situations might arise in which  judicial
behaviour was short of a criminal offence and outside the judges’ judicial
duties and in such situations, the conduct of a Judge has been discussed by
Parliament and is then the subject matter of an action in the Court.  Thus
when a Judge in his private capacity attacks any other person which induced
an MP to move for an Address, and later on if an action in tort is brought
against the Judge, the Court would have full jurisdiction.
Under the  Common Law prior to the Act  of Settlement, 1700,  the
Crown could suspend Judges even if they hold office during good behaviour.
There are two recorded cases where the Crown exercised this power, in the
case of Judge John Walter and Judge John Archer.  In both cases, the Judges
continued  to  receive  their  emoluments  and  retained  their  entitlement.
Suspension meant that they could not exercise their official functions.  Prof.
Shetreet states (ibid page 111) that the Act of Settlement, 1700 abolished this
prerogative power in respect of Judges.  He says that although in law it is
quite clear that a Supreme Court Judge cannot be suspended, in practice, he
would certainly be expected to take leave of absence pending a criminal trial
or proceedings before Parliament for misbehaviour involving moral blame.
This is necessary because permitting him “to dispense justice as a Judge of
the  land as usual with grave accusation over his head” is likely to destroy
public confidence in the impartiality of judicial proceedings before him in
145

particular and of the judicial process in general. (Judge Kernich K.S.1825,
Vol.13, Parliamentary Debates, 2000 series, 1138 Art. 1149)
Prof. Shetreet states (ibid page 112) that if criminal proceedings are
instituted against a Judge for an offence involving moral blame, violence or
dishonesty and the Judge refuses to take the  leave of absence pending the
trial  (or  resign  his  office),  it  is  generally  believed  that  administrative
arrangements would be made to ensure that no cases are assigned to his list.
This would probably be done by the Head of the Division instructing the
Clerk incharge of the cause list  not to prepare any list for the particular
Judge.  Similar arrangements will apparently be made if a Judge loses his
faculties because of old age or illness but still refuses to retire.  In the 1950s,
a Judge upon his failing to respond to the pressure put upon him was not
assigned  any work and  finally he  retired.   Prof.  Shetreet  states  that  this
unrecorded case reminds one of the case in US in Chandler’s case (1969) 398
US  74  (see  also  (1965)  382  US  1003),  where  the  Federal  Judge
unsuccessfully challenged the order of the Judicial Council which directed
that no cases be shown as assigned to him, including those previously listed.
Prof. Shetreet however states (ibid p 113) that the Judge, no doubt,
retains his judicial  power even if cases are not assigned to him and if an
aggrieved individual comes to him in chambers, or at home, or in the street
and  asks  for  injunction,  he  has  full  jurisdiction  to  grant  him the  proper
judicial remedy.  The Judge retains his title and still receives his salary.  The
146

only thing he cannot do because of the administrative arrangements, is to sit
regularly on the Bench to hear cases in his list.  Neither the clerk nor the
Head of the Division has any statutory duty to assign him judicial work if the
Judge  has  no  right  to  demand  allocation  of  cases and  the  Head  of  the
Division and the clerk have no duty to assign cases to him, the Judge is not
entitled to a judicial remedy.   This is because an individual who has not
suffered an injustice is not entitled to a judicial remedy.  Similarly, the Judge
can obtain no judicial remedy if he were only assigned very minor cases to be
heard in chamber.  There is an analogy in the case  of a member of the
Brighton  Council  whose  name  was  struck  off  from  all  the  committees
(Manton vs. Brighton 1951 (2) QB 393.
This is the position under common law and after the Act of Settlement,
1700 and after the Supreme Court Act, 1981.
Recent developments in UK
In July, 1994, the Lord Chancellor stated that “misbehaviour could
include:  conviction  for  drunk  driving,  any  offence  involving  violence,
dishonesty or moral turpitude and a substantiated complaint of behaviour
likely to cause offence on religious or racial grounds or which amounts to
sexual harassment”. (see Eddey and Darbyshire on the English Legal System,
7th Ed. 2001 p. 289).
147

Till  recently,  there  has  been  no  formal  machinery  for  making
complaints against Judges in the United Kingdom other than the procedure of
impeachment or Address for removal.  Sometimes Appellate Courts have
criticized  Judges  for  improper  behaviour  such  as  falling  asleep,  making
impatient gestures and  for interrupting excessively or for incompetence and
for commenting in the press about a case a Judge is trying (see Rodney
Brazier Constitutional Practice : The Foundations of British Government, 3rd
Edition 1999 p. 289).
JUDICIAL CORRESPONDANCE UNIT & PROTOCOL: 1998
In 1998 the Lord Chancellor set up the Judicial Correspondence Unit
with specific responsibilities for handling complaints against Judges.  The
Unit  is  under  the  ambit  of  the  Judicial  Group  in  the  Lord  Chancellor’s
Department.   Complaints  about  the  handling  of  cases  by  the  Court  are
generally are dealt with by the Customs Service Unit of the Court’s Service.
The  Court’s  Service  is  an  executive  agency  of  the  Lord  Chancellor’s
Department.
(see  Mechanism  for  Handling  Complaints  against  Judges  by  Mr.  Chau
Pak  –  Kwan,  Research  &  Library  Division,  Parliamentary  Council
Secretariat, Hong Kong, 2002).
In  recent  years  the  Unit  has  been  expanded  to  meet  the  growing
demand for an increasing rigorous style of investigation.  The staff of 13
148

members  cost  around  600  thousand  pounds.   The  budget  allocation  for
overheads in 2002-2003 was 53 thousand pounds.
There is a Protocol used by the Unit when dealing with the complaints
against  Judges.   The  Lord  Chancellor  only  considers  complaints  about
personal  conduct  but  not  about  judicial  decisions.   The  term  “personal
conduct” means a Judge whose behaviour towards litigants, defendants or
others in Court and a Judge’s behaviour or manner when dealing with a case.
Personal conduct may include matters such as the making of inappropriate
personal or offensive remarks by a Judge during the course of a trial, which
do not form part of his or her decisions in the case and behaviour by a Judge
outside Court which is inappropriate and would tend to bring the judiciary
into disrepute.
Complaints  about  alleged  discourtesy, discrimination  or bias  in the
dealing of a case may be amenable to judicial appeal processes, but may also
be  treated  as  complaints  about  judicial  conduct,  particularly  where  the
allegation is that the act of discrimination on racial or sexual grounds has
caused offence to the complainant.
Complaints  are  sent  directly  to  the  Unit  or  through  a  Member  of
Parliament depending on the choice of the complainant and the nature of the
complaint.  There is an initial screening process.  Complaints relating to
merits  of  judicial  decisions  will  be  dismissed.   Complaints  will  also  be
149

refused if  the hearing  complained  of took  place  long  ago and  the  judge
concerned cannot reasonably be expected to remember the case such as it was
heard more than two years ago.
The first stage of investigation is to seek the complainant’s willingness
to place the complaint before the Judge concerned for comments.  Unless this
willingness of the complainant is received, the investigation will not continue
and the complaint will be dismissed.   If the consent  is  ready, a letter is
addressed to the Judge concerned asking for his remarks within ten days.  If
the complaint is of a serious nature involving corruption, sexual or racial bias
or criminal activity the Lord Chancellor is notified of the complaint.  Once
the  investigation  is  completed,  the  complaint  is  evaluated  unless  the
complaint is trivial or clearly unjustified.  Other serious cases are sent to the
Lord  Chancellor.   The  complainant  is  kept  informed  of the  stage  of the
investigation.
So far as the disciplinary action is concerned, the Lord Chancellor sets
the  standards  of  conduct.   The  Lord  Chancellor’s  dismissal  powers  are
restricted  to  Judges  below  the  level  of  the  High  Court,  on  grounds  of
misbehabiour or incapacity.  A formal public rebuke is the Lord Chancellor’s
heaviest punishment short of dismissal.
By  the  1980s  there  were  calls  for  the  establishment  of  a  formal
complaints and disciplinary system.  An influential group called “Justice”
150

submitted a report in 1992 that something more than the current informal
arrangements were needed.
The Recent Constitutional Reform Act, 2005
Recently, the Constitutional Reforms Act, 2005 was passed.  Chapter 4
contains  4  parts.   Part  1  deals  with  the  rule  of  law;  Part  2  contains
arrangements to modify the office of Lord Chancellor, Part 3 deals with the
Supreme Court, Part 4 deals with appointments and discipline.  Chapter 1 of
Part 4 deals with the Commission and Ombudsman.  Chapter 2 deals with
appointments and Chapter 3 with discipline.
Before the Act  of 2005,  the Lord  Chancellor  could  remove judges
below the High Court but judges of superior Courts could be removed only
by the address procedure.
But, under Chapter 3 of Part 4 of the Act of 2005, Lord Chancellor in
consultation with the Lord Chief Justice could remove the judges listed in
Schedule 14.   The Lord Chief Justice could issue advice, a formal warning or
reprimand for disciplinary purposes.  He may also  suspend a judge.   The
Lord Chief Justice could nominate any ‘judicial office holder’ to conduct an
inquiry.   But, so far as  removal is concerned, the procedure by way of
address remains.
151

 Chapter 3 deals with disciplinary powers, contains sections 108 to 121.
Section  108 reads as follows:
“108 Disciplinary powers:
(1) Any power of the Lord Chancellor to  remove a person
from an office listed in Schedule 14 is exercisable only
after the Lord Chancellor has complied with prescribed
procedures (as well as any other requirements to which the
power is subject).
(2) The Lord Chief Justice may exercise any of the following
powers  but  only  with  the  agreement  of  the  Lord
Chancellor  and  only  after  complying  with  prescribed
procedures.
(3) The Lord Chief Justice may give a judicial office holder
formal  advice,  or  a  formal  warning  or  reprimand,  for
disciplinary purposes  (but  this  section  does  not  restrict
what he may do informally or for other purposes or where
any  advice  or warning  is  not  addressed  to  a particular
office holder).
(4) He may suspend a person from a judicial office for any period during
which any of the following applies:-
(a) the person is subject to criminal proceedings;
(b) the  person  is  serving  a  sentence  imposed  in  criminal
proceedings;
152

(c) the person has been convicted of an offence and is subject
to  prescribed  procedures  in  relation  to  the  conduct
constituting the offence.
(5) He may suspend a person from a judicial office for any period if –
(a) the person has been convicted of a criminal offence,
(b) it has been determined under prescribed procedures that
the person should not be removed from office, and
(c) it appears to the Lord Chief Justice with the agreement of
the Lord Chancellor that the suspension is necessary for
maintaining confidence in the judiciary.
(6) He may suspend a person from office as a senior judge for any period
during which the person is subject to proceedings for an Address.
(7) He may suspend the holder of an office listed in Schedule 14 for any
period during which the person-
(a) is under investigation for an offence, or
(b) is subject to prescribed procedures.
(8) While a person is suspended under this section from any office he may
not perform any of the functions of the office (but his other rights as
holder of the office are not affected).
Therefore, under sec. 108(3) to (7), the Lord Chief Justice can pass
various types of orders, enumerated in subsection (3) against ‘judicial office
holders’ viz. Senior Judge and those listed in Schedule 14.   ‘Senior Judges’
153

mean Master of Rules, President Queen’s Bench, President Family Division,
Chancellor of High Court, Lord Justice of Appeal and Puisne Judge of the
High Court (Judges of the House of Lords are obviously not covered by the
measures the Lord Chief Justice can take).
The  power  of  suspension  can  be  invoked  even  when  criminal
proceedings or address proceedings are pending.
Section 119 provides for delegation  of functions of the Lord Chief
Justice under Sec.100(3) to (7) to a ‘Judicial office holder’ and states as
follows: 
“ Section 119  Delegation of functions:  
(1) The Lord Chief Justice may nominate  Judicial Office holder (as
defined in Sec. 109(4) to exercise any of his functions under the
relevant section:
(2) The relevant sections are: 
(a) Section 108(3) to (7);
(b)  Section 111(2);
(c) Section 112;
(d) Section 116(3)(b)”
‘Judicial office holder’ is defined in sec. 109(4) (see below).
154

    It  is  therefore,  seen  that  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  may  delegate  the
functions of investigation under Sec.108 (3) to (7) to another ‘Judicial Office
holder’.  
Therefore, the inquiry is only by peers and the final decisions are taken
by the Lord Chief Justice.    
Section 109 deals with “Disciplinary powers: interpretation” and reads
as follows:
109.      “  Disciplinary powers”: interpretation:  
(1) This section has effect for the purposes of section 108.
(2) A person is subject to criminal proceedings if in any part
of the United Kingdom  if proceedings against him for an
offence have been begun and have not come to an end,
and the times when proceedings are begun and come to an
end for the purposes of this subsection are such as may be
prescribed.
(3) A person is subject to proceedings for an Address from
the time when notice of a motion is given in each House
of Parliament for an Address for the removal of the person
from office, until the earliest of the following events-
a. either notice is withdrawn;
155

b. either  motion  is  amended  so  that  it  is  no  longer  a
motion for an address for removal of the person from
office;
c. either motion is withdrawn, lapses or is disagreed to;
d. where  an  address  is  presented  by  each  House,  a
message is brought to each House from Her Majesty in
answer to the Address.
(4) “Judicial office” means-
a. office as a senior judge, or
b. an office listed in Schedule 14;
     and “judicial office holder” means the holder of a       
     judicial office.
(5) “Senior judge” means any of these-
a. Master of the Rolls;
b. President of the Queen’s Bench Division;
c. President of the Family Division;
d. Chancellor of the High Court;
e. Lord Justice of Appeal;
f. Puisne judge of the High Court.
(6) “Sentence” includes any sentence other than a fine (and
“serving” is to be read accordingly).
(7) The  times  when  a  person  becomes  and  ceases  to  be  subject  to
prescribed procedures for the purposes of section 108(4) or (7) are
such as may be prescribed.
156

(8) “Under investigation  for  an offence”  has  such  meaning  as may be
prescribed.
Schedule 14: Schedule 14 refers to various other offices with which we
are not concerned.  Section 115 deals with regulations about procedure and
state  that  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  may,  with  the  agreement  of  the  Lord
Chancellor, make regulations providing for the procedures to be followed in
the investigation and determination of allegations made by any person of
misconduct by judicial office holders.  Section 116 deals with contents of
Regulations.  Sections 115 and 116 read as follows:
“115. Regulations about procedures
The Lord Chief Justice may, with the agreement of the Lord
Chancellor, make regulations providing for the procedures that
are to be followed in-
a. the investigation and determination of allegations by
any person of misconduct by judicial office holders;
b. reviews  and  investigations  (including  the  making  of
applications or references) under sections 110 to 112.
116. Contents of regulations
(1) Regulations under section 115(a) may include provision as to any of the
following-
157

(a) circumstances in which an investigation must or may be
undertaken (on the making of a complaint or otherwise);
(b) steps to be taken by a complainant before a complaint is to
be investigated;
(c) the  conduct  of  an  investigation,  including  steps  to  be
taken  by the  office  holder  under  investigation  or  by a
complainant or other person;
(d) time  limits  for  taking  any  step  and  procedures  for
extending time limits;
(e) persons  by  whom  an  investigation  or  part  of  an
investigation is to conducted;
(f) matters to be determined by the Lord Chief Justice, the
Lord Chancellor, the office holder under investigation or
any other person;
(g) requirements as to records of investigations;
(h) requirements as to confidentiality of communications or
proceedings;
(i) requirements as to the publication of information or its
provision to any person.
(2) The regulations-
(a) may require  a decision  as  to  the  exercise  of  functions
under section 108, or functions mentioned in subsection
(1) of that section, to be taken in accordance with findings
made pursuant to prescribed procedures;
158

(b) may require that prescribed steps be taken by the Lord
Chief Justice or the Lord Chancellor in exercising those
functions or before exercising them.
(3) Where regulations under section 115(a) impose any requirement on the
office  holder  under  investigation  or  on  a  complainant,  a  person
contravening the requirement does not incur liability other than liability
to such procedural penalty if any (which may include the suspension or
dismissal of a complaint)-
(a) as may be prescribed by the regulations, or
(b) as may be determined by the Lord Chief Justice and the Lord
Chancellor or either of them in accordance with provisions so
prescribed.
(4) Regulations under section 115 may-
(a) provide for any prescribed requirement not to apply if the
Lord Chief Justice and the Lord Chancellor so agree;
(b) make different provision for different purposes.
(5)      Nothing in this section limits the generality of section 115.
These are the relevant provisions of he UK Constitutional Reform Act,
2005.
159

CHAPTER VIII
IMPEACHMENT AND ADDRESS PROCEDURES ARE DIFFERENT 
IMPEACHMENT:
There is a significant difference between an impeachment proceeding
on the one hand which is a trial by legislature and an address of both Houses
to His or Her Majesty leading to removal, on the other.   This is discussed in
chapters V and VI of Part III of the Book ‘Judges on Trial’ (1976) by Prof.
Shimon Shetreet.  This aspect is important because the Constitution of India
uses the word ‘impeachment’ only in the case of the President (Art. 56, 61).
In the case of the Vice President, removal is by resolution on the Council of
States (Art 67(b)); in the case of the Deputy Chairman, it is by resolution of
the Council of States (Art 90(c)); in the case of the Speaker and Deputy
Speaker of the House of People, it is by resolution of the House of People
(Art 94(c); and in the case of Judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Court, it is by address of each of he Houses to the Parliament to the President
(Arts  124,  125,  217).   Thus,  there  is  difference  between  removal  of
impeachment or by way of resolution or by way  of address.   
Impeachment is reserved for trying ‘high crimes and misdemeanours’.
Impeachment  is  in  fact  a  trial  by  the  legislature,  wherein  the  House  of
160

Commons is a prosecutor and the House of Lords exercises ‘the functions of
a High Court of Justice and of a Jury’ and returns the verdict and imposes a
sentence (May’s Parliamentary Practice, 39, 17th Ed, 1964).   Impeachments
are  reserved  for  extraordinary  crimes  and  extraordinary  offenders  but  all
persons,  whether  peers  or  commoners  may  be  impeached  for  any  crime
whatever.    Impeachment was a political weapon of Parliament in England in
its struggle against the Crown.   Misdemeanours included official misconduct
such  as  neglect  of  duty,  abuse  of  power,  oppression  of  rights  or
misapplication of funds.   They also included acts which Parliament deemed
an  encroachment  upon  its  prerogatives,  bribery,  corruption,  subversive
activities and treason.   The Crown could not interfere with impeachment
proceedings  by  exercise  of  its  powers  of  prorogation  which  terminates
sessions of Parliament or by way of dissolution.   Nor could the Crown grant
pardon to the accused.   Impeachment has not been resorted to in UK since
1805.    The proceedings are always initiated in the House of Commons.
They might have originated by a petition by an aggrieved person or by a
report of a Committee or upon relevant information brought to its attention.
A motion is required for commencement of the impeachment proceedings.
The House  may refer the matter to a Committee for further inquiry or may
stay away to impeach the accused.   But before final resolution, the House
may hear the accused at the Bar either in person or  by counsel.    Once a
motion is passed, the Member who has made the motion will go to the Bar
and impeach the accused.  Thereafter, the Committee which is appointed to
draw the articles of impeachment will deliver the same to the House of Lords
161

and a copy will be sent to the accused after his answers are received by the
House of Commons.   The trial begins in the House of Lords.   The House of
Commons appoints Managers to represent it.   The accused is summoned and
if he does not come to participate, he may be arrested and brought before the
House of Lords.  The accused or his counsel is heard, thereafter the House of
Lords passes a verdict of ‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’.    Each peer is asked for his
opinion on each charge separately.   If not found guilty by a simple majority,
the Lords will dismiss the impeachment.   If found guilty, Lords may not pass
judgment unless the Commons demanded it.   After obtaining the view of the
Speaker of the House of Commons, the Lords will impose sentence upon the
convicted  person.   In  impeachment  proceedings,  the  person  may  be
imprisoned, fined, removed, disqualified from office or otherwise punished,
or if the offence is capital, he may be sentenced to death.     The Commons
may,  however,  give  up  the  proceedings  in  the  middle  and  not  proceed
forward.  Even after conviction, the Commons can pardon the accused. 
  In  the  House  of  Lords,  in  impeachment  proceedings,  procedural
safeguards  are followed.   The accused  is heard, given  the copies  of all
depositions and the accused can be assisted by a lawyer.   Every Lord must be
present at the trial. In impeachment proceedings, the hearing of the evidence
and arguments cannot be delegated to a Committee because in impeachment
proceedings “all the law Lords must judge”.    When in doubt about the
question of law, the Lords could consult the judges before making a final
decision on the matter.   That opinion of the judges must be given in the
162

presence of the accused.    Impeachment proceedings are criminal in nature
and were considered as such (see Berger, Impeachment for High Crimes and
Misdemeanours, 1971, 44 South California Law Review 395 at 400-415; see
Berger on Impeachment and Good Behaviour, 1970, 79 Lord Law Journal,
1475 at 1518, 1519).
In several cases, judges of the courts were impeached for supporting
the Crown against Parliament.   But the last one was in 1805.
Address of both Houses for removal is different from impeachment
proceedings
The  procedure  by way of Address  for  removal (discussed  by Prof.
Shtreet in Ch. VI of his work ‘Judges on Trial’ (1976) is different from
impeachment.  There have been doubts whether the Address for removal may
originate  in  either  House  or  whether  it  must  originate  in  the  House  of
Commons.  The better view is that although proceedings may originate in
either  House,  “preferably  they  should  be  commenced  in  the  House  of
Commons”  (see  vol.  8,  Halsbury  Laws  in  England  681  (4  Ed)  1974).
Except in a few cases, proceedings have always originated in the House of
Commons.   Proceedings may be initiated by a motion for inquiry into the
conduct of a judge.  The motion may be based on a petition of an aggreived
individual or a report of a commission or an investigation conducted by an
MP.   Parliament may pass a resolution for an address to the Crown praying
163

that a commission of inquiry shall investigate into the conduct of a judge or
the way he administered the court.   A motion for an inquiry into the conduct
of a judge should be made upon previous notice, allowing the accused to
meet the charges by communicating his defence to other MPs.   In the period
between the notice and the debate on the motion, the government and other
members  will  conduct  some inquiries  and  will  form their  view  upon  the
matter.   After due notice had been given, the Member at a later date will state
the alleged misconduct.   Sometimes the complaint will be incorporated into
articles of charge.   On presenting the charges, the Member will move for
referring the matter to a Select Committee or to a Committee of the whole
House  for inquiry.    Charges  must  be specific  and distinct  and  reliable
evidence  must  be  introduced  before  the  start  of  the  inquiry.     It  is  an
established  constitutional  practice  that  “such  a  procedure  for  an  address
should not be instituted unless the prima facie case against a judge was so
strong as to justify an address”.   If these requirements are not satisfied, the
matter will not be referred for further inquiry.
If the requirements are satisfied, the members may decide the case on
merits,  but  in  practice  judicial  misconduct  has  been  referred  to  a  Select
Committee for further inquiry and in some cases the matter is dropped on the
ground that the alleged misconduct did not justify an address for removal
(p.132 of Prof. Shetreet’s book).   In fact, in several cases further inquiry
before the Select Committee revealed facts in favour of the judge which led
to abandonment of the proceedings.  Apart from the principle that only such
164

misconduct as would warrant an address for removal should be referred for
further inquiry, other considerations are also taken into account.  The harm
that such an inquiry might bring to the accused judge particularly where
subsequent non-parliamentary procedures in court are possible.   While a
judge  has  absolute  immunity  in  the  exercise  of  his  judicial  functions,
subsequent  proceedings  outside  Parliament  are  feasible  in  the  case  of
misconduct  outside  his  judicial  functions  giving  rise  to  civil  or  criminal
action against the judge.  The fact that an inquiry into the conduct of a judge,
no  matter  how  it  terminates,  is  of  itself  a  form  of  punishment,  will  be
carefully considered by  Parliament in deciding whether or not to refer the
matter  for  inquiry.   (Smith’s case  (1834), 21  Parliamentary debates,  3rd
series, 272 at 333).   If the House decides to make an inquiry, it makes a
further inquiry, or it may refer to a Select Committee or a Committee of the
whole  House.   The  Committee  gathers  evidence  and  hears  witnesses
including  the  judge,  thereafter  it  reports  its  recommendations  which  is
discussed in the House.    The judge is given due notice, copies of documents,
he may appear by counsel or in person and introduce evidence in his defence.
Upon  the  approval  of  the  report  by the  House  of  Commons,  the  whole
process is repeated again in the House of Lords including the setting up of a
Committee, hearing evidence at the Bar, debates and deliberation (p.133-34
of Prof. Shetreet’s book).   If the Lords come to the same decision to present
an Address to the Crown, they insert their title in the blank left for them by
the Commons in the Address.  After this is done, the House of Commons is
intimated and the Address is presented to Her Majesty.  Only in one case of
165

Sir Jonah Barrington, the entire process was gone through in one exercise
1830.   During the process, procedural safeguards are followed, the charges
must be in writing, the judge intimated, copies be given, the judge be heard
and allowed to cross-examine witnesses or call witnesses in support of his
defence.   This is at the stage of the inquiry by the Committee.   The charges
are not altered by the House of Commons at a later stage.  Delay is avoided
on the principle “when a judge was charged with criminality, he ought to be
acquitted or condemned with as little loss of time as possible” (O’Grady’s
case, (1823)).    Proceedings are initiated at the commencement of a session
of Parliament so that they are not carried to another session.   Sometimes,
judges are not made to suffer public indignity.   Prof. Shimon Shetreet states:
“The concern of the House to protect judges from public indignity resulting
from false charges is illustrated in the order issued by the Commons that the
charges against Lord Ellenborough, CJ be  erased from the Journals of the
House” (1816, 34 Parliament Debates, 1st Ser. at 131).
As to whether the procedure in Parliament is deemed “judicial” or not,
Prof. Shimon Shetreet states as follows:
“Without  clear  statutory provisions  regulating  the  procedure  for  an
address for removal, doubts might be entertained as to the nature of the
proceedings in Parliament upon a motion for an inquiry into conduct of
a judge with a view to passing an address for removal.  In fact MP’s
have been divided on questions of procedure.  However, on the whole,
166

it is clear that the proceedings have been deemed judicial in nature and
procedural safeguards protecting the accused judge, as well as public
confidence in the courts, have been followed.  That the proceedings for
an address  have been deemed judicial also appears from the frequent
reference by Members to proceedings for impeachment in support of
their views of the proper procedural course which should be followed
by the House upon a motion for an Address for removal.”
As to the role of Government, Prof. Shetreet states that no inquiry
should be started without preliminary investigations.   This principle has been
accepted  in  several  cases.    This  principle  was  derived  from  the
Government’s responsibility for the “due administration of justice throughout
the Kingdom” and from the “obligation which they owe to the dispensers of
justice to preserve them from injurious attack or calumnious accusations”
(see A. Todd, Parliamentary Government in England, 730  at 741 (1867).
Inter alia, judges have been approached, normally by the Lord Chancellor and
given an opportunity to refute the charges such as in  Baron Gurney’s case
(1843) and Kelly’s case (1867).   Yet another principle is that Government,
namely,  the  Executive  should  not  start  proceedings  in  Parliament but
proceedings should be initiated only by Members, unless the misconduct is
very grave.   Unlike proceedings for impeachment, dissolution or prorogation
of Parliament in UK, terminates the proceedings on a motion for an address
for removal.   (Of course, our Supreme Court has taken a contrary view in the
judgment in  Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability v.  Union of India:
167

1991 (4) SCC 699. It has also held that dissolution of the House does not
terminate the motion)      Sometimes where the motion for removal fails, there
may  be  a  general  censure  of  the  judge  in  the  debates (p.139  of  Prof.
Shetreet’s book).
168

CHAPTER IX
REMOVAL PROCEDURE IN CANADA (Federal) & IN ITS STATES
(A) Federal Courts
Canadian Constitution Act of 1867 states in sec 99(1)that judges of
Superior courts shall hold office during “good behaviour” and be removed
only  by  the  Governor  General  on  address  of  the  Senate  and  House  of
Commons.  Sec. 9(1)  of the Supreme Court  Act  also contains  like  terms.
Canada’s Parliament has also set in place a process to assess alleged breaches
of good behaviour by federally appointed judges.  Under the Judges Act,
1985 the role is played by the Canadian Judicial Council.   The Act repeals an
earlier statute of 1971.   It is learnt that Canadian Parliament has never had to
face a situation of removal of a judge although sometimes judges retire or
resign before the matter gets that far.   Where appropriate, the Council may
express disapproval of a judge’s conduct if the matter is not serious enough
to recommend that the judge be removed.
Some of the principles accepted before the Canadian Judicial Council
are  that  no  investigation  is  permitted  about  unnamed  judges  or  general
complaints about the judiciary as a whole or on the merits of the case.
169

The Judges Act, 1985:
In Canada, the Judges Act [R.S. 1985, C. J-1] deals with the question
of disciplinary action against judges.   Part 2 of the Act (sections 58 to 71)
deals with the Canadian Judicial Council and its powers.
Under sec. 59(1), it is stated that the Judicial Council shall consist of
(a) the Chief Justice of Canada who shall be the Chairman of the Council, (b)
the Chief Justice and any senior associate Chief Justice and associate Chief
Justice of each superior court or branch or division thereof, (c) the senior
judges,  as defined  in section  22(3) of the  Supreme Court  of Yukon, the
Supreme Court of North West territories and the Nunavut Court of Justice,
and (d) the Chief Justice of the Court Martial Appeal Court of Canada.  All
are judges.
(Subclause (e) of sec. 59(1) and subsections (2) and (3) of sec. 59 have
been repealed.)   Subsection (4) of sec. 59 states that each member of the
Council  may appoint  a  judge  of  that  member’s  court  to  be  a  substitute
member of the Council and the substitute member shall act as a member of
the Council during any period in which he or she is appointed to act but the
Chief Justice of Canada may, in lieu of appointing a member of the Supreme
170

Court of Canada, appoint any former member of that court to be a substitute
member of the Council.
Sec. 60 of the Act refers to the objects and powers of the Council.
Subsection (1) of sec. 60 states that the objects of the Council are to promote
efficiency and uniformity and to improve the quality of judicial service, in
superior courts.    Subsection 2(c) states that in furtherance  of the above
objects, the Council may make  inquiries and  investigation of complaints or
allegations described in sec. 63 and sub-sec. 2(d) states that the Council may
make inquiries described in sec. 69.
Sec. 63 deals with inquiries by the Council and reads as follows:
“63.(1)The Council shall, at the request of the Minister or the Attorney
General of a province, commence an inquiry as to whether a judge of a
superior court should be removed from office for any of the reasons set
out in paragraphs 65(2)(a) to (d).
(2) The Council may investigate any complaint or allegation made
in respect of a judge of a superior court.
(3) The Council may for the purpose of conducting  an inquiry or
investigation under this section, designate one or more of its members
who, together with such members, if any, of the bar of a province,
171

having  at  least  ten  years  standing,  as  may  be  designated  by  the
Minister, shall constitute an Inquiry Committee.
(4) The  Council  or  an  Inquiry  Committee  in  making  an  inquiry  or
investigation under this section shall be deemed to be a superior court
and shall have
(a) power to summon before it any person or witness  and to
require him or her to give  evidence on oath, orally or in
writing or on solemn affirmation if the person or witness is
entitled  to  affirm  in  civil  matters,  and  to  produce  such
documents  and  evidence  as  it  deems  requisite  to  the  full
investigation of the matter into which it is inquiring; and
(b) the same power to enforce the attendance of any person or
witness and to compel the person or witness to give evidence
as is vested in any superior court of the province in which the
inquiry or investigation is being conducted.
(5) The  Council  may  prohibit  the  publication  of  any  information  or
documents placed before it in connection with, or arising out of, an
inquiry or investigation under this section when it is of the opinion that
the publication is not in the public interest.
(6) An  inquiry or  investigation under this section may be held in
public or in private, unless  the Minister requires  that it be held in
public.”
Section 64 of the Act deals with notice of hearing and reads as follows:
172

“64. A judge in respect of whom an  inquiry or  investigation under
section  63  is  to  be  made  shall  be  given  reasonable  notice  of  the
subject-matter of the inquiry or investigation and of the time and place
of any hearing thereof and shall be afforded an opportunity, in person
or  by  counsel,  of  being  heard  at  the  hearing,  of  cross-examining
witnesses and of adducing evidence on his or her own behalf.”
Section 65 of the Act deals with Report and Recommendations.
It will be seen that the Council is permitted to recommend  removal
from office either on the ground of age or  infirmity or misconduct of the
Judge or on his or her having failed in due execution of that office or having
been placed, by his or her conduct or otherwise, in a position incompatible
with the due execution of that office.  The Act does not contemplate any
measures to be imposed other than removal.   Sec. 66 refers to grounds of
leave for absence to a judge found to be incapacitated or disabled.   It reads
as follows:
“The Governor in Council may grant leave of absence to any judge
found, pursuant to subsection 65(2), to be incapacitated or disabled, for
such  period  as  the  Governor  in  Council,  in  view  of  all  the
circumstances  of the  case, may consider  just or appropriate, and if
173

leave of absence is granted the salary of the judge shall continue to be
paid during the period of leave of absence so granted.”
Subsection (3) of sec. 66 deals with annuity to a judge who resigns and
reads as follows:
“The  Governor  in  Council  may  grant  to  any  judge  found  to  be
incapacitated  or disabled,  if the judge resigns,  the  annuity that the
Governor in Council might have granted the judge if the judge had
resigned at the time when the finding was made by the Governor in
Council.”
Section  69(3)  states  that  the  Governor  in  Council  may,  on  the
recommendation  of  the  Minister,  after  receipt  of  a  report  described  in
subsection 65(1) in relation to an inquiry under this section in connection
with a person (who may be removed from office by the Governor in Council
other than on an address of the Senate or House of Commons or on a joint
address of he Senate and House of Commons) by order remove the person
from office.   Sec. 70 deals with report to Parliament and any orders of the
Governor in Council made pursuant to sec. 69(3) and states that all reports
and evidence relevant thereto, shall be laid before Parliament within 15 days
after that order is made or if Parliament is not then sitting, on any of the first
15 days next thereafter that either House of Parliament is sitting.
174

Section 71 deals with removal by Parliament or Governor in Council
and states that nothing is done or omitted to be done under the authority of
any of the sections 63 to 70 affects any power, right or duty of the House of
Commons, Senate or Governor in Council in relation to the removal from
office of the judge or any other person in relation to whom an inquiry may be
conducted under any of those sections.
Canadian By-laws:
Canadian  Judicial  Council  has  made  By-laws  which  are  called
Canadian Judicial Council Inquiries and Investigations By-laws [SOR/2002-
371].    By-law No.2 refers to the constitution of an Inquiry Committee under
sec. 63(3).   By-law No.3 deals with appointment of independent counsel.
By-law No.4 deals with an Inquiry Committee engaging a legal counsel.   By-
laws  Nos.5  to  7  deal  with  Inquiry  Committee  proceedings  and  read  as
follows:
“5.(1) The Inquiry Committee may consider any relevant complaint or
allegation pertaining to the judge that is brought to its attention.
(2) The independent counsel shall give the judge sufficient notice of
all complaints or allegations that are being considered by the Inquiry
Committee to enable the judge to respond fully to them.
175

6.(1) Any hearing of the Inquiry Committee shall be conducted  in
public  unless,  subject  to  subsection  63(6)  of  the  Act,  the  Inquiry
Committee  determines  that  the  public  interest and  the  due
administration of justice require that all or any part of a hearing be
conducted in private.
(2) The  Inquiry  Committee  may  prohibit  the  publication  of  any
information  or  documents  placed  before  it  if  it  determines  that
publication is not in the public interest.
7. The Inquiry Committee shall conduct its inquiry or investigation
in accordance with the principles of fairness.”
By-law  No.8  refers  to  the  Inquiry  Committee  Report  and  reads  as
follows:
“8.(1) The  Inquiry  Committee  shall  submit  a  report  to  the  Council
setting out its findings and its conclusions in respect of whether or not
a recommendation should be made for the removal of the judge from
office.
(2) After the report has been submitted to the Council, the Executive
Director  of  the  Council  shall  provide  a  copy  to  the  judge,  to  the
independent  counsel  and  to  any  other  persons  or  bodies  who  had
standing in the hearing.
176

(3) If the hearing was conducted in public, the report shall be made
available to the public.”
By-laws Nos.9 and 10 refer to the judge’s response to the Inquiry
Committee report and read as follows:
“9.(1) Within  30  days  after  receipt  of  the  report  of  the  Inquiry
Committee, the judge may
(a) make  a  written  submission  to  the  Council   regarding  the
report; and
(b) notify the Council that he or she wishes to appear in person
before the Council, with or without counsel, for the purpose
of making a brief oral statement regarding the report.
(2) If the judge is unable, for any reason beyond the judge’s control,
to meet the time limit set out in subsection (1), the judge may request
an extension of time from the Council.
(3) The  Council  shall  grant  an  extension  if  it  considers  that  the
request is justified.
10.(1) If the judge makes a written submission regarding the inquiry
report, the Executive Director of the Council shall provide a copy to
the independent  counsel.  The independent counsel may, within 15
days after receipt of the copy, submit to the Council a written response
to the judge’s submission.
177

(2) If  the  judge  makes  an  oral  statement  to  the  Council,  the
independent counsel shall also be present and may be invited by the
Council to make an oral statement in response.
(3) The judge’s oral statement shall be given in public unless the
Council determines that it is not in the public interest to do so.”
It will be seen that the Inquiry Committee may act in accordance with
fairness and this implies grant of opportunity to the judge.   Further, under
the  Canadian  By-laws,  hearing  is  given  to  the  judge  before  the  Inquiry
Committee and again before the Judicial Council after the report is submitted
by the Inquiry Committee.   The Judicial Council consists only of judges.
By-laws  Nos.11  and  12  deal  with  the  consideration  of the  Inquiry
Committee report by the Council and reads as follows:
“11.(1)The Council shall consider the report of the Inquiry Committee
and any written submission or oral statement made by the judge or
independent counsel.
(2) Persons  referred  to in paragraph  2(3)(b) and members  of the
Inquiry Committee shall not participate in the Council’s consideration
of the report or in any subsequent related deliberations of the Council.
12. If the Council is of the opinion that the report of the Inquiry
Committee  is  unclear  or  incomplete  and  that  clarification  or
178

supplementary inquiry or investigation is necessary, it may refer all or
part of the matter in question  back  to the Inquiry Committee  with
specific directions.”
By-law No.13 states that the Executive Director of the Council shall
provide the judge with a copy of the report of its conclusions presented by
the Council to the Minister.   By-law No.14 states that these by-laws come
into force on January 1, 2003.    
It may be noted that the Council submits its report to the Minister, the
subsequent procedure is given in the Act itself as mentioned above in sec. 69
(3)  where  the  Governor  in  Council  may  on  the  recommendation  of  the
Minister,  remove  the  person  from  office  (if  he  is  competent  to  do  so,
otherwise than on an address of the Senate or the House of Commons or on a
joint address of the Senate or House of Commons).  Sec. 70 provides that the
order of the Governor in Council shall be placed before the Parliament at its
next sitting.
Complaint procedure:
As  per  to  the  “complaints  procedure”  approved  by  the  Canadian
Judicial Council w.e.f. 1.1.2003, the procedure for dealing with a complaint
has been laid down in great detail.   Under sec. 2.2 of the procedure, the
Executive  Director  of  the  Council  shall  not  open  a  file  in  respect  of
179

complaints which are evasional or an obvious abuse of the complaint process.
A complaint which is from an anonymous source shall be treated in the same
manner as in other complaints, to the extent possible.   Under sec. 3.4 where a
file has been opened and thereafter a complainant  seeks to withdraw the
same, the Chairperson of the Council  may close the file as withdrawn or
proceed  with consideration  of the  complaint on  the basis  that the  public
interest and the due administration of justice require it.   The Chairperson
under sec. 3.5 shall review the file and may close the file if he or she is of the
view that the complaint is trivial, vexatious, made for an improper purpose,
manifestly without substance and does not warrant consideration or is outside
the jurisdiction of the Council because it does not involve conduct.  The
Chairperson shall review the file and may seek additional information from
the complainant or seek the judges’ comments and of his or her Chief Justice.
When the Chairperson under sec. 3.6 has closed a file, the Executive Director
shall provide  to the judge  and to his or her Chief Justice a copy of the
complaint and of the letter closing the complaint.   Under sec. 4.1 where the
Chairperson  has  decided  to  seek  comments  from  a  judge,  the  Executive
Director shall  write  to  the  judge  and  his  or her Chief Justice requesting
comments.  Under sec. 5(1)(a)(i) the Chairperson shall review the response of
the judge and the judges to the Chief Justice, as well as any other relevant
material received in response to the complaint and may close the file where
the Chairperson concludes that the complaint is without merit or does not
warrant further consideration or (ii) where the judge acknowledges that his or
her conduct was inappropriate but the Chairperson is of the view that no
180

further matters are needed.   Under sec. 5.1(b) the Chairperson may hold the
file in abeyance pending pursuit of remedial measures under sec. 5.3.    Under
clause (c) of sec. 5.1 the Chairperson may ask the Council to make further
inquiries and prepare a report or refer the file to a panel under sec. 5.2 before
closing the file falling under sec. 5.1(a)(ii) where the judge acknowledges his
mistake, in his behaviour, the Chairperson may in writing provide the judge
with an assessment of his or her conduct and express any concerns which are
necessary.   Under sec. 5.3, the Chairperson may in consultation with the
judges, Chief Justices and with the consent of the judge recommend that the
problems  may  be  addressed  by  way  of  counselling  or  other  remedial
measures and close the file if satisfied that the matter has been appropriately
addressed.   Under sec. 5.4, the judge will be given a copy of the letter.
Under  sec.  6,  procedure  where  the  complaints  involved  Council
members is laid down.   Under sec. 9, the panel shall consist of 3 or 5
members  including  a Chairperson  and  may include  1 or 2 puisne judges
chosen from among a roster of judges established for this purpose, provided
that  the  Chairperson  and  a majority of a panel  shall  be  members  of the
Council.    The panel shall not include any judges who are members of the
court to which the judge, who is the subject of the complaint is a member.
Under  sec.  9.3,  the  Executive  Director  shall  inform  the  judge  about  the
constitution of the panel.   Sec. 9.4 states that the judge shall be provided
with any information to be considered by the panel that he or she may not
have  previously  received  and  shall  be  given  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
181

respond in writing.    Under sec. 9.5, after referring the file to the panel the
Chairperson shall not participate in any further consideration of the merits of
the complaint by the Council.   Sec. 9.6 provides that the panel shall review
the file and may direct further inquiry or close the file if the matter is not
serious  enough  to warrant  removal  or hold the  file  in  abeyance pending
remedial  measures  like  counselling  etc.  or  the  panel  may  make  a
recommendation to the Council that an Inquiry Committee be constituted
under  sec.  63(3)  because  the  matter  may  be  serious  enough  to  warrant
removal and provide a report to the Council and to the judge.   If the file is
closed, the panel will inform the judge about its assessment of the conduct.
Under sec. 10, the Chairperson shall name those Council members who will
be members of the Inquiry Committee and will designate its Chairperson.
The judge shall be entitled to make written submissions.   Under sec. 10.4,
the Council shall decide that no investigation is warranted because the matter
is not serious enough to warrant removal or that an investigation shall be held
under  sec.  63.2  because  the  matter  may  be  serious  enough  to  warrant
removal.   Under sec. 12.7 where an Inquiry Committee is constituted, the
complainant shall be advised accordingly.
(B) Judges of the Provinces in Canada
Unlike  superior  Court  Judges  in  the  Federal  system,  who  can  be
removed only by Parliament as stipulated by sec 99 of the Constitution Act,
1867, in most provinces, the provincially appointed Judges can be removed
182

by the Cabinet, without prior address of the legislature but the Government is
bound by the recommendations of the Provincial Judicial Council.
In Ontario, the North-West Territories and Nunaval, the removal is by
the legislature while in British Columbia and Newfoundland, removal can be
effective by the Provincial Judicial Council itself.
A Quebec Judge can be removed by the Minister of Justice, only if so
recommended by the Quebec Court of Appeal, following as recommendation
of  the  Quebec  Judicial  Council.   But,  the  Minister  can  reject  a
recommendation  for  the  Judge’s  removal.  (Cristin  Schmitz,  2001,
Workopolis. Com)
Case law relating to Judicial Councils in Canada
There are some Judgments of the Canadian Supreme Court and State
Federal Courts on some issues relating to the proceedings before the Judicial
Councils and their constitutionality and they are dealt with in Chapter XX
‘Discussion or Points referred to in Chapter II’. 
183

CHAPTER X
 PROCEDURES IN AUSTRALIA (FEDERAL) & STATE COURTS,
AND JUSTICE MURPHY’S CASE 
Australian Federal system:
Section  72(ii)  of  the  Australian  Constitution  governs  the  Supreme
Court, the County Court and the Ministers Court and states that the federal
judicial officers shall not be removed except by the Governor in Council on
address from both Houses of the Parliament in the same session praying for
such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
      In Australia, it is not settled whether the  removal of a judge upon an
address would be subject to judicial review. The  debates  of  the
National  Australiasian  Convention,  1897  show  that  the  constitutional
provision indicates that the two Houses are the only judges of the alleged
misbehaviour  of  the  judge  and  that  their  address  and  the  action  of  the
Governor General thereupon would not be reviewable by the High Court.  In
this connection, the correspondence between Mr. Isaacs and Mr. Barton at
page  952  of  the  Debates  in  1896-97  may be  noticed.     However,  two
Parliamentary Commissioners  opined  that the  High Court could review  a
removal and  quash  it where the  evidence  did not disclose matters which
could amount to misbehaviour.
184

It is also  not settled in Australia whether the Governor General in
Council will be bound to act in accordance with an address by both Houses.
It is generally thought an address should be binding.   However, one of the
Parliamentary  Commissioners  took  a  view  that  sec.  72  preserves  the
Governor-General’s  discretion to act upon an address (see chapter 20, page
511).
The question may be academic because the Governor General would
probably  accept  the  proof  of  misbehaviour  contained  in  the  address,  on
ministerial advice.
It is for the two Houses to determine whether to decide the question in
the House or ask some other body to advise them.    Each of the two Senate
Committees appointed in 1984 and the statutory Parliamentary Commission
of Inquiry appointed in 1986 to inquire into the conduct of a High Court
judge, Justice Murphy  were asked to find the facts and advise whether the
conduct constituted misbehaviour.   This is permissible as long as the Houses
do not delegate the actual determination of the question of misbehaviour.
Because  of  the  use  of  the  word  “proved” it  is  inferred  that  the
procedures are  judicial requiring formulation of charges and a full inquiry
with opportunity to the judge to be heard by the Houses.   This situation
arises where an Inquiry Committee is delegated with the function of finding
185

the  facts  of  prima  facie  misbehaviour.    The  Houses  may  adopt  the
proceeding followed by the courts or adopt an inquisitorial mode.    If the
facts have already been gathered in  some other inquiry or by conviction for
an offence in a court, the Houses may decide that no further evidence is
necessary.    Generally, a Select Committee is  appointed  to  conduct  the
investigation.
Odgers’ Australian Senate Practice: 
Odgers’ Australian Senate Practice, (Eleventh Edition 2004), edited by Harry
Evans,  discusses  in  detail  several  constitutional  questions  in  relation  to
investigation/inquiry into  “misbehaviour” of Judges referred to in sec. 72 (ii)
of the Australian Constitution and the various issues arising in regard to  the
procedure for removal on Address and other matters.
As to whether there could be judicial review of the order of removal
passed by the Governor-General  in Council  after an Address, two of the
Parliamentary Commissioners, as stated earlier, had expressed the view that
the High Court could review a removal on the judicial side and quash it.   The
authors, however, refer to the US judgment in Nixon v. US (1993 (508) US
927) wherein the US Supreme Court had held that the removal of a judge by
impeachment was not judicially reviewable. 
186

On  the  question  of  discretion  of  the  Governor  General  after  the
Address by both Houses, the authors say that it is not settled whether the
Governor General in Council would be bound to act in accordance with an
Address by both Houses.    They state that it is generally thought that because
the Houses act on “proved” grounds, the Address by the Houses should be
binding.   However, one of the Parliamentary Commissioners took the view
that sec. 72 preserves the Crown’s discretion to act or not to act upon the
Address.  The question as already referred to, may look academic because the
Governor General may ultimately go by the advice of the Ministry.    On the
question  whether the Houses  of Parliament should  themselves  decide the
question of ‘misbehaviour’ or whether they could delegate this function to a
Committee, there is no unanimity because there is no statute mandating any
particular procedure.   But, they could perhaps delegate as long as the final
determination is for the purposes of the Houses.
So far as the hearing to be given to the judge is concerned, that hearing
must be given finally in the Houses, even though the judge concerned might
have been given an opportunity before any Committee which recorded the
evidence.   The final decision as to  misbehaviour is, therefore, a matter for
the Houses.
One other important view expressed by the authors is that the hearing
in the Houses is to be given separately in each House.   It is stated as follows:
187

“It may be thought that an inquiry on behalf of  both Houses would
have something to commend it, but a strong argument could be made
out that any inquiry should always be initiated and followed up by one
House, and that the other House should not become involved at all
until it receives a message requesting its concurrence in an address.
The  two  Houses  proceeding  separately in this  way would  give the
judge who was the subject of the inquiry the safeguard of two hearings,
which is probably what the framers of sec. 72 intended.    Any joint
action by the two Houses may remove this safeguard.”
Thus, it appears to be the view that the Committee to which the inquiry
is  delegated is initially the Committee of one of the Houses and not the
Committee of both the Houses.  Apart from that, after the Committee submits
its report to one of the Houses and that House agrees with the prima facie
findings of the Committee, that House would request the other House to
concur with its resolution and when such concurrence is  sought from the
other House, the judge has to be given a  separate opportunity in the other
House. 
Another question is whether the Committee or the Select Committee to
which  the  inquiry  is  delegated,  can  be  given  the  power  as  part  of  the
delegation, to compel evidence, ie.,  to summon witnesses and to require the
production of documents.    It is doubtful whether one House acting alone
188

could lawfully confer such a power on persons or a  body other than its own
members.
A further question is whether the Committee so appointed is merely
gathering evidence and, therefore, no special safeguards are necessary.   A
body  which  is  merely  gathering  evidence  probably  does  not  require  any
elaborate proceedings or provide safeguards.    However, a body which has
the power to compel evidence, should have some restraints imposed upon it.
If a Committee is also to formally hear evidence and come to a judgment on
it, then procedures and safeguards are essential.    The authors then make an
important statement on ‘investigation’ as distinct from ‘inquiry’.   It says:
“It is suggested that it may be best to separate the functions of locating
and hearing evidence.  Then for the initial inquiry some investigative
body other than a select committee may be properly considered and the
questions of the power to compel evidence and of safeguards may be
more readily considered at the later stage.”
“It would appear that insufficient consideration was given to any of the
foregoing questions  when the Act of the Parliament was passed in
1986 to establish the Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry……  That
body also  combined the functions of locating evidence, conducting a
formal hearing of evidence and advising the Houses on the judgment
of the evidence.    It was given power to compel evidence.    In was, in
189

effect, a  joint body reporting to both Houses.  It was also virtually
required to meet in  closed session which may be appropriate for an
initial inquiry but is inappropriate for the hearing of evidence….. It has
generally been assumed that a formal hearing of evidence following
the procedures of a trial, would take place before a House agreed to an
address under sec. 72.”
According to these comments, a separate body which investigates into
facts and then comes to a decision to frame the charges, and another body
which subsequently inquiries into the charges with restraints, appears to be
proper rather than combining investigation and inquiry by one committee.
 
A connected point was argued by Mr. Kapil Sibal in his submissions
before the Lok Sabha in the case of Justice V. Ramaswamy.   He argued that
no  “investigation  was  done  at  any  point  of  time  before  Justice  Sawant
Committee which striaght away  framed charges and inquired into them”.
According to him, if the procedures were “quasi-criminal”, an investigation
must have been done before framing charges. Inquiry comes only later.    Mr.
Sibal argued that under sec. 3 of the Judges Inquiry Act, 1968, what was
contemplated was ‘investigation’ by a committee after admitting the motion.
He  submitted  that  after  admitting  the  motion,  the  first  thing  that  the
Committee should have done was to make an investigation into the grounds
on which the removal of a judge was prayed for and then frame charges.
But the answer of the other Members (particularly, Mr. George Fernandes)
190

was  that sec. 3(3) states  that the  Committee shall  frame definite  charges
against the judge on the basis of which the investigation is proposed to be
held.   So, according to some Members, the subsection contemplated framing
the  charges  first  and  thereafter  investigation.  Obviously,  the  word
‘investigation’ used in sec  3(3) of the  1968 was intended  to describe  an
‘inquiry’.)
States in Australia:
While  removal  on  address  from  Parliament  is  the  only  method  of
removal  of  Federal  Judges  under  sec  72(ii)  of  the  Commonwealth
Constitution,  the  State  Judges  in  Queensland,  Western  Australia,  South
Australia and Victoria can be removed under the ‘quamdiu se bene gesserint’
method.  Removal ground provisions in the Commonwealth Constitution are
limited to certain prescribed grounds.  But no removal provision in any State
law is restricted to prescribed grounds, except in New South Wales.  There is
no  address  from  Parliament  although  grounds  are  not  prescribed
(Queensland, Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia) or only on an
address from Parliament (Tasmania), or on an address from Parliament but
not on prescribed grounds only (New South Wales). 
New South Wales:  Judicial Officers Act, 1986:
191

Sec  53  of  the  Constitution  Act  1902  (New  South  Wales)  part  9,
(inserted  by  Constitution  (Amendment)  Act  1992  (NSW)  deals  with
‘Removal from Judicial Office and states:
“Section 53: (1) No holder  of Judicial  office  can  be  removed
from the office, except as provided by this Part (Part 9);
(2) The holder of a Judicial office can be removed from the office
by the Governor, on an address from both Houses of Parliament in the
same session, seeking removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour
or incapacity.
(3) Legislation may lay down the procedures and requirements to be
completed with before a judicial officer may be removed from office.”
Section 4 to 56 provide for suspension, retirement and abolition of office.
The New South Wales Act, 1986 refers to a Judicial Commission and
the Conduct Division of the Commission.  Sec. 3 defines the Commission as
a Judicial Commission and it also defines the Conduct Division.    Under sec.
5, the Commission will consist  of ten members, six official and four are
appointed members.   But the Conduct Division under sec. 22, which deals
with  disciplinary  action,  consists  of  three  persons  who  are  all  judicial
officers.
192

 Part 5 deals with the Conduct Divisions (sec. 13 and 14), Part 6 deals
with complaints against judicial officers.   There are four Divisions in Part 6.
The first Division deals with the making of complaints (sec. 15 to 17), the
second Division deals with preliminary examination of complaints (sec. 18 to
21), the third Division deals with Conduct Division and submission of reports
(sec. 22 to 29), and the fourth Division deals with miscellaneous aspects (sec.
30 to 39).
Part 7 deals with suspension and removal of judicial officers (sec. 40 to
43A).   Schedule 3 deals with procedure of the Conduct Commission.
Sec. 3(a) defines ‘judicial officer’ as a judge or associate judge of the
Supreme Court, or a judge of the District Court or a magistrate etc.
The  Conduct  Division  of  the  Commission  which  consists  of  three
persons and is constituted under sec. 22.  That section states that the three
persons shall be judicial officers but one may be a retired judicial officer.
Under sec. 15, the complaints have to be made to the Commission but
the Commission shall not deal with the complaint (except where it dismissed
the complaints summarily under sec. 20) unless it appears that the complaint,
if substantiated could justify parliamentary consideration for removal of the
judicial officer from office or where even if it substantiates as aforesaid, it
might  not  justify  parliamentary  consideration for  removal  and  warrants
193

further examination affecting the judicial and official duties and performance
of the officer.   Subsection (3) of section 15 states that a complaint should not
relate to a matter arising before the appointment of the judicial officer or a
matter arising before the commencement of the Act, unless it appears that if it
substantiated,  it  could  justify  parliamentary  consideration  for  removal.
Under subsection (4) of sec. 15, a complaint may be made in relation to a
judicial officer’s  competence in performing judicial or official duties.   A
complaint  under  subsection  (6),  may  be  made  even  though  the  matter
constitutes  or  may  constitute  a  criminal  offence.    The  Commission  or
Conduct Division may adjourn consideration if the allegations are being dealt
with by a court or it may adjourn the matter for any other appropriate reason.
Sec.  16 states  that  the  Minister may refer any matter  relating to a
judicial officer to the Commission.  Sec. 17 deals with the manner of making
complaints as provided in the regulations.  The complainant must identify
himself.
Before the  Commission refers any matter to the Conduct Division, it
has to conduct a preliminary examination under sec. 18 and thereafter, under
sec.  19,  it  may  either  summarily  dismiss  the  complaint  or  classify  the
complaint as a  minor one or it may classify it as a  serious one.   Sec. 20
permits the Commission to dismiss the complaint summarily if it is frivolous,
vexatious or trivial or is too  remote in point  of time or if there is  other
remedy or redress or where it relates to the exercise of a  judicial or other
194

function that is or was subject to adequate appeal or review rights, or where
the person against whom the complaint is made is no longer a judicial officer
or where generally the complaint is not justified.
Under sec. 21 where the complaint is not summarily dismissed, it shall
be referred to the Conduct Division.  Under sec. 23, the Conduct Division
shall examine the complaint and initiate such investigation as is appropriate.
All this shall be done confidentially, as far as practicable.
Under sec. 24, the Conduct Division may hold hearings and where the
complaint is of a serious nature, the hearings shall take place in public, unless
the Division directs that it should be in private.   Where the complaint is of a
minor nature, the hearing shall be private.  The Conduct Division may give
directions  as to who may be present at the hearing.  At the hearing, the
judicial officer may be represented by a legal practitioner.
In the matter of serious complaints, the Conduct Division has powers
under sec. 25 as are conferred by statute, namely, the Royal Commissions
Act, 1923 on Commissioners.   In case of minor complaints, the Division may
receive evidence on oath or affirmation.
The  Conduct  Division  may itself  dismiss  a complaint  on  the  same
grounds upon which the Commission could summarily dismiss a complaint or
where the complaint has not been substantiated.
195

Under sec. 29, in case of a serious complaint, the Conduct Division
shall submit a report to the Governor.  Where the Division is of the view that
the  matter  could  justify  parliamentary consideration  of  removal,  then  the
report shall set out the Division’s findings of fact and the  opinion.    The
Minister shall lay the report before the Houses after the report is presented to
the Governor.   A copy of the report shall also be given to the Commission.
Where the complaint is a minor one, the Conduct Division shall submit the
report to the Commission.  In all cases, copies will be given to the judicial
officers.
Sec. 34 deals with  medical examination of the judicial officer where
the complaint states that the officer is physically or mentally unfit to exercise
his or her functions efficiently.   Sec. 41 provides that a judicial officer may
not  be  removed  from  office  in  the  absence  of  a  report  of  the  Conduct
Division to the Governor setting out the opinion of the Division that the
matter  could  justify  parliamentary  consideration  for  removal.    Sec.  40
permits suspension of judicial officers after a complaint is made or a report is
made  by  the  Conduct  Division  that  the  judicial  officer  deserves  to  be
removed or where he is charged for an offence punishable by imprisonment
for 12 months or more or has been convicted by a Court within  New South
Wales or elsewhere.  
196

We may also state that sec. 38 permits a complainant to be declared as
a vexatious complainant by the Commission.   Sec. 36 and 37 are important,
and prohibit publication of the evidence given before the Division or of the
matters contained in documents filed with the Division.   It also states that
any person who makes a publication in contravention of the direction of the
Conduct  Division  will  be  guilty  of  an  offence  punishable  by  fine  or
imprisonment upto one year or both.    Sec. 37 prohibits the members or
officers  of  the  Commission  or  the  Conduct  Division  from  disclosing
information except where (a) consent is given by the person from whom the
information  is  obtained  or  (b)  in  connection  with  the  administration  or
execution  of  the  Act  (except  sec.  8  and  9) or  (c)  for  purposes  of  legal
proceedings arising out of the Act or any report or (d) for any other lawful
excuse.
Victoria
“Courts Legislation (Judicial Conduct) Act, 2005” of Victoria amends
the Constitution of Victoria, the Supreme Court Act and other Acts.    
We shall first refer to sec. 77(1) and 77(4)(a) of the Constitution Act,
1975 as amended by the Courts Legislation (Judicial Conduct) Act, 2005.   
(A) Constitution Act, 1975 of Victoria (as amended in 2005): sec. 77(1)
and 77(4)(a) in Part III, read as follows:
197

“77. Commissions of Judges:
(1) The  Commissions  of the  Judges  of the  Court  shall,
subject to subsection (4), continue and remain in full
force during their good behaviour, notwithstanding the
demise of Her Majesty, any law usage or practice to
the contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding but the
Governor  may  remove any  such  Judge  upon  the
address of the Council and the Assembly.
(2)  ……………..
(3)  …………….
(3A) …………..
(4) The Commission of a judge ceases to be in force and
the office becomes vacant-
(a) in  the  case  of  a  judge  appointed  before  the
commencement  of  section  4  of the  Courts  Amendment
Act 1986 who has not made an election under section 80A
– upon the judge attaining the age of 72 years; or
(b) …………
(c) ………..
(d) ……….. “
Part II of the Act contains sec. 18(2) which reads as follows:
198

Section 18 Power for Parliament to alter this Act:
(1) Subject to this section the Parliament may, by any Act, repeal,
alter or vary all or any of the provisions of this Act and substitute
others in lieu thereof.
(1A) ……………..
(1B) ……………..
(2) It  shall  not  be  lawful  to  present  to  the  Governor  for  Her
Majesty’s assent any Bill by which –
(a) ……………
(b) ……………
(c) …………..
(d) ……………
(e) …………...
(f) ……………
(fa) Part VII; or
(fb) Part III AA
(g) any  provision  substituted  for  any  provision  specified  in
paragraphs (a) to (fb)
may be repealed, altered or varied;
………………………………………….
Unless the third reading of the Bill is passed by a special majority”.
The object of the Act of 2005 was to amend the Constitution Act of
1975 to make fresh provisions with respect to the grounds for removal from
199

office  of  judicial  office  holders  and  to  provide  for  an  appointment  of
investigating  agency  etc.   The  Constitution  Act  of  1975  is  amended  by
inserting the words “(fb) Part IIIAA; or” and substituting in sec. 18(2)(g) of
the Constitution Act 1975, the words (fb) for the words (fa).   
Sec. 4 inserts Part IIIAA after Part III.   Part IIIAA introduced by sec. 4
consists  of  sec.  87AAA  to  87AAJ  relating  to  procedure  for  removal  of
Judges.
The effect of the amendment in 2005 of the Constitution is that the
new Part IIIAA introducing ss 87AAA to 87AAJ cannot be amended except
by a special majority.
Sec. 87AAA defines investigating committee as a committee appointed
under sec. 87AAD.   It also defines the word ‘judicial office’ as meaning the
office of the Judge of the Supreme Court, Master of the Supreme Court,
Judge of the County Court, Master of the County Court and the Magistrate.
It also defines the word ‘panel’ as the panel established under sec. 87AAC.
Sec.  87AAB  deals  with  removal  from  judicial  office  and  reads  as
follows:
“87AAB. Removal from judicial office :
200

(1) The Governor in Council may  remove the holder of a judicial
office from that office on the presentation to the Governor of an
address from both  Houses  of  the  Parliament  agreed  to  by  a
special majority in the same session praying for that removal on
the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
(2) A resolution of a House of the Parliament or of both Houses of
the Parliament praying for the removal from office of the holder
of  a  judicial  office  is  void  if  an  investigating  committee
appointed under section 87AAD has not concluded that facts
exist that could amount to proved misbehaviour or incapacity
such as to warrant the removal of that office holder from office.
(3) This  section  extends  to  term  appointments  or  acting
appointments to a judicial office but does not prevent the holder
of the office ceasing to hold office on the expiry of the term or
the period for which he or she is appointed to act.
(4) Except as provided by this Part, no holder of a judicial office can
be removed from that office.”
Sec. 87AAC(1) refers to the constitution of the ‘judicial panel’ which
will  consist  of  seven  persons appointed  by  the  Attorney General.  Under
87AAC(3) a person is only eligible for appointment if he or she has held “a
qualifying office” but no longer holds one.  Subsection (3) reads as follows:
“87 AAC: Judicial Panel:
201

(1) A panel of 7 persons is established for the purposes of this Part.
(2) Members of the panel are appointed by the Attorney-General for
the term specified in their instrument of appointment.
(3) A person is eligible for appointment as a panel member if he or
she has held a qualifying office but no longer holds one.
…………………………………………………………..
A ‘qualifying office’ is defined in sec. 87AAA as office of  a judge of
the Federal Court of Australia, Family Court of Australia, Family Court of
Western Australia, Supreme Court of a State other than Victoria, Supreme
Court of Australian Capital Territory or the Northern Territory.  Thus the
panel consists only of retired Judges.
Sec. 87AAD deals with appointment of an “investigating committee”.
It  states  that  a  committee  may  be  appointed  if  the  Attorney  General  is
satisfied  that  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for  the  carrying  out  of  the
investigation  into  whether  facts  exists  that  could  amount  to  proved
misbehaviour or incapacity on the part of the holder of a judicial office such
as to warrant the removal of that office holder.   An investigating committee
shall consist of three members out of the panel of seven persons referred to in
sec. 87AAC, who are appointed by the Attorney General and for selecting the
three members the Attorney General will seek the recommendation of the
most senior member for the time being in the panel.   The Attorney General
202

will also appoint the most senior member among the three as chairperson of
the committee.
Sec.  87AAE  refers  to  the  role  of  the  investigating  committee  as
follows:
“87AAE Role of investigating committee
The  role  of an investigating  committee is  to  investigate the  matter
relating to the holder of a judicial office referred to it and report to the
Attorney  General,  within  the  period  specified  by  him  or  her,  its
conclusion as  to  whether  facts  exist  that  could  amount  to  proved
misbehaviour or  incapacity  such  as  to  warrant  the  removal of that
office holder from office.”
Sec. 87AAF refers to the powers of the investigating committee and
reads as follows:
“87AAF Powers of investigating committee
(1) An  investigating  committee  has,  and  may  exercise,  the  powers
conferred by sections 17, 18, 19, 19A, 19B, 19C, 19D, 19E, 20,
20A, 21 and 21A of the Evidence Act 1958 as if the committee
were  a  body  of persons  to  whom the  Governor  in  Council  has
issued a commission and the chairperson of the committee were the
president or chairperson of the commission.
203

(2)      A person is not excused from answering any question or producing  
any document or thing when required by an investigating committee
on the ground that the answering of the question or the production
of the document or thing is prohibited by or under any Act.
(3) The answering of a question or the production of a document or
thing,  when  required  by  an  investigating  committee,  does  not
constitute  a  breach  of  a  provision  made  by  or  under  any  Act
prohibiting the disclosure of information of a kind contained in that
answer, document or thing.”
Sec. 87AAG refers to the procedure and evidence at an investigation
and reads as follows:
“87AAG Procedure and evidence at an investigation :
(1) If the investigating committee agrees,  a person or body  may be
legally represented at the investigation or represented by an agent
of any other kind.
(2) The investigating committee is not bound by the rules of evidence
and may be informed on any matter in issue at the inquiry in any
manner that it considers appropriate.
(3) The  investigating  committee  may  give  directions  as  to  the
procedure  to  be  followed  at  or  in  connection  with  the
investigation.”
204

The investigating committee prepares a report on the conduct and gives
findings and conclusions in the said report which will be submitted to the
Attorney General under sec. 87AAH.   The report must state  conclusions as
to  whether  facts  exist  that  could  amount  to  proved  misbehaviour  or
incapacity such as to warrant removal of the office holder.  Subsection (3)
thereof  states  that  the  Attorney  General  may,  if  he  or  she  considers  it
appropriate  to  do  so,  cause  a  copy  of  the  report  of  the  investigating
committee to be laid before each House of Parliament.
It is pertinent to note that sec. 5 of the Act amends sec. 77(1) of the
Constitution Act of 1975 as a consequence of Part IIIAA and omits the words
“during their good behaviour”.  It also omits the words “but the Governor
may  remove  any  such  Judge  upon  the  address  of  the  Council  and  the
Assembly”.  Sec. 5 also inserts before sec. 77(4)(a) of the Constitution Act of
1975 the following clauses “(aaa) on the judge being removed from office by
the  Governor  in  Council  in  accordance  with  Part  IIIAA;  or  (aa)  on  the
abolition of the office of the judge by under an Act; or”.
Part 3 deals with amendment of other Acts consequential to Part IIIAA
inserted in the Constitution Act 1975.    It amends the Supreme Court Act of
1986 in sec. 104(3A)(b) substituted the words “any Council in accordance
with Part IIIAA of the Constitution Act 1975” for the words “on the address
of both Houses of Parliament”.
205

The fact  that the Act of 2005  of Victoria amends the  Constitution
would show that the procedure for removal on the address of both Houses of
Parliament is substituted by the procedure now stated in Part IIIAA.   As set
out above, in case the ‘investigating committee’ recommends removal and
gives its report to the Attorney General, he can cause a copy thereof to be laid
before the House of Parliament as seen from sec. 87AAE.   The report would
contain  the  committee’s  conclusion  as  to  whether  facts  exist  that  could
amount to proved misbehaviour or incapacity such as to warrant the removal
of that office holder from office.
Queensland: Western Australia and South Australia:
The  Supreme  Court  Act  (Qld)  provides  in  sec  195(1)  that  the
commission of any present present/future Judges of the said Supreme Court
shall continue in force during his, her or their good behaviour.  Sec 195(2)
also says that, ‘However, it shall be lawful for her Majesty to remove any
such  Judge  or  Judges  upon  the  address  of  the  Parliamentary Assembly’.
Queensland had only one House of Parliament since 1922.  The Constitution
Act  1867(Gild)  sec  15  also  deals  with  a Commission  ‘quamdiu  se  bene
gesserint’ while sec 16 provides for removal by address also.  Both methods
are  available.   The  case  of  McLawley vs.  Vasta  Judge  of  Queensland
Supreme Court, (referred to by the Supreme Court of India in Justice V.
Ramaswamy’s  cases)  was  based  upon  the  second  method  of  removal  by
address.   Initially,  there  was  a  Parliamentary  Commission  of  Inquiry,
206

composed of three retired Supreme Court Judges (Gibbs, Lush & helsham).
The Commission found no misconduct in the Judge’s carrying out of his
duties of office as a Judge; but they also made findings on other matters
which  related  evidence  in  certain  defamation  proceedings  and  taxation
transactions.  The State Parliamentary Assembly adopted these later findings
as the reason for its address to the Governor.  The Governor removed him in
June 1989 on account of the address.
In Western Australia, sec 9(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1935, and ss
54,  55  of  the  Constitution  Act,  1889  (WA,  provide  that  Judges  or  the
Supreme Court hold office during good behaviour but can be removed by
address both Houses to the Majesty.
In South Australia, the Constitution Act 1934(SA) sec 74 and ss 74, 77
provide likewise.
Tasmania: Under the  Supreme Court  Act 1887  (Tas) sec 5 and Supreme
Court  (Judges  Independence  Act)  Act  1857  (Tas)  only  one  method  of
removal or suspension by address is provided without specified grounds.
207

The Justice Murphy case of Australia – Important Procedural issues
before the Committee
The case of Mr. Justice Murphy of the High Court of Australia is very
important in the context of various procedural and evidentiary issues that
arose  before  the  Committee.   Questions  relating  to  standard  of  proof,
compellability of witnesses, right of the judge to remain silent, his right to
cross examination etc., all these questions were raised by Justice Murphy and
the result was that the findings of the 1st Senate Committee were cancelled
and  the  2nd Senate  Committee  was  appointed  and  thereafter  there  were
criminal proceedings  in which the Judge was convicted but released and
there was a retrial and this was followed by a Parliamentary Commission of
Inquiry and it gave its findings.  But before action could be taken, the Judge
died  in  October  1986.  (The  entire  inquiry  proceedings  are  discussed
exhaustively in Odgers’ Australian Senate Practice (2004), edited by Harry
Evans, Clerk of the Senate).
1  st   Senate Committee  
Justice  Murphy,  Judge  of  the  High  Court  of  Australia  was  also  a
former  Senator,  Leader  of  the  Labour  Party  in  the  Senate  and  Attorney
General  in  the  Labour  Government  of  Mr.  Whitlam.   In  1983-84,  two
newspapers  published  alleged  transcripts  of  tape  recordings  of  telephone
conversation between certain persons which had been illegally intercepted
208

and  recorded  by Members  of  the  New  South  Wales  Police  Force.   The
newspapers claimed that the transcripts revealed the activities of the persons
associated with organized crime.  Most of the parties to the conversation
were not identified by name, but one of them was referred to as “a senior
Judge”.  The conversation recorded also included the one between that Judge
and a Sydney Solicitor who was alleged to have been associated with leaders
of organized crime. The judge was subsequently identified as Justice Murphy
of the High Court of Australia, which is the highest Court in that country.
The Labour Government took the view that no inquiry was necessary but the
Opposition Liberal National Party and Australia’s Democrats which were in
majority in the Senate insisted action against the judge, contrary to the wishes
of the Government.  The Senate appointed a Select Committee on 28th March,
1984  to report upon  the  genuineness  of the  alleged  transcripts  and as to
whether  the  conduct  of  the  Judge  constituted  misbehaviour  warranting
removal.
Various directions were given to the Committee by the Senate.  But
the Committee was directed to  protect the privacy rights and reputation of
individuals and not to disclose the operational methods and investigation of
law enforcement agencies (including the police).  Witnesses were to be given
notice of the matters proposed to be dealt with during their appearances and
also to make submission in writing before appearing, and witnesses could be
assisted  by  counsel.   The  Committee  determined  guidelines  for  its
proceedings which stated that it could meet in private and that the material
209

submitted to it would not be published unless it was necessary to make it
public.  Witnesses were to be notified of their rights and to be informed of the
allegations against them.  Witnesses could consult their lawyers during their
appearance.  The Committee could accept any request by witnesses to give
evidence in private unless the Committee felt that it was necessary to hear the
evidence in public.  Witnesses were given the right to object to the questions
on grounds of irrelevance or self-incrimination.  Mr. Murphy was not finally
summoned, but the Committee indicated to him that it desired to hear his
evidence on a number of matters.  It was so done because it was not clear
whether the Senate or its Committees could summon a High Court Judge.
The Judge claimed all the rights of an accused person in a criminal
trial, including the right to be notified of his specific charge, the right not to
attend if he so chose and the right to have all the evidence heard in his
presence and the right to cross examine witnesses.  It was not within the
power of the  Committee  to allow cross  examination  of witnesses  by the
Judge’s lawyer without express permission of the Senate.  The Committee
took the view that it was only “an investigating agency”, as in the case of a
prosecution  authority  to  determine  whether  a  prosecution  could  be
commenced.  It considered that only if it determined that the evidence so
warranted, it would recommend to the Senate that there should be a formal
hearing of the evidence, with the rights of an accused person extended to the
Judge.
210

The Judge refused to give oral evidence but gave a written statement to
the Committee in regard to  the evidence which it had received.  His lawyer
made submissions on that evidence and on law.
In its Report, the 1st SenateCommittee held that it was not satisfied of
the genuineness of the tapes and the transcriptions.  It held that the conduct
of the Judge did not amount to “proved misbehaviour”.  
It, however, referred an incidental matter arising out of the evidence of
one Mr. B which, if accepted, would show that the Judge  was  guilty of
another  offence,  namely,  the  offence  of  trying  to  influence  committal
proceedings in the Magistrate’s Court.  The Committee did not go into this
question.  But thus led to the appointment of the second Senate Committee.   
2  nd   Senate Committee  
In as much the report or the first Senate Committee   was in favour of
the Judge, the Opposition which was in the majority in the Senate got another
Senate Committee appointed on 6th September, 1989 in relation to the matters
disclosed  in  the evidence  of Mr. B, namely, that  the  Judge  attempted to
influence the committal proceedings.  One of the points was whether the
Senate could delegate to the Committee the power to compel evidence from
witnesses.   In  order  to  see  that  the  Committee  was  non-partisan,  two
independent commissioners were also appointed.  
211

The  Committee  was  given  various  directions  contained  in  23
paragraphs.  The Senate directed that the Committee could give its findings
on the basis of  two different standards of proof, namely  preponderance  of
probability and  also proof beyond reasonable doubt.  (The Commissioners
were to be two retired Supreme Court Judges of the State).  Witnesses could
be examined by the lawyer assisting the Committee as  also the lawyer of
Judge Murphy and the lawyer for other witnesses.  Hearings were to be in
public unless the Committee by majority held otherwise.  Justice Murphy was
given the rights of an accused in a criminal trial except that he was not to be
called but would be invited to given evidence. All evidence was to be taken
in his presence or in the presence of his counsel.  If Justice Murphy chose to
give evidence, then he may be subjected to cross examination.
The 2nd Committee formulated allegations against the Judge and stated
that  it  would  observe  rules  of  evidence  as  in  a  Court  and  rely  only  on
evidence  admissible  in  court  proceedings.   Mr.  Murphy’s  lawyer  cross
examined the witnesses.  The Committee’s proceedings were thus a departure
from parliamentary norms.  Mr. B was also examined and cross examined.
Other witnesses were also examined.  Mr. Murphy declined to give evidence.
His counsel made a statement of his reasons for that decision and one of the
reasons was that the Senate elections were close by.
212

The Members of the 2nd Senate Committee differed in their opinions.
Two members held that the actions of Justice Murphy had a tendency to
pervert  the  course  of  justice.   One  Commissioner  was  satisfied  beyond
reasonable  doubt  also.   Two  other  Members  were  not  satisfied  beyond
reasonable doubt, but found on balance of probabilities, that he was guilty.
One  other  Member  was  not  satisfied  beyond  reasonable  doubt.   Three
senators found him guilty under both standards of proof.  Yet another senator
did not find him guilty by either standards.
When the Senate met, senators of all parties  agreed that they would
refrain from further action in as much as, in the meantime, the Director of
Public Prosecution had decided to prosecute Justice Murphy on two charges
of attempting to pervert the ordinary course of justice.
Criminal Proceedings
In the criminal proceedings during 1985-86, the Supreme Court held
that the evidence given before the two Senate committees was not admissible
in the criminal court.  Then Parliament passed the Parliamentary Privileges
Act, 1987.  Thereafter Justice Murphy was committed for trial in the Supreme
Court and the committal was confirmed by the Federal Court (i.e. the High
Court).  (see  Murphy vs.   DPP (1985) 60 ALR 299).  The Judge was also
convicted by the Supreme Court in July 1985 and sentenced  to 18 months
imprisonment but was released pending the appeal.  
213

Thereafter,  the  conviction  was  quashed  because  of  legal  and
procedural irregularities in the original trial and a new trial in the Supreme
Court was ordered.  
In the 2nd trial the Judge chose not to give evidence but exercised his
right to make an unsworn statement to the Jury as per New South Wales law,
upon which he could not be cross examined.  The trial Judge acquitted him
but the Prosecutor recommended for prosecution under various charges of
bribery and conspiracy relating to influencing the criminal inquiry which the
Director of Prosecutions declined.  
Inquiry by Parliamentary Commission
Thereafter,  in  May  1986,  the  Royal  Commission  into  Alleged
Telephone  interceptions  held  that  the tapes  and transcripts  were genuine.
Meanwhile Justice Murphy attempted to resume his seat in the High Court.
Thereafter,  the  Government  appointed  a  new  inquiry  by a  Parliamentary
Commission.
The Parliamentary Commission was constituted by a special statute
and had to report to the two Houses of Parliament.  The bill to establish the
Commission  was  brought  in  and  passed  speedily  by  both  Houses.   The
214

Commission could hear the evidence in closed sessions.  Three distinguished
former Supreme Court Judges were appointed on the Commission.
The Act precluded the Commission from examining issues dealt with
in the trials earlier.  Unlike the 2nd Senate Committee, it was empowered to
compel the Judge to give evidence.  It was to admit only evidence which was
admissible in a court.  It was given access to the documents of the 2nd Senate
Committee and also allowed to hear evidence in private.
Justice  Murphy  questioned  the  constitutionality  of  the  Commission
but the High Court held against him.  (Murphy vs. Lush (1986) 65 ALR 651).
In August 1986, the Commission concluded its preliminary inquiry and
was about to take evidence when it was revealed that Justice Murphy was
suffering from terminal cancer.  As the inquiry into the charges would take
considerable time, a bill was introduced to repeal the Act which established
the Commission.  However, before the repeal, the Commissioners held that
misbehaviour under the constitution could only relate to performance in his
judicial duties in a conviction is criminal offence.  But it held that the word
‘misbehaviour’ consisted of conduct which indicated unfitness to continue in
office.  In the meanwhile, in October 1986 Justice Murphy died and the
matter came to an end.
215

CHAPTER XI
PROCEDURES IN HONG KONG, GERMANY AND SWEDEN
HONG KONG:
       
            Under the Constitution of Hong  Kong, 1990 ( as amended), Art. 88
states that  the Judges of the courts of the Hong Kong special Administrative
Region  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer,  on  the
recommdation of an independent commission.  
           “Section 89”:  
(1)  A  Judge  of  a  court  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative
Region may only be removed for inability of his or her duties, or for
misbehavior  , by the Chief Executive  on the recommendation  of a
Tribunal appointed by the Chief Justice of the court of Final Appeal
and consisting of not fewer than three Lord Judges. 
(2) The Chief Justice of the Court of Final Appeal of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region may be investigated only for inability to
discharge his or her duties, or for misbehavior, by a tribunal appointed
by the Chief Executive and consisting  of not fewer than five local
Judges  and  may  be  removed  by  the  Chief  Executive  on  the
216

recommendation of the tribunal and in accordance with the procedures
prescribes in this law.  
Sub clause (2) of Sec.90 states that in the case of removal of Judges of the
Court of Final Appeal and the Chief Judge of the High Court of the Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region, the Chief Executive shall in addition to
following the procedures prescribed in Article 88 and 89 of this Law, obtain
the endorsement of the Parliamentary Council and report such appointment or
removal to the standing Committee of the National Peoples Congress for the
record.      
Thus the investigating Tribunal in Hong Kong consists only of Judges.
GERMANY
German Constitution is known also as the Basic Law of the Federal
Republic of Germany.   It was promulgated by the Parliamentary Council on
23rd May, 1949.   It was amended by the Unification Treaty on 31st August,
1990 and federal statute of 23rd September, 1990.   On 3rd October, 1990,
Germany established the unity of Germany.   The Constitution protects the
treaty and basic rights of man, respects public life and facilitates peaceful
change.
217

Art. 97 of the Basic Law deals with independence of judges and reads
as follows:
“Art. 97 (Independence of the judges):
(1) The judges are independent and subject only to the law.
(2) Judges  appointed  permanently  on  a  full  time  basis  to  an
established  post,  can  against  their  will,  be  dismissed,  or
permanently or temporarily suspended from office or transferred
to another post or retired before expiration of their term of office
only under authority of a judicial decision and only on grounds
and in the form provided by law.  Legislation may set age limits
for the retirement of judges appointed for life.  In the event of
changes  in  the  structure  of  the  courts  or  their  areas  of
jurisdiction,  judges  may  be  transferred  to  another  court  or
removed from their office, provided they retain their full salary.”
      Art 98 of the Constitution (as amended on 18th March, 1971) states
that ‘if a Federal Judge, in his official capacity or un-officially, infringes
upon the principles of the Basic Law or the Constitutional order of the Land,
the  federal constitutional courts  may decide by a four-third majority, upon
the request  of the Bundestag, that the judge be transferred to another office
or be placed   on the retired list.   In a case of intentional infringement, his
dismissal may be ordered’.  
218

The Germany Judiciary Act was passed on 19th April, 1972 and was
last  amended  by  Art.  1  of  the  law  of  11th July,  2002.    Chapter  1  is
introductory, chapter 2 deals with qualification for judicial office, chapter 3
deals with judicial tenure and in that chapter, sec. 21 provides the procedure
for dismissal from service.   While sec. 24 deals with termination of service
by  judicial  decision,  sec.  25  in  that  chapter  states  that  judges  shall  be
independent and subject only to the law.   Chapter 5 deals with special duties
of a judge and sec. 39 thereof deals with maintenance of independence.   It
states that in and outside office, a judge shall conduct himself in relation also
to political activity in such a manner that confidence in his independence will
not be endangered.   Chapter 6 deals with honorary judges.    These are all in
Part 1 of the Act.
Part 2 of the Act deals with judges in federal service.  Chapter 1 is
general, chapter 2 deals with the representation of judges and deals with
constitution of Councils of Judges.   Sec. 50 states that the Council of Judges
shall be composed of five elected judges consisting of the Federal Courts of
Justice and with the Federal Patents Court and three elected judges at the
Federal  Court  of  Administration,  the  Federal  Finance  Court,  the  Federal
Labour  Court and  the  Federal  Social  Court.     The  Council  of  Judges
consisting of three elected judges shall also be established for the judges of
the  Military  Service  Courts.   Judicial  Councils  deal  with  Judicial
appointments.
219

Chapter  3  deals  with  “Federal  Service  Court”  which  deals  with
disciplinary proceedings.
Sec. 61 in chapter 3 deals with the constitution of the Service Court.
Subsection (1) states that a  special division of the Federal Court of Justice
shall  be  established  as  a  “Federal  Service  Court”  with  judges  in  federal
service.   Subsection (2) states that Federal Service Court shall conduct its
proceedings and give its decisions and for that purpose it shall consist of a
presiding judge, two permanent associate judges,  and two non-permanent
associate  judges.   The  presiding  judge  and  the  two  permanent  associate
judges shall be members of the Federal Court of Justice and the two non-
permanent associate judges shall be judges for life.   The President of the
Court and his permanent deputy may not be members of the Federal Service
Court.  Subsection (4) states that the Federal Service Court shall be akin to a
criminal division within the meaning of sec. 132 of the Courts Constitution
Act.   Sec.  62  deals  with  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Federal  Service  Court.
Subsection (1) states that the Federal Service Court shall give a final decision
in disciplinary matters as well as retirement of judges, their transfers, nullity
of appointment, revocation of appointment, dismissal, retirement on account
of  unfitness  for  service  or  limited  employment  on  account  of  limited
unfitness for service.
Sec. 63 states that the provisions of the Federal Disciplinary Rules
shall  apply  to  proceedings  in  disciplinary  matters.     Sec.  64  speaks  of
220

“disciplinary measures” such as a  reprimand in a disciplinary ruling or a
reprimand or a regulatory fine or removal from office imposed on a judge of
one of the Supreme Courts of the Federation.   Chapter 4 deals with judges of
the Federal Constitution Court.  Sec. 69 states that the Act shall apply to
judges of the Federal Constitution Court only insofar as they are compatible
with the special legal status of such judges pursuant to the Basic Law and to
the Federal Constitution Court Act.
In other words, the disciplinary powers against judges are vested in the
Federal Service Court which consist only of Judges.
In an article (1998 Vol.61, Law and Contemporary Problems), under
the  title  ‘Separating  Judicial  Power’,  David  P.  Currie,  Prof.  of  Law,
University of Chicago, states that in some respects the German Constitution
is more protective of judicial independence than that of the US.  It guarantees
judicial review of administrative action, it ensures their right to attack the
constitutionality  of  Government  action  before  the  constitutional  court,  it
permit judges to be disciplined or removed only by other judges.
SWEDEN
    
        According to Article 8 of Chapter 12 which deals with ‘ Parliamentary
Control’ of the Swedish Constitution, the removal of Judges is done only by
the Swedish Supreme Court.  Article 8 reads as follows:  
221

“Article 8:
‘(1)  Proceedings  under  penal  law  on  account  of  a  criminal  act
committed  by  a  member  of  the  Supreme  Court  or  the  Supreme
Administrative Court in the exercise of his official functions shall be
brought before the Supreme Court by a Parliamentary Ombudsman or
by the Justice Chancellor. 
(3) The  Supreme  Court  shall  likewise  examine  and  determine
whether, in accordance with the provisions  laid down in this
connection, a member of the  Supreme Court or the Supreme
Administrative Court shall be removed from office or suspended
from duty, or shall be obliged to undergo a medical examination.
Proceedings to this effect shall be initiated by a Parliamentary
Ombudsman or by the Justice Chancellor’.  
Thus, in Sweden, the discipline of Judges is entrusted to the Supreme
Court, including removal or suspension.
 
222

                                        CHAPTER XII
PROCEDURES IN TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO AND PRIVY
COUNCIL JUDGMENT (1994)
The case of Justice Crane and the judgment of the Privy Council, Rees
vs Crane   1994 (1) All ER 833 are quite important and interesting.  The case
deals with the issue of non-listing of cases before the Judge, pending an
inquiry.  The Privy Council held that, unlike in other cases of ‘investigation’
(as distinct from an inquiry), it is proper to give opportunity to the Judge
even during the stage of ‘investigation’ before charges are framed against the
Judge.    
Justice Crane was appointed as a judge in 1978 and was senior puisne
judge of the High Court of Trinidad and Tobago since 1985.  The three
appellants before the Privy Council  were members of the tribunal appointed
by the President of Trinidad and Tobago.   They were appointed as members
of a tribunal by the President to inquire into the question whether Justice
Crone should be removed from office.  
Justice  Crane  had  presided  in the High Court until 27th July, 1990
which was the end of the current term of the court and thereafter he went
abroad.  Even before he left and without his being informed, the Chief Justice
decided  that  cases  shall  not  be  listed  before  Justice  Crane  for  the  term
October 1990 to January 1991.    The decision was placed before the Judicial
223

and Legal Service Commission of which the Chief Justice was the chairman
and was agreed to by the Commission, again without any information to
Justice Crane before he left on vacation.   After the judge returned in early
September some two weeks before the new term, he found that he was not
assigned any cases and he was the only judge not so assigned.   He tried to
meet the Chief Justice on several occasions but was unsuccessful until 8th
October, 1990 when he delivered a letter to the secretary of the Chief Justice
by hand and thereafter had an interview with the Chief Justice.    In that
interview, the Chief Justice told him that a communication was sent to him in
August,  1990  conveying  the  decision  of the  Commission,  though  Justice
Crane was not told of its contents.  Later, he was sent a copy of the letter by
the Chief Justice on 23rd August, 1990.    Subsequently, the judge found the
original letter  in the large number of letters which had piled up during his
absence.   The letter of the Chief Justice read as follows:  “I have to inform
you  that  the  Judicial  and  Legal  Service  Commission,  having  considered
complaints about your  performance in court  and doubts about your  current
state of health, has decided that you should cease to preside in court until
further notice”.
Justice  Crane  wrote  back  a  letter  on  9th October,  1990  to  the
Commission stating that there were no valid grounds in the complaint and
also that the decision was unlawful.   The Commission sent a further reply
whereby the only change in the above letter was that instead of stating that
the Commission had decided, it was clarified that the Commission agreed
224

with the decision of the Chief Justice and that, therefore, the Commission
would declare that he should  cease to preside in court until further notice.
Thereafter, meetings of the Commission  took place on 15th, 25th and 26th
October, 1990.   One Mr. Pierre who deposed at the first meeting stated that
before the Commission could write to the President under sec. 137(3) of the
Constitution, it was necessary for the Commission to have in its possession
more detailed and specific evidence in support of the judge’s “inability” to
perform the functions of his office.
At the second meeting of the Commission, the Chief Justice presented
statistics and records relating to Justice Crane’s performance in court and
then left the meeting when another member took the chair.   The Chief Justice
returned  on 26th October, 1990  for the third  meeting,  by which  time the
members had a chance to study the material but he did not take part in the
discussion.
The Commission then resolved that it could represent to the President
under sec. 137(3) that “the question of removing the Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Crane from his office of puisne  judge are to be investigated”, and on 29th
October, 1990 it did so.   On 22nd November, 1990 the President appointed
the appellants (all Judges) as members of the tribunal to inquire into the
question pursuant to sec. 137(3) and (9) of the Constitution.    Justice Crane
learnt about this letter of the Commission through a television report on that
day and issued a written notice on 30th November, 1990 when he was told
225

that a hearing would take place on 3rd December, 1990.   By a letter dated of
23rd November,  1990,  the  President,  pursuant  to  sec.  137(4)  of  the
Constitution, “suspended” Justice Crane from performing the functions of his
office as a judge of the High Court.   The judge was given a copy of the
order.
Before the President passed these two orders, Justice Crane asked for
judicial review stating that the Chief Justice or the Commission could not
prohibit  him from presiding  in court and  sought  that the decision  of the
Commission recommending investigation against him be declared ultra vires
and  should  be  quashed  and  the  Commission  should  be  prohibited  from
representing to the President that such a question be investigated and that, in
any event, the three appellants should be prohibited from proceeding as a
tribunal  to  inquire  into  the  question  of  his  removal.    He  also  claimed
damages.  A single judge of the High Court, Blackman J held against Justice
Crane  while  the  Court  of  Appeal  by  majority,  reversed  the  judgment.
Ibrahim and David JJ held in his favour while Sharma J held against him.
David J held that the Chief Justice was biased and, therefore, the decision
was  vitiated,  Sharma  J  rejected  the  contention.     Ibrahim  J  found  it
unnecessary to decide the question in view of the other findings given by him
in favour of the Judge on the other points.   The Commission appealed to the
Privy Council and Justice Crane filed a cross appeal to the Privy Council.
226

It was not disputed  before the Privy Council that Justice Crane was
not told of the complaints which had been made or of the statistics or records
provided  by  the  Commission  at  its  meeting,  nor  was  he  told  that  the
Commission had decided to make a recommendation to the President for his
removal.   On 3rd December, 1990, the President’s secretary informed Justice
Crane about the appointment of the tribunal for deciding the question of his
removal  on  the  ground  of  ‘inability’  to  perform  his  functions  and/or
‘misbehaviour’.   In other words, while the original allegation was about his
physical inability, the reference by the President to the tribunal related not
only to that aspect but to his alleged misbehaviour.
We may state that the trial Judge Blackman J, though he held against
the Judge, had, in fact, found that the Chief Justice and the Commission had
acted ultra vires in suspending Justice Crane (i.e. by non-listing of cases) but
he refused relief because of the subsequent order of the President suspending
Justice Crane had come into being.  In the Court of Appeal, the majority
accepted that the suspension was unlawful as the procedure was not followed
and that there was breach of natural justice and of the constitutional rights of
the judge. 
It  may  be  noted  that  the  Commission  conducts  a  preliminary
investigation and if it refers the matter to the President, he will appoint a
tribunal for a regular inquiry.
227

In the Privy Council (judgment by Lord Slynn) it was stated that the
first question was whether the decision not to assign cases to the judge for the
term starting  in  October  was unlawful.    It was necessary to decide  the
question  because  the  Commission  agreed  with  the  decision  of  the  Chief
Justice.
In the Privy Council, it was stated by Lord Slynn that the first question
was whether the decision “not to assign cases” to the judge for the term
starting in October, 1990 was lawful.   It was clear that, initially, the decision
was of the Chief Justice and it was his decision that was implemented by the
Commission.   The Chief Justice was not only the President of the Court of
Appeal but also the ex-officio Member of the High Court.   He was also the
head of the Judicial Administration of Trinidad and Tobago.   He had the
powers to give directions regarding listing of cases (Order 34 Rule 4(1)(d)
and Rule 21 of the Rules of the Supreme Court, 1975).   He also had an
overriding power under Order 1 Rule 10(2).   Therefore, he did have the
power of allocating particular work to a particular judge and he could also
not list certain cases before a particular judge if that judge had backlog of
reserved judgments or if the judge was ill or was involved in an accident or
was not able to function effectively due to family or other public obligations.
Lord Slynn agreed that it may also be necessary where allegations are
made against a judge, that his work programme should be reoriented so that,
e.g., he was assigned only particular type of work for a period and did not sit
228

in another type of cases or even if he did not sit at all temporarily.   However,
this kind of arrangement could also be and should be capable of being made
by way of agreement or at least after frank and open discussion between the
Chief Justice and the judge concerned.   Lord Slynn then observed as follows:
“The  exercise  of these  powers,  however,  must  be  seen  against  the
specific provisions of the Constitution relating to the suspension of a
judge’s activities or the termination of his appointment.  It is clear that
sec. 137 of the Constitution  provides a procedure and an exclusive
procedure  for  such  suspension  and  termination  and,  if  judicial
independence is to mean anything, a judge cannot be suspended nor
can his appointment be terminated by others or in other ways.   The
issue in the present case is thus whether what the Chief Justice did was
merely within  his  competence  as  an  administrative  arrangement  or
whether it amounted to a purported suspension.”
In this connection, it is necessary to refer to sec. 137 subclause (4) of
the Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago, which reads as follows:
“Sec. 137(4):
Where the question of removing a judge from office has been referred
to a tribunal under subsection (3), the President, acting in accordance
with the advice of the Prime Minister in the case of the Chief Justice or
the Chief Justice in the case of a judge, other than the Chief Justice,
229

may suspend the judge from performing the functions of his office, and
any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President,
acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister in the case
of the Chief Justice or the Chief Justice in the case of a judge, other
than the Chief Justice, and shall in any case cease to have effect-
(a) where the tribunal recommends to the President that he should not
refer the question of removal of the judge from office to the Judicial
Committee; or
(b) where the Judicial Committee advises the President that the judge
ought not to be removed from office.”
In this context, it may be useful to refer to the other clauses (1), (2) and
(3) of sec. 137 which deal with the procedure for removal from office of the
judge.  Under the Act, a commission  investigates and  it  could  thereafter
recommend to the President that an inquiry is warranted.  The President then
appoints a tribunal for an inquiry.  The tribunal inquires and recommends to
the President.   The President consults the Privy Council and then passes
orders.   Sec. 137(1) to (3) read thus:
“Sec. 137:
(1) A  judge  may  be  removed from  office  only  for  inability  to
perform the functions of his office, (whether arising from infirmity of
mind or body or any other cause), or for misbehaviour, and shall not be
so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this section.
230

(2) A judge shall be removed from office by the President where the
question of removal of that judge has been referred by the President to
the  Judicial Committee and the Judicial Committee has advised the
President that the judge ought  to be removed from office for such
inability or for misbehaviour.
(3) Where the Prime Minister, in the case of the Chief Justice, or the
Judicial and Legal Service Commission, in the case of a judge, other
than the Chief Justice, represents to the President that the question of
removing a judge under this section ought to be investigated, then-
(a) the  President  shall  appoint  a  tribunal,  which  shall  consist  of  a
chairman and not  less than  two  other members, selected  by the
President,  acting  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the  Prime
Minister in the case of the Chief Justice or the Prime Minister after
consultation with the Judicial and Legal Service Commission in the
case of a judge, from among persons who hold or have held office
as a  judge of a court  having  unlimited  jurisdiction  in  civil  and
criminal  matters  in  some part  of  the  Commonwealth  or  a  court
having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court;
(b) the tribunal shall  enquire into the matter and report on the facts
thereof to the President and recommend to the President whether he
should refer the question of removal of that judge from office to the
Judicial Committee; and
(c) where  the  tribunal  so  recommends,  the  President  shall  refer  the
question accordingly.”
231

‘Judicial  Committee’  here  means  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy
Council.
After  referring  to  the  specific  procedure  in  the  Constitution  for
‘removal’ and ‘suspension’ pending inquiry, the Privy Council observed that
the majority in the Court of Appeal were correct inasmuch as what happened
here went beyond mere administrative arrangement which the Chief Justice
was  otherwise  entitled  to  make.    Despite  the  fact  that  the  respondent
continued to receive the salary and theoretically (as has been argued) would
have exercised some power (e.g. to grant an injunction if approached directly
to  do  so),  the  respondent  was  effectively  barred  from  exercising  these
functions as a judge sitting in court.    He was left out of the October to
January roster and there was no indication that he would thereafter sit again.
It was in effect an indefinite suspension.  This in their Lordships’ view was
outside the powers of the Chief Justice.   Such action of the Chief Justice was
not retrospectively corrected by the subsequent order of the President.  The
suspension by the Commission was wrongful as long as it lasted and the
majority of the Court of Appeal were entitled and right to quash the Chief
Justice’s decision.
Similarly,  the  Commission  whether  it  purported  to  confirm  the
decision of the Chief Justice or whether it purported to suspend judge under
its own powers, it was clear that it had no power to do so and its decision
should also be set aside as done by the majority of the Court of Appeal.
232

Further, the judge was not informed about the proposal for removal nor
was he given any notice of the complaints made against him nor was he given
any chance to reply to them.
It may be that, as held in a number of cases, that generally a person
who  is  being  investigated, has  no  right  to  be  given  an  opportunity  in
preliminary or initiating proceedings.   That right may arise at a later stage
when he has a right to know about the complaint.   This raises the question
whether in this case, the right to be informed about the complaint and to reply
at a later stage, dispenses with the obligation or duty to inform the judge at
the  stage  of  the  investigation  before  the  charges  are  framed  by  the
Commission.   It is true that natural justice does not require that a person
must be told of the complaints  made against him and given a chance to
answer them at the particular stage in question.    The reason leading the
courts  to  this  principle  was  the  fact  that  the  investigation  was  purely
preliminary, that there would be a full chance adequately to deal with the
complaints later, that the making of the inquiry without observing the audi
alteram  partem  maxim  would  be  justified  by  urgency  or  administrative
necessity, that no penalty or serious damage to reputation should be inflicted
by proceeding to the next stage without such preliminary notice, that the
statutory scheme properly construed  excludes such a right to know and to
reply at the earlier stage.
233

Having stated as above that there is no such right to know about the
gist of the complaints at a preliminary stage, Lord Slynn, however, observed
that in some cases, an opportunity to send a representation could be given at
the stage of investigation.    He stated as follows:
“But in their Lordships’ opinion, there is no absolute rule to this effect
even if there is to be, under the procedure, an opportunity to answer the
charges  later.    As  de  Smith’s  Judicial  Review  of  Administrative
Action (4th edn, 1980 p.199) puts it:  Where an act or proposal is only
the first step in a sequence of measures which may culminate in a
decision detrimental to a person’s interests, the courts will generally
decline to accede to that person’s submission that he is entitled to be
heard in opposition to this initial act, particularly if he is entitled to be
heard at a later stage.”
Lord  Slynn then  stated that while  considering  whether this general
practice should be followed, the court should not be bound by rigid rules.  It
may have to take into account all the circumstances of the case.   After stating
so, Lord Slynn made the following important observations in favour of giving
a right to represent during the investigation and before framing charges.   He
said:
“Plainly in the present case there would have been an opportunity for
the respondent  to answer the complaint  at a later stage  before  the
234

tribunal and before the Judicial Committee.   That is a pointer in favour
of the general practice but it is not conclusive.  Sec. 137 which sets up
the three-tier process is silent as to the procedure to be followed at
each stage and as a matter of interpretation is not to be construed as
necessarily  excluding  a right  to  be informed  and  heard  at the first
stage.  On the contrary its silence on procedures in the absence of other
factors indicates, or at least leaves open the possibility, that there may
well be circumstances in which fairness requires that the party whose
case is to be referred should be told and given a chance to comment.  It
is not a priori sufficient to say, as the appellants in effect do, that it is
accepted that the rules of natural justice apply to the procedure as a
whole but they do not have to be followed in any individual stage.  The
question remains whether fairness requires that the audi alteram partem
rule be applied at the commission stage.”
“… the Commission is not intended simply to be a ‘conduit pipe’ by
which complaints are passed on by way of representation….”.   “The
Commission before it represents, must be satisfied that the complaint
has  prima  facie  sufficient  basis  in  fact  and  the  charge  must  be
sufficiently  serious  to  warrant  representation  to  the  President,
effectively  the  equivalent  of  impeachment  proceedings.    Both  in
deciding what material it needs in order to make such a decision and in
deciding whether to represent to the President, the Commission must
act fairly.”  
235

In the present case, the Commission did not simply act as a conduit
pipe.  On the contrary, it decided that he needed more detailed and specific
evidence in support of the judge’s inability to perform the functions of his
office.   It is not shown that there would have been unnecessary delay in case
the  material  was  shown  to  the  judge  and  his  reply  was  sought  for”.
Therefore,  there  were  no  circumstances  which  required  dispensing  with
calling for a reply from the Judge at that stage.
          The Privy Council further observed “Nor is it right to say that the
Commission’s action is analogous to the decision of a police officer to charge
a defendant in a criminal process.   The composition of the commission and
the nature of the process made what happened here more akin to a quasi-
judicial decision.”    
The Privy Council also observed:            
“it  is  true  as  the  appellants  contend,  that  a  decision  to  make  a
representation  is  not  itself  a  punishment  or  penalty  and  that  the
eventual  dismissal  requires  two  further  investigations,  i.e.  before  a
tribunal to which the President will refer for inquiry and before the
Privy  Council  to  which  the  President  will  refer.   That  in  their
Lordships’ view, is too simplistic an approach in resolving the present
questions.  There was obviously considerable publicity for the decision
to make a representation (to the President) even if the detailed charges
236

were not publicized.   Indeed, it was reported on the television news on
22nd November  that  the  President  had  appointed  a  tribunal  to
investigate  whether  the  respondent  should  be  removed  as  a  judge,
apparently even before the respondent received from a policeman in
the  street  a copy  of  the  President’s  decision  suspending  him from
office.”
The manner in which a representation to the President was made by the
Commission  and  a  tribunal  was  appointed  by  the  President  and  the
respondent was suspended was bound to raise suspicion that the commission
and even the President was already satisfied that the charges were made out.
If the respondent had been given a chance to reply to such charges and had
been given the opportunity to do so before the representation was made to the
President,  the  suspicion  and  damage  to  his  reputation  might  have  been
avoided.   (p. 847)   The Privy Council said that a judge though by no means
uniquely, is in a particularly vulnerable position both for the present and for
the future if suspicion of the kind referred to is raised without foundation.
Fairness,  if  it  can  be  achieved  without  interference  with  the  due
administration of the courts, requires that the person complained of should
know at an early stage what is alleged so that, if he has  an answer, he can
give it.
The Privy Council, in this context, referred to the representation of the
Committee  of Investigation  to  the  Canadian  Judicial Council  (1982  (28)
237

McGill  LJ  380)  and  a  representation  to  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee
hearing against a judge in the US in 1984, where the judge was given even
during the preliminary investigation, an opportunity to rebut what was being
said against him.   They also made reference to the rules of procedure of the
Wisconsin Judicial Commission (1976 Wisconsin Law Reports 563 at 575)
which it is said are typical of the rules in many States of the US, where there
is a clear requirement that, in the course of a preliminary investigation and
before  a  formal  charge  is  made  or  hearing  held,  the  judge  be  given an
opportunity to respond either by making a personal appearance or by letter.
Lord Slynn further observed “it might indeed be thought to be in the interests
of the good  administration  of justice  that such a course should be taken
before  unjustified  charges  are laid  before  the  tribunal  with  its  inevitable
publicity not just for the judge but for the court system as a whole”.
On the basis of the above said reasons, the Privy Council stated that
Justice  Crane  was  not  treated  fairly,  he  ought  to  have  been  told  of  the
allegations made to the Commission and given a chance to respond to the
allegations  though  not  necessarily  by  oral  hearing  at  that  stage  of
investigation.   They affirmed the judgment of the Court of Appeal.
238

CHAPTER XIII 
PROCEDURES IN SINGAPORE,  NEW ZEALAND, ISRAEL AND
ZAMBIA
SINGAPORE :
According to the Constitution of Singapore (1963), the investigation
into conduct of Judges of Supreme Court is entrusted to Judges.  Part VIII of
the Constitution deals with Judiciary.  Art 98(2) of the Constitution states
that a Judge of the Supreme Court may resign but shall not be removed from
office except in accordance with clauses (3), (4), (5) of Art 98.
Art 98(3) to (5) read as follows:
“98(3):  If the Prime Minister, or the Chief Justice after consulting the
Prime Minister, represents to the President that a Judge of the
Supreme  Court  ought  to  be  removed  on  the  ground  of
misbehavior or of inability, from infirmity of body or mind or
any other cause, to properly discharge the functions of his office,
the President shall appoint a tribunal in accordance with clause
(4)  and  shall  refer  that  representation  to  it;  and  may on  the
recommendation of the tribunal remove the Judge from office.
239

(4) The tribunal shall consist of not less than 5 persons who hold or
have  held  office  as  a  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court,  or,  if  it
appears to the President expedient to make such an appointment,
persons who hold or have held equivalent office in any part of
the Commonwealth, and the tribunal shall be presided over by
the  member  first  in  the  following  order,  namely,  the  Chief
Justice  according  to  their  precedence  among  themselves  and
other members according to the order of their appointment to an
office qualifying them for membership (the older coming before
the younger  of two  members  with  appointments  of the same
date).
(5) Pending any reference and report under clause (3), the President
may,  if  he,  acting  in  his  discretion,  concurs  with  the
recommendation of the Prime Minister and, in case of any other
Judge, after consulting the Chief Justice, suspend a Judge of the
Supreme Court from the exercise of his functions.”
NEW ZEALAND:
 New Zealand Constitution (Part 4, Art.23) says that Judges shall not
be removed except by the Sovereign or the Governor-General, acting upon an
address  of  the  House  of  Republic  on  the  ground  of  ‘misbehavior’  or
‘incapacity’ to discharge functions of the office.
240

  In  New  Zealand,  the  Parliament  passed  the  Judicial  Conduct
Commissioner and Judicial Conduct Panel Act, 2004.
Section 4 of the Act states that the purpose of the Act is to enhance
public confidence in, and  to protect the impartiality and  integrity of, the
judicial  system by (a)  providing  a  robust  investigation  process  to  enable
informal decisions to be made about the removal of Judges from office, (b)
establishing an office for the receipt and assessment of complaints about the
conduct  of  judges,  and  (c)  providing  a  fair  process  that  recognises  and
protects the requirements of the judicial independence and natural justice.
Section 5 defines  a “Judge” as Judge of the Supreme Court or Judge of
the Court of Appeal or Judge or an Associate Judge of the High Court or
District Judge etc.  It includes a person who holds office as a temporary
Judge, temporary Associate Judge or acting Judge, but does not include a
retired Judge or a former Judge.
The  Act  provides  for  the  appointment  of  a  Judicial  Conduct
Commissioner under sec 7 and for a Judicial Conduct Panel under sec 21(1).
Section  7  states  that  the  Commissioner  will  be  appointed  by  the
Attorney General in consultation with the Chief Justice.  Section 8 defines
the  functions  and  powers  of  the  Commissioner  and  states  that  the
Commissioner shall receive complaints about Judges and will deal with them
241

in  the  manner  required  by  the  Act.   He  will  conduct  the  preliminary
examination of  complaints  and,  in  appropriate  cases,  recommend  that  a
Judicial Conduct Panel be appointed to inquire into any matter or matters
concerning the conduct of a Judge.  It states that it is not the function of the
Commissioner to challenge or call into question the legality or correctness of
any instruction, direction, order, judgment or other decision given or made by
a Judge in relation to any legal proceedings.  The Commissioner shall have
all powers necessary for carrying out his or her functions.  Section 9 states
that the Commissioner must act independently.  
Section 11(1) states that the complaint may relate to the conduct of a
Judge relating to exercise of judicial duties or otherwise or may relate to a
criminal offence, whether or not dealt with or is being dealt with by a court.
The Commissioner must deal with a complaint (a) taking the steps set out in
sec 14, (b) conduct a preliminary examination under sec 15, and (c) take
other appropriate steps set out in sections 16 to 19.  The section is subject to
sec 34.
Section  14  states  that  the  Commissioner  must  acknowledge  the
complaints and deal with them promptly without delay.  He has to send a
copy to the concerned Judge about whom the complaint is made.  He has also
to consult the relevant Head of the Bench.  “Head of the Bench” is defined in
sec 5 as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the President of the Court of
Appeal or Chief District Court Judge etc.  If the Commissioner is satisfied,
242

after such consultations, that the matter is being or will be dealt with by a
court or there is any other good reason, the Commissioner may defer dealing
with  the  complaint.   Under  sec  15  the  Commissioner  must  conduct  a
preliminary examination and form an opinion as to whether the complaint, if
proved, warrants consideration of the removal of the Judge or if there are any
grounds for dismissing the complaint under sec 16(1).  In the course of the
preliminary examination, the Commissioner  may seek the response of the
Judge.  The Commissioner must act in accordance with principles of natural
justice.  He  may  make  inquiries  which  are  appropriate,  obtain  court
documents that are relevant or consult the Head of the Bench.  Thereafter, he
may form his opinion and either dismiss the complaint as stated in sec 16 or
he may refer the complaint to the Head of the Bench as stated in sec 17 or
may recommend that the Attorney General appoint a Judicial Conduct Panel
to inquire into any matter or matters concerning the conduct of a Judge as
stated in sec 18.
Before we go to other sections, it will be necessary to refer to sec 12
which refers to the complainant.  A complaint may be by any person or may
be by the Attorney General or the Commissioner may  on his or her own
initiative, treat as a complaint any matter or matters concerning the conduct
of a Judge.  Section 13 deals with the manner in which a complaint has to be
made to the Commissioner.  It should be in writing.  It should identify the
judge,  and  the  complainant  must  identify  himself  and  he  must  state  the
243

subject  matter  of  the  complaint.   The  Commissioner  may  require  a
complainant to fill up a statutory declaration form.
We shall now refer to sections  16  to 19.  The Commissioner may
dismiss a complaint that fails to meet the required threshold.  The conditions
for dismissal are where the complaint is not within the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner or has no bearing on the Judge’s  judicial functions or his
judicial duties or where the requirements of sections 12 and 13 have not been
complied with or the complaint is frivolous, vexatious or not in good faith or
the subject matter of the complaint is  trivial or the complaint is about a
judicial decision or other judicial function or the person complained of is no
longer a Judge or the complaint was already considered by the Head of the
Bench or where the Commissioner has previously considered the same and
there are no grounds for taking any steps under sec 17 or 18.
Where the Commissioner dismisses a complaint he must inform the
complainant along with the grounds on which the dismissal is based.
The Commissioner may refer complaints to the Head of the Bench (i.e.
Chief Justice) under sec 17 where either a complaint is not dismissed by him
or where he considers that it is not a fit case for referring the complaint to the
Judicial Conduct Panel, i.e. where some corrective measures can be taken by
the Head of the Bench.  Where the Commissioner refers the complaint to the
Head of the Bench, he must inform the complainant about such a reference.
244

Section 18 is important and deals with the Commissioner’s power to
recommend that the Attorney General appoint a Judicial Conduct Panel.  This
section states that he will so recommend where he thinks that such an inquiry
by the  Panel  is  necessary  or  justified  and  where  the  alleged  conduct,  if
established,  may  warrant  consideration  of  removal  of  the  Judge.   The
Commissioner  must  give reasons for  the  recommendation  and  must
communicate the same to the complainant.
Sections 19 relates to the Commissioner’s duty of confidentiality in the
preliminary inquiry aforesaid.
Section 20 states that while the Commissioner recommends that the
panel be appointed, he must make the files available to the Attorney General
and the special counsel.
Section 21 enables the Attorney General to appoint a Judicial Conduct
Panel (It would mean that under the New Zealand Act, the Panel is not a
permanent  Panel  but  is  constituted  in  relation  to  each  case).   Before
appointing the Panel, the Attorney General must consult the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court whether a Panel should be appointed.
Section 24 refers to the functions of the Panel which reads as follows:
245

“(1) A Judicial Conduct Panel must inquire into, and report on, the
matter or matters of judicial conduct referred to it by the Attorney-
General on the recommendation of the Commissioner.
(2) The Panel must conduct  a hearing into the matter or matters
referred to it by the Attorney-General.
(3) The Panel may also inquire into, and report on, any other matters
concerning the conduct of the Judge that arise in the course of its
dealing with the referral from the Attorney-General.
(4) The Panel must give the Attorney General a report in accordance
with section 32.
Section  26  refers  to the powers  of the Panel while  conducting  the
hearing and inquiry and reads as follows:
“(1) For the purpose of performing its functions and duties, a Judicial
Conduct Panel has and may exercise the same powers as are conferred
on  Commissions  of  Inquiry  by  sections  4  and  4B  to  8  of  the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1908.
(2) Sections 4 and 4B to 9 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1908
apply to all persons involved in any capacity in any hearing or inquiry
under this section as if it were an inquiry conducted by a Commission
under that Act.
(3) The Panel must act in accordance with the principles of natural
justice.
246

Sections 27 states that the judge concerned is entitled to appear and be
heard at the hearing and be represented by counsel.  The reasonable costs of
such  representation  by  counsel  must  be  met  by  the  office  of  the
Commissioner. The special Counsel appointed under sec 28 is entitled to
appear and be heard at the hearing.  Any other person may be permitted to
appear personally or through counsel.
Section 28 deals with the appointment of “special counsel” during the
inquiry and such counsel must present allegations about the conduct of the
judge and make submissions on questions of procedure or law.  The special
counsel must perform duties impartially and in public interest.
Section  29  provides  that  the  Panel  must  hear  the  matter  in  public
unless it is of the view that in the interest of the person and also in public
interest that it should be heard in private.
Section 30 imposes  restrictions on publication and is quite important
and reads as follows:
“(1) If a Judicial Conduct Panel is of the opinion that it is proper to
do so, having regard to the interest of any person (including, without
limitation, the privacy of the complainant) and to the public interest,
the Panel may make any one or more of the following orders:
247

(a) an  order  prohibiting  the  publication  of  any  report  or
account of any part of the proceedings before the Panel, whether
held in public or in private:
(b) an order prohibiting the publication of the whole or any
part  of  any  books,  papers,  or  documents  produced  at  any
hearing:
(c) an order prohibiting the publication of the name or any
particulars of the affairs of the Judge concerned or any other
person.
(2) An order made under subsection (1) continues in force –
(a) until the time specified in the order; or
(b) if no time is specified in the order, until revoked under
subsection (3) or section 31.
(3) Any person  may, at  any time, apply to  a Panel  for an  order
revoking,  on  whole  or  in  part,  an  order  made  by  it  under
subsection (1), and the Panel may grant or refuse the application
as the Panel thinks fit.
(4) If a person is unable to apply to the Panel for an order under
subsection  (3) because  the  Panel  has  ceased  to  function,  the
person may apply to the Court of Appeal for an order revoking,
in whole or in part, an order made by the Panel under subsection
(1).
248

(5) A person commits an offence if he or she acts in contravention
of any order made under this section by a Panel.
(6) A  person  who  commits  an  offence  against  subsection  (5)  is
liable on summary conviction,-
(a) in  the  case  of  an  individual,  to  a  fine  not  exceeding
$3,000:
(b) in the case of a body corporate, to a fine not exceeding
$10,000.
Section 31 permits appeals to the  Court of Appeal against orders of
the Panel under sec 29 during the course of the hearing or orders made in
regard to publication under sec 30.
The Panel as provided in sec 32 shall submit its report to the Attorney
General  with its  findings  of fact  and  as  to  whether the  Judge has  to be
removed from his office along with its reasons.
Section  33  grants  a  discretion to  the  Attorney  General  to  initiate
removal of the Judge on receipt of the report and reads as follows:
“(1) If a Judicial Conduct Panel concludes that consideration of the
removal of a Judge is justified, the Attorney-General must determine,
at his or her absolute discretion, whether to take steps to initiate the
removal of that Judge from office.
249

(2) A  Judge  must  not  be  removed  from office  unless  a  Judicial
Conduct Panel has reported to the Attorney-General that it is of the
opinion that consideration of the removal of he Judge is justified.
Section 34 gives independent power to the Attorney-General to take
action  if  a  Judge  is  convicted  of  a  serious  offence  punishable  for
imprisonment for two or more years.
Section 35 amends the Official Information Act, 1982 and states that
“Official Information” does not include any evidence, submissions, or other
information given or made to the Judicial Conduct Commissioner or Judicial
Conduct Panel or the Judicial complainant’s Lay Observer.
ISRAEL
In Israel also, the Court of Discipline consists only of Judges, sitting or
retired.  In Israel the Basic law, Chapter II deals with the Judiciary.  Section 7
states that the tenure of a judge shall begin upon his declaration of allegiance
and shall end only on:-
(1) upon retirement on pension; or
(2) upon his resignation; or
(3) upon  his  being  elected  or appointed  to one  of the positions  the
holders  of  which  are  debarred  from  being  candidates  for  the
Knesset; or 
250

(4) upon a decision of the Judges’ Election Committee prepared by the
Chairman of the Committee or the President of the Supreme Court
and passed by a majority of at least seven members; or
(5) upon a decision of the Court of Discipline.
The  Judges  of  Israel  cannot  be  removed  from  office  except  by  a
decision of the Court of Discipline, consisting of judges appointed by the
President of the Supreme Court.
Section  13  of  the  Constitution  which  deals  with  disciplinary
proceedings reads as follows:-
“13. (a)  A judge shall be subject to the jurisdiction of a Court of
Discipline.
(b) A Court of Discipline shall consist of judges and judges retired on
pension appointed by the President of the Supreme Court.
(c)  Provisions  as  to  the  grounds  for  instituting  disciplinary
proceedings, the modes of filing complaints, the composition of the
bench,  the  powers  of  the  Court  of  Discipline  and  the  disciplinary
measures it shall be authorized to impose shall be prescribed by Law.
The rules of procedure shall be in accordance with Law.
Section 14 provides for suspension of a judge which reads as follows:-
251

“14. Where a complaint or information is filed against a judge, the
President of the Supreme Court may suspend him from office for such
period as he may prescribe.”
ZAMBIA
In Zambia too, the disciplinary Jurisdiction against Judges is granted to
Judges  only.   The  Constitution  of  Zambia  1991  as  amended  by  the
Constitution (Amendment) Act of 1996 deals with the Judiciary in Part VI.
Section 91 deals with the classification of the courts, namely, the Supreme
Court of Zambia, the High Court of Zambia, the Industrial Relations Court,
the subordinate courts and the local courts.  The disciplinary procedure, the
tenure of the Judges are referred to in article 98.  Article 98(1) says that a
person holding office of a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Judge of a High
Court shall vacate office on attaining the age of 65 years.  Sub-section (2) of
section 98 states that a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court may be
removed from office only for inability to perform the functions  of office
whether arising from infirmity of body or his incompetence or misbehaviour
and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this
article.  Section 98(3) reads as follows:-
“98(3).  If the President considers  that the question of removing a
Judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court under this article are
to be investigated, then –
252

(a) He shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a chairman and
not less than two other members who hold or have held high
judicial office;
(b) The tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts
thereof to the President  and advise the President whether the
Judge  are  to  be  removed  from  office  under  this  article  for
inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour.”
Thereafter, section 98(4) and (5) state as follows:-
“(4) Where a tribunal appointed under clause (3) advises the President
for a Judge  of the Supreme Court  or of the  High  Court  are  to be
removed from office for inability or incompetence or for misbehaviour,
the President shall remove such judge from office;
(5) If the question of removing a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the
High Court from office has been referred to a tribunal under clause (3),
the President may suspend the Judge from performing the functions of
his office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the
President and shall in case cease to have effect if the tribunal advises
the President that the Judge are to be removed from office.”
253

The Judicial (Code of Conduct) of 1999 of Zambia states in section 20
that there will be a complaints committee which shall consist of five members
who will or are qualified to hold high judicial office.
254

CHAPTER XIV
PROCEDURES IN BANGLADESH, PAKISTAN AND MALAYSIA :
BANGLADESH:
In Bangladesh, the Judicial Council which conducts inquiries against
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts consists of  Judges only and
not others.  Section 96 of the Constitution deals with the subject matter of
inquiries which is applicable to Judges of the Supreme Court as well as High
Courts.  This is clear from sec 94 which states that there shall be a Supreme
Court of Bangladesh, comprising of the  Appellate Division (i.e. Supreme
Court) and the High Court Division.  Clause (4) of Art 94 states that subject
to the provisions of the Constitution, the Chief Justice and other Judges shall
be independent in the exercise of their judicial functions.
According  to  sec  96  of  Bangladesh  Constitution,  a  Judge  of  the
Supreme Court shall hold office until he attains the age of 65 years.  He shall
not be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions of Art
96 subclauses (3) to (8).  These Articles provide for the constitution of a
Supreme  Judicial  Council which  shall  consist  of  the  Chief  Justice of
Bangladesh and the  two next senior Judges provided that if the inquiry is
against a Judge who is a member of the Council, then the next senior most
Judge shall act as a member.  The Council shall prescribe a Code of Conduct
255

to be observed by the Judges and shall also inquire into the capacity o2
conduct of a Judge or any other functionary who is not removable from office
except in like manner as a Judge.  Sub clause (5) provides that upon any
information  received  from  the  counsel  or  from  any  other  source,  if  the
President  has  reason  to  apprehend  that  a  Judge  may have  ceased  to  be
capable  of  properly  performing  the  functions  of  his  office  by  reason  of
physical or mental incapacity or that a Judge may have been guilty of gross
misconduct, the President may direct the Council to inquire into the nature
and report its findings.  Sub clause (6) states that if after the inquiry, the
Council reports to the President that in its opinion the Judge has ceased to be
capable of properly performing the functions of his office or has been guilty
of gross misconduct, the President shall remove the Judge from office.  Sub
clause (7) enables the Council, for the purpose of such an inquiry, to regulate
its procedure and shall have, in respect of issue and execution of processes he
same power as the Supreme Court.  Sub clause (8) permits a Judge to resign
in writing by letter addressed to the President.
Section 96 reads as follows:
“96.  Tenure of office of Judges
(1)Subject to the other provisions of this article, a Judge
shall  hold  office  until  he  attains  the  age  of  sixty-five
years.
256

(2)A Judge shall not be removed from office  except in
accordance with the following provisions of this article.
(3)There  shall  be  a  Supreme  Judicial  Council,  in  this
article referred to as the council, which shall consist of the
Chief  Justice  of  Bangladesh,  and  the  two  next  senior
Judges:
Provided that if, at any time the Counsel is inquiring into
the capacity or conduct of a Judge who is a member of the
Council, or a member of the Council is absent or is unable
to act due to illness o other cause, he Judge who is next in
seniority to those who are members of the Council shall
act as such member.
(4) The function of the Council shall be –
(a) to prescribe a Code of Conduct to be observed
by the Judges; and 
(b)  to  inquire  into  the  capacity  or  conduct  of  a
Judge  or  of  any other  functionary who  is  not
removable from office except in like manner as a
Judges.
(5) Where, upon any information received from the Council
or from any other source, the President has reason to apprehend
that a Judge:--
257

(a) may have ceased to be capable of properly performing the
functions  of  his  office  by  reason  of  physical  or  mental
incapacity, or
(b) may have been guilty of gross misconduct, the President
may direct the Council to inquire into the matter and report its
findings.
(6) If,  after  making  he  inquiry, the  Council  reports  to  the
President that in its opinion the Judge has ceased to be capable
of properly performing the functions of his office or has been
guilty of gross misconduct, the President shall, by order, remove
the Judge from office.
(7) For  the  purpose  of  an  inquiry  under  this  article,  the
Council shall regulate is procedure and shall have, in respect of
issue  and  execution  of  processes,  the  same  power  as  the
Supreme Court.
(8)A Judge may also resign his office by writing under his hand
addressed to the President.
It will be seen that in Bangladesh, the procedure for removal by address of
the Houses of Parliament to the President is not in existence and the only
procedure  for  ‘removal’  is  the  one  pursuant  to  recommendation  of  the
Judicial Council, which consists only of Judges.
PAKISTAN
258

According to the Constitution of Pakistan, there is a procedure for
inquiry into the inability or conduct of the Judges of the Supreme Court and
the High Courts and this procedure is contained in Art 209.  It is significant
that the Supreme Judicial Council which conducts these inquiries consists
only of Judges.  The basic procedure before the Council is also spelt out.
Article 209 to 211 read as follow:
“209 (1)  There shall be a Supreme Judicial Council of Pakistan, in
this Chapter referred to as the Council.
(2)  The Council shall consist of,
(a) the Chief Justice of Pakistan;
(b) the two next most senior Judges of the Supreme Court;
and
(c) the two most senior Chief Justices of High Courts
Explanation:-   For  the  purpose  of  this  clause,  the  inter  se
seniority  of  the  Chief  Justices  of  the  High  Courts  shall  be
determined with reference to their dates of appointment as Chief
Justice [otherwise than as acting Chief Justice], and in case the
dates of such appointment are the same, with reference to their
dates of appointment as Judges of any of the High  Courts.
(3) If at any time the Council is inquiring into the capacity or
conduct  of  a  Judge  who  is  a  member  of  the  Council,  or  a
259

member of the Council is absent or is unable to act due to illness
or any other cause, then
(a) if such member is a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Judge of
the Supreme Court who is next in seniority below the Judges
referred to in paragraph (b) of clause (2), and
(b) if such member is the Chief Justice of a High Court; the
Chief Justice of another High Court who is next in seniority
amongst the Chief Justices of the remaining High Courts, shall
act as a member of the Council in his place.
(4)  If, upon any matter inquired into by the Council, there is a
difference of opinion amongst its members, the opinion of the
majority shall  prevail,  and  the  report  of  the  Council  to  the
President shall be expressed in terms of the view of the majority.
(5)  If, on information [from any source, the Council or] the
President is of the opinion that a Judge of the Supreme Court or
of a High Court,
(a) may be incapable of properly performing the duties of his
office by reason of physical or mental incapacity; or
(b) may have been guilty of misconduct, the President shall
direct the Council to, [or the Council may, on its own motion,
inquire into the matter.
(6) If, after inquiring into the matter, the Council reports to
the President that it is of the opinion, 
260

(a) that the Judge is incapable of performing the duties of his
office or has been guilty of misconduct, and
(b) that he should be removed from office, the President may
remove the Judge from office.
(7) A Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court shall not
be removed from office except as provided by this Article.
(8) The Council shall issue a Code of Conduct to be observed
by Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts.
210 (1) For the purpose of inquiring into any matter, the Council
shall have the same power as the Supreme Court has to issue
directions or orders for securing the attendance of any person or
the  discovery or  production  of  any document;  and  any  such
direction or order shall be enforceable as if it had been issued by
the Supreme Court.
(2)  The provisions of Article 204 shall apply to the council as
they apply to the Supreme Court and a High Court.
211 The proceedings before the Council, its report to the President
and the removal of a Judge under clause (6) of Article 209 shall
not be called in question in any court.
It will be noted that, as in Bangladesh, the Constitution of Pakistan does not
provide for removal by address of the House to the President.  The only
261

procedure for removal is on the recommendation of the Judicial Council,
which consists only of Judges.
MALAYSIA:
Malaysian judges are accountable for their misconduct or inability to
perform the functions of their office.  They can be removed by the procedure
provided by Article 125 of the Malaysian Federal Constitution.  The Prime
Minister or the Chief Justice after consultation with the Prime Minister will
represent to the King that a particular judge should be removed.  A tribunal
will be set up to hear the representation and complaints against the judge.
This tribunal must consist of not less than five persons who hold or have held
office as a judge of the Federal Court or Court of Appeal or High Court or if
it appears to the King to be expedient, he could appoint such persons who
hold or have held equivalent office in any other of the Commonwealth.”
Thus all the members of the tribunal are or have been Judges.
Article  125  prescribes  that  judges  of  the  Federal  Court,  Court  of
Appeal  and  High  Court  may  be  removed  from  office  on  grounds  of
“misbehaviour” or if they cannot “properly discharge the function of their
office” because of their “inability, from infirmity of body or mind or any
other cause”.  “Misbehaviour” has been construed  as extending to conduct
outside the court.  Thus, there is in place a Constitutional mechanism for
removing  a  judge  who  has  misbehaved  or  is  incapacitated.   Inability  to
262

perform judicially for “any other cause” has been given a liberal construction.
The judiciary has recently introduced a Code of Ethics for judges to reinforce
this aspect of accountability.
In Malaysia, the procedure for removal by Address  is retained but the
inquiry is conduced by a tribunal consisting only of Judges and it makes
recommendation for ‘removal’.
In Malaysia, the conduct of a Judge cannot be discussed in any State
Parliamentary  assembly.   This  is  absolute.   In  Parliament  it  cannot  be
discussed in either House except on a substantive motion of not less than one
quarter  of  the  members  of  either  House.   Article  127  of  the  Federal
Constitution states:
“The conduct of a judge of a Federal Court, Court of Appeal or a High
Court shall not be discussed in either House of Parliament except on a
substantive motion of which notice has been given by not less than one
quarter of the total number of members of that House, and shall not be
discussed in the Parliamentary Assembly of any State.”
It has been stated in Malaysia that judges cannot be held accountable
for making wrong decisions.  There is no civil liability or penalties for wrong
decisions  made bona fide by judges.  In this regard section 14(1) of the
Courts of Judicature Act states:
263

“No judge or other person acting judicially shall be liable to be sued in
any civil court for any act done or ordered to be done by him in the
discharge of his judicial duty,  whether or not within the limits of is
jurisdiction,  nor  shall  any  order  for  costs  be  made  against  him,
provided that he at the time in good faith believed himself to have
jurisdiction to do or order the act complained of”.
This protection is essential to enable judges to decide fearlessly.  This
protection is only for civil liability and judges are still subject to the criminal
law of the land.  The section does not shield a judge for acts done outside the
court in the discharge of his judicial functions.  (See Judges and Judicial
Accountability, edited by Cyrus Das and closing address by Rt. Hon. Justice
Tan Sri Datak Steve Shim Lip Kiong, Chief Judge, Sabah and Sarawak).
264

CHAPTER XV
PROCEDURES IN UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
FEDERAL JUDGES
(1939,1980,2002 Acts)
United States of America – Judges of Federal Courts  :  
Federal Judges, according to Art. III of the US Constitution “hold their
offices  during  good  behaviour”.   Federal  Judges  are  also  accountable  as
provided in Art. II as civil officers of United States who could be removed
from office on impeachment for conviction of treason, bribery or other high
crimes and  misdemeanor.  The Constitution specifies only one method of
removal of a Federal Judge from office, namely by the impeachment process.
It may be that every type of conduct may not warrant impeachment.  Peer
influence has had a salutary effect on the conduct of brother judges. 
Before the statute of 1939, there is not much of case-law, but the case
of Justice Chase which went to the Senate in proceedings for impeachment
was unsuccessful and will be referred to in detail later. 
 
The 1939 Act:
265

A Bill was presented in 1937 to establish a court of three circuit Judges
who would “try district judges on charges of misbehaviour not included in, or
justified by charge of impeachment”.  Speaking for the bill in the House of
Representatives, Mr. Kitchens from Arkansas argued that a person taking the
appointment  of  a  Federal  Judge  agrees  to  hold  his  office  during  good
behaviour, but if he engages in behaviour which is not considered ‘good’, it
amounts  to  a breach of contract  and  could  result  in  removal  outside  the
impeachment procedure”.  
He further argued:
“It  seems  clear  that  the  question  of  ‘good  behaviour’…..  was  not
intended to be included in the words ‘treason, bribery or other high
crimes or misdemeanors’.  These words are not connected with, but are
exclusive of the causes for impeachment……  The terms ‘during good
behaviour’ do not reach the dignity of charges justifying impeachment.
This ‘behaviour’ clause is not in the impeachment article.  There are
those who would transpose this clause, erase it from Art III and insert
the same in Article II as a ground for impeachment.  This cannot be
done …….. The charges, as stated, in such a case must amount to
treason or bribery or high crimes and misdemeanors.  It seems clear
that there is a plain line of demarcation between a charge of breach of
contract  for  misbehaviour  and  a  charge  justifying  an  impeachment
proceeding.”
266

While  Mr.  Kitchens  presented  a  good  argument,  he  did  not  gain
enough support in the Congress to bring forward a law.  Impeachment still
remains the only method available for removal of a Judge sitting  on the
Federal Bench.  There has been also a debate whether there is a need for
conviction for “other high crimes and misdemeanour”. Further, the nature of
the crime in respect of which a Judge is convicted may also be of importance
in as much as if a Judge is convicted of a petty offence such as a traffic
violation,  it  is  unlikely  to  be  treated  as  good  enough  warranting
impeachment.  There are also situations where a Judge engages in conduct
that is not becoming of his position, but yet the actions may not be criminal.
A review of the history of impeachment proceedings in the Congress shows
that out of 15 cases that reached the trial stage in the Senate, 12 involved
Federal  Judges.   Some,  including  Justice  Chase  in  1805,  were  accused
because though their conduct was reprehensible, it was held not good enough
for impeachment.  Thus historically in some cases the US Congress did not
consider the constitutional requirement of good behaviour and high crimes
and misdemeanor as being conjoined.  The question naturally arose as to how
to deal with behaviour which was not good for impeachment but which was
not a crime or a impeachable offence.  It was noticed that the impeachments
were in fact intended to act as a check primarily on the executive rather than
on the judiciary.  “If good behaviour is not the complete converse of high
crimes  and  misdemeanor”  then  a  constitutional  category  of  “not  good”
behaviour  must  apply  to  Judges  not  subject  to  impeachment.   The
267

cumbersome impeachment process will not be effective on the case of  minor
offences.
Judicial Councils of the Circuit were finally brought into being by an
Act 53 stat 1223 of August 7, 1939 (Title 28 USC 332) which was titled “An
act  to  provide  for  the  Administration  of  the  US  Courts  and  for  other
purposes”.  The major purpose of the Act was to free the Federal Courts from
their previous reliance on the Judicial Department in budgetary matters and
to  furnish  to  the  Federal  Courts,  the  administrative  machinery  for  self
improvement, through which those courts would be able to scrutinize their
own work and develop efficiency and promptness in their administration of
justice.  For that purpose, the Act established the Administrative Office of US
Courts.  The Act further established two new bodies in each of the judicial
circuits; the Judicial Council, consisting of all the active circuit judges and
the Judicial Conference, consisting of the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme
Court and Judge of the circuit and district judges along with participating
members of the Bar.  The functions of the Council were to consider the
reports of the district administrative office and take such action as might be
necessary.  The purpose of the Judicial Conference was to meet annually to
consider the state of the business of the Courts and advise ways and means of
improving the administration.
During the debate when the 1939 Act was introduced, Chief Justice
Groner  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  who  was
268

chairman of the committee of circuit judges, pointed out that prior to the
1939  statute, the circuit judges had no authority to require a district judge to
speed up his work or to admonish him or to take any other action, but under
the proposed Act, the Administrative Office could bring to the notice of the
Judicial Council any thing that was wrong in the administration of justice.
Under the 1939 Act the Judicial Council was given authority for continuous
supervision of the work of the District Courts.  The Bill which preceded the
1939 Act was to allow compiling of information and provide a legal method
by which, if necessary, the courts may clean their own house.  
The Act thus established Circuit Judicial Councils through which the
Courts of Appeal Judges would review the case load reports of the newly
established Administrative Office of the US Courts and instruct Judges on
what was necessary to do to expedite the Courts’ business.  It also mandated
annual circuit conferences at which circuit and district judges would meet
with members of the bar to discuss judicial administration.  Sec 306 of the
Act stated:
“Sec 306. To the end that the work of the district Courts shall be
effectively and expeditiously transacted, it  shall be the duty of the
senior circuit Judge of each circuit to call at such time and place as he
shall designate, but at least twice in each year, a Council composed of
circuit Judges for such circuit, who are hereby designated a Council for
that purpose, at which Council the senior circuit Judge shall preside.
269

The same Judge shall submit to the Council quarterly reports of the
Director required to be filed by the provisions of section 304, clause
(3), and such action shall be taken thereon by the Council as may be
necessary.  It shall be the duty of the district judges promptly to carry
out  the  directions  of  the  Council as  to  the  administration  of  the
business of their respective Courts.”
Section 307 said that the Conference may advise ‘ways and means of
improving the administration of justice within the circuit’.
Section 332 of the 1939 Act (28 USC 332) (as quoted in  Chandlers’
case 1970) reads as follows:
“Section 332.  Judicial Councils:  The Chief Judge of each circuit shall
call, a least twice in each year and at such places as he may designate,
a council of the circuit Judges for the circuit, in regular active service,
at which he shall preside.  Each circuit Judge, unless excused by the
Chief Judge, shall attend all sessions of the Council.  The Council shall
be known as the Judicial Council of the Circuit.  ‘The Chief Judge
shall submit to the Council the quarterly reports of the Director of the
Administrative Office of he United States Courts.  The Council shall
take such action thereon as may be necessary.  The Judicial Council
shall  make  all  necessary order  for  the  effective  and  expeditious
administration of the business of the Courts within its circuit.  The
270

district Judges shall promptly carry into effect   all the orders of the
Judicial Council’.
It  will  be  seen  that  the  Judicial  Councils  of  the  Circuits  were
established  by  an  Act  of  7th August  1939  (28  USC  332)  for  “self-
improvement, through which those Courts will be able to scrutinize their own
work  and  develop  efficiency  and  promptness  in  their  administration  of
justice”.  The Bill was intended to see that ‘the Courts may clean their own
house’.
The  Act  did  not  expressly  refer  to  any  ‘minor  measures’  that  the
Judicial Council might resort to against the Judges.  But, the general powers
given to the Courts implied taking various minor measures.  That indeed
happened in Chandlers’ case.
(1970) Chandler’s case under 1939 Act: Non-listing of Cases
(1970) 398. US 74:
Under the 1939 Act, a question arose in Chandler vs. Judicial Council
as to whether a lesser measure imposed by the Council, namely, non listing
new cases before the Judge and “depriving him of both pending and future
cases” was constitutional.  The majority speaking through Burger CJ, did not
decide the question whether the 1939 statute in so far as it was general and
impliedly permitted lesser measures – like not allocating fresh cases – was
271

constitutional or not.  They simply refused to intervene stating it was not a fit
case for deciding the issues. 
Harlan  J,  however,  wrote  a  detailed  judgment  giving  exhaustive
reasons upholding the 1939 statute under which the Judicial Council was
imposing lesser measures to be imposed.  He said that the procedure under
the  1939  Act  provided  for  Intra-Judiciary  supervision  and  that  lesser
measures other than removal were not prohibited by the Constitution.  He
held that the statute was one which enabled the judiciary to set its own house
in order, and that non-listing of fresh cases did not amount to ‘removal’.
(Douglas & Black JJ dissented).
Justice Harlan after tracing the history of the Judicial Councils under
the 1939 Act, w.e.f. August 7, 1939 observed that the Judicial Council acted
as a ‘judicial’ Tribunal.  He quoted elaborately from the speech of Chief
Justice Groner of the Court of Appeal for the District of Colombia, who was
the Chairman of the Committee of Circuits, who participated in the drafting
of the Bill which preceded the 1939 Act.  He said that the architect of the
Judicial Council, Chief Justice Groner regarded the authority granted to the
Councils  was  closely  bound  up  with  the  process  of  the  judges  judging
themselves.  Judge Groner explained that under the existing law, (i.e. prior to
1939), the Circuit Judges had “no authority to require a distinct Judge to
speed up his work or to admonish him that he is not bearing the full and fair
burden that he is not expected to bear, or to take action as to any other matter
272

which is the subject of criticism… for which he may be responsible.”  As to
the kind of action a Judicial Council might be expected to take under the
1939 Act, Judge Groner stated that where there were arrears in a District, the
Judicial  Council  would  see  to  it,  either  that  the  particular  Judge  who  is
behind his work catches up with his work, or that assistance is given to him
whereby the work may be made current”.  If it appeared that a particular
Judge “has been sick for 4 or 5 months and had been unable to hold any
court, or had been unable, by reason of one thing or another, to transact any
business…, immediate action could be taken to correct that situation.’  The
discussion of the Council would be ‘final’.  Judge Parker, it appears stated
that if a Judge did not deliver judgment for 2 years, then under the 1939 Act,
the Council could correct him.
According to Harlan J, the Act of 1939, in short, proposes to fill up the
hiatus that existed in the law so that corrective action could be taken short of
recommending removal’.  He said:
“This Parliamentary history lends support to a conclusion that, at least
in the issuance of orders to district judges to regulate the exercise of
their official duties, the Judicial Council acts as a Judicial tribunal for
purposes of this Court’s appellate jurisdiction under Art III…. Any
problems unearthed by the Director’s studies were to be “corrected by
the Courts themselves.”
273

The House Report, Harlan J pointed out, shows that several speakers
stated  that  “the  corrective  power  would  be  exercised  by  the  Courts
themselves.  The Report quoted the endorsement of the Bill by the American
Judicature Society that “there is no way to fortify judicial independence equal
to  that  of  enabling  the  Judges  to  perform  their  work  under  judicial
supervision.”  It is a judicial power, “one to be entrusted  only to a judicial
body”. 
Harlan J observed: “Because the Parliamentary history shows Congress
intended the Councils to act as Judicial bodies in supervising the district
Judges, there is no need to decide whether placement of this authority in a
non-judicial body would violate the constitutional  separation of powers, as
Chief Justice Groner seems to have believed.  It is sufficient to conclude from
reason and analogy that this responsibility is of such a nature that it may be
placed in the hands of Art III Judges to be exercised as a Judicial function.
It is clear that Justice Groner was definitely of opinion that entrusting
such  supervision  to  a  non-judicial  body would  offend  the  principle  of
separation of powers.  In fact, he said that the Director of the Administration
office created under the 1939 Act would gather statistics of arrears etc. would
have no power to issue any directives to the District Judges.  That power is
vested only in the Judicial Councils.
He observed as follows:
274

“For these reasons, I would conclude that the actions challenged by
Judge Chandler sufficiently affect matters within this court’s appellate
jurisdiction to bring his application for an extraordinary writ within our
authority under sec. 1651(a) and that his charges, if sustained, would
present an appropriate occasion for the issuance of such a writ.
In the present posture of this case, Judge Chandler, in my opinion, is
not entitled to the relief he seeks.  The order of December 13, 1965
which prompted his recourse to this court, has been superseded by the
order of February 4, 1966, which I am satisfied is entirely within the
authority of the Council.  I am wholly unable to regard the latter order
either as a “removal” of Judge Chandler from judicial office, or as
anything  other  than  an  effort  to  move  along  judicial  traffic  in  the
District Court.  In this state of affairs, I can find  no room for the
constitutional argument so vigorously made by my Brothers Black and
Douglas.”
Harlan J further observed as follows:
“Throughout  Judge  Chandler’s  briefs,  and  in  the  dissents  of  my
Brothers  Black  and  Douglas,  there  are  strong  assertions  of  the
importance of an independent federal judiciary.  I fully agree that this
principle  holds  a  profoundly  important  place  in  our  scheme  of
government.  However, I can discern no incursion on that principle in
275

the legislation creating the Judicial Councils and empowering them to
supervise the work of the district courts, in order to ensure the effective
and expeditious handling of their business.  The February 4 Order,
entered pursuant to this statutory authority, is a supportable exercise of
the Council’s responsibility to oversee the administration of federal
justice.”
However, Douglas and Black JJ dissented.  But, in view of the opinion of the
majority, the appeal was dismissed.
The 1980 Act
 The 1939 Act was  replaced  by the  Judicial  Councils  Reform and
Judicial Conduct and  Disability Act 1980 (title 28 USC 372 (c).  This Act
was intended to ‘provide a simple and clear procedure for the resolution of
alleged disability or misconduct of a Federal Judge’.  The Act is grounded on
the principle of self determination.  Congress sought to devise a ‘fair and
proper procedure whereby the Judicial branch can keep its own house in
order (S. Rep. No. 362, 96th Congress, (1st session, 2, 11 (1979).  The Senate
Report stated that the Act was intended to reach
“wilful misconduct in office, habitual interference, and other conduct
prejudicial to the administration of justice that brings the judicial office
into disrepute’.
276

  The 1980 Act contained sec 28 USC 372(c)(6)(b) states that the
Judicial Council may take:
“such action as is appropriate to assure the effective and expeditious
administration of the business of the Courts within the circuit”.
The 1980 Act does not apply to the Judges of the US Supreme Court.  It
applies  only to Judges  of the  District  Courts  and  the  Appellate  (Circuit)
Courts in federal system or a bankruptcy Court Judge, or a magistrate.
The Judicial Council of the Circuit Court consists of (1) the Chief
Judge of the Court of Appeals for the Circuit (2) upto seven appellate Court
Judges in active service (chosen by seniority by majority vote of all such
Judges) and (3) an equal number of district Court Judges of the  Circuit in
active service (chosen by seniority).
Section  372(c)(1)  authorizes  “any  person  alleging  that  any  federal
Judge “has engaged in conduct prejudicial to the effective and expeditious
administration  of  business  of  the  Courts”  or  alleging  that  such  Judge  is
“unable to discharge all the duties of office by reason of mental or physical
disability” to complain in writing through the office of the clerk of the Court
of Appeals of the circuit in which the Judge sits.
277

Under sec  372(c)(3)A,  a complaint  can  be  dismissed  by the  Chief
Judge of the Circuit if it is frivolous or it ‘directly related to the merits of a
decision or procedural ruling’.  Under sec 372(c)(3)(B), the Chief Judge may
also conclude the proceeding if he finds that corrective action has been taken
or that intervening events have made the complaint infructuous.  Otherwise,
sec 372(c)(4)(A) directs the Chief Judge to convene a special committee,
comprising the Chief Judge himself and equal number of circuit and district
Judges, to “investigate the facts and allegations contained in the complaint”.
The special committee is empowered by sec 372(c)(5) to ‘conduct an
investigation as extensive as it considers necessary” and at the conclusion of
the  investigation,  the  special  committee  “shall  expeditiously  file  a
comprehensive written report” with the Judicial Council of the Circuit.  The
section says that the report presents the findings of the investigation and the
special committees recommendations for ‘necessary and appropriate action’
by the Judicial Council.
Following  receipt  of  the  special  committee’s  report,  the  Judicial
Council may conduct additional investigation which it considers necessary
[(sec  372(1)(6)(A)].   Under  sec  372(c)(6)(C),  if  the  Judicial  Council
determines that no action is required, it may dismiss the complaint under sec
372(1)(6)(B).  otherwise, it may take ‘such action as is appropriate to assure
the  effective and expeditious administration of the business of the Courts
within the circuit.”
278

Under section 372 (c)(B)(iii) to vii), the Council may certify disability
or take action including 
(i) a request to the Judge to voluntarily retire; 
(ii) censure or reprimand the Judge, either privately or publicly; 
(iii) order that the Judge not be assigned further cases, but only ‘on a
temporary basis for a time certain; or 
(iv)  order  ‘such  other  action  as  it  considers  appropriate  under  the
circumstances”.
‘Privately means by private communication.  The name of the complainant
and the name of the Judge is not published.  But the nature of misbehaviour
and the nature of the measure imposed can be published.
‘Publicly’ means that there will be a public announcement referring to
the name of the complaint and the name of the Judge, along with nature of
complaint and the nature of the measure imposed.
Alternatively, under sec 372(c)(7)(A), the Judicial Council may refer
the complaint together with the record and recommendations for appropriate
action  to  the  Judicial  Conference,  i.e.  where  the  allegations  proved  may
require ‘removal’ by impeachment.  Under sec 372(c)(8)(A), in the event of
such  referral,  the  Judicial  Conference  may  conduct  ‘such  additional
279

investigation as it considers appropriate’ and may take the same remedial
steps available to the Judicial Council.
Section  372(c)(6)(B)(vii)(I)  &  372(c)(8)(A)  expressly  prohibit  the
Judicial Council or Judicial Conference from passing an order of ‘removal’.
Under sec 372(c)(B)(i), if a Judicial Council determines that an Art III
Judge ‘may have engaged in conduct’ that ‘might constitute one or more
grounds  for  impeachment;  the  Council  is  required  to  certify  that
determination to the Judicial Conference.
Under  sec  372(c)(8)(A),  if  the  Judicial  Conference  concurs  in  the
Judicial Council’s determination, or makes such a determination itself, it is
directed  to  transmit  the  determination  and  record  to  the  House  of
Representatives, which may take ‘whatever action it considers necessary’.
National Commission on Judicial Discipline and Removal (1993):
In 1990, the National Commission on Judicial Discipline and Removal
was appointed to examine the working of the 1980 Act.  The Commission
started its work in January 1992 and gave an elaborate report (running into
200 pages), after a large consultation process.  It made recommendations for
changes in the 1980 Act.  On that basis, the 1980 Act was replaced by the Act
of 2002.
280

The Judicial Improvements Act, 2002 ( U.S.C. 351 to 364). 
      This Act of 2002 came into being as  a result of the Report of National
Commission on Judicial Discipline and Removal (1993) and replaced the
1980 Act.  The Act authorises the Judicial Council to take
“ such action as is appropriate to assure the effective and expeditious
administration of branches of the courts within the circuit”  
(The 2002 Act does not also apply to the Judges of the American Supreme
Court.  It applies to the District Judges and the appellate Circuit Court Judges
in the federal system).
Section 354(a)(1)(C) states that the Judicial Council, if the complaint is not
dismissed, shall take ‘such action as is appropriate to assure the effective and
expeditious administration of the branches of the courts “ within the circuit
section 354(a)(2) bears the title, “ description of possible action if complaint
is not dismissed”.  It provides as follows; 
(A) In general   , - Action by the Judicial Counsel under paragraph (1)(C)
may include -  
281

(i )  ordering that, on a temporary basis for a certain time, no further
cases  be  assigned  to  the  Judge  whose  conduct  is  the  subject  of a
complaint. 
(ii) censuring and reprimanding such Judge by meaans of a private
communication; and 
(iii) censuring or reprimanding   such Judge by means of a public
announcement.”  
(B) For Article III Judges:      If the conduct of a Judge appointed to hold
office  during good behaviour is the subject of the complaint, action by
the Judicial Councils under paragraph (1)(C) may include- 
i) Certifying disability of the judge pursuant to the procedures and
standards provided under section 372(b); and 
ii) requesting the Judge voluntarily retire, with the provision that
the length of service requirements under sec. 371 of this title
shall not apply. 
(C) For magistrate Judges:……………………….”  
So far as ‘removal’ is concerned, Sec.354(3) does not permit the Judicial
Council to order ‘removal’ an Art. III Judge but it has to refer to the
282

Judicial Conference (which is a superior body) to remove an Art III Judge
under Sec. 354(b)(2) if is of the view that Judge appointed to hold office
during good behavour may have engaged in conduct – 
(A) which might constitute one or more grounds for  impeachment
under Art II of the Constitution, or 
(B) which, in the interest of justice, is not amendable to resolution by
the Judicial Council”
Section  355(b)(1)  provides  for  action  by  the  superior  body,  namely,  the
Judicial Conference, “ if impeachment is warranted” where it agrees with the
Judicial council to that effect.  Its opinion will then be transmitted to the
House of Representatives for whatever action the House of Representatives
considers to be necessary.”
Section  355(2)  provides  that  in  case  of  ‘felony  conviction’,  the  Judicial
Conference  may  vote  by  majority,  “  for  whatever  action  the  House  of
Representatives considers necessary”  
The Act of 2002 makes special provision in Sec. 353(b) to cover ‘change in
status or death of Judges in the special committee where a Judge is elevated
or dies or retires.  It states that “ Judge appointed to a special committee
under sub  section  (a) may continue  to serve  on  that committee  after  the
becoming a senior Judge or in the case of the Chief Judge of the Circuit after
283

his or her turn as  Chief Judge terminates under subsection (a)(3) or (c) of
section 45.  If a Judge appointed to a Committee dies, or  retires from office
under Sec. 371(a) while serving on the committee, the Chief Judge of the
Circuit may appoint another Circuit or district Judge, as the case may be, to
the committee”  
These are the provisions of the Act of 2002, presently in force.
284

CHAPTER XVI
THREE IMPORTANT ISSUES DECIDED BY U.S. FEDERAL
JUDICIARY
       There are three important Constitutional issues which have been decided
by the American Federal Judiciary.  They are as follows:  
(A) For imposition of “minor measures” by the Judicial Council, no
amendment of the U.S. Federal Constitution is necessary.  “Minor
corrective measures” can be taken by the Judicial Branch as part of
In-House procedure as per the 1939 and the 1980 Statutes.  The
said principles laid down under the 1980 Act equally applies to the
Statute of 2002 which replaced the 1980 Statute.
(B) The manner in which a case has been decided by Judge on merits
cannot be the subject matter of an impeachment proceeding. This
principle  can  be  drawn  from  the  failure  of  the  impeachment
proceedings against Justice Chase in 1805. 
(C) Once the impeachment is successful in the Senate, it cannot be
challenged  by  the  Judge  concerned,  before  the  U.S.  Supreme
Court.  This was so decided in the case of Justice Nixon. 
We shall now deal with these three aspects one after the other.  
285

(A) Whether “minor measures” can be imposed by the Judicial Councils  
without an amendment  to the Federal Constitution?  (See also Chapter
XX).
     
The American Federal Courts, in a series of Judgments have held that
the Act  of 1980 by which the Judicial Councils are constituted to inquire into
‘misbehavior’ for the purpose of (a) imposing   ‘minor measures’ like request
for  retirement,  withdrawal  of  cases,  public  or  private  censure  etc  or  (b)
recommending   to   the  Judicial  Conference  of  United  States  to  propose
impeachment, is constitutionally valid.  
Their reasoning is that, though minor measures are not specifically
referred  to in the Federal Constitution still,  no such express  provision  is
necessary in as much as the Judicial Branch has general or inherent power to
impose  minor  measures  of  internal  corrective  mechanisms.  The  Judicial
Council  is  one  such  mechanism.   However,  where  the  Judicial  Council
considers that ‘removal’ by impeachment is the proper punishment in a given
case, it cannot pass final orders of ‘removal’ but has to recommend to the
higher body, namely, the Judicial Conference of United States to propose
‘removal’ by address in Senate.  The Judicial Council could also recommend
for removal to the Senate.  Removal order can be passed by he Senate if there
is ‘misbehaviour’ proved.  But the Constitution does not prohibit imposition
of minor measures by any other mechanism with in the Judicial Branch and
therefore, the procedure prescribed in the 1980 Act for imposition of minor
286

measures by the Judicial Council, is valid.  So far as ‘removal’ is concerned,
the constitutional procedure for impeachment remains and the  power of the
Senate cannot be transferred to Judicial Council or Judicial Conference by
way  of  an  ordinary  law.   If  the  Council  or  the  Conference  were  to  be
empowered  to  remove  a  Federal  Judge  otherwise  than  by  way  of
impeachment, only then a constitutional amendment will be necessary.  
When we come to the disciplinary procedure in respect of Judges of
the State Courts, (which will be dealt with in detail in the next chapter), we
shall presently show that several State Constitutions have been amended to
enable  a  State  Judicial  Commission  or  a  State  Supreme  Court  to  direct
‘removal’ of a Judge and this is an additional method of ‘removal’, apart
from impeachment or address. Several State Constitutions have still retained
the procedure for ‘removal’ of State Judges by the parliamentary process of
impeachment as well as  address by the State Senate to the State Governor.
But  for  the  amendment  of  the  Constitution  enabling  the  State  Judicial
Commission  or  the  State  Supreme  Court  to  ‘remove’  a  Judge,  such  a
procedure would have been unconstitutional.  That is why the procedure for
‘removal’ by the State Judicial Commission or the State Supreme Court is
expressly provided in the State Constitution.  
We may, however, point out that the State Constitutions also provide
for minor measures to be taken by the State Judicial Commissions but the
existence of such a provision in the State Constitutions does not mean that
287

but  for that provision in the State Constitutions,  the imposition of minor
measures would have been ultra-vires of the Constitution.  As held by the
Federal Appellate Courts, minor measures can be imposed by the Judicial
Branch as a matter of self-regulation within the Judicial Branch’s general or
inherent  powers  by  way  of  ordinary  law,  and  there  is  no  need  for  a
Constitutional amendment.   Indeed, the State Constitution amendments were
for a different purpose, namely, from being in another method of removal,
apart from impeachment or address  and not because imposition  of minor
measures would have otherwise been void without constitutional sanction.
These  aspects,  being  quite  important,  will  be  considered  in  detail,
(including the Judgment of the American Federal Courts), in Chapter XX.  To
avoid reputation,  we are not referring to the Judgments of the American
Federal Courts upholding the validity of the laws which permitted imposition
of minor measures by the Judicial Council.        
(B) Impeachment cannot be resorted to on the basis that the decision on the
merits of a case decided by a Judge is erroneous 
Justice Samuel’s Chase: (1805)
It is now well settled in United States that impeachment proceedings
cannot be initiated on the basis that the decision of a Judge on the merits of a
case is erroneous.  This is illustrated by the failure of impeachment process in
relation to Justice Chase in 1805.
288

Justice Samuel Chase was appointed to the US Supreme Court by a
Federalist President John Adams.  Before that, he was Chief Judge of the
Maryland General Court.  It appears that he was a federalist and believed in a
strong central government.  But in his decisions, he also reflected a concern
for the rights of individuals and protection of the citizen’s rights by due
process.
Thomas  Jefferson,  who  was  swept  into  power  in  1980  by  the
Republicans, initiated an impeachment motion against Justice Samuel Chase
and the trial began in March 1805 in the US Senate which was under the
control of the Republicans.  The then Vice President of the United States
Aaron Burr was the head of the Senate.  He was also a Republican.  The
impeachment failed because the charges related to the merits of cases decided
by Justice Chase.  There were 8 Articles of charges all relating to the manner
in which Justice Chase dealt with a case of treason in a trial.  Article 1
contained a charge that Justice Chase, in his judicial capacity, conducted
himself in a manner highly arbitrary, oppressive and unjust.  The charge
contained 3 parts which stated that in delivering an opinion on a question of a
law he was wrong; he had unduly restricted the counsel for the accused from
referring to citations of some statutes and that he debarred the accused from
his constitutional privilege of addressing the Court on the question of law as
well as  on facts.  Other Articles  of charge related  to exclusion  of some
testimony,  failure  to  follow  Virginia  law,  irregularity  in  the  grand  jury
289

proceedings and in his address to the Jury.  There was voting on the charges.
Charge 1 fell 16 to 18, Charge 2 fell 10 to 24, Charges 3, 4 and 8 by18(19) to
16, and did not get the required 2/3rd verdict, Charge 5 fell 0 to 34, Charge 6
fell 4 to 30, and Charge 7 fell 10 to 24. All these charges related to the merits
of the case.  The impeachment failed.  If Justice Chase’s impeachment had
succeeded, there  was  a possibility of impeachment  of Chief Justice  John
Marshall also, but the failure of the impeachment put an end to any such
proposal.
This principle of non-impeachment in relation to merits of the case was
carried into the 1980 Act and later into the Act of 2002.  
The 1980 Act encoded in US 28 USC sec 372(c)(3)(A) provided that
the Chief Judge may dismiss a complaint, “if he finds it to be……  directly
related to the merits of a decision or procedural ruling.”   Again D.C. CIR
JUD. MISCONDUCT R (1)(b) states “Conduct prejudicial to the effective
and expeditious administration of the business of the Courts….  Does not
include making wrong decisions – even very wrong decisions – in cases”.
In the Judicial Improvements Act of 2002, it is stated in sec 352(b)(1)
(A)(ii) that the Chief Judge may dismiss the complaint if it is ‘directly related
to the merits of a decision or procedural ruling’.
290

Further,  on  January  1,  2005,  US  Chief  Justice  William  Rehnquist
issued the Annual Report of the year 2004 of the Federal Judiciary.  The long
Chapter of that Report was entitled “Criticism of Judges based on Judicial
acts”.  In that Chapter, the Chief Justice pointed out that the authority of
Congress to impeach and remove Judges should not extend to decisions from
the Bench.  He pointed out that the principle was established 200 years ago
when  the US House of Representatives  impeached  Justice Chase  but  the
Senate did not remove him from office.  He pointed out “The Senate’s failure
to convict him represented a judgment that impeachment should not be used
to remove a Judge for conduct in the exercise of his judicial duties.  The
political precedent set by Justice Chase’s acquittal has governed the use of
impeachment to remove Federal Judges from that day to this: the Judges’
judicial acts may not serve as a basis for removal.  Any other rule could
destroy judicial independence – instead of trying to apply the law fairly,
regardless of public opinion, Judges would be concerned about inflaming any
group that might be able to muster the votes in the Congress to impeach and
convict them.”
(C)  Appeal  to  US  Supreme  Court  does  not  lie  against  removal  by
impeachment as it is a political question. 
       In US, an appeal does not lie to the Supreme Court against removal by
impeachment in the Senate. (Nixon vs. US: (1993) 506 US 224). Judge Nixon
291

was removed by the President after the Senate took note of his conviction,
and the Senate also convicted him. 
 In India, our Supreme Court  has decided  in the case of Justice V.
Ramaswami case that the procedure by a Committee of Judges appointed
under  the  Judges  (Inquiry)  Act,  1968,  is  judicial  but  inchoate  as  the
Committee can only recommend and that the address procedure is a political
one and that  an   appeal lies to the Supreme Court  after final order of
removal is passed by the  President.  It was pointed out that in America it is a
political question throughout and hence was not justiciable.  In India, it is
statutory judicial procedure blended later with political procedure and hence
justiciable after the removal order is passed.  
Nixon, the Chief Judge of a Federal District Court was  convicted of
federal crime and sentenced to imprisonment. The House of Representatives
adopted articles of impeachment and presented the same to the Senate.  After
the  report  of  a  committee  of  Senators  who  voted  to  convict  Nixon,  the
Presiding Officer entered a judgment for removal of Judge Nixon.  The Judge
filed a suit in the District Court for a declaratory judgment and reinstatement
of his salary and privileges on the ground that Senate Rule XI which permits
delegation of the inquiry to a Senate Committee violates Articles I and III of
the Constitution in as much as the Constitution requires the entire Senate to
deal with impeachment.  
292

The District Court in which the suit was filed came to the conclusion
that the dispute was not justiciable as it involved a political question which
could not be resolved by the Courts.  The dismissal of the suit was affirmed
by he Court of Appeal for the District of Columbia Circuit.  The Supreme
Court of United States dismissed the appeal holding that the claim of Judge
Nixon that Senate Rule XI violated the provisions of the Constitution was not
justiciable.   Notwithstanding  the  use  of  the  word  ‘try’  used  in  the
Constitution  in  the  clause,  “Senate  shall  have  he  full  power  to  try  all
impeachments”, the Supreme Court held that it was a political issue.  While
holding  that  the  issue  was  political,  the  Court  referred  to  two  earlier
judgments in Baker vs. Carr (1962) 369 US 186 and Powell vs. McCormack
(1969) 395 US 486.  (These judgments have been referred to by Supreme
Court of India in Justice V. Ramaswami’s cases).
But, as pointed earlier, in Chapter VI, the Supreme Court of India has
held that the final order of removal passed by the President is justiciable.
These are three important issues that arose in the US Federal system
and they are relevant in the present discussion.
293

CHAPTER – XVII
PROCEDURES IN U.S. STATE COURTS, CALIFORNIA, IDAHO,
CONNECTICUT, TEXAS AND WISCONSIN
We shall now refer to the procedure for removal and ordering other
minor measures against  the Judges of some of the State Courts  in U.S.  We
shall start with the State of California.
CALIFORNIA STATE COURT JUDGES:
Removal of Judges by Impeachment:
Article 4, clause (a) section 18 of the California Constitution deals
with sole power of impeachment.   Impeachment shall be by the Senate.  A
person may not be convicted unless, by roll call vote entered in the journal,
two-thirds of the membership of the Senate concurs.   
Art 4, sec. 18(b) referes to impeachment of Judges of the State Courts ‘
for misconduct in office’.  It states: 
“ 18(b):  State officers elected on a state wide basis, members of the
State  Board  of Equalization,  and   Judges  of  State  Courts are  subject  to
impeachment for  misconduct in  office.   Judgment  may  extend  only  to
removal from office and   disqualification to any office under the State, but
the person convicted or acquitted remains subject to criminal punishment
according to law’.  
294

Another method of removal provided in the Constitution:
Art 6, Sec. 18: Second method: Judicial Performance Commission:
California was also the first State in USA to constitute a Commission
on Judicial Performance.  This happened in the year 1960. The Commission’s
authority was first spelt out in Article 6, Sections 8, 18, 18.1, and 18.5 of the
California  Constitution.   There  have  been  amendments  to  the  State
Constitution in 1966, 1976, 1988, 1994 and 1998 bringing in various changes
in  regard  to  the  Commission’s  work.  The  Commission,  is  subject  to  the
Government Code which is called the Code of Civil Procedure.  Sections
68701 upto 68755 deal with this subject.  
The Commission can impose ‘minor measures’ or retire or direct
removal of a Judge straightaway.
Article 6, Section 18 deals with the powers of the Judicial Performance
Commission.  It reads as follows:-
“Section 18.                 (a)  . A Judge is disqualified from acting as a Judge,
without loss of salary, while there is pending (1) an indictment or an
information  charging  the  judge  in  the  United  States  with  a  crime
punishable as a felony under California or federal law, or (2) a petition
295

to the Supreme Court to review a determination by the Commission on
Judicial Performance to remove or retire a judge.
(b) The Commission on Judicial Performance may disqualify
a judge from acting as a judge, without loss of salary, upon notice of
formal proceedings by the commission charging the judge with judicial
misconduct or disability.
(c) The Commission on Judicial Performance shall suspend a
judge from office without salary when in the United States the judge
pleads guilty or no contest or is found guilty of a crime punishable as a
felony  under  California  or  federal  law  or  of  any  other  crime  that
involves moral turpitude under that law.  If the conviction is reversed,
suspension terminates, and the judge shall be paid the salary for the
judicial office held by the judge for the period of suspension. If the
judge is suspended and the conviction becomes final, the Commission
on Judicial Performance shall remove the judge from office.
(d) Except as provided in subdivision (f), the Commission on
Judicial Performance may (1) retire a judge for disability that seriously
interferes with the performance, or (2) censure a judge or former judge
or remove a judge for action occurring not more than 6 years prior to
the commencement of the judge’s current term or of the former judge’s
last term that constitutes wilful misconduct in office, persistent failure
or inability to perform the judge’s duties, habitual intemperance in the
use of intoxicants or drugs, or conduct prejudicial to the administration
of justice that brings the judicial office into disrepute, or (3) publicly or
296

privately admonish a judge or former judge found to have engaged in
an improper action or dereliction of duty. The commission may also
bar  a  former  judge  who  has  been  censured  from  receiving  an
assignment, appointment,  or reference  of work from any California
state court.  Upon petition by the judge or former judge, the Supreme
Court may, in its discretion, grant review of a determination by the
Commission  to  retire,  remove,  censure,  admonish,  or  disqualify
pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  a  judge  or  former  judge.   When  the
Supreme Court reviews a determination of the Commission, it may
make a independent review of the record.  If the Supreme Court has
not acted within 120 days after granting the petition, the decision of
the Commission shall be final.
(e) A judge retired by the Commission shall be considered to
have  retired  voluntarily.   A  judge  removed  by  the  Commission  is
ineligible  for  judicial  office,  including  receiving  an  assignment,
appointment, or reference of work from any California State court, and
pending further order of the court is suspended from practicing law in
this  State.   The  State  Bar  may  institute  appropriate  attorney
disciplinary proceedings against any judge who retires or resigns from
office with judicial disciplinary charges pending.
(f) A  determination  by  the  Commission  on  Judicial
Performance to  admonish or  censure a judge or former judge of the
Supreme Court or remove or retire a judge of the Supreme Court shall
be reviewed by a tribunal of 7 Court of Appeal Judges selected by lot.
297

(g) No  court,  except  the  Supreme  Court,  shall  have
jurisdiction  in  a civil  action  or  other  legal  proceeding  of  any  sort
brought  against  the  Commission  by  a  judge.   Any  request  for
injunctive relief or other provisional remedy shall be granted or denied
within 90 days of the filing of the request  for relief.  A failure to
comply with the time requirements of this section does not affect the
validity of Commission proceedings.
(h) Members of the Commission, the Commission staff and
the examiners and investigators employed by the commission shall be
absolutely immune from suit for all conduct at any time in the course
of their official duties. No civil action may be maintained against a
person,  by  any  employer,  public  or  private,  based  on  statements
presented by the person to the Commission.
(i) The  Commission  on  Judicial  Performance shall  make
rules implementing  this  section,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the
following:
(1) The Commission shall make rules for the investigation of
judges.   The  commission  may  provide  for  the  confidentiality of
complaints to and investigations by the commission.
(2) The Commission shall make rules for formal proceedings
against judges when there is cause to believe there is a  disability or
wrongdoing within the meaning of subdivision (d).
(j) When the Commission institutes formal proceedings, the
notice  of  charges,  the  answer,  and  all  subsequent  papers  and
298

proceedings  shall  be  open  to  public  for  all  formal  proceedings
instituted after February 28, 1995.
(k) The Commission may make explanatory statements.
(l) The budget of the Commission shall be separate from the
budget of any other State agency or court.
(m) The Supreme Court shall make  rules for the conduct  of
judges,  both  on  and  off  the  bench,  and  for  judicial
candidates in the conduct of their campaigns. These rules
shall be referred to as the Code of Judicial Ethics.”
It will be noticed that a Judge is disqualified under this section in Art.
6  pending a criminal charge or pending formal proceedings charging the
Judge with penal misconduct or disability. The Commission shall suspend a
Judge without salary in case the Judge pleads guilty or there is no contest or
is found guilty of a crime involving moral turpitude. The other punishments
that can be imposed by the Commission are (i) retirement for disability, (ii)
censure, or (iii) removal of a Judge in respect of any action of the Judge prior
to six years before the commencement of the Judge’s current term or for
willful misconduct or persistent failure or inability to perform  his duties,
habitual  intemperance  in  the  use  of  intoxicants  or  drugs  or  conduct
prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the Judicial office
into disrepute; (iv) admonishing. The Commission may also bar a  former
Judge who has been censured from receiving an assignment, appointment or
reference of work from any California State Court.  A Judge, relieved by the
299

Commission is to be treated as one under voluntary retirement.  Pending
further orders of the Court, he may be suspended from practicing law in the
State.
 A  decision  by  the  Commission  is  subject  to  appeal  to  a  Tribunal
consisting of seven Judges of the Court of Appeal who are selected by lot.
No Court except Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction in civil action or
other legal proceeding  of  any sort brought  against  the Commission  by a
Judge.  Members of the Commission have personal immunity from suit for all
acts. The Commission issues formal proceedings giving notice of the charges.
The Supreme Court has to make rules for conduct of the Judges for the Code
of Judicial Ethics.  
In view of the amendment in Art. 6  permitting the Commission even
to pass orders of removal, this provides a second method of removal, apart
from the procedure of impeachment covered by Art.4.  The Commission itself
is now  empowered, by Art. 6  of the Constitution as stated above, to pass
orders of removal subject to right of appeal, and other measures as stated
above.   
Section 18.5 provides that the Commission may provide the Governor
of the State with a text of any private admonishment, advisory letter, or other
300

disciplinary action.  Section 18.5 (d) states that all information released under
this section shall remain confidential and privileged.
We shall now refer to the history of some of the amendments to Art. 6
in California.   In 1966, it appears that the amendment to the Constitution
brought in public censure as a sanction which could be imposed in addition
to removal from office.  In 1976 the Commission on Judicial Qualifications
was  renamed  as  Commission  on  Judicial  Performance.   Private
admonishment was also added.  Use of intoxicants or drugs as an act for
judicial intemperance was also added. Further, “willful and persistent failure
to perform judicial duties” was changed into “persistent failure or inability to
perform the Judge’s duties”.  The  1988 amendment gave the Commission
authority to conduct open hearings at the request of the Judge or where the
charges involved moral turpitude, corruption or dishonesty and when to do so
would be in the pursuit of public confidence and in the interests of justice.
Public  ‘reproval’  was  also  added  as  another  sanction.   In  1994  the
amendment mandating open hearings in all cases involving formal charges
conferred authority for censure and removal on the Commission rather than
on  the  Supreme  Court.  Further,  ‘reproval’  was  removed  in  1994
(http//cjp.ca.gov/manadtehist.htm).  
Among  the  various  types  of  misconduct  the  following  categories
appear from the Annual Reports of California Courts:-
301

Abuse of contempt   
Administrative
malfeasance
Alcohol or drug related
criminal conduct
Bias/appearance of bias
toward particular class
Bias/appearance of bias
(not  directed  toward  a
particular class)
Comment  on  pending
case
Decisional  delay/tardi-
ness/other dereliction of
Duty
Demeanor/decorum
Disqualification/
disclosure and related 
retaliation
Ex  parte  communi-
cations
Failure  to  cooperate/
lack  of  candor
w/regula-
tory authorities 
Failure to ensure rights
Gifts/loans/favours/
ticket fixing
Improper business 
activities
Improper political
activities
Miscellaneous 
off-bench conduct
Misuse of court
resources
Non-substance abuse
criminal conduct
Off-bench  abuse  of
office
On-bench  abuse  of
authority  in  perfor-
mance of judicial duties
Pre-bench misconduct
Sexual  harassment/
inappropriate
workplace  gender
comments
Sleeping
Substance abuse
IDAHO STATE COURT JUDGES:
Impeachment: Art 5 (Sec.3)
Article 5 of the Idaho Constitution, section 3 speaks of impeachment
by the Senate.  Judgment shall not extend beyond removal or disqualification
to hold office. Section 28 of Article 5 provides that rules as to retirement,
discipline  and  removal from  office  of  Judges  and  Justices  shall  be  ‘as
provided by law’.  Thus, the Constitution itself permits a law to be made for
‘removal’ (i.e. by any other mode).
302

As  a  specific  law  for  removal  otherwise  than  by  impeachment  is
permissible, such a law has been made in Idaho.  The Constitution provides
for another  method  of removal  by law.  A law  has  been  passed  for  the
constitution of a Judicial Council for recommending action to the Supreme
Court, which passes the final orders.
Art. 5( Sec.28): Judicial Council recommends to Supreme court, minor and
major measures: 
The  Idaho  Judicial  Council  has  been  constituted  to  discipline  the
Judges including Judges of the Court of Appeals.  Upon receiving a written
complaint,  the  Council  investigates  and  upon  finding  good  cause,  it
recommends  disciplinary action to the Supreme Court.  Cause may include
wilful, misconduct in office, wilful and persistent failure to perform duties,
habitual intemperance, prejudicial conduct that brings the judicial office into
disrepute or violations of the Code of Judicial Conduct.  The Justice or Judge
may  also  be  a  retired for  disability  that  seriously  interferes  with  the
performance of judicial duties.
The final decision on discipline and removal is made by the Supreme
Court.  All investigations by the Council are  confidential under the statute
but,  after  the  Council  files  its  findings  and  recommendations  with  the
Supreme Court, the file becomes public and is available with the clerk of the
Supreme Court.
303

The Rules of Idaho Judicial Council provide that the Judicial Council
may make a report to Supreme Court and the Legislature at intervals of not
more  than  two  years,  submit  to  the  Governor  the  names  of  Judges  for
appointment  and  also  recommend  removal,  discipline  or  retirement  of
Judicial Officers.  
These  duties  are  contained  in  Rule  2  of  the  General  Rules  of
Procedure.  Subject of Removal, discipline or retirement of Judges starts with
Rule 21.  Rule 21 contains the definitions.  Rule 22 confers power on the
Council  to  summon and  examine  witnesses  and  compel  their attendance,
failing which their property can be attached by way of an application to the
Supreme Court  or to  any  court  or a Judge  thereof,  as  done  in  cases  of
contempt.   Under  the  same  Rule,  if  the  accused  Judge  is  in  default,
depositions and discovery procedures may be taken and used without notice
to him or affidavits of witnesses may be used in evidence.  Rule 24 provides
for  confidentiality of the proceedings before the Council.  It states that all
papers filed with and proceedings before the Council, shall be confidential
until  the record  is  filed  by the Council  in the Supreme Court, provided,
however,  that  if  allegations  against  a  Judge  are  made  public  by  the
complainant or the Judge or third persons, the  Judicial Council, and/or the
Judge may comment on the existence, nature and status of any investigation
and  may  correct  any  false  or  misleading  information  including  false  or
misleading information regarding the actions taken by the Judicial Council.
304

Rule 25 provides  for confidentiality and for privilege in respect of
defamatory materials.  It states that papers filed with the Council or testimony
given to the Council shall be privileged.  The record filed by the Council in
the Supreme Court continues to be privileged but on such filing, it looses its
confidential character.  The writing which was privileged prior to its filing
with the Council does not loose privilege by such filing.
Rule 28 deals with the grounds for discipline, removal or retirement
and for the initial inquiry and for preliminary investigation.  Sub-clause (a)
states that the Council, upon receiving a  verified statement, not obviously
unfounded or frivolous, alleging facts indicating that a Judge is guilty of
willful misconduct  in office, willful and persistent failure to perform the
duties  of a Judge, habitual intemperance, or of conduct prejudicial to the
administration  of  justice  that  brings  the  judicial  office  into  disrepute,  or
violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct or a Judge has a disability that
seriously interferes with the performance of the Judge’s duties which is or is
likely to become of a permanent character, shall make an initial enquiry or
investigation to determine whether formal proceedings shall be instituted and
a hearing held.  The  Council, without receiving a verified statement, may
make such a preliminary investigation of its own motion.
Sub-clause (1) of clause (a) of Rule 28 deals with initial enquiry. It
says  that  after  notifying  the  Judge  informally,  the  Council  or  its
305

representative shall make an initial enquiry to determine whether or not the
complaint  contained  in  the  verified  statement  is  obviously  unfounded  or
frivolous.  In making that initial enquiry, the Council or its representative
may obtain and consider any information which it deems pertinent.
Sub-clause  (2)  of  clause  (a)  of  Rule  28  deals  with  preliminary
investigation. It says that if the Council concludes that the complaint set out
in the verified statement is not obviously unfounded or frivolous, the Council
shall conduct a preliminary investigation,  after first notifying the Judge in
writing of the investigation and the nature of the charge, and shall afford
reasonable opportunity in the course of such preliminary investigation for the
Judge or the Judge’s counsel to present evidence on behalf of the Judge. In
conducting  the  investigation,  the  Council  may  consider  any  information
obtained during the course of the initial enquiry.  If the Council determines
that the physical  or mental  health  of the Judge  is  in issue, it  may order
physical and/or mental examination of the Judge by independent examiners.
Sub-clause (b) of Rule 28 states that if the  preliminary investigation
does not disclose sufficient cause to warrant further proceedings, the Judge,
complainant and other parties in the discretion of the Council shall be so
notified.
306

Sub-clause (c) of Rule 28 states that if the preliminary investigation
does disclose sufficient cause to warrant further proceedings, the Council
may:
(1) continue the case for further action, investigation or review;
(2) require personal appearance of the Judge before the Council;
(3) recommend a remedial course of conduct to the Judge   and require
the Judge’s acquiescence thereto;
(4) institute formal proceedings; or
(5) take or direct such other action as the Council may determine  will  
reasonably  curtail  or  eliminate  the  conduct  of  the  Judge  which
involves any matter within the jurisdiction of the Council.
Rule 29 deals with formal proceedings.  Clause (a) states that after the
preliminary investigation has been completed, if the Council concludes that
formal proceedings should be instituted, the Council shall, without delay,
issue a written notice to the accused Judge advising of the institution  of
formal proceedings to enquire into the charges against the Judge.
Sub-clause (b) of Rule 29 states that notice shall specify in ordinary
and concise language the charges against the Judge and the alleged facts
upon which such charges are based and shall advise the Judge of the right to
file a written answer to the charges within a specified time.
Rule 30 deals with the answer of the Judge and Rule 31 deals with
hearing before the Council.  Council may hear the matter concerning the
307

removal,  discipline  or  retirement  or  may delegate  the  hearing  to  special
masters.
Rule 32 deals with the hearing. It says that the failure of the Judge to
answer or to appear at the hearing shall not, standing alone, be taken as
evidence of the truth of the facts alleged to constitute grounds for removal,
discipline or retirement.  The failure of the Judge to testify in the Judge’s
own behalf or to submit to a medical examination may be considered, unless
it appears that such failure was due to circumstances beyond the Judge’s
control.
Rule 33 deals with the procedural rights of the Judge.  Sub-clause (a)
states that an accused Judge shall have the right and reasonable opportunity
to defend against the charges, to be represented by counsel and to examine
and cross-examine witnesses.  The Judge shall also have the right to the
issuance of the subpoenas for attendance of witnesses to testify or to produce
books, papers or other evidentiary matter.  In case the Judge is adjudged
insane or incompetent, the Council shall appoint a guardian ad litem unless
the Judge has a guardian who will represent him.
Rule 41 states that if the Council finds good cause, it shall recommend
to the Supreme Court for the removal, discipline or retirement of the accused
Judge.  Rule 44 states that the accused Judge may request the Supreme Court
to review the Judicial Council’s findings as confirmed by the Supreme Court.
308

Rule  52  states  that  all  Judicial  Performance  Evaluations,  records,
documents and reports relating to an individual Judge shall be considered to
be confidential and shall not be disclosed by the Judge or a Judicial Council
to any third party.
CONNECTICUT STATE COURT JUDGES: 
Three methods of removal:
Art. 5, section 2 provides two methods of removal: Impeachment & Removal
by address to Governor (sec. 2):
Art.  V  of  the  Connecticut  Constitution  deals  with  the  “Judicial
Department” and contains six sections.  Sec. 2 states that the judges shall
hold  office  for  a  term  of  eight  years  but  that  they  may be  removed  by
impeachment.  The Governor shall also remove them on the address of two-
thirds  of  each  House  of  the  General  Assembly.    Thus,  there  are  two
procedures, (i) removal by impeachment and (ii) removal by address to the
Governor.
Third method: Art V Sec.7: Minor measures by Council and Major ones by
Supreme Court. 
309

Sec.  7 of Art. V was added in  1976,  providing  a third  method  of
removal.   Sec. 7 applies to judges of all courts, except those courts to which
judges are elected.   They may, in such manner as shall by law be prescribed,
be removed or suspended by the Supreme Court.   The General Assembly
may establish a Judicial Review Council which may also, in such manner as
shall by law be prescribed,  censure any such judge or  suspend any such
judge, for a definite period not longer than one year.  (w.e.f. Nov. 24, 1976
introduced by amending Art. V)
Sec. 1 of Art. IX states that the House of Representatives shall have the
sole power of impeachment.  Sec. 2 states that all impeachments shall be tried
by the Senate.    When sitting for that purpose, there shall be an oath or
affirmation.   No person shall be convicted without the concurrence of at least
two-thirds of the members present.   When the Governor is impeached, the
Chief Justice shall preside.
Sec. 3 of Art. IX states that the Governor and all other executive and
judicial officers, shall be liable to impeachment; but judgments in such cases
shall not extend further than to removal from office and disqualification to
hold  any  office  of  honour,  trust  or  profit  under  the  State.    The  party
convicted shall, nevertheless, be liable and subject to indictment, trial and
punishment according to law.  Sec. 4 deals with the procedure in case of
treason.
310

Art. XI contains the general provisions and sec. 5 thereof states that all
officers  holding  the  office  by  election  or  appointment  shall  continue  to
exercise  the  duties  thereof,  according  to  their  respective  commissions  or
appointments, until their office shall have been abolished or their successors
selected and clarified in accordance with the Constitution or the laws enacted
pursuant thereto.
Connecticut statute referable to Art. V (sec. 7):
Under the above powers granted by the Constitution, a law has been
made by the legislature.
Chapter  872(a)  of  the  Connecticut  statute  (41  CS  1)  deals  with
removal, suspension and censure of judges.   
Sec.  51-51(g)  declares  the  object  of  the  statute  in  the  following
manner.   It states that the General Assembly finds that for the impartial and
effective administration of justice in the State (1) the continued independence
of the judiciary is indispensable, (2) it is in the public interest to foster the
dignity and integrity of the judiciary, (3) to the foregoing ends it is desirable
to establish appropriate mechanisms and procedures for the maintenance of
judicial  discipline,  and  (4)  the  mere  making  of  unpopular  or  erroneous
decisions is not a ground for judicial discipline or for a finding of want of
judicial integrity.
311

Sec. 51 – 51(h) states that the chapter shall apply to judges of the
Superior Court, Appellate Court, judges of the Supreme Court, compensation
commissioners  and  family  support  magistrates.    Sec.  51(i)  deals  with
grounds for removal, suspension and censure, which it is expressly stated will
be in addition to removal by impeachment and removal by the Governor on
the address of two-third of members of each House of the General Assembly.
Clause (a) states that a judge is liable for censure, suspension or  removal
from office for the following reasons:
“(1) conduct prejudicial to the impartial and effective administration of
justice  which  brings  the  judicial  office  into  disrepute,  (2)  wilful
violation of sec. 51-39(a) or any canon of judicial ethics, (3) wilful and
persistent  failure  to  perform the  duty of a judge,  (4)  neglectful  or
incompetent performance of the duties of a judge, (5) final conviction
of  a  felony  or  of  a  misdemeanor  involving  moral  turpitude,  (6)
disbarment or suspension as an attorney-at-law, (7) wilful failure to file
a financial statement or the filing of a fraudulent financial statement
required  under  sec.  51-46(a),  or  (8)  temperament  which  adversely
affects the orderly carriage of justice.”
Sec.  51  –  51(j)  deals  with  removal or  suspension by the  Supreme
Court.   Sub-clause (a) thereof states that the Supreme Court may remove or
suspend  any judge  or family support  magistrate  for any period  upon  the
312

recommendation of the Judicial Review Council established under sec. 51-51
(k) or its own motion.   Upon receipt of such recommendation or on its own
motion,  the  Supreme Court  shall  make  an  investigation  of  the  conduct
complaint of and hold a hearing thereon, unless such an investigation and
hearing  has  been  held  by the  Judicial  Review  Council.    Sub-clause  (c)
thereof states that the hearing shall not be public unless requested by the
judge  or  the  family  support  magistrate  under  investigation.    51  - 51(i)
enables the Judicial Review Council to make regulations.
Sec.  51  –  51(l)  deals  with  investigation  of  conduct  of  a  judge,
compensation  commissioner or family support  magistrate by the Council.
The  section  combines  procedure  for  preliminary  investigation  as  also  a
regular inquiry.
“Sec.51-51(l).  Investigation of  conduct  of  judge,  compensation
commissioner or family support magistrate. (a) Except as provided in
subsection  (d),  the  Judicial  Review  Council  shall  investigate every
written complaint brought before it alleging conduct under sec. 51-51
(i),  and  may  initiate an  investigation  of  any  judge,  compensation
commissioner or family support magistrate if (1) the council has reason
to believe that conduct under sec. 51-51(i) has occurred or (2) previous
complaints  indicate  a  pattern  of  behaviour  which  would  lead  to  a
reasonable belief that conduct under sec. 51-51(i) has occurred.  The
Council  shall,  not  later  than  five  days  after  such  initiation  of  an
313

investigation  or  receipt  of  such  complaint,  notify  by  registered or
certified mail any judge, compensation commissioner or family support
magistrate under investigation or against whom such complaint is filed.
A copy of any such  complaint  shall  accompany such  notice.   The
council  shall  also  notify  the  complainant  of  its receipt  of  such
complaint not later than five days  thereafter.  Any investigation to
determine whether or not there is probable cause that conduct under
sec. 51-51(i)  has  occurred  shall  be  confidential  and any individual
called by the council for the purpose of providing information shall not
disclose his knowledge of such investigation to a third party prior to
the decision of the council on whether probable cause exists, unless the
respondent requests  that such investigation  and disclosure be open,
provided information known or obtained independently of any such
investigation  shall  not  be  confidential.   The  judge,  compensation
commissioner  or  family  support  magistrate  shall  have  the  right  to
appear and be heard and to offer any information which may tend to
clear him of probable cause to believe he is guilty of conduct under
sec.  51-51(i).    The  judge,  compensation  commissioner  or  family
support magistrate shall also have the right to be represented by legal
counsel and examine and cross-examine witnesses.   In conducting its
investigation under this  subsection, the Council may request that a
court furnish to the Council a record or transcript of court proceedings
made  or  prepared  by  a  court  reporter,  assistant  court  reporter  or
314

monitor and the court shall, upon such request, furnish such record or
transcript.
(b) The Council shall, not later than three business days after the
termination of such investigation, notify the complainant, if any, and
the judge, compensation commissioner or family support magistrate
that the investigation has been terminated and the results thereof.  If
the Council finds that conduct under sec. 51-51(i) has not occurred, but
the judge, compensation commissioner or family support magistrate
has acted in a manner which gives the appearance of impropriety or
constitutes an unfavourable judicial or magisterial practice, the Council
may issue an admonishment to the judge, compensation commissioner
or family support magistrate recommending a change in judicial or
magisterial  conductor  practice.   If  an  admonishment  is  issued,  the
Council shall inform the complainant, if any, that an admonishment
was issued, provided the admonishment is the result of misconduct
alleged in the complaint and the substance of the admonishment shall
not be disclosed.
(c) If a preliminary investigation indicates that probable cause exists
that  the  judge,  compensation  commissioner  or  family  support
magistrate is guilty of conduct under sec. 51-51(i), the  Council shall
hold a hearing concerning the conduct or complaint.   All hearings held
pursuant to this subsection shall be open.   A judge, compensation
315

commissioner or family support magistrate appearing before such a
hearing shall be entitled to counsel, to present evidence and to cross-
examine  witnesses.   The  Council  shall  make  a  record  of  all
proceedings pursuant to this subsection.   The Council shall not later
than thirty days after the close of such hearing publish its findings
together with a memorandum of its reasons therefore.
(d) No complaint against a judge, compensation commissioner or
family support magistrate alleging conduct under sec. 51-51(i) shall be
brought  under  this  section  but  within  one  year from  the  date  the
alleged  conduct  occurred or  was  discovered or  in  the  exercise  of
reasonable  care  should  have  been  discovered,  except  that  no  such
complaint may be brought more than three years from the date the
alleged conduct occurred.
Sec.51-51(m).  Vote  of  Council.  Findings  to  be  indexed.  (a)  The
Judicial Review Council may take any action upon a majority vote of
its members present and voting, except that twelve members of the
Judicial Review Council shall constitute a quorum for any action to
publicly  censure  a  judge,  compensation  commissioner  or  family
support magistrate, suspend a judge, compensation commissioner or
family  support  magistrate  for  any  period,  refer  the  matter to  the
Supreme Court with a recommendation that a judge or family support
magistrate be suspended for a period longer than one year or refer the
316

matter to the Supreme Court with a recommendation that a judge or
family support magistrate be removed from office or to the Governor
with a recommendation that a compensation commissioner be removed
from office and the concurring vote of seven of such members shall be
required.
(b) The  Council  shall  make  its  findings  in  writing  and  all  such
findings shall be compiled and indexed.
Sec.51-51(n). Authority of Council. (a) The Judicial Review Council
may, after a hearing pursuant to subsection (c) of sec. 51-51(l), (1)
publicly  censure the  judge,  compensation  commissioner  or  family
support magistrate, (2) suspend the judge, compensation commissioner
or family support magistrate for a definite term not to exceed one year,
(3) refer the matter to the Supreme Court with a recommendation that
the  judge  or  family  support  magistrate  be  suspended  for  a  period
longer than one year, (4) refer the matter to the Supreme Court with a
recommendation  that  the  judge  or  family  support  magistrate  be
removed from office or to the Governor with a recommendation that
the  compensation  commissioner  be  removed  from  office  or  (5)
exonerate  the  judge,  compensation  commissioner  or  family support
magistrate of all charges.”
Sec. 51 - 51(o)  compels the witnesses to testify before the Supreme
Court or the Judicial Review Council.   Sec. 51 - 51(p) deals with suspension
317

of salary during the period of suspension.   Sec. 51 - 51(q) deals with the
recommendation of the Council regarding appointment or reappointment of
judges.
Sec. 51 - 51(r) state that any judge aggrieved by the decision of the
Judicial Council may appeal to the Supreme Court.
Summarising  the  position,  it  is  to  be  seen  that  the  Constitution
provides for two methods, namely, impeachment through the Legislature and
removal by the Governor by address.     According to the Constitution, other
modes of removal can be prescribed by law, as stated in amended Art. 5, sec.
7.    On the recommendation of the Judicial Review Council, the removal can
be made by the Supreme Court as provided by law.   Chapter 872(a) of the
law provides not only for minor punishments but also for  removal by the
Supreme Court upon recommendation of the Judicial Review Council.
TEXAS STATE COURT JUDGES  :   
Art. 15 of the Constitution provides for three methods of removal.
Two methods are provided by Art. 15. 
(A) Art.15 Section 1, 2: Impeachment: 
318

Art. 15, section 1, 2 of the Constitution deal with Impeachment in
general.   Sec. 2 says that the Governor, Judges of the Supreme Court, Court
of Appeals and District Judges can be impeached.   This is done by House of
Representatives (sec. 1).    
(B) Art.15 Section 8: Address by House:
Sec.  8  thereof  deals  with  another  mode  of  removal  of  judges  by
Governor on address of two-third of each House of Legislature.  That section
reads as follows:
“Art. 15
Sec. 8 – Removal of Judges by Governor on address of two-thirds of
each House of Legislature.
The  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  Court  of  Appeals  and  District
Courts, shall be removed by the Governor on the address of two-thirds
of  each  House  of  the  Legislature,  for  wilful  neglect  of  duty,
incompetency,  habitual  drunkenness,  oppression  in  office,  or  other
reasonable  cause which  shall  not  be  sufficient  ground  for
impeachment; provided, however, that the cause or causes for which
such removal shall be required, shall be stated at length in such address
and entered on the journals of each House; and provided further, that
the cause or causes shall be notified to the judge so intended to be
removed, and he shall be admitted to a hearing in his own defense
319

before any vote for such address shall pass, and in all such cases, the
vote shall be taken by yeas and nays and entered on the journals of
each House respectively.”
(C) Art. 5, sec. 1A: Third method by Supreme Court:
Art. 5 (Judicial Department) sec. 1A of the Texas Constitution refers to
retirement,  censure,  removal and compensation of justices and judges and
also refers to the State Commission on Judicial Conduct and Proceeding.    It
contains very elaborate provisions, to which we shall presently refer.
Art. 5, sec. 1A, subsection (6) deals with the procedure for discipline
and removal.  Subsection (6) states that a judge can be removed from office
for wilful or persistent violation of rules promulgated by the Supreme Court
of  Texas,  incompetence  in  performing  the  duties  of  the  office,  wilful
violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct, or wilful or persistent conduct that
is glaringly inconsistent with the proper performance of the judges’ duties or
where  such  conduct  casts  public  discredit upon  a  judiciary  or  the
administration of justice.   It further says that a judge may be disciplined or
censured in lieu of removal from office or may be suspended with or without
pay immediately on being indicted by a State or Federal Grand Jury for a
felony offence or charged with a misdemeanor involving official misconduct.
On the  filing of a complaint, the Commission  will give notice to the  judge
concerned,  and  also  an  opportunity  to  appear  and  be  heard  by  the
320

Commission and it may recommend to the Supreme Court for suspension of
the judge from office.  The Supreme Court after considering the record of
such appeals and the recommendation of the Commission may suspend the
person  from office  with  or without  pay, pending  final  disposition  of the
charge.
This is contained in sub-clause (a) of subsection (6) of sec. 1A of
Art. 5.
Sub-clause (b) states that any person holding the office referred to in
sub-clause (a), who is eligible for retirement benefits, may be  involuntarily
retired and any person who is not so eligible, may be removed from office,
for disability seriously interfering with the performance of his duties which
is, or is likely to become permanent in nature.  Subsection (7) empowers the
Commission  to  conduct  preliminary investigations  or order  attendance  of
witnesses and production of documents.
Subsection (8) says that after such investigation as deemed necessary,
the Commission may in its discretion, issue a private or public admonition,
warning, reprimand or requirement that the person obtain additional training
or education or if the Commission determines that the situation merits such
action, it may institute formal procedure and order a formal hearing to be
held before it concerning public censure, removal or retirement of a person.
Subsection  (8)  states  that  the  Commission  may issue  an  order  of  public
321

censure or recommend to a Review Tribunal, the removal or retirement, as
the case may be.
Subsection (9) refers to the  Review Tribunal which shall consist of
seven justices or judges of the Court of Appeals who are selected by lot by
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.  The said tribunal shall review the
Commission’s recommendations for the removal or retirement of the judge.
Subsection (10) provides that all papers filed and procedures before the
Commission shall be confidential, unless otherwise provided by law and the
filing of papers with and the giving of testimony before the Commission shall
be privileged unless provided by law.   However, the Commission may issue
a public statement any time during any of its proceeding when sources within
the Commission cause notoriety concerning the judge or the Commission and
the Commission  determines  that the best  interests  of the judge  or of the
public will be served by issuing such statement. 
Subsection (11) states that the Supreme Court may provide for the
rules   before  the  Commission  and  before  the  Review  Tribunal  and  the
Supreme Court.
Subsection (13) states that sec. 1A is alternative to and cumulative of
methods of removal of persons holding an office provided elsewhere in the
Constitution.
322

Thus,  Texas  Constitution  provides  three  methods  for  removal  of
Judges,  one  by  impeachment  (Art.  15,  ss.  1,  2);  one  by  Address  to  the
Governor (Art. 15, sec. 8) and a third by the Commission recommending to
the Supreme Court (Art. 5, IA).
Texas Rules:
We  shall  next  refer  to  the  procedural  rules  for  the  removal  or
retirement of judges.  As stated earlier, the Commission has been authorized
to pass minor measures but if it considers necessary that the judge should be
removed or retired, it has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court which
refers it to the Review Tribunal.   The rules which we shall now refer to are
those that have to be followed for the purpose of removal or retirement of
judges.  
Rule 3 deals with preliminary investigation.  This may be made upon
receipt of a verified statement or by the Commission  on its own motion or
otherwise.   This  is  meant  to  find  out  if  the  allegation  of  misconduct  or
disability is unfounded  or frivolous.    If it is so, the Commission shall
terminate the procedure.   Under Rule 4 the procedure for full investigation is
indicated.   If the preliminary investigation discloses that the allegations are
not unfounded or frivolous or if sufficient cause exists to warrant full inquiry
as to whether the judge is guilty of wilful or persistent conduct which is
323

clearly  inconsistent  with  the  performance  of  his  duties  or  casts  public
discredit  upon the  judiciary or the administration  of justice or where the
disability seriously interferes with the performance of his duties, which is or
is likely to become permanent in nature, then the Commission shall conduct a
full  investigation.    It shall then inform the  judge and seek his response.
Rule 5 provides for issuance of notice, service and return of sub-poenas.
Rule 6 enables  the Commission to make an offer to the judge to appear
informally and this is kept confidential.
Rule 9 enables the judge to ask the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
to appoint a special Court of Review which may conduct the hearing.  The
Special Court may dismiss, affirm or modify the order of the Commission or
may direct formal proceedings to be initiated.   
Rule  10  deals  with  formal  proceedings  after  the  investigation  is
completed by the Commission where it is considered that formal proceedings
are necessary.    Then there is a procedure for filing a reply by the judge and
then  a  hearing  to  find  out  whether  there  are  grounds  for  removal  or
retirement.   All legal evidence shall be received as in the trial of civil cases.
Among  the  procedural  rights  of  the  judge are  a  right  to  reasonable
opportunity by introducing evidence, right to be represented by counsel and
right  to  examine  and  cross-examine  witnesses  or  produce  oral  or
documentary evidence or seek the attendance of witnesses.    If the judge is
adjudged insane or incompetent then a guardian ad litem may be appointed.
324

The  Commission  may vote  one way or the  other and recommend  to  the
Review Tribunal for removal or retirement or the Commission may dismiss
the case or publicly order a censure, reprimand, warning or admonition.   Out
of  seven  members  of  the  Review  Tribunal,  six  votes are  required  for  a
recommendation of the removal or retirement.
Under Rule 13, an appeal is provided to the Supreme Court of Texas
against the order of the Review Tribunal.
Rule 15 provides for suspension of a judge in case of indictment by a
State or Federal Grand Jury for a felony offence or where he is charged with
misdemeanor involved with official misconduct.
Rule 17 provides for confidentiality and privilege of proceedings in
respect of all papers filed with and proceedings before the Commission.
Texas has passed a separate code of  Judicial Conduct consisting of
several canons.
It will thus be seen that, as in Connecticut, there are three methods of
removal of judges in Texas.
Wisconsin State Courts  :  
325

Here also, the Constitution provides for three methods of removal.
1  st   Method: Impeachment:   
Article  VII  of  the  Wisconsin’s  Constitution  which  deals  with  the
Judicial Branch refers to impeachment trial in section 1.  That section states
that the trial of impeachment shall be in the Senate.  The assembly of the
Senate shall have the power of impeaching all civil officers of the State for
corrupt  conduct  in  office,  or  for  crimes  and  misdemeanor.   It  says  that
impeachment shall be by majority of all the members elected.  No judicial
officer  shall  exercise  his  office,  after  he  has  been  impeached,  until  his
acquittal.  Before the trial of impeachment, the members of the Court shall
take an oath or affirmation, truly and impartially to try the impeachment
according  to  the  evidence.   No  person  shall  be  convicted  without  the
concurrence of 2/3rd members present.  Judgment in cases of impeachment
shall not extend further than to removal from office, or disqualification to
hold any office of honour, profit or trust under the State.  But the party
impeached shall be liable to indictment, trial and punishment according to
law.  
2  nd   Method: Address:  
Section 13 of Article VII refers to removal of Justices and Judges by
Address (as amended in April 1974 and April 1979).  It states that any Justice
326

or Judge may be removed from office by Address of both Houses of the
legislature, if 2/3rd of all members elected to each House concur therein, but
no removal shall be made by virtue of this section unless the justice or the
judge complained of is served with a copy of the charges, as the ground of
address, and he has had an opportunity of being heard.  On the question of
removal, ayes and noes shall be entered on the journals.
3  rd   Method:   The Constitution  of Wisconsin permits all types of measures
including removal by the  Supreme Court: 
Section 11 of Art VII of the Constitution, as introduced from April
1977, states that each Justice or Judge shall be subject to reprimand, censure,
suspension,  removal for  cause  or  for  disability  by  the  Supreme  Court
pursuant to procedure  established by the legislature by law.  No Justice or
Judge who has been removed for cause, shall be eligible for reappointment or
temporary  service.   This  section  is  alternative  and  cumulative  with  the
methods of removal provided in sections 1 and 13 of this Article and sec 12
of Art XIII.   (Section 12 of Art XIII does not concern judges as it deals with
recall of elective officers.)
The Wisconsin legislature made a law in 1976 creating the Judicial
Commission as an agency independent of the Supreme Court.  The statutory
procedure is found at sections 757.81 to 757.99 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
327

The Commission has made rules, adopted guidelines for internal policies and
procedures.
Section  757.83  of  the  Statutes  deals  with  the  Constitution  of  the
Judicial  Commission.   Sec  757.85  deals  with  investigation (with  giving
notice  to  Judge)  and  prosecution as  stated  in  the  judgment  of  the  Privy
Council  already  referred  to  in  the  case  of  the  Judge  from  Trinidad  and
Tobago (Rees vs. Crane, 1994(1) All ER 833).  The above section provides
for an opportunity to the Judge even at the stage of investigation.  It reads: 
“757.85 Investigation; prosecution.
(1) (a) The Commission shall  investigate any possible misconduct
or permanent disability of a judge or circuit or supplemental  court
commissioner.  Misconduct constitutes cause under article VII, section
11, of the Constitution.  Except as provided in para (b), judges circuit
or  supplemental  court  commissioners,  clerks,  court  reporters,  court
employees  and  attorneys  shall  comply  with  requests  by  the
Commission for information, documents and other materials relating to
an investigation under this section.
(b) The judge or circuit or supplemental court commissioner who is
under investigation is not subject to the request procedure under part.
(a) but is subject to the subpoena procedure under sub. (2)
(2) The Commission may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and to commend the production of books,
328

papers, documents or tangible things designated in the subpoena in
connection with an investigation under this section.
(3) The Commission may notify a judge or circuit or supplemental
court  commissioner  that  the  commission  is  investigating  possible
misconduct  by  or  permanent  disability  of  the  judge  or  circuit  or
supplemental court commissioner.  Before finding probable cause, the
commission  shall  notify the  judge  or  circuit  or supplemental  court
commissioner of the substance of the complaint or petition and afford
the judge or circuit or supplemental court commissioner a reasonable
opportunity to respond.  If the judge or circuit or supplemental court
commissioner responds, the Commission shall consider the response
before it finds probable cause.
(4) The Commission may require a judge or circuit or supplemental
court commissioner who is under investigation for permanent disability
to submit to a medical examination arranged by the Commission.
(5) The Commission shall, upon a finding of probable cause that a
judge or circuit or supplemental court commissioner has engaged or is
engaging  in  misconduct,  file  a  formal  complaint  with  the  Supreme
Court.  Upon a finding of probable cause that a judge or circuit or
supplemental  court  commissioner  has  a  permanent  disability,  the
Commission  shall  file  a  petition  with  the  Supreme  Court.   If  the
Commission requests a jury under s. 757.87 (1), the request shall be
attached to the formal complaint or the petition.
329

(6) The  Commission  shall  prosecute any  case  of  misconduct  or
permanent disability in which it files a formal complaint or a petition.
(7) Insofar as practicable, the procedures applicable to civil actions
apply to proceedings under ss. 757.81 to 757.99 after the filing of a
complaint or petition.”
Section 757.89 states that the allegations of the complaint or petition
must be proved with a standard of “reasonable certainty by evidence that is
clear, satisfactory, and convincing.”  If the hearing is by a panel, the panel
shall  make  findings  of  fact,  conclusions  of  law  and  recommendations
regarding  appropriate  discipline  for  misconduct  or  appropriate  action  or
permanent  disability  and  shall  file  the  findings,  conclusions  and
recommendation with the Supreme Court.
Section  757.99(1)  states  that  the  Supreme  Court  shall  review the
findings of fact, conclusions of law and recommendations under sec 757.89
and determine appropriate discipline in cases of misconduct and appropriate
action in cases of permanent disability.  The rules of the Supreme Court
applicable to civil cases in the Supreme Court govern the review proceedings
of this section.
Section 757.93 relates to confidentiality of proceedings.  Sub clause (a)
of sub sec (1) thereof states that all proceedings under sections 757.81 to
757.99 relating to misconduct or permanent disability prior to the filing of a
330

petition or formal complaint by the Commission are confidential unless a
judge  or  circuit  waives  the  right  to  confidentiality  in  writing  to  the
Commission.  Any such waiver does not affect the confidentiality or the
identity of a person providing information under sub clause (b).
Sub clause (b) of sub sec (1) of sec 757.93 states that any person who
provides information to the Commission concerning probable misbehaviour
or permanent disability may request that the Commission_not disclose  his or
her identity to the judge or circuit prior to the filing of a petition or a formal
complaint before the Commission.
Sub section (2) of section 757.93 states that in case, prior to the filing
of a formal complaint or a petition, an investigation of possible misconduct
or permanent disability becomes known to the public, the Commission may
issue statements in order to confirm pendency of the investigation to qualify
the procedural aspects of the disciplinary proceedings, to explain the right of
a judge or circuit to a fair hearing without prejudgment, to state that the judge
or  circuit  denies  the  allegations,  to  state  that  an  investigation  has  been
completed and no probable cause has been found out in order to correct
public misinformation.
Section 757.94 deals with privileges and immunity.  Sub section (1)
states  that a complaint  or communication  alleging  judicial misconduct  or
permanent disability with the Commission or its staff or Panel and testimony
331

in  an  investigation  under  sec  757  is  privileged.   The  members  of  the
Commission or Panel shall be immune from public liability for any conduct
in the course of their official duties under sections 757.81 to 757.99
Section 757.95 deals with temporary suspension by the Supreme Court.
It states that Supreme Court may, following the filing of a formal complaint
or a petition by the Commission, prohibit a judge or a circuit from exercising
the  powers  of  a  judge  or  circuit  pending  formal  determination  of  the
proceedings.
It will be seen, therefore that Wisconsin provides for a two-tier system.
The  investigative  functions  are  before  the  Judicial  Commission  which
determines whether there is probable cause for coming to the conclusion that
there  is  misconduct  or  disability.  In  case  there  is  prima  facie  proof  of
misconduct or disability, the Commission initiates a complaint against the
judge in Wisconsin Supreme Court for which purpose a panel of Judges will
be formed from among the Supreme Court Judges to decide issues of fact and
law and the panel makes its recommendations to the Supreme Court which
reviews the same to pass final orders.  The judge is represented by counsel at
all stages, including the stage of investigation.  Sometimes, before referring a
matter to a panel, the Commission which has investigated into the complaint
initially may even invite the Judge to a meeting to discuss specific concerns
arising out of the investigation.
332

Formal advisory opinions  on  questions  judicial  conduct  or code  of
judicial ethics are not rendered by the Commission.  Such opinions are given
by the Judicial Conduct Advisory Committee as outlined in the appendix to
Supreme Court Rules, chapter 60.
333

CHAPTER XVIII
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA : RESTATEMENT OF VALUES OF
JUDICIAL LIFE AND INHOUSE PROCEDURE (1997)
In this chapter, we shall deal with two important resolutions of the
Supreme Court of India, on (A) Restatement of Values of Judicial Life and
(B) Inhouse Procedure within the Judiciary passed in 1997.
(A) RESTATEMENT OF VALUES OF JUDICIAL LIFE 
“  RESOLUTION  
The following two Resolutions have been ADOPTED in the Full Court
Meeting of the Supreme Court of India on May 7, 1997.
RESOLVED  that  an  in-house  procedure  should  be  devised  by  the
Hon’ble Chief Justice of India to take suitable remedial action against Judges
who by their acts of omission or commission do not follow the universally
accepted values of judicial life including those indicated in the “Restatement
of Values of Judicial Life”.
RESOLVED FURTHER THAT every Judge should make a declaration
of all his/her assets in the form of real estate or investments (held by him/her
334

in  his/her  own  name  or  in  the  name  of  his/her  spouse  or  any  person
dependent on him/her) within a reasonable time of assuming office and in the
case of sitting Judges within a reasonable time of adoption of this Resolution
and thereafter whenever any acquisition of a substantial nature is made, it
shall be disclosed within a reasonable time.  The declaration so made should
be similar declaration for the purpose of the record.  The declaration made by
the Judges or the Chief Justice, as the case may be, shall be confidential.
WHEREAS by a Resolution passed in the Chief Justices’ Conference
held  at New Delhi  on  September  18-19,  1992,  it  was  resolved  that  it  is
desirable  to  restate  the  pre-existing  and  universally  accepted  norms,
guidelines and conventions reflecting the high values of judicial life to be
followed by Judges during their tenure of office;
AND WHEREAS the Chief Justice of India was further requested by
that Resolution to constitute a Committee for preparing the draft restatement
to be circulated to the Chief Justices of the High Courts for discussion with
their colleagues, which was duly circulated on 21.11.1993;
AND  WHEREAS  suggestions  have  been  received  from  the  Chief
Justices of the High Courts after discussion with their colleagues;
AND WHEREAS A Committee has been reconstituted by the Chief
Justice of India on April 7, 1997, to finalise the ‘Restatement of Values of
335

Judicial Life’ after taking note of the draft Restatement of Values of Judicial
Life prepared by a Committee appointed pursuant to the Resolution passed in
the Chief Justices’ Conference 1992 and placed before the Chief Justices’
Conference in 1993;
AND WHEREAS such a Committee constituted by the Chief Justice of
India has  prepared  a draft  restatement  after  taking  into  consideration  the
views received from various High Courts to the draft which was circulated to
them; 
NOW, THEREFORE, on a consideration of the views  of the High
Courts  on  the  draft,  the  restatement  of  the  pre-existing  and  universally
accepted norms, guidelines and conventions called the ‘RESTATEMENT OF
VALUES OF JUDICIAL LIFE’ to serve as a guide to be observed by Judges,
essential for an independent, strong and respected judiciary, indispensable in
the impartial administration of justice, as redrafted, has been considered in
the Full Court Meeting of the Supreme Court of India on May 7, 1997 and
has been ADOPTED for due observance.
RESTATEMENT OF VALUES OF JUDICIAL LIFE
(1) Justice must not merely be done but it must also be seen to be done.
The behaviour and conduct of members of the higher judiciary must
reaffirm  the  people’s  faith  in  the  impartiality  of  the  judiciary.
336

Accordingly, any act of a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court,
whether in official or personal capacity, which erodes the credibility of
this perception has to be avoided.
(2) A Judge should not contest the election to any office of  a  Club,
society or other association; further he shall not hold such elective
office except in a society or association connected with the law.
(3) Close  association  with  individual  members  of  the  Bar,  particularly
those who practise in the same court, shall be eschewed.
(4) A Judge should not permit any member of his immediate family, such
as spouse, son, daughter, son-in-law or daughter-in-law or any other
close relative, if a member of the Bar, to appear before him or even be
associated in any manner with a cause to be dealt with by him.
(5) No  member  of  his  family,  who  is  a  member  of  the  Bar,  shall  be
permitted to use the residence in which the Judge actually resides or
other facilities for professional work.
(6) A  Judge  should  practise  a  degree  of  aloofness  consistent  with  the
dignity of his office.
(7) A Judge shall not hear and decide a matter in which a member of his
family, a close relation or a friend is concerned.
(8) A Judge shall not enter into public debate or express his views in
public on political matters or on matters that are pending or are likely
to arise for judicial determination.
(9) A Judge is expected to let his judgments speak for themselves.  He
shall not give interview to the media.
337

(10) A Judge shall not accept gifts or hospitality except from his family,
close relations and friends.
(11) A Judge shall not hear and decide a matter in which a company in
which he holds shares is concerned unless he has disclosed his interest
and no objection to his hearing and deciding the matter is raised.
(12) A Judge shall not speculate in shares, stocks or the like.
(13) A Judge should not engage directly or indirectly in trade or business,
either by himself or in association with any other person. (publication
of a legal treatise or any activity in the nature of a hobby shall not be
construed as trade or business).
(14) A Judge should not ask for, accept contributions or otherwise actively
associate himself with the raising of any fund for any purpose.
(15) A  Judge  should  not  seek  any  financial  benefit  in  the  form  of  a
perquisite  or  privilege  attached  to  his  office  unless  it  is  clearly
available.  Any doubt in this behalf must be got resolved and clarified
through the Chief Justice.
(16) Every Judge must at all times be conscious that he is under the public
gaze  and  there  should  be  no  act  or  omission  by  him  which  is
unbecoming of a high office he occupies and the public esteem in
which that office is held.
These are only the “Restatement of the Values of Judicial Life” and are
not meant to be exhaustive but illustrative of what is expected of a Judge”.
338

The  Law  Commission  recommends  that  till  a  statutory  Code  of
Conduct  is  published  in  accordance  with  the  proposed  law,  the  above
‘Restatement of Judicial Values’ approved by the Supreme Court on May 7,
1997 shall be the Code of Conduct to be followed, the breach of which shall
be treated as amounting to ‘misbehaviour’. This has been reiterated by us in
Chapter XX.
(B)   DISCIPLINE AND REMOVAL OF JUDGES:  
“  IN-HOUSE PROCEDURE  
This Committee has  been constituted  with  a view to devise an  In-
House Procedure for taking suitable remedial action against Judges who, by
their acts of omission or commission, do not follow universally accepted
values of Judicial life including those included in the Restatement of Values
of Judicial Life.
Complaints are often received containing allegations against a Judge
pertaining to the discharge of his judicial functions.  Sometimes complaints
are received with regard to the conduct and behaviour of the Judge outside
the Court. The complaints are generally made by a party to the proceedings
who  feels  dissatisfied  with the adverse  order passed  by the  Judge  or by
persons  having  a  personal  grudge  against  the  Judge.   Most  of  these
complaints are found to be false and frivolous.  But there may be complaints
339

which  cannot  be regarded as baseless  and may require deeper probe.  A
complaint casting reflection on the independence and integrity of a Judge is
bound to have a prejudicial effect on the image of the higher judiciary of
which the Judge is an honoured member.  The adoption of the In-House
Procedure would enable a complaint against a Judge being dealt with at the
appropriate level within the institution.  Such a procedure would serve a dual
purpose.   In  the  first  place,  the  allegations  against  a  Judge  would  be
examined  by  his  peers  and  not  by  an  outside  agency  and  thereby  the
independence of the judiciary would be maintained.  Secondly, the awareness
that there exists a machinery for examination of complaints against the Judge
would preserve the faith of the people in the independence and impartiality of
the judicial process.  The Committee has approached the task assigned to it in
this perspective.
HIGH COURT JUDGE:
A complaint against a Judge of a High Court is received either by the
Chief  Justice  of  that  High  Court  or  by  the  Chief  Justice  of  India  (CJI)
directly.  Sometimes such a complaint is made to the President of India.  The
complaints that are received by the President of India are generally forwarded
to the CJI.   The Committee suggests the adoption of the following procedure
for dealing with such complaints:-
(1) Where the complaint is received against a Judge of a High Court by the
Chief Justice of the High Court, he shall examine it. If it is found by
him that it is frivolous or directly related to the merits of a substantive
340

decision in a judicial matter or does not involve any serious complaint
of misconduct or impropriety, he shall file the complaint and inform
the CJI accordingly.  If it is found by him that the complaint is of a
serious nature involving misconduct or impropriety, he shall ask for
the response thereto of the Judge concerned.  If on a consideration of
the allegations  in the complaint in the light of the response of the
Judge concerned, the Chief Justice of the High Court is satisfied that
no further action is necessary he shall file the complaint and inform the
CJI  accordingly.  If the Chief  Justice of the  High  Court  is  of  the
opinion that the allegations contained in the complaint need a deeper
probe, he shall forward to the CJI the complaint and the response of the
Judge concerned along with his comments.
(2) When the complaint is received by the CJI directly or it is forwarded to
him by the President of India the CJI shall examine it.  If it is found by
him that it is  either frivolous  or directly related to the merits of a
substantive decision in a judicial matter or does not involve any serious
complaint of misconduct or impropriety, he shall file it.  The complaint
shall then be sent by the CJI to the Chief  Justice of the concerned
High Court for his comments.  On the receipt of the complaint from the
CJI the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court shall ask for the
response  of  the  Judge  concerned.  If  on  a  consideration  of  the
allegations in the complaint in the light of the response of the Judge
concerned the Chief  Justice of the High Court  is satisfied that no
further action is necessary or if he is of the opinion that the allegations
341

contained in the complaint need a deeper probe, he shall return the
complaint to the CJI along with a statement of the response of the
Judge concerned and his comments.
(3) After considering the complaint in the light of the response of the
Judge concerned and the comments of the Chief Justice of High Court,
the CJI, if he is of the opinion that a deeper probe is required into the
allegations  contained  in  the  complaint,  he  shall  constitute  a  three
member Committee consisting of two Chief Justices of High Courts
other than the High Court to which the Judge belongs and one High
Court  Judge.   The  said  Committee  shall  hold  an  inquiry  into  the
allegations contained in the complaint.  The inquiry shall be in the
nature of a fact finding inquiry wherein the Judge concerned would be
entitled  to  appear  and  have  his  say.   [But  it  would  not  be  formal
judicial inquiry involving the examination and cross-examination of
witnesses and representations by lawyers].
(4) For  conducting  the  inquiry  the  Committee  shall  devise  its  own
procedure consistent with the principles of natural justice.
(5) After such inquiry the Committee may conclude and report to the CJI
that  (a)  there  is  no  substance  in  the  allegations  contained  in  the
complaint,  or  (b)  there  is  sufficient  substance  in  the  allegations
contained in the complaint and the misconduct disclosed is so serious
that it calls for initiation of proceedings for removal of the Judge, or
(c) there is substance in the allegations contained in the complaint bu
342

the misconduct disclosed is not of such a serious nature as to call for
initiation of proceedings for removal of the Judge.
A copy of the Report shall be furnished to the Judge concerned
by the Committee.
(6) In a case where the Committee finds that there is no substance in the
allegations contained in the complaint, the complaint shall be filed by
the CJI.
(7)  If  the  Committee  finds  that  there  is  substance  in  the  allegations
contained in the complaint and the misconduct disclosed in the allegations
is such that it calls for initiation of proceedings for removal of the Judge,
the CJI shall adopt the following course:-
(i) the Judge concerned should be advised to resign his office or
seek voluntary retirement;
(ii) In case the Judge expresses his unwillingness to resign or
seek voluntary retirement, the Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court should be advised by the CJI not to allocate any
judicial work to the Judge concerned and the President of
India and the Prime Minister shall be intimated that this has
been done because allegations  against the Judge had been
found by the Committee to be so serious as to warrant the
initiation  of proceedings  for removal  and  the  copy of the
report of the Committee may be enclosed.
(8) If the Committee finds that there is substance in the allegations but the
misconduct  disclosed  is  not  so  serious  as  to  call  for  initiation  of
343

proceedings  for  removal  of  the  Judge,  the  CJI  shall  call  the  Judge
concerned and advise him accordingly and may also direct that the report
of the Committee be placed on record.
CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE HIGH COURT:
A complaint against the Chief Justice of a High Court is normally
received either by the CJI or by the President of India who forwards it to the
CJI.  On receipt of such a complaint the CJI shall examine it and if it is found
by  him  that  it  is  either  frivolous  or  directly  related  to  the  merits  of  a
substantive  decision  in a judicial  matter or does  not involve  any serious
complaint of misconduct or impropriety, he shall file the complaint without
any further action.  In case it is found by the CJI that the complaint is of a
serious  nature  involving  misconduct  or  impropriety, he  shall  ask  for  the
response of the Chief Justice concerned about the allegations contained in the
complaint.   If,  on  a  consideration  of  the  allegations  in  the  light  of  the
response of the Chief Justice concerned, the CJI is satisfied that no further
action is necessary he shall file the complaint.  If, however, he is of the
opinion that the allegations contained in the complaint need a deeper probe,
he shall constitute a three member Committee consisting of a Judge of the
Supreme Court and two Chief Justices of other High Courts. The Committee
shall hold an inquiry on the same pattern as the Committee constituted to
examine a complaint against a Judge of the High Court and further action in
the light of the findings of the Committee shall be taken by the CJI on the
same lines.
344

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT:
If a complaint is received against a Judge of the Supreme Court by the
CJI or if such a complaint is forwarded to him by the President of India, the
CJI shall first examine it and if it is found by him that it is either frivolous or
directly related to the merits of a substantive decision in a judicial matter or
does not involve any serious complaint of misconduct or impropriety, he
shall file the complaint without any further action.  In case it is found by him
that the complaint is of a serious nature involving misconduct or impropriety,
he  shall  ask  for  the  response  thereto  of  the  Judge  concerned.   If,  on  a
consideration  of the allegations  in the light of the response of the Judge
concerned, the CJI is satisfied that no further action is necessary he shall file
the complaint.  If, however, he is of the opinion that the matter needs a
deeper probe, he would constitute a Committee consisting of three Judges of
the Supreme Court.  The said Committee shall hold an inquiry on the same
pattern as the Committee constituted to examine a complaint against a Judge
of a High Court and further action on the same lines in the light of the
findings of the Committee shall be taken by the CJI.
The Committee feels that the In-House Procedure suggested herein will
allay  the  misgivings  in  certain  quarters  that  the  members  of  the  higher
judiciary are not accountable for their conduct.  At the same time, it will also
serve as a safeguard for the members of the higher judiciary from being
345

maligned or being subjected to vilification by false and frivolous complaints.
The Committee earnestly hopes that the occasions for invoking the In-House
Procedure will seldom arise”.
346

CHAPTER XIX
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA:  IN-HOUSE PROCEDURE  IN 
JUSTICE A.M.BHATTACHARJEE’S CASE
        On the question of In-House procedure, within the Judicial Branch, the
Supreme  Court  has  laid  down  the  procedure  in  the  case  reported  in  C.
Ravichandran Iyer v. Justice A.M. Bhattacharjee (1995 (5) SCC 457).   We
shall refer to the principles laid down in that case.
In the year 1994-95, certain allegations were made against the then
Chief  Justice  of  Bombay  High  Court,  Justice  A.M.  Bhattacharjee.   The
allegations related to monies allegedly paid by certain publishers to the Judge
in respect of some books authored by the judge but published from outside
India.   It is not necessary to go into the nature of allegations against the
Judge but it is sufficient to state that various Bar Associations in Bombay
sought the resignation of the judge.   They also sought action under the
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.    A practising advocate filed a writ petition in
the Supreme Court under Art. 32 of the Constitution seeking inquiry against
the Judge or his resignation, in the form of a PIL.
The Supreme Court took up the matter and after giving a notice to the
various  parties,  it  laid  down  various  principles  relating  to  In-House
procedure, particularly as to what is to be done if the conduct of the Judge
347

was not such as to warrant removal by address by the Houses of Parliament to
the President.  
The Supreme Court considered the scope and meaning of the word
‘misbehaviour’ in Art. 124(4) and observed that the word ‘misbehaviour’ is
advisedly not defined.   It is a vague and elastic word and embraces within its
sweep different faces of conduct as opposed to good conduct.  The Court
referred to the meaning of the word ‘misconduct’ and adverted to its meaning
in cases of professional misconduct, such as in the Full Bench decision of the
Madras High Court in First Grade Pleader, Re (AIR 1931 Mad 422), and to
‘misconduct’ of arbitrators.   It quoted from an earlier judgment in Krishna
Swami v. Union of India, 1992 (4) 605 to the effect that ‘every act or conduct
or even error of judgment or negligent acts by higher judiciary per se does
not  amount  to  misbehaviour.    Wilful  abuses  of  Judicial  office,  wilful
misconduct in the office, corruption, lack of integrity, or any other offence
involving moral turpitude would be ‘misbehaviour’.   Persistent failure to
perform judicial duties of the Judge or wilful abuse of office  dolus malus
would  be misbehaviour.    Misbehaviour  would  extend  to conduct of the
Judge in or beyond the execution of Judicial office.   Even administrative
actions or omissions too are accompaniment of mens rea.
The Supreme Court considered various principles relating to judicial
independence,  judicial  individualism.    It  stated  that  the  procedure  for
removal by address under Art. 124(4) and (5) was cumbersome and that in
348

some  cases  where  the  conduct  does  not  warrant  removal,  some  other
mechanism must be innovated.  
The observations of the Supreme Court in para 15 (p. 471) in this
behalf are as follows:
“15. The Founding Fathers of the Constitution advisedly adopted a
cumbersome process of impeachment as a mode to remove a Judge
from office for only proved misbehaviour or incapacity which implies
that impeachment process is not available for minor abrasive behaviour
of a Judge. It reinforces that independence to the Judge is of paramount
importance to sustain, strengthen and elongate rule of law.  Parliament
sparingly resorts to the mechanism of impeachment designed under the
Constitution by political process as the extreme measure only upon a
finding of proved misbehaviour or incapacity recorded by a committee
constituted  under  section  3  of  the  Act  by  way  of  address  to  the
President  in  the  manner  laid  down  in  Art.  124(4)  and  (5)  of  the
Constitution, the Act and the Rules made thereunder.”
The Supreme Court reiterated the need for a mechanism to correct
behaviour which did not warrant removal by address to the President.   It
observed again in paras 25 and 26 as follows:
349

“25. Guarantee of tenure and its protection by the Constitution would
not, however, accord sanctuary for corruption or grave misbehaviour.
Yet every action or omission by a judicial officer in the performance of
his  duties  which  is  not  a  good  conduct  necessarily,  may  not  be
misbehaviour indictable by impeachment, but its insidious effect may
be pervasive and may produce deleterious effect on the integrity and
impartiality of the Judge.  Every misbehaviour in juxtaposition to good
behaviour, as a constitutional tautology, will not support impeachment
but a misbehaviour which is not a good behaviour may be improper
conduct not befitting to the standard expected of a Judge.  Threat of
impeachment  process  itself  may  swerve  a  Judge  to  fall  prey  to
misconduct  but  it  serves  disgrace  to  use  impeachment  process  for
minor offences or abrasive conduct on the part of a Judge.   The bad
behaviour of one Judge has a rippling effect on the reputation of the
judiciary as a whole.  When the edifice of judiciary is built heavily on
public  confidence  and  respect,  the  damage  by  an  obstinate  Judge
would rip apart the entire judicial structure built in the Constitution.
26. Bad  conduct  or  bad  behaviour  of  a  Judge,  therefore,  needs
correction to prevent erosion of public confidence in the efficacy of
judicial process or dignity of the institution or credibility to the judicial
office held by the obstinate Judge.  When the Judge cannot be removed
by impeachment process for such conduct but generates widespread
feeling of dissatisfaction among the general public, the question would
350

be who would stamp out the rot and judge the Judge or who would
impress upon the Judge either to desist from repetition or to demit the
office in grace?   Who would be the appropriate authority?   Who
would be the principal mover in that behalf?  The hiatus between bad
behaviour and impeachable misbehaviour needs to be filled in to stem
erosion  of  public  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  judicial  process.
Whether the Bar of that Court has any role to play either in an attempt
to correct the perceived fallen standard or is entitled to make a demand
by a resolution or a group action to pressurize the Judge to resign his
office as a Judge?  The resolution to these questions involves delicate
but pragmatic approach to the questions of constitutional law.”
The Supreme Court observed that except under the provisions of the
Judges  Inquiry Act 1968  and the procedure for Address  indicated  in the
Constitution in Art. 121, 124(4) and 124(5), by necessary implication, no
other “forum” or a platform is available for “discussion” of the conduct of the
judge in the discharge of his duties as a judge of the Supreme Court or High
Court, much less.   The Bar Council or groups of practising advocates could
not publicly discuss the issue.   However, it observed (para 34) that the office
bearers of the Bar Association could meet the Judge in his chambers and
apprise him of the relevant information in its possession to see whether the
Judge would mend himself.     If that does not yield results, they could
approach the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned. (If the behaviour of
351

a Chief Justice of a High Court was in question, they could approach the
Chief Justice of India.)
The  Supreme  Court  suggested  that  the  mechanism  to  deal  with
behaviour which does not warrant removal by address of the Houses of the
Parliament to the President, is  self-regulation  within the  Judicial  Branch.
The Supreme Court observed (para 35 p. 479):
“It is of importance to emphasise here that impeachment is meant to be
a drastic remedy and needs to be used in serious cases.  But there must
exist some other means to ensure that Judges do not abuse the trust the
society has in them.  It seems to us that self-regulation by the judiciary
is the only method which can be tried and adopted.”
The  Supreme  Court  then  suggested  that  the  position  of  the  Chief
Justice of India is a unique position as the head of the Judiciary and that he
could be approached for appropriate action within the Judicial Branch.   The
Court referred to an article by Irving R. Kaufman, Chief Justice, US Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit [(Vol. 88) 1978-79, p. 681 Yale Law Journal
“Chilling Judicial Independence”] wherein it was stated that “pressure by
peers” would yield salutary effect on the erring Judge and that the judicial
system can better survive by pressure of the peers instead of disciplinary
action.
352

The  Supreme  Court  also  referred  to  another  article  by  Harry  T.
Edwards, Chief Justice, US Courts of Appeal for the District of Colombia
Circuit (Vol. 87, Michigan Law Review, p. 765 (1989)) “Regulating Judicial
Misconduct and Divining ‘Good Behaviour’ for Federal Judges”, in which
this aspect of “self-regulation” was emphasized.   Judge Edwards stated: 
“I believe that federal judges are subject to some measure of control by
peers with respect to behaviour or intimidation that adversely affects
the work of the court and that does not rise to the level of impeachable
misconduct.   ‘I would submit that the ideal of judicial independence is
not compromised when judges are monitored and are regulated by their
own peers.’   This limited system of judicial self-regulation resists no
constitutional  dilemma  as  long  as  removal  power  remains  with
Congress.   ‘I  argue  that  judiciary  alone  should  monitor  this  bad
behaviour through a system of self-regulation.’”
Having thus pointed out that in cases where the behaviour of a judge of
the  Supreme Court  or  High  Court  does  not  warrant  removal  by  way  of
address of Houses of Parliament to the President, “self-regulation” within the
judiciary by way of an In-House procedure is appropriate, the Supreme Court
indicated the procedure as follows:
“40. Bearing all the above in mind, we are of the considered view
that where the complaint relates to the Judge of the High Court, the Chief
353

Justice  of  that  High  Court,  after  verification,  and  if  necessary,  after
confidential  enquiry  from  his  independent  source,  should  satisfy  himself
about the truth of the imputation made by the Bar Association through its
office-bearers against the Judge and consult the Chief Justice of India, where
deemed necessary, by placing all the information with him.   When the Chief
Justice of India is seized of the matter, to avoid embarrassment to him and to
allow fairness in the procedure to be adopted in furtherance thereof, the Bar
should suspend all further actions to enable the Chief Justice of India to
appropriately deal with the matter.   This is necessary because any action he
may take  must  not  only  be  just  but  must  also  appear  to  be  just  to  all
concerned, i.e., it must not even appear to have been taken under pressure
from any quarter.   The Chief Justice of India, on receipt of the information
from the Chief Justice of the High Court,  after being satisfied about the
correctness and truth touching the conduct of the Judge, may tender such
advice either directly or may initiate such action, as is deemed necessary or
warranted under given facts and circumstances.   If circumstances permit, it
may be salutary to take the Judge into confidence before initiating action.
On the decision being taken by the Chief Justice of India, the matter should
rest at that.   This procedure would not only facilitate nipping in the bud the
conduct of a Judge leading to loss of public confidence in the courts and
sustain public faith in the efficacy of the rule of law and respect for the
judiciary,  but  would  also  avoid  needless  embarrassment  of  contempt
proceedings against the office-bearers of the Bar Association and group libel
against all concerned.   The independence of judiciary and the stream of
354

public justice would remain pure and unsullied.   The Bar Association could
remain a useful arm of the judiciary and in the case of sagging reputation of
the particular Judge, the Bar Association could take up the matter with the
Chief Justice of the High Court and await his response for the action taken
thereunder for a reasonable period.”
355

CHAPTER XX
DISCUSSION, VIEWS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON  POINTS
REFERRED TO IN CHAPTER II 
The various issues which call for discussion and recommendations in
regard to the proposed draft of the JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL, 2005 have
been enumerated in Chapter II.  We shall deal with them one after the other in
this Chapter and give our views and recommendations. 
(I) Is judicial independence absolute and are not judges accountable?  
This question has been dealt with elaborately in Chapter III.  It has been
pointed out that the Constitution is supreme and each of the three branches
have their respective allocated powers under the Constitution.  None of the
three  branches  can  claim  supremacy  over  the  other.   The  principle  that
Parliament is supreme, a principle advocated by Prof. Dicey is today not
accepted even in England where that principle originated.   Recent judgments
of  Laws J. in England, and Judge Iacobucci of Canada clearly state that it is
the Constitution, whether written or convention bound, that is supreme and
that each of the three wings must work in harmony.   Our Supreme Court has
also stated so in Special reference No.1 of 1964 Keshav Singh’s Case (1965)
1 SCR 413 and in Peoples’ Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India AIR
356

2003 SC 2363. Each of the branches is put in check by the other as indicated
in the Constitution and in fact, the Constitution’s main purpose is to create
checks and balances.  Merely because the Supreme Court exercises power of
judicial review over Parliamentary and executive action, the Courts cannot
claim supremacy over other branches.  Judicial review is again a basic feature
of the Constitution.    Judges are limited in their powers and functions by the
provisions of the Constitution and the laws, by precedents, conventions and
by traditional  judicial values  or judicial ethics. Further there are implicit
restrictions by the manner in which the people perceive them or expect them
to behave or to conduct themselves. 
As  regards  disciplining  judges  of  the  superior  courts  who  may be
guilty of misbehaviour, the Constitution contains express provisions. Art. 124
(4) of the Constitution provides for a Motion for removal of a judge being
moved in either House of Parliament by a requisite number of Members of
Parliament,  followed  by  `investigation  and  proof’  of  misbehaviour  and
thereafter an address for removal if the misbehaviour was proved. The Judges
(Inquiry) Act and the Rules of 1969 thereunder provide that the exercise of
investigation and proof would be by a three-member Inquiry Committee of
two  judges  and  a  jurist,  to  whom  the  reference  would  be  made  by  the
Speaker/Chairman of either House as the case may be.
This  was  felt  inadequate  and cumbersome to  deal  with  all  kinds  of
misbehaviour and therefore, in the year 1997, the Supreme Court of India
357

formulated the  ‘Restatement of Values of Judicial Life’ for all Judges of
the Supreme Court and High Courts, to follow. The reason why the word
‘Restatement’  was  used  was  that  these  values  were  already  there,  some
written, some unwritten and some followed over centuries as a matter of
tradition or convention.  In as much as they were not newly created or born,
the Supreme Court called them 'Restatement of Values of Judicial life’.  One
more reason was that the Court felt the need to inform incumbent Judges or
those  freshly appointed, that  there is  a Code of Conduct  which they are
expected to follow.  The need to apprise the Judicial Branch of these values
was perhaps felt as a necessity to prevent a fall in the standards of conduct. 
Along  with  the  ‘Restatement  of  Values  of  Judicial  Life’,  an  `In-House
Procedure’ for dealing with misbehavior or even `deviant behaviour’ was
issued.  The mechanism provided therein is to have such misbehavior or
deviant  behaviour  corrected  by  ‘peers’  within  the  Judicial  Branch,  a
procedure which is in vogue in a number of countries.  Any breach of the
Code of Conduct or Values of Judicial Life could be the cause for correction
by the peers.  
Under the present Bill of 2005 in the above address procedure is retained
and, the investigation and proof of charges will have to be taken up by a five-
judge National Judicial Council to whom the matter may be referred by the
Speaker/Chairman of either House as the case may be, upon a Motion. If on
such reference, the Judicial Council finds that the charge of misbehaviour is
358

proved  it  will  send  its  Report  with  its  recommendation  to  the
Speaker/Chairman whereupon the House will take it up under Art. 124 (4).
Under the Bill of 2005 an additional procedure by way of a complaint
is now prescribed. The complaint can be by any person. It will be scrutinized
and verified by the same National Judicial Council of five judges and if it
decides  to  proceed  further  it  will  frame  charges  and  conduct  a  regular
investigation. If it finds that the charges that are proved warrant removal of
the judge concerned, it will send its Report to the President to be placed
before both Houses of Parliament. Thereafter the same procedure as in the
case of removal by address is to be followed. 
In the view of the Law Commission, deduced in the background of the
Constitution and the law and the principles of judicial accountability referred
to in the earlier chapters, the broad features of the present Bill of 2005 cannot
be described as an encroachment on the independence of the Judicial Branch.
The  Bill of 2005 appears  to provide  an  additional  procedure which  may
ultimately, in some cases, lead to ‘removal’ by address.  The provisions of the
Bill of 2005 are by and large consistent with what has been stated in the
Judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Justice  V.Ramaswami’s case.  The
proposals in the Bill also facilitate statutory recognition, with some minor
changes, to the Restatement of Judicial Values and the In-House procedure
already  approved  by  the  Full  Court  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  1997.
359

Therefore,  it  will  not  be  correct  to  view  this  Bill  as  an  attempt  by  the
Executive or the Legislature to encroach upon independence of the Judiciary.
As stated  in Chapter III, judicial independence is  not absolute  and
judicial accountability is and must go, hand in hand, with the independence
of the judiciary.
 
In this Report, the Law Commission is further recommending that the
new statute must provide for the imposition of one or other of certain ‘minor
measures’  by  the  Judicial  Council  against  any  Judge  found  guilty  of
‘misbehaviour’ which may not warrant removal. Such minor measures would
include issuing advisories, warning, request to resign, withdrawal of work,
public or private censure or admonition etc.   Such minor measures, short of
removal,  are  in  vogue  in  several  countries.  The  incorporation  of  such
provisions for ‘minor measures’ by statute has been upheld by the federal
courts in U.S.A. even though there is no express provision therefor in the US
Federal Constitution. As already noticed in the earlier Chapters, there are
similar provisions in the U.K., Canada and Germany and in almost all the
States in the U.S. We have also referred to some of those provisions as found
in the Constitution and statutes of California, Idaho, Connecticut, Texas etc.
This is on the principle that it is for the judiciary to set its own house in
order.  This is not to be viewed as an encroachment by the Executive or the
Legislature so long as the disciplinary control is vested in ‘peers’ within the
360

Judicial Branch.  This aspect will be elaborated with reference to judicial
precedents, hereinbelow.
In the context of s.21 of the Bill of 2005 which provides for stoppage
of assigning judicial work to a judge pending investigation and inquiry, a
question  arises  whether  withdrawal  of  cases  from  the  Judge’s  list  or
suspension pending the inquiry proceedings is permissible.   This question
also will be discussed in detail in this Chapter.
 
The Law Commission reiterates that judicial independence is not
absolute, judicial independence and accountability are two sides of the
same coin and that the present proposals in the Bill of 2005 together with
our recommendations for enabling the Judicial Council to impose ‘minor
measures’  including  stoppage  of  assignment  of  judicial  work  are
constitutional.  They  ought  not  to  be  viewed  as  an  encroachment  on
Judicial Independence by the Executive or by the Legislature.  
(II) What  are  the  principles  of  Constitutional  law  laid  down  by  the
Supreme Court in the cases relating to Justice V. Ramaswami?
In Chapter VI, the four judgments of the Supreme Court of India and the
background  facts  in  the  cases  of  Justice  V.Ramaswami  have  been  fully
discussed and in this chapter we propose to give a summary of the principles
of law laid down in those cases. 
361

(i) Initially, the then Chief Justice of India appointed a Committee of Judges
of the Supreme Court (B.C.Ray, K.J.Shetty and M.N.Venkatachalaiah JJ) to
go into the facts and to find out if there was any prima facie case against the
Judge which required the Judge not to exercise his judicial functions pending
the investigation proceedings.  The Committee held that a Judge could not be
required not to exercise his judicial functions unless the appropriate authority
had given a finding that the Judge’s conduct  involved moral turpitude and
the Chief Justice of India was satisfied  that such inference was reasonable. 
(ii) Thereafter, there were four judgments of the Supreme Court, namely Sub
Committee on Judicial Accountability vs Union of India: 1991(4) SCC 699;
Sarojini  Ramaswami  (Mrs) vs   Union  of  India 1992(4)  SCC  506;
Krishnaswamy v.  Union of India 1992 (4) SCC 605 and  Lily Thomas   vs
Speaker,  Lok  Sabha  1993  (4)  SCC  234.    We  have  referred  to  these
judgments in detail in Chapter VI.
The following  principles  of Constitutional  law were laid down in the
above Judgments: 
(1) The Motion referred to in Sec 3(1) of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 is
only in the nature of a complaint by a group of Members of Parliament
and is not part of the Parliamentary process.  The stages at which the
Motion  is  initiated,  admitted  by  the  Speaker/Chairman  and  when  an
362

Inquiry  Committee  inquires  into  the  allegations  and  finds  that  the
allegations  of  misbehaviour  are  proved,  are  all  not  part  of  the
Parliamentary process. Parliamentary process is the political process.  The
inquiry  before  the  Inquiry  Committee  is  judicial.   The  Parliamentary
process starts only after the Inquiry Committee submits its Report to the
House of Parliament that a case of misbehavior or incapacity on the part
of the Judge is proved.   The motion once admitted by the Speaker does
not lapse upon the dissolution of the Lok Sabha.
(2) Inasmuch as the process till the Report is submitted by the Committee to
the House is not part of the Parliamentary process, the discussion on the
Judge’s  conduct  when  the  Motion  is  initiated  or  admitted  and  the
discussion before and in the Inquiry Committee and in its Report, does
not  offend  Art  121  of  the  Constitution  which  prohibits  discussion  in
Parliament “with reference to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme
Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a
motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal
of the Judge as hereinafter provided”.     
(3) Art. 121 lifts the bar against discussion about the conduct of the Judge,
once the Report is submitted by the Inquiry Committee to the House and
at that stage for the first time, during the Parliamentary process, it is
permissible to discuss the conduct of the Judge. In fact, it is necessary at
that stage to give the judge a copy of the Report of the Inquiry Committee
363

and an opportunity to the Judge to meet the findings.  The judge is not
entitled to a copy of the Report at any anterior stage.
(4) The  words  ‘proved  misbehavior  or  incapacity’  indicate  that  the
misbehavior  or  incapacity  has  to  be  proved  initially  before  a  forum
outside Parliament.  The Inquiry Committee appointed under sec. 3(1) of
the  1968  Act  is  meant  to  go  into  the  ‘proof’  of  the  misbehavior  or
incapacity and as that procedure is outside the Parliamentary process as
stated above, it satisfies the requirement of the proof being established
outside  the  Parliament.  Thus  the  procedure before the submission  of
Report and thereafter is a blend of judicial and Parliamentary processes.  
(5) The passing of a law for the purpose of prescribing the procedure for
removal as visualised by Art. 124(5) is a condition precedent for initiating
any Motion in Parliament.  Thus, Art 124(5) is not merely a provision for
enabling a law to be passed.     Unless such a law is passed, no Motion
can be initiated under Art. 124(4). 
(6) The Committee of Judges appointed under Sec. 3(1) performs a judicial
function.  In fact under the proviso to sec. 200(2) of the Government of
India Act, 1935, a Judge could not be removed except by the decision of a
disciplinary committee of the Privy Council. The Privy Council was the
highest judicial body so far as the British colonies were concerned at that
point in time. 
364

(7) At the stage of admission of the Motion under s. 3 (1) of the 1968 Act, the
Speaker or the Chairman can take a decision after consulting such persons
as he may deem fit, as provided in sec. 3(1) of the 1968 Act.  One of the
best persons whom he could consult is the Chief Justice of India. The
Chief  Justice  of  India,  as  the  head  of  the  Judiciary,  could  give  the
necessary advice. 
(8) Once the motion is admitted and a reference is made under Sec. 3(2) to
the Committee, the Motion is kept in abeyance and it gets activated only
when a report of the Inquiry Committee is given with the finding that the
Judge is guilty of misbehavior or that he is incapacitated.      
(9) The  1968  Act  and  the  Rules  made  thereunder  provide  for  a  judicial
process for determination of facts and supersede the rules, if any, made by
the House of Parliament under Art. 118 of the Constitution of India.  The
procedure laid down in the Rules made under Art. 118 for appointing
committees is part of the Parliamentary process but in as much as those
Rules are superseded  by the 1968 Act and Rules made under that Act, the
procedure becomes judicial and the Parliamentary process starts only after
a  Report  of  ‘proved  misbehavior  or  incapacity’  is  submitted  by  the
Inquiry Committee to the House.  Thereafter, the Motion which is kept in
abeyance, gets activated and the Parliamentary process commences. 
365

(10)On receiving a notice of Motion under sec. 3 of the 1968 Act, only where
the Speaker/ Chairman forms an opinion that there is a prima facie case
for investigation, he will constitute an Inquiry Committee as prescribed.
(11)(a) At the stage of admitting the Motion under Section 3(1) of the Act
and  before referring  the  allegations  to  a Committee,  the  Judge  is  not
entitled,  as  of  right,  to  an  opportunity.  It  is  open  to  the  Speaker  or
Chairman, to give an opportunity to the Judge, if he feels that in the facts
and circumstances of the case, it is appropriate to give such opportunity.  
    (b) During the course of the inquiry before the Committee, the judge is
entitled to cross-examine witnesses and also examine witnesses on his
side.
(12)Once the Inquiry Committee in its Report holds that the ‘misbehaviour or
incapacity’ is not proved, the matter ends there and the Speaker/Chairman
cannot thereafter proceed with the Motion.    This is because under Art.
121 there can be no discussion in Parliament about the conduct of a Judge
if misbehaviour or incapacity is not proved outside the Parliament.
(13)But  where  the  Inquiry  Committee  holds  that  the  ‘misbehaviour  or
incapacity’ is proved, Parliament is not bound by that verdict and it is
open  to  it  to  go  into  the  matter  and  come to  a different  conclusion,
namely, that ‘misbehaviour or incapacity’ has not been proved.
366

(14) Parliament is entitled to go into the probative value of the evidence on
which the Committee has relied. 
(15) Among  the  three  Members  in  the  Committee  constituted  under
Section 3(1) of the 1968 Act, as per the Rules of 1969 made under that
Act,  if two members hold that the charges are not proved and one holds
that the charges are proved, the dissenting note need not be forwarded to
the House.    But, when two Members hold that the charges are proved
and one Member dissents and holds that the charges are not proved, then
the dissent also must be forwarded to the House.
(16)  The  Judge  concerned  cannot  interdict  or  seek  an  injunction  to
restrain the Speaker/Chairman from admitting the Motion or making a
reference  to  the  Committee,  nor  can  the  Judge  obtain  stay  of  the
proceeding before the Committee or on the submission of its Report to the
House.
(17) The Judge can only challenge the final order of ‘removal’ passed by
the President after the address by the Houses inasmuch as the proceedings
before  the  Committee  are  ‘inchoate’  till  such  order  is  passed  by  the
President.   The Inquiry Committee is not a ‘tribunal’ for the purposes of
Art. 136 of the Constitution because it is only a recommendatory body.
367

(18) A copy of the Report of the Inquiry Committee cannot be given to
the Judge immediately after the Report is made.   The Judge is entitled to
the  copy  of  the  Report  only  after  the  Report  is  submitted  to  the
Speaker/Chairman.
(19) Pending  the  Motion  as  well  as  inquiry before  the Committee  or
before the final order of removal is passed, the Judge cannot, in the light
of the provisions of the 1968 Act, be ‘suspended’ from office and no court
can stop the Judge from exercising judicial functions.    Nor can work be
withdrawn.  
(20)  Till  a  Judge  is  removed  from  office  or  retires,  his  salary  and
allowances cannot be withheld, even if an inquiry is pending against him.
(21) The Judge is entitled to be heard during the debate in Parliament
after the submission of Report by the Committee and he has also a right to
be represented by counsel, if he so desires.
(22) It is only in case the Report is accepted and the Motion for removal
is passed after hearing the Judge that the misbehaviour or incapacity is
“deemed to be proved”. 
(23) In Parliament, if the required number of Members accept that the
misbehaviour or incapacity has been proved, Parliament need not assign
368

any reasons  while  passing  a resolution  recommending  removal  of the
Judge to the President. 
(24) After a removal order is passed by the President, the judge who is
removed can approach the Supreme Court on limited grounds such as
whether adequate opportunity was given to the judge or whether there
was any illegality in the proceedings. The scope of the proceedings before
the Parliament are wider and there are no such limitations and this is one
reason why the judge should not be permitted to approach the court even
before the report is submitted to Parliament.
The above principles settled by the Supreme Court of India account for the
need  to  balance  the  concepts  of  both  judicial  independence  and  judicial
accountability.
(III) What  are  the  points  arising  out  of  the  Report  of  Justice  Sawant
Committee:
We have referred to this report in Chapter VI.   The Justice Sawant
Committee stated as follows:
“(1) (i)  The  word  “misbehaviour”  as  applicable  to  judges  of  the
Supreme Court and the High Courts, in the context of Articles 124(4)
and  (5)  and  other  relevant  provisions  of  the  Constitution,  means
conduct or a course of conduct on the part of a judge which brings
369

dishonour or disrepute to the judiciary so as to shake the faith and
confidence which the public reposes in the judiciary.  It is not confined
to criminal acts or to acts prohibited by law.  It is not confined to acts
which are contrary to law.  It is not confined to acts connected with the
judicial office.   It extends to all activities of a judge, public or private.
(ii) The act or omission must be wilful.   The wilful element may be
supplied by culpable recklessness, negligence, disregard for rules or an
established code of conduct.  Even though a single act may not be
wilful, a series of acts may lead to the inference of wilfulness.
(iii) Monetary recompense would not render an act or omission any
the less ‘misbehaviour’ if the person intentionally committed serious
and  grave  wrongs  of  a  clearly  unredeeming  nature  and  offered
recompense when discovered.
(iv) ‘Misbehaviour’  is  not  confined  to  conduct  since  the  judge
assumed charge of the present judicial office.  It may extend to acts or
omissions while holding prior judicial office, if such act or omissions
makes him unworthy of holding the present judicial office.
(2) The proceedings under the 1968 Act, read with Art. 124(4) before the
Committee are ‘quasi-criminal’ because of the word ‘charge’ ‘guilty’
and ‘not guilty’, ‘plea of judge’ used in the Act.  In fact, as far back as
370

1870, the Privy Council, which was the authority conducting inquiries
against High Court Judges in the colonies, issued a Memorandum in
relation to removal of  Judges where it described that the proceeding
for removal is ‘quasi-criminal’.   
(3)   The standard of proof is proof beyond reasonable doubt and not on
preponderance  of probabilities.    The ‘misbehaviour’  must  be held
proved accordingly by the Inquiry Committee constituted under the
Judges (Inquiry) Act.
(4) The  judge  against  whom  an  inquiry  is  being  held  is  under  a
constitutional obligation to cooperate with the inquiring authority and
not to raise petty-fogging objections to obstruct the inquiry in which
case an adverse inference may be legitimately drawn against him.
  
(IV) Is  the  proposed  provision  in  the  Bill  of  2005  for  establishing  a
National Judicial Council consisting only of Judges consistent with the
concept of judicial accountability?
The  1968  Act  envisages  a  Committee  of  two  Judges  and  a  Jurist
whereas  the  proposed  Bill  of  2005  envisages  a  National  Judicial
Council consisting only of Judges.  The provision in the 1968 Act is
that the Committee under sec. 3(1) of that Act shall consist of  three
Members:
(a) one shall be chosen from among the Chief Justice of India
and other Judges of the Supreme Court;
371

(b) one shall be chosen from among the Chief Justices of the
High Courts;
(c) one shall be a person who is, in the opinion of the Speaker or,
as the case may be, the Chairman, a distinguished jurist.
Under the proposed Bill, the Judicial Council is to consist of 
(a) Chief Justice of India, Chairperson;
(b) Two senior-most Judges of the Supreme Court, to be nominated
by the Chief Justice of India – Members;
(c) Two  senior-most  Chief  Justices  of  the  High  Courts  to  be
nominated by Chief Justice of India – Members.
In  our  view  this  proposal  in  the  Bill  of  2005  is  consistent  with
international  traditions  and  conventions  and  is  supported  by  similar
provisions in other countries providing for peer review so far as disciplinary
action is concerned as stated hereinbelow. 
At the outset we refer to the international traditions and conventions
relating to peer review in the matter of disciplinary enquiries against judges
of superior courts.
(1) According to the principles  laid  down for the Independence of the
Judiciary, known as Siracusa Principles (May 25-29, 1981), it is stated in
respect of ‘Discipline’ in Arts. 13 and 14 as follows:
372

“Art. 13: Any disciplinary proceedings concerning Judges should be
before a court or a board composed of and selected by members of the
judiciary.
Art. 14: All disciplinary action should  be based  upon  standards  of
judicial conduct promulgated by law or on established rules of court.”
(2) According to the Latimer guidelines for the Commonwealth 1998, on
‘Parliamentary  Supremacy,  Judicial  Independence  –  towards  a
Commonwealth  Model’,  it  is  stated  in  para  VI(1)(i)  that  the  disciplinary
action must be taken by an ‘independent judicial tribunal. It is further stated
in sub-para (ii) thereof that “in all matters, the process should be conducted
by the Chief Judge of the Courts”.
(3) According to the Beijing Statement of Principles of Independence of
Judiciary,  1995,  it  is  stated  in  principle  24  that  where  parliamentary
procedures or procedures for the removal of a judge by vote of the people do
not apply, procedures for the removal of Judges must be under the control of
the Judiciary.
Several countries have a Commission or Judicial Council comprising only of
Judges:
373

(1) The  United Kingdom has recently passed the ‘Constitutional Reform
Act, 2005’.  Chapter 3 of Part 4 deals with ‘discipline’.   Sec. 108 deals with
‘removal’, formal advice, or a formal warning or reprimand, for disciplinary
purposes (but this section does not restrict what he may do informally or for
other  purposes  or  where  any  advice  or  warning  is  not  addressed  to  a
particular office-holder).   Under sec. 108, powers are vested in the Lord
Chief Justice to pass these orders with the consent of the Lord Chancellor.
But, if it is a case of removal, only the Lord Chancellor can pass orders.
So far as the Lord Chief Justice is concerned, under sec. 119, he is
permitted  to  delegate  his  functions  to  a  ‘Judicial  office-holder’.  The
definition of judicial office holder includes the Master of Rolls, President of
the Queen’s Bench Division, President of the Family Division, Chancellor of
High Court,  Lord Chief Justice of Appeal and puisne judge  of the High
Court. These are the persons to whom the enquiry can be delegated by the
Lord Chief Justice. 
Thus in UK, the disciplinary process is fully within the control of the
Judiciary.
(2) Canada:
In  Canada,  sec.  59(1)  of  the  Judges  Act,  1985  provides  for  the
constitution of a Judicial Council consisting of:
374

(a) the Chief Justice of Canada (Chairman),
(b) the  Chief  Justice  and  any  Senior  Associate  Chief  Justice  and
Associate  Chief  Justice  of  each  superior  Court  or  a  branch  or
division thereof,
(c) the senior Judges of the Supreme Court of Yukon, the Supreme
Court of North West Territories and the Nunavat Court of Justice ,
as defined in sec. 22(3)of the Act, and
(d) the Chief Justice of the Court Martial Appeal Court of Canada.
Thus, in Canada, all the members of the Judicial Council are Judges.
Australia:
(a) New  South  Wales:  Under  the  Judicial  Officers  Act,  1986  the
complaints are referred to the Conduct Division of the Judicial Commission.
Under sec. 22, the Conduct Division shall comprise of 3 persons who are all
Judicial Officers, of whom one may be a retired Judicial Officer.
Judicial Officer is defined in sec. 3(a) as a Judge or associate Judge of
the Supreme Court or a Judge of the District Court or a magistrate etc.
Thus, all the members of the disciplinary committee are Judges.
(b) Victoria:  The Constitution and other laws have been amended and
recently the Courts Legislation (Judicial Conduct) Act, 2005 has been passed.
375

Sec. 87AAA speaks of a ‘Judicial Panel’ to be constituted under sec.
87AAC.
Sec.  87AAC  states  that  the  ‘Judicial  Panel’  shall  consist  of  seven
members  appointed  by  the  Attorney  General.    A  person  is  eligible  for
appointment only if he or she has held ‘a qualifying office’ but no longer
holds one.
A ‘qualifying office’ is defined as the office of 
(a) a Judge of the Federal Court of Australia,
(b) a Judge of the Family Court of Western Australia,
(c) a Judge of the Supreme Court of a State other than Victoria.
(d) a Judge of the Supreme Court of Australian Capital Territory or
Northern Territory.
Thus, all members of the Panel are Judges.
Germany:  
According to Art. 97(2) of the Constitution, Judges can be dismissed,
suspended or transferred or retired before expiration of their term only under
the authority of a ‘judicial’ decision.
Under Art. 98, the Constitution states that a Federal Judge may be
transferred  or placed in  the  retired  list  or dismissed  only by the  Federal
Constitutional Court.
376

S. 50 of the German Judiciary Act, 1972 states that a Council of Judges
composed of 5 Judges of the Federal Courts of Justice and the Patents Court
and three Judges of the Court of Administration, the Federal Finance Court
and  the  Federal  Labour  Court  and  the  Federal  Social  Court,  shall  be
members.   A Council of Judges consisting of three Judges shall also be
established for action against Judges of the Military Service Courts.
Thus, all the members in this Council are judges.
Hong Kong:
Under Art. 89 of the Hong Kong Constitution, it is stated in cl. (1) that
‘removal’ will be investigated only by Judges.  The tribunal of Judges shall
be appointed by the Chief Justice of the Court of Final Appeal and will
consist of not fewer than three local Judges.   Clause (2) states that a Chief
Justice  of  the  Court  of  Final  Appeal  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special
Administrative Region shall be investigated by a tribunal appointed by the
Chief Executive and consisting of not fewer than five local Judges.
Thus, the tribunal consists only of Judges.
Malaysia:
Under Art. 125 of the Malaysian Federal Constitution, the tribunal for
investigation into complaints against Judges comprises of 5 persons who hold
or have held office as a Judge of the Federal Court or Court of Appeal or
377

High Court or where expedient, persons  holding equivalent  office in any
other part of the Commonwealth.
Thus, all members of the tribunal are judges.
Pakistan:
Under  Art.  209  of the  Pakistan  Constitution,  the  Supreme Judicial
Council which investigates Judges comprises of
(a) the Chief Justice of Pakistan,
(b) two next most senior Judges of the Supreme Court and
(c) the two most senior Chief Justices of High Courts.
Thus, all members of the Judicial Council are judges.
Sweden:
Under  Art.  8  of  the  Swedish  Constitution  in  Chapter  12,  the
proceedings will have to be taken up before the Swedish Supreme Court on a
complaint by the ombudsman or the Justice Chancellor.
Bangladesh:
Under Art. 96 of the  Bangladesh  Constitution, it is  stated that  the
Supreme Judicial Council which deals with discipline shall consist of 
(a) the Chief Justice of Bangladesh and
(b) two next senior Judges.
378

Thus, all members of are Judges are Judges in the Judicial Council.
Israel:
In Israel, the basic law in Ch.II Sec. 7 (5) speaks  of the Court of
Discipline and s.13 of that Chapter states that the Court of Discipline shall
consist  of  sitting  and  retired  judges  appointed  by  the  President  of  the
Supreme Court. All the members of the Court of Discipline are judges.
Zambia:
In Zambia, the Constitution of 1991 as amended in 1996 provides in
Art. 98 (3) that the President shall appoint a Tribunal which shall consist of a
Chairman and not less than two members who hold or have held high judicial
office.
Thus all members of the Tribunal are judges.
The Judicial (Code of Conduct) Act of 1999 of Zambia states in section 20
that there will be a complaints committee which shall consist of five members
who will or are qualified to hold high judicial office.
Thus all the members of the Complaints Committee are judges.
379

USA:
In the USA, in the federal system, the relevant Acts of 1939, 1980 and
2002 under which Judicial Councils of the Circuit are constituted for each
circuit  consists  only of Judges  in  the  Circuit.   This  Council  can  impose
‘minor measures’.   But, if it considers ‘removal’ as appropriate, it has to
refer the matter to the Judicial Conference of United States which consists of
the Chief Justice  of US Supreme Court, Judges  of the  Circuit  Courts  of
Appeal and District Courts.
We have referred to the details of the three Acts of 1939, 1980 and
2002 in extenso earlier.
Thus, in USA in the federal system, all the members of the Judicial
Council of the circuits and the Judicial Conference, are Judges.
Peer review alone satisfies constitutional standards of independence:
The  importance  of  the  independence  of  the  Judicial  Branch  is
fundamental to the survival of democracy and the rule of law.  Independence
includes  individual  independence  as  well  as  institutional  independence.
Without going into a fuller discussion of the principles relating to judicial
independence or judicial accountability, which we have elaborated in Chapter
III and in this Chapter, we shall confine ourselves to the question of peer
review and its importance.
380

In s.220 (2) (b) of the Government of India Act 1935, it was provided that the
investigation against the judges of the High Court shall be conducted by the
Privy Council and that it could recommend removal to His or Her Majesty. In
1948 this power stood transferred to the Federal Court which could make a
similar recommendation to the Governor General of India. Thus before the
Constitution of India came into force, the inquiry into allegations  against
judges of the superior courts was entirely in the hands of the judiciary.
It  is  to  be  noted  that  Parliament  enacted  the  1968  Act  with  a
Committee consisting of two judges and a jurist and the present proposal in
this Bill is more or less on the same lines.
Our Supreme Court in C.K. Ravichandran Iyer v. A.M. Bhattacharjee,
1995 (5) SCC 457, dealt with the importance of ‘peer review’.   The Supreme
Court  referred  to  several  authorities  as  to  why  peer  review  has  been
considered to be in the best interests of preserving judicial independence and
making Judges judicially accountable.   This is consistent with international
traditions too, as pointed above. In fact the Supreme Court referred to the
views of Mr.Irving R Kaufman in (1978-79) Vol. 88 Yale Law Review p.681
and to the views off Judge Henry T Edwards, Chief Justice, U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia (1989) Vol. 87 Michigan Law Review
765,  as  to  why  peer  review  “will  alone  be  good  and  consistent  with
independence  of  judges.”  In  Canadian  Federal  Court  in  Justice  Paul
381

Cosgrove  v.  Attorney  General  Ontario 2005  FC  1454,  Justice  Madam
Mactavish said that this is a kind of “institutional filter”. The Canadian courts
have  also  stated  that  judges  have  the  necessary  expertise  to  review  the
conduct of other brother and sister judges.
In the USA, in the preamble to the 1939 Act (28 USC 332) it is stated
that  the  Judicial  Councils  were  being  established  for  ‘self-improvement,
through which those Courts  will be able to scrutinize their own work and
develop efficiency and promptness in their administration of justice’.
Harlan J in Chandler’s case (1970) 398 US 74 stated that the 1939 Act
provided  for  intra-judiciary supervision  and  that  the  statute  enabled  the
judiciary to ‘set its own house’ in order.   He quoted from the speech of Chief
Justice Groner of the Court of Appeals from the District of Colombia that it
was a process of  judges judging themselves.   As the Congress itself was
intending  that  the  Judicial  Councils  should  act  as  judicial  bodies  in
supervising  district  judges,  there  was  no  need  to  decide  whether  the
placement  of  this  authority  would  violate  the  principle  of  separation  of
powers.   Such a question would have arisen if the supervising authority was
entrusted to a non-judicial body.
This is the crucial aspect.  Unless the supervision of the judiciary is
wholly  allowed  to  be  wholly  controlled  by  a  judicial  body,  it  would,
according  to  Justice  Groner  (as  quoted  by  Justice  Harlan),  offend  the
382

principle of separation of powers.   In fact, Douglas and Black JJ would not
agree even for this internal supervision within the judiciary for they would
contend that the parliamentary process of impeachment, however difficult
and however unsuccessful over centuries, should alone remain.   That view,
according to us, is an extreme view.   On the other hand, we agree with the
views of Justice Groner that vesting supervision in a body which consists of
non-judicial members would infringe the independence of the judiciary and
the doctrine of separation of powers.
The Law Commission is of the view that S.3(1) of the Bill of 2005
which  provides  for  the  establishment  of  a  National  Judicial  Council
consisting only of judges is constitutionally valid and is consistent with
the concept  of  independence  of  judiciary,  judicial  accountability and
doctrine of separation of powers.
(V) Should the Chief Justice of India be excluded from the inquiry on a
‘complaint’ ? 
In the Bill of 2005, sections 5, 7 and 8 of Chapter II section 16 of
Chapter V apply to the complaint procedure. Sections 9 and 10 of Chapter III
and section 17 of Chapter VI apply to the reference procedure.  Sections 3, 4
and 6 of Chapter II, section 11 of Chapter IV,  sections 12 to 15 of Chapter
V, section 18 of Chapter VI, sections 19 to 21 of Chapter VII and sections 22
to 29 of Chapter VIII apply to both the complaint and reference procedures.
383

 
The definition of ‘Judge’ in sec. 2(d) reads as follows: 
‘  Sec.2(d)’:     ‘Judge’ means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court and includes the Chief Justice of a High Court’.
This  definition  as  contained  in  the  Bill  applies  to  the  complaint
procedure  as well as to the reference procedure.
In our view, section 2(d) of the Bill of 2005 has rightly excluded the
Chief Justice of India from the definition of the word ‘Judge’ for the purpose
of complaint procedure under section 5 though the Chief Justice of India has
been included, by virtue of the proviso to section 3(2) for the purpose of the
reference procedure under section 9.
 There are good reasons as to why the Chief Justice of India should not
be included.
There  is  considerable  difference  between  the  manner  in  which  a
complaint is initiated before the Judicial Council and the manner in which
Members  of  Parliament  initiate  a  motion  in  the  House  before  the
Speaker/Chairman seeking a reference to the Judicial Council.
A  Motion  must  be  initiated  before  a  House  of  Parliament  by  a
prescribed number of Members of Parliament for the purpose of ‘removal’ of
any judge of the Supreme Court of India including the Chief Justice of India.
Then the matter goes before the Speaker or Chairman who are constitutional
functionaries.  On the other hand, a ‘complaint’ can be made by any person,
384

be it an ordinary litigant or a lawyer or any other person and cannot be placed
on the same pedestal as a Motion moved by a responsible group of Members
of Parliament.  
Further, if any person can file a ‘complaint’, the Chief Justice of India,
who is the administrative head of the entire Judiciary, becomes vulnerable to
unscrupulous complaints.   This will not augur well for the Judiciary which
enjoys a high degree of confidence among the people.    The Supreme Court,
in  Supreme Court Advocates–on Record Assn. v.  Union of India, 1993 (4)
SCC 441, observed that the Chief Justice of India has been given a ‘centre-
stage’ position under the Constitution.   In the case of Veeraswami v. Union
of India: 1991 (3) SCC 655, the Supreme Court referred to the primacy and
importance of the office of the Chief Justice of India.   In Sub-Committee on
Judicial Accountability v.  Union of India: 1991 (3) SCC 655 the primacy
accorded  to  the  Chief  Justice  of  India  was  again  reiterated.   In  C.K.
Ravichandran Iyer v.  Justice A.M. Bhattarcharjee: 1995 (5) SCC 457, the
Supreme Court referred to the Chief Justice of India as the ‘head of the
Judiciary in the country…..  The Chief Justice of India is the first among the
Judges”.  (For a recent reiteration of this view see  Union of India   v.  Kali
Dass Batish (2006)  1 SCALE 190 @ 196, para 14)
The Law Commission is of the opinion that the Bill takes the correct
stand that the Chief Justice of India, for good reasons, should not be
subjected to the ‘complaint procedure’.  Further, the provision in this
385

behalf is neither discriminatory nor arbitrary inasmuch as the position
of the Chief Justice of India as the administrative head of the Judiciary is
special and is not the same as other Judges of the Supreme Court or
Chief Justices of the High Courts. 
 
A  plain  reading  of  the  definition,  no  doubt,  shows  that  the  Chief
Justice  of  India  is  not  included  in  the  proposed  ‘complaint’  procedure.
However, the words 'means a judge of the Supreme Court' may give rise to a
contention that the Chief Justice of India, being also a Judge of the Supreme
Court, comes within the definition. 
The Law Commission recommends, by way of abundant caution that
after the words, ‘Judge of the Supreme Court’ in s. 2 (d) of the Bill of 2005,
the words ‘other than the Chief Justice of India’ be inserted.
(b) Definition of the word ‘Judge’ for the purpose of reference procedure
under section  9, 10 and 17 should obviously include the Chief Justice India
also. There are some sections in the proposed Bill, as stated above which
apply to both procedures, namely, sections 3,4,6,11, 12 to 15, 18, 19 to 21
and 22 to 29.
 
We therefore recommend that section 2(d) be substituted by the
following definition:
386

“(d) ‘Judge’ means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court and includes the Chief Justice of a High Court and also the Chief
Justice of India for purposes of the reference procedure but shall not
include  the  Chief  Justice  of  India  for  the  purposes  of the  complaint
procedure;
We further recommend that there should be a separate definition
of  the  words  ‘complaint  procedure’  and  ‘reference  procedure’  as
follows:
“complaint procedure” means a procedure which is initiated by
way of a complaint to the Council under section 5;
“reference procedure”  means  a procedure which  is  initiated by
way  of  a  motion  for  removal  which  is  referred  by  the  Speaker  or
Chairman to the Council
(VI) What should happen when a Supreme Court Judge against whom a
complaint has been filed and is pending, becomes the Chief Justice of India
during  the  pendency  of  the  investigation.  A  related  question  arises  with
regard to High Court judges also.
One can visualise situations in which while a complaint is pending
against a sitting judge of the Supreme Court, the judge becomes a Chief
Justice of India. Or, similarly, when a complaint is pending against a Chief
Justice of a High Court, he may be elevated as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
387

Obviously such complaints cannot be allowed to become infructuous merely
because  of  the  elevation  of  the  Judge.  Therefore,  the  Bill  of  2005  must
contain provisions to meet these contingencies so that the investigation or
inquiry is not stalled on that account.
In such an event when a Supreme Court Judge is elevated as Chief
Justice of  India after a complaint or after a motion initiated in either House
leading to a reference before his elevation as Chief Justice of India, he should
not be a member of the Judicial Council. 
We recommend that a second proviso to section 3(2) should be
inserted to the following effect:
 “Provided further that where under a complaint is made by any
person or a reference is made by the Speaker or Chairman against a
Judge  of the  Supreme Court before his  elevation  as  Chief  Justice  of
India, he shall not be a Member of the Council and the President shall
nominate  the  next  senior  most  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  as  the
Chairperson and also another Judge of the Supreme Court next in the
seniority to be a Member of the Council.”
 The Law Commission recommends that the Bill of 2005 should be
amended to provide that if a complaint has been filed against a Supreme
Court Judge, the same can be continued even after the Supreme Court
Judge is elevated as Chief Justice of India.   
388

An Explanation has to be added to this effect to Sec. 5 below sub-section
(1) of section 5 of the Bill of 2005.  A similar Explanation should be
added below sub-section (1) of Sec. 5 to provide for the continuance or
initiation of the enquiry against a Judge or the Chief Justice of the High
Court when he is elevated to the Supreme Court in respect of acts of
misbehaviour during the period when he was a Judge of the High Court.
(VII) Whether the remedy of ‘removal’ of a Judge by address is sufficient
and whether other ‘minor measures’ such as:  advisories, warnings,
corrective steps, request for retirement, withdrawal of cases from the
Judge’s  List,  censure  or  admonition  (public  or  private),  should  be
included in the Bill of 2005 – in cases coming before the Judicial
Council under the ‘complaint’ procedure?
The Bill of 2005 provides an additional procedure by way of complaint
and provides that the Judicial Council, if it finds the charge of misbehaviour
proved, can only recommend ‘removal’.
The Law Commission of India is of the view that Bill of 2005 requires
to be amended to include ‘minor measures’ to be imposed in the case of
complaint  procedure.  We  propose  to  explain  the  basis  for  this  view  by
detailed reasons.
 
389

We  have  pointed  out  earlier,  while  dealing  with  the  question  of
‘Judicial Independence and Judicial Accountability’, in Chapter III, that in
practice the procedure for ‘removal’ by way of address to the Head of the
State, such as the President or Governor General or Her Majesty in U.K. has
rarely been successful.  In England, there has not been an impeachment since
1805.   Even in U.S., impeachment has rarely succeeded.  In our country, the
solitary  instance  since  independence,  i.e.  in  the  case  of  Justice  V.
Ramaswami, was not successful.    
Harry  T.  Edwards,  Circuit  Judge  of  US  Court  of  Appeals  for  the
District  of  Columbia,  in  an  article  ‘Regulating  Judicial  Misconduct  and
Divining “Good Behaviour” for Federal Judges’ (1989) 87 Michigan L R 765
states:
“…  the  framers  designated  a  deliberately  cumbersome removal
mechanism,  impeachment  by  the  House  of  Representatives  and
removal  upon  conviction  by  two-thirds  of  the  Senate,  to  provide
additional protection  of the Judiciary against congressional politics.
The Senate was chosen as the adjudicator…”
Several jurists have, in fact, stated that the procedure for impeachment
or removal by address has become a dead letter.  The reason is not far to seek.
A proceeding in Parliament in regard to impeachment or removal by address
is  a  political  question.  The  legislature  cannot  be  moved except  when  a
390

prescribed number of legislators initiate a Motion.  It has to be admitted by
the Presiding Officer of the House.  Even when there is proof, it comes for
voting  in  the  legislatures  after  the  Judge  is  given  opportunity  to  defend
himself personally or through counsel. Parliamentarians are not obliged to
vote,  they  may  even  abstain,  as  happened  in  the  case  of  Justice  V.
Ramaswami.   Parliament need not give reasons for deciding either to direct
removal or to direct proceedings be dropped.   There are, therefore, a number
of hurdles for an address procedure to be successful.    
The history of the proceedings against Justice Murphy in Australia is
another standing example.   The Judge, before elevation to the High Court,
was a member of the Labour Party and an Attorney General in the State.   The
Labour Party was in power and it was reluctant to take action. But, because
the Labour Party was not in the majority in the Senate, the Senate appointed a
Committee for inquiry. There was the first Senate Committee which acquitted
the Judge. Then the Senate appointed  a second committee on  a different
charge.  Meanwhile  criminal  proceedings  were  launched  against  him  and
ultimately a special commission was appointed under a new law. Later that
law was sought to be repealed.  During these prolonged proceedings, the
Judge did not participate, took the matter to the courts, later became ill with
cancer and died.  
         The cumbersome process is one aspect.  The other more important
aspect is that not all types of ‘misbehavior’ may warrant ‘removal’.  A Judge
391

may be slack in his work or talkative or not prompt in writing judgments, or
may use abusive language.  There may still be other types of conduct not
involving  bribery or crime involving moral  turpitude.   In all such  cases,
taking an overall picture of the Judge’s career and his willingness to rectify
his defects, it may not be necessary to direct ‘removal’ from office.   Certain
defects can be cured by proper advice, certain others could be corrected by
‘minor measures’ other than ‘removal’. 
Yet  another  aspect  is  that  a  Motion  for  ‘removal’  of  a  Judge  for
‘deviant behavior’ not involving bribery or crime involving moral turpitude
may simply fail in the Houses of Parliament because the Parliamentarians
may feel that ‘removal’ is too disproportionate a punishment   vis-à-vis the
gravity of the misconduct proved.  
Judge J Clifford Wallace, at a Senate hearing on judicial discipline in
1986 suggested that not all crimes are considered so serious that they should
mandate automatic forfeiture of office.  Some kinds of misbehaviour do not
call for total disqualification of an otherwise competent Judge.  Judge Harry
T. Edward, Circuit Judge, US Court of Appeals for District of Columbia (see
(1987) Vol 87 Mich LR 765 at 775 says:
“Thus, one potential implication of the ‘hiatus’ line of reasoning is that
an alternative to impeachment must exist for removing a misbehaving
Judge if Congress chooses not to impeach for bad behaviour.”
392

R.  Berger  stated  that  ‘impeachment  is  not  an  exclusive  remedy’
(Impeachment: The Constitutional Problem: 122-80 (1973).  All impeachable
behaviour is not good and all criminal behaviour is not good; but all ‘not
good’ behaviour is not criminal, nor is it impeachable.  If there is a ‘hiatus’
between ‘impeachable’ behaviour and ‘not good’ behaviour, the ‘not good’
behaviour must be regulated and can be regulated only by minor measures.
Chief Justice Gleeson of Australia stated that:
“The difficult cases tend to be those in which the complaint, even if it
is made out, would not justify removal.  The complainant is likely to
assume  there  must  be  some  other  sanction  available.   (‘Public
Confidence in the Judiciary, (2002) 76 Aust LJ 558 at 563)
Chief Justice J.J. Spigelman of New South Wales sated in April 2003
at the 5th Worldwide Common Law Judiciary Conference, that the New South
Wales disciplining sanctions which do not provide any sanction other than
removal require review because the lack of a provision for minor sanctions in
the law has made the law a ‘toothless tiger’.
In C. Ravichandran Iyer v. Justice A.M. Bhattacharjee: 1995 (5) SCC
457, the Supreme Court observed (p.471):
393

“Parliament  sparingly  resorts  to  the  mechanism  of  impeachment
designed under the Constitution by political process as the extreme
measure…..”
The Supreme Court of India, in the above case, referred to the need to
correct errant behaviour of Judges by way of imposing ‘minor measures’ and
quoted Jeffrey N. Barr and Thomas E. Willging who concluded that “several
Chief Judges view the Act (the Act of 1980 in US) as remedial legislation
designed not to punish Judges but to correct aberrant behaviour and provide
for corrective action as a central feature of the Act.”  
 The Supreme Court further stated that in US, between 1980 to 1992,
2388 complaints were filed.  95 per cent thereof resulted in dismissal.   1.7
per cent of the complaints ended in either dismissal from service or corrective
action of reprimand.  These were two public reprimands and one private
reprimand.    Two cases were reported to Judicial Conference by the Judicial
Councils certifying that the grounds might exist for impeachment.
The Court also observed (p.475):
“The hiatus between bad behaviour and impeachable behaviour needs
to be filled in to stem erosion of public confidence in the efficiency of
the judicial process.”
The Supreme Court referred to  Chandler v.  Judicial Council: (1970)
398 US 74 as a case where when the Judicial Council imposed a ‘minor
394

measure’ of withdrawal of pending and future cases from a Judge’s list, the
same was upheld by the US Supreme Court.
The  National  Commission  for  Review  of  the  Constitution  (2001)  also
enumerated certain  deviant  behaviour and recommended that  there was  a
need to provide for imposition of minor measures inasmuch as the removal
procedure was cumbersome and may not appropriate in most cases.
In Vol. I, Ch. VII of the Report of the National Commission to Review the
Working  of  the  Constitution,  in  para  7.3.8  it  was  suggested  that  the
Committee must consist of the Chief Justice of India and two senior- most
judges and that they be empowered to examine deviant behaviour of judges
of the High Court and the Supreme Court and where the conduct did not
warrant a recommendation for removal, the Committee could administer a
warning or issue directions that no judicial work be allotted to the judge or
that the judge be transferred to some other High Court. It also recommended
that in appropriate cases the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Chief
Justice of India, as the case may be, may withdraw judicial work after the
Inquiry Committee recorded a finding against the judge. 
In the Consultation Paper Vol. II, Book I, the National Commission referred
to the various types of deviant behaviour in paras 14.4 and 14.5 in respect of
which minor measures alone would be appropriate.
395

The  Constitution  provides  in  Art.  124  (4)  for  `removal’  in  case
`misbehaviour’ is proved on the part of a judge. But `misbehaviour’ may not
always be of a serious type which warrants removal. There may be `bad
behaviour’,  or  `deviant  behaviour’  which  needs  only  correction  but  not
removal.  In some countries the Constitutions specifically say that judges
hold office during `good behaviour’. Though our Constitution does not say so
explicitly, it is, in our view, implicit in the oath that Judges take that they
assure us of their `good behaviour’.  Therefore, when there are deviations
from  `good  behaviour’  or  there  is  bad  behaviour,  not  amounting  to
`misbehaviour’,  and  not  warranting  removal,  an  internal  mechanism  for
correction thereof requires to be provided by law and is not prohibited by the
Constitution.
Minor Measures have been provided in the statutes of other countries like
U.S.A etc.
Historically, the proposals to impose ‘minor measures’ on the Judge
started in the Federal system in U.S.A. in 1939 when the law under the Title
28 USC 332 was passed with effect from August 7th, 1939.  That Act, in fact,
did not expressly contain specific provisions for awarding ‘minor measures’
but only contained sec.306 to the effect that the ‘Judicial Council’ shall take
such action ‘as may be necessary’.  Likewise, sec. 332 of that Act also stated
that the Council shall take such action ‘as may be necessary’.  In exercise of
this  general  power  under  ss  306  and  332,  the  Judicial  Council  started
imposing several ‘minor measures’ to speed up the disposal of cases and to
396

improve the efficiency of the Judges. In fact, the long title of the Act stated
that the Act was intended for
“self-improvement,  through  which  those  courts  will  be  able  to
scrutinize  their own work and develop efficiency and promptness  in
their administration  of Justice”.
         
The powers conferred by the 1939 statute indicated a kind of intra-Branch
self-regulation  in  a  general  fashion  and  the  Judicial  Council  used  those
provisions to impose ‘minor measures’.  
The 1939 Act was replaced by the 1980 Act (Act 28 USC  372).  It was
called the Judicial Councils Reform and Judicial Conduct and Disability Act,
1980.  It carried the matter further by expressly enlisting ‘minor measures’
which could be imposed by the Judicial Council.   The Act, however, stated
that  in  the  event  the  Judicial  Council  felt  that  the  conduct  warranted
‘removal’, it should forward the papers to the Judicial Conference of United
States.  The Judicial Conference is a higher body and only that body can
recommend to the Senate for ‘removal’ by impeachment.  
The 1980 Act of U.S. was based upon the principle of self-regulation.
Congress sought to devise a ‘fair and proper procedure’ whereby the Judicial
Branch can keep its own house in order (S.Rep.No.362, 96th Congress 1st
397

Session, 2, I.t. 11) (1979).  The Judicial Council’s power of keeping the
“house in order” would include the power to take ‘minor measures’ also.
The 1980 Act was intended to deal effectively with “wilful misconduct
in  office,  habitual  interferences  and  other  conduct  prejudicial  to  the
administration of Justice that brings the judicial office into disrepute”.  Sec.
372  (1)(6)(B)  required  the  Judicial  Council  to  take  “such  action  as  is
appropriate  to  assure  the  effective  and  expeditious  administration  of  the
business of the Courts of the circuit”.  Sec. 372 (c)(B)(iii) to (vii) provides
that the Council may make orders including 
(1) a request to the Judge to voluntarily retire; or
(2) censure or reprimand of the Judge, privately or publicly;
or
(3) order that the Judge be not assigned further cases but only
on a ‘temporary basis for a certain time’; or
(4) such  other  action  as  it  considers  appropriate  in  the
circumstances.
In case the Council felt ‘removal’ was warranted it could, under Section 372
(c) (7) (A) refer the matter to the Judicial Conference.    Sections 372 (c) (6)
(B) (vii) (I) and Sec. 372 (c) (8) (A) of the 1980 Act expressly prohibited the
Judicial Council or Judicial Conference from passing an order of ‘removal’.
398

The complainant could allege, as per Sec.372 (c) (1) that a ‘federal
judge has engaged in conduct prejudicial to the effective and expeditious
administration  of business  of the Courts’ or that  ‘the judge  is  unable  to
discharge all the duties of office by reason of mental or physical disability’.
If the complaint is frivolous or is ‘directly related to the merits of a decision
or procedural ruling’ it could be dismissed summarily by the Chief Judge of
the circuit under Section 372 (c) (3)(A).   In other cases, the Chief Judge
could take ‘corrective action’ as stated above by imposing ‘minor measures’
and in serious   cases, the Judicial Council would refer the matter to the
Judicial Conference to consider recommending ‘removal’ to the Senate.
The  US Act  of 2002,  which  replaced  the 1980  Act,  also  provides
expressly for similar ‘minor measures’ to be imposed by the Judicial Council.
           Under the U.K.Act of 2005, under s.108 (3), the Lord Chief Justice
could impose minor measures such as formal advice, or formal warning or
formal reprimand or even suspend a judge from judicial office. 
Further, in the various States of the US, we find such ‘minor measures’
are statutorily permissible to be imposed by the Judicial Councils against
State Judges.  In Germany and in the Provinces of Canada, the statutes permit
imposition of  ‘minor measures’.  
399

Accordingly,  the  Law  Commission  recommends  that  a  special
provision be inserted in the Bill of 2005 to enable the Judicial Council to
impose ‘minor measures’, in the complaint procedure. The omission in
the Bill of 2005, in this behalf, needs to be rectified by providing, in the
case  of a  complaint  procedure  for  the  imposition  of following  minor
measures by the National Judicial Council, viz.,
(1)Issuing advisories;
(2) Issuing warnings;
(3) Withdrawal of judicial work pending and future for a limited time;
(4) Request that the judge may voluntarily retire;
(5) Censure or admonition, public or private.
We may explain that a `public censure or admonition’ in the U.S. means that
the name of the complainant and of the judge concerned are published in the
media and placed on the internet. A `private censure or admonition’ is where
the name of the complainant and the judge are not disclosed but the public
are informed through the media and the internet that upon a complaint against
a judge of the particular court, a private censure or admonition was issued.
We do not propose to recommend a separate definition in this behalf but we
are of the view that the words “public or private” should be understood in the
same manner as stated above.
400

(VIII) Constitutional validity of a law by Parliament providing for imposition
of ‘minor measures’ by the Judicial Council
This issue is of central importance. A fundamental question generally
posed is when the Constitution provides in Art 124(4) (read with Art 124(5)
and 217) only for removal by address of the Houses to the President but does
not  expressly  permit  any  ‘minor  measures’  to  be  imposed,  whether  a
provision in a law made under Art 124(5) for imposing ‘minor measures’ will
be ultra vires the Constitution?  Or can such a provision be justified with
reference to Article 246 read with Entry 11-A of List III of the Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution which refers to the topic `Administration of
Justice’?
This question has been elaborately considered in a number of cases in
USA where too, the Constitution provides only for impeachment.  Still, the
Courts there have upheld the validity of the provisions in the statute of 1939
which impliedly permitted imposition of minor measures and the validity of
the statute of 1980 and 2002 which expressly permitted imposition of ‘minor
measures’. 
We shall now refer to these judgments.
401

(1) Judge Chandler’s case: self-regulation within the Judiciary is valid:
In  Chandler vs.  Judicial  Council (1970)  398  US  74,  the  Judicial
Council acting under the 1939 Act ordered that the pending and future cases
in the list of Judge Chandler be removed.  This action was upheld by the US
Supreme Court.  The separate judgment of Harlan  J in that case  is  very
enlightening  and  it  gives  reasons  for  upholding  imposition  of  ‘minor
measures.  The reasoning is that it was permissible for the Judiciary to self-
regulate, to have intra-judiciary or in-house mechanism and these were not
prohibited by the Constitution.  The Judiciary has general powers to set its
house in order.  In respect of such a general or inherent power which exists in
a  Judicial  Council,  an  ordinary  law  can  expressly  provide  for  ‘minor
measures’ without the need for a Constitutional amendment.  Such a law does
not violate the Constitution.  
It is necessary in this connection to refer to certain passages from the
judgment  of  Harlan  J  in  Chandler emphasizing  the  principle  of  inherent
powers of the Judicial Council, which consists of members of the judiciary,
in the matter of self-regulation, as can be gleaned from the 1939 Act.  Harlan
J referred to the observations of Chief Justice Groner who participated in the
congressional debate which preceded the 1939 Act as follows:
402

“whatever is wrong in the administration of Justice, from whatever
sources it may arise, is brought to the attention of the Judicial Council
that it may be corrected by the Courts themselves”.
Harlan J observed:
“The Judicial Council will fill the hiatus of authority that existed under
the then current-arrangements (i.e. before 1939) and then “provide a method,
a  Parliamentaryly valid,  legal  method,  by which,  if  necessary, and  when
necessary, the Courts may clean their own house.”  Any problems unearthed
by the Director of the Administrative Office on basis of statistics were to be
“corrected, by the Court themselves”.  
Harlan J said that there were number of references in the hearings in
the Congress and in the Committees “to the fact that the  corrective power
would be exercised by the Court themselves”.  He also quoted the response of
the American Judicature Society which stated: “there is no way to fortify
judicial independence equal to that of  enabling the Judges to perform their
work under Judicial supervision”.  All these indicated that such a power was
to be given ‘only to a judicial body’.  
Harlan  J  then  made  a  very  important  observation.   “Because  the
Parliamentary history shows Congress intended the Councils to act as judicial
bodies in (the) supervision of district  Judges, there is no need to decide
403

whether placement of the authority in a non-judicial body would violate the
constitutional separation of powers, as Chief Justice Groner seems to have
believed”.  
Thus, while dealing with the 1939 Act in a case in 1970 Harlan J
pointed out that the basis  of the 1939 Act, as disclosed  from debates  in
Congress was that ‘in-house’ Judiciary self-regulation  was legitimate and
valid and can be inferred from its general powers to improve the efficiency of
the judicial administration.
(2) Hastings v. Judicial Conference of U.S.: (1987)829 F. 2d 91 (U.S.
Court of Appeals)
This case dealt with the validity or authority of the Judicial Conference
to recommend and certify to the Congress that the case was fit for ‘removal’
of the Judge.    This power was challenged by Judge Hastings as amounting
to an unconstitutional delegation of powers by Congress and the challenge
was  rejected  by  the  United  States  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of
Columbia by Judgment dated September 15, 1987.   The recommendation of
the Judicial Council to the Judicial Conference for removal was also upheld.
Judge  Alcee  Hastings,  Judge,  U.S.  District  Court  of  Florida  was
initially charged in a criminal case for bribery but was acquitted. (See U.S. v.
Hastings (1982) 681 2d 70) Thereafter, at the instance of his colleagues,
404

impeachment proceedings were commenced against him in the Congress on
17  articles  of  bribery and  perjury. On  a  recommendation  of the  Judicial
Conference  Judge  Hastings  was  convicted,  impeached  and  removed.  But
before  the  Judicial  Conference  took  up  the  matter,  he  challenged  the
proceedings on the ground that it was not permissible to delegate the inquiry
to the Judicial Council and to the Judicial Conference. This challenge was
rejected by the Court of Appeals. 
It was  observed  that  the  Judicial  Council,  if  it  was  to  certify that
impeachment  was  warranted,  it  was  not  exercising  unconstitutional
delegation of powers but its certification would be “merely informational” to
the  Congress  and  that  as  there  could  only  be  a  recommendation  by the
Judicial  Conference  for  removal,  Congress  still  “completely  controls  all
aspects of any impeachment.”   
Further,  the  Court  held  that  the  combination  of  investigative  and
adjudicatory functions vested in the Judicial Council was not invalid and
rejected the argument based on due process relying upon Withrow v. Larkin
(1975) 421 US 35.  
(3) In  the Matter of Complaints under Investigation by the Investigating
Committee of the Judicial Council:- (1980) 783 F.2d. 1488.
The Eleventh circuit held that the Intra Court or In-House procedure of
the judges to discipline other Judges was not unconstitutional.  It stated that
405

the judicial  system had  undertaken  to  ‘police  itself’ within  constitutional
limits.  It held that when the inquiry was placed “ within the hands of Judicial
colleagues’, the independence of the judge is accorded maximum respect.  
It referred to the special expertise of Judges in the Judicial Council to
deal with judicial discipline,
“The fact that (the Act) places the investigation and a determination of
what action to take, entirely within the hands of judicial colleagues,
makes  it  likely  that  the  rightful  independence  of  the  complained-
against  judge,  especially  in  the  area  of  decision  making,  will  be
accorded maximum respect. Because of their own experience, other
Judges  can be expected to understand  the demands  unique to their
profession; and as each is a decision-maker himself, these other Judges
may be expected to refrain from applying sanctions that could chill the
investigated Judge’s freedom to decide cases as he sees it, since such
sanctions could be a precedent that could be turned against the Judge.
Above all, Judges will certainly be reluctant to take any action that
would inhibit the freedom and independent functioning of the Courts”.
(1507-08)
The 11th Circuit observed that impeachment alone was not sufficient.   Other
measures were necessary and were not unconstitutional.   With reference to
employees of the Executive, the Court stated:
406

“Yet the impeachment provisions can hardly be thought to furnish the
only constitutionally permissible means of punishing misconduct on
the part of Executive Branch Offices.   The only other courts to address
the issue have likewise concluded that that the impeachment provisions
of  the  Constitution  do  not  render  the  Acts’ disciplinary provisions
facially unconstitutional” (1506-07).  The same principle would apply
to in-house regulation within the Judiciary.
(4) John H. McBryde  v.  Committee to Review Circuit Council Conduct
and Disability Orders of the Judicial Conference of U.S.: (2001) 264 F. 3d.
52  (21st Sept. 2001) (Later, the U.S. Supreme Court  on October 7, 2002
refused to grant certiorari). 
Judge McBryde, a Federal District judge, was investigated under the
1980  Act.  The  complaint  was  by  an  attorney  and  related  to  ‘abusive
behaviour’ towards lawyers and litigants. The Investigation Committee of the
Judicial Council noticed alarming patterns of conduct and after consulting
psychiatrists, recommended that if he did not resign, there should be 
(i) a public reprimand (this remained posted on the website of the Fifth
Circuit); 
(ii) no new cases be assigned to the Judge for an year;        
(iii) he be not allowed for a period of three years to preside over cases
involving 23 named lawyers who had participated in the investigation
or were listed as potential witnesses. 
407

The incidents found by the Investigative Committee related to a tendency on
the part of the judge to question the integrity of lawyers appearing before him
and to overreact to perceived transgressions and to impose abusive sanctions.
He evidenced an obsessive need for control and showed disrespect for his
fellow judges. The Committee found that his behaviour had a chilling effect
on  the  legal  community deterring  lawyers  from representing  their  clients
properly and this impaired the administration of justice.
The  Judicial  Council  endorsed  these  recommendations  of  the
Investigation Committee and issued the above directions. 
The  Judge  filed  a  civil  suit  in  the  District  Court  challenging  the
recommendations on the ground of violation of due process,  violation  of
separation of powers etc.  The suit was dismissed (vide 83 F. Supp 2d 135).
The court however struck down s.372 (c) (14) of the 1980 Act which dealt
with  confidentiality  insofar  as  it  allegedly  affected  the  judge’s  First
Amendment rights.
By the time the appeal came up before the Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia circuit, the one year and three year periods mentioned in
the order of the Judicial Council expired. However, the Appeals Court felt
that the appeal could still be considered because of the public reprimand
which continued to remain on the internet. Judge Williams speaking for the
408

Court  (Judge  Tatel  dissenting  in  part)  observed  that  intra-judiciary
supervision by statute was constitutionally valid.  The Court rejected the
contention that imposition of measures other than removal by impeachment
was not permissible under the Constitution. It vacated the other findings of
the District Judge and did not decide whether a long term disqualification
from hearing cases would amount to removal.
It was argued for the judge that imposition of lesser sanctions would
affect judicial independence and that the fact that Constitution vested the
impeachment power in Congress precluded all other methods of disciplining
judges.  On  this  theory he  argued  that  the  act  violated  the  separation  of
powers. 
Judge  McBryde  relied  upon  Northern  Pipeline  Construction  Co.  v.
Marathon  Pipeline  Co. (182)  458  US  50  to  say  that  the  Constitutional
guarantees provided insulation from the legislature and the executive and
there could be no supervision within the judiciary. Rejecting this contention,
Judge Williams stated as follows:
“Lesser sanctions are common, as the court noted i.e. Chandler’s case
at p.85 as follows: `Many courts…..have informal, unpublished rules
which…..provide that when a judge has a given number of cases under
submission,  he will  not  be assigned  more cases  until  opinions  and
orders  issue  on  his  `backlog’.  These  are  reasonable,  proper  and
409

necessary rules, and the need for enforcement cannot reasonably be
doubted.’ 
           “ As there is no basis for Judge McBryde’s core assumption that
judicial  independence  requires  absolute  freedom  from  such  lesser
sanctions, his two claims fall swiftly.”
Then  the  Court  of  appeal  referred  to  the  argument  that  the  Constitution
speaks only of impeachment and other measures are impliedly excluded. The
court said: 
“But  Judge  McBryde’s  attempt  to  fudge  this  distinction  between
impeachment  and  discipline  doesn’t  work.  The  Constitution  limits
judgments  for  impeachment  to  `removal  from  office’  and
`disqualification  to  hold  office’  (Art.1  Sec.3  Cl.  7).  It  makes  no
mention of discipline generally.”
The court then made a very crucial observation as follows:
“ The Supreme Court recently observed that it accepted the proposition
that ‘when a statute limits a thing to be done in a particular mode, it
includes a negative of any other mode’(Christensen v. Haris County
(2000) 529 US 570 at 583). But application of the maxim depends on
the `thing to be done’. Here the thing to be done by impeachment is
removal and disqualification, not discipline of any sort.”
410

In  other  words  the  Constitution  permitted  a  particular  method  for
impeachment and disqualifications but did not prohibit disciplining judges in
a different mode.
The court pointed out that the Constitution retained and did not preclude
criminal prosecution (Art. 1, sec 3, Cl 7) and at least three circuits have held
that  prosecution  can  precede  impeachment.  The  court  pointed  out  that
Douglas and Black, JJ accepted this position in Chandler’s as well.
Judge McBryde then relied on Hamilton’s statement in the Federalist (No.79)
that the impeachment “is the only provision on the point which is consistent
with the necessary independence of a judicial character and is the only one
which we find in our Constitution in respect of our own judges.”
The Court rejected this contention and observed as follows:  
“ But, even if we assume the remark embraces not merely removal and
disqualification but other forms of discipline, it does not seem likely to
have been aimed at intra-branch constraints. Hamilton’s concern with
judicial independence seems largely to have been directed at the threat
from the two other branches. ” 
The Court, after referring to  Nixon v.  U.S. (1993) 506US 224 stated
that impeachment was an exception.  It was the sole check that could be
411

imposed by the legislature on the Judicial Branch and any other check by the
legislature was not permissible.  But checks within or intra-judiciary were
permissible.  The Court stated: 
“In our Constitutional system, impeachment was designed to be the
only check on the judicial branch by the legislature” 
“Hamilton’s concern with judicial independence seems to  have been
directed  against  the  threat  from  the  two  other  branches and  he
(Hamilton) characterized the Judiciary as the ‘least dangerous branch’
(Federalist No.78 at 522).  Thus, it seems natural to read Hamilton as
seeing the guarantees of life-tenure and undiminished compensation,
and the limited means for denying Judges their protection, simply as
assuring  independence  for  the  Judiciary  from  other  branches……
Indeed,  the  Hamiltonian  concern  for  protecting  the  Judiciary  from
other branches  argues for an internal disciplinary powers. Arrogance
and bullying by individual Judges expose the Judicial branch to the
citizen’s justifiable contempt.  The Judiciary can only gain from being
able  to  limit  the  occasions  for  such  contempt’.  [See  In  Certain
complaints of the Judicial Council of the Eleventh Circuit (1986) 783 F
2d 1488 (1507-08)]
The court referred to  Myers v. U.S  (1926) 272 US 52, where the Supreme
Court held, in respect of government servants that the impeachment article
412

was not absolute on the subject. The court observed “the Constitution made
no difference between government servants and judges.”
Congress, according to the Court, enacted the 1980 Act merely for enabling
Intra- branch efforts of control by the Judiciary of its own members.      
The Court said:
“Given the benefit to the Judiciary  from intra-branch efforts to control
the self-indulgence of individual judges, we see no basis for inferring
structural limits on Congress enabling such efforts”. 
Earlier it said: 
“……  We see  nothing in the Constitution  requiring us to view the
individual Art.III Judge as an absolute monarch restrained only by the
risk  of  appeal,  mandamus  and  like  writs,  the  criminal  law,  or
impeachment  itself.   We  must  reject  Judge  McBryde’s  facial
Constitutional claims”  
After holding that in regard to the other punishments awarded by the Judicial
Council, the periods of one year and three years respectively, having already
expired before the appeal came to be heard the court held that the appeal did
not become moot and that it was open to the appellant to canvass of the
correctness of the punishment of reprimand. 
413

It said:
“In short, the claim of implied negation from the impeachment power
works well for removal or disqualification.  But it works not at all for
the  reprimand sanction,  which  bears  no  resemblance to removal or
disqualification  and  is  the  only  sanction  in  the  case  that  remains
unmoot.  Thus Judge  Mc Bryde’s textual argument fails. Given the
benefits to the Judiciary from intra-branch  efforts to control the self-
indulgence  of  individual  Judges,  we  see  no  basis  for  inferring
structural limits on Congress’s enabling such efforts”.
It also went into the merits of the punishment of one year and three years and
vacated the same on facts. It however affirmed the reprimand.
We may add that in the Report of the National Commission on Judicial
Discipline  and  Removal  (1993),  in  the  U.S.  which  was  a  Commission
appointed to review the enforcement of the 1980 Act, (a Report which runs
into 210  pages), it is stated  at page  83 (Ch.V on Judicial Discipline) as
follows:
“……  the  Act  of  1980…….sought  to  provide  ….a  formal
mechanism  within  the  Judiciary as  a  supplement  to  the
impeachment process”.
414

The above judgment in McBryde and the 1993 Report clearly
establish  that  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  US  Constitution
contained  provisions  only  for  impeachment,  still  the  US  Courts
upheld laws under which ‘minor measures’ could be imposed.  It was
not  necessary  that  the  Constitution  should  contain  provisions  for
imposing ‘minor measures’.  As part of the power to keep its own
house in order, the Judiciary could, under ordinary law made by the
legislature, impose ‘minor measures’.
Canada (Federal): 
(i) In Canada, the Supreme Court in MacKeigan vs. Hickman: 1989
(2)S.C.R 796 (at 811-812), La Forest J clearly observed that s 99(1)
of  the  Constitution  Act,  1867which  speaks  only  of  removal  by
address of the Houses, does not preclude Parliament from making a
law providing other mechanisms:
“for  dealing  with  inquiries  or  complaints  relating  to  the
performances  of  judicial  functions  that  are  either  not
sufficiently serious as to warrant proceedings for removal, or
which may preclude or assist the conduct but not constitute an
impediment to the proper functioning of such proceedings or
effectively amount to a substitute for them.”
415

(ii) In  Justice Paul Cosgrove vs.  Attorney General of Ontario 2005
F.C. 1454,  Justice  Madam  Mactavish  observed  that  the  Canadian
Judicial Council (CJC) acts as ‘institutional filter’.  The procedure in
its  By-laws  and  the  complaint  procedure  represents  a  carefully
calibrated effort to reconcile the need for judicial accountability, with
the preservation of the independence of the judiciary.  This process
includes  an  ‘institutional  filter’,  in  the  form  of  the  judicial  pre-
screening  process,  which  maintains  an  appropriate  relationship
between  the  judiciary  and  outside  influences.   Complaints  are
considered internally, and are only referred for an inquiry where the
CJC itself determines that the complaint is sufficiently serious and
sufficiently meritorious as to potentially warrant the removal of the
Judge.”   The  preliminary  screening  stage  recognized  by  Justice
Strayer  in  Gratton vs.  Canadian  Judicial  Council:  1994(2)FC  769
offers an important protection against unmeritorious complaints.
A question arises as to the legislative competence of our Parliament to make
such  a  law  providing  for  imposition  of  minor  measures  by  the  Judicial
Council. The question would be whether the power could be traced to Art.
124 (5) of the Constitution of India. The point here is whether a law enabling
imposition of minor measures can be brought within Art. 124 (5) which reads
as follows:
416

“ (5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation
of an address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour
or incapacity of a judge under clause (4).”
The second part of Art. 124 (5) refers to the investigation and proof of
misbehaviour or incapacity of a judge as referred to in Clause (4). If this
second part can be treated as an independent provision and not necessarily
connected  with  the  procedure  for  presentation  of  an  address,  there  is  no
difficulty in holding that this part confers sufficient power to legislate a law
relating to imposition of minor measures by the Judicial Council. In our view
the word `and’ after the word `investigation’ should be read disjunctively and
so read the second part of Art. 124 (5) expressly permits the making of a law
authorizing the Judicial Council to impose minor measures.  As stated earlier
the first part of Art. 124 (4) dealing with a Motion in either House is not part
of the Parliamentary procedure and can be regulated by statute and it has
been so held by the Supreme Court in the cases of Justice V.Ramaswami. In
fact,  that  is  how  an  inquiry  outside  Parliament  into  misbehaviour  or
incapacity is provided by a law made under Art. 124 (5). The same Judicial
Council, by virtue of the later part of Art. 124 (5) can be authorized by law in
a complaint procedure to impose minor measures.
The Law Commission is of the view that in the light of the judgments
of the US and Canadian Courts, in our view, intra-branch supervision within
the Judiciary can be recognized and provided for by the Parliament for the
benefit of the Judiciary as long as the intra-branch supervision did not extend
417

to removal by address, a sanction which is exclusively within the purview of
the Parliament.  All other `minor measures’ which Parliament may by statute
allow  to  the  Judiciary  cannot  be  considered  as  being  ultra  vires  the
Constitution.  
The  constitutional  provision  of  address  by  the  Parliament  to  the
President which signifies inter-Branch control is distinct from in-house or
intra-Branch control. The address procedure is only a limitation on Executive
and Parliamentary interference with the conduct of judges. It never purported
to prescribe the outer limits of disciplining the Judges by intra-branch or in-
house mechanism.   
In the present Bill there can validly be a recognition by the Parliament
of the inherent power of the judiciary to put its own house in order by and
permitting  the  Judicial  Council  to administer  minor  measures  for  acts  or
omissions of a judge which do not warrant removal by address. By providing
a law enabling the Judicial council to impose minor measures, the Parliament
would only be facilitating the intra-branch control by the judiciary over its
members.
Assuming that Art. 124 (5) which permits a law to be made for the
purpose  of  Art.  124  (4) is  not  attracted,  even  then  such  a provision  for
imposing minor measures at the level of the Judicial council can be justified
with reference to Article 246 read with Entry 11-A of List III of the Seventh
418

Schedule of the Constitution which refers to the topic `Administration of
Justice’.  The  subject  of  ‘Administration  of  Justice’  is  wide  enough  to
encompass the  in-house disciplinary procedure for judges  of the superior
courts. In  State  of Bombay v. Narothamdas  Jethabai   1951  SCR 51, the
Supreme Court while interpreting the words `administration of justice” in the
State List of the Government of India Act 1935, speaking through Justice
Mahajan  (as  he  then  was)  said:  (at  pp.83-84)  “It  seems  to  me  that  the
legislative powers conferred on the Provincial Legislature by Item of List II
has been conferred by use of language  which is of the widest  amplitude
(administration of justice and constitution and organization of all courts). It
was  not denied that  the phrase employed would  include within  its ambit
legislative power in respect to jurisdiction and power of Courts established
for the purpose of administration of justice. Moreover, the words appear to be
sufficient to confer upon the Provincial Legislature the right to regulate and
provide for the whole machinery connected with the administration of justice
in the Provincial.” The same views were echoed in a recent judgment of the
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Jamshed N Guzdar v. State of
Maharashtra  (2005) 2 SCC 591 where Shivaraj Patil, J., speaking for the
Bench observed: 
“  The general jurisdiction of the High Courts is dealt with in
Entry 11-A under the caption `Administration of Justice’, which has a
wide meaning and includes administration of civil as well as criminal
justice.  The  expression  `administration  of  justice’  has  been  used
without  any  qualification  or  limitation  wide  enough  to  include  the
419

`powers’ and `jurisdiction’ of all the courts except the Supreme Court.
The semi colon (;) after the words `administration of justice’ in Entry
11-A has significance and meaning. …It is an accepted principle of
construction  of  a  Constitution  that  everything  necessary  for  the
exercise of powers is included in the grant of power.”
We have already pointed out that in the 1939 Act in the U.S.A, there
was no specific provision for imposition of minor measures and S. 307 and
S.332 of Title 28 USC 332 merely referred to `administration of the business
of the courts’ and the said words were interpreted by Harlan J in Chandler’s
case 398 US 74 as enabling minor measures such as withdrawal of listing of
cases. 
From the  above  discussion  it  is  clear the  words  `administration  of
justice’ in Entry 11-A can encompass all that is necessary and incidental to
speedy, effective and efficient judicial administration and would permit the
Parliament  to make  a law  constituting  the  National  Judicial  Council  and
empowering  it to impose minor measures.
Even otherwise, in our view, the question is not whether there is any
express  provision  in  the  Constitution  granting  power  to  impose  minor
measures  but  the  question  is  whether  there  is  any  provision  in  the
Constitution  which  takes  away or  restricts  the  power  of the  judiciary  or
prohibits the judiciary from imposing minor measures. The answer is that
there is no such prohibition in our Constitution. In fact when Parliament itself
420

wants to recognize this power which is already with the judiciary, there is no
need to question the validity of this grant of power. That was exactly what
was observed in McBryde’s Case in the U.S, quoting from Christensen v.
Harris County (2000) 529 U.S 570 (583) that “ when a statute limits a thing
to be done in a particular mode it includes a negative of any other mode”.
The Law Commission recommends that the Bill of 2005 must be
suitably modified to provide for ‘minor measures’ to be imposed by the
Judicial Council itself. Such a law can be made under the latter part of
Art. 124 (5) and in any event, under Art. 246 read with Entry 11- A of
List III of Schedule VII of the Constitution of India which refers to the
subject  of  ‘Administration  of  Justice’.  Introducing  a  provision
permitting ‘minor measures’ to be imposed by the Judicial Council will
be valid and will not be unconstitutional.
(IX)   Whether in the case of a `reference’ by Speaker/Chairman pursuant to a
Motion for removal by address under Art. 124, the Judicial Council is
bound to report that the charges warranting removal are proved or are
not proved or whether if such charges do not warrant removal it could
either impose minor measures itself or whether or it could recommend
to Parliament that it is a fit case warranting minor measures?
We have already pointed out above that in the case of complaint procedure it
is open to the Judicial Council to impose minor measures itself where in its
421

opinion the charges do not warrant removal and that a law to that effect can
be validly made. 
But the question arises whether in a reference procedure initiated pursuant to
a  reference  by  the  Speaker/Chairman,  where  the  charges  do  not  warrant
removal,  the  Judicial  Council  could  itself  impose  minor  measures  or
recommend minor measures to Parliament.
Under  Art.  124  (4)  read  with  Art.  217,  the  members  of  Parliament  are
permitted  to  move  a  Motion  only  for  removal.  In  fact  that  is  the  only
provision which permits Parliament to have a say in the matter of disciplining
judges. The allegations must be so grave as to warrant removal.  Inasmuch as
there cannot be a Motion for imposition of minor measures under Art.124 (4),
it is impermissible for the Judicial Council to do the same thing indirectly
while considering a reference by the Speaker or Chairman, in a Motion for
removal by address. The position would however be different if, in addition
to the reference, there is a complaint before the Judicial Council on the same
facts which constitute the reference. In such event, the Judicial Council will
follow the complaint procedure as well.   
Further the Supreme Court pointed out in Justice V.Ramaswami’s cases that
if  misbehaviour  was  not  proved  Parliament  could  not  take  up  a  Motion
inasmuch  as  such  misbehaviour  must  be  proved  outside  Parliament.  The
Supreme Court further stated that it is only where the misbehaviour is proved
422

that the motion could be taken up. In our view unless the Judicial Council
comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  misbehaviour proved  warrants  removal,
Parliament  cannot  consider  the  Motion  for  removal.  Since  a  Motion  for
removal which is the only situation conferring jurisdiction on Parliament to
consider removal of a judge, it is impermissible for the Parliament to consider
imposition of minor measures. That, under our Constitutional scheme is not
permissible and should be left entirely to the Judicial Council in a complaint
procedure. 
The Law Commission is of the view that it is not permissible for the
Judicial  Council  to  recommend  imposition  of  minor  measures  on  a
reference  by  the  Speaker/Chairman  of  either  House  of  Parliament.
However,  if  there  is,  simultaneously,  a  complaint  on  the  same  facts
before  the  Judicial  Council,  in  addition  to  a  reference,  the  Judicial
Council can itself impose such ‘minor measures’ while disposing of the
complaint. However, while returning the reference to the House it cannot
recommend any minor measure to be passed by the House. 
(X) Tenability  of  an  argument  based  on  California  and  other  State
Constitutional  Amendments  to  contend  that  imposition  of  `minor
measure’ requires amendment of the Constitution:
423

We have already stated that for imposing minor measures, the Constitution
need not be amended and in fact the U.S. courts have decided that without
amendment of the Constitution minor measures could be imposed.
A question arises whether even though the U.S. Federal Constitution
was not amended for imposing ‘minor measures’, why have the States in the
U.S. amended their State Constitutions?
(A) It is true that in California and most of the States in U.S., the State
Constitutions  were  amended  while  bringing  in  new  provisions  for
“disciplining”  State  Judges  in  a  manner  other  than  by  impeachment  or
removal by address into the Constitutional provisions.    
It must be noted that this was because the new provisions introduced in
the State Constitutions deal not with the recommendation for removal but
with an additional method of ‘removal’ by a State Judicial Commission or by
the State Supreme Courts, which is apart from the provision for ‘removal’ by
impeachment or by address as contained in the State Constitutions.  Inasmuch
as the States wanted to provide an additional method of ‘removal’ other than
removal  by  impeachment  or  address,  the  State  Constitutions  had  to  be
amended.  On the other hand, the Federal Constitution did not have to be
amended because Federal Judges could be removed only by ‘impeachment’
and the Judicial Council or the Judicial Conference was not enabled to pass
any final orders of removal. In the Federal system, according to the 1980 Act
424

and the Act of 2002, the Judicial Council and Judicial Conference could only
make a recommendation for removal.   The position in the States as stated
above  is,  however,  different.   The  State  Judicial  Commissions  were
empowered to straightaway order removal.  This could not be done except by
way  of  amendment  of  the  State  Constitutions  and  that  was  why  the
amendments were made permitting the Judicial Commissions or the State
Supreme Courts to pass orders of removal.
The  State  Constitutional  amendments,  no  doubt  introduced  ‘minor
measures’ as well, along with a procedure for removal by the State Judicial
Commissions or the State Supreme Court. But, in our view, this was done
incidentally  while  providing  an  additional  constitutional  procedure  for
‘removal’ by the Judicial Council or State Supreme Court and not because a
constitutional amendment was necessary for imposing minor measures.  As
stated earlier, an in-house procedure within the Judiciary is lawful and can
provide for ‘minor measures’ without any amendment of the Constitution.
The US Federal Court Judgments from Chandler to McBryde accept such a
position.
The Law Commission is of the view  that no amendment of the
Constitution is necessary in our country if a law is made by Parliament
enabling the Judicial Council to impose ‘minor measures’ as part of an
in-house mechanism.   
425

(XI) Tenability of an argument that ‘complaint’ procedure before the
Judicial Council is ultra-vires because the allegations are not by way of
a Motion in the House:
It  may  be  argued  that  instead  of  a  Motion  for  an  Address  as
contemplated by Article 124 (4), since we are proposing that the Judicial
Council can make a recommendation to Parliament for ‘removal’ of the judge
where  the  proved  misbehaviour  warrants  it,  Article  124  (4)  needs
amendment.   
In our view, it is not necessary to amend Article 124 (4).   The reason
is  that our Supreme Court in Justice V. Ramaswami’s case held that the
initial Motion and reference to the committee by the Speaker/Chairman is not
part of the Parliamentary process but it is part of the Judicial process. A law
can validly be made by Parliament under Article 124 (5) for the Judicial
Council to recommend to Parliament for removal by address. The Supreme
has held that making of such a law is a condition precedent to the removal
procedure inasmuch as the proof of misbehaviour or incapacity must be by a
body outside Parliament. Unless the procedure for such proof by an outside
body is prescribed, Art. 124 (4) cannot come into play.
A second reason is that, as pointed out by the U.S. Appeals Court in
Hasting’s  Case (1987)  the  recommendation  by  a  committee  of  Judges
(Judicial Council) is “merely informational”.    
426

In the Canadian case Gratton vs. Canadian Council 1994(2) F.C. 769,
it was argued before Strayer J that Parliament had unlawfully purported to
give to the Canadian Judicial Council and its Committees, an authority which
was vested solely in Parliament by sec 99(1) of the Constitution Act, 1867.
In other words, this method enables the Judicial Council under sec 63 of the
Judges  Act  1985  by  way  of  a  complaint,  to  conduct  investigation  and
recommend removal of a Judge in its report to the Minister.  Making such a
law was permitted by sec 99(1) of the Constitution but it was contended that
this amounted to abdication of its powers by Parliament because Parliament
could remove a Judge by address of the Houses to the Governor-General.
This contention was rejected by Strayer J relying on the decision of the Privy
Council  in  Hodge vs.  Reg:  (1883-84)  9  A.  (117  (PC).   A  sovereign
Parliament could legitimately delegate such functions, it held.  The power of
Parliament to remove was not an ‘adjudicative’ power which could not be
delegated.   Even  if  it  were  judicial,  still  as  stated  in  Hodge vs.  Reg,
Parliament  could  delegate  such  functions,  in  exercise  of  its  sovereign
functions.  The Canadian Parliament was sovereign and not merely a delegate
of the British Parliament.
The  Law  Commission  is  of the  view  that  the  procedure  in the
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968  and in the proposed Bill of 2005 enabling
investigation/inquiry  by  the  Judicial  Council  by  way  of  a  complaint
procedure in addition to a reference procedure is not an infringement of
427

the Parliamentary process contained in Art 124(4) and does not amount
to impermissible delegation and is valid.  
(XII) Can a Chief Justice of a High Court be part of the Judicial Council in
the case of an inquiry against a Judge of the Supreme Court?
The Draft Bill 2005, provides in sec 3(1) that in respect of all inquiries,
whether against a Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court, the Judicial
Council will be a permanent body consisting of the Chief Justice of India,
two senior most Judges of the Supreme Court and two senior most Chief
Justices of the High Court.  
It has already been stated that a Judicial Council cannot investigate
allegations against the Chief Justice of India if made in a ‘complaint’ to the
Judicial Council but that the Council can investigate allegations against the
Chief Justice of India upon a reference by the Speaker or Chairman under sec
9(2) of the Bill of 2005.
But, still the question is whether in the investigation of a ‘complaint’
against a Judge of the Supreme Court, it is proper that two senior-most Chief
Justices of the High Court should be members of the Judicial Council?
Unlike the Act of 1968, where the Committee was of an ad hoc nature
to be constituted whenever a reference was made by the Speaker/Chairman,
428

the present Bill of 2005 contemplates a permanent body which can receive
‘complaints’ from time to time or to which reference can be made by the
Speaker/Chairman.
In our view, it would be of considerable embarrassment to two Chief
Justices of High Courts to sit in judgment over allegations against a Supreme
Court Judge.  There could be a variety of reasons as to why a Chief Justice of
a High Court may not like to inquire against a Judge of the Supreme Court.  
The Law Commission recommends that the Judicial Council when
it investigates into allegations against a Supreme Court Judge (in the
complaint or reference procedures) or against the Chief Justice of India
(in a reference procedure) should not include the two senior most Chief
Justices  of the  High  Courts.   In  such  an event, the Judicial  Council
should  comprise the Chief Justice of India and four senior most Judges
of the Supreme Court.  
The provisions of the Bill of 2005 have to be suitably amended to
provide for this contingency. 
(XIII) Is there a need for a recusal provision to be incorporated in the Bill of
2005?
429

Apart from the situations envisaged in sec 3(2) of the Bill of 2005
where  the next senior most Judge comes into the Judicial Council, there
could be situations where one of the five members of the Judicial Council
may have a genuine reason for ‘recusing’ himself. For example, the Judge
against whom complaint is made or a reference made, may be a close relation
or a former junior of his when they were at the Bar or a close friend over a
period of years, being from the same State from which the Member Judge
hails.
The Law Commission is of the view that, inasmuch as the Judicial
Council of five Judges must collectively take decisions, the procedure,
where a Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice of a High Court recuses
himself or herself, is that the next person in seniority must fill the vacant
slot. It is necessary to make a provision in this behalf by appropriate
amendment to the Bill of 2005 itself.  In our view, it is not desirable to
leave such a ‘recusal’ provision to the Rules. 
(XIV )Should the process of investigation precede charges and the inquiry
commence only after the framing of charges?  Should the investigating
judges  be  different  from  the  Judges  in  the  Judicial  Council  who
conduct the inquiry? Should the investigating judge invariably report
his findings to the Judicial Council without finally disposing of the
complaint at his level?
430

The Act of 1968 as well as the proposed Bill of 2005 do not keep the well-
known  distinction  between  `allegation’,  `preliminary  investigation  into
allegations’, `framing of charges’ and `inquiry into charges’ as being the
various steps which in that order can lead to removal. 
We shall therefore deal with this distinction in some detail.
 
We  find  that  in  several  countries  there  is  a  separate  provision  for
investigation  by  the  Council  or  by  a  separate  investigation  Committee
preceding the framing of the charges by the Council.  The 1968 Act does not
refer to a prior investigation before the regular inquiry.  In fact, in the case of
Justice V. Ramaswami, his counsel Sri Kapil Sibal raised a serious objection
before the House that the Justice Sawant Committee did not ‘investigate’ any
facts before framing the ‘charges’, and that the Committee framed charges
straightaway on the basis of the allegations  and that investigation should
precede framing of charges.  This is because, in the course of investigation, it
might come to light that there is no factual basis for the allegations and they
could as well be dropped.  But, this was countered by certain members who
pointed  out  that  the  provision  in  sec  3(1)  of  the  1968  Act  talks  of
investigation after framing of charges. The confusion arose on account of the
use of the word `investigation’ for the word `inquiry’ in the 1968 Act. This in
our  opinion requires  a clear elucidation  of the different  stages  of the  (i)
allegations  (ii)  investigation  (iii)  framing  of charges  and  (iv)  conduct  of
inquiry into the charges.
431

The  point  here  is  that  normally  charges  are  to  be  framed  only  if  the
investigation into the allegations show some prima facie material for charges
being  framed  before  the  regular  inquiry  is  launched.   This  aspect  gains
importance because once the  charges are framed against  a judge without
investigating  whether  there  is  a  prima  facie  case  on  facts,  the  Judge’s
reputation  gets  tarnished  and  once  the  damage  is  done,  it  will  be  very
difficult for him to retrieve his image.  
It will however be noticed that Art 124(5) of the Constitution uses the
words ‘investigation and proof’.  The 1968 Act was entitled Judges (Inquiry)
Act.  Further, inasmuch as the Sawant Committee stated that the proceedings
are quasi-criminal, in our view, in the parlance of the Criminal Procedure
Code,  1973,  the  common  nomenclature  that  is  used  is  ‘investigation’,
‘framing of charges’ and ‘inquiry’ to indicate the three separate stages must
be taken up in that order.
The  marginal  note  of  section  7  of  the  Bill  of  2005  speaks  of
‘preliminary  scrutiny’  while  the  body  of  subsection(1)  speaks  of
‘consideration and verification’ of the allegations in the complaint.
Given the above ambiguously worded provisions in the Bill of 2005,
the question is as to how the Bill of 2005 should be rectified to bring about
432

the  necessary  distinction  between  allegations,  investigation,  charges  and
inquiry, so far as complaint procedure is concerned.
Section 10 of the Bill of 2005 however indicates that, in the case of
reference  from the  Speaker/Chairman,  notwithstanding  anything  in  sec  7
(wrongly printed as sec 6), the charges will be straightaway framed i.e. there
is no need for a ‘preliminary scrutiny’.
In  our  view,  the  word  ‘investigation’  used  in  Art  124  (5)  of  the
Constitution connotes a ‘preliminary investigation’ while the word ‘proof’
indicates proof after a regular inquiry.  The Constitution itself visualises a
two-stage procedure.  But marginal note of sec 7 of the Bill of 2005 uses the
words `preliminary scrutiny’  and in subsection (1) of section 7 the words
‘considering’ and ‘verification’ are used. 
So  far  as  ‘frivolous  and  vexatious’  allegations  in  a  complaint  are
concerned,  the  words  `preliminary  scrutiny’  in  the  marginal  note  and
`considering’  and  `verification’  in  the  main  body  of  the  section  may be
sufficient.  Whether  the  allegations  are  ‘frivolous  or  vexatious’  can  be
normally determined on a reading of the complaint itself.  However, in order
to determine whether a complaint is ‘not made in good faith’ [clause (a) of
sec 7(1)] or whether or not sufficient grounds for contemplating a regular
inquiry exist, it is necessary to empower the Judicial Council to conduct an
‘investigation’ preceding the inquiry.  Such investigation is something more
433

than a scrutiny or a verification but, at the same time, it is not a full-fledged
inquiry.
Some changes are necessary in ss. 2 to 8 which deal with the complaint
procedure; some are necessary in the reference procedure in s. 10; some other
changes are also necessary in the general procedure for inquiry (which the
Bill of 2005 terms `investigation’) viz., Ss. 12, 16, 17, 19, 22, 24, 25, 26 and
27.
The Law Commission recommends the following amendments to the Bill
of 2005: 
(i) In Sec. 2 the following definitions of ‘investigation’ and `inquiry’ may be
inserted: `investigation’ means ‘preliminary investigation’; ‘inquiry’ means
‘inquiry for proof’ .
(ii) In sec 3(1), the words ‘to investigate’ be substituted by the words ‘to
investigate  and  inquire’;  in  sec.  3(2),  the  word  ‘investigating’  shall  be
substituted by the words ‘investigating or inquiring’;  in sec 3(3), the word
‘investigation’ shall be substituted by the words ‘investigation and inquiry’.
(iii) In  sec  6 for the word  ‘investigation’, the  words  ‘investigation  and
inquiry’ be substituted in the body as well as in the marginal heading to the
section.
434

(iv) In  sec  7,  the  marginal  heading  should  read  “Verification  and
preliminary investigation of complaints’; in the body of sec 7(1) for the word
‘verification’, the words ‘verification or where necessary, such preliminary
investigation as it deems appropriate’ be substituted; in the body of sec 7(1)
(b), for the word ‘investigating’ the word ‘inquiry’ be substituted; in the body
of  sec  7(2), for the  word  ‘verification’, the  words  ‘verification  or where
necessary, preliminary investigation as it deems appropriate’ be substituted. 
(v) Marginal heading to sec 8 is correct when it speaks of ‘inquiries’.  But,
sec 8(1) has to be reframed as follows:
“8(1):  If after the verification and preliminary investigation under section 7
in respect of a complaint, the Council proposes to conduct any inquiry, it
shall frame definite charges  against the Judge on  the basis  of which the
inquiry is proposed to be held”.
(vi) In  sec  10  for  ‘section  6’sustitute  ‘section  7’  and  the  word
‘investigation’ be substituted by the word ‘inquiry’.
(vii) So far as Chapter V is concerned, the heading should be ‘Procedure for
Inquiry’. 
435

(viii) In sec 12(1), 12(2) and 12(2) proviso and in section 13, for the words
‘investigation’ and  ‘investigating’, the  words  ‘inquiry’ and  ‘inquiring’ be
respectively substituted.
(ix)  In  Sec.  15(1)  and  15  (2),  for  the  word  `investigation’  the  words
`preliminary investigation or inquiry’ be substituted
(x) Heading of Ch. VI should be ‘Procedure after conclusion of Inquiry’
(xi) In sec 16(1), sec 17(1), the word ‘investigation’ be substituted by the
word ‘inquiry’. (In regard to s. 16 there are some more amendments which
will be discussed separately hereinafter)
(xii) In sec 19(1), for the words ‘or conducting any investigation’, the words
‘or conducting any preliminary investigation or inquiry’ shall be substituted.
(xiii)  In  sec.  21,  for  the  word  `investigation’,  the  words  ‘preliminary
investigation and inquiry’ be substituted.
(xiv) We are proposing that the whole of section 22 comprising sub-sections
(1) to (3) should be shifted to sec 7 as subsections (3) to (5) and in the body
of sub-section (3) of sec. 7 (as now proposed) the words ‘constituting an
investigating committee’ can be retained but the words ‘for the purpose of
conducting investigation into the matter’ have to modified as ‘for the purpose
of  conducting  preliminary  investigation  and  for  finding  whether  definite
436

charges require to be framed for conducting an inquiry into the matter’. In the
present  proposal  for  inserting  sec  7(4)  as  stated  above  for  the  word
‘investigation’,  the  words  ‘preliminary investigation’  be  substituted.   [As
regards the marginal heading of section 7 we have already suggested the
change in sub-para (iv) above] 
(xv)  In  sec.  23,  for  the  word  `investigation’,  the  words`  preliminary
investigation and inquiry’ be substituted.
(xvi) In sec 24, in the marginal heading, the words ‘Investigation by the
Council’  be  substituted  by  the  words  ‘Investigation  and  Inquiry  by  the
Council’. In the body of sec 24, for the words ‘Any investigation’ the words
‘Any preliminary investigation, or inquiry’ be substituted. 
(xvii)In  sec  25,  in  marginal  heading  and  body  of  the  section,  the  word
‘investigation’  be  substituted  by  the  words  ‘complaint,  preliminary
investigation and inquiry’.
(xviii)  In  sec  26,  for  the  word  ‘investigation’,  the  words  ‘preliminary
investigation or inquiry’ be substituted.
(xix) In sec 27, the word ‘investigation’ in the marginal heading and in the
body  of section be substituted by the words ‘preliminary investigation and
inquiry”.
437

(XV) Whether  the  National  Judicial  Council  can  itself  conduct  the
preliminary investigation, frame charges and then conduct the inquiry?
(a) No doubt, in several countries the procedure to which we have referred,
shows that the Judicial Council or Commission delegates investigation to a
smaller Committee of Judges.  In fact, sec 22 of the Draft Bill of 2005 (which
we  have  suggested  should  be  shifted  to  sec  7)  proposes  that  such  a
Committee may be constituted  by the Council.  This is permissible.
In  Hastings vs.  Judicial Conference of US (1987) 829 F.2d. 91, this
point was raised before the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit and in its judgment dated 15th September, 1987, the Court
of  Appeals  held  that  “the  combination  of  investigative  and  adjudicating
functions vested in the Judicial Council” is “not inherently impermissible”.
The Law Commission is of the view that section 22 of the Bill of
2005 which permits the Judicial Council itself to conduct an investigation
or  appoint  a  Committee  comprising  of  its  Members  to  conduct  the
investigation, is constitutionally valid.
(b) S.22 however requires a change in the language. As it stands now, it can
be interpreted  as if the  members of the Council have to appoint another
committee for investigation. Whereas the investigation Committee has to be
constituted by the Judicial Council. 
438

The  Law  Commission  therefore  recommends  that the  following
words of section 22  “it may designate one or more of its members who
shall constitute an investigating committee for the purpose of conducting
investigation into the matter” shall be substituted by the words “ it may
constitute  an  investigating  committee  comprising  one  or  more  of  its
members for the purpose of conducting investigation into the matter”.
(XVI) Should the Judge be given an opportunity at the stage of preliminary
‘investigation’ before the Judicial Council on a complaint to clarify the
facts, even if, in the event of the charges being framed, he will have a
full-fledged opportunity before the Judicial Council (or in case of a
recommendation for  removal, he may have yet another opportunity
before the Houses)?
The Bill of 2005 indeed provides in s. 7 (2) that at the stage of verification of
the complaints under s. 7 (1), the Council “may, if it deems it necessary so to
do, call for the comments of the judge concerned.” 
On this question, the leading authority is the judgment of the Privy
Council in Rees vs. Crane 1994(1) All ER 833, where Lord Slynn, speaking
for the Privy Council dealt with this aspect exhaustively with reference to
fundamental principles of administrative law and judicial independence.
439

In that case Lord Slynn stated that, generally, a person who is being
investigated has  no  right  to  be  given  an  opportunity  in  preliminary  or
initiating proceedings and that right usually arises at a later stage when he
has a right to know about the complaint.  It is also true, he said, that natural
justice does not normally require that a person must be told of the complaint
made against him and given a chance to answer them at the particular stage in
question.  The reason leading the Courts to this principle was the fact that the
investigation  was  purely  preliminary,  that  there  would  be  a  full  chance
adequately to deal with the complaints later and sometimes it may be a matter
of urgency precluding notice.  Lord Slynn then stated that there are, however,
some cases where an opportunity has to be given to the judge to submit a
representation at the stage of investigation.  He stated 
“But, in their Lordship’s opinion, there is no absolute rule to this effect
even if there is to be, under the procedure, an opportunity to answer the
charges later.  As de Smith’s Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(4th Ed, 1980, p 199) put it:  Where an act or proposal is only the first
step in a sequence of measures which may culminate in a decision
detrimental to a person’s interests, the Courts will generally decline to
accede to that person’s submission that he is entitled to be heard in
opposition to this initial act, particularly if he is entitled to be heard at
a later stage.”
440

But, he stated that while considering this general practice, the Court should
not  be  bound  by  rigid  rules.   It  may  have  to  take  into  account  all  the
circumstances of the case.  He then said:
“Plainly in the present case there would have been an opportunity for
the respondent  to answer the complaint  at a later stage  before  the
tribunal and before the Judicial Committee.  That is a pointer in favour
of the general practice but it is not conclusive.  Sec. 137 which sets up
the three-tier process is silent as to the procedure to be followed at
each stage and as a mater of interpretation is not to be construed as
necessarily excluding  a right  to  be informed and  heard  at the first
stage.  On the contrary its silence on procedures in the absence of other
factors indicates, or at least leaves open the possibility, that there may
well be circumstances in which fairness requires that the party whose
case is to be referred should be told and given a chance to comment.  It
is not a priori sufficient to say, as the appellants in effect do, that it is
accepted that the rules of natural justice apply to the procedure as a
whole but they do not have to be followed in any individual stage.  The
question remains whether fairness requires that the audi alteram partem
rule be applied at the Commission stage.”
The Privy Council emphasized that, in case a Judge’s case goes straightaway
for inquiry – without an opportunity to submit a representation at the stage of
441

investigation – there will be considerable  publicity and the  suspicion and
damage to the Judge’s reputation must be avoided.
The Privy Council also pointed out that there is provision to allow the
Judge or affected party to submit a representation at the stage of investigation
before the Canadian Judicial Council (see 1982 Vol. 28, McGill LJ 380), as
well as before the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee (1984) and before the
Wisconsin  Judicial  Commission  (see  1976  Wisconsin  Law  Reports  563,
579).  
We have set out the rules of the Wisconsin Judicial Commission, Idaho
Judicial Council, Connecticut Judicial Review Council and Texas Tribunal of
Seven Judges – where the rules expressly contemplate right to representation
or an opportunity at the stage of investigation to the Judge.  
As pointed out hereinabove, section 7(2) of the Bill of 2005 does
provide an opportunity to the Judge to submit his ‘comments’ but it
gives  a discretion to the Council  to call for comments ‘if it deems it
necessary’. We are of the view that, as in the States in the U.S., this must
be obligatory.
The Law Commission recommends that for the word ‘may’ in s. 7
(2), the word ‘shall’ should be substituted and the words ‘if it deems it
necessary so to do’, should be deleted.
442

(XVII) Whether the provisions of sec 21 permitting stoppage of assignment
of judicial work to the Judge pending a motion or investigation into a
complaint or reference is constitutionally valid?  What is the proper
interpretation of Art 124(5) read with Art 225 of the Constitution?
Section 21 of the Bill of 2005 talks of ‘stoppage of assigning judicial
work in certain cases’.  It reads as follows:
“Sec. 21:  During the pendency of the investigation or impeachment,
the Council may recommend stoppage of assigning judicial work to the
judge concerned if it appears to the Council that it is necessary in the
interest of fair and impartial investigation.”
The Justice B.C. Ray Committee appointed by the Supreme Court in
the case of Justice V. Ramaswami, as noted in Chapter VI, held that it was
not permissible to stop allocating work to a Judge during investigation until
the charges are prima facie made out by the appropriate authority.
Later on, in so far as ‘suspension’ of a Judge is concerned, B.C. Ray, J.
speaking  for  the  Constitution  Bench  in  Sub  Committee  on  Judicial
Accountability vs. Union of India: 1991(4) SCC 699 observed:
443

“The Constitution, while providing for the suspension of a Member of
the Public Service Commission in Art 317(2) in a similar situation, has
deliberately abstained from making such a provision in case of higher
constitutional  functionaries,  namely,  the  superior  Judges  and  the
President and the Vice-President of India, facing impeachment.  It is
reasonable to assume that the framers of the constitution had assumed
that  a  desirable  convention  would  be followed  by a Judge  in  that
situation  which  would  not  require  the  exercise  of  a  power  of
suspension.”
Earlier, the learned Judge observed:
“…. The absence of a legal provision like Art 317(2) …. To interdict
the Judge …. till the process of removal under Art 124(4) is complete
does not necessarily indicate that the Judge shall continue to function
during that period.  That area is to be covered by the sense of propriety
of the learned Judge himself and the judicial tradition symbolized by
the views of the Chief Justice of India.  It should be expected that the
learned Judge would be guided in such a situation by the advice of the
Chief Justice of India, as a matter of  convention unless he himself
decides  as  an  act  of propriety to  abstain  from discharging  judicial
functions during the interregnum.”
444

Further as stated by Prof. Simon Shetreet (see Ch. VII above) under the
common law prior to the Act of Settlement 1700, the Crown could suspend
judges even if they hold office during good behaviour. There were two cases
of such suspensions one relating to Judge John Walter and another in case of
Judge John Archer. Prof. Shetreet however says that as a matter of practice
the  judge  should  take  leave  of  absence  pending  a  criminal  trial  or
proceedings  before  Parliament  for  misbehaviour  involving  moral  blame.
Otherwise, to grant permission to him “to dispense justice as a judge of the
land as usual with grave accusations over his head” is likely to destroy public
confidence in the impartiality of judicial proceedings before him in particular
and of the judicial process in general.” He also stated that administrative
arrangements could be made, in such situations that no cases are assigned to
the judge’s list. He refers to a case in England in 1950 when a judge who
failed to respond to the pressure put on him was not assigned any work and
was finally retired. He also refers to the case in the U.S. of Justice Chandler
(1970) 398 U.S 74 where the federal judge unsuccessfully challenged the
order  of  the  Judicial  Council  which  directed  withdrawal  of pending  and
future cases from him. Prof. Shetreet also pointed out that the judge is not
entitled  to claim assignment of cases  and  that  when he has  not  suffered
injustice he is not entitled to a judicial remedy. This was on the analogy in
the case of a member of the Brighton Council whose name was struck off
from all committees (Manton v. Brighton 1951 (2) QB 393).
445

Now, the point is that sec. 21 of the proposed Bill of 2005 does not use
the word ‘suspension’ but uses  the words ‘stoppage of assigning judicial
work’ in certain circumstances i.e. during the pendency of the investigation
or impeachment.  The section says that the Council may recommend for such
stoppage if it appears to the Council that it is necessary in the interests of fair
and impartial investigation.
In other words, sec 21 does not speak of stoppage of assignment of
judicial work in every case where there is a complaint or reference.  It must
be felt necessary in the interests of fair and impartial investigation.
The  question  still  is  whether  such  a  power  to  stop  a  Judge  from
performing Judicial work, which belongs to the Chief Justice, can also be
given  to  the  Judicial  Council?   A  further  question  arises  whether  if
‘suspension’ pending investigation or removal by address is not permissible
according to the Supreme Court, the stoppage of assigning judicial work
amounts to the same?  Another question also arises whether the powers of the
Chief Justice of a High Court under Art 225 of the Constitution “to regulate
the  sittings  of  the  Court  and  of  its  members  thereof  sitting  alone  or  in
Division  Courts”,  (which,  of  course,  is  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the
Constitution and to the provisions of any law) can be subjected to a law
under Art 124(5) providing for ‘stoppage of assigning judicial work’ to a
Judge in certain situations?
446

No  doubt,  stoppage  of  assignment  of  judicial  work  pending
investigation or impeachment, as pointed by the Privy Council in  Rees vs.
Crane 1994(1) All ER 833, amounts to purported ‘suspension’ of the Judge.
After all, ‘suspension’ is a prohibition against an office-holder exercising
functions or powers of his office’.  Lord Slynn posed the question:
“The issue in the present case is this whether what the Chief Justice did
was merely within his competence as an administrative arrangement or
whether it amounted to a purported suspension.”
The question was answered by stating that on facts, there was an ‘indefinite
suspension’ and the Chief Justice acted without jurisdiction because the law
in  that  colonial  country  required  only  the  President  to  pass  an  order  of
‘suspension’ after a prescribed procedure was followed.  Lord Slynn held that
what  was  done  by  the  Chief  Justice  “went  beyond  an  administrative
arrangement which the Chief Justice was otherwise entitled to make.”  He
observed:
“the respondent was effectively barred from exercising these functions
as  a  Judge  sitting  in  Court.   …..  It  was  in  effect an  indefinite
suspension.”
(A) We shall examine the position with reference to Art 225 under which
the Chief Justice has powers to assign work.
447

First,  Art 225  deals  only with  High  Courts  and  not  with  Supreme
Court.   Secondly, the  Judicial  Council  is  a  separate entity and  it  cannot
exercise the powers of the Chief Justice of India or Chief Justice of a High
Court.  Thirdly, Art 225 uses the words ‘subject to the provisions of the
Constitution and any law of the appropriate legislature’.  It also refers to
‘respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of
justice in the Court, including  any power to make rules  of Court and to
regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or in
Division  Courts’.   This  may  have  reference  to  the  Codes  of  Civil  and
Criminal Procedure or the Letters Patent or any special law which prescribes
as to the mode of hearing of cases by judges sitting single or in divisions. Art
225 permits a law to be made to achieve the above purposes.  In fact the
Delhi High Court Act, Kerala High Court Act and the Karnataka High Court
Act are examples of such laws. 
It  could  be  said  that  withdrawal  of  judicial  work  is  part  of  the
‘administration of justice’ or it relates to ‘regulating the sittings of the Court’.
Nevertheless, instead of going by Art 225, we think that, we get a clear
answer from Art 124(5) itself.  We shall now refer to Art 124(5).
(B) Does  Art  124(5)  permit  a  law  to  be  made  which  provides  for
withdrawal  of  judicial  work  from  a  Judge,  pending  preliminary
448

investigation and inquiry on a complaint or pending inquiry pursuant
to a reference?
If we go by Art 124(5) read with Art 217, it is clear that Parliament can
make a law which is applicable to both High Court and Supreme Court.
Further, Art 124(5) reads:
“Article 124 (5):  Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the
presentation of an address  and for the investigation and proof of the
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4).”
As  we  have  stated  earlier,  the  word  `and’  can  be  construed
disjunctively.  Parliament  can,  therefore,  make  a  law  for  the  purpose  of
‘investigation and proof’ of misbehaviour or incapacity and, as part of the
power, provide not only for `minor measures’ at the end of the inquiry, but
also  for  `interim measures’  such  as  withdrawal  of judicial  work pending
conclusion of investigation and inquiry.
Now,  it  is  well  settled  that  if  the  Constitution  vests  power  in
Parliament to make such a law, such law can also prescribe a procedure
which facilitates the achievement of the object of an effective procedure for
investigation  and  proof.   It  is  well-known  that  if  a  person  is  under
investigation or disciplinary inquiry, his suspension or withdrawal of work
from him may, in a large measure, facilitate a more effective and speedy
449

investigation or inquiry. Those who may give information at the stage of
investigation or give evidence in the inquiry may not feel inhibited by the
presence of the judge sitting in court deciding cases. There is a possibility of
a  situation  where  the  cases  of  the  advocate  who  had  given  a  complaint
against the judge may be listed before the same judge. 
Thus Parliament which can make a law for a particular purpose, viz., to
enable the Judicial Council to conduct investigation and inquiry for proof of
misbehaviour of judges, can also in the same law confer incidental power on
the Judicial Council to recommend to the Chief justice to withdraw judicial
work from the judge for a temporary period, viz., during the pendency of the
investigation or inquiry by the Judicial Council or pending proceedings for
removal by address or pending criminal proceedings.
This aspect did not fall for consideration in Justice V. Ramaswami’s
case, (Sub. Committee in Judicial Accountability vs. Union of India: 1991(4)
SCC 699) inasmuch as the 1968 Act or the 1969 Rules did not contain a
provision like sec 21 of the Bill of 2005. The observations of the Supreme
Court in that case that Constitution permits a member of the Public Service
Commission to be suspended under Art. 317 (2) pending inquiry while the
Constitution does not make any such provision in respect of a judge, have to
be understood in the context that the 1968 Act which was made under art.124
(5) did not contain any provision like s.21 contained in the Bill of 2005. That
is why the Supreme Court did not have nay occasion to consider whether Art
450

124 (5) itself is a provision under which a law can be made in respect of
investigation and proof of charges of misbehaviour against a judge, providing
incidentally for the suspension of  such a judge. We are of the view that the
observations of the Supreme Court do not amount to a decision that a law
made under Art. 124 (5) cannot provide for suspension pending investigation
or inquiry. 
In the light of the above principles,  the Law Commission is of the
opinion that it is permissible for Parliament to make a law to provide
that  the  Judicial  Council  could  as  an  interim  measure  recommend
withdrawal of judicial work from a judge of the Supreme Court or High
Court, for the purpose of an effective investigation and inquiry. The Law
Commission is therefore of the opinion that s.21 is constitutionally valid.
(XVIII)(A) Whether there should be some provision to prevent frivolous and
vexatious ‘complaints’ being filed and provide for some sanctions as in
the various Lok Pal Bills or as in the State laws on Lok Ayuktas.     
(B) Whether the complaint must be in the form of a petition with a
verification of contents giving the source of information and whether it
should or should not be supported by an affidavit?
(A) In our view, there must be some provision in the Bill of 2005 which
will take care to prevent frivolous or vexatious complaints or complaints not
made in good faith falling under proposed sec. 7(1)(a).   In the case of such
451

complaints, it is not sufficient merely to ‘dismiss’ the same.   The office of a
Judge  and  his  functions  are  of  utmost  importance  to  society  and  the
reputation  of  Judges  and  the  Judiciary  cannot  be  allowed  to  be  easily
tarnished.
It is not uncommon that whenever a body like the Judicial Council is
established, there are a lot of people who would readily start abusing the
system.   Further, the time of the Judicial Council is very valuable.  The
Judicial  Council  consists  of  the  Chief  Justice  of  India,  two  senior-most
Judges of the Supreme Court and two senior-most Chief Justices of High
Courts.  They also have other regular duties to perform as Judges.   There is,
therefore,  need  to  provide  ‘preventive’  measures  by  way  of  a  separate
section. We are of the view that filing a complaint which is found to be
frivolous or vexatious or not in good faith should be made an offence and
punished summarily with imprisonment not exceeding one year.
Such provisions are found in the various drafts of the Lok Pal Bills and
were also contained in statutes constituting ‘Lok Ayuktas’ in several States.
For e.g., Sec. 12 (2) of the Lok Pal Bill 2001 apart from prescribing a form
states  that  the  complaint  may  be  accompanied  by  a  fee  which  may  be
prescribed and a certificate of deposit under sub-section (3) of s. 12. Sec. 12
(3) states that the  complainant  shall deposit such sum of money in such
manner  and  such  authority or agency as  may be  prescribed  and  that  the
certificate of such deposit shall be furnished in prescribed form. S. 12 (2)
452

states that if the complainant is unable to make a deposit he must apply for
exemption. S. 21 deals with the disposal of the deposit under s. 12 and the
penalty for malafide complaint. We however do not recommend a similar
procedure of making a deposit along with the complaint as the procedure
appears to be cumbersome and that making of such complaints an offence is
by itself a sufficient deterrent.
The  Law  Commission,  therefore,  recommends  appropriate
sanctions  against such complaints.  It recommends that the following
provisions be inserted in the Bill of 2005 by way of a separate section:
“(1) Any person who makes a complaint which is either frivolous
or vexatious or is not in good faith, against a Judge with
intent to cause harassment to the Judge against whom the
complaint is filed, shall be punishable.
(2)   When any offence under  subsection  (1) is  committed, the
Judicial  Council  may  take  cognizance  of  the  offence  and
after  giving  the  offender  a  reasonable  opportunity  of
showing  cause  why  he  should  not  be  punished  for  such
offence, try such offender summarily, so far as may be, in
accordance with the procedure specified for summary trials
under the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973  and  if  such
offender is found guilty of committing the offence, sentence
him to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
453

year and also to fine which may extend to rupees twenty five
thousand.”
The Law Commission recommends an amendment of the Bill of 2005 to
provide for an offence on the above lines.
(B) The question is whether the complaint must be in the form of a petition
with a verification of contents giving the source of information and whether
it should or should not be supported by an affidavit?
Sec. 5(2) of the Bill of 2005 indeed makes provision in this behalf but
it is further necessary to provide in sec. 5(2), that there must be verification
as stated below.
The Law Commission recommends that s. 5 (2) of the Bill of 2005
be amended to provide that the complaint must be in the form prescribed
in  the  rules,  must  give  full  particulars  of  the  ‘misbehaviour  or
incapacity’ which is the subject matter of the allegation and must contain
a  verification  as  to  which  of  the  allegations  are  within  the  personal
knowledge  of  the  complainant  and  which  are  based  on  information
received and from whom.   It must also contain a statement that the
complainant is aware that if the allegations in the complaint are found to
be frivolous or vexatious or not in good faith, the complainant is liable to
be summarily punished for an offence under the Act.
454

The  Law  Commission  is  also  of  the  view,  there  is  no  need  to
require  an  affidavit  to  accompany  the  complaint  inasmuch  as  every
affidavit  has  to  be  sworn  before  an  advocate  or  notary  or  other
authorized person and if such a procedure is followed, the confidentiality
of the allegations cannot be fully assured. (Hereinbelow, we are providing
that  the  complainant  should  be  prohibited  from  giving  publicity  to  the
complaint  before  filing  the  complaint  as  well  as  during  the  course  of
investigation or inquiry except with the express permission of the Judicial
Council in writing)
(XIX) Should the words ‘misbehaviour’ or ‘incapacity’ be defined in the Act?
If so, in what manner?
(a) Certain views have been expressed by jurists and Judges that it is not
necessary to define the meaning of the word ‘misbehaviour’ or ‘incapacity’
and  that  it  should  be  left  to  the  Judicial  Council  to  decide  whether  the
particular act or omission constituted ‘misbehaviour’ or the particular state of
health of the Judge revealed ‘incapacity’.  In fact, it is so observed in C.K.
Ravichandran Iyer v. Justice A.M. Bhattacharjee, 1995 (5) SCC 457.
But, even so with a view to make things clear and not to keep it vague
and also to make complainants, Members of Parliament and Judges aware of
the meaning of the words ‘misbehaviour’ or ‘incapacity’, we are of the view
that these words be defined by way of an ‘inclusive definition’.
455

There  are  various  types  of  misbehaviour  or  deviant  behaviour.  They  are
categorized by some commentators such as David E Danda as 
(i) improper courtroom behaviour’
(ii) improper or illegal influence
(iii) impropriety of the bench 
(iv) other improper activities
Under each of these items, a long list of deviant behaviour are listed out (vide
http://library.findlaw.com/2001/Jan/1/129422.html)  We  have  earlier
referred to the Annual reports of the State courts in California where a long
list of misbehaviour or deviant behaviour was given.
The  National  Commission  for  Review  of  the  Working  of  the
Constitution (2001) in its Consultation Paper (Vol. 2 Book 1) (para 14.4,
14.5) refers to ‘deviant behaviour’ which may not warrant ‘removal’.  The
types of ‘deviant behaviour’ referred to are: not observing the Court hours of
work and observing time at one’s pleasure; not delivering judgments in time,
and postponing the same in some cases for years and even leaving the Court
by retirement/transfer without delivering judgments.  Sometimes case-lists
are manipulated in the sense that heavy matters are pushed to the bottom of
the list.   Some Judges direct listing of cases without reference to the Chief
Justice.  Some are too liberal for the sake of populism, admit all cases and
456

liberally grant interim relief.   Some Judges do not keep distance from centers
of political power.
(b) Various definitions of misbehaviour or incapacity:
(i) The Justice Sawant Committee which inquired the case of Justice V.
Ramaswami  stated  that  ‘misbehaviour’  as  per  Art.  124(4)(5)  and  other
provisions of the Constitution means: 
(a) conduct  or  a  course  of  conduct  which  brings  dishonour  or
disrepute to the Judiciary as to shake the faith and confidence
which the public reposes in the Judiciary.   It is not confined to
criminal acts or to acts prohibited by law.  It is not confined to
acts contrary to law.   It is not confined to acts connected with
the Judicial  Office.   It  extends  also  to  activities  of a Judge,
public or private.  
(b) The act or omission must be wilful.   The wilful element may be
supplied by culpable recklessness, negligence or disregard for
rules or an established Code of Conduct.   Even though a single
act may not be wilful, series of acts may lead to inference of
wilfulness.
(c) Monetary  recompense  would  not  render  an  act  or  omission
anytheless ‘misbehaviour’ if the person intentionally committed
457

serious and grave wrongs of a clearly unredeeming nature and
offered recompense when discovered.
(d) ‘Misbehaviour’ is not confined to the conduct since the Judge
assumes charge of the present Judicial Office.   It may extend to
acts or omissions while holding prior judicial office, if such acts
or omissions make him unworthy of holding the present judicial
office.
(ii) In the UK, the Appellate Courts have at times criticized judges for
improper behaviour such as falling asleep, making impatient gestures and for
interrupting excessively or for incompetence or for commenting in the Press
about a case the Judge is trying (Rodney Brazier, Constitutional Practice: The
Foundations of British Government, 1999, p.289).
(iii) According to the Protocol in the Lord Chancellor’s Department in the
Judicial  Correspondence  Unit,  1998  (vide  Ch.  VII),  the  term  ‘personal
conduct’ means a Judge whose behaviour towards litigants, defendants or
others in Court and a Judge’s behaviour or manner of dealing with a case.
‘Personal conduct’ may include matters such as the making of inappropriate
personal or offensive remarks by a Judge during the course of a trial (which
do not form part of his or her decision in the case) and behaviour by a Judge
outside Court which is inappropriate and would tend to bring the Judiciary
into disrepute.  Complaints about discourtesy, discrimination or bias in the
dealing of a case may be amenable to judicial appeal process, but may also be
458

treated as complaints about judicial conduct, particularly where the allegation
is that of discrimination on racial or sexual grounds which has caused offence
to the complainant.
(iv) Art.125  of  the  Malaysian  Constitution  states  that  Judges  may  be
removed on grounds of ‘misbehaviour’ or if they cannot ‘properly discharge
the function of their office because of their inability, from infirmity of body
or mind or any cause’. But, these words have been interpreted in various
ways. ‘Misbehaviour’ has been construed as extending to conduct outside the
Court.  Inability to perform judicially for ‘any other cause’ has been given a
liberal constriction.  The Judiciary has recently introduced a Code of Ethics
for Judges.
(v) In the US State Courts, there are detailed provisions which refer to
various  kinds  of  misbehaviour.    Art.  6,  sec.  18(d)  of  the  California
Constitution refers to ‘incapacity’ as ‘disability that seriously interferes with
the performance of the Judge’.   So far as ‘misbehaviour’ is concerned it uses
the  words  wilful  misconduct  in  office,  persistent  failure  or  inability  to
perform the Judge’s duties, habitual intemperance in the use of intoxicants or
drugs or conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice that brings the
judicial office into disrepute or improper action or dereliction of duty.
(vi) In  Idaho,  Rule  28  of  the  Rules  of  general  procedure  refers  to
‘misconduct in office, wilful or persistent failure to perform the duties of a
459

Judge, habitual intemperance, or of conduct prejudicial to the administration
of justice that brings the judicial office into disrepute, or violation of Code of
Judicial  Conduct.    ‘Incapacity’  is  described  as  ‘disability  that  seriously
interferes with the performance of the Judge’s duties which is or is likely to
become of a permanent character’.
(vii) The Connecticut Law, Chapter 872(a) sec. 51-51(h)(1) refers to ‘wilful
violation of canon of judicial ethics, wilful and persistent failure to perform
the duty of a Judge, neglectful or incompetent performance of the duties of a
Judge, final conviction of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude, disbarment or suspension as attorney-at-law; wilful failure to file a
financial  statement or  the  filing  of  a  fraudulent  financial  statement,
temperament which adversely affects the orderly carriage of justice.
(viii) In addition to the types of ‘misbehaviour’ mentioned above, it may be
necessary to add that proof of consistent ‘favouritism’ for or ‘discrimination’
against a litigant or a lawyer of a particular caste, class, community or region
would also tantamount to misbehaviour.  
(ix) In Chapter II, we have mentioned that there is an article by Giucomo
Oberto,  Judge  Turin,  Italy  and  Dy.  Secretary  General  of  International
Association  of  Judges  and  that  article  quotes  a  long  list  of  items  of
misbehaviour and deviant behaviour.  (It is also available on the web).
460

(x) The judgment in C.K.Ravichandran Iyer v. Justice A.M. Bhattarcharjee
refers to the meaning of ‘misbehaviour’ given in Krishnaswami v. Union of
India: 1992 (4) SCC 605.  There, it was stated:
“Every act or conduct or even error of judgment or negligent act by
higher judiciary per se does not amount to misbehaviour.  Wilful abuse
of judicial office, wilful misconduct in the office, corruption, lack of
integrity, or any other offence involving  moral turpitude, would be
misbehaviour.  Misconduct implies actuation of some degree of mens
rea by the doer. Judicial finding of guilty of grave crime is misconduct.
Persistent failure to perform the judicial duties of the Judge or wilful
abuse of office  dolus malus would be misbehaviour.  Misbehaviour
would extend to conduct of the Judge in or beyond the execution of
judicial office.”
(xi) In the States in US, where ‘misbehaviour’ is referred to (see Ch. XVII
above), it is stated that ‘incompetence in performing the duties of the office’,
also  amounts  to  ‘misbehaviour’.  But,  as  we  shall  point  under  the  next
heading, a complaint cannot be made on the basis of the merits of a judgment
but that question is different from ‘incompetence in the performance of the
duties of the office’.
(xii) Dato Param Cumaraswamy in his Chennai speech in November 2004
(referred to in Chapter III), after referring to bribery, corruption, abuse of
461

language, abuse of contempt powers and lenient sentences in grave offences,
also  refers  to  “cash,  gifts,  hospitalities,  including  womanizing,  dining,
entertainments, holidays abroad”, and said that golf courses are venues in fast
developing countries where payments are made by losing bets taken with
Judge.   He also refers to favouring particular law-firms, selected lawyers
relations.
The Law Commission recommends that there should be a broad
definition of `misbehaviour’ as stated above. It should include breach of
the Code of Conduct. So far as ‘incapacity’ is concerned it should be
further  qualified  as  one  which  is  or  is  likely  to  be  of  a  permanent
character which does not enable him to perform his judicial functions
properly. It recommends that such a definition be introduced in S.2 of
the Bill of 2005. 
(XX) Whether a complaint which relates solely to the merits of a judgment
or order ought to be entertained?
Several countries have a provision that a complaint dealing with merits
of a case will be rejected at the stage of preliminary investigation.  This was
the reason why the impeachment motion against Justice Chase failed in USA
in 1805.
462

The 1980 U.S Act Title 28 USC Sec. 372 (c) (3) (A) provides that the
Chief Judge may dismiss a complaint  “if he finds it to be …… directly
related to the merits of a decision or procedural ruling”.
In the US Judicial Improvements Act of 2002, it is stated in sec. 352(b)
(1)(A)(ii)  that  the  Chief  Judge  may dismiss  the  complaint  if  it  ‘directly
related to the merits of a decision or procedural ruling’.    Most of the States
in US have a like provision. 
This is the position in the United Kingdom (see Ch. VII) and several
other countries also.
In the calendar year of 2001, there were 1610 Judges within California
and 835 complaints were received against 781 different Judges and of these
807  were summarily dismissed  as  relating  to  ‘legal  errors’ or ‘erroneous
discretionary orders’ and not for judicial misconduct.   There were 5 private
admonitions keeping names confidential; private advisory letters were issued
in 19 cases and only 3 Judges were disciplined.   In 2002, there were 918
complaints against 836 different Judges and only in four cases the Judicial
Commission found material to initiate proceedings.
In New York, there were 3363 Judges and Justices and in 2000, there
were on an average 1400 complaints and 1000 were dismissed summarily.  In
463

2001, 1308 complaints were received and 960 were dismissed summarily.  In
2001, 11 censures and 15 admonitions were issued.
There are similar statistics in other States.  Even in the Federal system,
the National Commission on Judicial Discipline and Removal appointed by
Congress to review the 1980 Act, in its Report of August 1993, stated that
even the House Judiciary Committee which received complaints found that
90% did not merit any consideration at all.  Judge Harry T. Edwards, Circuit
Judge (Vol. 87 Mich. L.R 765 at 790) stated that frivolous complaints make
up to 88% and sometimes 99.5% of the total complaints received in a Circuit.
It cannot be gainsaid that the weeding out of complaints that relate to the
merits of a judicial order is necessary since the proposed Judicial Council is
to comprise of the senior-most judges who even otherwise would be tied
down with pending judicial work. It, however, requires to be provided that in
relation to a pending or decided case there are other connected allegations of
misbehaviour like bribery etc., the complaint will be maintainable.
The Law Commission recommends that the Bill of 2005 should make
appropriate  provisions  that  enable  the  screening  and  weeding  out of
complaints that relate to the merits of a pending or decided case except
where the complaint contains allegations of misbehaviour in relation to
that very case such as bribery etc., in which event such complaint will
have to be nevertheless examined.
464

(XXI)  Whether a provision protecting complainant’s identity – as in the case
of Whistleblowers’ laws – is necessary?
The facts on the basis of which allegations  of ‘misbehaviour’ of a
Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court are made are generally within the
knowledge of individual members of the Bar or individual litigants or in
some cases, media persons.   Individual lawyers are particularly afraid of
coming out  openly by way of a ‘complaint’ because  they do not  like to
jeopardize their careers by making allegations against a sitting Judge of the
High Court or Supreme Court.   They have other cases before the same Judge
and the Judge may not recuse himself in the cases in which the complainant
lawyer is appearing.   
If we are realistic in the matter of complaints against Judges then some
more special provisions appear to be necessary.  A litigant or media person or
a lawyer may, in certain circumstances, be apprehensive of even contempt
proceedings.  Even  if  ‘truth’  becomes  a  valid  defence  in  contempt
proceedings, as is proposed in a pending Bill for amending the Contempt of
Courts Act 1971, several lawyers would be reluctant to make complainants
against sitting Judges out of fear of reprisal. 
The Law Commission’s 179th Report on Public Interest Disclosure and
Protection of Informers (2001) is relevant in this context.
465

There are precedents in the laws of other countries.  Sec. 757.93(1)(b)
of the Wisconsin law of 1976 creating the Judicial Commission is a part of
the  Wisconsin  Statutes  (see  Ch.  XVII  above).  It  clearly  states  that  ‘any
person who provides information to the Commission concerning probable
misbehaviour or permanent disability, may request that the Commission “not
disclose his or her identity to the Judge or Circuit” and he may make such a
request prior to the filing  of a petition  or a formal complaint before the
Commission.   
In  the  light  of  the  practical  problems  mentioned  above,  the  Law
Commission  recommends  that  a  ‘whistleblower’  provision  must  be
provided in the Bill of 2005. Further, there should also be a provision
that in case any  ‘reprisal’ against  the complainant  is  brought  to the
notice of the Judicial Council, the Judicial Council may take such action
as it may deem fit in public interest.
(XXII) Is there a need for preserving the confidentiality of the Complaint, the
investigation and the inquiry process? Should the Bill of 2005 contain
a  provision  that  such  confidentiality  will  be  maintained
notwithstanding the provisions of the Right to Information Act 2005?
An important aspect that requires to be dealt with is the need to require the
complainant and others including witnesses participating in the investigation
and inquiry to maintain strict confidentiality regarding the documents and
466

proceedings  in  relation  to  the  complaint,  the  investigation  and  the
consequential inquiry, if any. This is because the matters are of a sensitive
nature involving a high constitutional functionary and any disclosure of such
information  at  any  stage  may  not  only  endanger  a  fair  conduct  of
investigation and inquiry but also irredeemably tarnish the image of a judge
even before the conclusion of the statutory and constitutional processes.
The  need  for  the  complainant  and  other  participants  to  maintain
confidentiality  absolutely  necessary  because  as  is  experienced  in  other
countries a large percentage of complaints will stand rejected in the Judicial
Council either because they are frivolous or vexatious or not in good faith or
relate to a grievance of a litigant or a lawyer on the merits of a case before the
judge in which he might have been unsuccessful. 
Such provisions as to confidentiality are also to be found in sec. 63(5) of the
Canadian Judges Act, 1985, and sec. 6(2) of the Canadian bye laws; sec. 30
and 35 of the New Zealand Judicial  Conduct Commissioner and Judicial
Conduct  Panel  Act,  2004;  sec.  18(i)(1)  of  Art.  6  of  the  California
Constitution; sec. 757.93 of the Wisconsin statute is also the same effect.
There is no doubt a provision in s.12 (1) of the Bill of 2005 for in camera
proceedings before the Judicial Council but in our view the said provision
has to be widened in light of the various aspects mentioned above. 
467

This is to prevent the tendency of complainants and others participating, even
before the complaint is filed in the Judicial Council or when the Council is
investigating  or  inquiring  into  the  conduct,  from  giving  publicity  to  the
contents of the complaint or documents or proceedings in the media or the
Bar Associations.  If the Judicial  Council  comes to  a conclusion  that  the
allegations  are  true  the  confidentiality  should  be  maintained  by  the
complainant, every person including a witness and a lawyer who participates
in the investigation and inquiry. 
Needless to mention that this confidentiality ought to be maintained by the
members of the Judicial Council. 
The  Law  Commission  is  conscious  of  the  need  for  transparency  and
accountability  in  the  functioning  of  the  Judicial  Council  as  well  as  the
recently  enacted  Right  to  Information  Act,  2005.  However,  given  the
sensitive  nature  of  the  function  performed  by  the  Judicial  Council,  it  is
important to provide for a separate information disclosure regime in relation
to the functioning of the National Judicial Council in terms of the Bill of
2005 that is not within the purview of the Right to Information Act, 2005. It
must be understood that the Law Commission is not suggesting that there
should be no disclosure of any such information concerning the work of the
Judicial Council generally or in relation to individual cases before it. Where
`minor  measures’ are  imposed, there  can be  a publication  of such  minor
measures but if a private censure or admonition is ordered, then the name of
468

the  complainant  and  the  judge  shall  not  be  disclosed.  In  the  case  of  a
recommendation  for  removal,  after  the  Report  is  submitted  to  the
Speaker/Chairman,  it  will  be  for  the  Speaker/Chairman  to  decide  on
publishing the Report. What is in fact being suggested is that the decisions as
to how much information should be disclosed and at what stage must be left
to the discretion of the Judicial Council itself. 
The Law Commission therefore recommends that there should be
a provision in the Bill of 2005 that every complainant and every person
including a witness and a lawyer who participates in the investigation
and inquiry, whether or not  he seeks confidentiality about his name,
must undertake to the Judicial Council that he shall not reveal his own
name,  name  of  the  Judge  complained  against,  the  contents  of  the
complaint  or  any  of  the  documents  or  proceedings  to  anybody  else
including the media without the prior written approval of the Judicial
Council and it will be for the Judicial Council to decide when and to
what extent the contents of the complaint shall be disclosed to the public.
It must be made clear that this is notwithstanding anything contained in
the Right to Information Act 2005. Once the enquiry is completed before
the Judicial Council, if `minor measures’ are imposed on a complaint
procedure, the same can be published by the Judicial Council with the
qualification  that in the  case  of `private  censure  or admonition’,  the
name  of  the  complainant  and  of  the  Judge  concerned  shall  not  be
published. In the case of recommendation for removal, since the report is
469

to  be  submitted  to  the  Speaker/Chairman,  it  will  be  for  the
Speaker/Chairman to decide when such report can be published.
As these provisions affect the independence of the judiciary and any
publicity before a final decision is arrived at by the Judicial council imposing
minor measures or recommending removal to the Parliament will adversely
prejudice the proceedings as well tarnish the image of the judge facing the
investigation and inquiry, the Law Commission further recommends that
s.19 of the Bill of 2005 be amended to provide that the violation of the
confidentiality provisions abovementioned would be an offence and that
procedure for punishing such offence would be as prescribed under s.20
of the Bill of 2005.
(XXIII)   Should an appeal to Supreme Court for Judicial Review against
orders awarding minor measures or removal be provided ?
(1) The Bill of 2005 deals with ‘removal’ by address of the Houses to the
President which may be the result of inquiry pursuant to either a reference or
a complaint.   It is silent on the question of further challenge to the ‘removal’.
The  Supreme  Court  has  laid  down  in  Mrs.Sarojini  Ramaswami v.
Union of India: 1992 (4) SCC 506, that even after the Committee of Judges
gives  a finding of ‘guilt’, the finding is still ‘inchoate’ till  the Report is
considered by the Houses of Parliament and the findings are accepted by the
Houses.   Parliament may or may not accept the Report.  It has also to give a
470

hearing to the Judge personally or through counsel.  Parliament, no doubt, is
not required to give reasons.  According to the Supreme Court, the Report is
not liable to be challenged in a Court of law till the final order of removal is
passed.  In fact, the Judge is not entitled to a copy thereof till the Report is
submitted by the Committee of Judges to the Speaker or the Chairman.     The
Supreme Court also held that the Inquiry Committee cannot be treated as a
‘tribunal’ for the purposes of Art. 136.   
The Supreme Court rejected the ‘political question’ doctrine because,
unlike  in  the  case  of  impeachment  in  US  which  is  purely  a  ‘political
question’, the position in India is different- because the procedure is partly
‘judicial’ before the Committee and then ‘political’ before the Parliament.
Hence, the  principles  laid  down  by US Supreme Court  in  Powell’s case
(1969) (395 US 486) are not applicable here.
The  judgment  of  the  US  Supreme  Court  in  Nixon v.  US
(1993) 506 US 224 states that in US, the impeachment process is a purely
political process and that it cannot be questioned in the Supreme Court of
USA.
However, in the case of final orders passed by the Judicial Councils in
US, question has arisen whether that order is a ‘judicial order’ and could be
questioned  in  the  courts.   The  first  such  case  was  Chandler v.  Judicial
Council (1970) 398 US 74.  In that case, the Judicial Council imposed a
471

punishment of non-listing of fresh cases and removal of cases which were in
his list.  When the order was challenged in the courts and when it went up
finally to the US Supreme Court, the majority did not decide whether the
order of the Council was ‘judicial’ or not.  Harlan J however held it was a
judicial order.  Douglas and Black, JJ. dissented on another point, namely,
that no law could be made imposing minor measures.
Presumably, on the basis of Harlan J’s opinion, subsequently in every
case where minor punishments were awarded by the Judicial Council, the
Judge challenged the same in the District court and the appeals have gone to
the Circuit appellate courts.  No case, other than Chandler, appears to have
gone before the US Supreme Court for a decision on whether the order of the
Council is judicial. In McBryde’s case, the decision of the Court of Appeal
was affirmed by the Supreme Court by refusing to grant certiorari. 
But, so far as the law in our country is concerned it is not in doubt
because in Justice V. Ramaswami’s cases, the Supreme Court has held that
even the removal order passed by the President can be challenged in the
Supreme Court.  Afortiorari, the minor measures if ordered by the Judicial
Council, can obviously be challenged in judicial review proceedings because
the order is final unlike the case of removal where the order of the Judicial
Council is only in the nature of a recommendation to Parliament..
472

The appropriate Court to adjudicate upon such a remedy resorted to by
the Judge is obviously the Supreme Court.
No doubt after L.Chandra Kumar v. Union of India: 1997 (3) SCC 261,
the orders of the President directing ‘removal’ or the orders of the Judicial
Council imposing minor measures can be subject to judicial review under
Art. 226 of the Constitution before the High Court unless another effective
alternative remedy is provided before the Supreme Court, so that the High
Court may, in its discretion, refuse to interfere and direct the parties to avail
of the alternative remedy before the Supreme Court.
It is,  therefore,  necessary, in  our  view  that  the  Bill  of  2005  must
contain a specific provision for an appeal before the Supreme Court.
(2)(i) There is a view that all judicial remedies must be barred so that the
matter would come to an end after the President (in case of removal) or the
Judicial Council (in case of minor measures) pass orders.  
But, we are firmly of the view that the remedy of judicial review cannot be
ousted  and  in  fact,  ‘judicial  review’  under  Arts.  226  and  227  of  the
Constitution, according to  Chandra Kumar, is part of the basic structure of
the Constitution and cannot be removed even by a constitutional amendment.
473

(ii) Apart from that, international traditions and conventions contemplate
an appeal to a Court of law.
Art. 20 of the UN Basic Principles  of Judicial Independence, 1995
states that disciplinary proceedings, suspension and removal of Judges should
be subject to independent review; Art. 15 of the Siracusa Principles of the
International  Commission  of  Jurists,  1981,  para  2.37  of  the  Montreal
Resolution on the World Conference on Independence of Judges, 1983, Art.
20 of Dr. L.M. Singhvi’s Final Report to UN (1985), Art. 45 of the Lusaka
Seminar, 1986, all underscore the need to provide for an independent judicial
review.
(iii) Several States  in US provide a judicial remedy in regard to action
against  Judges  of  the  State  Courts.   For  example,  in  California,  the
Constitution provides in clause (f) of sec. 18 of Art. 6, that a decision of the
Judicial  Performance  Commission  to  admonish  or  censure  a  Judge  or  to
remove or retire a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be reviewed by a tribunal
of 7 Court of Appeal Judges.  Clause (g) provides that no Court, except the
Supreme Court, shall entertain any action.
In Idaho,  the  Judicial  Council’s  recommendations  are  to be  placed
before the Supreme Court for removal, discipline or retirement.  Rule 44 of
the Idaho Judicial Council Rules provides for a review.
474

In Connecticut, under sub-clause 51(r) of sec. 51 of Chapter 872(a) of
the statutes, the Judge may appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision
of the Judicial Council.
In Texas,  under Rule  10  of the  Rules, there  is  a Review  Tribunal
consisting of 7 Judges in which 6 must agree on removal and under Rule 13
an appeal against removal lies to the Supreme Court.
In Germany, the decision to remove has to be taken by two thirds of
the Federal Constitutional Court and there is no problem.   In Sweden, the
removal order is finally passed by the State Supreme Court itself.   This is
also the position in some States in US.  Here too, there is no need for a
further appeal.   In the colonial countries, the ‘removal’ order is passed by the
Head of State after consulting the Privy Council.
Taking into account the Constitutional position that judicial review
under  Art.  226,  227  is  part  of  the  basic  structure  of  the  Constitution
according  to  L.  Chandrakumar’s case  and  the  fact  that  several  countries
permit an appeal, and international traditions require an appeal, we are of the
view that it will be unconstitutional not to provide for an appeal against an
order of removal or a final order of the Judicial Council.  Even ordinary
public servants have a right to move the Court against an order of removal.  It
is not, therefore, permissible to exclude a further appeal on the judicial side
in the case of Judges of the High Court or Supreme Court, whether it be an
475

order  of  removal  passed  by  the  President  or  an  order  imposing  minor
punishments.
The Supreme Court of India in the  Justice V.Ramaswami’s  case (see
Chapter VI) was of the view that the Inquiry Committee was not a tribunal
for the purposes of Art. 136. An affected Judge could either approach a High
Court under Art. 226 or the Supreme Court under Article 32.  But, in the light
of the composition of the Judicial Council, which includes the Chief Justice
of India, two senior Supreme Court Judges and two senior Chief Justices of
the High Courts, and given the limited scope of judicial review in a writ
jurisdiction the writ remedy may not be the most appropriate one. Further the
likely delay that may occur if the matter starts with a writ petition in the High
Court needs to be accounted for. 
In view of all the above factors, the Law Commission recommends that
the Bill of 2005 be amended to provide an appeal to the Supreme Court
by a Judge against:
(1) order  of  removal  passed  by  the  President,  whether  the
proceedings started on a complaint or a reference;
(2) other final orders passed by the Council in regard to ‘minor
measures’ passed on the basis of a complaint. 
The Law Commission further suggests that such appeal should preferably be
heard by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court next in seniority to
476

those who were members of the Judicial Council, although this is matter
which need not be provided in the Bill of 2005. 
However, it needs to be clarified that this provision of a right of
appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  is  available  only  to  the  judge  who  is
aggrieved by an order passed against him either for removal or where it
is a final order of the Judicial Council imposing minor measures. As
regards the complainant it is not necessary to provide any right of appeal
and if he wants to pursue the matter further he may have to resort to the
remedy under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution.
(XXIV) What is the ‘standard of proof’ before the Judicial Council as well as
before the Houses of Parliament?  Is it ‘preponderance of probabilities’
or is it ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’? What are the standards in a
‘quasi-criminal’ inquiry?
The Justice Sawant Committee dealing with the question of ‘standard
of proof’ in an inquiry under Art. 124(4) (read with the Judges (Inquiry) Act,
1968) made an in-depth study regarding this question in matters relating to a
reference to the Committee by the Speaker/Chairman.  It observed that the
inquiry  before  the  three-member  Committee  appointed  by  the
Speaker/Chairman is ‘quasi-criminal’ in nature and that the proof must be
‘beyond reasonable doubt’.   It also referred to the Memorandum issued by
the Privy Council which provided a like standard of proof.  In the US, a
higher standard of ‘clear, satisfactory and convincing evidence’ is necessary
477

which Justice Sawant commented could mean many things.  Justice Sawant
Committee also referred to an article by Chief Justice Ben F. Overton of the
Supreme Court of Florida in Chicago-Kent Law Review to the same effect.
(This aspect is discussed in Ch. VI).
So far as ‘impeachment’ proceedings are concerned, it is stated by
Prof. Shimon Shetreet, quoting Berger, ‘Impeachment for High Crimes and
Misdemeanors (1971) 44 S. Calif L Rev. 395 at 400-415) and Berger on
Impeachment and Good Behaviour (1970) 79 Lords Law Journal 1475 (1518,
1519) that the impeachment proceedings are ‘criminal’ in nature.
In Australia, in the case of Justice Murphy, the 2nd Senate Committee
was directed to give findings on the basis of two different standards – (i)
preponderance of probabilities, (ii) proof beyond reasonable doubt.  Justice
Murphy was given the rights of an accused in a criminal trial except that he
was not to be called but would be ‘invited’ to give evidence.   All evidence
was to be recorded in his presence or in the presence of his counsel.   If
Justice Murphy chose to give evidence, he may be cross-examined.
In this context it is necessary to refer to the general standard of proof
applicable  to  all  types  of  quasi-criminal  proceedings,  inasmuch  as  the
proceedings  for an address for removal and other proceedings  before the
Judicial Council are in the nature of a quasi-criminal process.
478

So  far  as  ‘quasi-criminal’ proceedings  are  concerned,  dealing  with
contempt cases, the Supreme Court in Bijay Kumar Mahanty v. Jadu (2003) 1
SCC 644, relying upon Mrityunjoy Das v. Sayed Hasibur Rahaman 2001 (3)
SCC 739, has stated as follows:
“We have no difficulty in accepting the contention that the case against
the appellant is required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt.   The
contempt proceedings under the Act are quasi-criminal.   The standard
of  proof  required  is  that  of criminal  proceedings.    Therefore,  the
charge has to be established beyond reasonable doubt.”
In Re: Arundhati Roy AIR 2002 SC 1375, the Supreme Court held that
in quasi-criminal proceedings, the presumption of innocence operates.
In the matter of election petitions where corrupt practices are alleged,
the Supreme Court stated in  Borgaram Deuri v. Premodhar Bora (2004) 2
SCC 227 as follows:
“Allegations  of  corrupt  practices  are  viewed  seriously.  They  are
considered  to be  quasi-criminal in nature.   The standard of proof
required  for proving  corrupt  practice  for all intent  and  purposes  is
equated with the standard expected in a criminal trial.   However, the
difference between an election petition and a criminal trial is, whereas
an  accused has  the  liberty  to  keep  silence,  during  the  trial  of  an
479

election petition the returned candidate has to place before the Court
his version and to satisfy the Court that he had not committed the
corrupt  practices  as  alleged  in  the petition.   The  burden  is  on  the
election petitioner, however, can be discharged only if and when he
leads cogent and reliable evidence to prove the charges levelled against
the returned  candidate.   For the said  purpose, the charges  must  be
proved beyond reasonable doubt and not merely by preponderance of
probabilities as in civil action. (See Gajanan Krishnaji Bapat vs. Dattaji
Raghobaji Meghe  (1995) 5 SCC 347;  Surinder Singh vs.  Hardilal
Singh:  1985(1)  SCC  91;  R.P.Moidutty  v.  P.T.  Kunju  Mohammad
(2001) 1 SCC 481 and  Mercykutty Amma  vs.  Kadavoor Sivadason
(2004) 2 SCC 217)” (emphasis supplied)
From  the  above  judgments,  it  is  clear  that  in  a  quasi-criminal
proceeding  such  as  the  one  leading  to  an  address  by the  Houses  to  the
President, the proof must be ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’ and not proof
by ‘preponderance of probabilities’.  But, the Judge does not have a right to
silence, and, therefore, the law and the Rules may legitimately require that
the Judge file his defence.   Such a law will not offend clause (3) of Art 20 of
the Constitution.  If he chooses to remain silent or remain ex parte, he will be
doing so at his own risk.   This is so far as complaint/reference proceedings
before the Judicial Council where removal is recommended.
480

The  next  question  is  whether,  so  far  as  ‘minor  measures’  are
concerned, the proof of ‘misbehaviour’ not warranting ‘removal’ can be by
preponderance of probabilities?
Where  there  are  serious  allegations  which  are  likely  to  lead  to  a
recommendation for removal, there is no difficulty that the standard of proof
should be ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’.   But there could be a case where
there are several allegations, some serious and some not so serious, and in
that event, a defence counsel would like to know whether the standard of
proof is ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’.   If it is proof beyond reasonable
doubt, his attempt will be to create a reasonable doubt and that will be his
line of cross-examination.   Of course, in a quasi-criminal case, the accused
Judge has no right to silence but can be required to set out his view of the
facts.  Still, defence counsel concentrates, in cross-examination, to create a
reasonable doubt.  Hence, the law cannot be left vague as to what should be
the standard of proof.
Again,  there  may  be  a  number  of  allegations,  some  of  which  are
serious and some are not serious.  There can be practical difficulties in the
presentation  of  evidence  for  the  cross-examining  counsel,  if  different
standards are applicable to different charges.  Even for chief-examination,
there can be problems.
481

Even in regular criminal proceedings, there are serious offences and
there are smaller offences.  But, the standard of proof, namely, of ‘proof
beyond reasonable doubt’ is common to all of them.
Further, the Constitution  uses the word ‘misbehaviour’.   We have
explained that there can be various types of misbehaviour, some serious and
some not so serious.  It can be argued that fixing different standards for
different types of misbehaviour is not permissible.  Yet, there can be a grey
area where it is not possible to decide whether the allegations in a complaint
are serious or not so serious. The Law Commission is of the view that
‘proof’ must be ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’  as regards all types of
charges which come before the Judicial Council. 
Therefore, the Law Commission recommends that in sec. 16(1)(a) and (b),
the words ‘substantiated either wholly or partially’ to be substituted by
the word ‘proved wholly or partially’ along with an Explanation that
`proved’ means `proved beyond reasonable doubt.’
(Further amendments to s. 16 are discussed separately hereinbelow)
(XXV)  What should be the procedure in case one of the members of the
Judicial Council is elevated as the Chief Justice of India or is elevated
to  the  Supreme Court,  or  where  there  is  a  vacancy  on  account  of
natural causes or the Judge’s services are not available due to other
causes,  so  as  to  make  it  clear  that  de-novo  proceedings  are  not
contemplated?
482

In the US federal system, in the Judicial Improvement Act, 2002 there is a
specific provision in sec 353(b) in so far as the Investigation Committee is
concerned, to cover such contingencies.  It reads as follows:
“Section  353(b)  Change  of  status  or  Death  of  Judges:  A  Judge
appointed to a special committee under subsection (a) may continue to
serve on that committee after becoming a senior Judge or in the case of
the Judge of the Circuit, after his or her term as Chief Judge terminates
under subsection (a)(3) or (c) of section 45.  If a Judge appointed to a
committee under subsection (a) dies, or retires from office under sec.
371(a) while serving on the Committee, the Chief Judge of the Circuit
may appoint another Circuit or district Judge, as the case may be, to the
Committee.”
The  Law  Commission  is  of  the  view  that  even  though  the
proceedings before the Judicial Council are quasi-criminal, they need
not  be  started  de  novo where  among  the  Members  of  the  Judicial
Council, one who is a Judge of the Supreme Court is elevated as Chief
Justice of India or  where  a  Chief  Justice  of a High  Court who  is  a
Member is elevated as Judge of the Supreme Court of India or where a
vacancy arises due to natural causes or retirement or recusal or where
any of the Members is not available (say) due to sickness or other causes
and that vacancy is otherwise filled.  The Chief Justice of India must be
483

entitled  to  make  appropriate  arrangements  by  way  of  filling  up  the
vacancy and the proceedings must be continued from the stage where it
stopped without the need to start them de novo. 
Accordingly, the Law Commission recommends that a provision
on the above lines with a further clarification that proceedings need not
be started de novo, in the case of contingencies mentioned above, may
have to be incorporated in the Bill of 2005.
(XXVI)  What should  happen if  the Judge against  whom investigation  or
inquiry  is  initiated  reaches  the  age  of  superannuation  during  the
pendency of the proceedings before the Judicial Council?
A situation that can arise in some cases where a Judge against whom
investigation and inquiry is on, may reach superannuation and claim that the
proceedings can no longer be continued.
In the case of public servants, the law undoubtedly is that disciplinary
inquiries abate or have to be abandoned if the public servant retires before
the proceedings have reached finality.  The principle here is that once the
relationship of master and servant ceases, there is no scope for inflicting a
punishment thereafter.  In order to get over this problem, several service rules
provide that the service of the employee may be continued till the completion
of the disciplinary proceedings with a view to award punishment. In some
484

other cases where a public servant is allowed to retire, the rules provide that
the  disciplinary  proceedings  already  started  shall  be  continued  for  the
purpose of imposing a cut in the pension to a reasonable extent.
So far as Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts are concerned,
they  hold  constitutional  office  and  there  is  a  view  that  strict  principles
applicable to ordinary public servants do not normally apply. (We say this
because the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 has been applied in Justice
Veeraswami’s  case)   Leaving  technicalities  apart,  question  arises  if  the
‘misbehaviour’ was very close to the date of retirement and the proceedings
are not likely to be completed before the date of superannuation, the statute
must provide that the proceedings will not lapse on that account but that they
may be continued for the purpose of imposing certain minor measures.
 
No doubt, in such situations, though there is no question of ‘removal’,
or request for retirement, or non-listing of cases for judicial work, but it must
still be permissible for the Judicial Council to administer censure/admonition
(public or private).
The Law Commission recommends that the Bill of 2005 should
include a provision to make it clear that where a Judge of the High Court
or  Supreme  Court  who  is  under  investigation  or  inquiry  before  the
Judicial Council, reaches the age of superannuation during the pendency
of the said proceedings, the proceedings can be continued for the purpose
485

of imposing the minor measures such as censure or admonition, public or
private. 
(XXVII) Where removal is recommended by the Judicial Council, should it
also recommend that in case the recommendation is accepted by the
Houses and the removal order is passed by the President, the judge
should be barred from holding any public or judicial, quasi-judicial
office  nor  can  he  have  chamber  practice  or  be  an  arbitrator  in
arbitration proceedings?
We  have  seen  that  in  the  states  in  the  U.S.  (see  Ch.XVII  above),  it  is
specifically provided in the relevant statutes that where the Judicial Council
is either ordering removal or is recommending removal, the Council is further
authorized to bar the Judge from holding any public or judicial, quasi-judicial
office or to order that he cannot have chamber practice or be an arbitrator in
arbitration proceedings.
The Law Commission recommends that the Bill of 2005 should contain a
provision that where the recommendation of the Judicial Council for
removal is accepted by the Houses and the removal order is passed by
the President, the judge should be barred from holding any public or
judicial, quasi-judicial office nor can he have chamber practice or be an
arbitrator in arbitration proceedings. 
486

(XXVIII) Should the Judicial Council frame a statutory Code of Conduct
(subject  to  modification  by  Council  by  notification)?   Should  the
breach of such Code should be treated as misbehaviour? Should the
extant Code of Conduct approved by the Supreme Court in 1997 be
adopted as the statutory Code till such time the Judicial Council frames
a Code of Conduct?
Section  28(1)  of  the  draft  Bill  of  2005  provides  that  the  Judicial
Council shall in the interest of administration of justice, issue from time to
time the Code of Conduct which consists of guidelines for the conduct and
behaviour  of Judges.  Sub-section  (2)  thereof  provides  that  such  Code of
Conduct may provide that every Judge of the Supreme Court and High Court,
at the time of appointment and thereafter annually shall give intimation of his
assets and liabilities to the Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justice of the
High Court, as the case may be.
The Law Commission is of the view that such a Code of Conduct
should be published in the Gazette of India so that every Judge shall be aware
of the existence of such Code of Conduct.
Most of the judiciaries in several countries have prescribed Codes of
Conduct.  The international traditions and conventions referred to in Chapter
IV advert to the need for a Code of Conduct to be published.  In the various
statutes and Rules relating to action by Judicial Commission to which we
have  referred,  it  is  stated  that  such  Code  of  Conduct  will  be  published.
Breach of Code of Conduct is one of the matters which could be treated as
‘misbehaviour’.
487

There can be no controversy that there should be a Code of Conduct
for Judges of the High Court and Supreme Court and that breach thereof
could be treated as ‘misbehaviour’.
Realizing this, the full court of the Supreme Court passed a Resolution
on May 7th, 1997 evolving a Code and it was given the title, ‘Restatement of
Values of Judicial Life’.
The  Law  Commission  recommends  that  the  Code  of  Conduct
issued by the Council under section 28(1) should be published in the
Gazette of India.  The Commission further recommends  that till  such
time as the Judicial Council comes to be constituted under the proposed
Bill of 2005 and such Judicial Council publishes a Code of Conduct, the
Bill  must  provide  that  the  ‘Restatement  of  Values  of  Judicial  Life’
adopted by the Supreme Court in its Resolution dated May 7th, 1997 shall
be treated as the Code of Conduct for the purposes of the proposed law.
It should also contain a provision that the Code of Conduct could be
modified from time to time by the Judicial Council by amendments that
could be notified in the Official Gazette.
(XXIX)  Whether the proposed Bill should apply to complaints relating to
misbehaviour  which  occurred  before  the  commencement  of  the
proposed Act or in some cases to such conduct which occurred while a
488

person was functioning as a High Court Judge before being elevated as
a Chief Justice of the High Court or a Judge of the Supreme Court?
A  question  arises  whether  the  accusations  being  quasi-criminal  in
nature, a Judge could be subjected to an investigation and inquiry under the
proposed Act for such past misbehaviour and whether it would offend clause
(l) of Art. 20 of the Constitution.
In our view, the provisions of clause (1) of Art. 20 of the Constitution
are not attracted because the ‘misbehaviour’ is not treated as an ‘offence’
under the criminal law.  Even if the procedure applicable for investigation or
inquiry is as done in quasi-criminal case, the Act does not create a new
offence.
The Law Commission recommends that the Bill of 2005 should be
made  applicable  to  complaints  relating  to  ‘misbehaviour’  which
occurred before the commencement of the proposed Act but it should not
go back to a remote past, the details of which would have gone out of the
memory of the Judge.  It could be restricted to a period of two years
before the commencement of the Act provided the Judge has not retired
by the date the complaint is filed before the Judicial Council.
(XXX)  What other amendments are required to be carried out to the
Bill of  2005?
The Law Commission has examined the Bill of 2005 very carefully and has,
on  its  broad  features  made  extensive  recommendations  as  set  out
489

hereinabove. There are certain other changes which in its view are required to
be carried out to the Bill of 2005. These are set out hereinbelow.
(1) Section  2(b)  of  the  Bill  defines  Code  of  Conduct  as  meaning  the
guidelines  issued by the Council under sub section (1) of sec 32.   The
inverted commas in sec 2(b) are not properly printed.  The Law Commission
recommends that they should read as “Code of Conduct”.  
Secondly, there is no sec 32 in the proposed Bill.  The Law Commission
recommends that “section 32” must be substituted by “section 28”.
(2)    The Law Commission  recommends that the heading of Chapter II
“MACHINERY FOR INVESTIGATION” should be substituted by the words
“MACHINERY FOR PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION AND INQUIRY”.
(3) Section 10 shall be subdivided into two parts and the section 10 as
proposed in the draft Bill should be substituted by following section:
“(1) On receipt of a reference from the Speaker or the Chairman under
sub-section  (2)  of  section  9,  the  Council  shall,  notwithstanding
anything  contained  in  section  7, frame definite  charges  against  the
Judge on the basis of which inquiry is proposed to be held.
490

(2) Charges framed under sub-section (1) together with statement of
grounds on which each charges is based shall be communicated to the
Judge and he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a
written statement of defence within such time as may be specified by
the Counsel.” 
(4) Section 11 subsection (3) deals with the procedure where the Judge
refuses to undergo medical examination.  But sec 11 does not provide for the
procedure where the Judge agrees to undergo the medical examination.  The
Law Commission recommends that there must be a separate sub section after
sub section (3) to the following effect: 
“(4) If  the  Judge  agrees  to  undergo  medical  examination  considered
necessary by the Medical Board, the said Board may permit him to produce
such other  medical  reports  or opinions  of experts  as  the  Judge  deems it
necessary  to  prove  that  he  does  not  suffer  from any  physical  or  mental
incapacity, and thereafter the Medical Board shall submit a report to the
Council with its findings based upon the medical examination conducted at
the instance of the Board as well as the material produced by the Judge as
aforesaid.”
491

The Law Commission further recommends that sub sec (4) of sec 11
should be re-numbered as sub-section (5) and it should contain a provision
requiring the Council to also consider the material produced by the Judge
before the Medical  Board.  The  Law Commission recommends that  sub
section (5) should be substituted by the following sub section:
“(5) The Council may, after considering the written statement of the
Judge, the medical  report  submitted by the  Medical  Board  and the
material  submitted  by the  Judge  before the Medical  Board,  if  any,
amend the charges framed under subsection (1) of sec 8 or sec 10, as
the  case  may be,  and  in  such  a  case,  the  Judge  shall  be  given  a
reasonable  opportunity  of  presenting  a  fresh  written  statement  of
defence”.
(5) The  heading  of  Chapter  V  reads  as  “PROCEDURE  FOR
INVESTIGATION”.  The Law Commission  recommends that the heading
should  be  substituted  by  the  following  heading  “PROCEDURE  FOR
INQUIRY”.
(6) In the proviso to sec 12(2), the word “may” is repeated twice.  The
Law Commission recommends that the word “may” after the word “writing”
may be deleted.
492

(7) The  heading  of  Chapter  VI  reads  as  “PROCEDURE  AFTER
CONCLUSION  OF  INVESTIGATION”.   The  Law  Commission
recommends  that  the  above  words  should  be  substituted  by  the  words
“PROCEDURE AFTER  CONCLUSION OF INQUIRY”.
(8) Section 16(1)(b) provides, that in the case of a complaint, the report of
the  Council,  which  is  in  writing  shall  be  communicated  along  with  the
findings and recommendations to (i) the  complainant;  and  (ii)  the  Judge
concerned; (iii) the President.  According to the judgments of the Supreme
Court in Justice V. Ramaswami’s cases referred to elaborately in this Report,
the Judge is not entitled to a copy of the Report till the original Report is
submitted  by  the  Council  to  the  Speaker/Chairman.   (Of  course,  such  a
question would arise only if the findings warrant removal). 
The Law Commission therefore recommends that in sec 16(1)(b) of the two
clauses “(i) the complainant” and the words “and (ii) the Judge concerned” be
deleted and clause (iii) be designated as clause (i).
(9) Section 16(2), which is again part of the complaint procedure, states
that the President on receipt of the recommendation under sub section (2) is
satisfied  that  (a)  no  allegation  made  in  the  complaint  have  or  has  been
substantiated either wholly or partly, against the concerned Judge, he shall
close the case and no further action shall be taken against the Judge.
493

In our view while it is correct that in a complaint procedure, the Council
should submit its Report to the President, inasmuch as this is not a Report
prepared  pursuant  to  any  reference  by  the  Speaker  or  Chairman,  the
President, which means Executive should not be vested with a further power
to be “satisfied” as stated in sub section (2) of sec 16.  In our view the
procedure  envisaged  that the  President  must be  `satisfied’ requires  to  be
modified.
It is universally accepted that the Executive should have no say in the matter
of a disciplinary action taken against a Judge.  This is also clear from the
discussion  in  the  Report  of  the  Joint  Committee  of  Parliament  which
preceded the 1968 Act, to which we have referred elaborately, where it was
unanimously  accepted  by  all  the  distinguished  Members  of  the  Joint
Committee, as well as those who gave evidence, that the Executive should be
kept out of the procedure relating to disciplinary action against Judges.  In
fact, even in the reference procedure, if the Judicial Council comes to the
conclusion that the allegations are not proved, the matter ends there and the
Parliamentary procedure does not start and the Speaker or the Chairman, in
such a case, has to simply drop the motion.  That was what the Supreme
Court decided in the cases of Justice V. Ramaswami.
The  Law  Commission,  therefore,  recommends that  sec  16(2)(a)  be
substituted by the following provision:
494

“If the  Council,  in  its  Report,  has  come to  the  conclusion  that  no
charges  have  been  proved  either  wholly  or  partially,  against  the
concerned  Judge,  the  President  shall  close  the  case  and  no  further
action  shall  be  taken  against  the  Judge  and  the  Judge  and  the
complainant shall be informed accordingly.”
(10) Section 16(2)(b) uses the words “a prima facie case has been made out
by the Council against the Judge, then he (President) shall cause the findings
of the Council along with the accompanying materials to be laid before the
Houses of the Parliament.”
According to the normal scheme of an investigation and an inquiry, the
position  is  that  if  the  Council  finds  a  prima  facie  case  after  making
preliminary investigation, it will frame charges and then conduct an inquiry.
In the inquiry, the Council gives definite and clear findings that the charges
have not been made out or that they have been made out.  Therefore, there is
no question, even in a complaint procedure, of “a prima facie case has been
made”.
The Law Commission, therefore, recommends sub clause (b) of sec 16(2) to
be substituted by the following sub section: 
“If the Council, in its Report, has come to the conclusion that the charges are
proved and recommends that the charges warrant removal, then the President
495

shall cause the Report and the recommendation of the Council, along with the
accompanying materials, to be laid before both House of Parliament.”
Sub section (3) of sec 16 contemplates that in the case of a Report under sub
section (2) of sec 16, Government shall move a motion in either House.
Though  in the case  of a reference procedure, a Motion is moved by the
Members  of  the  Houses,  the  question  arises  whether  in  the  case  of  a
complaint procedure, where the Council has recommended that the charges
are proved and warrant removal, the Government can be empowered to move
a motion in Parliament.
We  have  referred  to  considerable  literature  that  normally  the  Executive
should not be empowered to bring a motion in the House and that such a
prerogative should vest in the legislators.  However, in a situation where
there is already a Report of a Judicial Council consisting of Judges, finding
that charges are proved and they warrant removal, we are of the view that
Government moving a motion in either House of Parliament under sec 16(3),
would not impinge upon the independence of the judiciary.
The Law Commission, therefore,  recommends changes in sec 16(1)(b) as
stated earlier and also substitution of sections 16(2)(a) and 16(2)(b) by new
provisions as stated above. 
496

(11) Section 17 deals with disposal of motion on reference of the Speaker or
Chairman.  Section 17(1) requires the Council to forward its findings to the
Speaker  or  the  Chairman.   The  sub  section  does  not  refer  to  the
recommendation of the Council to be submitted to the Speaker/Chairman. 
The Law Commission recommends that sec 17(1) be amended appropriately
to  state  that  the  Judicial  Council  shall  forward  its  findings  and
recommendations for removal, if any, to the Speaker or Chairman. 
(No doubt, we have earlier stated that in the case of reference procedure, the
Council cannot recommend that the charges which have been proved, warrant
minor measures.  Such a question can arise only in a complaint procedure
with  the  further  difference  that  where  minor  measures  are proposed,  the
Council  will  be  the  final  authority and  the  recommendation  need  not  be
submitted to the Speaker or Chairman).  
497

In a reference procedure the question of a recommendation arises only if the
charges which are proved warrant removal.  We have already pointed out that
it is not open to either of the Houses to impose minor measures.  They can
only say whether they are accepting the recommendation of the Council for
removal or not.  The Parliament need not give any reasons even if it does not
accept the Report of the Council and comes to the conclusion that no removal
order need be passed.
However,  the  Law  Commission recommends  that  sec  17(1)  must  be
amended to provide that the Judicial Council shall forward its findings and its
recommendations  for  removal  of  a  Judge,  if  any,  to  the  Speaker  or  the
Chairman.  
(12) The marginal note of sec 18 uses the words “Impeachment”.  In our
Report, we have pointed out that there is a difference between impeachment
and removal by address of the Houses to the Head of the State.  Further, we
have pointed out that the Constitution uses the word “Impeachment” only in
the case of President of India while it uses the words “by a resolution” so far
as the Vice-President, Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and Speaker
of the House of Representatives  are concerned.  So far as Judges of the
Supreme Court  and  High  Court  are  concerned,  the Constitution  uses  the
words “address of the Houses for removal”.
498

Hence the Law Commission  recommends  that the marginal note to sec 18
which uses the word “Impeachment” be substituted by the words “Address 
by the Houses”.
499

 
CHAPTER XXI
Summary of Recommendations and Views of the Law Commission
on the  draft Judges (Inquiry) Bill 2005
1.  Judicial  independence  is  not  absolute.  Judicial  independence  and
accountability are two sides of the same coin. The present proposals in the
Bill of 2005 together with our recommendations for enabling the Judicial
Council to impose ‘minor measures’ including stoppage of assignment of
judicial  work  are  constitutional.  They  ought  not  to  be  viewed  as  an
encroachment  on  Judicial  Independence  by  the  Executive  or  by  the
Legislature. (p.341)
2.  S.3(1) of the Bill of 2005 which provides for the establishment of a
National Judicial Council consisting only of judges is constitutionally valid
and  is  consistent  with  the  concept  of  independence  of  judiciary, judicial
accountability and doctrine of separation of powers. (p.363)
3. The Law Commission is of the opinion that the Bill takes the correct
stand  that  the  Chief  Justice  of  India,  for  good  reasons,  should  not   be
subjected to the ‘complaint procedure’.  Further, the provision in this behalf
is neither discriminatory nor arbitrary inasmuch as the position of the Chief
Justice of India as the administrative head of the Judiciary is special and is
not the same as other Judges of the Supreme Court or Chief Justices of the
High Courts. (pp.365-366)
 
4. Section 2(d) be substituted by the following definition:
“(d) ‘Judge’ means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court
and includes the Chief Justice of a High Court and also the Chief Justice of
India for purposes of the reference procedure but shall not include the Chief
Justice of India for the purposes of the complaint procedure;
500

We further recommend that there should be a separate definition of the
words ‘complaint procedure’ and ‘reference procedure’ as follows:
“complaint procedure” means a procedure which is initiated by way of
a complaint to the Council under section 5;
“reference procedure” means a procedure which is initiated by way of a
motion for removal which is referred by the Speaker or Chairman to the
Council. (pp.366- 367)
5(a) A second proviso to section 3(2) should be inserted to the following
effect:
 “Provided further that where under a complaint is made by any person
or a reference is made by the Speaker or Chairman against a Judge of the
Supreme Court before his elevation as Chief Justice of India, he shall not be a
Member of the Council and the President shall nominate the next senior most
Judge of the Supreme Court as the Chairperson and also another Judge of the
Supreme Court next in the seniority to be a Member of the Council.” (p.368)
(b) The Bill of 2005 should be amended to provide that if a complaint has
been filed against a Supreme Court Judge, the same can be continued even
after the Supreme Court Judge is elevated as Chief Justice of India.  An
Explanation has to be added to this effect to Sec. 5 below sub-section (1) of
section 5 in the Bill of 2005.  A similar Explanation should be added in sub-
section (1) of Sec. 5 to provide for the continuance or initiation of the enquiry
against a Judge or the Chief Justice of the High Court when he is elevated to
the Supreme Court in respect of acts of misbehaviour during the period when
he was a Judge of the High Court. (pp.368-369)
6. A  special  provision  be  inserted  in  the  Bill  of  2005  to  enable  the
Judicial Council to impose ‘minor measures’, in the complaint procedure.
The omission in the Bill of 2005, in this behalf, needs to be rectified by
providing,  in  the  case  of  a  complaint  procedure,  for  the  imposition  of
following minor measures by the National Judicial Council, viz.,
(1)Issuing advisories;
(2) Issuing warnings;
501

(3) Withdrawal of judicial work pending and future for a limited time;
(4) Request that the judge may voluntarily retire;
(5) Censure or admonition, public or private. (p.379-380)
7. The Bill of 2005  must, as  stated in recommendation  No. 6 above, be
suitably modified  to provide  for ‘minor measures’ to  be  imposed  by the
Judicial Council itself. Such a law can be made under the latter part of Art.
124 (5) and in any event, under Art. 246 read with Entry 11- A of List III of
Schedule  VII of the  Constitution  of India  which  refers  to the subject  of
‘Administration  of  Justice’.  Introducing  a  provision  permitting  ‘minor
measures’ to be imposed by the Judicial Council will be valid and will not be
unconstitutional. (pp.400-401)
8. It is not permissible for the Judicial Council to recommend imposition of
minor measures on a reference by the Speaker/Chairman of either House of
Parliament. However, if there is, simultaneously, a complaint on the same
facts  before  the  Judicial  Council,  in  addition  to  a reference,  the Judicial
Council  can  itself  impose  such  ‘minor  measures’  while  disposing  of  the
complaint. However, while returning the reference to the House it cannot
recommend any minor measure to be passed by the House. (p.403) 
9.  No  amendment  of  the  Constitution  is  necessary  if  a  law  is  made  by
Parliament enabling the Judicial Council to impose ‘minor measures’ as part
of an in-house mechanism. (p.405) 
10. The procedure in the Judges (Inquiry) Act,1968  and in the proposed Bill
of 2005 enabling investigation/inquiry by the Judicial Council by way of a
complaint  procedure,  in  addition  to  a  reference  procedure,  is  not  an
infringement of the Parliamentary process contained in Art 124(4) and does
not amount to impermissible delegation and is valid. (p.407)
11.  The  Judicial  Council  when  it  investigates  into  allegations  against  a
Supreme Court Judge (in the complaint or reference procedures) or against
the Chief Justice of India (under a reference) should not include the two
senior most Chief Justices of the High Courts. In such an event, the Judicial
Council should comprise the Chief Justice of India and four senior most
502

Judges of the Supreme Court.  The provisions of the Bill of 2005 have to be
suitably amended to provide for this contingency. (p.408-409)
12. Inasmuch as the Judicial Council of five Judges must collectively take
decisions, the procedure  where a Supreme Court judge or Chief Justice of a
High Court recuses himself or herself, is that  the next person in seniority
must fill the vacant slot. It is necessary to make a provision in this behalf by
appropriate amendment to the Bill of 2005 itself.  It is not desirable to leave
such a ‘recusal’ provision to the Rules. (pp.409-410)
13. The following further amendments are required to be made to the Bill of
2005. (pp. 413-417) 
(i) In Sec. 2 the following definitions of ‘investigation’ and `inquiry’ may be
inserted: 
`investigation’ means ‘preliminary investigation’;
 ‘inquiry’ means ‘inquiry for proof’.
(ii) In  sec 3(1), the words ‘to investigate’ be substituted by the words ‘to
investigate  and  inquire’;  in  sec  3(2), the  word  ‘investigating’  shall  be
substituted by the words ‘investigating or inquiring’; in  sec 3(3), the word
‘investigation’ shall be substituted by the words ‘investigation and inquiry’. 
(iii) In  sec  6 for the word  ‘investigation’, the  words  ‘investigation  and
inquiry’ be substituted in the body as well as in the marginal heading to the
section.
(iv) In  sec  7,  the  marginal  heading  should  read  “Verification  and
preliminary investigation of complaints”; in the body of sec 7(1) for the word
‘verification’, the words ‘verification or where necessary, such preliminary
investigation as it deems appropriate’ be substituted; in the body of sec 7(1)
(b), for the word ‘investigating’ the word ‘inquiry’ be substituted; in the body
of  sec  7(2), for the  word  ‘verification’, the  words  ‘verification  or where
necessary, preliminary investigation as it deems appropriate’ be substituted. 
(v) Marginal heading to sec 8 is correct when it speaks of ‘inquiries’.  But,
sec 8(1) has to be reframed as follows:
503

“8(1):  If after the verification and preliminary investigation under section 7
in respect of a complaint, the Council proposes to conduct any inquiry, it
shall frame definite charges  against the Judge on  the basis  of which the
inquiry is proposed to be held”.
(vi) In  section  10  for  ‘section  6’  substitute  ‘section  7’  and  the  word
‘investigation’ be substituted by the word ‘inquiry’.
(vii) So far as Chapter V is concerned, the heading should be ‘Procedure for
Inquiry’. 
(viii) In sec 12(1), 12(2) and 12(2) proviso, and in section 13, for the words
‘investigation’ and  ‘investigating’, the  words  ‘inquiry’ and  ‘inquiring’ be
respectively substituted.
(ix)  In  sec.  15(1)  and  15  (2),  for  the  word  `investigation’,  the  words
`preliminary investigation or inquiry’ be substituted.
(x) Heading of Ch. VI should be ‘Procedure after conclusion of Inquiry’
(xi) In sec 16(1), sec 17(1), the word ‘investigation’ be substituted by the
word ‘inquiry’. (In regard to s. 16 there are some more amendments which
will be discussed under para 27 hereinbelow)
(xii) In sec 19(1), for the words ‘or conducting any investigation’, the words
‘or conducting any preliminary investigation or inquiry’ shall be substituted.
(xiii)  In  sec.  21,  for  the  word  `investigation’,  the  words  ‘preliminary
investigation and inquiry’ be substituted.
(xiv) The whole of s.22 comprising sub-sections (1) to (3) should be shifted
to sec 7 as subsections (3) to (5) and in the body of sub-section (3) of sec. 7
(as now proposed) the words ‘constituting an investigating committee’ can be
retained but the words ‘for the purpose of conducting investigation into the
matter’  have  to  modified  as  ‘for  the  purpose  of  conducting  preliminary
504

investigation and for finding whether definite charges require to be framed
for  conducting  an  inquiry  into  the  matter’.  In  the  present  proposal  for
inserting sec 7(4) as stated above, for the word ‘investigation’, the words
‘preliminary investigation’ be substituted.  [As regards the marginal heading
of section 7 we have already suggested the change in sub-para (iv) above] 
(xv)  In  sec.  23,  for  the  word  `investigation’,  the  words`  preliminary
investigation and inquiry’ be substituted.
(xvi) In sec 24, in the marginal heading, the words ‘Investigation by the
Council’  be  substituted  by  the  words  ‘Investigation  and  Inquiry  by  the
Council’. In the body of sec 24, for the words ‘Any investigation’ the words
‘Any preliminary investigation, or inquiry’ be substituted. 
(xvii)In sec 25, in the marginal heading and in the body of the section, the
word  ‘investigation’  be  substituted  by  the  words  ‘complaint,  preliminary
investigation and inquiry’.
(xviii)  In  sec  26,  for  the  word  ‘investigation’,  the  words  ‘preliminary
investigation or inquiry’ be substituted.
(xix) In sec 27, the word ‘investigation’ in the marginal heading and in the
body of the section, be substituted by the words ‘preliminary investigation
and inquiry”.
14. Section 22 of the Bill of 2005 which permits the Judicial Council  itself to
conduct an investigation or appoint a Committee consisting of its Members to
conduct the investigation is constitutionally valid. (p.418)
15. The following words of sec 22, “it may designate one or more of its
members who shall constitute an investigating committee for the purpose of
conducting investigation into the matter” shall be substituted by the words “
it may constitute an investigating committee comprising one or more of its
members for the purpose of conducting investigation into the matter”. (p.418)
505

16. Section 7(2) of the Bill of 2005 does provide an opportunity to the Judge
to submit his ‘comments’ but it gives a discretion to the Council to call for
comments ‘if it deems it necessary’. This must be made obligatory. For the
word ‘may’ in sec 7 (2), the word ‘shall’ should be substituted and the words
‘if it deems it necessary so to do’, should be deleted. (pp. 421-422)
17. It is permissible for Parliament to make a law to provide that the Judicial
Council  could, as  an  interim measure, recommend withdrawal  of judicial
work from a judge of the Supreme Court or High Court, for the purpose of an
effective investigation and inquiry. The Commission is of the opinion that
S.21 is constitutionally valid. (p. 430)
18. Appropriate sanctions should be provided against frivolous and vexatious
complaints.  The following provisions be inserted in the Bill of 2005 by way
of a separate section:
“(1) Any person who makes a complaint which is either frivolous or
vexatious or is not in good faith, against a Judge with intent to
cause harassment to the Judge against whom the complaint is
filed, shall be punishable.
 (2)     When  any  offence  under  subsection  (1)  is  committed,  the
Judicial Council may take cognizance of the offence and after
giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
why  he  should  not  be  punished  for  such  offence,  try  such
offender summarily, so far as may be, in accordance with the
procedure  specified  for  summary  trials  under  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and if such offender is found guilty of
committing the offence, sentence him to imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year and also to fine which may extend
to rupees twenty five thousand.” (pp. 432-433)
19. Section 5 (2) of the Bill of 2005 be amended to provide that the complaint
must be in the form prescribed in the rules, must give full particulars of the
‘misbehaviour or incapacity’ which is the subject matter of the allegation and
must contain  a verification  as to which  of the allegations  are  within  the
personal knowledge of the complainant and which are based on information
received  and  from  whom.  It  must  also  contain  a  statement  that  the
506

complainant is aware that if the allegations in the complaint are found to be
frivolous or vexatious or not in good faith, the complainant is liable to be
summarily punished for an offence under the Act. (p. 433-434)
There  is  no  need  to  require  an  affidavit  to  accompany  the  complaint
inasmuch as every affidavit has to be sworn before an advocate or notary or
other  authorized  person  and  if  such  a  procedure  is  followed,  the
confidentiality of the allegations cannot be fully assured. (p.434)
20. There should be a broad definition of `misbehaviour’ in the Bill of 2005
as stated in Chapter XX (item XIX). It should include breach of the Code of
Conduct. So far as `incapacity’ is concerned, it should be further qualified as
one which is or is likely to be of a permanent character which does not enable
him  to  perform  his  judicial  functions  properly.  Such  a  definition  be
introduced in S.2 of the Bill of 2005. (p. 441)
21. The Bill of 2005 should make appropriate provisions  that enable the
screening and weeding out of complaints that relate to the merits of a pending
or  decided  case  except  where  the  complaint  contains  allegations  of
misbehaviour in relation to that very case such as bribery etc., in which event
such complaint will have to be nevertheless examined. (p.443)
22.  A  ‘whistleblower’  provision  must  be  provided  in  the  Bill  of  2005.
Further, there should also be a provision that in case any ‘reprisal’ against the
complainant is brought to the notice of the Judicial Council, the Judicial
Council may take such action as it may deem fit in public interest. (p. 445)
23. There should be a provision in the Bill of 2005 that every complainant
and every person including a witness and a lawyer who participates in the
investigation and inquiry, whether or not he seeks confidentiality about his
name, must undertake to the Judicial Council that he shall not reveal his own
name,  the  name  of  the  Judge  complained  against,  the  contents  of  the
complaint or any of the documents or proceedings to anybody else including
the media without the prior written approval of the Judicial Council and it
will  be  for  the  Judicial  Council  to  decide  when  and  to  what  extent  the
contents of the complaint shall be disclosed to the public. It must be made
507

clear  that  this  is  notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  Right  to
Information Act 2005. Once the enquiry is completed before the Judicial
Council, if `minor measures’ are imposed on a complaint procedure, the same
can be published by the Judicial Council with the qualification that in the
case of `private censure or admonition’, the name of the complainant and of
the Judge concerned shall not be published. In the case of recommendation
for removal, since the report is to be submitted to the Speaker/Chairman, it
will  be  for  the  Speaker/Chairman  to  decide  when  such  report  can  be
published. (pp. 448-449)
24. S.19 of the Bill of 2005 should be amended to provide that the violation
of the confidentiality provisions abovementioned would be an offence and
that procedure for punishing such offence would be as prescribed under s.20
of the Bill of 2005. (p. 449)
25. The Bill of 2005 be amended to provide an appeal to the Supreme Court
by a Judge against:
(1)  orders  of  removal  passed  by  the  President,  whether  the  proceedings
started on a complaint or a reference;
(2) other final orders passed by the Council in regard to ‘minor measures’
passed on the basis of complaint (p.455)
26. However, it needs to be clarified that this provision of a right of appeal to
the Supreme Court is available only to the judge who is aggrieved by an
order passed against him either for removal or where it is a final order of the
Judicial Council imposing minor measures. As regards the complainant it is
not necessary to provide any right of appeal and if he wants to pursue the
matter further, he may have to resort to the remedy under Article 32 or 226 of
the Constitution. (p.456)
27. ‘Proof’ must be ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’ in all cases as regards
all types of charges which come before the Judicial Council. In sec. 16(1)(a)
and (b), the words ‘substantiated either wholly or partially’ to be substituted
508

by the word ‘proved  wholly or partially’ along with  an Explanation  that
`proved’ means `proved beyond reasonable doubt.’ (p.461)
28.  Even  though  the  proceedings  before  the  Judicial  Council  are  quasi-
criminal, they need not be started de novo where among the Members of the
Judicial Council, one who is a Judge of the Supreme Court is elevated as
Chief Justice of India or where a Chief Justice of a High Court who is a
Member is elevated as  Judge of the Supreme Court  of India or where  a
vacancy arises due to natural causes or retirement or recusal or where any of
the Members is not available (say) due to sickness or other causes and that
vacancy is otherwise filled.  The Chief Justice of India must be entitled to
make appropriate arrangements by way of filling up the vacancy and the
proceedings must be continued from the stage where it stopped without the
need to start them de novo. A provision on the above lines with a further
clarification that proceedings need not be started de novo, in the case of
contingencies mentioned above, may have to be incorporated in the Bill of
2005. (pp.462-463)
29. The Bill of 2005 should include a provision to make it clear that where a
Judge of the High Court or Supreme Court who is under investigation or
inquiry before the Judicial Council, reaches the age of superannuation during
the pendency of the said proceedings, the proceedings can be continued for
the purpose of imposing the minor measures such as censure or admonition,
public or private. (pp.464-465)
30. The Bill of 2005 should provide that where the  recommendation of the
Judicial Council is accepted by the Houses and the removal order is passed
by the President, the judge should be barred from holding any public or
judicial, quasi-judicial  office nor can he have chamber practice  or be an
arbitrator in arbitration proceedings. (p.465)
31. Section 28(1) refers to the Code of Conduct. The provision must say that
it should be published in the Gazette of India. Till such time as the Judicial
Council comes to be constituted under the proposed Bill of 2005 and such
Judicial Council publishes a Code of Conduct, the Bill must provide that the
‘Restatement of Values of Judicial Life’ adopted by the Supreme Court in its
509

Resolution dated May 7th, 1997 shall be treated as the Code of Conduct for
the purposes of the proposed law. It should also contain a provision that the
Code of Conduct could be modified from time to time by the Judicial Council
by amendments that could be notified in the Official Gazette. (p.467)
32. The Bill of 2005 should be made applicable to complaints relating to
‘misbehaviour’ which occurred before the commencement of the proposed
Act but restricted to a period of two years before the commencement of the
Act provided the Judge has not retired by the date the complaint is filed
before the Judicial Council. (p.468)
33.  The following further amendments be made to the Bill of 2005 (pp.468-
477)
(1) In Section 2(b) the inverted commas for the words should clearly be
indicated to read as “Code of Conduct”.   In the same sub-section, “section
32” must be substituted by “section 28”.
(2) The heading of Chapter II “MACHINERY FOR INVESTIGATION”
should be substituted by the words “MACHINERY FOR PRELIMINARY
INVESTIGATION AND INQUIRY”.
(3) Section 10 shall be subdivided into two parts and the section 10 as
proposed in the draft Bill should be substituted by following section:
“(1) On receipt of a reference from the Speaker or the Chairman under
sub-section  (2)  of  section  9,  the  Council  shall,  notwithstanding
anything  contained  in  section  7, frame definite  charges  against  the
Judge on the basis of which inquiry is proposed to be held.
(2) Charges framed under sub-section (1) together with statement of
grounds on which each charges is based shall be communicated to the
Judge and he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a
written statement of defence within such time as may be specified by
the Counsel.”
510

(4) In Section 11 after subsection (3) there must be a separate sub section
to the following effect: 
“(4) If the Judge agrees to undergo medical examination considered
necessary by the Medical Board, the said Board may permit him to
produce such other medical reports or opinions of experts as the Judge
deems it necessary to prove that he does not suffer from any physical
or mental incapacity, and thereafter the Medical Board shall submit a
report  to  the  Council  with  its  findings  based  upon  the  medical
examination  conducted at the instance of the Board  as well as  the
material produced by the Judge as aforesaid.”
Further sub sec (4) of sec 11 should be re-numbered as sub-section (5) and
should be substituted by the following sub section:
“(5) The Council may, after considering the written statement of the
Judge, the medical  report  submitted by the  Medical  Board  and the
material  submitted  by the  Judge  before the Medical  Board,  if  any,
amend the charges framed under subsection (1) of sec 8 or sec 10, as
the  case  may be,  and  in  such  a  case,  the  Judge  shall  be  given  a
reasonable  opportunity  of  presenting  a  fresh  written  statement  of
defence”.
(5) The  heading  of  Chapter  V  which  reads  as  “PROCEDURE  FOR
INVESTIGATION” should  be  substituted  by the heading  “PROCEDURE
FOR INQUIRY”.
(6) In the proviso to sec 12(2), the word “may” is repeated twice;  the
word “may” after the word “writing” may be deleted.
511

(7) The heading of Chapter VI which reads as “PROCEDURE AFTER
CONCLUSION  OF  INVESTIGATION”  be  substituted  by  the  heading
“PROCEDURE AFTER  CONCLUSION OF INQUIRY”.
(8) In sec 16(1)(b) of the two clauses “(i) the complainant” and the words
“and (ii) the Judge concerned” be deleted and ‘clause (iii)’ be designated as
‘clause (i)’.
(9) Sec 16(2)(a) be substituted by the following provision:
“If the  Council,  in  its  Report,  has  come to  the  conclusion  that  no
charges  have  been  proved  either  wholly  or  partially,  against  the
concerned  Judge,  the  President  shall  close  the  case  and  no  further
action  shall  be  taken  against  the  Judge  and  the  Judge  and  the
complainant shall be informed accordingly.”
(10) Section 16(2)(b) be substituted by the following sub section: 
“If the Council, in its Report, has come to the conclusion that  the
charges are proved and recommends that the charges warrant removal,
then the President shall cause the Report and the recommendation of
the Council, along with the accompanying materials, to be laid before
both House of Parliament.”
(11) Sec 17(1) be amended appropriately to state that the Judicial Council
shall forward its findings and recommendations for removal, if any, to the
Speaker or Chairman. Sec 17(1) must be amended to provide that the Judicial
Council shall forward its findings and its recommendations for removal of a
Judge, if any, to the Speaker or the Chairman.  
(12) The marginal note to sec 18 which uses the word “Impeachment” be
substituted by the words “address by the Houses”.
512

We place on record our appreciation for the extensive research and
help rendered by Dr. S. Muralidhar, Part-time Member, in the preparation of
this Report and in particular in regard to Chapters II, XX and XXI.
We recommend accordingly.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
 (Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi)
Member-Secretary
Dated:  31st January, 2006
513

ANNEXURE - I
This Annexure is a draft of the Bill which has been referred to the Law
Commission  by  the  Government  of  India  for  its  examination  and
suggestions. The recommendations of the Law Commission for making
necessary changes in this draft Bill are contained in Chapter XXI of this
report. 
514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

522

523

524

525

526

527

528

529

530

531