LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
196TH REPORT
ON
MEDICAL TREATMENT TO TERMINALLY ILL
PATIENTS (PROTECTION OF PATIENTS 
AND MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS)
MARCH, 2006
Justice                                                                                           LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

M. JAGANNADHA RAO                                                    SHASTRI  BHAWAN  
Chairman                                                                                            NEW DELHI-110 001
                                                                                                                                                                      TEL: 23384475
                                                                                                                                                          FAX: (001) 23073864, 23388870
                                                                                                                                                           E-mail: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                          Residence:
                                                                                                                                                                         1, JANPATH
                                                                                                                                                                  NEW DELHI – 110 011
                                                                                                                                                                       TEL: 23019465
28  th   April, 2006  
Dear Shri Bhardwaj ji,
This 196th Report of the Law Commission on ‘Medical Treatment to
Terminally Ill Patients (Protection of Patients and Medical Practitioners)’ is
one of the most novel, interesting and important subjects ever undertaken by
the Law Commission of India for a comprehensive study.
The request for a study on this subject came from the Indian Society
of Critical  Care Medicine at a Seminar on 27th April, 2005, which was
inaugurated by Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice.   The Commission
agreed to study and give a Report as well as a draft Bill.
So  little  is  known  in  our  country  about  the  law  applicable  to
terminally ill patients (including patients in persistent vegetative state) who
desire to die a natural death without going through modern Life Support
Measures like artificial ventilation and artificial supply of food.
Indeed  almost  everybody has  been  asking  the  Commission  if this
Report is for the purpose of legalizing ‘Euthanasia or Assisted Suicide’.  We
have, therefore, started the first paragraph of our Report in Chapter I with
the following words:
“The title to this Report immediately suggests  to one that we are
dealing with ‘Euthanasia’ or ‘Assisted Suicide’.  But we make it clear
at the  outset  that  Euthanasia  and  Assisted  Suicide  continue  to  be
unlawful and we are dealing a different matter ‘with-holding Life-
2

Support Measures’ to patients terminally ill and, universally, in all
countries, such withdrawal is treated as ‘lawful’”.
While  ‘Euthanasia’  is  an  act  of  any  person,  including  a  doctor,  of
intentionally killing a person who is terminally ill by giving drugs, ‘Assisted
Suicide’ is an act of the patient who receives the assistance of a doctor and
takes a drug with the intention of committing suicide.  They are unlawful as
held by our Supreme Court in Gian Kaur vs. State of Punjab: 1996(2) SCC
648 and will continue to be unlawful.
A hundred years ago, when medicine and medical technology had not
invented the artificial methods of keeping a terminally ill patient alive by
medical treatment, including by means of ventilators and artificial feeding,
such  patients  were  meeting  their  death  on  account  of  natural  causes.
Today, it is accepted, a terminally ill person has a common law right to
refuse modern medical procedures and allow nature to take its own course,
as was done in good old times.   It is well-settled law in all countries that a
terminally  ill  patient  who  is  conscious  and  is  competent,  can  take  an
‘informed decision’ to die a natural death and direct that he or she be not
given medical treatment which may merely prolong life.  There are currently
a large number of such patients who have reached a stage in their illness
when according to well-informed body of medical opinion, there are no
chances of recovery.   But modern medicine and technology may yet enable
such patients to prolong life to no purpose and during such prolongation,
patients could go through extreme pain and suffering.  Several such patients
prefer  palliative  care  for  reducing  pain  and  suffering  and  do  not  want
medical treatment which will merely prolong life or postpone death.
Unanimity among Courts in all countries on certain legal principles:
The House of Lords in Airedale NHS Trust vs. Bland: 1993(1) All ER
821 (HL), the American Supreme Court in Cruzan vs. Director MDH (1990)
497 US 261, the Irish Supreme Court in Ward of Court, Re a : 1995 ILRM
401,  the Court of Sessions, Inner House of Scotland in Law Hospital NHS
Trust vs.  Lord Advocate: 1996 SLT 848, the Canadian Supreme Court in
Ciarlariello vs. Schater 1993(2) SCR 119 and in Rodriguez vs. The Attorney
General  of  Canada 1993(3)  SCR  519,  the  Australian  Courts  in  Q vs.
Guardianship   Administrative  Board  &  Pilgrim:  1998  V.S.  (CA)   and
Northridge vs.  Central  Sydeny Area  Health  Service: (2000)  NSW 1241
(SC), Issac Messiha vs. South East Health: 2004. NSW (SC) 1061 and the
3

New Zealand Court in Auckland Area Health Board vs. Attorney General:
1993(1) NLLR 235, to name a few, are unanimous on the legal principles.
Competent patient: (Informed decision):
Every terminally ill who is a competent patient has a right to refuse
treatment and the decision is binding on the doctors provided the decision
of the patient is an ‘informed decision’ (i.e., the decision is taken by the
patient who has been informed about (i) the nature of his or her nature, (ii)
any  alternative  form  of  treatment  that  may  be  available,  (iii)  the
consequences  of  these  forms of treatment  and  (iv)  the  consequences  of
remaining untreated).     Where a ‘competent patient’ takes an ‘informed
decision’, when he or she is terminally ill, not to receive medical treatment,
such  a  decision  is  binding  on  the  doctors  and  if, contrary  to  that,  any
invasive treatment is given it amounts to battery and if further the patient
dies, it may even amount to murder.    Where a ‘competent patient’ takes an
‘informed decision’ to allow nature to have its course, he is, under common
law, not guilty of ‘attempt to commit suicide’ (under sec. 309, Indian Penal
Code, 1860), nor is the doctor who thereby omits to give treatment, guilty of
abetting suicide under sec. 306 or of culpable homicide under sec. 299 read
with sec. 304 of the Indian Penal Code.
Incompetent patients and competent patients who have not taken informed
decision:
On the other hand, according to the same case law, in the matter of
incompetent  patients  and  also  competent  patients  who  have  not  taken
informed decisions, the doctor can take a decision to withhold or withdraw
medical treatment, if that is in the ‘best interests’ of the patients and if it is
based on the opinion of a body of medical experts.    A ‘competent patient’
is proposed to be defined as a patient who is not an ‘incompetent patient’.
An ‘incompetent patient’ is proposed to be defined as being a minor
or person of unsound mind or a person who is unable to 
(i) understand the information relevant to an informed decision
about him or her medical treatment;
(ii) retain that information;
(iii) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making
his or her informed decision;
4

(iv) make  an  informed  decision  because  of  impairment  of  or  a
disturbance in he functioning of his or her mind or brain; or
(v) communicate his or her informed decision as to the medical
treatment,
Such  patients  are  not  competent  to  take  ‘informed  decisions’  about
withholding or withdrawing medical treatment.  
As stated above, in the case of such ‘incompetent patients’ who are
suffering from terminal illnesses as also in the case of ‘competent patients’
who, the doctor is satisfied, have not taken an informed decision, the doctor
can, - and this is well-settled law today – take a decision to withhold or
withdraw medical treatment in the ‘best interests’ of the patients if that is
the view of a body of experts.    This principle is based on the Bolam test.
‘Best  interests’, according  to decided  cases are not confined  to medical
interests  but  include  ‘ethical,  social,  moral,  emotional  and  welfare
considerations’.
Director General of Health Services and Directors of Medical Services to
prepare panel of experts:
In order that  these  principles  and procedures are properly applied
with  care  and  are  not  abused,  the  Law  Commission  has  recommended
several  safeguards  or  conditions  to  be  met  in  the  case  of  ‘incompetent
patients’ and ‘competent patients’ who have not taken informed decisions.
It is proposed that the doctors must, in the case of patients of these two
categories,  consult  three  medical  experts  from  a  panel  prepared  by  a
Statutory Authority.
Expert opinion of panel mandatory:
Withholding and withdrawal of medical treatment by a doctor in the
best interests of such patients referred to in the last paragraph, is permitted
only  if  that  course  is  considered  to  be  appropriate  by a  body  of  three
medical experts empanelled by the Director General of Health Services for
Union Territories and Directors of Medicine (or equivalent authorities) for
the States, selected from the panel by the attending medical practitioner.
Maintenance of Register by medical practitioners mandatory:
5

In addition, it is proposed that, in the case of competent as well as
incompetent  patients,  a  Register  must  be  maintained  by  doctors  who
propose withholding or withdrawing treatment.   The decision as well as the
decision-making process must be noted in the Register.   The Register to be
maintained by the doctor must contain the reasons as to why the doctor
thinks the patient is competent or incompetent, as to why he thinks that the
patient’s decision in an informed decision or not, as to the view of the
experts the doctor has consulted in the case of incompetent patients and
competent patients who have not taken an informed decision, what is in
their best interests, the name, sex, age etc. of the patient.   He must keep the
identity of the patient and other particulars confidential.
Patient, parents or relatives must be informed:
Once the above Register is duly maintained, the doctor must inform
the patient (if he is conscious), or his or her parents or relatives before
withdrawing or withholding medical treatment.
In case the patient, parents or relatives want to move the High court
under section 14, the medical practitioner shall postpone such withholding
or withdrawal for a period of fifteen days and if he does not receive any
orders from the High Court, he may then proceed with the withholding or
withdrawal.
Copy of contents of Register regarding each patient to be sent to statute
named Authority:
A copy of the contents of the Register in regard to each patient who is
terminally ill, containing all the details as stated above and the decisions
taken must be simultaneously communicated by the doctor to the Director
General of Health Services or Director of Medical Services (as the case may
be) and acknowledgement obtained.    The said authorities must also keep
the information confidential.
Medical Council guidelines to be followed:
6

The  doctors  and  experts  must  also  act  in  consonance  with  any
guidelines prescribed by the Medical Council of India.
Summary of safeguards in case of incompetent patients and patients who
have not taken informed decision:
These safeguards can be summarized as follows:
(1) No decision will be taken by a medical practitioner to withhold or
withdraw medical treatment to a terminally ill patient unless, as
required by the Bolam test, he has obtained the expert opinion of a
body of three experts, who are experts in relation to the particular
illness of the patient and in the matter of critical care.
(2) Such experts cannot be selected by the doctor at random or at his
discretion from those in the profession but must be selected by
him  out  of  panel  of  experts  prepared  and  published  by  the
Director-General of Medical Services for Union Territories and
the Directors of Medicine (or other authorities holding equivalent
posts)  in  the  States.    Such  panels  must  consist  of  experts  in
various  branches  of  medicine  and  critical  care  and  must  have
minimum experience of 20 years and must be of good reputation.
These panels must be published in the appropriate Gazette and on
the  respective  websites  for  easy  access.   Those  against  whom
disciplinary proceedings are pending or have been found guilty of
professional  misconduct  will  have  to  be  excluded  from  such
panels.   In case of difference of opinion among the three experts,
majority opinion prevails.    It is from such a panel that the doctor
must select three experts and go by their opinion.
(3) Every medical practitioner who takes a decision to withhold or
withdraw medical treatment must maintain a register giving details
as to why he is or is not satisfied that a patient is competent and as
to why he considers the patient has or has not taken an informed
decision, as to the opinion of the experts from the panel; the age,
sex, address of the patient and what is in the best interests of the
patient and other particulars.   The information will have to be
kept confidential.
(4) The  medical  practitioner  has  to  inform  the  patient  (if  he  is
conscious) or parents or relatives about his decision to withhold or
7

withdraw treatment and if they desire to move the High Court, he
has to wait for 15 days and if no orders are received from the High
Court, he can proceed.
(5) A copy of the contents of the register relating to each such patient
shall  be  lodged,  as  a  matter  of  information,  with  the  Director
General of Health Services or Director of Medical Sciences, as the
case may be, immediately on the taking of a decision to withhold
or  withdraw  treatment  and  an   acknowledgement  therefor  will
have to be obtained.    The above authorities will also have to keep
the information confidential.
Only if above safeguards are followed, decision of doctors to withhold or
withdraw medical treatment will be treated as lawful:
If the above procedures are followed, the medical practitioner can
withhold  or  withdraw  medical  treatment  to  a  terminally  ill  patient.
Otherwise,  he  cannot  withhold  or  withdraw  the  treatment.   More
importantly, he will be entitled to the benefits of the provisions of the Act
which  deem  such  withholding  or  withdrawal  as  ‘lawful’,  only  if  the
provisions of the Act have been followed by him.   If the safeguards are not
followed, the medical practitioner is not entitled to the above benefit and
can be proceeded against in a civil or criminal action.   We have, in this
context, examined the provisions of sec. 299, sec. 306 and sections 76, 79,
81, 88 and other provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Provisions enabling the High Court (Division Bench) to grant declarations
or issue directions expeditiously:
Court  declarations  as  to  ‘lawfulness’  of  the  proposed  action  of  a
doctor are common in several countries.   In UK and common law countries,
there is a procedure enabling patients, parents or relatives or next friend or
doctors or hospitals to approach a court of law for a declaration that the
proposed  action  of  withholding  or  withdrawing  medical  treatment  from
critically ill patients is ‘lawful’ in the circumstances because it is in their
best interests.    The patient, parents or relatives can also move the Court for
a declaration that the medical treatment be continued or be withheld or
withdrawn.   This  procedure  is  intended  to  enable  courts  to  lay  down
precedents as to what is ‘good medical practice’ and once such precedents
are available, it may indeed be not necessary to rush to the Court in every
8

case.   In fact, such ‘best medical practices’ laid down by Courts in the UK
and  Commonwealth  countries  have  now  crystallized  into  various  legal
principles which we have incorporated in the proposed draft Bill.    
We have therefore thought  it fit to provide an enabling provision
under  which  the  patients,  parents,  relatives,  next  friend  or  doctors  or
hospitals can move a Division Bench of the High Court for a declaration
that  the  proposed  action  of  continuing  or  withholding  or  withdrawing
medical treatment be declared ‘lawful’ or ‘unlawful’.   As time is essence,
the High Court must decide such cases at the earliest and within thirty days.
In UK, decisions are sometimes made within half an hour if there is grave
urgency and reasons are given later.   Such speedy procedure has to be
followed because Courts are dealing here with life and death situations.
Once  the  High  Court  gives  a  declaration  that  the  action  of
withholding or withdrawing medical treatment proposed by the doctors is
‘lawful’,  it  will  be  binding  in  subsequent  civil  or  criminal  proceedings
between same parties in relation to the same patient.   This provision is
intended to prevent harassment of doctors and hospitals as stated by Thomas
J in New Zealand.
In the Bill, we made it clear that it is not necessary to move the High
Court in every case.   Where the action to withhold or withdraw treatment is
taken without resort to Court, it will be deemed ‘lawful’ if the provisions of
the Act have been followed and it will be a good defence in subsequent civil
or criminal proceedings to rely on the provisions of the Act.
Confidentiality:
It is internationally recognized that the identity of the patient, doctors,
hospitals, experts be kept confidential.   Hence, we have proposed that in
the Court proceedings, these persons or bodies will be described by letters
drawn  from  the  English  alphabet  and  none,  including  the  media,  can
disclose or publish their names.    Disclosure of identity is not permitted
even after the case is disposed of.
Guidelines to be issued by Medical Council of India:
9

The Medical Council of India must prepare and publish Guidelines in
respect of withholding or withdrawing medical treatment.   The said Council
may consult other expert bodies in critical care medicine and publish their
guidelines in the Central Gazette or on the website of the Medical Council
of India.   These guidelines can be modified from time to time.
Advance Medical Directives and Medical Powers of Attorney to be void:
We have proposed that Advance Medical Directives (Living Wills)
and Medical Powers of Attorney be of no effect and shall be deemed void
inasmuch as they can be easily abused and create unwanted litigation.    We
have given elaborate reasons in this behalf in Chapter VII.
These  are  our  basic  recommendations  in  the  draft  Bill  which  is
annexed to the Report.
The  Report contains  vast literature, both  case  law and  statutes  of
several countries, UK, USA, Canada, Australia and its States, New Zealand,
South Africa and other countries.    A special feature of the Report is that
the  case  law  is  given  extensively  with  medical  facts  and  the  medical
decisions  which  have  been  taken,  so  that  legislators,  lawyers,  judges,
doctors  and  all  others  may  understand  the  international  trends  and  the
uniformity in all countries in the basic principles applicable.
Yours sincerely,
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Sri H.R. Bhardwaj
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHI.
10

I N D E X
Chapter No Title Page No.
I Introductory 3 - 7
II Supreme Court of India on Suicide,
Euthanasia, Assisted Suicide, 
Abetment of Suicide, Stopping Life
Support Treatment 8 - 20
III Principles of law laid down by the
House of Lords in Airedale NHS
Trust vs. Bland 21 - 38
IV Other cases decided in UK and 
Ireland before and after 
Airedale 39 - 173
V Leading case law and statutes in
United States of America 174 - 209
VI Legal position in Canada, Australia,
New Zealand and South Africa 210 - 283
VII Legal Principles applicable in India
and position under Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 284 - 389
11

VIII Summary of Recommendations 390 -  408
Annexure Draft of proposed Bill, namely,
“Medical Treatment of Terminally Ill
Patients (Protection of Patients and 
Medical Practitioners) Bill, 2006 409 - 424
Chapter – I
Introductory
The  title  to  this  Report  immediately  suggests  to  one  that  we  are
dealing with ‘Euthanasia’ or ‘Assisted Suicide’.   But we make it clear at the
outset that Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide continue to be unlawful and we
are dealing with a different matter ‘Withholding Life-support Measures’ to
patients terminally ill and, universally, in all countries, such withdrawal is
treated as ‘lawful’.
The Seminar of April 2005
The Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mumbai, approached
the  Law  Commission  of  India  requesting  the  participation  of  the  Law
Commission in a Seminar on “End-of-Life Issues” to be held on 27th April,
2005 at New Delhi in which the Union Minister for Law and Justice, Sri
H.R. Bhardwaj was the Chief Guest.  The Seminar was attended by Medical
12

Specialists,  Legal  Experts,  and  Media  Personnel  and  issues  relating  to
“withholding life support measures in dying patients” were discussed.  It
was  obvious  that  several  legal, moral,  religious  and  ethical  issues  were
involved in the above subject apart from social issues.  The Seminar was
organized in the wake of the Terri Schiavo Case (stopping life support) in
USA  and  the  case  of  Venkatesh (organ  transplantation)  in  the  Andhra
Pradesh High Court.  The Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine took the
initiative  to  develop  guidelines on  these  issues  for  ‘intensive  care
specialists’.  The Society was of the view that there was need to develop
appropriate legislation for end-of-life issues in our country.
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice Sri H.R. Bhardwaj agreed that
there was need to develop some legal frame-work.  The speakers included
the Chairman of the Law Commission of India and Sri S. Balakrishnan,
Senior  Advocate,  Supreme  Court  of  India,  Dr.  Ram  E.  Rajagopalan,
President of the Society, Dr. R.K. Mani, President (Elect) of the Society and
Dr. Rajesh Chawla, Secretary of the Society.
A  large  number  of  senior  doctors  attended  the  seminar  and
emphasized  the  need  for  a  law  on  the  subject  of  ‘withholding  of  life-
support’ to dying patients.  Their main apprehension was that if the doctors
took the risk of withdrawing life-support, there was the possibility of their
being prosecuted for ‘abetting’ suicide under sec 306 of the Indian Penal,
Code, 1860.
At that  Seminar,  the  proposal  that  the  Law  Commission  of India
should come forward with a Paper on the subject of ‘withdrawal of life-
13

support’ was accepted. But, the Commission realized soon that most of the
cases before the doctors have given rise to purely legal issues.     As the
issues  are  legal  issues,  the  Commission  has  decided  to  prepare  a  final
Report.
Withdrawal of life support is different from Euthanasia or Assisted Suicide:
One of the first things that has to be taken note of is that ‘withdrawal
of life support’ to patients is totally different from Euthanasia and Assisted
Suicide.
The subject of withdrawal of life support to patients who are in a
critical stage or under coma for long periods has attracted the attention of
the law makers in various countries.  There are statutes in some countries,
and also guidelines issued by several Medical Councils and a large number
of decisions of the Courts.  There is a vast literature on the subject including
Reports of several Law Commissions.
It is the position today in our country that attempt to commit suicide
is  an offence under sec 309 of the Indian Penal Code and abetment  of
suicide  is  also  an  offence  as  per  sec  306.   The  word  ‘Abetment’  is
independently defined under sec 107 of the Penal Code.
 
14

‘Euthanasia’ is the act of killing someone painlessly, especially, for
relieving  suffering  of a person  from incurable  illness.   It is  also  called
‘mercy-killing’.    
‘Assisted suicide’ is where a doctor assists a patient by giving him
medicines at the request of a patient who is unable to withstand pain, for
enabling the patient to bring his life to an end.
In our country, and in several countries (with very few exceptions),
‘Euthanasia’ and ‘Assisted Suicide’ are offences.
In this Report, we are of the view that ‘Euthanasia’ and ‘Assisted
Suicide’ must continue to be offences under our law.  The scope of the
inquiry  is,  therefore,  confined  to  examining  the  various  legal  concepts
applicable  to  ‘withdrawal  of  life  support  measures’  and  to  suggest  the
manner  and  circumstances  in  which  the  medical  profession  could  take
decisions for withdrawal of life support if it was in the ‘best interests’ of the
patient.   Further, question arises as to in what circumstances a patient can
refuse  to  take  treatment  and  ask  for  withdrawal  or  withholding  of  life
support measure, if it is an informed decision.
In that context, it will also become necessary to propose sufficient
safeguards  to  the  ‘patient’  so  that  the  procedure  proposed  for  doctors
arriving at a decision for withdrawal of life support measures is not misused
or abused by any body, including the patient, the relatives of the patient or
the doctors or the hospitals where the patient is under treatment.
15

The  Indian  Society  of  Critical  Care  Medicine  has  already  come
forward with several guidelines for the use of the medical profession.  It
appears  that  the  Medical  Council  of  India  has  not  so  far  framed  any
guidelines.
The Law Commission in its 42nd Report recommended the deletion of
sec 309 of the Penal Code which makes the ‘attempt to commit suicide’ an
offence.  We make it clear that we are not concerned with that issue in this
Report but we are concerned only with ‘withdrawal of life support’ to dying
patients.
New method of presentation of legal principles adopted in this Report:
We felt  that, in  this  Report, we have to deviate  from the  normal
method  of presentation  of Report  adopted  in  other  Reports  of the  Law
Commission.  The legal principles applicable to stoppage of life-support
systems cannot be understood unless one is able to know the facts in the
leading cases where the principles of law have been laid down.  Further,
several of the law reports are not within the reach of the medical profession.
In fact, some of the law reports to which we have referred are not available
easily even to the members of the legal profession or the Judges.  Hence, we
decided to deal with each case in an extensive manner so that law makers,
patients or their relatives, doctors, lawyers and Judges can understand in
what circumstances, the particular principles of law were laid down.  We
felt that, a mere reference to a legal principle divorced from the facts, cannot
furnish any idea about the applicability of the legal principles to any given
16

set of facts.  We hope that this method adopted by us in this Report will be
to the satisfaction of one and all.
In order to put our recommendations in legislative form, a draft of a
Bill, namely, “Medical Treatment of Terminally Ill Patients (Protection of
Patients,  Medical  Practitioners)  Bill”,  is  annexed  to  this  Report  as
‘Annexure’.
17

Chapter - II
Supreme Court of India on suicide, euthanasia, 
assisted suicide, abetment of suicide, stopping life support treatment
The Supreme Court had occasion to discuss  the issues of suicide,
euthanasia, assisted suicide, abetment of suicide, stopping life sustaining
treatment in Gian Kaur vs. State of Punjab: 1996(2) SCC 648.
As the Supreme Court referred to some of the provisions of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 in that connection, we shall refer to those provisions.
(a) Sections 107, 306 and 309 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Section 306 of the Penal Code which refers to ‘abetment of suicide’,
reads as follows:
“Section 306: If any person commits suicide whoever abets the
commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
be liable to fine.”
Section 107 defines ‘abetment of a thing’ as follows:
“A person abets the doing of a thing, who 
First: Instigates any person to do that thing;
18

Secondly: Engages with one or more other person or persons in any
conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or  illegal omission
takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing
of that thing; or
Thirdly: Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing
of that thing.
Explanation 1: A person who by willful misrepresentation, or by
willful concealment of a material fact which he is bound to disclose,
voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure a thing
to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Explanation 2: Whoever,  either  prior  to  or  at  the  time  of  the
commission  of  an  act,  does  anything  in  order  to  facilitate  the
commission of that act and thereby facilitates the commission thereof,
is said to aid the doing of that act.”
 
Section 309 of the Code makes ‘attempt to commit suicide’ an
offence and it states as follows:
“Section 309: Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act
towards  the  commission  of  such  offence,  shall  be  punished  with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with
fine or with both.”
Thus, ‘attempt to commit suicide’ is an offence which may result in
imprisonment (for a term which may extend to one year) or with fine or with
both.
19

While dealing with sec 309, it is necessary to refer to two important
decisions  of  the  Supreme Court  of  India  where,  in  the  first  case  in  P.
Rathinam vs.  Union of India 1994(3)SCC 394 a two-Judge Bench of the
Supreme Court struck down sec 309 as unconstitutional and in the second
case in  Gian Kaur vs.  State  of Punjab: 1996(2)SCC 648  a Constitution
Bench overruled the earlier judgment and upheld the validity of sec 309.
In both the judgments, the provisions of Art 21 of the Constitution of
India  which  guarantees  that  no  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  life  or
personal  liberty except according to procedure established  by law, were
interpreted.  It was held in both cases, that, in any event, sec 309 did not
contravene Art 14 of the Constitution of India.
We do not propose to discuss the first case of P. Rathinam which was
overruled in the second case, Gian Kaur.  But, it is necessary to state that in
P. Rathinam, sec 309 ‘attempt to commit suicide’ was alone in question
whereas in the second case, Gian Kaur, the question was about the validity
of  both  sections  306  (abetment  of  suicide)  as  also  sec  309  (attempt  to
commit suicide).   In Gian Kaur, the appellants who were convicted under
sec 306 for ‘abetment of suicide’ contended that if sec 309 dealing with
‘attempt to commit suicide’ was unconstitutional, for the same reasons, sec
306  which  deals  with  ‘abetment  of  suicide’  must  be  treated  as
unconstitutional.  But, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity
of both sec 306 and sec 309.
In Gian Kaur, the Supreme Court made it clear that ‘Euthanasia’ and
‘Assisted Suicide’ are not lawful in India and the provisions of the Penal
20

Code 1860 get attracted to these acts.  But, the question is whether there is
anything in Gian Kaur’s case upholding sections 306 and 309, which either
directly or indirectly deals with ‘withdrawal of life support’?
(A) Fortunately, in the context of sec 306 (abetment of suicide), there are
some  useful  remarks  in  Gian  Kaur which  touch  upon  the  subject  of
withdrawal of life support.  Before the Supreme Court, in the context of an
argument dealing with ‘abetment’ of suicide, the decision of the House of
Lords in  Airedale N.H.S. Trust vs.  Bland 1993(1) All ER 821, was cited.
The Supreme Court referred to the  distinction between withdrawing life
support and euthanasia, as follows: (p. 665).
“Airedale N.H.S. Trust vs. Bland  was a case relating to withdrawal of
artificial  measures  for  continuance  of  life by  a  physician.   Even
though it is not necessary to deal with physician  assisted suicide or
euthanasia case, a brief reference to the decision cited at the Bar may
be made.  In the context of existence in the persistent vegetative state
of no benefit to the patient, the principle of sanctity of life, which is
the concern of the State, was stated to be not an absolute one.  In such
cases also, the existing crucial distinction between cases in which a
physician decides not to provide, or to continue to provide, for his
patient, treatment of care which could or might prolong his life, and
those in which he decides, for example, by administering a lethal
drug, actively to bring his patient’s life to an end, was indicated and it
was then stated as under….”  (emphasis suggested).
and their Lordships quoted the following passage from Airdale:
21

“But, it is not lawful for a doctor to administer a drug to his patient to
bring  about  his  death,  even  though  that  course  is  prompted  by a
humanitarian desire to end his suffering however great that suffering
may be (See  R vs.  Cox (18.9.1992, unreported per Ognall J in the
Crown Court at Winchester).   So to act is to cross the Rubicon which
runs between on the one hand the care of the living patient and, on
the other hand, euthanasia-actively causing his death to avoid or to
end his suffering.  Euthanasia is not lawful at Common-law.  It is of
course well known that there are many responsible members of our
society – who believe that euthanasia should be made lawful, but that
result  could,  I  believe,  only  be  achieved  by  legislation  which
expresses the democratic will that so fundamental a change should be
made  in  our  law,  and  can,  if  enacted,  ensure  that  such  legalized
killing can only be carried out subject to appropriate supervision and
control”.  (emphasis supplied)
The  Supreme  Court  stated,  after  the  above  quotation  from  Airdale as
follows: (p 665)
“The desirability of bringing about such a change was considered to
be function of the legislature by enacting a suitable law providing
therein adequate safeguards to prevent any possible abuse.”
In effect, the Supreme Court, while making the distinction between
euthanasia, which can be legalized only by legislation, and ‘withdrawal of
life-support’, appears to agree with the House of Lords that ‘withdrawal of
22

life support’ is permissible in respect of a patient in a persistent vegetative
state as it is no longer beneficial to the patient that ‘artificial measures’ be
started  or  continued  merely  for  ‘continuance  of  life’.   The  Court  also
observed that the principle of ‘sanctity of life, which is the concern of the
State’, was ‘not an absolute one’.
(B) We may also refer to certain observations in Gian Kaur as to whether
a ‘right to die’ with dignity was part of a ‘right to live’ with dignity in the
context of Art 21 where death due to termination of natural life is certain
and imminent and the process of natural death has commenced.  The Court
observed: (p 661)
“A  question  may  arise,  in  the  context  of  a  dying  man  who  is
terminally  ill  or  in  a  persistent  vegetative  state  that  he  may  be
permitted to terminate it by a premature extinction of his life in those
circumstances.  This category of cases may fall within the ambit of
the ‘right to die’ with dignity as a part of ‘right to live’ with dignity,
when death due to termination of natural life is certain and imminent
and the process of natural death has commenced.”
From the above passages, it is clear that the Supreme Court accepted
the statement of law by the House of Lords in Airedale that ‘euthanasia’ is
unlawful and can be permitted only by the legislature i.e. act of killing a
patient painlessly for relieving his suffering from incurable illness.  (and be
subject to appropriate supervision and control).  Otherwise, it is not legal.
‘Assisted suicide’ is where a doctor is requested by a patient suffering from
23

pain and he helps the patient by medicine to put an end to his life.   This is
also not permissible in law.   Again, at p 661, the Supreme Court stated:
“These are not cases of extinguishing life but only of accelerating
conclusion  of  the  process  of  natural  death  which  has  already
commenced.  The debate even in such cases  to permit  physician-
assisted termination of life is inconclusive.  It is sufficient to reiterate
that the argument to support the view of permitting termination of life
in such cases to reduce the period of suffering during the process of
certain-natural death  is not available to interpret Art 21 to include
therein  the  right  to  curtail  the  normal  span  of  life.”  (emphasis
supplied).
The  last  sentence  must  be  understood  in  the  context  of  ‘assisted
suicide’ and not in the context of withholding or withdrawing life support.
But where a patient is terminally ill or is in a persistent vegetative state, a
premature extinction of his life in those circumstances, by withholding or
withdrawal of life support, is part of the right to live with dignity and, is
permissible, when death due to natural termination of life is certain and
imminent and the process of natural death has commenced.
The case of ‘withdrawal of artificial measures for continuance of life
by a physician’, decided by Airedale N.H.S. Trust vs. Bland (1993 (1) All
ER. 821 (HL) deals with something different from euthanasia or physician
assisted suicide.  It relates to the withdrawal of artificial measures used by a
physician for continuance of life.  In the context of a patient in a persistent
vegetative state with no benefit to himself, the principle of sanctity of life,
24

which is the concern of the State, has been stated to be not an absolute one.
In such cases also, there is a crucial distinction between cases in which (a) a
physician decides not to provide or continue to provide treatment or care
which can or may prolong his life and (b) where the physician decides, for
example, to administer a lethal drug, actively to bring an end to the patient’s
life.  The former is permissible but the latter is not.  Taking care of a living
patient is different from crossing the Rubicon to resort to euthanasia.  (para
40 of SCC)
If these are the guidelines that can be culled out from the judgment of the
Supreme Court in  Gian Kaur’s case, which expressly referred to  Airedale
N.H.S. Trust vs. Bland, there is no difficulty in accepting the principles laid
down in UK and other countries as to when it would be lawful for a patient
or a doctor to direct stoppage of ventilation or artificial nutrition or other
life  sustaining  treatment.  We  shall,  therefore,  deal  elaborately  with  the
principles of law laid down in UK and other countries.  After referring to
the case law in other countries, we shall come back to the provisions of the
Indian Penal Code and to the tort law.
 
(b) Sections 87, 88 and 92 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860:
These sections of the Penal Code are also relevant and their relevancy
can be seen in the various judgments that are analysed in the following
chapters.    For the present, we shall merely refer to these sections.
25

Section 87 of the Code is relevant.  It deals with ‘Act likely to cause
harm, but done without criminal intent and to prevent other harm’.  It reads
as follows:
“87.  Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or
grievous hurt, done by consent:
Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and
which is not known by the doer to be likely to cause death or grievous
hurt, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be
intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen years of
age, who has given consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that
harm; or by reason of any harm which it may be known by the doer to
be likely to cause any such person who has consented to take the risk
of that harm.
Illustration: A and Z agree to fence with other for amusement.  This
agreement implies the consent of each to suffer any harm which in the
course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play; and if A,
while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence.”
 
Section 88 deals with ‘Act done in good faith for benefit of a person
with consent’.  It reads as follows:
“88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith
for person’s benefit:
26

Nothing, which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason
of any harm which it may cause or be intended by the doer to cause or
be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for whose
benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether
express or implied, to suffer that harm, or to take the risk of that
harm.
Illustration: A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation
is  likely  to  cause  the  death  of  Z,  who  suffers  under  a  painful
complaint, but not intending to cause Z’s death, and intending , in
good  faith,  Z’s  benefit,  performs  that  operation  on  Z,  with  Z’s
consent.  A has committed no offence.”
Section 92 deals with ‘Act done in good faith for benefit of a person
without consent’.  It reads as follows:
“92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent:
Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a
person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without that
person’s consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible
for that person to signify consent, or if that person is incapable of
giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in lawful charge
of him from who it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing
to be done with benefit:
Provided-
First – That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing
of death, or the attempting to cause death;
27

Secondly  –  that  this  exception  shall  not  extend  to  the  doing  of
anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death,
for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt or
the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
Thirdly  –  That  this  exception  shall  not  extend  to  the  voluntary
causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose
other than preventing of death or hurt;
Fourthly – That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any
offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
Illustrations: (a) Z  is  thrown  from  his  horse,  and  is
insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires to be trepanned.  A, not
intending Z’s death, but in good faith, for Z’s benefit, performs the
trepan before Z recovers his power of judging for himself.  A has
committed no offence.
(b) Z is carried off a by a tiger.  A fires at the tiger knowing it to be
likely that the shot may kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, and in good
faith intending Z’s benefit.  A’s ball gives Z a mortal wound.  A has
committed no offence.
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to
prove fatal unless an operation be immediately performed.  There is
no time to apply to the child’s guardian.  A performs the operation in
spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the child’s
benefit.  A has committed no offence.
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child.  People below
hold out a blanket.  A drops the child from the housetop, knowing it
to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill the
28

child, and intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit.  Here, even if
the child is killed by the fall, A has committed no offence.
Explanation: Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the
meaning of sections 88, 89 and 92.”
(C) Section 81 of the Code:
Section 81 of the Code is also relevant.  It deals with ‘Act likely to
cause harm, but done without criminal intent and to prevent other harm.  It
reads as follows:
“81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and
to prevent other harm.
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the
knowledge that it is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any
criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of
preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.
Explanation: It is a question of fact in such a case whether the
harm  to  be  prevented  or  avoided  was  of  such  a  nature  and  so
imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the
knowledge that it was likely to cause harm.
Illustrations: (a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and
without any fault or negligence on his part, finds himself in such a
position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run
down a boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board, unless he
changes the course of the vessel, and that, by changing his course, he
must incur risk of running down a boat C with only two passengers
29

on board, which he may possibly clear.  Here, if A alters his course
without any without any intention to run down the boat C and in good
faith for the purpose of avoiding the danger to the passengers in he
board B, he is not guilty of an offence, though he may run down the
boat C by doing an act with he knew was likely to cause that effect, if
it be found as a matter of fact that the danger which he intended to
avoid was such as to excuse him in incurring the risk of running down
the boat C.
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the
conflagration from spreading.  He does this with the intention in good
faith of saving human life or property.  Here, if it be found that the
harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to
excuse A’s act, A is not guilty of the offence.”
We  shall  come  back  to  these  provisions,  in  the  context  of  their
applicability  to  ‘stoppage  of  life  support  system’, in  Chapter  VII,  after
discussing the comparative law in the other chapters.
30

Chapter III
Principles of law laid down by the House of Lords in Airedale NHS Trust v.
Bland:
We have already referred in Chapter II to the principles laid down by
the  House  of Lords  in  Airedale case  (1993)(1)All  ER 821  (HL) which
makes a distinction between withdrawal of life support on the one hand, and
Euthanasia and Assisted suicide on the other.  That distinction has been
accepted by our Supreme Court in Gian Kaur’s case 1996(2) SCC 648.
In this Chapter, we shall refer in detail to the facts in Airedale and to
the views expressed by the Law Lords, and in particular by Lord Keith,
Lord Goff of Chieveley and Lord Browne Wilkinson.   We shall than refer
to large number of cases decided in UK on the basis of the principles laid
down in Airedale.
We  shall  start  with  the  leading  decision  Airedale  NHS  Trust vs.
Bland.
Airedale NHS Trust vs. Bland: 1993(1) All ER 821:  (This was an appeal by
the Official Solicitor, representing Mr. Bland).  
Mr. Anthony Bland met with an accident and for three years, he was
in  a  condition  known  as  ‘persistent  vegetative  state’  (PVS).   The  said
condition was the result of destruction of the cerebral cortex on account of
prolonged deprivation of oxygen and the cortex had resolved into a watery
31

mass.  The cortex is that part of the brain which is the seat of cognitive
function and sensory capacity. The patient cannot see, hear or feel anything.
He cannot communicate in any way.  Consciousness has departed for ever.
But the brain-stem, which controls the reflective functions of the body, in
particular the heart beat, breathing and digestion, continues to operate.
In the eyes of the medical world and of the law, a person is not
clinically dead so long as the brain-stem retains its function.
In order to maintain Mr. Bland in his present condition, feeding and
hydration are achieved  by artificial means of a nasogastric tube while the
excretory functions are regulated by a catheter and other artificial means.
The Catheter is used from time to time to give rise to infusions which have
to be dealt with by appropriate medical treatment.
As for Bland, according to eminent medical opinion, there was no
prospect whatsoever that he would ever make a recovery from his present
condition but there was every likelihood that he would maintain the present
state of existence for many years to come provided the artificial means of
medical care is continued.
The doctors and the parents of Bland felt, after three years, that no
useful purpose would be served by continuing the artificial medical care and
that it would be appropriate to stop these measures aimed at prolonging his
existence.
32

Since there were doubts whether withdrawal of life support measures
could amount to a criminal offence, the Hospital Authority (the appellant)
moved the High Court for a declaration designed to resolve these doubts.
The Family Division of the High Court granted the declarations sought for
on  19.11.92.  That  judgment was affirmed by the Court of Appeal  (Sir
Thomas Bingham M.R., Butler-Sloss and Hoffman L.JJ) on 9.12.1992.  The
declarations granted by the Court were as follows:
“that despite the inability of the defendant to consent thereto, the
plaintiff and the responsible attending physicians:
(1) may  lawfully  discontinue  all  life-sustaining  treatment  and
medical supportive measures designed to keep the defendant
alive in his existing persistent vegetative state including the
termination of ventilation, nutrition and hydration by artificial
means; and
(2) may  lawfully  discontinue  and  thereafter  need  not  furnish
medical treatment to the defendant except for the sole purpose
of enabling him to end his  life  and die peacefully with the
greatest dignity and the least of pain suffering and distress.”
On further appeal to the House of Lords, Lord Keith of Kinkel observed that
the object of medical treatment and care is, after all, to benefit the patient.
But it is unlawful, both under the law of torts and criminal law of battery, to
administer medical treatment to an adult, who is conscious and of sound
mind, without his consent (In  re F. Mental Patient: Sterlisation) 1990 (2)
AC  1.   Such  a  person  is  completely  at  liberty  to  decline  to  undergo
33

treatment, even if the result of his doing will be that he will die.  This
extends  to  the  situation  where  the  person,  in  anticipation  of  his  death
through one cause or another and entering into a condition such as P.V.S.,
gives clear instructions that in such event, he is not to be given medical
care, including artificial feeding, designed to keep him alive.  The second
point is that it very commonly occurs that a person due to accident or some
other cause, becomes unconscious and is thus not able to give or withhold
consent  to  medical  treatment.   In  that  situation,  it  is  lawful,  under  the
principle of necessity, for medical men to apply such treatment as in their
informed opinion is in the “best interests” of the unconscious patient.  In In
re J (A  Minor) (Wardship: Medical Treatment)(1991) Fam. 33, the Court of
Appeal held it to be lawful to withhold life saving treatment from a very
young child in circumstances where the child’s life, if saved, would be one
irredeemably  racked  by pain  and  agony.  In  the case  of a permanently
insensate  being,  who  if  continuing  to  live  would  never  experience  the
slightest  actual  discomfort,  it  is  difficult,  if  not  possible,  to  make  any
relevant comparison between continued existence and the absence of it.  It
is,  however,  perhaps  permissible  to  say  that  to  an  individual  with  no
cognitive capacity whatever, and no prospect of ever recovering any such
capacity in this world, it would be a matter of complete indifference whether
he lives or not.  Lord Keith observed:
“a medical practitioner is under  no duty to continue to treat such a
patient  where  a  large  body  of  informed  and  responsible  medical
opinion is to the effect that no benefit at all would be conferred by
continuance.   Existence  in  a  vegetative  state  with  no  prospect  of
recovery is by that opinion regarded as not being a benefit, and that, if
34

not unarguably correct, at least forms a proper basis for the decision
to  discontinue  treatment  and  care:  (Bolam vs.  Freirn  Hospital
Management Committee 1957(1) WLR 582).
After stating that the principle of sanctity of life is important for the State,
Lord Keith said it was not absolute.  He said:
“It  (the  principle  of  sanctity  of  life)  does  not compel  a  medical
practitioner  on pain of terminal sanction to treat a patient, who will
die, if he does not, contrary to the express wishes of the patient.  It
does not authorize forcible feeding of prisoners on hunger strike.  It
does  not compel the temporary keeping  alive of patients  who are
terminally ill where to do so would merely prolong their suffering.
On the other hand, it forbids the taking of active measures to cut short
the life of a terminally-ill patient.  In my opinion, it does no violence
to the principle  to hold that  it is lawful to cease to give medical
treatment and care to a P.V.S. patient who has been in that state for
over  three  years,  considering  that  to  do  so  involves  invasive
manipulations of the patient’s body to which he has not consented
and which confers no benefit upon him.”
Lord Keith observed that the law in other countries, and in particular in
USA was the same that such withdrawal is not treated as a criminal offence.
He said:
“it  is  of  some  comfort  to  observe  that  in  other  common-law
jurisdictions, particularly in the United States where there are many
35

cases on the subject, the Courts have, with near unanimity, concluded
that  it  is  not  unlawful  to  discontinue medical  treatment  and  care,
including artificial feeding of P.V.S. patients and others in similar
conditions”.
He also pointed out that, in order to protect the interests of patients, doctors
and patients families and reassurance to the public, it is permissible to seek
a  declaration  from  the  Family  Division  and  the  Court  of  Appeal  for
permission for withdrawal of life support. This is necessary till a body of
experience and practice is built up.
Lord Goff of Chievely quoted from Lord Bingham’s judgment in the
Court of Appeal and the following part of that extract from Lord Bingham’s
Judgment is important:
“…in law, Anthony is still alive.  It is true that his condition is such
that it can be described as a living death; but he is nevertheless still
alive.  This is because, as a result of development in modern medicine
and technology, doctors no longer associate death exclusively with
breathing and heart beat, and it has come to be accepted that death
occurs  when  the  brain, and  in  particular  the  brain  stem has  been
destroyed.  (See Prof. Ian Kennedy’s paper entitled “Switching off
life Support Medicines: The Legal Implications”, reprinted in Treat
Me Right, Essays in Medical Law and Ethics (1988), especially at pp
351-352) ….. he is still alive…as a matter of law.
36

…. We are concerned with circumstances in which it may be
lawful to withdraw from a patient medical treatment or care by means
of which his life must be prolonged by such treatment or care, if
available, regardless of the circumstances.
First, it is established that the principle of self determination requires
that respect must be given to the wishes of the patient, so that if an
adult  patient  of  sound  mind  refuses,  however  unreasonably,  to
consent to treatment or care by which his life would or might be
prolonged, the doctors responsible for his care must give effect to his
wishes, even though they do not consider it to be in his best interests
of the patient to do so (see  Schloendorff vs.  Society of New York
Hospital (1914) 211 NY 125 per Cardozo J; S vs. McC (Orse S.) and
M (D.S. Intervenur); W vs. W (1972) AC24(43) per Lord Reid; and
Sidaway vs. Board of Governors of the Bethlem Royal Hospital and
Maudsley Hospital (1985) A.C 871(882) per Lord Scarman.  To this
extent,  the  principle  of  sanctity  of  human  life must  yield  to  the
principle  of  self-determination  (see  ante,  pp  351  H-352A,  per
Hoffman L.J) and, for present purposes perhaps more important, the
doctor’s duty to act in the best interests of his patient must likewise
be qualified. On this basis, it has been held that a patient of sound
mind may, if properly informed, require that life support should be
discontinued, See  Nancy B   vs.  Hotel-Dieu de Quebec: (1992) 86
D.L.R. (4th) 385.  Moreover, the same principle applies where the
patient’s refusal to give consent has been expressed at an earlier date,
before  he  becomes  unconscious  or  otherwise  incapable  of
communicating it; though in such circumstances, especial care may
37

be necessary to ensure that the prior refusal of consent is still properly
to  be  referred  as  applicable  in  the  circumstances  which  have
subsequently occurred: See, e.g. In re T (Adult: Refusal of Treatment)
1992(3) W.L.R. 782.  I wish to add that, in cases of this kind, there is
no question of the patient having committed suicide, nor therefore of
the doctor having aided or abetted him in doing so.  It is simply that
the patient has, as he is entitled to do, declined to consent to treatment
which might or would have the effect of prolonging his life, and the
doctor  has,  in  accordance  with  his  duty, complied  with  his  duty,
complied with his patient’s wishes.”  (emphasis supplied)
Lord Goff went on to further quote the following words of Lord Bingham
on informed consent:
“But, in many cases, not only may the patient be in no condition to be
able to say whether or not he consents to the relevant treatment or
care, but also he may have given no prior indication of his wishes
with regard to it.  In the case of a child, who is a ward of Court, the
Court itself will decide whether medical treatment should be provided
in the child’s best interests, taking into account medical opinion. But
the Court cannot give its consent on behalf of an adult patient who is
incapable of himself deciding whether or not to consent to treatment.
I am of the opinion that there is nevertheless no absolute obligation
upon the  doctor who has the patient in his care  to prolong his life,
regardless of circumstances.  Indeed, it would be most startling, and
could lead to the most adverse and cruel effects upon a patient, if any
such absolute rule were held to exist. It is scarcely consistent with
38

primacy given to the principle of self-determination in those cases in
which the patient of sound mind has declined to give his consent, that
the law should provide no means of enabling treatment to be withheld
in appropriate circumstances where the patient is in no condition to
indicate, if that was his wish, that he did not consent to it. The point
was  put  forcibly  in  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
Massachusetts  in  Superintendent  of  Belchertown  State  School vs.
Saikewicz (1977) 370 N.E. 2d 417 (428) as follows:
“To  presume  that  the  incompetent  person  must  always  be
subjected  to  what  may rational  and  intelligent  persons  may
achieve is to downgrade the status of the incompetent person
by placing  a lesser  value  on  his  intrinsic  human worth  and
vitality.”
Lord Goff continued:
“I must, however, stress, at this point, that the law draws a distinction
between cases in which a doctor decides not to provide, or to continue
to provide, for his patient treatment or care which could or might
prolong  his  life  and  those  in  which  he  decides,  for  example  by
administering a lethal drug,  actively to bring the patient’s life to an
end.  As I have already indicated, the former may be  lawful, either
because  the  doctor  is  giving  effect  to  his  patent’s  wishes  by
withholding the treatment or care, or even in circumstances in which
(on principles  which  I shall  describe), the patient  is  incapacitated
from stating whether or not he gives his consent. But it is not lawful
for a doctor to administer a drug to his patient to bring about his
39

death, even though that course is prompted by a humanitarian desire
to end his suffering, however great that suffering may be.  See Reg
vs. Cox (unreported) (18th Sept. 1992)…. Euthanasia is not lawful at
common law; but that result could, I believe, only be achieved by
legislation….”
Lord Goff then quotes the crucial reasoning of Lord Bingham as to
why stoppage of life support is not an offence.  Bingham M. R. stated:
“Why is it that a doctor who gives his patient a lethal injection which
kills him commits an unlawful act and indeed is guilty of murder,
whereas  a  doctor  who,  by  discontinuing life-support,  allows  his
patient to die, may not act unlawfully – and will not do so, if he
commits no breach of duty to his patient?  Prof. Glanville Williams
has suggested (See his Textbook of Criminal Law, 2nd Ed (1983) p
282) that the reason is that what the doctor does when he switches off
a life support machine, “is in substance not an act but an omission to
struggle”, and that “the omission is not a breach of duty by the doctor,
because he is not obliged to continue in a hopeless case.”
Significantly, Lord Goff further explains what happens in a withdrawal of
life support.  He says:
“I agree that the doctor’s conduct in discontinuing life support can
properly be categorized as an omission.  It is true that it may be
difficult to describe what the doctor actually does as an omission, for
example, where he takes some positive step to bring the life support
40

to an end.  But discontinuation of life support is, for present purposes,
no different from not initiating life support, in the first place.  In each
case, the doctor is allowing his patient to die in the sense that he is
desisting from taking a step which might, in certain circumstances,
prevent  his  patient  from  dying  as  a  result  of  his  pre-existing
condition; but as a matter of general principle,  an omission such as
this will not be unlawful unless it constitutes a breach of duty to the
patient.  I also agree that the doctor’s conduct is to be differentiated
from that of, for example, an interloper who maliciously switches off
a  life  support  machine…  Accordingly,  whereas  the  doctor  in
discontinuing life support, is simply allowing his patient to die of his
pre-existing condition, the interloper is actively intervening to stop
the doctor from prolonging the patient’s life, and such conduct cannot
possibly be categorised  as an omission.
…..discontinuance of life support can be differentiated from
ending a patient’s life by a lethal injection. ..… the reason for that
difference is that, whereas the law considers that discontinuance of
life-support may be consistent with the doctor’s duty to care for his
patient, it does not, for reasons of policy, consider that it forms part of
his duty to give his patient a lethal injection to put him out of his
agony.”
After referring to  In re F (Mental Patient: Sterilisation) 1990(2) AC 1, in
which it was held that a doctor may, when treating an unconscious patient,
treat such a patient if he acts in his “best interests” – Lord Goff said, the
same principle applies when a doctor decides whether or not to stop the life
41

support in the best interests of the patient.  A doctor, for example, is not, as
held  by  Thomas  J  in  Auckland  Area  Health  Authority vs.  AG:1993(1)
NZLR 235 bound to perform a surgery on a cancer patient if it is likely to
result  in  shortening  the  patient’s  life  further.   He  may  then  lawfully
administer  palliatives  to  reduce  the  pain  and  suffering.   He  said  that,
therefore,
“when the doctor’s treatment of his patient is lawful, the patient’s
death will be regarded in law as exclusively caused by the injury or
disease to which his condition is attributed.”
Life  support  systems are new innovations  in  Medical  technology.  Life
support  methods  can  be  initially  adopted,  “But  if  he  neither  recovers
sufficiently to be taken off it nor dies, the question will ultimately arise
whether  he should  be  kept  on it indefinitely.”  After quoting  Prof.  Ian
Kennedy and  from Thomas J of New Zealand, Lord  Goff said  that  the
question is not whether the doctor should take a course which will kill the
patient, the question is “whether in the best interests of the patient that his
life  should  be  prolonged  by  the  continuance  of  this  form  of  medical
treatment or care.  In the present  case  the continuance  is,  according  to
doctor, of no utility at all as it has no therapeutic purpose of any kind”.
Rejecting the American Court’s view that a surrogate or substitute
could be allowed to take a decision on behalf of an incompetent patient, (see
In re Quinian : (1976) 355 A. 2d. 647 and Superintendent of Belchertown
State School vs. Saikewicz 370 N.E. 2d 417, Lord Goff said:
42

“…. I do not consider that any such test forms part of English law in
relation to incompetent adults, on whose behalf nobody has power to
give consent to medical treatment.  Certainly, in In re F 1990(2) AC
1, your Lordship’s House adopted a straightforward test based on the
best interests of the patient;….”
Lord Goff finally approved Lord Bingham MR’s view that Courts could
grant declarations for stoppage of life support, in the interests of patients,
doctors  and  patients’ families  and  in the context  of re-assurance to the
public.
Lord Lowry agreed with Lord Goff.
Lord Browne-Wilkinson’s opinion is equally important.  We shall only refer
to certain important aspects.
Lord Browne-Wilkinson stated that till recently, death was beyond
human  control  but  recent  developments  in  medical  science  have
fundamentally  affected  those  previous  uncertainties.   “In  medicine,  the
cessation of breathing of heartbeat is no longer death.   By the use of a
ventilator, lungs which in the unaided course of nature would have stopped
breathing,  can  be  made  to  breathe,  thereby  sustaining  heartbeat………
This has led medical profession to  redefine death in terms of brain-stem
death.”   In medical terms, an unconscious patient kept alive by use of a
ventilator  is  called  ‘a  ventilated  corpse’.    He also  poses  the  question,
arising out of modern technology:
43

“Given that there are limited resources available for medical care, is it
right to devote money to sustaining the lives of those who are, and
always will be, unaware of their own existence rather than to treating
those who, in a real sense, can be benefited e.g. those deprived of
dialysis for want of resources.”
New problems have also arisen in computing damages in accident
cases  on  the  basis  whether  the  person  is  alive  or  dead.    Question  of
succession depends upon the timing of death.
Omission  to  do  certain  thing  may  constitute  offence  “where  the
accused was under a duty to the deceased to do the act which he omitted to
do”.   Counsel Mr. Munby contended that ‘removal of the nasogastric tube
necessary to provide artificial feeding and the discontinuance of the existing
regime of artificial feeding’, constitute ‘positive acts of commission’.   Lord
Browne Wilkinson said:  (p 881)
“I do not accept this.   Apart from the act of removing the nasogastric
tube, the mere  failure to continue to do what you have previously
done, is not, in any ordinary sense, to do anything positive; on the
contrary,  it  is  by  definition  an  omission  to  do  what  you  have
previously done.
The  positive  act  of  removing  the  nasogastric tube  presents  more
difficulty.   It is undoubtedly a positive act, similar to switching off a
ventilator in the case of a patient whose life is being sustained by
artificial ventilation.   But, in my judgment, in neither case should the
act be classified as positive, since to do so would be to introduce
44

intolerably fine distinctions.    If, instead of removing the nasogastric
tube, it was left in place but no further nutrients were provided for the
tube to convey to the patient’s stomach, that would not be an act of
commission.   Again, as has been pointed out (Skegg, ‘Law, Ethics
and Medicine’ (1984) p. 169 et seq), if the switching off a ventilator
were to be classified as a positive act, exactly the same result can be
achieved by installing a time-clock which requires to be re-set every
12 hours; the failure to reset the machine could not be classified as a
positive act.”
His lordship concluded:
“In my judgment, essentially what is being done is to omit to feed or
to ventilate; the removal of the nasogastric tube or the switching off
of a ventilator are merely incidents of that omission.   (See Glanville
Williams, Textbook of Criminal Law, p. 282; Skegg, p. 169 et seq)”. 
Any treatment given by a doctor to a patient which is invasive (i.e.
involves  any  interference  with  the  physical  integrity  of  the  patient)  is
unlawful unless done with the consent of the patient; it constitutes the crime
of battery and the tort of trespass to the person.    In the case of a charge of
murder by omission to do an act and the act of omission could only be done
with the consent of patient, refusal by the patient, will be a valid defence for
a doctor.
45

“The doctor cannot owe to the patient any duty to maintain his life
where that life can only be sustained by intrusive medical care to
which the patient will not consent.”
In the case of minors, the Court,  exercising  the Crown’s right  as
parens patriae under the wardship jurisdiction, can consent on the child’s
behalf.    Until  1960  (in  UK),  the  Court  had  the  same  parens patriae
jurisdiction over adults who were mentally incompetent.   But by the joint
effect of the Mental Health Act, 1959 and the revocation of the warrant
under the Sign Manual under which the jurisdiction of the Crown as parens
patriae over those of unsound mind was conferred on the Courts, the Courts
ceased to have any parens patriae jurisdiction over the person of a mentally
incompetent adult, being left only with the statutory jurisdiction over his
property (as opposed to his person) conferred by the Act of 1954.    
Lord Browne Wilkinson observed:
“Faced with this problem, the House of Lords in In re F. (1990) (2)
A.C. page 1, developed and laid down a principle, based on concepts
of necessity, under which a doctor can lawfully treat a patient who
cannot consent to such treatment if it is in the interests of the patient
to receive such treatment.  In my view, the correct answer to the
present case depends on the extent of the right to continue lawfully to
invade the bodily integrity of Anthony Bland without his consent.   If,
in the circumstances, they have no right to continue artificial feeding,
they cannot be in breach of any duty, by ceasing to provide such
feeding.”
46

While accepting the procedure of obtaining a declaration from Court,
he says:
“(In re F), both Lord Brandon of Oakbrook (at p.64) and Lord Goff
(at  p.75,  77)  make  it  clear  that  the  right  to  administer  invasive
medical care is wholly dependent upon such care being  in the best
interests of  the  patient.    Moreover,  a  doctor’s  decision  whether
invasive care is in the best interests of the patient falls to the assessed
by  reference  to  the  test  laid  down  in  Bolam v.  Frienn  Hospital
Management Committee 1957 (1) WLR 582, viz., is the decision in
accordance with a practice accepted at the time by a responsible body
of medical opinion.”
On the basis of that test, Lord Browne-Wilkinson concludes that “if
there comes a stage where the responsible doctor comes to the reasonable
conclusion (which accords with the views of a responsible body of medical
opinion), that further continuance of an intrusive life support system is not
in the “best interests” of the patient, he can no longer lawfully continue that
life support system; to do so would constitute the crime of battery and the
tort of trespass to the person.   Therefore, he cannot be in breach of any duty
to maintain the patient’s life.   Therefore, he is not guilty of murder by
omission.”
The above judgment of the House of Lords in Airedale lays down a
crucial principle of law when it says that withholding or withdrawal of life
support to a dying patient merely amounts to allowing the patient to die a
47

natural  death  and  that  where  death  in  the  normal  course  is  certain,
withholding or withdrawal of life support is not an offence.
If  a  patient  capable  of  giving  informed  consent  refuses  to  give
consent  or  has,  in  advance,  refused  such  consent,  the  doctor  cannot
administer life support systems to continue his life even if the doctor thinks
that it is in the patient’s interest to administer such system.  The patient’s
right of self-determination is absolute.  But the duty of a doctor to save life
of a patient is not absolute.  He can desist from prolonging life by artificial
means if it is in the best interests of the patient.  Such an omission is not an
offence.  The doctor or the hospital may seek a declaration from the Court
that such withholding, which is proposed, will be lawful.
In this Chapter, we have set out the broad principles laid down by the
House of Lords in  Airedale.   In the next Chapter, we shall refer to other
cases decided in UK before and after Airedale.
48

Chapter IV
Other cases decided in UK and Ireland before and after Airedale
Airedale (1993) decided by the House of Lords, has been followed in
a  number  of  cases  in  UK  and  it  was  pointed  out  that  in  the  case  of
incompetent  patients,  if  doctors  act  on  the  basis  of  informed  medical
opinion,  and  withdraw  the  artificial  life-support  systems  if  it  is  in  the
patient’s best interests, then the said action cannot be characterized as an
offence under criminal law.   Even before  Airedale, there are important
judgments which got crystallized in Airedale.
The question arises as to what is meant by the words ‘best interests of
the patient’.  This  question is  interlinked  with another  important  aspect
dealing with the consent or wishes of the patient or in case the patient is a
minor, on the wishes of the parents, or where the patient is in permanent
vegetative  state,  as  to  who  should  decide  about  this.  As  everybody,
including the doctors and the Court have to give weight to the wishes of the
patient or his parents, question arises whether the thinking of the patient or
the parents is based upon a rational analysis of the problem or is based on
irrelevant matters.  Therefore, it has been held that the consent or refusal of
the patient or parents is entitled to weight, only where it is an informed one,
in the sense that the decision has been taken after full knowledge of the
choices or otherwise of life support systems prolonging the life without pain
or suffering.
49

In as much as, from the point of view of the State, life is sacrosanct
and every effort should be made to continue life in a patient, the question
arises when a patient’s parents’ desire to stop life-support system, can be
accepted?  In case there is divergence of opinion between the opinions of
the patient/parents on the one hand and that of the doctors on the other,
whether it will always be necessary for any of these or all of them to obtain
the opinion of the Court of Law?  These aspects have come up for decision
in UK in several cases.
We shall now refer to other decisions of UK on this subject to show
the gradual development of the law in UK on these important issues.
(1) Re  B  (a  minor)(wardship:  medical  treatment):  1981(1)WLR  1421
(Templeman  &  Dunn  LJJ).:  A  baby  girl  was  suffering  from a  Down’s
Syndrome since her birth and she also had intestinal blockade which was
amenable to surgery.  If surgery was not done, she would die in a few days.
With surgery, she could live upto 20 to 30 years. The parents objected to
permission for surgery as they felt that the child would remain mentally and
physically handicapped, if she survived.  The local authority made her a
ward of Court and applied to the Court to direct the surgery to be carried on.
Ewbank J held that the parents’ view should be respected and that it was not
in the best interests of the child to authorize the surgery.
But the Court of Appeal differed on the ground that, if operated, the
child  would  live  the  normal  life  span  of  a  ‘mongoloid  child’  with  the
handicaps/defects/life  of  such  a  child  and  in  as  much  as  it  was  not
established that a life of that description ought to be extinguished.
50

The Court of Appeal held that as the child had been made a ward of
the Court, the Court would decide what was in the “best interests” of the
child and the decision did not lie with the parents or doctors, though the
views of the parents and doctors will be kept in mind.  The Trial Court erred
in going only by the wishes of the parents.  The Court directed the surgery
to be conducted.
2. Re J (a minor) (Wardship: medical treatment):  1990(3) All ER 930.
(Lord Donaldson of Lymington MR, Balcombe & Taylor L JJ)
This was again a case of a ward of Court.   One J, born prematurely,
who  suffered  from  severe  brain  damage  and  the  brain  tissue  was
irreplaceable.  He was epileptic and the medical evidence was that he was
likely to develop spastic quadriplegia, would be blind and deaf and was
unlikely even to be able to speak or develop intellectual faculties.  His life
expectancy  was  uncertain  but  he  was  expected  to  die  before  late
adolescence, although he could survive a few years.
He had been ventilated twice for long periods and treatment was both
painful and hazardous.  Further re-ventilation, doctors felt, would result in
his collapse.  Question before the Court was whether if breathing should
stop, re-ventilation should be done or not?
The trial Judge, in parens patriae jurisdiction, directed treatment but
held that he be not re-ventilated.  The Official Solicitor appealed against
withholding life saving treatment.
51

The  appeal  be  dismissed  in  as  much  as  the  child  suffered  from
physical disabilities so grave that his life would, from his point of view, be
so “intolerable” if he were to continue living, that he would have chosen to
die if he were in a position to make a sound judgment and in such situations,
the Court could direct that “treatment without which death would ensue
from natural causes, need not be given to the ward to prolong his life, even
though he was neither on the point of death nor dying.”  However, the Court
could never permit termination of life by the taking of positive steps.  In
deciding whether to authorize that treatment need not be given, “the Court
had to perform a balancing exercise in assessing the course to be adopted in
the best interests of the child, looked at from his point of view and giving
the fullest possible weight to his desire, if he were in a position to make a
sound judgment, to survive, and taking into account “the pain and suffering
and quality of life” which he would experience if life was prolonged and the
pain and suffering involved in the proposed treatment.  Having regard to the
invasive  and  hazardous  nature  of  the  re-ventilation,  the  risk  of  further
deterioration  if  J  was  subjected  to  it  and  the  extremely  unfavourable
progress  with  or  without  the  treatment,  it  was  in  J’s  best  interests that
authority for re-ventilation be withheld.
Donaldson MR stated that the child who was a ward or could be
treated medically in exactly the same way as one who is not medically fit,
the only difference being that the doctors will be looking to the Court rather
than to the parents for necessary consent.  In allocating limited resources to
particular patients, the fact that a child is or is not a ward of Court, is
irrelevant.   Balcombe  LJ  stated  that  the  Court  while  exercising  parens
52

patriae jurisdiction of the sovereign, was not expected to adopt any higher
or different standard than that which, viewed objectively, a reasonable and
responsible parent would have taken.  
Taylor LJ observed that in deciding against providing treatment, the
Court must be satisfied to a high degree of probability that its decision is in
the child’s best interests; certainty of proof was not required.
Lord Donaldson observed that in most cases, this (stopping treatment)
would be a matter to be discussed and decided by doctors in consultation
with parents.  That did not mean that parents could tell the doctors what to
do, but they would have the right to withhold consent to treatment, subject
to the right of the doctors to apply to the Court to make the child a ward of
Court and to seek guidance from Court.  (In the present case, there was
difference  of  opinion  between  doctors  and  parents  as  to  whether  that
treatment should be withheld).
He also held that in principle, neither the Court nor the parents could
insist upon doctors that a particular treatment which the doctor found to be
not suitable, should be given to the patient. The inevitable and desired result
is that choice of treatment is in some measure a joint decision of the doctor,
and the Court or parents.
He also said that, ‘in an imperfect world,  resources will always be
limited and  on  occasion,  agonizing  choices  will  have  to  be  made  in
allocating  those  resources  to  particular  patient.  He  referred  to  Re  C (a
minor) (wardship: medical treatment) 1989(2) All ER 702 where a child was
53

dying and no amount of medical skill or care could do more than a brief
postponement of the moment of death.  
Lord Donaldson referred to the decision of the Supreme Court of
British Columbia in  Re Superintendent of Family and Child Science and
Dawson (1983) 145 DLR (3d) 610).  In that case the child was severely
brain damaged and the question was whether the child could be subjected to
a ‘simple’ kind of surgical treatment which would ensure the continuation
of his life or whether, when the parents did not consider it to be in the
child’s best interests as it would be a life of suffering, such surgery should
not  be  done  so  that  the  child  could  die  with  dignity.   He  quoted  the
judgment of McKenzie J of the Supreme Court of British Columbia to the
following effect:
“I do not think that it lies within the prerogatives of any parent or of
this Court to look down upon a disadvantaged person and judge the
quality of that person’s life to be so low as not to be deserving of
continuance.   The  matter  was  put  in  an  American  decision  –  Re
Weberlist (1974) 360 NYS (2d) 783 (at 787) where the learned Asch
J said: 
“There is a strident cry in America to terminate the lives of
other people  –  deemed  physically  or  mentally  defective….
Assuredly, one  test  of a civilization  is  its  concern  with  the
survival  of  the  ‘unfittest’,  a  reversal  of  Darwin’s
formulation….  In this case, the Court must decide what its
ward would choose, if he were in a position to make sound
judgment.”  
54

This last sentence puts it right.  It is not appropriate for an external decision-
maker to apply his standards of what constitutes a liveable life and exercise
the right to impose death if that standard is not met in his estimation.  The
decision can only be made in the context of the disabled person viewing the
worthwhileness or otherwise of his life in its own context as a disabled
person – and in that context, he would not compare his life with that of a
person enjoying normal advantages.  He would know nothing of a normal
person’s life, having never experienced it.”
Lord Donaldson clarified that what was in issue was not a right to
impose death but a right to choose a course of action which would fail to
avert death.  The choice was that of the patient, if of full age and capacity,
the choice was that of the parents or Court if, by reason of his age, the child
would not be able to make the choice and it was a choice which must be
made  solely  on  behalf  of  the  child and  in  what  the  Court  or  parents
conscientiously  believe  to  be  “in  his  best  interests”.  He  held  that  the
Canadian Judgment should not be understood as advocating an  absolutist
approach.  “In real life, there are presumptions, strong presumptions and
almost overwhelming presumptions, but there are few, if any, absolutes”.
He distinguished Re B (1981)(1) WLR 142) as a case where having
regard to the suffering of the child from his birth with Downs’s Syndrome
and was a mongol, the parents, with great sorrow, came to the conclusion
that it was not in the best interests of the child to continue his life.  The
parents did not view it from the point of view of the child, if capable of
taking a decision.  Hence, the burden shifted to the Court.  Further in that
55

case, there were differences in the opinions of the surgeons.  The Court gave
its consent for surgery as it considered it was not a case ‘demonstrably so
awful’ or ‘intolerable’.  Lord Donaldson continued:
“We know that the instinct and desire for survival is very strong.  We
all believe in and assert the sanctity of human life.  As explained, this
formulation  takes  account  of this  and  also  underlines  the need  to
avoid looking at the problem from the point of view of the decider but
instead,  requires  him to look  at it  from the point  of view  of the
patient.  This gives effect, as it should, to the fact that even very
severely handicapped people find a quality of life rewarding which to
the unhandicapped may seem manifestly intolerable.  People have an
amazing adaptability.   But in the end, there will be cases in which the
answer must be that it is not in the interests of the child to subject it to
treatment  which  will  cause  increased  suffering  and  produce  no
consummate benefit, giving the fullest possible weight to the child’s
and mankind’s desire to survive”.
Here, as regards J, the doctors were unanimous that any invasive procedure,
such as introduction of a naso-gastric tube drips which have to be given and
that constant blood sampling, would cause the child distress.     Hence,
discontinuance of life-support was held valid.
(3) Re C (a minor) (wardship: medical treatment): 1989(2) All ER 782
(19/20 April, 1989) (CA).
(Lord Donaldson of Lymington MR, Balcombe, Nicholls JJ).  
56

In this case a baby was made a ward of Court shortly after her birth by the
local authority as it was felt that her parents would have great difficulty in
looking  after  her.   The  child  was  seriously  brain  damaged,  severely
handicapped  and  terminally  ill.   The  medical  opinion  was  that  only
palliative care could be given to relieve pain and suffering rather than to
achieve prolongation of life.  The trial Court, which was approached by the
local authority, heard the Official Solicitor as the child’s guardian-ad-litem,
and granted leave “to treat the ward in such a way that she ended her life
peacefully with least pain, suffering and distress and that the hospital was
not required to treat any serious infection which the baby contracted nor
need  it  set  up  any  intravenous  feeding  system  for  her.”   The  official
Solicitor appealed.
The Court of Appeal affirmed it and held that where the ward of
Court was terminally ill, the Court would authorize treatment which would
relieve the ward’s suffering during the remainder of his or her life  and
would accept the opinion of the doctors that the aim was only to relieve
suffering rather than achieve a short prolongation of life. The Court could
not, however, give directives as to how the child could be treated, hence the
directions of the trial Judge not to treat for serious infections or intravenous
feeding were set aside.
Lord  Donaldson  referred  to  B (a  minor)  (Wardship  :  medical
treatment)  Re:  (1981)(1)  WLR  1421  (CA);  B  (a  minor)  (Wardship  :
sterilization) Re: 1987 (2) All ER (HL) = 1988 A.C. 199; Re D (a minor)
(Wardship: Sterilisation) Re 1976(1) All ER 326.
57

In Re D (1976) above mentioned, Heilborn J had stated that “once a
child was a ward of Court, no important step in the life of that child, can be
taken without the consent of the Court.”
Lord Donaldson referred to Re B (1981) (1) WLR 1421 (CA) above and to
the view expressed therein that the ‘best interests’ of the child are alone
relevant rather than just going by the parents’ views.  He said that in Re B
(1987) (HC), it was also said that the paramount consideration was the well-
being, welfare and interests of the ward.
We  next  come  to  the  separate  Judgment  of  Balcombe  LJ.   He
distinguished the judgment of the Canadian Court in Re SD 1983(3) WWR
618 decided by McKenzie J.  In that case a seven year old boy had severe
brain damage caused by meningitis.  The question was whether an operation
to revise a ‘shunt’ (a plastic tube which chains excess cerebrospinal fluid
away from the brain) which had become blocked, should be performed.  The
boy’s parents opposed on the ground that he should be allowed to die with
dignity rather than to continue to endure a life of suffering.  The evidence
there was that, without a shunt revision, the boy would not necessarily die
but might live for months or years.  McKenzie J said (629) that was
“not a ‘right to die’ situation where the Courts are concerned with
people who are terminally ill from incurable conditions.  Rather, it is
a question whether S, has the right to receive appropriate medical and
surgical care of a relatively simple kind which will assure him the
continuation of his life, such as it is.”
58

Balcombe LJ made another significant remark: 
“Courts in the United States of America have also been faced with
similar cases and the problem has been the subject of discussion at
legal conferences.  Nevertheless, neither in this country nor, so far as
I  know,  elsewhere  has  the  legislature  attempted  to  lay  down  the
guidelines for the Courts or others faced with a problem of the type
that arises in this case”.
In this case, there is also significant remark which came from Lord
Donaldson was that in these type of cases, the name of the patient as well as
opinions of professors etc., should be kept confidential and not referred to in
the judgment of the Court.  He stated:
“What  is  required  in  such  cases  is  that  the  Judge  should  give
judgment in open Court, taking all appropriate measures to preserve
the personal privacy of those concerned….   Thus, in this judgment, I
have quoted extensively from the Professor’s advice without, I hope,
giving any clue as to his identity or that of C, her parents or the
authority involved.”
(4) Re C (a minor)(Wardship : medical treatment) No.2 (A) 1989(2) All
ER 791
(Lord Donaldson of Lymington  MR, Balcombe and Nicholas L JJ)
(21/26 April 1989)
59

This judgment refers to need to restrict ‘freedom of publication’ and
to  the  harm which  publications  may cause  to  the  ward.   Question  was
whether injunction could be granted against newspapers wishing to identify
and interview those involved in the care and treatment of the ward, and
from publishing details of care and treatment and family background.
The Court heard the application of Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday
made before the Court of Appeal to review its earlier order of 20.4.1989
restraining  any  person  from  making  or  causing  or  permitting  inquiry
directed to ascertain the identity of the patients, patient’s parents, doctors,
hospital and medical advice.
The review was allowed in part.  It was held that since publicity about
the  medical treatment of the ward of the Court could affect the quality of
care given to her, the public interest – that is required in ensuring that the
quality of care she was receiving did not suffer - would require the Court, in
the interests of the ward, to issue an injunction prohibiting identification of
the  ward,  the  parents  or  publication  of  information in  that  regard,
notwithstanding  that  the  ward  may  be  incapable  of  noticing  such
identification or publicity.  Moreover, such an injunction would reinforce
the duty of confidentiality owed by those caring for her.    The injunction
against identifying the parents was justified in order to protect the wardship
jurisdiction since parents might refuse to make a child a ward of Court if
they  thought  that  they  might  be  identified  and  singled  out  for  media
attention.
60

(Of course, while external publication should be stopped, the doctors
and hospital or local authority must know the real name of the patient
or names of parents so that it can have an idea as to the patient in
respect of whom the Court has passed orders – in regard to continuing
or withdrawing life support etc.)
(5) Ward of Court, Re a: (1995) ILRM 401) (Hamilton CJ, O’Flaherty,
Egan,  Blayney,  Denham  JJ)  (Ireland)  (Supreme  Court)  (Appeal
against the order of Lynch J of the High Court.)
The ward born in 1950, suffered irreversible brain damage as a result
of anesthesia during 1972 and for several decades, the ward was invalid, the
mother of the child was appointed in 1994 by the Court to be guardian of
the person and estate of the child and in 1995 she sought directions from the
Court for withdrawal of all artificial nutrition and hydration and to give
necessary directives as to the child’s care.
In this case, the child suffered brain damage of a serious nature, she
was spastic, both arms and hands were contracted, both legs and feet were
extended, her jaws were clenched, for otherwise she would bite inside of her
cheeks and tongue, her back-teeth had been capped to prevent the front
teeth from fully enclosing.  She could not swallow, she could not speak.
She was incontinent.  For 20 years she was fed through nasograstric tube.  It
was painful, and was replaced by gastronomy tube in 1972 which required
administration of general anaesthetic.  The tube became detached  in Dec
1993, and a new tube was inserted under general anaesthesia .  The ward’s
heart and lungs were functioning normally.  She could not speak.  She had a
61

minimal capacity to recognize – those who were attending on her over a
long  period.   She  tracked  people  with  her  eyes  and  reacted  to  noises,
although it was mainly a reflex from the brain stem.
The  High  Court  which  heard  the  case  gave  consent  for  such
withdrawal of nourishment by tube, whether nasogastric or the gastrostomy
tube and decided such termination lawful. It consented to the non-treatment
of infections or other pathological conditions which may effect the ward
(except  palliative  care  to  avoid  pain  and  suffering)  and  declared  such
treatment  lawful;  it  authorized  the  mother  and  family  to  make  such
arrangements as they considered suitable and appropriate for the admission
of  the  ward  to  a  type  of  institution  which  was  not  contrary  to  their
philosophy and ethics and to proceed in accordance with the consensus and
declarations made (It stayed the order for 21days to enable parties to move
the Supreme Court).
In the Supreme Court, the judgment was confirmed.  Hamilton CJ
considered various important aspects of law which were troubling the Irish
Courts in several cases.
It  referred  to  Balcombe  LJ’s  observations  in  In  re  J  (a  minor)
(wardship:  Medical  Treatment) 1990(3)  All  ER  930  (p.  441),  that  in
deciding what is in the best interests of a ward, the Court adopts the same
attitude as a responsible parent would do in the case of his or her own child;
the Court, exercising the duties of the sovereign as  parens patriae, is not
expected to adopt any higher or different standard than that which, viewed
objectively, a reasonable and responsible parent would do.
62

The appellate Court was convinced that the ward was not fully in
Permanent Vegetative State (PVS), as she has minimal cognitive capacity.
However, after 20 years, there was no prospect of her improvement.
The mother and family members supported discontinuance of life-
support.
After  quoting extensively from  Airedale decided  by the House of
Lords,  and  to  the  findings  of  the  High  Court,  Hamilton  CJ  quoted  Sir
Thomas Bingham M.R. in  Airedale that  euthanasia  and  assisted  suicide
were different, as follows:
“It is, however, important to be clear from the outset what the case is,
and is not, about.  It is not about euthanasia, if by that it meant the
taking of a positive action to cause death.  It is not about putting
down  the old and infirm, the mentally defective or the physically
imperfect….  The issue is whether artificial feeding and antibiotic
drugs may lawfully be withheld from an insensate patient with no
hope of recovery when it is known that if that is done, the patient will
shortly, thereafter die.”
He then considered the provisions of the Irish Constitution in Chapter XII
thereof.  Art 40 enumerates “personal rights”, (including the right to life
etc.).  Art 41 enumerates the rights of the ‘Family” and deals with the effect
of grant of permission to withdraw life-support system in relation to these
rights. He stated that the nature of the ‘right to life’ and its importance
63

imposed  a  strong  presumption  in  favour  of  taking  all  steps  capable  of
preserving it, save in exceptional circumstances.  The problem was to define
such circumstances.  He stated:
“As  the  process  of  dying  is  part,  and  an  ultimate,  inevitable
consequence of life, the right to life necessarily implies the right to
have nature taken its course and to die a natural death and, unless the
individual  wishes,  not  to  have  life  artificially  maintained by  the
provision of nourishment by abnormal artificial means, which have
no curative effect and which is intended merely to prolong life.
The right, as so defined, does not include the right to have life
terminated or death accelerated, and is confined to the natural process
of dying.  No person has the right to terminate or to have terminated
his or her life, or to accelerate or have accelerated his or her death.”
In as much as here the patient is maintained artificially and the treatment is
in no way, nor intended to be, curative and has been so for twenty years,
there is no termination of life involved.
Hamilton CJ also stated that the right to bodily integrity, privacy and
self-determination are “unenumerated rights” but are implied by the ‘right to
life’.  They are available if the patient is mentally competent and he or she
could wish the artificial treatment to be discontinued even if it would result
in death.  The artificial treatment being intensive, constitutes an interference
with the integrity of her body and cannot be regarded as normal means of
nourishment.  ‘A competent adult, if terminally ill, has the right to forego or
64

discontinue  life-saving  treatment.  Treatment  being  afforded  to  a  ward
constitutes ‘medical treatment’ and not merely ‘medical care’, as stated by
Sir Stephen Brown in Airedale N.H.S. Trust.  Artificial feeding by means of
a nasogastric tube is ‘medical treatment’.  As the ward is unable to exercise
the right for stopping medical treatment, it was not open to any person or
persons to exercise that right on her behalf.  All citizens shall, as human
persons, be equal before the law.  The loss by an individual of his or her
mental capability does not result in diminution of her life or her personal
rights recognized by the Constitution, including the right to life, the right to
bodily integrity, the right to privacy, including self-determination and the
right to refuse medical care or treatment.  The ward is unable to have all
these  rights  respected,  defended,  vindicated  and  protected  from  unjust
attack, in spite of the lessened or diminished capacity. By reason of the fact
that  she  is  a ward  of Court  and  the  provisions  of  sec  9  of  the  Courts
(Supplemented  Provisions)  Act,  1961  apply,  the  responsibility  for  the
exercise  and  vindication  of  these  rights  rests  on  the  Court.   The  first
consideration  is  the paramount well-being, welfare and interests  of the
ward  as  stated  by  Lord  Hailsham   L.C.  in  Re (A  Minor:  Wardship:
Sterilisation) (1988 AC 199 at p 202).  As stated by Balcombe J in In Re J
(A Minor Wardship: Medical Treatment): 1990(3) All ER 930, the Court as
representative  of  the  Sovereign  as  parens  patriae will  adopt  the  same
standard which a reasonable and responsible parent would do.  The Court
has regard to the constitutional rights of the ward and is bound to defend
and vindicate these rights.
On this basis, the Supreme Court was satisfied to take the ‘awesome’
decision  to  consent  to  the  withdrawal  and  termination  of  the  abnormal
65

artificial means of nourishment by tube, thus ceasing to prolong her life to
no useful purpose and allowing her to die.  “The true cause of the ward’s
death will not be the withdrawal of such nourishment but the injuries which
she sustained on the 26  th   April, 1972  ”.  The trial Judge, while permitting
discontinuance, had regard to the fact that the “treatment was intrusive and
burdensome and of no curative effect, to the fact that the ward had only
minimal cognitive function, had been  in that condition  for twenty three
years, to the wishes of the mother and other members of the family, to the
medical  evidence  and  to  the  submissions  by  all  the  parties  to  the
proceedings.”
In a separate concurring Judgment, O’Flaherty J referred to Walsh vs.
Family Planning  Services  Ltd (1992)  I.R.  496  to  say  that  a  competent
person must give consent to medical treatment and, as a corollary, has an
absolute  right  to refuse medical treatment even if it  leads  to death.  In
American  law, this  right  is  the  constitutional  right  to  self-determination
(otherwise right to bodily integrity) as well as being regarded as a privacy
right.  So it is in Irish Law (Ryan vs. AG: (1965) I. R 94 and Kennedy vs.
Ireland: (1987) I.R. 587.  If the ward is  unable to make a decision for
withdrawal of treatment, consent has to be given on her behalf.  In regard to
“right to life’, Art 2 and 6 of the European Convention and Art 6 of the
ICCPR are relevant.  He said:
“This case is not about terminating a life but only to allow nature to
take its course which would have happened even a short number of
years ago and still does in places where medical technology has not
advanced so much as in this country.”
66

He  quotes  a  beautiful  passage  from  the  Supreme  Court  of  Arizona  in
Rasmussen vs. Fleming (1987) 154 Ariz 207 as follows:
“Not long ago, the realms of life and death were delineated by a
bright line. Now this line is blurred by wondrous advances in medical
technology  –  advances  that  until  recent  years  were  only  ideas
conceivable by such science fiction visionaries as  Jules Verne and
H.G.  Wells.   Medical  technology  has  entered  a  twilight  zone  of
suspended  animation  where  death  commences  while  life,  in  some
form, continues.  Some patients,  however,  want  no  part  of a  life
sustained only by medical technology.  Instead, they prefer a plan of
medical treatment that allows  nature to take its course and permits
them to die in dignity.”  (emphasis supplied)
He refers to the judgment of the State Appellate Court in US in In re Fiori
(1995) A.R.(2d) 1350 where more than 50 decisions of US Courts were
reviewed and states:  “It appears near judicial unanimity has been attained in
the United States to permit a course similar to that sanctioned by the learned
trial Judge in this case”.  The following  summary of US cases was given:
“(1) Absent the existence of a statute on the subject, the various
legal precepts relied upon to authorize the withdrawal of sustenance
from a person in a persistent vegetative state have been reduced to a
‘best interest’ analysis, ‘substituted judgment criterion’ and a ‘clear
and  convincing’  evidence  standard  of  proof  which  draw  their
strengths from the federal and state constitutional rights of privacy.
67

(2) Equally applicable to the right of an individual to forego life
sustaining  medical  treatment  is  the common law right  to freedom
from unwanted interference with bodily integrity (self-determination).
(3) But the right to bodily integrity can be exercised only by a
person competent to evaluate her condition.  Otherwise, it has to be
exercised by a surrogate under the doctrine of ‘substituted judgment’.
Courts  will rely on ‘substituted judgment’ doctrine  only when the
surrogate  decision  maker  demonstrates  the  incompetent  person’s
preferences with reasonable certainty.  When the patient expresses a
treatment-preference prior to her loss of competence, the Court views
the  surrogate  as  merely  supplying  the  capacity  to  enforce  the
incompetent’s  choice.   Thus,  a  dying  patient’s  right  to  self-
determination out-weighs the rights of the patient’s family, physician
or  other  care  provider  to  base  a  treatment  determination  on  that
individual  interests  or  ethical  imperatives.   The  irreversible
incompetent’s right to self-determination also outweighs the States
interest in preserving life, preventing suicide, protecting third party
dependants of the dying patient, and preserving the ethical integrrity
of the medical profession.   (In Re Quilan Revisited: The Judicial
Role in Protecting the Privacy Right of Dying Incompetents: (1988)
15 Hast. Cnst L.Q. 479, 484-486)”
The  competent  patient  taking  an  informed  decision  is  acceptable.
However, O’ Flaherty J, rightly, disagrees with the ‘Substituted Judgment’
doctrine  of  US  Courts  (it  was  also  rejected  by  the  House  of  Lords  in
Airedale).   He says, he prefers the ‘best interests’ doctrine.
68

Blayney J, in his concurring judgment, referred to the judgment of the
US Supreme Court in  Cruzan v.  Director, Missouri Department of Health
(1990) 497 US 261 and pointed out that in the US case, Brennan and O’
Connor agreed that artificial feeding amounted to ‘medical treatment’.  With
that  view,  Marshal  and  Blackman  agreed.    Rehnquist  CJ  too  treated
artificial nutrition and hydration as constituting ‘medical treatment’.
Denham  J,  while  agreeing  with  the  trial  judge,  referred  to  In  re
Quinlan (1976) 355 A. 2d) 647 where it was stated that “the individual’s
right to privacy grows as the degree of bodily invasion increases”.
(6) Law Hospital NHS Trust v. Lord Advocate (Scotland): (1996)  SLT
848 = 1996 SCLR 491) (22nd March 1996) (Lord President (Hope), Lord
Clyde, Lord Cullan, Lord Milligam and Lord Wylie).   (Court of Sessions,
Inner House) (Court of Five Judges)
Mrs J, a patient, had been in a persistent vegetative state (PVS) since
22nd January 1992.  She had no prospect of recovery and was unable to give
a valid consent to the taking of further steps.  She could not see, hear, feel
pain or pleasure, nor communicate by word or movement or make voluntary
movements of any kind.    The brain stem was alive.  Breathing, cardiac
function and digestion were artificially maintained.  Involuntary movements
of the eyes and the ability to make sounds gave the impression of apparent
wakefulness.    This was followed by periods of apparent sleep with eyes
closed.  She was now permanently insensate.    The consultant physician and
two neurologists were of the view that her condition was hopeless and there
were no useful avenues of treatment.  The curator-ad-litem represented her.
69

Her  husband,  daughter  and  two  brothers  agreed  that  life-sustaining  and
medical  treatment  should  be  discontinued.   The  patient  was,  however,
unable to give consent.  
The present action was raised as an ordinary action by the NHS Trust,
in the Outer House and was reported to the Inner House.   The declarations
sought for were similar to those in Airdale.    In England where the courts
parens patriae jurisdiction was abolished, the courts innovated a procedure
whereby  declarations  in  regard  to  termination  of  life  support  could  be
granted.   In  Scotland,  as  the  parens patriae jurisdiction  remained,  a
declaratory remedy was sought under the parens patriae jurisdiction.  The
Lord  Ordinary  before  whom  the  action  came  up,  reported  to  the  Inner
House,  seeking  that  rulings  be  given,  including  a  ruling  about  the
competency of the action.
The  Lord  President  (Lord  Hope)  referred  to  the  modern  invasive
procedures  available  in  medical  technology  to  keep  a  person  alive  by
artificial ventilation and artificial nourishment, a patient who would have
otherwise died  a normal death.  Where the patient was of full  age and
capable  of  understanding  and  was  able  to  consent  to  the  procedures  if
medical advice stated that they were for his or her benefit, a patient could
refuse medical treatment on the basis of a right to self-determination which
provided  the  solution  to  all  problems,  at  least  so  far  as  the  court  was
concerned.   It was not in doubt that a medical practitioner who acts or omits
to act with consent of his patient requires no sanction of the court.
70

The problems arose where the patient was not of full age or lacked
the capacity to consent to what was being proposed.  The law had to decide
issues firmly rather than refer merely to moral obligations of the doctors,
because a ‘deliberate omission which causes  death may also expose the
medical practitioner to the allegation that his conduct is criminal’.    It was
not a sufficient reassurance for a doctor, in the present state of the law, to be
told that his proposed conduct was medically ethical.   He was entitled to
know about civil or criminal liability under the law.
The  Lord  President  stated  that  in  Airedale,  the  House  of  Lords
decided on grounds of public policy, that the courts should, by declaration,
provide to doctors faced with such decisions, clear rulings as to whether the
course which they propose to adopt was or was not lawful.   The medical
profession was entitled to look to the courts.   This view had the support of
the Scottish Law Commission in its Report on Incapable Adults (Scot Law
Com No.151, para 5.86).
He said that a declaration may be sought in the manner in which it
was done in Airedale and relief could be claimed as in the Practice Note of
March 1994 by the Official Solicitor (1994 (2) All ER 413).
After holding that the Lord Ordinary had parens patriae jurisdiction in
Scotland  and  that  a  declaratory  relief  was  sought  as  conceived  by  the
Scottish  Law Commission he said that the application was maintainable
whether or not, there were objectors to such an application.
71

But, the more important issue that was raised by the Lord Advocate
was  whether  a  virtual  declaration  could  be  sought  whether  a particular
proposed conduct was a crime or not in as much as that would amount to an
intrusion into the fields of criminal courts which have exclusive jurisdiction
to decide the questions (in Scotland, the High Court of Justiciary).
Of course, in the present case, as the doctors, parents, relatives were
all in favour of withdrawal of life support, there was no need to seek a
declaratory relief.    But, in any event, the Lord Ordinary could grant a
declaration  for  the  purpose  of giving  ‘guidance  and  reassurance’ to  the
pursuers  and  to  the  patient’s  medical  practitioner  about  the  legal
consequences of terminating the life sustaining treatment, insofar as it was
competent for such guidance to be given by “this court”.    Without such
guidance, they would not be able to discontinue the treatment.    Otherwise,
the risks were great.   In fact, their risks had not diminished because of the
fact that the curator-ad-litem to Mrs. J had expressed in his affidavit that it
was in the patient’s best interests that her treatment and care be continued
and not discontinued as proposed.    The proposed declaration did not seek
any relief that particular conduct be declared to be not criminal.    “What it
seeks is a declarator that the pursuers and the medical practitioner ‘may
lawfully discontinue’ the treatment”.
But, the word ‘lawful’ in the declaration sought, without qualification
implies an assertion that the conduct was not only not a breach of duty
according to the civil law but that it was also not a crime known the law of
Scotland’.     In Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland, the House of Lords approved
of a declaration in these terms after considering among other things whether
72

the proposed discontinuance of the treatment was unlawful because it would
constitute an offence.  Sir Stephen Brown (at p.805), in the Family Division,
said that he did  not consider it appropriate to make any declaration with
regard  to  any  possible  consequences  so  far  as  the  criminal  law  was
concerned.   In the context of his opinion, the declaration that the course
proposed was lawful meant that it was lawful ‘according to civil law’.    But
in the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords, the Official Solicitor also
proposed the question whether the proposed action would be criminal in
nature.   Lord President then says:
“Lord Goff of Chieveley (at p.862 G) and Lord Mustill (at pp.888E-
889F) expressed strong reservation about the granting of a declarator
as to criminality in a civil case.  Lord Mustill pointed out that the
decision in that case would in any event not create an estoppel in the
criminal  courts  which  would  form  a  conclusive  bar  to  future
prosecution.   Nevertheless, they did proceed to decide the issue and
it is clear from all the speeches that their Lordship were of the view
that the conduct  which was proposed would not amount to crime
according to the law of England.”
Having said that, the Lord President doubted if any declaration that
might be granted would preclude the criminal court from going into the
question.   He stated:
“while a declaration can be given about the civil law in this process, it
is beyond the jurisdiction of this court to say whether the proposed
course of conduct is or is not criminal.    Nevertheless, I consider that
73

it is not open to this court to assert that a proposed course of conduct
is or is not criminal by means of a bare declaration.    If it is necessary
for the court to resolve this issue in order to decide whether or not a
party to the action is entitled to some other civil remedy, then this will
be within its competence.  The decision about the criminality of the
conduct can be said to be ancillary to the provision of a remedy which
it is within the power of this Court to provide.  But a bare declaration
that a course of conduct, or a proposed course of conduct is, or is not
criminal, is in a different position.  The only purpose to be served by
such a declaration would be in regard to the operation of the criminal
law, which lies beyond the jurisdiction of the Court.”
In Scotland, the civil jurisdiction alone is with the Court of Sessions (which
made this reference to the Inner House while the criminal jurisdiction is
with High Court of Justiciary).   He, however, says:
“We are not being asked to intervene in (any)  criminal proceedings
which have already been instituted or to interfere in some other way
in  the  business  which  is  being  conducted  in  the  High  Court  of
Justiciary.  What we are being asked to do is to authorize the Lord
Ordinary to issue a declaration as to the criminality of the proposed
conduct,  with knowledge that this will not bar proceedings in that
Court  but  in  the  hope  that  it  will  in  practice  ensure  that  no
prosecution will be taken there.”
There are, he says, strong reasons of policy for leaving the definitions of
what amounts to ‘Criminal conduct’ to be decided by the criminal Courts.
74

“Any declaration which we might make would not be binding on the
High Court of Justiciary.  Nor would any declaration which we might
authorize be binding on the Lord Advocate, who would be entitled in
the public interest, irrespective of what we might say, to bring the
matter before the criminal courts, to which the issue clearly belongs
because the function of the criminal law is to regulate conduct by the
imposition of criminal sanctions.”
Another distinction peculiar to Scotland, as  being a second reason, was
stated as follows:
“A further point which ought not to be overlooked is that, while an
appeal lies to the House of Lords from the Court of Sessions, the
High  Court  of  Justiciary  is  the  Supreme  Court  of  Criminal
Jurisdiction  in  Scotland,  from  whose  decisions  no  appeal  to  the
House of Lords is competent.  In Mackintosh, Lord Advocate (1876)
(3) 12 (HL) 34, it was held that it would be contrary to the provisions
of Art 19 of the Act of Union, 1707 for decisions of the High Court of
Justiciary to be held to be other than final and conclusive on that
Court.   In  my opinion,  we  should  leave  it  to  the  High  Court  of
Justiciary to define what conduct is or not criminal under the law of
Scotland.   It is not for the Court  of Session  to explore  questions
relating to the scope of the criminal law which have not already been
established by decision in the High Court of Justiciary.”
75

For  these  reasons,  while  I  consider  that  the  Lord  Ordinary  may
properly  grant  a  declaration  in  this  case,  the  terms  of  the  proposed
declaration will require to be amended to make it clear that the declaration
is given in regard to the civil consequences of the proposed conduct.  Some
other solution must be found as to how the re-assurance in regard to the
criminal consequence of that conduct can be given to the pursuers and the
medical practitioner.”
As  regards  the  existence  of  parens  patriae jurisdiction,  the  Lord
President stated that, it was jurisdiction of the Crown which, as stated in
Airedale, could be traced to the 13th century.  It laid down a duty to protect
the person and property of those who were unable to protect themselves,
such as minors and persons of unsound mind.  But in England and Wales,
the jurisdiction survives only for minors and so far as persons of unsound
mind were concerned, it ceased to exist because of the Mental Health Act,
1959 and the revocation ‘by Warrant under the Sign Manual’ of the Warrant
dated 10.4.1956, by which such Jurisdiction in relation to unsound persons
was assigned to the Lord Chancellor and Judges of the Chancery Division
of the High Court.  In Airedale, the House of Lords, therefore, laid down
that a  declaration could be granted under inherent powers in the case of
persons other than minors, that “the proposed discontinuance of treatment
was in the patient’s ‘best interests’.”  In Scotland there was no such problem
in regard to  parens patriae jurisdiction as sec 1 of the Exchequer Court
(Scotland 1 Act, 1856) had not been repealed though sec 19 was repealed.
The Lord President referred to the Canadian case in Mrs. E vs. Eve
1986 (2) SCR 388, as one where the parens patriae jurisdiction was held by
76

L’a Forest J (p 410) as being available for a Court under its inherent powers,
to  permit  non  therapeutic  sterilization  of  persons  mentally incompetent,
(referred to in  In re B (A Minor) (Wardship : Sterilisation): 1988 (1) AC
199 (at p 211).  In Ireland, in ‘Ward of Court, In the matter of a’ (1995(2)
ILR M 401 too, the Court could hold that a Judge of the High Court could
exercise  his  parens  patriae jurisdiction,  (as  exercised  by  the  Lord
Chancellors of Ireland prior to 1922 and now vested in the President of the
High Court) to give consent on behalf of a ward in persistent vegetative
state.  It is not the practice in Scotland to treat persons of unsound mind as
wards of Court.
Finally, the Lord President held that an application can be presented
to the Outerhouse by the Area Health Authority or NHS Trust in whose care
the patient was for the time being, or by any relative of the patient within
the meaning of sec. 1  of the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976.  Application
would  be  seeking  treatment  withdrawal.   The  Lord Advocate,  the  Area
Health Authority or NHS Trust and relatives of patients have to be heard.
Medical  reports,  proposed  treatment  or  proposals  for  discontinuance  of
medical support should be sought for.  In view of the advice given by BMA
guidelines on Treatment Decision for Patients in Persistent Vegetative State
(July, 1993), the life prolonging treatment must continue until the patient
has been insentient for at least 12 months.  Details of PVS and the treatment
must be given.  Advance directives  of patient, if any, should be stated,
whether it is in writing or not.  It must be prayed that a curator ad litem be
appointed  to  protect  the  patient’s  interests.   Case  should  be  heard  in
chambers without intimation on the notice boards, unless public interest
requires.  There is no need to seek a declaration.  The Court’s parens patriae
77

jurisdiction can be invoked.  At least two medical reports are necessary on
the  patient’s  condition,  and  the  application  must  specify  the  treatment
proposed or to be discontinued to allow the patient to die in dignity.
(Lord Clyde, Lord Cullen, Lord Milligan wrote separate judgments.  Lord
Wylie agreed with the Lord President).
(7) In re B (A Minor) (Wardship: Sterilisation): 1988(1) AC 199
This was a case of a mentally retarded 17 year old ward and her
ability to understand speech was that of a 6 year old child.  Her mother and
staff at the Sunderland Borough Council where she lives, became aware that
the girl showing signs of sexual awareness and could become pregnant.  The
Council applied to the Court for an order that B, a ward of Court, should be
allowed to undergo sterlisation compulsorily.  She would panic and require
heavy sedation during normal delivery, which carried risk of injury to her.
Caesarian was deemed inappropriate.  She may not care for the child as a
mother.  Bush J gave leave for sterilisation.
On appeal, the said decision was confirmed.  On further appeal, the
House of Lords also confirmed the decision.  It said that a court exercising
wardship  jurisdiction,  when  reaching  a  decision  on  an  application  to
authorize an operation for the sterlisation of a ward, was concerned only
with one primary and paramount consideration, namely, the welfare and best
interests of the ward; that accordingly, on the evidence adduced of the risk
of  B  becoming  pregnant,  of  the  lack  of  effective  contraceptive  which
required being formulated for her, of the trauma that childbirth would bring
to her and to prevent the risk of injury to her or her child, and of her
78

inability even to desire or care for a child, the operation would be in the best
interests of the child.
Lord Templeman, however, observed that sterilization of a girl under
18 shall not be undertaken except with permission of a Judge of the High
Court.  Or else, a doctor sterilising a child merely on basis of her parent’s
consent, may become liable criminally.
The majority disagreed with La Forest J of the Canadian Supreme
Court  In re Ere: (1986) 31 DLR (4th) 1 where it was said that the Court
could never give consent to sterlisation of a minor.  It approved the decision
of Heilborn J in In re D (A. Minor)(Wardship: Sterlisation) 1976 Fam 185
that a girl could be sterilised if pregnancy could be an unmitigated disaster.
8. In re F (Mental  Patient:  Sterilisation) : 1990(2)  AC  1.  Here the
patient was not a minor, hence parens patriae jurisdiction was not available,
but even so, applying the inherent power doctrine, the same test, namely, the
test  of  “best  interests  of  the  patient”  was  applied  by Lord  Brandon  of
Oakbrook (at p.64).
Here the woman was 36 years old, was mentally handicapped and
unable to consent to an operation.  She became pregnant.  The hospital staff
considered that she would be unable to cope with the effects of pregnancy
and giving birth to a child and that, since all other forms of contraception
were unsuitable and it was considered undesirable to further her limited
freedom of movement in order to prevent sexual activity, it would be in her
best interests to be sterilised.  Her mother who was of the same view moved
79

the Court for a declaration that such operation would not amount to an
unlawful act by reason of the absence of her consent.  The trial Judge and
the Court of Appeal accepted that the lady be sterilised.
On appeal, the House of Lords affirmed the decision.  It referred to
Bolam vs. Freirn Hospital Management Committee 1957(1) WLR 582 and
In re B (A minor)(Wardship: Sterilisation): 1988 A.C 199.  It said that it
was open to the Court under its ‘inherent’ jurisdiction to make a declaration
that  a proposed  operation  was  in  the  patient’s  best  interests,  where the
patient was an adult but unable to give informed consent, where the purpose
was to prevent the risk of her becoming pregnant.
Though  parens  patriae jurisdiction  was  abolished  in  England  by
statute in the case of mentally ill patients, the trial Judge and the Court of
Appeal held that the Court could give consent under inherent jurisdiction.
The House of Lords held that though the  parens patriae jurisdiction
was  not  available  because  it  was  abolished  in  the  case  of  mentally-ill
patients  by  statute,  the  Court  still  had  inherent  jurisdiction  to  grant  a
declaration that sterilization of F in the circumstances of the case, would not
be unlawful if it was in the best interests of the patient. Though there was no
need to obtain a declaration in as much as doctors could perform the surgery
on the ground that it was in the best interests of such a patient, but  in
practice the  Court’s  jurisdiction  should  be  invoked  whenever  it  was
proposed to perform such an operation, ‘since a declaration would establish,
by judicial process whether the proposed operation was in the best interests
of the patient and therefore lawful’. In determining whether the proposed
80

operation was in the best interests of the patient, the Court could apply the
established test of what would be accepted as appropriate treatment at the
time by a reasonable body of medical opinion skilled in the particular form
of treatment.  At common law, a doctor can lawfully operate on or give
other treatment to adult patients  who are incapable of consenting to his
doing so, provided that the operation is in the best interests of such patients.
The operation or treatment will be in their best interests only if it is carried
out in order either to save their lives or to ensure improvement or prevent
deterioration in their physical or mental health.  (Lord Griffith dissented)
Among the cases considered are Bolam 1957 (2) All ER 118 Re D (a
minor)(wardship: sterilization) : (1976)(1) All ER 326,  Re Eve (1986) 31
DLR (4th) 1 (Canadian Supreme Court)  Re Grady (1981) 85 NJ 235 (NJ
SC); Re Jane (1988) (Australian Family Court), Marshall vs. Curry (1933) 3
DLR 260 (NS SC);  Murray vs.  McCarthy : 1949(2) (DLR 422 (BC, SC);
Schlocndorf vs. Society of New York Hospital  (1914) 211 NY 123 (NY Ct
of Apps): & other cases of English Courts.  The main judgment is by Lord
Brandon of Oakbrook and Lord Goff of Chieveley. (The judgment of the
Court of Appeal was rendered by Lord Donaldson of Lymington MR, Neill
& Butter-Sloss LJJ).
Three cases where the Court granted permission for sterilisation of
mentally incompetent persons who could not give consent were referred to:
Re T (14th May 1987, unrep) Per Latey J; Re X (1987, Times, 4th June, per
Reeve J) and T vs. T: 1988 (1) All ER 613 (Wood J).
81

The House of Lords referred to Cardozo J in Schloendorff vs. Society
of New York Hospitals (1914) 211 NY 123 (126) to the following effect (in
respect of a competent patient):
“Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to
determine what shall be done with his own body; and a surgeon who
performs an operation without his patient’s consent commits assault.”
This was reiterated by Lord Reid in S vs S, W vs. Official Solicitor (1970)
(3) ALL ER 107 (HL).
In Re Grady (1981) 85 NJ 235 (US) and in Re Jane (22nd Dec 1988)
(Australia, Nicholson CJ) it was observed that it is of importance that the
patient, - (there a minor) - must be represented by some disinterested third
party.
Lord Hailsham LC, dissented from the view of La Forest J in Re Eve
(1986) 31 DLR (4th) page 1 (though, on facts that decision may be correct))
where it was held that (p 32) that sterilization ‘should never be authorized
for  non-therapeutic  purposes’  and  described  it  as  unconvincing  and   in
startling and contrary to the welfare principle which should be the first and
paramount consideration in wardship cases.
Lord Templeman, however, stated that in such cases the concerned
persons must approach the High Court and if sterilization is done without
consent of Court, the doctors will be liable for criminal, civil or professional
82

proceedings, notwithstanding that the doctor had the consent of the child’s
parents.
(8A) Practice Note by Official Solicitor: 1994(2) All ER 413: Withdrawal
of  treatment –  Insensate  patient –  patient  in  persistent  vegetative  state.
Sanction of High Court required before treatment terminated – confirmation
of diagnosis.  
This Practice Note was issued by the Official Solicitor mentioning the
procedure to be followed while seeking declaratory relief.   The formal of
the declaration is also given in the Practice Note.
The Note states that termination of artificial feeding and hydration for
patients in a PVS requires,  virtually in all cases, sanction of High Court
Airedale and Frenchay Healthcare NHS Trust vs. S: 1994(2) All ER 403 are
quoted.   (That it need  not be in all cases was laid down by the Court of
Appeal, in Re Burke, (2005) EWCA (Civ) 2003)
The  diagnosis:  The  Medical  Ethics  Committee of  British  Medical
Association issued guidelines in July 1993.  A PVS diagnosis should not be
confirmed unless the patient is in that state for 12 months.  Such a decision
must be preceded by rehabilitative measures such as arousal programmes.
(Airedale and  Report  of  House  of  Lords  Select  Committee  on  Medical
Ethics HC paper (1993-94) 21-I).
Procedure  for  application  to  court  is  detailed  on  the  basis  of
procedure indicated by HL in F v. West Berkshire Health Authority: 1989
83

(2) All ER 545 (HC) and Official Solicitor’s Practice Note of May 1993:
1993 (3) All ER 222.    (The form of declaration to be asked is also set out
in the present Practice Direction).
Parties:   Applicants  may be  either  next  of  kin  or  relevant  Area  Health
Authority/NHS Trust/(which in any event ought to be a party).   The views
of next of kin are very important and should be made known to court.   The
Official Solicitor should be invited to act as guardian ad litem of the patient.
The evidence:  There should be at least  two neurological reports on the
patient, one of which will be commissioned by the Official Solicitor.  Other
medical evidence, such as evidence about rehabilitation  or nursing care,
may be necessary.
The  views  of  the  patient if  previously  expressed,  either  in  writing  or
otherwise are important and the High Court may determine the effect of a
purported advance directive as to future medical treatment (Re T: 1992 (4)
All ER 649).
(8B) Practice Note 1996 (4) All ER 766
This Practice Note deals with withdrawal of treatment to insensate
patients and patients in persistent vegetative state.   It requires sanction of
High Court Judge before treatment is terminated.   It requires confirmation
of  diagnosis  from  two  independent  reports  from  neurologists  or  other
doctors experienced in assessing disturbances of consciousness.  The duties
of doctors making the diagnosis as reported in the Report of the Working
Group of Royal College of Physicians is set out.   It also states that the
84

views  of  the  patients  and  others  have  to  be  obtained  and  will  be  an
important component of the decision of the doctors.   For a detailed account
of the practice direction including the manner in which applications have to
be made to the Court, one may refer to the Practice Note set out by the
Official Solicitor Act in 1996 (4) All ER 766.
(9) Re T (adult: refusal of medical treatment): 1992 (4) All ER 649=1992
(3) WLR 782
(Lord Donaldson of Lymington, Butler-Sloss and Staughton LJJ) (d.
30.7.92)
The case related to an adult patient, a lady T, who was injured in an
accident  on  1.7.92.  She  was  34  weeks  pregnant  and  required  blood
transfusion.   She  was brought  up by her mother,  who  was a Jehovah’s
witness, but the patient was not herself a member of that religious sect.
The patient told the staff nurse after a private conversation with her mother,
that it was sinful to have blood transfusion according to the beliefs of that
sect.    She  then  blindly  signed  a  form  of  refusal  of  consent  to  blood
transfusion  after  the  caesarian  operation.    The  consultant,  therefore,
hesitated to give her blood transfusion and put her on a ventilator and some
drugs.  Her father and her boyfriend applied to the court in an emergency
hearing for authorization of blood  transfusion, and the judge  authorized
blood transfusion and stated that, in the circumstances prevailing, it was not
unlawful to do so and was in the “best interests” of the patient.  The learned
Judge observed that at the emergency stage, the patient had not objected and
hence the blood transfusion at that stage was lawful.
85

On appeal by T, the Court of Appeal observed that certain earlier
decisions cited by Counsel were distinguishable and as the patient was not a
minor, permission of Court was not necessary to give blood transfusion.
It was further held that although prima facie, every adult had the right
and capacity to decide whether he or she would accept medical treatment,
even  at  the  risk  of  permanent  injury to  health  or  premature  death,  and
regardless of whether the reasons for refusal were rational or irrational, or
were unknown or non-existent, still if an adult did not have the capacity, at
the time of the purported refusal and continued not to have that capacity, or
if his or her capacity to make a decision had been overborne by others, it
was the duty of doctors to treat him in whatever way they considered, in the
exercise of their clinical judgment, to be in his best interests.
It  was  held,  on  the  facts,  that  the  doctors  had  been  justified  in
disregarding T’s instructions and in administering blood transfusion as a
matter of necessity since the evidence showed that T had not been fit to
make a genuine decision because of her medical condition and that, in fact,
she was subjected to the undue influence of her mother, which vitiated her
decision to refuse blood transfusion.  The appeal was dismissed.
Lord Donaldson MR & Butter Sloss LJ held that 
(1) On behalf of a patient who is physically and mentally capable of
exercising a choice but who is not in a position to make such a decision
because, for example, he is unconscious, his next of kin has no legal right to
consent or to refuse consent to medical treatment on behalf of the patient.
86

However,  to  seek  the  consent  of  the  next  of  kin  is  not  an  undesirable
practice of the interests of the patient will not be adversely affected by any
consequential delay, since consultation with the next of kin may reveal that
the patient has made an anticipating choice whether to accept or refuse
specific treatment and, e.g. a blood transfusion, which if clearly established
and applicable in the circumstances, will bind the medical practitioner.
(2) The standard forms of refusal to accept blood transfusion used by
hospitals should be redrafted to separate the disclaimer of legal liability (on
the part of the hospital) from the declaration by the patient of his decision
not to accept a blood transfusion so as to bring the possible consequences of
a refusal forcibly to the patient’s attention.
(3) A patient should know in broad terms the nature and effect of the
medical procedure to which consent is given or refused.  But, although
doctors are under a duty to give the patient appropriate full information as to
the nature of the treatment and the likely risks (including any special risks
attaching to the treatment being administered by particular person), failure
to perform that duty will only amount to negligence but does not as such
vitiate the consent or refusal.  However, misinforming a patient, whether
innocently  or  not,  and  withholding  information  which  is  expressly  or
impliedly sought by the patient, will vitiate either a consent or a refusal – (a)
If, in a potentially life-threatening  situation  or one in which  irreparable
damage  to  the  patient’s  health  can  be  anticipated,  doctors  or  hospital
authorities are faced with a refusal of an adult patient to accept essential
treatment, they should both in the public and the patient’s interest, at once
87

seek  a declaration  from the  court  as  to  the  lawfulness  of  the  proposed
treatment and it should not be left to the patient’s family to take action.
The  learned  judges  referred  to  the  following  passage  from  the
decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Mallette v. Shulman: (1990) 72
OR (2d) 417 (a blood transfusion case where it was given to an unconscious
patient carrying a card that she was a Jehovah’s witness).   There Robins JA
stated (at p.432):
“At  issue  here  is  the  freedom  of  the  patient  as  an  individual  to
exercise her right to refuse treatment and accept the consequences of
her  own  decision.    Competent  adults,  as  I  have  sought  to
demonstrate, are generally at liberty to refuse medical treatment even
at the risk of death.   The right to determine what shall be done with
one’s body is  a fundamental right in  our  society.   The concepts
inherent in this right are the bedrock upon which the principles of
self-determination  and  individual  autonomy  are  based.    Free
individual choice in matters affecting this right should, in my opinion,
be accorded very high priority.”
Robin JA excluded from consideration, the interest of the State in
protecting innocent third parties and preventing suicide.
88

(10) Re C (adult: refusal of medical treatment: 1994 (1) All ER 819
(Thorpe J) (14.10.93) : C-Test:
A 68 year old male patient suffering from paranoid schizophrenia,
developed gangrene in a foot during his confinement in a secure hospital
while serving a 7-year term of imprisonment.  He was removed to a general
hospital where the consultant surgeon opined that if the leg below the knee
was not amputated, the chances were 15% of survival and he would most
likely die.  C refused amputation.  A solicitor was called in the meantime,
there was some improvement due to drugs, still the need for amputation due
to fresh gangrene attack at a future date could not be ruled out.  The hospital
authorities moved the court for permission to amputate the leg below knee,
contending  that  the  decision  of  the  patient  refusing  amputation  was
impaired by his mental illness and that he failed to appreciate the risk of
death.
It was held that the High Court, in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction,
could  give  directions  by way of  injunction/declaration  in  respect  of  an
individual  not  capable  of  refusing/consenting  to  medical  treatment
(including future medical treatment).  However, the question to be decided
was whether it had been established that his capacity had been so reduced
by his chronic mental illness and that he did not sufficiently understand the
nature, purpose and effects of the preferred medical treatment.  That in turn
depended upon whether he had comprehended and retained information as
to the proposed treatment, had believed it and had weighed it in the balance
89

when  making  a  choice (known  as  C  Test).      This  was  the  test  of
‘competency’.
Thorpe J described competency of patient as follows:
“I consider helpful Dr E’s analysis of the decision-making process
into  three  stages:  first,  comprehending  and  retaining  treatment
information,  secondly, believing  it and  thirdly, weighing  it in  the
balance to arrive at choice.”
(C-Test)
On facts, it was held that amputation should  not be made, as his
decision making was not so impaired by his schizophrenia. The presumption
in favour of his right to self-determination was not displaced.   Re T (adult:
refusal of medical treatment) 1992 (4) All ER 649 and Airedale 1993 (1) All
ER 821 (HL) were applied.
(11). Frenchay Healthcare NHS Trust v. S: 1994 (2) All ER 403 (CA)
(Sir Thomas Bingham MR, Waite and Peter Gibson LJJ) (14.1.1994)
S, a healthy adult, in June 1991, took a drug overdose which resulted
in acute and extreme brain damage.  Medical treatment was of no avail.
Until  June  1993,  he  was  fed  through  a  nasogastric  tube  as  the  only
practicable way of feeding him and later by a gastronomy tube through the
stomach wall.    The gastronomy tube got removed due to his movement and
a fresh operation to re-insert it was likely to result in his death according to
the doctors.   They felt he should be allowed to die a natural death.  
90

The hospital  moved the High Court as a matter  of urgency for a
declaration authorizing it  not to replace the gastronomy tube.   The judge
granted the declaration arising in the patient’s best interests.  On appeal by
the official solicitor, the Court of Appeal held that the judge was right and
that the hospital need not replace or reinsert the tube.
Sir Thomas Bingham MR held that the question which the court had
to determine, in an application for permission not to continue treatment to a
PVS patient was to consider what was in the ‘best interests’ of the patient.
Though the court had power to review the medical opinion and was not
bound to accept it in all cases or circumstances placed before it did not
warrant it, the court would be reluctant to place those treating the patient in
a position of having to carry out treatment which they considered to be
contrary to the patient’s best interests unless the court had real doubt about
the reliability, bona fides or correctness of the medical opinion in question.
Airedale was applied.
It  was  further  held  that  where  a  hospital  seeks  to  discontinue
treatment to a PVS, as a general rule, the hospital must apply to the court
and obtain a declaration that it was proper to do so, and such an application
should  be  preceded by  a  full  investigation  with  an  opportunity  for  the
official solicitor, as the representative of the patient, to explore the situation
fully,  to  obtain  independent  medical  opinion  for  himself  and  to  ensure
proper material is placed before court.   Nevertheless, emergency situations
will arise in which an application to the court is not possible, or where,
although an application to court is possible, it will not be possible to present
91

the application in the same leisurely way as in the case where there is no
pressure of time.   Re C: 
(12). Re Y (Mental capacity: Bone Marrow Transplant) (1997 (2) WLR
556) (14.6.1996) (Connel J)
A 25 years old plaintiff and her elder sister (the defendant) came from
a  very  close  supportive  family.  The  plaintiff  suffered  a  bone  marrow
disorder.  Since 1984, the plaintiff had undergone extensive chemotherapy
(i.e.  for  12  years).    There  had  been  recent  deterioration  in  plaintiff’s
condition  and  there  was  a  strong  likelihood  that  her  situation  would
progress to acute myeloid leukemia in next three months.   The only feasible
prospect was a bone marrow transplant from her sister (defendant).   The
defendant  was  severely  mentally  and  physically  handicapped  and  was
incapable of giving consent to bone marrow transplant.  Plaintiff sought a
declaration  that  two  preliminary  blood  tests  and  a  conventional  bone
marrow harvesting operation under general anaesthetic could lawfully be
taken from the defendant, despite the fact that defendant could not give her
consent.
The learned judge allowed the application stating:
(1) The test in such case was whether it was in the best interests of the
defendant for the procedure to take place.    The fact that the process would
benefit the plaintiff was not relevant, unless, as a result of the defendant
helping the plaintiff, the best interests of the defendant were served.
92

(2) Without  any transplant,  the plaintiff’s  prospects  for survival  were
poor and her condition was deteriorating fast.   If the plaintiff died, this
would have adverse  effect on  the mother of the parties  with whom the
defendant  had  a  closer  relationship  than  with  any  other  relative.    In
particular, the mother’s ability to visit the defendant would be handicapped
significantly.   The defendant would be harmed by the reduction in or loss
of contact to her mother.
(3) It was to the “emotional, psychological and social  benefit” of the
defendant to act as donor to her sister because, in this way, her positive
relationship  with  her  mother  was  most  likely  to  be  prolonged.    The
disadvantages to the defendant of the harvesting procedure were very small.
The bone marrow donated by the defendant would cause her no loss and she
would suffer no real long-term risk.
Apart from referring to Airedale and other judgments of UK Courts,
Connel J referred to an American case in Curran v. Bosze: (1990) 566 NE
2d 1319, where an application designed to permit bone marrow harvesting
from twins for the benefit of their brother was considered.   The Supreme
Court  of  Illinois  concluded  that  the  doctrine  of  ‘substituted  judgment’
(rejected in Airedale) was inapplicable but that the best interest test applied.
Calvo J stated in that case that the benefit the donor will get and mostly it is
in enhancing some close ties between donor or donee or their mother.  He
said:
“In each of the foregoing cases where consent to the kidney transplant
was authorized, regardless whether the authority to consent was to be
93

exercised by the court, a parent or a guardian, the key inquiry was the
presence  or  absence  of  a  benefit  to  the  potential  donor.
Notwithstanding the language used by the courts in reaching their
determination that a transplant may or may not occur, the standard by
which the determination was made was, whether the transplant would
be in the best interests of the child or incompetent person.
The  primary  benefit  to  the  donor in  these  case  arises  from  the
relationship existing between the donor and the recipient.   In Strunk,
the donor lived in a State institution.   The recipient was a brother
who served as the donor’s only connection with the outside world.  In
both Hart and Little, there was evidence that the sibling relationship
between the donor and the recipient was close.
Connel J then quoted the further observations of Calvo J in Curram v.
Bosze to the following effect:
“….. there must be an existing, close relationship between the donor
and recipient.  The evidence clearly shows that there is no  physical
benefit to a donor child.  If there is any benefit to a child who donates
bone-marrow to  a  sibling,  it  will  be  a  psychological  benefit.
According to the evidence, the psychological benefit is not simply
one of personal, individual altruism in an abstract theoretical sense,
although that may be a factor.
A psychological benefit is grounded firmly in the fact that the
donor and recipient are known to each other as family.  Only where
94

there is an existing relationship between a healthy child and his or her
ill-sister or brother, may a psychological benefit to the child from
donating bone marrow to a sibling realistically be found to exist.  The
evidence establishes that it is the existing sibling relationship, as well
as the potential for a continuing sibling relationship, which forms the
context in which it may be determined that it will be in the  best
interests of the child to undergo bone marrow harvesting procedure
for a sibling’.
And finally Calvo J stated:
“The guardian ad litem for the twins recommends that it is not in the
best interests of either Alisu or James to undergo the proposed bone
marrow harvesting  procedure,  in  the  absence  of an  existing  close
relationship  with  the  recipient  (their  half-brother)  and  over  the
objection  of  their  primary  care  taker  (the  mother).   Because  the
evidence presented supports this recommendation, we agree”.
Connell J while allowing the application considered that, because of these
principles, the benefit occurring to the donor is of equal, if not greater,
importance.
(13). Gillick vs. West Norfolk  Wisbech Area Health Authority: = 1986 AC
112: 1985(3) All ER 402 (HL): (‘Gillick Competence’)
The case related to a slightly different problem but certain principles
laid  down  therein  regarding  ‘consent’  have  application  in  cases  of
95

withdrawal of life support.   The test laid down in this case is known as
‘Gillick Competence’.
In this case, the plaintiff who had five daughters under the age of 16,
sought  an  assurance  from  the  Local  Area  Health  Authority  that  her
daughters  would  not  be  given  advice  and  treatment  on  contraception
without the plaintiff’s prior knowledge and consent while they were under
16.  This she did keeping in mind the circular issued by the Dept. of Health
and Social Security that, while normally a doctor should not advice use of
contraceptives  to  girls  under  16  without  consent  of  the  parents,  in
exceptional circumstances if they advised in that regard without the consent
of the parents, it may not be unlawful keeping in view the principle of
confidentiality between doctors and their clients.  Initially, she approached
the local Area Health Authority but they refused to respond.  She then filed
the present action.  According to her, the circular amounted to advice to
doctors to commit the offence of causing or encouraging unlawful sexual
intercourse between males and girls under 16, contrary to sec 28(1) of the
Sexual Offences Act, 1956 or the abetting of it.
The learned Judge (Woolf J, as he then was) held that a doctor acting
as per  the  circular  would not  be committing  any offence  of causing  or
encouraging unlawful sexual intercourse.  The Court of appeal, however,
reversed the judgment (1985(1) All ER 533). 
The House of Lords was approached by the Deptt. Of Health and the
appeal was allowed.  It was held that, having regard to the reality that a
child became increasingly independent as it grew older,  parental authority
96

can be recognized only as long as they were in need of the protection and
such rights yielded to the child’s right to make its own decisions when it
(or) reached a sufficient understanding and intelligence to be capable of
making up its own mind.  A girl under 16 did not, merely by reason of her
age, lack legal capacity to consent to contraceptive advice and treatment by
a doctor.  (Lord Templeman dissented).
It was  held by the majority that a doctor, who in exercise of his
clinical judgment gave contraceptive advice and treatment to a girl under 16
without her parents’ consent, did not commit any offence under the 1956
Act, because the  bona fide exercise of a clinical judgment by the doctor
negated mens rea which is an essential ingredient of those offences on this
aspect. (Lord Brandon dissented).
Therefore, a doctor had such discretion provided the girl had reached
an age where she had a sufficient understanding and intelligence to enable
her to understand fully what was proposed, that being a question of fact in
each case.  The Deptt’s circular could be followed by a doctor without
involving him in any infringement of parental rights or breach of criminal
law.  (Lord Brandon and Lord Templeman dissenting).
(14). Re (A minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment): 1991(4) All ER 177
(CA)(Lord Donaldson of Lymington, Stranghton & Farquharson LJJ)
R,  a  15  year  old  who  had  psychotic  problems  was  placed  in  a
children’s home.  She experienced visual and audatory hallucinations.  She
was violent too and paranoid.  Ward’s mental condition was fluctuating
97

between normal behaviour and psychosis.  The local authority placed her in
an adolescent psychiatric unit where she was sedated from time to time with
her consent.  This it did because the patient was behaving in a paranoid,
argumentative and hostile manner.  Although she had clear intervals when
her mental illness was in recession, the prognosis was that if the medication
was not administered, she would return to her psychotic state.  However, in
rational and lucid periods, when she had sufficient understanding to make
the decision, she objects to taking the drugs.  In those circumstances, the
Local Authority refused to authorize the administration of drugs against her
will, while the unit was not prepared to continue to care for her unless it had
authority to administer appropriate medication to control her.  The Area
Local Authority commenced wardship proceedings and applied for leave for
the unit to administer medication, including anti-psychotic drugs, whether
or not the ward consented.  The question arose (i) whether the Judge had
power to override the decision  of the ward who was a minor  to refuse
medication and treatment irrespective of whether the minor was competent
to give her consent and (ii) whether he had the requisite capacity to accept
or refuse such medication or treatment.
Walter J granted the application, holding that although a wardship
judge  could  not  override  the  decision  of a ward  who  had  the  requisite
capacity, on the facts, the ward did not have the capacity.  The Official
Solicitor as guardian-ad-litem of the ward appealed, contending that if a
child had the right to give consent to medical treatment, the parents, (and a
fortiorari)  the  wardship  Court’s  right  to  give  or  refuse  consent  was
terminated.   On  appeal,  the  Court  of  Appeal  confirmed  the  judgment
98

holding that the Judge was right in granting the application for the unit to
administer medication irrespective of whether the ward consented.
In the course of judgment, Lord Donaldson MR referred to Gillick’s
case (1985)(3) All ER 402 and referred to, what is now known as “Gillick
Competence”.  He said:
“The test of ‘Gillick Competence’, although not decisive in this case,
is nevertheless of general importance ….. The House of Lords, in that
case,  was  quite  clearly  considering  the  staged  development  of  a
normal child.  For example, at one stage it (the patient) will be quite
incapable  of  deciding  whether  or  not  to  consent  to  a  dental
examination, let alone treatment.  At a later stage, it will be quite
capable of both, but incapable of deciding whether to consent to more
serious treatment.  But there is no suggestion that the extent of this
competence can fluctuate upon a day-to-day or week-to-week basis.
What  is  really  being  looked  at  is  an  assessment  of  mental  and
emotional age, as contrasted with chronological age, but even this test
needs to be modified in the case of fluctuating mental disability to
take account of that misfortune.  It should be added that, in any event,
what is invoked is not merely an ability to understand the nature of
the proposed treatment – in this case compulsory medication – but a
full understanding and appreciation of the consequences both of the
treatment in terms of intended and possible side effects and, equally
important, the anticipated consequences of a failure to treat… 
But even  if  she  was  capable  on  a good  day of a sufficient
degree  of  understanding  to  meet  the  Gillick criteria,  her  mental
99

disability, to the cure or amelioration of which the proposed treatment
was directed, was such that on other days, she was not only ‘Gillick
incompetent’, but actually sectionable.   No child in that situation can
be regarded as ‘Gillick Competent’ and the Judge was wholly right in
so finding in relation to R.”
In the body of the Judgment, it was held that if a ‘Gillick Competent’ person
consents, there can be no problem but where such person refuses, “Consent
can be given by someone else who has parental rights or responsibilities.
The failure or refusal of the ‘Gillick competent’ child is a very important
factor in the doctor’s decision whether or not to treat, but does not prevent
the necessary consent being obtained from another competent source.”
Lord Donaldson then laid down six principles, which read as follows:
(1) No doctor can be required to treat a child, whether by the Court in
the exercise of its wardship jurisdiction,  by the parents,  by the
child or anyone else.  The decision whether to treat (a patient) is
dependent  upon  an  exercise  of  his  own  profession  judgment,
subject only to the threshold requirement that, save in exceptional
cases usually of emergency, he had the consent of someone who
has authority to give that consent.  In forming that judgment, the
views  and  wishes  of  the  child  are  a  factor  whose  importance
increases with the increase in child’s intelligence and undertaking.
(2) There can be concurrent powers to consent.  If more than one body
or person has power to consent, only a failure to or refusal of
consent by all having that power will create a veto.
100

(3) A ‘Gillick Competent’ child or one over the age of 16 will have
power to consent but this will be concurrent with that of a parent
or guardian.
(4) ‘Gillick Competence’ is a development concept and will not be
lost or acquired on a day-to-day or week-to-week basis.  In the
case of mental disability, that disability must also be taken into
account, particularly where it is fluctuating in its effect.
(5) The Court in the exercise of its wardship or statutory jurisdiction
has power to override the decisions of a ‘Gillick Competent’ child
as much as those of parents or guardians.
(6) Waite J, was right to hold that R was not ‘Gillick Competent’ and,
even  if  R  had  been  (the  Judge),  was  right  to  consent  to  her
undergoing  treatment  which  might  involve  compulsory
modification.”
(15). Re MB (Medical Treatment): 1997(2) FLR 426:
The  case  is  quite  important  and  deals  with  refusal  of  Caesarean
operation by a pregnant lady and raises the question whether, if the refusal
is to be treated as one made by a ‘competent person’, the doctors could be
given leave to perform the Caesarean operation with a view to save the life
or prevent brain damage to the foetus.  Question is whether the life of the
mother or of the child (to be born) has priority?  The trial Judge granted
permission but the Court of Appeal refused leave.
There  the  appellant  attended  the  clinic  when  she  was  33  weeks
pregnant.  She refused to allow blood samples to be taken because of her
101

‘fear of needles’.  When she was 40 weeks pregnant, it was found that the
foetus was in the breach position. It was explained to the patient that a
normal delivery would pose serious risk of death or brain damage to the
baby.  She initially gave consent in writing and so did her partner but later
she panicked on account of ‘needle phobia’ and withdrew consent.  Finally
she agreed but refused to allow anaesthesia.  The health authority applied to
court and the court granted leave to the gyanecologist to operate on her,
using reasonable force, if necessary.   
On 18.2.97, after she finally refused at 9.00 pm, the hospital sought a
court order at 9.25 pm and Hollis J made a declaration at 9.55 pm permitting
the operation.   Earlier in the day, the lady was provided  with  her own
lawyers.  After decision of Hollis J, Mr. Francis Q.C again spoke to her and
she asked him to file an appeal.  On the following morning, she signed
another consent form and co-operated fully in the operation as well as for
induction  of  anaesthesia.   A  boy  child  was  born  after  the  caesarian
operation.  The appeal was filed – perhaps to settle the issues arising in the
case.
(A) Butler-Sloss LJ speaking on behalf of the Court of Appeal, agreed
with the trial judge and held that 
(1) patient’s consent is necessary for invasive medical treatment and
that a mentally competent person was entitled to refuse medical treatment,
whether for good or rational or even for irrational reasons or for no reasons
at all, even where that decision might lead to his or her death.  The only
situation in which it was lawful for the doctors to intervene was where ‘it
102

was believed that the adult patient lacked the capacity to decide  and the
treatment was in the patient’s best interests’.  The court did not have the
jurisdiction to take into account the interests of the unborn child at risk from
refusal of a competent mother to consent for medical intervention.
(Dicta of Lord Donaldson in Re T (Adult: Refusal of Treatment) sub
non  Re T (An Adult: Consent to Medical Treatment) and of Sir Stephen
Brown (President) in Re S (Adult: Refusal of Medical Treatment) where he
had to take an urgent decision, even without consulting the patient – were
dissented).
(2) Medical  treatment  can  be  undertaken  in  an  emergency  even  if,
through lack of capacity, no consent had been competently given, provided
the treatment was a necessity and did no more than was reasonably required
in the best interests of the patient Re F (Mental Patient: Sterilization): 1990
(2) AC1.
(3) On  the  facts,  the  evidence  of  the  obstetrician  and  the  consultant
psychiatrist established that the patient could not bring herself to undergo
the  caesarian  section  she  desired  because  a  panic  –  fear  of  needles
dominated  everything  and,  at  the  critical  point  she  was  not  capable  of
making a decision at all.  On that basis, it was clear that she was at the time
suffering from an impairment of her mental functioning which disabled her
and was temporarily incompetent.
Test in  Re. C (Refusal of Medical Treatment): 1994(1) All ER 819
applied.
103

(4) Furthermore, since the mother (pregnant lady) and father wanted the
child to be born alive and the mother (the pregnant lady) was in favour of
the operation, subject only to her needle phobia, and was likely to suffer
long term damage if the child was born handicapped or dead, it must follow
that medical intervention was in the patient’s best interests, with the use of
force if necessary for it to be carried out.   In these circumstances, the judge
was right in granting the declaration.
(B)  On the question of capacity to decide, the Court of Appeal quoted
Lord Donaldson (Re T (An Adult) (Refusal of Medical Treatment) (1993
Fam 95 (102) = 1992 (4) All ER 649 sub nom Re T (An Adult: Consent to
Medical  Treatment)  1992  (2)  FCR  458  (460):  (at  p.112)  (at  p.470)  as
follows:   (That was case of a pregnant lady involved in a car accident who
required blood transfusion)
“Capacity to decide:
The right to decide one’s own fate presupposes a capacity to do so.
Every adult is presumed to have that capacity, but it is a presumption
which  can  be  rebutted.   This  is  not  a  question  of  the  degree  of
intelligence or education of the adult concerned.   However, a small
minority of the population lack the necessary mental capacity due to
mental  illness  or  retarded  development  (see,  for  example  Re  F
(Mental Patient) (Sterilisation) 1990 (2) AC1).    This is a permanent
or at least a long term state.   Others who would normally have that
capacity  may  be  deprived  of  it  or  have  it  reduced  by  reason  of
104

temporary  factors,  such  as  unconsciousness  or  confusion  or  other
effects of shock, severe fatigue, pain or drugs used in their treatment.
Doctors, faced with a refusal of consent, have to give very
careful and detailed consideration to the patient’s capacity to decide,
at that time when decision was made.   It may not be the simple case
of the patient having no capacity because, for example, at that time he
had hallucinations.   It may be the more difficult case of a temporarily
reduced capacity at the time when his  decision was made.  What
matters is that the doctors should consider whether at the time he had
a capacity which was commensurate with the gravity of the decision
which he purported to make.   The more serious the decision, the
greater  the  capacity  required.   If  the  patient  had  that  requisite
capacity, they (doctors) are bound by his decision.  If not, they are
free to treat him in what they believe to be in his ‘best interests’.”
(C) The Court of Appeal quoted Thorpe J in  Re C (Refusal of Medical
Treatment) 1994 (1) FCR: 1994 (1) All ER 819, (There it was a man of 68,
suffering from paranoid schizophrenia refusing to have an amputation of his
leg) to the following effect:
“I consider helpful Dr E’s analysis of the decision-making process
into  three  stages:  first,  comprehending  and  retaining  treatment
information,  secondly, believing it and,  thirdly, weighing it in the
balance to arrive at choice.”
This is known as the ‘C Test’.
105

(D) (i)  The Law Commission of UK has proposed a similar approach in
para  2.20  of  its  Consultation  Paper  129,  “Mentally  Incapacitated
Adults and Decision-Making”.
(ii)  In 1995, the Law Commission of UK recommended in Law Com
No.231 on ‘Mental Capacity’ (in paras 3.2 – 3.23) that a person is
without capacity at the material time if he is unable by reason of
mental disability to make a decision for himself on the matters in
question either because:
(a) he is unable to understand or retain the information relevant to the
decision, including information about the reasonably foreseeable
consequence of deciding one way or another or failing to make
the decision; or
(b) he is unable to make a decision based on that information.”
“Mental disability’ was defined as a disability or disorder of the
mind or brain, whether permanent or temporary, which results in
an impairment or disturbance of mental functioning.”
(E) Caesarian Section cases:
Butler-Sloss LJ then referred to other Caesarian Section decisions:
(a) In  Tameside and Glossap Acute Services Trust v.  CH: 1996 (1) 7
FLR 762, the patient was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and was
admitted under sec. 3 of the Mental Health Act, 1893.   She was found to be
pregnant and the foetus was in danger if the pregnancy continued.  There
106

was overwhelming evidence that she lacked the capacity to consent to or
refuse the treatment proposed.  Wall J, in making the declaration sought
under sec. 63 of that Act, set out the general principles which govern non-
consensual  treatment  and  applied  the  three-part  test  (the  case  in  Re  C
decided by Thorpe J, called the ‘C-Test’).
(b) The  next  case  as  to  caesarian  section  is  Norfolk  and  Norwich
Healthcare (NHS) Trust v.  W: (1996) (2) FLR 613.   That was a peculiar
case  where  the  lady,  who  was  under  pschiatric  treatment,  came  to  the
hospital in labour denying that she was pregnant.  She was in a state of
arrested  labour.   The  obstetrician  considered  a  forceps  delivery  or  a
caesarean section had to be performed.  A psychiatrist examined her and
found she was not suffering from a mental disorder.  He was not certain
whether she was capable of comprehending and retaining information about
the proposed treatment but she continued to deny she was pregnant.  He was
not sure if she was capable of believing the information about the treatment.
He was,  however,  of the  opinion  that  she  was  not  able  to  balance  the
information given to her.  This was the C test.  Johnson J (at p.616) held
that:
“… although she was not suffering from a mental disorder within the
meaning of the statute, she lacked the mental competence to make a
decision  about  the  treatment  that  was  proposed  because  she  was
incapable of weighing up the considerations that were involved.  She
was called upon to make that decision at a time of acute emotional
stress; and (the) physical pain in the ordinary course of labour made
107

even  more difficult  for  her  because  of  her  own  particular  mental
history.”
The judge was satisfied that the operation was in her  best interests
and that, in the circumstances, the court had power, at common law, to
authorize the use of reasonable force.
(c) Rockdale Healthcare (NHS) Trust v.  C (unreported, 3rd July 1996)
also related to a caesarian operation.  During the hearing of Norfolk, above
referred to, Johnson J was approached for an urgent declaration because the
obstetrician  considered  that  the  caesarian  section  had  to  be  carried  out
within  an  hour if  the  foetus  was to  survive  and  risk  of damage to  the
patient’s health was to be avoided.   The lady had previously a caesarian
section and she said she would rather die than have it again.  It was not
possible  to  obtain  psychiatric  evidence  in  the  time  available.   The
obstetrician considered that the patient was fully competent.  The judge had
very little time and only ‘the scantiest information’ upon which to assess the
patient and make a decision.  Johnson J applied the C test (as laid down by
Thorpe J) and found that the patient was not capable of weighing up the
information that she was given, the third element of the C test.  Johnson J
held:
“The patient was in the throes of labour with all that is involved in
terms of pain and emotional stress.  I concluded that a patient who
could, in those circumstances speak in terms which seemed to accept
the inevitability of her own death, was not a patient who was able
properly to weigh-up the considerations that arose so as to make any
108

valid decision, about anything of even the most trivial kind, still one
which involved her own life.”
Adverting  to  this  case,  Butler-Sloss  LJ  commented  that  one  may
question whether there was evidence before the court which enabled the
judge to come to a conclusion contrary to the opinion of the obstetrician that
she was competent.  Nonetheless, he made the declarations sought.   In fact,
the patient changed her mind and consented to the operation.
(d) Re L: (unreported, 5th Dec. 1996) is yet another case of caesarian
operation.  Kinkwood J was faced with an application, on facts similar to
the Re MB.  It was again a case of needle phobia.   An urgent application
was made in respect of a patient L, in her twenties who had been in labour
for some hours and the labour had become obstructed.  In the absence of
intervention, the foetus was at risk and deterioration was inevitable and
death would follow.   The carrying of a dead-foetus would be injurious to
the patient’s health and the removal of the foetus by surgical procedure
would become necessary.   An emergency caesarean section was strongly
indicated.   L wanted her baby to be born alive but she suffered from needle
phobia  and was unable to consent  to the use  of a needle and  therefore
(opposed) to the proposed course of treatment.    Kirkwood J applied the C
test of Thorpe J and said:
“…  that  her  extreme  needle  phobia  amounted  to  an  involuntary
compulsion that disabled L from weighing treatment information in
the  balance  to  make  a  choice.   Indeed,  it  was  an  affliction  of  a
109

psychological nature that compelled L against medical advice with
such force that her own life would be in serious peril.”
The  learned  Judge  held  that  she  was  incapable  of  weighing  the
relevant treatment information in the balance and thus lacked the relevant
mental competence to make a treatment decision.   He further held that it
was in her best interests to have the operation and he granted the declaration
sought by the hospital.
(e) Butler-Sloss  LJ  referred  also  to  Re S (Adult:  Refusal  of  Medical
Treatment) 1993 Fam 123 C = 1993 (1) FLR 26) where Sir Stephen Brown,
President had to take a decision in a matter of ‘utmost urgency’.   The
hearing was brief, the lady could not be represented.  The Health Authority
and the hospital applied  for emergency caesarean section.  The Official
Solicitor acted as amicus curiae.   The patient’s objection was based on
religious grounds.  The court stated that it was approached at 1.30 pm, the
hearing was at 2.00 pm and the order was at 2.18 pm.  Stating that there was
no direct English case at that time, he relied upon an American case in Re C
(1990) 573 A 2d 1235 (1240, 1246-1248, 1252).  The judge said:
“I do not propose to say any more at this stage, except that I wholly
accept  the  evidence  of  Mr  P  as  to  the  desperate  nature  of  this
situation, and I grant the declaration as sought.”
(F) Conclusions of Butler-Sloss LJ on “capacity of a woman to decide”:
on medical intervention to her.  (Butler-Sloss LJ)
(caesarian cases)
110

“(1) Every person is presumed to have the capacity to consent to or
to refuse medical treatment unless and until the presumption is rebutted.
(2) A  competent  woman  who  has  the  capacity  to  decide,  may,  for
religious reasons, (or) other reasons, (or) for rational or irrational reasons or
for no reason at all, choose not to have medical intervention, even though
the consequence may be the death or serious handicap of the child she bears,
or her own death.  In that event, the courts do not have the jurisdiction to
declare  medical  intervention  lawful  and  the  question  of  her  own  best
interests objectively considered, does not arise.
(3) Irrationality is here used to connote a decision which is so outrageous
in its defiance of logic or of accepted  moral standards  that no sensible
person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided it could have
arrived at it.  As Kennedy and Grubb Medical Law (Butterworth, 2nd Ed,
1994)  point  out,  it  might  be  otherwise  if  a  decision  is  based  on  a
misperception of reality (e.g. the blood is poisoned because it is red).  Such
a misperception will be more readily accepted to be a disorder of the mind.
Although it might be thought that irrationality sits uneasily with competence
to decide, panic, indecisiveness and irrationality in themselves do not as
such amount to incompetence.  The graver the consequences of the decision,
the  commensurately  greater  the  level  of  competence  required  to  take  a
decision: (Re T (above), Sideway (a) 1985 AC 871 at 904, Gillick vs. West
Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority and Another: (1986) AC 112
169 (186).
111

(4) A person lacks capacity if some impairment or disturbance of mental
functioning  renders  the  person  unable  to  make  a  decision  whether  to
consent to or refuse treatment.  That inability to make a decision will occur
when
(a) the patient is unable to comprehend and retain the information
which  is  material  to  the  decision,  especially  as  to  the  likely
consequences of having or not having the treatment in question:
(b) the patient is unable to use the information and weigh it in the
balance as part of the process of arriving at the decision.  If, as
Thorpe  J  observed  in  Re  C (above),  a compulsive  disorder  or
phobia  from  which  the  patient  suffers  stifles  belief  in  the
information presented to her, then the decision may not be a true
one.  As Lord Cockburn CJ put it in Bank vs. Goodfellow (1870)
LR  Q  B  549  (569):  ‘one  object  may  be  so  forced  upon  the
attention of the invalid as to shut out all others that might require
consideration’:
(5) The ‘temporary factors’ mentioned by Lord Donaldson MR in Re T
(viz.  confusion,  shock,  fatigue,  pain  or  drugs)  may  completely  erode
capacity  but  those  concerned  must  be  satisfied  that  such  factors  are
operating to such a degree that the ability to decide is absent.
(6) Another such influence may be panic induced by fear.  Again, careful
scrutiny of the evidence is necessary because fear of an operation may be a
rational reason for refusal to undergo it.  Fear may also, however, paralyse
the will and thus destroy the capacity to make a decision.
112

(G) Having exhaustively analysed the principles, Butler-Sloss LJ referred
to the “Guidelines from the Royal College of Obstetrians and Gynaecologist
entitled  “A Consideration of the Law and Ethics in relation to Court –
Authorised  Obstetric  Intervention”.   The  guidelines,  it  was  observed,
provide  an  interesting  dissertation  on  the  decisions  so  far  made  in  the
Courts, a summary of the problems which arise, and give advice to the
members of the medical profession who have to meet them.  The Committee
concluded:
“…. It is inappropriate, and unlikely to be helpful or necessary, to
invoke judicial intervention to overrule an informed and competent
woman’s refusal of a proposed medical treatment, even though her
refusal might place her life and that of her foetus, at risk.”
The learned Judge observed that the above guideline correctly reflects the
present state of the law.  “The only situation in which it is lawful for the
doctors  to  intervene  is  if  it  is  believed  that  the  adult  patient  lacks  the
capacity to decide.”  “If the competent mother refuses to have the medical
intervention, the doctors may not  lawfully do more than attempt to persuade
her.  If that persuasion is unsuccessful, there are  no further steps towards
medical intervention to be taken.  We recognize that the effect of these
conclusions is that there will be situations in which the child may die or may
be seriously handicapped because the mother said no and the obstetrician
may not be able to take the necessary steps to avoid the death or handicap.
The mother may indeed later reject the outcome, but the alternative would
be an unwarranted invasion of the right of the woman to make the decision.
113

(16). Re D (Medical Treatment): 1998(2) FLR 10 – (Sir Stephen Brown J)
(26th September, 1997)
The  defendant,  a  man  of  49  years,  suffered  from  long-standing
psychiatric illness and had spent a very large part of his life in and out of
psychiatric hospitals.  He suffered from chronic renal failure and required
dialysis three/four times a week but his mental condition made it impossible
for him to give the necessary co-operation for that treatment. The hospital
authorities applied to the Court for a declaration that it would be lawful for
the Trust not to impose haemodialysis in circumstances in which, according
to medical opinion, it was not reasonably practical to do so as the patient
was  not  co-operating.   The  official  Solicitor  represented  the  patient,
obtained a doctor’s  opinion that in the context of the patient not being
capable and not cooperative, the doctors  should  be protected if dialysis
became impossible to be conducted.
The  Court  accepted  the  application  and  gave  declaration  that,
‘notwithstanding the defendant’s inability to consent to or refuse medical
treatment, it is lawful as being in the best interests of the patient that the
plaintiff  hospital  does  not  impose  haemodialysis  upon  him  in  the
circumstances  in  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  medical  practitioners
responsible for such treatment, it is not reasonably practical to do so’.
(17). Re L (Medical Treatment: Gillick Competency): 1998(2) FLR 810
(Sir Stephen Brown J) (10th June 1998).
114

A 14 year old girl was in a life threatening condition.  She rejected
medical treatment involving the possibility of a blood transfusion to which,
because she was a Jehovah’s witness, she would not consent.  She had
sincere convictions and was mature for her age.  The surgeon made it clear
to her that he was in no doubt that the blood transfusion was necessary to
save her life. The girl had not been made aware of the actual manner of
death.  The surgeon, however, informed the Court that she would suffer a
horrible death.  The hospital authority sought leave of Court to administer
blood transfusion without her consent.  The issue was whether she was
Gillick competent?
It  was  held  by  Stephen  Brown  J,  granting  permission  for  blood
transfusion – without her consent – that though the child’s religious views
may not be discussed by the Court still, there was a distinction between ‘a
view’ of this kind and the “constructive formulation of an opinion” which
occurred with adult experience; this had not happened in this child’s case.
It must not be overlooked that she was still a child.  Also she had a sheltered
life,  largely  influenced  by  the  Jehovah’s  witness  congregation.   This
necessarily limited her understanding of matters which were grave.  She was
not given all the information which it would be right and appropriate to
have in her mind while deciding whether or not she could give consent.  She
was  not ‘Gillick  Competent’.   Re  R (A  Minor)  (Wardship  :  Medical
Treatment) : 1991(4) All ER 177 (CA).  The Court had, therefore, to decide
what was in her best interests, as on the facts, it was not only in her best
interests but absolutely vital, that she received the treatment despite her lack
of consent.
115

Per Curiam:  it will be appropriate to authorise treating without her
consent even if the child were ‘Gillick Competent’ because this was an
extreme case and she was in a grave condition.
(18). Siamese  Twins  case:  Re  A  (Children):  2000  EWCA  254  (Ward,
Brooke, Robert Walker L JJ) (22.9.2000)
This  is  very  lengthy  judgment  (about  88  pages).   It  raises  very
important medico-legal issues.  
The problem there was, in the case two conjointed twins, whether
invasive surgery and their separation was necessary if one of them (Jodic)
could be made to live longer while it was absolutely certain that  the same
surgery would leave the other one, Mary, dead.  Jodic was stronger and in
fact she was supplying oxygen to Mary.  The parents were not in favour of
separating them.  But, if operation was not done in six months, both will
die..  The twins could not obviously decide.  Johnson J granted a declaration
to the hospital to separate the twins.  The twins were born on 8.8.2000.
Johnson J granted declaration on 25.8.2000.  Johnson J took video-evidence
of doctors to save time.  Mary was provided nutrition by tube.  If separated
in six months, Mary would die but Jodic could live with a good quality of
life, with defects which could be corrected.  There were several medical
reports on these issues placed before the Court.  (pp 1 to 18).
The  parents  appealed.   Separate  judgments  were delivered  by the
learned Judges (22.9.2000).
116

Ward LJ:  The learned Judge referred to the fundamental principle
that a persons body is inviolate.  (In  Re F. Mental Patient: Sterilisation:
1990(2) AC 1 (per Lord Goff) & Lord Reid in S vs. McC, W vs. W (1972)
(AC 24(43).  Then there was the principle of a right of self-determination
(Re F, Lord Goff referring to Cardozo J and there was also the patient’s
right to veto).  This was recognized in Airedale : 1993 AC 789.
Treatment of the competent adult requires his consent but when he
lacks competency, common law permits the principle of necessity to be
applied (Lord Goff in  Re F). In the case of children’ parents, if they are
married, they have the power to consent.  (Lord Scarman in Gillick vs. West
Norfolk A.H.A: 1986(1) AC 112(184).  If they are not, it is the mother’s
prerogative to give consent.  Where parents refuse, their decision must be
respected.  To ignore it and operate, would be an assault (In Re R (A Minor)
(Wardship consent to treat): (1992) Fam 11, per Lord Donaldson MR.  But
the parental right is not sovereign or beyond review and court control. (Lord
Scarman in Gillick at p 184)  Overriding control is vested in the Court as to
the best interests of the child.  The sovereign’s right to protect children, in
course of time, passed on to the Lord Chancellor and then to the Judges and
formed part of the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court.  See  Re B (A
Minor)  Wardship:  Medical  Treatment):  1981(1)  WLR  1424.   (per
Templeman and Dunn L JJ).  Under the family law, the test for overriding
the parents’ refusal is the child’s paramount welfare or interest (Re B (A
Minor  Wardship:  Sterilisation: 1988  AC  199  (per  Lord  Hailshan  of St.
Marylebone LC).  The meaning of welfare here is described as ‘not limited
to best medical interests’ (Butler-Sloss LJ in  Re MB (Medical Treatment
117

1997(2) FLR 426 (439).  In Re A (Male Sterilisation) 2000 (1) FLR 55, she
stated
“In my judgment, best interests encompasses medical, emotional and
all other welfare issues”.
Mary’s best welfare & best interests: As Mary would instantly die, this
question was crucial to the case.  The first question was ‘what are the gains
and  losses  to  her  from  the  intervention.   In  Re  F,  Lord  Brandson  of
Oakbrook did say that “the operation or other treatment will be in her best
interests, if, but only if, it is carried out in order either to save their lives, or
to ensure improvement or prevent deterioration in their physical or mental
health”.  This test does not help as Mary will die immediately after the
operation.
The Judge then sought aid from the principles laid down in Airedale.
That was a case in which termination  was granted in respect of a PVS
patient.  Airedale has been subjected to academic scrutiny.  See:-
(i) Kennedy  &  Grubb:  Withdrawal  of  Artificial  Hydration  and
Nutrition: Incompetent Adult: (1993) 2. Med L Rev 359;
(ii) Kennedy & Grubb, Medical Law (2nd Ed) Ch. 16
(iii) J. Finnis – ‘Blood, Crossing the Rubicon: (1993) 109 LQR 329
(iv) J Keown: Restoring Moral and Intellectual Shape to the Law after
Bland: (1997)113 LQR 481.
118

Airedale’s principles  on  culpability  were  summarized  into  six  parts  as
follows:
“(i) There was some recognition that the intention was to cause death.
(ii) Actively to bring a patient’s life to an end is: to cross the Rubicon
which runs between, on the one hand, the care of the living patient
and, on the other hand, euthanasia – actively causing his death to
avoid or to end his suffering.  Euthanasia is not lawful at common
law” – per Lord Goff at p. 865 F.
(iii) Withdrawal  of  treatment  was,  however,  properly  to  be
characterized as an omission.
(iv)      An omission to act would nonetheless be culpable if there was a  
duty to act,
(v)      There was no duty to treat if treatment was not in the best interests  
of the patient.
(vi) Since  there  was  no  prospect  of  the  treatment  improving  his  
condition the treatment was futile and there was no interest for
Tony Bland (in Airedale) in continuing the process of artificially
feeding him upon which the prolongation of his life depends.”
Quality of life:
Proposition (iv) and (v) were taken up by Ward LJ in the context of Mary.
Would Mary’s life, if  not separated from his twin, “be worth nothing to
her”?  ‘Quality of life’  that  would continue  after surgery was treated  as
relevant in Re B in 1981: 1981(1) WLR 1424 where Templeman & Dunn
LJJ referred to it.  The former said the test to be adopted was
119

“… whether the life of this child is demonstrably going to be so awful
that in effect the child must be condemned to die.”
After referring to the above, Ward L J quoted the case decided by him in In
Re C (A Minor) (Wardship: Medical Treatment)(dt. 14.4.89) 1990 Fam 26
(on appeal see Re C: 1989(2) All ER 782, dt. 20.4.89) where he approached
the  question  as  follows:  firstly  that  no  treatment  would  alter  the
hopelessness of the child’s position and secondly, that in so far as he was
able to assess the quality of life “which as a test in itself raises as many
questions as it can answer”.  He judged the quality of the child’s life as
demonstrably “awful and intolerable”, following  Re B.
Similarly in Re J (A minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment): 1990 (3)
All ER 930  (CA), the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the Official  Solicitor’s
submission and stated that ‘life would be intolerable to the child judged
from the perspective of the child’.
After referring to the views of academics and others and to the ‘right
to life’, Ward LJ said that he would not agree that ‘Mary’s life would be
worth  nothing  to  her’.   Her  life  had  its  own  “eneliminable”  value  and
dignity.
Next question is whether “To prolong Mary’s life.. would be very
seriously to her disadvantage?”  But as the proposed treatment would not
prolong her life, this question does not arise.  According to Lord Goff in
120

Airedale, the decision to discontinue a line of treatment which prolongs life
is governed by the principle of the patient’s best interests.
In the present case, the treatment amounts to an invasion and Mary’s
consent is necessary.  Mary is not receiving treatment and there is also no
question of discontinuing a treatment.
Hence, the proposed surgery is not in Mary’s interests according to
Ward LJ.  But, this conclusion was not end of the judgment of Ward LJ.
He posed further questions.
Two children – parents wishes relevant subject to welfare principle:
What does the Court do now?  If the operation is in Jodie’s interest
and not in Mary’s interest, can it be allowed?  Ward LJ then referred to the
provisions of the Children’s Act, 1984 and to Birmingham City Council vs.
H (A Minor) 1994(2) AC 212, where the mother who delivered a child was
herself a ‘child’.  It was held that the Court must approach the question
without giving priority to one child over the other.  A balance has to be
struck  and  her  parents  wishes  become  relevant.   Parents’  wishes  are
subordinate  to  the  welfare  of  the  child.   Re  KD  (A  minor)  (Ward:
Termination of access).  After referring to  J vs.  C 1970 AC 668,  Reg vs.
Gyngoll 1893(2) QB 232 he referred to  In Re Z (A minor)(Identification:
Restrictions on publication) 1997 Fam 1, where Sir Thomas Bingham MR
said that here, the Court can consider the parents’ wishes but give its own
judgment as to what is in the child’s welfare.
121

Court’s power to review the decision of the decision maker:
The next question according to Ward LJ is whether the role of the
Court is of a reviewer or a decision maker?  In Re T: (Wardship: Medical
treatment) 1997(1) All ER 906 (CA), the Court of Appeal went by the
parents’ refusal to the liver transplant of the patient: (Butler-Sloss, Waite,
Rock L.J.J).  Waite LJ stated in that case that the  “scale, at one end of
which lies the clear case where parental opposition to medical intervention
is  prompted  by  scruple  or  dogma  of  a  kind  which  is  particularly
irreconcilable with  principles of child health and welfare widely accepted
by  the  generality  of  mankind,  and  that,  at  the  other  end  lie  highly
problematic cases where there is genuine scope for a difference between the
parent and the Judge.  In both situations, it is the duty of the Judge to allow
the Court’s opinion to prevail in the perceived paramount  interest of the
child concerned but in cases as the latter end of the scale, there must be a
likelihood (though never, of course, a certainty) that the greater the scope
for genuine debate between one view and another, the stronger will be that
inclination of the Court to be influenced by a reflection that in the last
analysis, the best interests of every child include an expectation of difficult
decisions affecting the length and quality of its life will be taken for it by
the parent to whom its case has been entrusted by nature.”
After  thus  referring  to  Waite  LJ’s  observations,  Ward  LJ  then
considered two questions finally – (1) What weight is  to be given to parents
wishes, (2) How the balance is to be struck: Ward LJ ultimately concludes:
(p 41)
122

“I am in no doubt at all that the scales come down heavily in Jodie’s
favour.  The best interests of the twins is to give the chance of life to
the child whose actual bodily condition is capable of accepting the
chance to her advantage even if that has  to be at the cost of the
sacrifice of the life which is so unnaturally supported.  I am wholly
satisfied that the least detrimental choice, balancing the interests of
Mary against Jodie and Jodie against Mary, is to permit the operation
to be performed”.
Ward LJ said that a declaration will be granted as above, provided it
is lawful according to criminal law.
Then Ward LJ took up criminal law and agreed with Brooke LJ’s
separate opinion in the same case as to why doctors could not be found fault
with on the criminal side if the twins were separated.  He went into the
definition of murder, the meaning of ‘intention’, the ‘doctrine of double
effect’  (the  act  which  produces  a  bad  effect  is  nevertheless  morally
permissible if the action is good in itself), killing, unlawfulness, doctrine of
necessity,  policy of  the  law,  legal  duties;  offending  the  sanctity  of life
principle, and concluded (pp 41-46)
“For  these  reasons,  very  shortly  expressed,  I  conclude  that  the
operation which I would permit, can be lawfully carried out”
Then Ward LJ considered the Human Rights Act, 1988 (which was yet to
come into force) and the judgment of the European Commission  Paton vs.
123

United Kingdom (1980)3 EHRR 408, which construed Art 2 and he stated
that the action proposed complied with that Act too.
Finally Ward LJ concluded (at p 47):
“In my judgment, the appeal must be dismissed.  Lest it be thought
that this decision could become authority for wider propositions, such
as that a doctor, once he has determined that a patient cannot survive,
can kill the patient, it is important to restate the unique circumstances
for which this case is authority.  They are that it must be impossible to
preserve the life X without bringing about the death of Y, that Y by
his or her very continued existence, will inevitably bring about the
death of X within a short period of time; and that X is capable of
living an independent life but Y is incapable under any circumstances
(including all forms of medical intervention) of viable independent
existence.  As I said at the beginning of the judgment, this is a very
unique case”.
Brooke and Walker LJJ:
Brooke LJ wrote (pp 47 to 74) a very elaborate judgment on the doctrine of
necessity in criminal law and concluded that the interests of Judic required
the surgery even if M may die as a result.  Robert Walker concurred (pp 74
to 88).
(19) Re T (Wardship: Medical Treatment) (CA) 1997(1) WLR 906 (Butler
Sloss, Waite and Rock L JJ) (24.10.96) (This case has been referred
in the Twin’s case above)
124

A  male  child  who  was  born  with  a  life-threatening  liver  defect
underwent surgery soon after birth, when he was three and a half weeks old.
The operation was unsuccessful and caused the child considerable pain and
distress.  Medical prognosis was that he would not live beyond 2 ½ years if
there was no liver transplant.  The doctors expressed the view that the child
was suitable for liver transplant, though it was a complicated procedure, and
that there were chances of success and if the liver was transplanted, the
child could live for many years, a normal life.  The mother refused consent
as she felt the surgery would be painful.  The local authority applied to the
Court for permission to have surgery performed.  The Judge held that the
mother’s opposition was unreasonable and directed surgery.
On appeal by the mother, the judgment was reversed where invasive
surgery was likely to prolong life of a child born with a threatening defect
and  the  parents opposed  surgery  and  refused  consent,  the  paramount
consideration  was  no  doubt  for  the  welfare  of  the  child  and  about  the
reasonableness of the mother’s refusal.  Since the child’s welfare depended
on the mother who is expected to take care of the child, her views were
relevant  and  the  trial  Judge  erred  in  deciding  that  her  view  was
unreasonable. The Judge failed to assess the relevance or the weight of the
mother’s concern as to the benefits to her child on account of the surgery
and post-operative treatment, the dangers of failure both long-term as well
as short term treatment, the possibility of the need for further transplant, the
likely length of life and the effect on her child of all those concerns together
with the strong reservations expressed by one of the doctors about coercing
125

the mother into playing a crucial part in the aftermath of the operation and
thereafter.
(20)  Re A (Male Sterlisation): 2000(1)FLR 549 : (Butler-Sloss & Thorpe
LJJ)
Butler-Sloss  LJ  stated  that  ‘best  interests’  encompass  ‘medical,
emotional and all other welfare issues’.
Thorpe LJ laid down the principle on the basis of which a Judge
should decide the “best interests” of a patient.  He said:
“There can be no doubt in my mind that the evaluation of best
interests is akin to a welfare appraisal…….
Pending the enactment of a checklist or other statutory direction, it
seems to me that the first-instance Judge, with the responsibility to
make  an  evaluation  of  the  best  interests  of  a  claimant  lacking
capacity, should draw up a balance sheet.   The first entry should be
of any factor or factors of actual benefit.  In the present case, an
instance would be the acquisition of foolproof contraception.  Then
on the other sheet, the Judge should write any counter-balancing dis-
benefits to the applicant. An obvious instance in this case would be
the apprehension of risk and the discomfort inherent in the operation.
Then the Judge should enter on each sheet the potential gains and
losses in each instance making some estimate of the extent of the
possibility that the gain or loss might accrue.   At the end of that
exercise,  the  Judge  should  be  better  placed  to  strike  a  balance
between the sum of the certain and possible gains against the sum of
126

the certain and possible losses.  Obviously, only if the account is in
relatively  significant  credit  will  the  Judge  conclude  that  the
application is likely to advance the best interests of the claimant.”
21) Ms.  B vs.  An  NHS  Hospital  Trust:  2002  EWHC  429.   (Dame
Elizabeth Butler Sloss (President of the Family Court) (d. 22.3.2002) 
Ms B, born in 1956, was a post-graduate and she was a teacher in
Social Work, and had a Management Diploma.  On 26.8.99, she suffered
haemorrhage of the spinal column in her neck.  Cavernoma was diagnosed,
being a malformation of blood vessels in the spinal cord.  She executed a
living  will  on  4.9.99,  which  instructed  that  if  she  suffered  from  life
threatening  condition  or permanent  mental  impairment,  the  treatment  be
withdrawn.  She recovered from treatment, worked in her job, but in 2001,
she suffered weakness.  She suffered cervical spine cavernoma  as a result
of which she became tetraplegic, suffered  complete paralysis from neck
down. She was put in ICU on 16.2.2001.  She had to be put on ventilator.
She recovered and again her health failed, put in ICU on 28.3.2001, but this
time she asked that the ventilator be withdrawn.   Psychiatrists were divided
in their view of her capacity.  She recovered and made a further living will
on 15.8.2001 and refused treatment till November.  She moved the Court for
declaration that the treatment was invasive and was a trespass.
Butler-Sloss  J  referred  to  the  principle  of  ‘autonomy’.     That
principle accepts the capacity of a person of full age to consent or not to
consent to medical treatment.   It was laid down by Lord Reid in S vs. McC:
W vs  W: 1972(AC)  25(43  and  by Lord  Goff  in  Re F (Mental  Patient:
127

Sterilisation) 1990(2) AC1 and by Lord Donaldson in re T. 1992(4) All ER
649.   She referred to the observations of Robins JA in Malette vs.  Shulman
67 DLR (4th) 321 (336), Re MB (Medical Treatment) 1997(2) FLR 426 and
stated that the approach is identical with the jurisprudence in other parts of
the world.   In  Cruzan vs  Director (1990) 497 US 261, the US Supreme
Court stated “No right is held more sacred, or is more carefully guarded….
than the right of every individual to the possession and control of his own
person, free from all restraint or interference of others, unless by clear and
unquestionable authority of law”.
The principle of sanctity of life (i.e. protecting or prolonging life) is
also accepted to be  not absolute but that it is still a  concern of the State,
including  the  judiciary.   At the  same time, no  medical  officer  can  be
compelled to treat a patient against his wishes, even if death is imminent.
This principle of sanctity of life was explained by Lord Keith in Airedale
1993 AC 789 (859) and Lord Goff (p 864).  See also Nancy B vs. Hotel –
Dieu de Quebec : (1992) 86 DLR (4th) 385) where in a case before the
Quebec  Supreme  Court,  a  25  year  old  woman  with  an  incurable
neurological disorder refused ventilation and the Court accepted her prayer
to stop ventilation.
As  to  mental  capacity,  there  is  a  presumption  that  every  person
possesses mental capacity to decide about medical treatment but this can be
rebutted (Re MB : 1997(2) FLR 426 (436).  Assessing capacity is a difficult
exercise.  As stated by Justice Steffen in McKay vs. Bugstedt (1990) 801 P.
ed 617 (Nev Sup ct) 2(at p 5), in regard to Kenneth who was 31 years and
tetraplegic from the age of 10:
128

“One  of  the  verities  of  human  experience  is  that  all  life  will
eventually end in death.   As the seasons  of life  progress through
spring, summer and fall, to the winter of our years, the expression
unknown to youth is often heard evincing the wish to one might pass
away in the midst of a peaceful sleep. It would appear, however, that
as the scientific community continues to increase human longevity
and promote ‘the greying of America’, prospects for slipping away
during peaceful slumber are decreasing.  And for significant number
of  citizens,  like  Kenneth,  misfortune  may rob  life of much  of its
quality long before the onset of winter.”
In that case Kenneth pleaded for his release from a life of paralysis held
intact by the ‘life sustaining properties of a respirator’.
Judge  Dame  Butler-Sloss  then  quoted  from  Bartling vs.  Superior
Court of Los Angeles Country (1984) 163 Cal App(3d) 186, where it was
held that the patient’s previous ambivalence about withdrawal of treatment
was not relevant to the assessment of his capacity:
“The fact that (a patient) periodically wavered from this posture (i.e
preferring death to his intolerable life on the ventilator) because of
severe  depression  or  for  any  other  reason,  does  not  justify  the
conclusion  of  (the  hospital)  and  his  treating  physicians  that  his
capacity to make such a decision was impaired to the point of legal
incapacity.  (Lane vs. Candura: (1997) NE (2d), 1232, 1234).”
She  also  referred  to  a  similar  ambivalence  in  the  case  before  her,  the
medical  evidence  of  number  of  doctors,  and  concluded  that  Ms  B  was
129

competent to make all relevant decisions about her treatment including the
decision about withdrawal of artificial ventilation and granted her prayer for
withdrawal, after distinguishing  St Geroge’s Health Care NHS Trust Vs  J
(1999) Fam 20(63).  She gave 10 guidelines on mental capacity:
“Guidance  has  already  been  given  by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  St.
George’s Healthcare NHS Trust V. S (1999) Fam 26 at page 63 in the
Guidelines at page 758 et seq.     The circumstances of the present
case are however very different from the facts of that case.  It might
therefore  be  helpful  if  I  restate  some  basic  principles  and  offer
additional guidelines in case a situation similar to the present should
arise again.
i) There is a presumption that a patient has the mental capacity to
make  decisions  whether  to  consent  to  or  refuse  medical  or
surgical treatment offered to him/her.
ii) If mental capacity is not in issue and the patient, having been
given  the  relevant  information  and  offered  the  available
options, chooses to refuse the treatment, that decision has to be
respected by the doctors.  Considerations that the best interests
of the patient would indicate that the decision should be to
consent to treatment are irrelevant.
iii) If there is concern or doubt about the mental capacity of the
patient, that doubt should be resolved as soon as possible, by
doctors within the hospital or NHS Trust or by other normal
medical procedures.
130

iv) In  the  meantime,  while  the  question  of  capacity  is  being
resolved, the patient must, of course, be cared for in accordance
with  the  judgment  of  the  doctors  as  to  the  patient’s  best
interests.
v) If there  are  difficulties  in  deciding  whether  the  patient  has
sufficient mental capacity, particularly if the refusal may have
grave consequences for the patient, it is most important that
those considering the issue should not confuse the question of
mental capacity with the nature of the decision made by the
patient,  however  grave  the  consequences.   The view of the
patient may reflect a difference in values rather than an absence
of  competence  and  the  assessment  of  capacity  should  be
approached with this firmly in mind.   The doctors must not
allow their emotional reaction to or strong disagreement with
the decision of the patient to cloud their judgment in answering
the  primary  question  whether  the  patient  has  the  mental
capacity to make the decision.
vi) In  the  rare  case  where  disagreement  still  exists  about
competence, it is of the utmost importance that the patient is
fully informed of the steps being taken and made a part of the
process.    If  the  option  of  enlisting  independent  outside
expertise is being considered, the doctor should discuss this
with the patient so that any referral to a doctor outside the
hospital would be, if possible, on a joint basis with the aim of
helping both sides to resolve the disagreement.    It may be
crucial to the prospects of a good outcome that the patient is
131

involved before the referral is made and feels equally engaged
in the process.
vii) If the hospital is faced with a dilemma which the doctors do not
know how to resolve, it must be recognized and further steps
taken as a matter of priority.   Those in charge must not allow a
situation of deadlock or drift to occur.
viii) If there is no disagreement about competence but the doctors
are for any reason unable to carry out the wishes of the patient,
their duty is to find other doctors who will do so.
ix) If all  appropriate  steps  to  seek  independent  assistance  from
medical  experts  outside  the  hospital  have  failed,  the  NHS
Hospital Trust should not hesitate to make an application to the
High Court or seek the advice of the Official Solicitor.
x) The treating clinicians and the hospital should always have in
mind  that  a  seriously  physically  disabled  patient  who  is
mentally competent has the same right to personal autonomy
and  to  make  decisions  as  any  other  person  with  mental
capacity.
All those reading this judgment must be careful to recognize
the importance of complying with the publicity injunction set
out at the beginning of this judgment.”
22) Simms Vs An NHS Trust 2002 EW HC 2734 (Dame Elizabeth Butler
Sloss, President) (11.12.2002)
132

This case related to two patients from different families, where the
patients, a boy of 18 and a girl of 16 each were suffering from a variant of
Creutzfeldt  –  Jakob  disease.   Both  sets  of  parents  wanted  a  particular
treatment, so far untested on human beings, be given as the patients did not
have the mental capacity to think.  The patients were lying in bed totally
invalid.
The Judge quoted from her judgment  In Re A: (Male Sterilisation)
2001(1) FLR 549 (555) as follows:
“The  doctor, acting  to  that required  standard,  has, in  my view, a
second duty, that is to say, he must act in the best interests of a
mentally  incapacitated  patient:  (See  also  “Re  S  (Adult  Patient
Sterilisation)” 2001 Fam 12.”
She also referred to Lord Goff in Re F (Mental Patient: Sterilisation) 1990
(2) AC 1 (77) that the doctor, and others have 
“to exercise a choice in exactly the same way as would the Court or
reasonable parent in relation to a child, making due allowance, of
course, for the fact that the patient is not a child, and I am satisfied
that is what the law does in fact require.”
Best interests are not necessarily medical, they include emotional and all
other welfare issues: (Re MB – 1997(2) FLR 426).
The learned Judge then posed the question whether the high doses of
PPS have the support of a responsible body of medical opinion in UK.
After referring to Bolam test, and Sidaway (1985) AC 871 (893), that there
was a view in favour of the treatment, if any, suggested by a responsible
133

body of professionals.  She analysed the risks and benefits and the best
interests.  After holding that it was in their best interest and there was no
alternative treatment available and that the parents wanted it and the pain of
the surgery was to be short-lived, she permitted the PPS treatment be given
and held that it was lawful to do so.
23) Re  SG (Adult  mental  patient:  Abortion :  1991(2)  FLR  329  (Sir
Stephen Brown).
This was case of a pregnant, severely mentally handicapped 26 year
old lady.  A termination had been recommended by her GP and a consultant
gynaecologist.  In the light of the House of Lord’s decision in  Re F, her
father sought a ruling as to whether a formal declaration of the Court was
required before a termination of pregnancy was performed.  The Abortion
Act  1967  permitted  termination  if  there  was  certificate  by  two  medical
practitioners  to  the  effect  (a)  that  the  continuance  of  pregnancy  would
involve risk to the woman’s life or injury to her physical or mental health or
to  that  of  any  existing  children,  outweighing  the  risks  of  terminating
pregnancy; or (b) that there is a substantial risk that the child if born would
suffer  from  a  physical  or  mental  abnormality  such  as  to  be  seriously
handicapped.  
The question is whether, in the case of mentally incapacitated woman,
the declaration of the Court was necessary.
Stephen  Brown  P  held  that  the  termination  of  a  pregnancy  was
already  closely  regulated  by  the  Act  which  provided  ‘fully,  adequate
safeguards for doctors who are to undertake this treatment’ (at p 331).  He
134

held that it was not necessary to seek the special approval of the High Court
before the termination of a pregnancy, provided the three conditions in sec 1
of the Abortion Act were complied with.   (Stephen Brown J had said the
same thing in Re GF (medical treatment) 1992(1) FLR 293)  He, however,
said that this was a developing branch of law and that the Law Commission
or the Medical Ethics Committee of the British Medical Association could
go into the matter.
(24) Re S (Adult Patient: Sterilisation): 2001 Fam 15 (CA).  
In  this  case,  Dame  Elizabeth  Butler  Sloss  said  that  the  criteria
accepted  by Stephen  Brown  in  Re  GF (1992)(1)  FLR  293  ought  to  be
cautiously interpreted and applied.   In a separate judgment, Thorpe LJ said
that, if there was a case near the boundary line, the parties could approach
the Court.
(25) Re SS (an adult: Medical Treatment) 2002(1) FLR 73: (Wall J)
This case again related to termination of pregnancy.  The patient was
being treated in the psychiatric hospital.
Wall  J  held  that  problems  with  pregnant  patients  in  psychiatric
hospital are not unusual.  The issue of the termination of pregnancies in
such circumstances must arise frequently.    He stated that it is essential that
each hospital should have a protocol to deal with possible termination of
such pregnancies, and that the protocol should be  designed to address the
issue in good time so that, wherever practicable, and in the interests of the
patient,  a  termination  can  be  carried  out  at  the  earliest  opportunity.
Furthermore, any such protocol should ensure that the patient is referred, at
an early stage, to obtain independent legal advice, whether from the Official
135

Solicitor or the solicitor who, as in this case, appears to have represented
her at the Mental Health Review Tribunal.
(26) Re S (Hospital Patient: Court’s Jurisdiction) (1996 Jan 1).
In this case, Sir Thomas Bingham MR said (p 18):
“In  cases  of  controversy  and  cases  involving  momentous  and
irrevocable  decisions,  the  Courts  have  treated  as  justiciable  any
genuine question as to what the best interests of a patient require or
justify.   In making these decisions, the courts have recognized the
desirability of informing those involved whether a proposed course of
conduct  will  render  them  criminally  or  civilly liable,  they  have
acknowledged their duty to act as a safeguard  against malpractice,
abuse  and  unjustified  action;  and  they  have  recognized  the
desirability,  in  the  last  resort,  of  decisions  being  made  by  an
impartial, independent tribunal.”
(27) NHS Trust vs D: 2003 EWHC 2793 (Coleridge J) (pregnancy case)
The  defendant  was  a  young  adult  lady  suffering  from  severe
schizophrenia. She was 18 and became pregnant.  She was not capable of
making a decision.  Her doctors advised termination of pregnancy.  An
application by the claimant-hospital was allowed permitting termination as
the procedure under the Abortion Act, 1967, namely, certificates  of two
doctors were there and conditions mentioned in Sec 1 of that Act were
satisfied.  Declaration was granted.  (2002 EWHC (Fam) 3184 referred)
It was stated that, however, after the coming into force of Human
Rights Act, 1998,  questions arose as to whether Sec 1 of the Abortion Act,
136

1967 could be applied to mentally incompetent patients, or whether other
procedures were necessary.
Coleridge J referred to the decision of Sir Stephen Brown P in 
Re SG (adult mental patient: abortion) : 1991 (2) FLR 329 (already referred
to)  and  stated  that  procedures  under  Abortion  Act,  1967  of  obtaining
opinion of two doctors is sufficient even in the case of a pregnant woman
who is not having mental capacity.    He referred to the caution that has to
be taken while accepting the judgment of the doctors, as stated by the Court
of Appeal in  Re S (adult patient: sterilization) (2001 Fam 15)(CA), and
clarified the position between normal cases arising under that Act where the
woman has capacity to take a decision and other cases where the woman is
not competent.  Coleridge J stated as follows:
“The  safeguards  provided  by  the  Abortion  Act  1967  provide
comprehensive  and  adequate  protection  for  competent adults  who
have made their own decision to terminate a pregnancy.  A mentally
incapacitated  woman,  however,  does  not  have  the  opportunity  to
weigh all the factors and make a decision for herself.  If the guidance
in Re SG were to be strictly applied, it would leave responsibility for
all such decisions for mentally incapacitated women, regardless of
circumstances,  with  their  medical  professionals.   This  cannot  be
correct in all circumstances.
The advent of the Human Rights Act, 1998 has enhanced the
responsibility of the Court to protect positively the welfare of these
patients, and in particular to protect the patient’s right to respect for
her private and family life under Art 8(1) of the European Convention
on Human Rights.”
137

Even so, in pregnancy cases, “where the issues of capacity and best interests
are clear and beyond doubt, an application to the Court is not necessary.”  
But, “where there is any doubt as to either capacity or best interests,
an application  to  the  Court  should  be  made.  In particular and without
limiting  the  generality  of  that  proposition,  the  following  circumstances
would ordinarily warrant the making of an application:
(i) where there is a dispute as to capacity, or where there is a realistic
prospect  that the patient will regain capacity, following a response
to  treatment,  within  the  period  of  her  pregnancy  or  shortly
thereafter;
(ii) where  there  is  a  lack  of  unanimity  amongst  the  medical
professionals as to the best interests of the patient;
(iii) where the procedures under Sec 1 of the Abortion Act, 1967 have
not been followed (i.e. where two medical practitioners have not
provided a certificate);
(iv) where the patient, members of her immediate family  or the foetus’
father  have  opposed  or  expressed  views  inconsistent  with  a
termination of the pregnancy; or
(v) where there are other exceptional circumstances (including where
the termination may be the patient’s last chance to bear a child)”
Even if a case is filed anywhere near the boundary line of any one of
the above criteria, it should be referred to the Court, to avoid doubts, as
stated  by  Thorpe  LJ  in  Re  S (adult  patient  sterlisation)  2001  Fam  15.
Further, as stated by Wall J in Re SS: 2002 (1) FCR 73, the importance of
138

making necessary applications  in  good time cannot be overstated.  It is
imperative that the medical profession ensures that adequate protocols are
put in place for the timely resolution of these issues.
28) An NHS Hospital Trust v. S & others: (2003) EWHC 365 (Fam)
(Dame Elizabeth Butler-Sloss P) (6th March 2003): 
S, aged 18, was born with a genetic condition, velo-cardiac facial
syndrome, and was suffering from ‘global development delay’ and ‘bilateral
renal dysplasia’.  He has been under haemo-dialysis since May 2000.   He
has  severe  learning  disability  with  problems  arising  from  limited
understanding of medical treatment he is receiving.   He is diagnosed as
autistic.   He suffers from epilepsy, a tendency to blood-clotting and has a
moderate immuno-deficiency.  His mental capacity has been assessed as that
of a 5 or 6 year child.   He clearly does not have the capacity to take
decisions about his medical treatment.   
The  Hospital  approached  the Court  seeking  a declaration  that  the
Hospital need not perform kidney-transplantations since that would not be
in S’s best interests and that S should not undergo peritoneal dialysis.   Only
haemo-dialysis could continue for the foreseeable future and if it no longer
be provided, no other form of dialysis should be given except palliative
care. The parents opposed the plea of the Hospital and wanted the kidney
transplantation to go on.   His mother offered to donate a kidney.    The
Official Solicitor, representing S, wanted all forms of dialysis should be
considered  and  he  reserved  his  views  on  suitability  of  kidney
transplantation.
139

However, later, it was agreed by all that haemodialysis be given and
if it could no longer be given, then peritoneal dialysis be given and that
transplantation of kidney was not in his best interests.   There still remained
two areas of disagreement:
(1) There  was  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  whether  or  in  what
circumstances a kidney transplantation would ever be suitable for
S.
(2) There was strong disagreement over the possibility of giving S a
different form of haemodialysis by the use of AV fistula.
After analyzing the medical evidence, and the legal principles as 
(1) to ‘best interests: sanctity of life’ as stated in  Re B (A minor:
Wardship: Medical Treatment) 1981 (1) WLR 1421 (CA) and by Lord Goff
in Airedale 1993 AC 789, 
(2) duty of medical profession, as stated by Lord Goff in Re F (mental
patient: sterlisation) 1990 (2) AC 1; Simms v. Simms and PA vs. JA: 2002
(EWHC 2734), 
(3)  ‘best  interests:  duty  of  Court’:  as  explained  in  Re  A  (Male
Sterilisation) 2000 (1) FLR 549) 
the Court proceeded to decide the issues.
140

Butler-Sloss  P  referred  to  what  Thorpe  LJ  said  in  Re  A  (Male
Sterlisation) 2000(1) FLR 549 (at p.560) as follows:
“There  can  be  no  doubt  in  my mind  that  the  evaluation  of  best
interests is akin to a welfare appraisal…….
Pending the enactment of a checklist or other statutory direction, it
seems to me that the first-instance Judge, with the responsibility to
make  an  evaluation  of  the  best  interests  of  a  claimant  lacking
capacity, should draw up a balance-sheet.   The first entry should be
of any factor or factors of actual benefit.  In the present case, an
instance would be the acquisition of foolproof contraception.  Then
on the other sheet, the Judge should write any counter-balancing dis-
benefits to the applicant. An obvious instance in this case would be
the apprehension of risk and the discomfort inherent in the operation.
Then the Judge should enter on each sheet the potential gains and
losses in each instance making some estimate of the extent of the
possibility that the gain or loss might accrue.   At the end of that
exercise,  the  Judge  should  be  better  placed  to  strike  a  balance
between the sum of the certain and possible gains against the sum of
the certain and possible losses.  Obviously, only if the account is in
relatively  significant  credit  will  the  Judge  conclude  that  the
application is likely to advance the best interests of the claimant.”
Butler-Sloss  P  said  she  would  add  ‘his  enjoyment  of  life’  as  an
additional factor to be weighed.   After considering S’s ability to cope with
the treatment, the four options for treatment, namely, Haemodialysis via
central  catheter,  peritoreal  dialysis  AV  fistula  in  the  arm  and  possible
141

kidney  transplantation  in  the  future  -  (under  separate  headings)  -,  the
learned Judge observed:
“(1)  S cannot make his own decisions as to his future medical care
since he does not have capacity to do so;
(2) I am satisfied that it is in his best interests to  continue his
present haemodialysis treatment;
(3) I consider that the possibility of an AV fistula should not be
excluded after he has settled into the adult way of life;
(4) When haemodialysis is considered by the medical team caring
for  him (as)  no  longer  to  be  effective,  I  agree  with  the  medical
evidence that he should move to peritoneal dialysis;
(5) The  possibility  of  a  kidney  transplantation  should  not  be
excluded on non-medical grounds.”
29) HE v.  Hospital  NHS Trust & Anor: (2003) EWHC 1017  (Justice
Munby) (7th May 2003)
This  case  is  important  and  deals  with  the  validity  of  “Advance
Directives”.  While Munby J was sitting in urgent applications, the father of
the patient made an application in the afternoon on a Friday (2nd May 2003)
for relief to save the life of his daughter.    It was obvious that speed was of
the essence.   The Official Solicitor acted fast and came to Court at short
notice.  The Court made the order permitting blood transfusion in spite of
the Advance Directive and Munby J gave reasons five days later.
142

In  this  case,  the  claimant,  the  father  (HE)  and  his  family  were
Muslims, and the 2nd defendant (AE) was his daughter, aged 24 years, was
born and brought up as a Muslim.    But when her parents separated, she and
her brother went to live with their mother.   The mother became a Jehovah’s
Witness  and her children followed suit.   AE was then brought up as a
Jehovah’s  Witness.   AE  suffered  from congenital  heart  problem, which
required surgery when she was a child and she knew that further surgery
would be necessary when she became an adult.   On 13th February 2001, she
signed  a  printed  Advance  Medical  Directive/Release  and  her  signatures
being witnessed by two Ministers of her Church, excluding, among others,
blood transfusion.  In November 2002, the doctors felt that as she was a
Jehovah’s  witness,  she  could  be  given  surgery  using  erythroprotein  to
stimulate  blood  production  but  on  20th November  2003,  AE  became ill
suddenly, and the doctors felt that surgery was necessary and some partial
amputation  was  also  necessary  on  her  hands,  which  was  not  possible
without blood transfusion.  Her mother and brother objected in spite of
being told that there was risk of death to AE.  
AE was sedated from 20th April 2003 till 2nd May, when the father
moved the present application, as her position became extremely critical.
The  father  stated  in  writing  giving  seven  reasons  why  the  Advance
Directive of AE should not be acted upon.
Justice Munby heard the case at 2.20 PM on 2nd May 2003 and he
read the statement of the father and the doctor’s faxed statement.   The
Official  Solicitor  agreed  to  act  as  her  litigation-friend  as  AE  was  not
conscious.  The Judge consulted Kennedy and Grubb; Principles of Medical
143

Law (Ed 1998) (paras 3009 and 4.105 - 4.114) and referred to Re T (Adult:
Refusal  of  Treatment) 1993  Fam  95  and  Re  AK (Medical  Treatment:
Consent) 2001 (1) FLR 129 and soon thereafter granted a declaration that it
would be lawful to give blood transfusion in spite of the Advance Directive.
On 7th May 2003, the Judge gave reasons.  These are quite important.
Munby J started saying that three propositions are now well-settled
and it is not necessary to cite authority:
(1) A competent adult patient has an absolute right to refuse consent
to  any  medical  treatment  or  invasive  procedure,  whether  the
reasons are rational, irrational, unknown or non-existent, and even
if the result of refusal is the certainty of death.  He agreed with
Prof. Andrew Grubb’s observation (see 2002 Med L Rev 201 at
203) that: ‘English law could not be clearer.  A competent adult
patient once properly informed, has the unassailable right to refuse
any or all medical treatment or care’.
(2) Consistently  with  this,  a  competent  adult  patient’s  anticipatory
refusal of consent (a so-called advance-directive or a living-will)
remains binding and effective notwithstanding that the patient has
subsequently become and remained incompetent.
(3) An adult is presumed to have capacity, so the burden of proof is on
those who seek to rebut the presumption and who assert a lack of
capacity.”
The learned Judge further referred to burden of proof as follows:
144

As to the law on burden and standard of proof, he held:
(i) While there is a presumption in favour of capacity and the burden
to  prove  incapacity  is  on  those  who  dispute  capacity,  there  is
another burden where there is an advance directive.  This burden
is  on  those  who  rely  on  the  advance  directive  to  prove  its
existence,  its  continuing  validity and  applicability.   If  there  is
doubt, that doubt falls to be resolved in favour of preservation of
life.
(ii) As to standard of proof of the advance directive, it must be clear
and convincing based on balance of probabilities as in civil cases.
The more extreme the gravity of the matter in issue, the stronger
and more cogent the evidence must be.  When life is at stake
evidence must be scrutinized with special care.  (In re H. (Minors)
(Sexual Abuse: Standard of Proof) 1996 AC 563 and dictum of
Ungoed – Thomas J in  Re Dellow’s Will Trusts: 1964 (1) WLR
451  (455).   The  continuing  validity and  applicability  of  the
advance  directive  must be  established  by clear  convincing  and
inherently reliable evidence.
(iii) Depending upon the lapse of time and the known changes in the
patient’s  circumstances  during  that  time,  the  validity  of  the
advance  directive  has  to  be  examined.   See  In  re  T:  (Adult:
Refusal of Treatment) 1993 Fam 95, Lord Donaldson MR (p 103)
where  he  referred  to  two  ‘ys’  for  the  validity  of  an  advance
directive or anticipatory choice.  He said that there is:
145

“… a conflict between two interests, that of the patient and that of the
society in which he lives.  The patient’s interest consists of his right
to self-determination – his right to live his own life, how he wishes,
even  if it  will  damage his  health  or lead  to  his  premature  death.
Society’s interest is in upholding the concept that all human life is
sacred and that it should be preserved if at all possible.  It is well-
established  that  in  the  ultimate,  the  right  of  the  individual  is
paramount.  But this merely shifts the problem where the conflict
occurs and calls for a very careful examination of whether, and if so
the way in which, the individual is exercising that right.  In case of
doubt, that doubt falls to be resolved in favour of the preservation of
life for if the individual is to override the public interest, he must do
so in clear terms”.
Munby J refers to Lord Donaldson’s statement (at p 114) that an ‘advance
directive’ ‘may have been based upon an assumption’, in which case, it is
necessary to examine the assumption.    Lord Donaldson said:
“If… the assumption upon which it is based is falsified, the refusal
ceases to be effective.  The doctors are then faced with a situation in
which the patient has made no decision and he by then being unable
to decide for himself, they have both the right and the duty to treat
him in accordance with what in the exercise of their clinical judgment
they consider to be in his best interests.”
Munby J refers to Francis & Johnston, ‘Medical treatment: Decisions and
the Law’ (Ed 2001) (para 1.29) that a patient’s consent to treatment will not
survive a material change of circumstances.  In the same way, says Munby J
that, a patient’s anticipatory refusal to treatment will not survive a material
146

change of circumstances.  He quotes Lord Goff in Airedale (at p 864) where
it is stated that an advance directive must be considered with ‘especial care’.
“…. Especial  care  may be  necessary to  ensure  that  the prior  refusal  of
consent  is still properly to be regarded as applicable in the circumstances
which have subsequently occurred.”
Munby J also refers to what Hughes J said in Re AK: 2001(1) FLR
129 (p 134):
“…  in the case of an adult patient of full capacity, his refusal to
consent to treatment or care must in law be observed.  It is clear that
in  an  emergency,  a  doctor  is  entitled  in  law  to  treat  by invasive
means, if necessary, a patient who, by reason of the emergency, is
unable  to  consent,  on  the  ground  that  the  consent  can,  in  those
circumstances, be assumed. It is, however, also clearly the law that
the doctors are not entitled so to act if it is known that the patient,
provided he was of sound mind and full capacity, has let it be known
that he does not consent and that such treatment is against his wishes.
To this extent an advance indication of the wishes of a patient of full
capacity and sound mind are effective. Care will of course have to be
taken  to  ensure  that  such  anticipatory  declarations  of wishes  still
represent the wishes of the patient.  Care must be taken to investigate
how long ago the expression of wishes was made.  Care must be
taken to investigate with what knowledge the expression of wishes
was made.  All the circumstances in which the expression of wishes
was given will, of course, have to be investigated.”
147

This is so far as burden of proof and standard of proof of advance directives
and their continued validity and applicability. 
On the validity of the advance directive, Munby J said – there are no
legal requirements of forms.  In fact, it need not even be in writing (In Re
T).  It may be oral or in writing.  It should be a firm and settled view of the
person and not an offhand remark or casual expression.  The same principle
applies to a ‘revocation of an advance directive’.  The popular term ‘a living
will’ is misleading.  It is not governed by the (UK) Wills Act, 1837.  A
written  advance  directive  can  be  revoked  even  orally.   An  irrevocable
advance directive is a ‘contradiction in terms’.  It is a legal impossibility.
Munby J stated:
“A  free  man  can  no  more  sign  away  his  life  by  executing  an
irrevocable advance directive refusing life-saving treatment than he
can  sign  away  his  liberty  by subjecting  himself  to  slavery.  Any
condition in an advance directive purporting to make it irrevocable is
contrary to public policy and void.”
Yet another proposition laid down by Munby J was that if there was an
advance directive, none except the person who made it can revoke it and it
remains effective if the person has later become incompetent due to his
health condition.  But, he cannot impose formal or other conditions upon its
revocation  and  they  would  be  void  as  being  contrary  to  public  policy.
Hence, paragraph (2d) of the Advance Directive which reads as:
“that the Advance Directive shall remain in force and bind all those
treating me unless and until I expressly revoke it in writing”
148

is void as being contrary to public policy.  Revocation in writing is not
necessary.  It can be oral.   The patient could orally say she has renounced
her faith as a Jehovah’s witness.   It will also be invalid if it had stated that
it had to be revoked in the presence of two witnesses.
In the present case, AE seems to have been influenced by a wish to
return to her original faith (Muslim religion) in order to marry a Muslim.  A
‘secular system of law founded on the freedom of the individual cannot hold
bound to his previous written statement, a patient whose courage fails him
as he is wheeled into the operation theatre, whatever he may previously
have said in writing’.  Any self-imposed factor on a patient’s ability to
revoke such a document will be contrary to public policy and void.  The
question is
“whether an advance directive has been revoked or has,  for some
other reason, ceased to be operative…”
This then becomes a question of fact.  On that question, the burden of proof
lies  in those who  assert  the continuing  validity and  applicability of the
advance directive.
The patient’s change of mind can be evidenced by written or spoken
words or may be clear from  the patient’s actions – for sometimes actions
speak louder than words.  It may be some change in circumstances.  It may
be alleged that the patient no longer professes the faith which underlay the
advance  directive;  or that he has  since been  cured;  it  may be said  that
medical science has moved on; it may be said that since then, the patient had
married and has children, and now finding himself with more compelling
reasons to choose to live even in a severely disadvantaged life.   It may be
149

suggested  that  the  advance  directive  has  been  revoked  expressly  or  by
conduct inconsistent with the continued validity of the advance directive.
Once there is some real reason for doubt, then the burden shifts to those
who assert on its continuing validity and applicability.  If the doubt is not
removed, it gets resolved in favour of the preservation of life.  If there is
doubt, the advance directive cannot come in the way of the doctor deciding
upon what is in the best interests of the patient.  Whether such a doubt has
come into play depends on the circumstances.  Too skeptical a reaction to
well-founded  suggestions  that circumstances  have changed,  may turn an
advance directive into a death warrant for a patient who in truth wants to be
treated.  Munby J then stated:
“the longer the time which has elapsed since an advance directive was
made,  and  the  greater  the  apparent  changes  in  the  patient’s
circumstances  since  then,  as  I  have  seen,  there  will  need  to  be
especially close, rigorous and anxious scrutiny”
Munby J finally summarised the law regarding ‘advance directives’
into seven propositions:
“(i) There are no formal requirements for a valid advance directive. An
advance directive need not be either in or evidenced by writing.
An advance directive may be oral or in writing.
(ii) There are no formal requirements for the revocation of an advance
directive.  An advance directive, whether oral or in writing, may
be  revoked  either  orally  or  in  writing.    A  written  advance
150

directive  or  an  advance  directive  executed  under  seal,  can  be
revoked orally.
(iii) An advance directive is inherently revocable.  Any condition in an
advance directive purporting to make it irrevocable; any even self-
imposed  fetter  on  a  patient’s  ability  to  revoke  an  advance
directive, and any provision in an advance directive purporting to
impose formal or other condition upon its revocation, is contrary
to  public  policy  and  void.   So,  a  stipulation  in  an  advance
directive, even if in writing, that it shall be binding unless and
until revoked in writing is void as being contrary to public policy.
(iv) The  existence  and  continuing  validity  and  applicability of  an
advance  directive  is  a  question  of  fact.   Whether  an  advance
directive has been revoked or has for some other reason ceased to
be operative is a question of fact.
(v) The  burden  of  proof  is  on  those  who  seek  to  establish  the
existence and continuing validity and applicability of an advance
directive.
(vi) Where  life  is  at  stake,  the  evidence  must  be  scrutinized  with
special  care.   Clear  and  convincing  proof  is  required.   The
continuing validity and applicability of the advance directive must
be  clearly  established  by  convincing  and  inherently  reliable
evidence.
(vii) If there is doubt, that doubt falls to be resolved in favour of the
preservation of life.”
After  laying  down  the  above  principles,  Munby  J  relied  on  the
father’s statement before Court dated 2nd May 2003 wherein the father set
151

out seven reasons as to why the Advance Directive ceased to be operative:
(i) that since Dec. 2002, his daughter AE rejected her faith as Jehovah’s
witness and desired to revert back to becoming a Muslim as a condition of
her  marriage  to  a  Turkish  gentleman.  (ii)  she  stopped  attending
meeting/congregation or services of Jehovah’s witnesses, which she used to
frequently attend twice a week.  She had promised her fiancé that she would
not attend these meetings she has not done so from the beginning of Jan.
2003.   (iii) the consent forms signed by her predated her change of faith and
as such should not be relied upon.  (iv) she was admitted in the hospital
prior to her collapse but made no mention of the Advance Directive to the
medical authorities.  (v) she remained in hospital for 2 days before she was
discharged and throughout that time, she did not make any reference to the
Advance Directive.  (vi) after re-admission into the hospital, she confirmed
to her brother and aunt, that ‘she did not want to die’.   (vii) approximately 2
months ago, she informed her family she intended to marry her fiancé and
would not allow anything to get in her way and confirmed she would follow
Muslim faith.
Relying  on  these  facts,  the  learned  Judge  held  that  the  Advance
Directive was based solely on the then religious faith of AE as a Jehovah’s
witness and once that faith ceased to influence her and she turned back to
her original Muslim faith, the basis of the Advance Directive stood knocked
down.   It ceased to be ‘effective’ as stated by Donaldson MR in In re T.
Even  otherwise,  there  is  doubt  as  to  whether  the  Advance  Directive
continued  to  be  valid  and  those  doubts  must  be  resolved  in  favour  of
preservation  of  life.    The  best  interests  of  AE  also  required  blood
transfusion be given.
152

Finally, the learned Judge observed that where the facts come to the
knowledge  of  the  hospital  authorities  which  require  urgent  medical
intervention  in  respect  of a patient,  the  hospital  authorities  and doctors
could take expeditious action in the Court, rather than leave to one of the
relatives of the patient to move the Court.   (quoting Lord Donaldson in In
re T (p.115).
30) NHS Trust v. T: 2004 EWHC 1279:
(Justice Charles)  (28th May 2004)
The hospital sought a declaratory relief in regard to Ms. T aged 37
years, who has borderline ‘personality disorder’.   She used to harm herself
by cutting herself and blood-letting, resulting in fall of haemoglobin level
and leading to chronic anemia.  She frequently required blood transfusion
supplemented by iron.   She had taken such treatment for years.  But on
28.1.2004,  she  executed  an  Advance  Directive,  (attested  by  a  lawyer),
giving various directions refusing blood transfusion ‘unless when she is
subject to compulsory treatment under the Mental Health Act, 1983’.   The
reasons given by her were that she was not aware when she would cut
herself and she felt blood was evil and the blood given to her mixes with
hers and becomes evil and that would increase the danger of her committing
acts of evil again.   She stated she was mentally competent while writing the
Advance Directive and she named her mental health lawyer, H and another
social worker  be told  if  she was  admitted  in  hospital.    If she  lacked
capacity, her lawyer should be consulted and he would speak for her in a
crisis.
153

On 24.3.2004, the treating psychiatrist opined that she was unstable
and that blood  transfusion  and iron  were necessary.   On 8.4.2004,  the
patient reached a collapsing state.   On 9.4.2004, on the application of the
hospital,  Pauffley  J,  by  her  order,  permitted  blood  transfusion,  using
minimum  force.   It  was  given  and  she  recovered  by  13.4.2004.   On
16.4.2004, her solicitor wrote objecting to further blood transfusion.
After  holding  that  under  the  new C.P.R. (Civil  Procedure  Rules),
interim declarations can be given and referring to circumstances in which, in
a  given  case,  a  declaration  may be too  premature  having  regard  to  the
capacity of the patient at the moment or the lack of emergency, Charles J
held  that,  on  the  medical  evidence  before  him,  the  lady  Ms.  T  lacked
capacity when she signed the Advance Directive, that as in Re MB she was
unable  to  weigh  the  relevant  information  and  competing  factors.   Her
position, at the present moment when she again refused, was no different.
Charles J then examined what was in her best interests.  He quoted
Munby J in A v. A. Health Authority 2002 (1) FLR 481 that an adult’s best
interests  involve  a  welfare  appraisal  in  the  widest  sense  of  taking  into
account, where appropriate, a wide range of ethical, social, moral, emotional
and welfare considerations.  Reference was made to similar views of the
President Butler-Sloss LJ in  Re A (medical treatment: male sterlization)
2000 (1) FLR 549.  He then quoted Thorpe LJ from Re A as to what is in
best interests in the case of mental patients.  The two reasons given by the
patient in her advance directive that blood transfusion became a vicious
circle and her blood was evil, could not be given weight.  The ‘potential
154

gains’ in the balance sheet were more than the losses, as enumerated by
Thorpe LJ.
31) Doncaster & Basset Law Hospitals NHS Trust & Anor v. C: (2004)
EWHC 1657
(Sumner J) (12th July 2004)
This was an application by the NHS Trust in respect of an elderly
lady C, for administering general anaesthetic to C against her wishes for
purpose of an LT scan.   This was necessary as a prior ultrasound scan
revealed a suspected renal carcinoma.   The Official Solicitor did not oppose
the application.
C had a history of mental illness for 40 years also.   She was in
hospital number of times, she was reluctant for medication, had delusional
beliefs.    She considered that the ultrasound report was someone else’s.
Medical  interventions,  according  to  her,  were  a  plot  on  her.  Doctors
considered this as mental illness, schizophremia etc.   She was unable to
weigh up the benefits and risks of treatment options.
The Judge, after referring  to the objections  of her counsel  placed
reliance on para 4(b) of the principles stated by Butler-Sloss LJ (as she then
was)  in  Re:  MB 1997  (2)  FCR  that  inability  of  the  patient  to  make  a
decision could be inferred “if the patient is unable to use the information
and  weigh  it  in  the  balance  as  part  of  the  process  of  arriving  at  the
decision”.   A compulsive disorder or phobia, as stated by Thorpe J in Re: C
1994  (2)  FCR  151  from which  the  patient  suffers,  stifles  belief  in  the
155

information presented to her and then the decision may not be a true one.  It
was, therefore, in her interests to administer anaesthetic for a CT scan.
(32) R  (Burke) v.  The General  Medical  Council  : (2004  EWHC 1879
(Admind)
(Munby J)  (30th July, 2004) : (reversed on certain points by Court of
Appeal)
This judgment, running into 224  paras (in 95 pages), reviews the
entire law on the subject.    That part of the judgment which strikes down
some of the guidelines given by the General Medical Council of England as
being contrary to several Articles of the European Convention has since
been set aside by the Court of Appeal.    
The learned Judge has given an index of the headings, in the opening
part of the judgment, for convenience.  Of importance are the following
headings:
1. GMC Guidance (paras 7 to 17)
2. Artificial Nutrition and hydration (paras 18 to 20)
3. Competence, Incompetence and Advance directives (paras
41 to 50)
4. Ethical Basis of Law ( (paras 51 to 53)
5. Autonomy and Self-determination (54 to 56)
6. Dignity (para 57, 58)
7. Autonomy, dignity and (European) Convention (paras 59 to
72)
156

8. Tension between these principles (paras 73 to 79)
9. Conclusions   (para 80)
10.      Common Law (para 81)  
11. Duty to Care (paras 82 to 87)
12. Best interests (paras 88 to 97)
13. Best interests and prolonging treatment (paras 98 to 113)
14. The evaluation of best interests (para 114, 115)
15. Conclusions   (para 116)
16. The (European) Convention (paras 117, 118)
17. Negative and Positive obligations (paras 119 to 121)
18. (a) Inter-relationship between Arts 2, 3, 8 (paras 122
to 129) (of the Convention)
(b) Art 8 (para 130)
(c) Art 3 (paras 131 to 151)
(d) Art 2 (paras 152 to 162)
19. Convention  and Withdrawal of ANH (Artificial Nutrition
and Hydration) (para 163 to 177)
20. Conclusions   (paras 178, 179)
21. Compelling the doctor (paras 180 to 184)
22. Involving the Court (paras 195 to 211)
23. Summary and discussion (para 212)
24. Summary of Conclusions   (para 213 to 214)
25. Discussion (paras 215 to 223)
26. Relief   (paras 224, 225)
157

(Appendix: GMC Guidance) (items 9 to 82).”
The case deals with Mr. Burke, aged 44 years, who suffered from
cerebellar ataxia, (a congenital  brain disorder),  but  was mentally sound.
Food  was  sometimes  given  by  artificial  means  (artificial  nutrition  and
hydration : ANH).  
It was the patient who sought clarification from the Court for the
purpose of continuing the ANH and wanted guidance as to the exceptional
circumstances under which ANH could be withdrawn.  He contended that
certain paras (namely paras 32, 38, 81 and 82) (as also para 13, 16, 42) of
the Guidance issued by the General Medical Council of England (2002)
(GMC)  with  regard  to  withholding  or  withdrawing  Life  Prolonging
Treatments  –  are  inconsistent  with  Arts  2,  3  and  8  of  the  European
Convention.  He referred to judicial review under the Human Rights Act,
1998 (which came into force from 2.10.2000).  The guidance was issued by
the GMC under sec 35 of the Medical Act, 1983.  
The case essentially related to patients who were  not in permanent
vegetative state (PVS) but the Court incidentally considered the cases of
PVS patients  also.  Here the patient did not want the doctors to take a
decision for withdrawal of life support on the assumption that his life was
no longer worth living.  The Official Solicitor and the Disability Rights
Commission (DRC), the British Medical Council and the Ethics Committee
of the British Medical Association were heard.
If we should refer to the judgment in R (Burke) in detail, which we
would have very much liked to do so, it would add to the bulk of this
158

Report.  So far as the common law principles referred to in the Judgment are
concerned, we do not propose to refer to them in as much as most of the
decisions quoted in the Judgment have already been discussed by us in this
Chapter.  
The judgment of Munby J summarises a large number of judgments
of UK and the European Court at Strasbourg and will be very helpful for
researchers, except for his views on the validity of GMC guidelines which
have not been accepted by the Court of Appeal.  We shall refer to the
Judgment  of the  Court  of Appeal  in  detail,  hereinbelow.   (see  item 34
below)
(33) Portsmouth  NHS  Trust vs.  Wyatt  &  Others:  (2004)  EWHC  2247
(Hedley J) (7th October 2004)
The child was born on 21st October 2003 at 26 weeks gestation and
weighing about 1 lb.  She was placed in an incubator and had, in fact, never
left the hospital.  She had severe respiratory failure requiring ventilation for
most of her first 3 months.  She had pulmonary hypertension resulting in
damage to the lungs with recurrent urinary tract infection and worsening
kidney function.  Her heart size was small.  There was not much possibility
of brain growth.  She was experiencing pain.  In July 2004, she suffered
severe  infection  and  was  in  ICU  in  Southampton  Hospital.   She  was
assessed there and also at Portsmouth.
(In an earlier judgment dated 30.9.2004, Hedley J held that doctors
and hospital must be given  anonymity.)   The patient required very high
levels of oxygen to be able to breathe – not nasally, but by a mechanism
159

which  covered  her  head  with  a transparent  plastic  box  and from it she
received maximum oxygen.  This method itself damaged the lungs.  She
therefore required ventilation.  Kidneys were deteriorating, there was no
chance of transplant.  She could only have dialysis.
Parents  wanted  treatment  to  be  given.   All  the  doctors  felt  that
artificial ventilation even when required, would not be good for her.  The
Judge observed that the doctors were bound to follow the guidance by the
British  Medical  Association  on  ‘Withholding  and  Withdrawing  life
Prolonging Medical Treatment’ (2001 at that time), but that guidance was
not binding on the Court though ‘entitled to the closest attention and deep
respect’.
It was the unanimous opinion of doctors that artificial ventilation, if
required at any stage, was in her best interests under ss 2, 3 of Children’s
Act, 1989 and parental responsibility was recognized.   That included the
right to consent to or refuse treatment.  No one else had it, save the Court,
where, as here, its jurisdiction had been invoked.
Hedley  J  referred  to  R  (Burke) vs.  GMC:  2004  EWHC  1874  by
Munby J and proposed to apply the law as laid down therein.   (As stated
earlier, the judgment of Munby J to the extent the Judge held that certain
GMC guidelines violated the European Convention, was set aside by the
Court of Appeal.)    He said:
“This case evokes some of the fundamental principles that undergird
our humanity.  They are not to be found in Acts of Parliament or
decisions  of  the  Courts  but  in  the  deep  recesses  of  the  common
psyche of humanity whether they be attributed to humanity being
160

created in the image of God or whether it be simply a self-defining
ethic of a generally acknowledged humanism.”
and referred to the ‘sanctity of life’, ‘individual’s autonomy’, and ‘dignity of
the human being’ as adumbrated by Hoffman LJ in the Court of Appeal in
Airedale.
But here, the child had these rights but she was not able to exercise a
choice of her own.  That was done usually by her parents, but here it could
be done by the Court, as to what was in her best interests.  But interest
encompasses medical, emotional and all other welfare issues (Re A : 2000
(1) FLR 549 (President) and Re S: 2001 Jan 15 (Thorpe LJ).  He said that
the “infinite variety of the human conditions never cease to surprise and it is
that fact that defeats any attempt to be more precise in a definition of best
interests.”   He referred then to Lord Donaldson MR and Taylor LJ in Re J:
1991 Fam 33 on the balancing exercise by the Court.   He stated that it
becomes necessary to find out if the condition would become ‘intolerable’
for the patient so as to require stoppage of treatment in its best interests.  He
referred to Thorpe LJ in Re A: 2000(1) FLR 549 (at 560).
Hedley J then said: “Given that death is the one experience (other
than  birth)  that  all  humanity must  share,  no  view  of  life  that  does  not
include  a  contemplation  of  the  place  of death,  even  in  a  child,  can  be
complete.  As a society, we fight shy of pondering in death, yet inherent in
each of us is a deep desire both for oneself and for those we love for a
‘good’ death.  It seems to me, therefore, that in any consideration of best
interests in a person at risk of imminent death is that of securing a ‘good’
death.  He then refers to Taylor LJ words in Re J (1991) Fam 33 as follows:
161

“Despite the Court’s inability to compare a life afflicted by the most
severe disability with death, the unknown, I am of the view that there
must be extreme cases in which the Court is entitled to say: ‘The life
which  this  treatment  would  prolong  would  be  so  cruel  as  to  be
intolerable’……  in  those  circumstances,  without  there  being  any
question of deliberately ending the life or shortening it.   I consider
the Court  is  entitled  in  the  best  interests  of the  child  to  say that
deliberated  steps  should  not  be  taken  artificially  to  prolong  its
miserable life span”
“….. At what point in the scale of disability and suffering ought the
Court to hold that the best interests of the child do not require further
endurance to be imposed by positive treatment to prolong its life?
Clearly, to justify withholding  treatment, the circumstances  would
have to be extreme….  I consider the correct approach is for the Court
to judge the quality of life the child would have to endure if given the
treatment and  decide  whether in  all  the  circumstances  such a life
would be so afflicted as to be intolerable to that child.   I say “to that
child”  because  the  test  should  not  be  whether  the  life  would  be
tolerable  to the  decider.   The test  must  be whether the  child  in
question, if capable of exercising sound judgment, would consider the
life tolerable.”
After  considering  the  (i)  relevant  factors  for  the  purpose  of
assessment of her best interests, (ii) the views of the parents and (iii) the
guardians’ position, Justice Hedley held:
162

“Subject to two observations that I wish to make at the end of this
judgment, I do not believe that any further aggressive treatment, even
if necessary to prolong life, is in her best interests.  I know that that
may mean that she may die earlier than otherwise she might have
done but  in  my judgment,  the  moment of  her death  will  only be
slightly advanced.  I have asked myself: what can  now be done to
benefit Charolotte?  I can only offer three answers: first, that she can
be given as much comfort and as little pain as possible; secondly, that
she can be given as much time as possible to spend physically in the
presence of and in contact with her parents; thirdly, that she can meet
her end whenever that may be in what Mr. Wyatt called the TLC of
those who live her most.  Although I believe and find that further
invasive and aggressive treatment would be intolerable to Charolotte,
I prefer to determine her best interests on the basis of finding what is
the best that can be done for her…..
I propose to grant relief broadly along the lines contended for
by the Hospital and Guardian, although I said that I would put over
any argument about the exact wording until I had given judgment.  It
is not necessary for me to consider injunctive relief or any positive
declaratory relief in the light of the conclusions to which I have come
on best interests.  I say no more than that the former (at least in
mandatory  terms)  is  currently  precluded  by  the  Court  of  Appeal
decision in  Re J (a Minor)(Child Care: Medical Treatment): 1993
Fam  15,  whilst  the  latter  raises  very  considerable  practical
difficulties.
163

I said that I had  two further observations to make.  First this
relief is  only permissive, it  does  not  relieve  them of the  right  or
responsibility for advising or giving the treatment that they and the
parents think right in the light of the circumstances as they develop.
All it does is to authorize them, in the event of disagreement between
the  parents  and  themselves,  not  to  send  the  child  for  artificial
ventilation or similar aggressive treatment.  Secondly, I would like to
ask the treating doctors (without in anyway suggesting an answer to
them) to give further consideration to an elective tracheotomy on the
basis of its possible contribution to Charolotte’s palliative care as
described by Dr. G.” 
(34) GMC vs. Burke:  (2005) EWCA (Civ) 1003: (CA)
(Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers, MR, Waller and Wall LJJ)
(d. 28.7.2005)
This is one of the most useful judgments on the various related aspects of
the subject.
It  was  an  appeal  by  the  General  Medical  Council  against  the
judgment of Munby J (2004 EWHC 1879 Admn) (already referred to) dt.
30th July, 2004.   
Out of six declarations granted by the learned Judge, three related to
medical treatment of Mr. Burke while three other declarations held that a
number of paragraphs of the Guidance published by the General Medical
Council in August 2002 (on Withholding and Withdrawing Life-Prolonging
164

Treatment:  Good  Practice  and  Decision  Making)  were  violative  of  the
European Convention.   The GMC was aggrieved by the declarations.   As
stated while dealing with Justice Munby’s judgment, the declarations were
sought by the patient himself i.e. Mr. Burke.
The evidence in the case was that Mr. Burke will remain competent
until  the final stage of his  disease.  He will thus be competent  to take
decisions except at the final stages of his case, when he may first lose his
ability to communicate though he will be conscious but later, he will go into
coma.  During the final stages, ANH (Artificial Nutrition and Hydration)
will not be capable of prolonging his life.  Mr. Burke wanted that ANH
should  not  be  withdrawn  at  the  earlier  stages  when  he  is  able  to
communicate.
The Court of Appeal held that there was no question of withdrawing
ANH if Mr. Burke was able to communicate.   The GMC guidelines did not
say that ANH could be withdrawn when the patient is able to communicate.
The Judges of the Court of Appeal did not agree with Munby J who,
according  to  them, stated  that  patient’s  view  of  his  best  interests  must
prevail over the view of the doctors.  However, the Court of Appeal held
that ‘best interests’ is an objective test to be applied by the doctors, while
the patient’s view is based on his right of ‘self-determination’.   They said
that:
“Where a patient  makes it clear that he does  not  wish  to receive
treatment which is, objectively, in his  medical  best  interests,  it is
165

unlawful for doctors to administer that treatment.   Personal autonomy
or the right of self-determination prevails”
They, however, observed that the patient cannot decide about medical
best interests.  They said:
“Autonomy  and  the  right  of  self-determination  do  not  entitle  the
patient to insist on receiving a particular medical treatment regardless
of  the  nature  of  the  treatment.   Insofar  as  a  doctor  has  a  legal
objection to provide treatment, this cannot be founded simply upon
the  fact  that  the  patient  demands  it.   The  source  of  duty  lies
elsewhere”
So far as ANH is concerned, there is no need to look far for the duty
to provide this.  Once a patient is accepted into a hospital, the medical staff
come under a positive  duty at common law to  care  for the  patient.   A
fundamental aspect of this positive duty of care is a duty to take such steps
as are reasonable to keep the patient alive.  Where ANH is necessary to keep
the patient alive, the duty of care will normally require the doctors to supply
ANH.   This duty will not, however, override the competent patient’s wish
not to receive ANH.   Where the competent patient makes it plain that he or
she wishes to be kept alive by ANH, this will not be the source of the duty
to provide it.   The patient’s wish will merely underscore that duty.
The duty to keep a patient alive by administering ANH or other life
prolonging treatment is not absolute, the exceptions have been restricted to
two situations: (1) where the competent patient refuses to receive ANH and
166

(2) where the patient is not competent and it is not considered to be in the
best interests of the patient to be artificially kept alive.   It is with the second
exception that the law has most difficulty.    The Courts have accepted that
where life involves an extreme degree of pain, discomfort or indignity to a
patient, who is sentient but not competent and who has manifested no wish
to be kept alive, these circumstances may absolve the doctors of the positive
duty to keep the patient alive.  Equally, the Courts have recognized that
there may be no duty to keep alive a patient who is in a persistent vegetative
state (PVS).  In each of these examples, the facts of the individual case may
make it difficult to decide whether the duty to keep the patient alive persists.
In the case of Mr. Burke, no such difficulty arose because he was
sentient, competent and he wished to be kept alive, regardless of the pain,
suffering or indignity of his condition.   The doctor’s duty to keep the
patient alive is not therefore called in question.   Lord Phillips said:
“Indeed, it seems to us that for a doctor deliberately to interrupt life-
prolonging treatment in the face of a competent patient’s express wish
to be kept alive, with the intention of thereby terminating the patient’s
life, would leave the doctor with no answer to a charge of murder”
Lord  Phillips  then  went  into  the  question  whether ‘withdrawal  of
ANH’ contrary to the wishes of Mr. Burke infringes Articles 2, 3 and 8 of
the European Convention.  Articles 2, 3 and 8 read as follows:
“Art. 2  1. Everyone’s right to life shall be protected by law.
No one shall be deprived of his life intentionally save in the execution
167

of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a crime for which
this penalty is provided by law.
2. Deprivation  of  life  shall  not  be  regarded  as  inflicted  in
contravention of this Article when it results from the use of force
which is no more than absolutely necessary:
a. in defence of any person from unlawful violence;
b. in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape
of a person lawfully detained;
c. in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a riot
or insurrection.”
“Art. 3   No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment.”
“Art. 8 1.  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
family life, his home and his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and
is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of  national
security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”
The  learned  Judge  agreed  with  Munby  J  where  he  had  stated  as
follows:
168

“…..   Art.  2  does  not  entitle  anyone  to  continue  life-prolonging
treatment where to do so would expose the patient to ‘inhuman or
degrading  treatment’  breaching  Art.  3.    On  the  other  hand,  a
withdrawal of life-prolonging treatment which satisfies the exacting
requirements of the common law, including a proper application of
the intolerability test, and in a manner which is in all other respects
compatible with the patient’s rights under Art. 3 and Art. 8 will not,
in my judgment, give rise to breach of Art. 2”
Having approved this passage from Justice Munby’s judgment, Lord
Phillips clarified:
“We endorse  this  conclusion.    It does  not,  however,  lead  to the
further conclusion that if a National Health doctor were deliberately
to bring about the death of a competent patient by withdrawing life-
prolonging treatment contrary to that patient’s wishes, Art. 2 would
not be infringed.  It seems to us that such conduct would plainly
violate Art. 2.   Furthermore, if English law permitted such conduct,
this would also violate this country’s positive obligation to enforce
Art.  2.   As we  have  already indicated,  we do  not  consider  that
English criminal law would countenance such conduct.   However,
the fact that Arts. 2, 3 and 8 of the Convention may be engaged does
not, in our judgment, advance the argument or alter the common law.”
The Court of Appeal, therefore, held that the doctor who is in charge of the
Mr.  Burke  would  himself  be  obliged,  so  long  as  the  treatment  was
169

prolonging  Mr.  Burke’s  life,  to  provide  ANH  in  accordance  with  his
expressed wish.   This is not in doubt either.
The Court of Appeal then dealt with the validity of paras 13, 16, 32,
42 and 81 of the Guidelines (hereinafter called ‘Guidance’) issued by the
GMC.  
Is the Guidance compatible with the duty of a doctor to administer
ANH to a competent patient where this is necessary to keep the patient alive
and the patient expresses to be kept alive.   We shall first refer to these paras
of the Guidance.
Para 13 of the Guidance deals with the right of adult patients to refuse
treatment.  It has no reference to the duty of the doctor to provide ANH.  It
has no bearing on the present case.
Para  16  of  the  Guidance  deals  with  the  differences  in  choice  by
patients based on different values, beliefs and priorities which doctors must
take into account.  Where, however, a patient wants treatment which the
doctors  feel  is  not  clinically  indicated,  they  have  no  ethical  or  legal
obligation.   The Court of Appeal felt that para 16 has no relevance to the
case of ANH, except where a patient demands ANH during terminal stages
where it is not going to prolong life.   This was an unlikely scenario and not
one that can properly concern Mr. Burke at this stage of his illness.
Para 32 of the Guidance states that it is the doctor’s responsibility to
make a decision about whether to withhold or withdraw a life-prolonging
170

treatment, taking into account the views of the patient or those close to the
patient.  Exceptionally, in an emergency where the senior clinician cannot
be contacted in time, if the doctor is appropriately experienced, a junior
hospital doctor or deputizing general practitioner may take responsibility for
making the decision but it must be discussed with the senior clinician as
soon as possible.   On this, the Court of Appeal observed as follows:
“This  is  part  of  the  general  framework  of  the  guidance  and  not
specifically directed to the provision, or withdrawal of ANH.  We
accept that, if read in isolation, the phrase ‘taking into account of the
views  of  the  patient’,  might  suggest  that  a  consultant  or  general
practitioner in charge of a patient’s case could withhold or withdraw
ANH, contrary to the expressed wish of a competent patient if he
considered  that  there  was  good  reason  for  disregarding  his  wish.
Taken in the context of the Guidance as a whole, however, we do not
consider that any reasonable doctor would conclude from para 32 that
it would be permissible to withdraw life-prolonging treatment with a
view of ending a patient’s life despite the patient’s expressed wish to
be kept alive.”
Para 42 of the Guidance stated that a doctor should bear in mind that
he  is  bound  to  respect  an  adult  patient’s  refusal  of  treatment,  made
competently,  even  where  complying  with  the  decision  will  lead  to  the
patient’s death.  If a specific treatment is requested which, in the doctor’s
considered  view  is  clinically  inappropriate,  the  doctor  is  not  legally or
ethically bound to provide it.   However, he should give the patient a clear
171

explanation of the reasons for his view, and respect the patient’s request to
have a second opinion.   The Court of Appeal stated:
“We understand that it is the second half of this paragraph that the
Judge considered objectionable.  This could only be relevant to Mr.
Burke’s predicament if one postulates that a doctor might consider it
‘clinically inappropriate’ to keep him alive by administering ANH
despite his wishes that this should be done.  We consider such a
scenario to be totally unrealistic”
Para 81 of the Guidance states that where patients have capacity to
decide, they may consent or refuse to any proposed intervention of any kind.
Where patients lack capacity to decide, the doctors should take into account
various circumstances:
(i) provide ANH for a trial-period, if there is reasonable uncertainty
about the likely benefits or burdens of ANH;
(ii) where death is imminent, it is not appropriate to start artificial
hydration  or  nutrition,  although  artificial  hydration  can  be
provided to give symptom-relief;
(iii) where death is imminent and artificial hydration and/or nutrition
are already in use, it may be appropriate to withdraw them if it is
considered that the burdens outweigh the possible benefits of the
patient;
(iv) where  death  is  not  imminent, it  usually will  be  appropriate  to
provide  artificial  nutrition  and  hydration.   However,  if  the
patient’s  condition  is  so  severe  and  progress  is  so  poor  that
172

artificial  nutrition  or  hydration  may  cause  suffering,  a  senior
clinician (who might be from another discipline such as nursing)
may have to be consulted.
The Court of Appeal, in relation to para 81 of the Guidance observed
as follows:
“This is the only paragraph to which the Judge has taken exception
that deals expressly with ANH.  The first sentence requires the doctor
to comply with the expressed wishes of a patient with capacity.  No
exception  can  be  taken  to  this.   The  remainder  deals  with  the
approach to be taken where the patients lack capacity to decide for
themselves and their wishes cannot be determined.  We cannot see
that this has any relevance to Mr. Burke’s predicament”
For  the above reasons, the Court  of Appeal did not consider that
insofar as the Guidance related to Mr. Burke, there was any ground for
declaring them unlawful.
The  Court  of  Appeal  then  identified  certain  topics from  Justice
Munby’s judgment which required some elucidation of law:
(i) The right of a patient to select the treatment that he will receive;
(ii) The  circumstances  in  which  life-prolonging  treatment  can  be
withdrawn from a patient who is incompetent;
(iii) The duty to seek the approval of Court before withdrawing life-
prolonging treatment.
173

(i) Right of patient to select the treatment that he will receive:
It is not correct to say that Justice Munby opined that a doctor is
obliged to render treatment which is not clinically indicated, merely because
the patient wants it.   The GMC’s submissions to the following effect are
correct:
(a) The doctor, exercising this professional clinical judgment, decides
what treatment options are clinically indicated (i.e. will provide
overall clinical benefit) for his patient.
(b) He then offers those treatment options to the patient in the course
of which he explains to him/her the risks, benefits, side-effects etc.
involved in each of the treatment options.
(c) The patient then decides whether he wishes to accept any of those
treatment options and, if so, which one.   In the vast majority of
cases,  he  will,  of  course,  decide  which  treatment  option  he
considers to be in his best interest and, in doing so, he will or may
take into account other, non-clinical, factors.   However, he can, if
he wishes, decide to accept (or refuse) the treatment option on the
basis of reasons which are irrational or for no reasons at all.
(d) If he chooses one of the treatment options  offered to him, the
doctor will then proceed to provide it.
(e) If, however, he refuses all of the treatment options offered to him
and instead informs the doctor that he wants a form of treatment
which the doctor has not offered him, the doctor will, no doubt,
discuss that form of treatment with him (assuming that it is a form
174

of treatment known to him) but  if the doctor concludes that this
treatment is not clinically indicated, he is not required (i.e. he is
under no legal obligation) to provide it to the patient although he
should offer to arrange a second opinion.
The Court of Appeal, however, reiterated that so far as a competent
patient is concerned, if he wanted to be kept alive by ANH, a doctor cannot
refuse and if he refuses,  it will amount to murder.   “Where life depends
upon continued provision of ANH, there can be no question of the supply of
ANH not being clinically indicated unless a clinical decision has been taken
that the life in question should come to an end.    That is not a decision that
can be taken in the case of a competent patient who expresses the wish to
remain alive.”
As to when ANH is not clinically indicated, it may be,  even in the
case of a competent patient, that at the last stage of life, ANH may hasten
death rather than prolong it, and at that stage, whether to administer ANH or
not, will be a clinical decision which is likely to turn on whether or not it
has a palliative effect or is likely to produce adverse reactions.   “It is only
in this situation that, assuming the patient remains competent, a patient’s
expressed wish that ANH be continued, might conflict with the doctor’s
view that this is not clinically indicated.”
In such a situation, Lord Phillips stated, disagreeing with Munby J,
that the patient’s wish is not determinative of the treatment.   “Clearly, the
doctor would need to have regard to any distress that might be the cause as a
result of overriding the expressed wish of the patient.  Ultimately, however,
175

a patient cannot demand that a doctor administer a treatment which the
doctor considers adverse to the patient’s clinical interests.   This said, we
consider that the scenario we have fast described is extremely unlikely to
arise in practise.”
(ii) Position of the incompetent patient:
The position of a PVS is already decided by the House of Lords in
Airedale vs Bland.   But, the Court of Appeal clarified that to keep a PVS
patient  alive  merely  because  of  his  advance  directive,  will  violate  the
Mental Capacity Act, 2005.  They said, explaining Airedale, as follows:
“… We do not consider it appropriate to add to what was said by their
Lordships (in  Bland), other than to make the following observation.
While a number of their Lordships indicated that an advance directive
that the patient should not be kept alive in a PVS should be respected,
we do not read that decision as requiring a patient to be kept alive
simply because he has made an advance directive to that effect.  Such
a proposition would not be compatible with the provisions  of the
Mental  Capacity  Act,  2005,  which  we  consider  accords  with  the
position  at  common  law.    While  sec.  26  of  that  Act  requires
compliance with a valid advance directive to refuse treatment, sec. 4
does no more than require this to be taken into consideration when
considering what is in the best interests of a patient.”
He continued:
176

“There  are  tragic  cases  where  treatment  can  prolong  life  for  an
indeterminate period, but only at a cost of great suffering while life
continues.  Such a case was  In re J (a Minor) (Wardship: Medical
Treatment) (1991 Fam 33).  There are other cases and these are much
more common, where a patient has lost competence in the final stages
of life and where ANH may prolong these final stages, but an adverse
cost so far as comfort and dignity are concerned, sometimes resulting
in the patient’s last days being spent in a hospital ward rather than at
home, with family around.
It is to these situations that so much debate in this case has been
directed.   Apprehensions have been expressed by some who have
intervened that those in charge of patients may too readily allow, or
fail to provide, ANH or other life prolonging treatment on the ground
that the patient’s life, if prolonged, will not be worth living.  As an
example of the first situation described above, the Disability Rights
Commission  brought  to  our  attention  the  disturbing  story of  Jane
Campbell.  She suffers from spinal muscular atrophy and is severely
disabled.  She was not expected to live beyond the age of four but has
lived a fulfilling and productive life of high achievement.   In 2003,
she was struck down by pneumonia.   Two consultants were minded
to conclude that her life was so parlous that, if she needed artificial
respiration to remain alive, she would not wish to receive it.   Only
the intervention of her husband, who showed them a photograph of
her taking her degree, persuaded the consultants that her life was
worth saving.”
177

The Court of Appeal referred then to some disturbing reports of the
Medical Ethics Alliance which were placed before the Joint Committee of
Parliament on the draft Mental Incapacity Bill.   These were cases where
patients  who  were  terminally ill  appear  to  have  been  denied  water  and
nutrition  in  circumstances  where  this  was  contrary  to  the  demands  of
palliative care.    The Reports underlined the importance of clear case law
and guidance.  The Court of Appeal approved Justice Munby’s opinion in
this context except for the last two sentences underlined.   Munby J had
said:
“There  is a very strong  presumption in favour of taking  all steps
which will prolong life, and save in exceptional circumstances, or
where  the  patient  is  dying,  the  best  interests  of  the  patient  will
normally require such steps to be taken.   In case of doubt, that doubt
falls to be resolved in favour of the preservation of life.  But the
obligation is not absolute.  Important as the sanctity of life is, it may
have to take second place to human dignity.   In the context of life-
prolonging treatment, the touchstone of best interest is intolerability.
So if life prolonging treatment is providing some benefit, it should be
provided unless the patient’s life, if thus prolonged, would from the
patient’s point of view be intolerable.”
After approving the earlier part of the extract, the Court of Appeal
commented on the last two sentences as follows:
“We do not think that any objection could have been taken to this
summary had it not contained the final two sentences, which we have
178

emphasised.   The suggestion that the touch stone of ‘best interests’ is
the ‘intolerability’ of continued life has, understandably given rise to
concern.   The test of whether it is in the best interests of the patient
to  provide  or  continue  ANH  must  depend  upon  the  particular
circumstances.   The two situations that we have considered above are
very different.   As to the approach to be adopted to the former, the
Court dealt with that in Re J and we do not think  it appropriate to
review  what  the  Court  there  said  in  a  context  that  is  purely
hypothetical.”
As regards the ‘best interests’ of a patient close to death, the Court of
Appeal  observed  that  the  Judge  Munby  himself  recognized  that
‘intolerability’ was not the test of ‘best interests’ and that the following
words of Munby J were correct:
“where the patient is dying, the goal may properly be to ease suffering
and, where appropriate, to ‘ease the passing’ rather than to achieve a
short prolongation of life”
and the Court of Appeal continued:
“We do not think it possible to attempt to define what is in the ‘best
interests’ of a patient by a single test, applicable in all circumstances.
We would add that the disturbing cases referred to in paragraphs 57
and 58, if correctly reported, were cases where the doctors appear to
have failed to observe the Guidance.  They are not illustrative of any
illegality in the Guidance.   The Guidance expressly warns against
179

treating the life of a disabled patient as being of less value than the
life of a patient without disability, and rightly does so”
(iii) Is  there  a  legal  requirement  to  obtain  Court  authorization  before
withdrawing ANH in every one of the cases specified by Munby J?
Munby J had declared that ‘in certain circumstances’, this question
must be answered in the affirmative.  He listed five categories of cases and
observed that paras 38 and 82 of the Guidance are therefore illegal.   These
categories are as follows:
(i) where there is any doubt or disagreement as to the capacity
(competence) of the patient; or 
(ii) where  there  is  lack  of  unanimity  amongst  the  attending
medical professions as to either 
(a) the patient’s condition or prognosis; or
(b) the patient’s best interests; or
(c) the likely outcome of ANH being either withheld or
withdrawn; or
(d) otherwise  as  to  whether  or  not  ANH  should  be
withheld or withdrawn; or
(iii) where  there is evidence  that the  patient  when competent
would  have  wanted  ANH  to  continue  in  the  relevant
circumstances; or
(iv) where there is evidence that the patient (even if a child or
incompetent) resists or disputes the proposed withdrawal of
ANH; or
180

(v) where persons having a reasonable claim to have their views
or evidence  taken  into  account (such as parents  or close
relatives, partners, close friends, long term careers) assert
that withdrawal of ANH is contrary to the parents’ wishes or
not in the patient’s best interest.”
Para  38  of  the  Guidance  requires  that  a  clinician  with  relevant
experience be consulted (from another discipline such as nursing) where the
doctor has limited experience or is in doubt about options or the patient is
not likely to die immediately or there are differences among the doctors.
Para 82 says that where significant conflicts arise about whether artificial
nutrition or hydration should be provided, either between doctors and other
members  of the  health team or those  close to the patient, and it is not
possible to resolve the conflict, the doctor should seek legal advice.
The Court of Appeal held that even assuming that the five situations
mentioned by Munby J are cases where the Court has to be approached, the
Guidance paras 38 and 82 are not unlawful merely because they do not state
that Court sanction is required in such cases.
The Court of Appeal learnt from the Intensive Care Society (ICS) that
each year approximately 50,000 patients are admitted to ICU and out of
these 30% die in ICU or in the wards before discharge.   Most of these die
because treatment is withdrawn or limited, where the treatment would have
merely prolonged the process of dying.
181

But, if Munby J’s directions for approaching Court in all the five
contingencies,  were  to  be  accepted,  the  ICS  said  that  every  day  10
applications have to be made to the Court and this would be impractical.
The Court of Appeal held:
“In the event, we do not consider that the Judge is right to postulate
that there is a legal duty to obtain Court approval to the withdrawal of
ANH in the circumstances that he identifies”
They said that it may be a matter of ‘good practice’ to obtain Court
approval but it cannot be made mandatory in every case, even where there
are differences.    Munby J had however observed that after the judgment of
the European Court in Glass v. UK: 2004 (1) FLR 1019 (= 2004 Lloyds Rep
Med 78), what under English law was a ‘rule of practice’ had become a
‘rule of law’.   The Court of Appeal examined this aspect by referring to the
facts in Glass v. UK in detail and found that the European Court merely held
that, on the facts, the doctors, who were treating a minor whose guardian
(mother) did not consent to administration of diamorphine, had ample time
to move Court and that the doctors failed to do so.   The European Court
had not laid down any rule of law.   It pointed that the case was not one of
emergency.  The observations of Munby J were, therefore, not accepted.
Before we part with this case, we have to refer to para 71 of the
judgment of the Court of Appeal which deals with the question whether the
Court  which  is  approached  is  indeed  making  lawful  what  is  otherwise
unlawful.  The Court said that is not the effect of the declaration.   This is
only a matter of ‘good practice’.  It referred to Airedale as follows:
182

“We asked the Gordon to explain the nature of the duty to seek the
authorization of the Court and he was not able to give us a coherent
explanation.  So far as the Criminal Law is concerned, the Court has
no power to authorize that which would otherwise be unlawful – see
for instance the observation of Lord Goff of Chievley in Bland at p.
785H.     Nor  can  the  Court  render  unlawful  that  which  would
otherwise  be  lawful.    The same is  true  in  relation  to  a possible
infringement  of  Civil  Law.    In  Bland,  the  House  of  Lords
recommended that, as a matter of good practice, reference should be
made to the Family Court before withdrawing ANH from a patient in
a PVS, until a body of experience and practice had built up.   Plainly,
there will be occasions in which it will be advisable for a doctor to
seek  the  Court’s  approval  before  withdrawing  ANH  in  other
circumstances, but what justification is there for postulating that he
will be under a legal duty to do so”
The Court of Appeal held it was not a matter of ‘legal duty’ but only
of ‘good practice’.
183

Chapter – V
Leading case law and statutes in United States of America
In this chapter, we shall refer to some leading judgments from USA
and also refer to some of the pieces of legislation.
(A) USA (Federal):
(1) Cruzan vs. Director, MDH: (1990) 497 US 261 (dated 25th June 1990)
(Rehnquist  CJ delivered the opinion, in which White, Sandra Day
O’Connor, Scalia and Kennedy JJ  joined.  O’Connor and Scalia J filed
cocurring opinions.  Brennan J filed a dissenting opinion in which Marshall
and Blackmun JJ joined.  Stevens filed a separate dissenting opinion).
Nancy Cruzan met with a motor accident on January 11, 1983, while
she lost control of her car, the vehicle overturned and went down Elm Road
in Jaspar County, Missouri.  She has been in Mission State Hospital, in a
Persistent Vegetative State (PVS), where she only exhibits motor reflexes
but evinces no indication of significant cognitive function.  The State is
bearing the cost of her care.  Cruzan’s parents requested for termination of
her  artificial  nutrition and hydration  but  the  hospital  refused, since that
would result in her death.  The State trial Court authorized termination but
the State Supreme Court refused to so authorize.  While recognizing a right,
on part of a patient, to refuse treatment under common law doctrine of
informed consent, the Court questioned applicability of the said principle to
184

this case.  It declined to read into the State Constitution a broad right to
privacy that would support an unrestricted right to refuse treatment and
expressed doubt if the Federal Constitution embodied such a right.  The
Court then decided that the State’s Living Will statute embodied a state
policy  strongly  favouring  the  preservation  of  life  and  that  Cruzan’s
statements to her housemate were unreliable for the purpose of determining
her intent.  It rejected the argument that the parents were entitled to order
termination  of  her  medical  treatment.   It  concluded  that  no  person  can
assume  that  choice  for  an  incompetent  person,  in  the  absence  of  the
formalities required by the Living Will Statute or in the absence of clear and
convincing evidence of the patient’s wishes.
The US Supreme Court affirmed the judgment and held that (1) the
State of Missouri was competent to require that the incompetent’s prior
wish as to withdrawal of life sustaining treatment, should be proved by
‘clear and convincing’ evidence.  (Here the plea about the patient’s earlier
words, while conscious, that she did not wish to live unless at least one half
of normal life was assured by treatment, was not substantiated by clear and
convincing evidence); 
(2) Most State Courts in US have based a right to refuse treatment on the
basis of the common law right to informed consent or on both that right and
a constitutional privacy right.  Courts have also turned to guidance from
State statutes; 
(3) A competent person is at liberty under Due Process Clause in refusing
unwanted  medical  treatment  (Jacobson vs.  Massachusetts:  197  US  11).
However, the question whether that constitutional right has been violated,
must be determined by balancing the liberty interest against relevant State
185

interests.  For purposes of this case, it is assumed that a competent person
would have a constitutionally protected right to refuse life-saving hydration
and  nutrition.   This  does  not  mean  that  an  incompetent  person  should
possess the same right, since such a person is unable to make an informed
and voluntary choice to exercise that hypothetical right or any other right.
While  State  of  Missouri  has,  in  effect,  recognized  that,  under  certain
circumstances, a  surrogate may act for the patient in electing to withdraw
hydration and nutrition and thus cause death, it has established a procedural
safeguard to assure that surrogate’s action conforms, as best as it may, to the
wishes expressed by the patient while competent; 
(4) It is permissible for the Missouri State, in its proceedings, to apply a
‘clear and convincing’ evidence standard, which is an appropriate standard
when the individual interests at stake are both particularly important and
more substantial than mere loss of money (Santosky vs.  Kramer: 455 US
745).  The State of Missouri has a general interest in the protection and
preservation of human life, as well as other, more particular interests, at
stake.  It may legitimately seek to safeguard the personal element of an
individual’s choice between life and death.  The State is also entitled to
guard against potential abuses by surrogates who may not act to protect the
patient.
(5) Similarly, the State is entitled to consider that a judicial proceeding
regarding an incompetent’s wishes may not be adversarial, with the added
guarantee of accurate fact finding that the adversary process begins with it.
(6) The State may also decline to make judgments about the ‘quality’ of a
particular individual’s life, and simply assent an unqualified interest in the
preservation  of  human  life  to  be  weighed  against  the  constitutionally
186

protected interests  of the individual. The clear and  convincing  evidence
standard also serves as a societal judgment about how the risk of error
should be distributed between the litigants.  Missouri State may permissibly
place  the  increased  risk  of  an  erroneous  decision  on  those  seeking  to
terminate life-sustaining treatment.  An erroneous decision not to terminate,
results in a maintenance of the status quo, with at least the potential that a
wrong decision will eventually be corrected or its impact mitigated by an
event  such  as  an  advancement  in  medical  science  or  the  patient’s
unexpected  death.   However,  an  erroneous  decision  to  withdraw  such
treatment is not susceptible of correction.  Although the Missouri State’s
proof requirement may have frustrated the effectuation of Cruzan’s not-fully
expressed desires, the Constitution does not require general rules to work
flawlessly.
(7) On facts, it was held that the State Supreme Court did not commit any
constitutional error in concluding that the evidence adduced at the trial did
not amount to clear and convincing proof of Cruzan’s desire for withdrawal
of hydration and nutrition. The trial Court had not adopted a ‘clear and
convincing’ evidence standard, and Cruzan’s observation that she did not
want to live life as a ‘vegetable’ did not deal in terms with withdrawal of
medical treatment or of hydration and nutrition. 
(8) The  ‘Due  Process’  clause  does  not  require  a  State  to  accept  the
‘substituted  judgment’  of  close  family  members  in  the  absence  of
substantial proof that their views reflect the patient’s.  The US Supreme
Court’s  decision  upholding  the  State’s  favoured  treatment  of  traditional
family relationships,  Michael H vs.  Gerald  D 491  US 110, may not be
turned into a constitutional  requirement  that  a State  must  recognize the
187

primacy of these relationships in a situation like this.  Nor may a decision
upholding a State’s right to permit family decision-making, Parham vs. J.R
442 US 584, be turned into a constitutional requirement that the State must
recognize  such  decision-making.   Cruzan’s  parents  would  surely  be
qualified to exercise such a right of ‘substituted judgment’, were it required
by the Constitution.  However, for the same reasons that Missouri State may
require a clear and convincing evidence of the patient’s wishes, it may also
choose to defer only to those wishes, rather than confide the decision to
close family members.
Having set out the head-note as it occurs in the law report, we shall
now refer to certain other important principles laid down in the judgment
delivered by Rehinquist CJ:
At Common Law, even the touching of one person by another without
consent and without legal justification was a battery.  The notion of bodily
integrity has been embodied in the requirement that informed consent is
generally required for medical treatment.  Justice Cardozo, while on the
Court of Appeals of New York, aptly described this doctrine: “Every human
being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be
done with his own body, and a surgeon who performs an operation without
his  patient’s consent commits an assault, for which he will be liable in
damages”.  Schloendoff vs. Society of New York Hospital: (1914) 211 NY
125.   The  informed  consent  doctrine  has  become  firmly  entrenched  in
American tort law.
The logical corollary of the doctrine of informed consent is that the
patient  generally  possesses  the  right  not  to  consent,  that  is  to  refuse
treatment.  When In re Quinlan 70 NJ 10 was decided, there were a few
188

cases of treatment being refused, but now during the years 1976-1988, there
have been 54 reported cases.  According to Prof Tribe, in his American
Constitutional Law, (2nd ed. 1988), such a right is available under Common
Law as also under the Constitutional law.  The right to self-determination
was not lost because the patient was incompetent.  It would be exercised by
a ‘surrogate’ using a ‘subjective’ standard when there was clear evidence
that the incompetent person would have exercised it.  Where such evidence
was lacking, an incompetent person’s right could still be invoked under the
‘objective’ and ‘best interests’ standards.
The Fourteenth Amendment provides that no State shall ‘deprive any
person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law’.  It protects
an interest in life as well as an interest in refusing life sustaining medical
treatment.  Where surrogates are not available or cannot take a decision, a
State is entitled to guard against  potential  abuses and  decline to make
judgments  about  the  ‘quality’  of  life  and  simply  assent  an  unqualified
interest  in  preservation  of  human  life  to  be  weighed  against  the
constitutionally protected interests of the individual.  The State of Missouri
sought  to  advance  these  interests  through  the  adoption  of  a  ‘clear  and
convincing’ standard of proof to govern such proceedings.  Such a higher
standard is necessary to prevent erroneous decisions that may be made to
terminate life which if they led to the death of the patient, the situation
would  be  irreversible.   An  erroneous  decision  to  withdraw  life-saving
treatment is not susceptible of correction.  
The Court said: “In sum, we conclude that a State may apply a clear
and convincing evidence standard in proceedings where a guardian seeks to
discontinue  nutrition  and  hydration  of  a  person  diagnosed  to  be  in  a
189

persistent vegetative state.  We note that many Courts which have adopted
some sort of substituted judgment procedure in situations like this, whether
they limit consideration of evidence to the prior expressed wishes of the
incompetent individual or whether they allow more general proof of what
the individual’s decision would have been, require a clear and convincing
standard of proof of such evidence.”
In this  case, the  testimony adduced  at trial  consisted primarily of
Nancy Cruzan’s statements, made to a house-mate about a year before her
accident,  that  she  would  not  want  to  live,  should  she  face  life  as  a
‘vegetable’, and she is said to have made other observations to the same
effect.  The observations did not deal in terms with withdrawal of medical
treatment or of hydration and nutrition.
The parents of Cruzan would qualify for being persons who could
make the ‘substituted judgment’ if a State permitted  or required such a
judgment but there is no acceptance that the view of close family members
will necessarily be the same as the patient’s would have been, had she been
confronted with the prospect of her situation while competent.  The State
law  required  the  clear  and  convincing  evidence  of  the  patient’s wishes
rather  than  confine  the  decision  to  close  family  members.   (The  case
obviously was treated as not raising surrogate rights).
Sandra Day O’Connor, in her concurring Judgment, made it clear that
the  case  before  the  Court  did  not  have  to  do  with  the  validity  of  a
surrogate’s  decision.   Having  said  that,  she  referred  to  the  modern
techniques  of  ventilator  and  artificial  nutrition  as  amounting  to
administering ‘medical treatment’ and that the Due Process Clause protects
a patient’s right to refuse such ‘medical treatment’.  As to surrogates, States
190

could  require  a  clear  and  convincing  evidence  standard.   The  patient’s
appointment of a proxy to make a proxy to make healthcare decision has
been accepted by several States and that some Courts are also accepting
such a procedure of appointment by a durable power of attorney.  Some
States allow an individual to designate a proxy to carry out the intent of a
living will.   Giving   effect  to a proxy’s decisions  may also  protect the
‘freedom of personal choice in matters of family life’ as stated in Cleveland
Board of Education vs. La Flem (1974) 414 US 632.  She pointed  out that
at  least  13  States  (details  of  which  she  gave  in  fn  2)  and  District  of
Columbia have passed statutes that durable powers of attorney could be
issued authorizing appointing of proxies for making health care decisions.
(Most of these States started in 1989).  Thirteen States have ‘living will’
statutes authorizing the appointment of health care proxies.
Scalia J, in a concurrent judgment traced the history of illegality of
suicide and assisted suicide over centuries but observed that the right to
refuse treatment was based on the dichotomy between action and inaction.
He said:
“Suicide, it is said, consists of an affirmative act to end one’s life;
refusing  treatment  is  not  an  affirmative  act  ‘causing’  death,  but
merely a passive acceptance of the natural process of dying.  I readily
acknowledge  that  the  distinction  between  action  and  inaction  has
some bearing  upon  the  legislative  judgment  of what  ought  to  be
prevented  as  suicide  –  though  even  there,  it  would  seem  to  me
unreasonable to draw the line precisely between action and inaction,
rather than between various forms of inaction.  It would not make
much sense to say that one may not kill oneself by walking into the
191

sea, but may sit on the beach until submerged by the incoming tide, or
that one may not intentionally lock oneself into a cold storage locker
but  may refrain from coming indoors when the temperature drops
below freezing.  Even as a legislative matter, in other words, the
intelligent line does not fall between action and inaction, but between
those forms of inaction that consist of abstaining from ‘ordinary’ care
and  those  that  consist  of  abstaining  from  ‘excessive’  or  ‘heroic’
measures.  Unlike action vs inaction, that is not a life to be discerned
by logic or legal analyses and we should not pretend that it is.”
“It is not surprising, therefore, that the early cases considering the
claimed right to refuse medical treatment dismissed as specious, the
nice distinction between  “passively submitting to death and actively
seeking it.  The distinction may be merely verbal, as it would be if an
adult sought death by starvation instead of a drug.  If the State may
interrupt one mode of self-destruction, it may with equal authority
interfere with the other.  John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital vs.
Heston (1971)  58  N.J.  576;  see  also  Application  of  President  &
Directors of Georgetown College Inc: (1964) 118 US App. DC-80:
331  F  2d  1000.    The  third  asserted  basis  of  distinction  –  that
frustrating Nancy Cruzan’s wish to die in the present case requires
interference  with  her  bodily  integrity  –  is  likewise  inadequate,
because  such  interference  is  impermissible  only  if  one  begs  the
question  whether refusal  to undergo the treatment  on her  own, is
suicide.  It has always been lawful not only for the State, but even for
private  citizens  to  interfere  with  bodily  integrity  to  prevent  a
felony….. That general rule has of course been applied to suicide.  At
Common Law, even a private person’s use of force to prevent suicide
192

was privileged…. It is not even reasonable, much less required by the
Constitution,  to  maintain  that, although  the  State  has  the  right  to
prevent a person from slashing his wrists, it does not have the powers
to apply physical force to prevent him from doing so, nor the power,
should  he  succeed,  to  apply,  coercively,  if  necessary,  medical
measures to stop the flow of blood.  The state-run hospital, I am
certain,  is  not  liable  under  42  U.S.C.  1983  for  violation  of
constitutional rights, nor the private hospital liable under general tort
law, if, in a state where suicide is unlawful, it pumps out the stomach
of a person who has intentionally taken an overdose of barbiturates,
despite that person’s wishes to the contrary”.
Scalia J then deals with the dissent by Brennan & Stevens JJ and says:
“…  the State has no such legitimate interest that could outweigh ‘the
person’s choice to put an end to her life”.….. the State must accede to
her ‘particularized and intense interest in self-determination in her
choice whether to continue living or die.”  For, insofar as balancing
the relative interests  of the State and  the individual  is concerned,
there is nothing distinctive about accepting death through the refusal
of ‘medical treatment”, as opposed to accepting it through the refusal
of food, or through the failure to shut off the engine and get out of the
car after parking in one’s garage after work.  Suppose that Nancy
Cruzan were in precisely the condition she is in today, except that she
could be fed and digest food and water without artificial assistance,
how is the State’s interest in keeping her alive thereby increased or
her  interest  in  deciding  whether  she  wants  to  continue  living
reduced?” (emphasis supplied)
193

He stated that he could not agree with Brennan & Stevens that a person
could make the choice of death.  That view the State has not yet taken.  The
Constitution does not say anything on the subject.
2) Washington et al vs. Gluckberg et al: (1997) 521 US 702
Two judgments were delivered on 26th June 1997 by the US Supreme
Court, one was in  Washington v.  Gluckberg and the other was in  Vacco,
Attorney  General  of  New  York  et  al vs.  Quill  et  al. (1997)  117  S.Ct
2293.    Both  related  to  the  validity of  a law  made  in  different  States,
banning ‘assisted suicide’.  The two judgments refer incidentally to Cruzan
and   related  cases  dealing with  the right of a patient  to refuse medical
treatment.  Therefore, these cases are also relevant in the present discussion.
In this case, Rehnquist CJ delivered the opinion which was concurred by
O’Connor, Scalia, Kennedy and Thomas JJ.  O’Connor gave a concurring
opinion, in which Ginsberg and Breyer JJ joined in part.  Stevens, Souter,
Ginsberg and Breyer JJ each filed concurring opinions.
Here, in the State of Washington, the act of assisting suicide was
always an offence.  The present law makes ‘promoting a suicide attempt’ a
felony and provides : “A person is guilty of (that crime) when he knowingly
causes or aids another person to attempt suicide”.
The  Respondents  were  Washington  physicians  who  occasionally
treated  terminally  ill,  suffering  patients,  declared  that  they would  assist
these patients in ending their lives if the State’s assisted suicide ban was not
there.  They, along with three gravely ill plaintiffs (who have since died),
and a non-profit organization that counsels people considering ‘physician-
assisted  suicide’,  filed  this  suit  against  State  and  others  seeking  a
194

declaration that the ban was, on its face, unconstitutional.  They assert a
liberty  interest  protected  by  the  14th Amendment’s  Due  Process  Clause
which extends to a personal choice by a mentally competent, terminally ill
adult to commit suicide by medical assistance.  The trial and first appellate
Courts held the ban was unconstitutional.
Allowing the appeal (see Head Note), the Supreme Court held that the
Washington law  against ‘causing’ or ‘aiding’ suicide was not violative of
the Due Process Clause.  For over 700 years, assisted suicide had remained
prohibited under Anglo American Common Law and it has been a crime in
almost every State.  The President had, in fact, signed the Federal Assisted
Suicide Funding Restriction Act, 1997 which prohibits the use of federal
funds in support of physician assisted suicide.  The right to assist suicide is
not a fundamental liberty interest protected by Due Process Clause, in the
light of history.  The substantive due process has two features – firstly, it
protects those fundamental rights and liberties which have been, objectively
considered  to  be  deeply  rooted  in  the  American  history  and  tradition.
Secondly, the  Court  has  required  a  ‘careful  description’  of the  asserted
fundamental interest.  The right to assist suicide claimed by the respondents
runs counter to the second requirement.  This asserted right has no place in
the traditions of US, even for terminally ill, mentally competent adults.  The
contention  that  the  asserted  interest  is  consistent  with  the  Court’s
substantive due process cases, - if not the Country’s history and practice – is
not persuasive.  On the other hand, the constitutionally protected right to
refuse  treatment  by  use  of  lifesaving  hydration  and  nutrition  that  was
discussed  in  Cruzan was  not  simply deduced  from abstract  concepts  of
personal autonomy, but was, in fact, based on the country’s history and
tradition, given the Common Law rule that forced medication was a battery
195

and the long traditions protecting the decision to refuse unwanted medical
treatment.  Although,  Planned Parenthood vs.  Casey (1992) 505 US 833
recognised  that  many  of  the  rights  and  liberties  protected  by  the  Due
Process Clause sound in personal autonomy, it does not follow that any and
all important, intimate and personal decisions are so protected (see A San
Antonio Independent School District vs. Rodriguez: (1973) 411 US 1.  The
ban is rationally related to legitimate government interests in prohibiting
intentional killing and preserving human life; preventing the serious public
health problem of suicide, especially among the young and elderly and those
suffering from unrelated pain or depression or other mental disorders, for
protecting  the  medical  profession’s  integrity and  ethics  and  maintaining
physician’s  role  as  healers  of  patients,  protecting  the  terminally ill  and
vulnerable groups and for avoiding a possible slide towards voluntary and
perhaps even involuntary euthanasia.
In the main opinion delivered by Rehnquist CJ, it was stated that the
majority of States in US have laws imposing criminal penalties on those
who assist suicide.  In fact, over a period of 700 years, the Anglo American
Common  Law  punished  or  disapproved  suicide  and  assisted  suicide.
“Because of advances in medicine and technology, Americans today are
increasingly  likely  to  die  in  institutions,  from  chronic  illness….Public
concern and democratic action are therefore sharply focused on how best to
protect dignity and independence at the end of life, with the result that there
have been many significant changes in State laws and in the attitudes these
laws reflect.  Many States, for example, now permit ‘living wills’, surrogate
health-care decision making, and the withdrawal or refusal of life sustaining
medical  treatment.  …At  the  same time,  however,  voters  and  legislators
196

continue for the most part to re-affirm their States ‘prohibitions on assisting
suicide.”  
Washington  passed  ‘Natural  Death  Act,  1979’  which  specifically
stated that the
‘withholding or withdrawal of life sustaining treatment …. shall not,
for any purpose, constitute a suicide”
and that 
“nothing in this chapter shall be construed to condone, authorize or
approve mercy killing….”
(Washington Laws, Ch. 112, sec 8(1)).  The Washington statute at issue in
this case, i.e. banning assisted suicide is in the Washington Rev Code see
9A.36.060 1994) (see Wash Rev Code ss 70.112.070(1), 70.122.100)(1994).
(However,  Oregan  enacted  in  1994  a  Death  With  Dignity  Act,  which
legalized  physicians  assisted suicide for competent, terminally ill adults.
See Oregan Rev Stet. MC 127.8N.  The Act was upheld in Lee vs. Oregan:
107 F.3d 1382 (A 9, 1997).  Iowa and Rhode Island too rejected assisted
suicide  (1997).   President  Clinton  signed  the  Federal  Assisted  Suicide
Funding Restrictive Act  1997 which prohibits the use of federal funds in
support of physician assisted suicide. (Pub. L. 105-12, 111 Stat 23 codified
at 42 USC para 14401 etc)”.
In  Cruzan,  the  Court  assumed  that  the  Constitution  guaranteed
competent persons a ‘constitutionally protected right to refuse life saving
hydration and nutrition’.  The question now is whether the liberty protected
197

by the Due Process Clause ‘includes a right to commit suicide which itself
includes a right to assistance in doing so’.
To  accept  this  plea,  the  Court  has  to  review  centuries  of  legal
doctrines and practices and strike down the considered policy choices of
almost every State.  If a thing has been practiced for two hundred years by
common consent, it will need a strong case for the Fourteenth Amendment
to affect it.  (Reno v. Flores (1993) 507 US 292 at 302).  Apart from history
and practice, the plea runs contrary to the Court’s due process line of cases,
which  no  doubt  include  ‘basic  and  intimate  exercises  of  personal
autonomy’.  The respondents claim that the “due process clause includes a
right to commit suicide with another’s assistance”, cannot be accepted.
In Cruzan, it was only stated that at common law there was the right
to refuse medical treatment in the absence of which such medical intrusion
would be ‘battery’.  Informed  consent is necessary for medical treatment.
The  Court  there  said  that  ‘the  principle  that  a competent  person  has  a
constitutionally  protected  liberty  interest  in  refusing  unwanted  medical
treatment’.   The Court  assumed that the US Constitution would grant a
competent  person  a  constitutionally  protected  right  to  refuse  life-saving
hydration and nutrition’.  The Court concluded that, notwithstanding that
right,  the  Constitution  permitted  Missouri  State  to  require  a  clear  and
convincing  evidence  of  an  incompetent  patient’s  wishes  concerning
withdrawal of life sustaining treatment.  Rehnquist CJ said
“The decision to commit suicide with the assistance of another may
be  just  and  profound  as  the  decision  to  refuse  unwanted  medical
treatment, but it has never enjoyed similar legal protection.  Indeed,
the two acts are widely and reasonably regarded as quite distinct…..
198

In  Cruzan itself, we recognized that most States outlawed assisted
suicide  –  and  even  more  do  today  –  and  we  certainly  give  no
intimation that the right to refuse unwanted medical treatment could
be  somehow  transmitted  into  a  right  to  assistance  in  committing
suicide.”
Though the Due Process protection for abortion in certain situations and
personal decisions regarding marriage, contraception, family relationships,
child rearing, education etc. were based on a right to personal autonomy, it
‘does  not  warrant  the  sweeping  conclusion  that  any  and  all  important,
intimate and personal decisions are so protected.   “The history of the law’s
treatment of assisted suicide in this country has been and continues to be
one of the rejection of nearly all efforts to permit it.  That being the case,
our decisions lead us to conclude that the assisted ‘right’ to assistance in
committing suicide is not a fundamental liberty interest protected by the
Due  process  clause.   The  Constitution  also  requires,  however,  that
Washington’s  assisted  suicide  ban  be  rationally  related  to  legitimate
government interests…. This requirement is unquestionably met here.  As
the Court below recognized, Washington’s assisted suicide ban implicates a
number of state interests.  First, Washington has an ‘unqualified interest in
the preservation of human life.  The State’s prohibition on assisted suicide,
like all homicide laws, both reflects and advances its commitment to this
interest…  This interest is symbolic and aspirational as well as practical…
The  State  has  an  interest  in  preventing  suicide….   Research  indicates,
however, that many people who request physician assisted suicide withdraw
that request if their depression or pain are treated…”
199

Rehnquist CJ also pointed out that the State has an interest in protecting the
integrity and ethics of the medical profession and physician’s groups and
concluded that ‘physician assisted suicide is  fundamentally incompatible
with the physician’s role as healer’.  And physician assisted suicide could
undermine the trust that is essential to the doctor patient relationship, by
blurring the time-honoured line between healing and harming.
In addition, the State has an interest in protecting vulnerable groups –
including the poor, the elderly and disabled persons – from abuse, neglect
and mistakes.  The Court recognized the real risk of subtle coercion and
undue influence in end-of-life situations.  If physician assisted suicide were
permitted, many might resort to it to spare their families the substantial
financial burden of end of life health-care costs.
The State’s interest extends to protecting the disabled and terminally
ill people from prejudice, negative and inaccurate stereotypes, and ‘societal
indifference’.  The ban reflects and reinforces the policy that the lives of
terminally ill, disabled and elderly people must be no less valued than the
lives of the young, and healthy.
The State may fear that permitting assisted suicide will start it down
the path to voluntary and perhaps even involuntary euthanasia.  The Court
of  Appeal,  no  doubt,  struck  down  the  ban  in  so  far  as  it  applied  to
“competent,  terminally  ill  adults  who  wish  to  hasten  their  deaths  by
obtaining medication prescribed by their doctors.  But the Washington law
rightly insists that if the protection is a matter of constitutional right, it must
apply to all persons.  But, if in the process of physician assisted suicide, the
family members and loved ones will inevitably participate, then it could
200

prove extremely difficult to police and contain.  The Act prevents  such
erosion.”
The Court said that this concern is supported by unfortunate results of
the practice of euthanasia in the Netherlands.  The Dutch government’s own
study revealed that in 1990, there were 2,300 cases of voluntary euthanasia,
400  cases  of  assisted  suicide,  and  more  than  1000  cases  of  euthanasia
without an explicit request.  In addition to these latter 1000 cases, the study
found  an  additional  41941  cases  where  physicians  administered  lethal
morphine  overdoses  without  the  patients’  explicit  consent.   This  study
suggests  that,  despite  the  existence  of  various  reporting  procedures,
euthanasia in the Netherlands has not been limited to competent, terminally
ill adults who are enduring physical suffering, and that regulation of the
practice  may  not  have  prevented  abuses  in  cases  involving  vulnerable
persons, including severely disabled neonates and elderly persons suffering
from  dementia.   Washington  State,  like  most  other  States,  reasonably
ensures against the risk by banning, rather than regulating, assisted suicides.
(We are not referring to the reasons given in the other concurring opinions
in this case.)
3) Vacco, Attorney General of New York et al vs. Quill et al: (1997) 117
SCt 2293.
This case refers to the validity of the New York’s statute prohibiting
assisted suicide and as to how its validity was upheld after rejecting the plea
that the Act violated the Equal Protection Clause.
The main opinion was given by Rehnquist CJ, with whom O’Connor,
Scalia, Kennedy and Thomas joined.  O’Connor filed a concurring opinion
201

with  which  Ginsburg  and  Breyer  JJ  agreed  in  part.   Stevens,  Souter,
Ginsburg, Breyer filed separate opinions also.
The New York statute prohibits assisted suicide.  (N.Y. Penal Law,
sec. 125.19).    Section 120.30 makes it an offence if a person intentionally
causes or aids a person to attempt suicide.  Promoting suicide attempt is a E
class felony.  However, N.Y. law permits refusal of medical treatment, even
if the withdrawal of such treatment will result in death.  N.Y. Public Health
Law Art 29-B.
Respondents  are  physicians  who  claim a  right  to  prescribe  lethal
medication for mentally competent, terminally-ill patients who are suffering
great pain and who desire doctor’s help in taking their own lives, but are
deterred from doing so because of the New York Act.  They contend that
this is no different from permitting a person to refuse life sustaining medical
treatment and hence, the Act is discriminatory.
This plea was not accepted by the US Supreme Court.  The Equal
Protection Clause states that no State shall ‘deny to any person within its
jurisdiction  the equal  protection  of the laws’. This  provision  creates  no
substantive rights.  It embodies a general rule that the State must treat like
cases  alike  but  may however,  treat  unlike  cases  differently.   Everyone,
regardless of physical condition is entitled, if competent, to refuse unwanted
life-saving medical treatment, but no one is permitted to assist a suicide.
The “distinction between assisted suicide and withdrawing life-sustaining
treatment,  a  distinction  widely  recognized  and  endorsed  in  the  medical
profession and in our legal traditions, is both important and logical.  It is
certainly  rational’.   ‘The  distinction  comports  with  fundamental  legal
principles  of  causation  and  intent.   First,  when  a  patient  refuses  life-
202

sustaining medical treatment, he dies from an underlying fatal disease or
pathology;  but  if  a  patient  ingests  lethal  medication  prescribed  by  a
physician, he is killed by that medication.  (Death which occurs after the
removal of life-sustaining systems is from natural causes).  (When a life-
sustaining treatment is declined, the patient dies primarily because of an
underlying fatal disease).   In the debates before the Sub-Committee of the
House, it was pointed out that withdrawal of treatment and assisted suicide
are  different.   ‘Furthermore,  a  physician  who  withdraws  or  honours  a
patient’s refusal  to  begin  life  sustaining  medical  treatment, purposefully
intends or may so intend, only to respect his patient’s wishes and “to cease
doing useless and futile or degrading things to the patient when (the patient)
no longer stands to benefit from them….  The same is true when a doctor
provides aggressive palliative care; in some cases, painkilling drugs may
hasten a patient’s death, but the physician’s purpose and intent is, or may
be,  only  to  ease  his  patient’s  pain.”   A  doctor  who  assists  a  suicide,
however,  “most,  necessarily  and  indubitably,  intends  primarily  that  the
patient be made dead”.  Similarly, a patient who commits suicide with a
doctor’s  aid necessarily has the specific intent to end his or her life, while a
patient who refuses or discontinues treatment might not….  See e.g. Matter
of Conroy, (1985) 98 N.J. 321 (at 351), (patients who refuse life sustaining
treatment  ‘may  not  harbor  a  specific  intent  to  die’  and  may  instead
‘fervently wish to live, but to do so free of unwanted medical technology,
surgery or drugs).
“…,  it  is  not  surprising  that  many  Courts,  including  New  York
Courts, have carefully distinguished refusing life-sustaining treatment from
suicide.  See e.g.  Fosmire vs.  Nicolean, 75 NY 2d 218 (Merely declining
medical ….. care is not considered a suicidal act’).  In fact, the first State
203

Court decision explicitly to authorize withdrawing life-sustaining treatment
noted the ‘real distinction between self infliction of deadly harm and a self
determination against artificial life support.  (In re Quinlan 70  NJ 10: 355
A.2d. 647…)  And recently, the Michigan Supreme Court also rejected the
argument that the distinction ‘between acts that artificially sustain life and
acts  that  artificially  curtail  life’  is  merely  ‘a  distinction  without
constitutional  significance  –  a  meaningless  exercise  in  semantic
gymnastics’, insisting that ‘the  Cruzan majority disagreed and so do we.
(“Kevorkian: 447 Mich at 471)”
Similarly, the overwhelming majority of State legislatures have drawn
a clear line between assisting suicide and withdrawing or permitting the
refusal of unwanted life-saving medical treatment by prohibiting the former
and permitting the latter.  Washington vs.Glucksberg (1997) 117 S.Ct 2258,
and ‘nearly all States expressly disapprove of suicide and assisted suicide
either in statutes dealing with durable powers of attorney in health care
situations or in ‘living will’ statutes.  Kevorkian 447 Mich at 478-479…
Thus, even as the States move to protect and promote patient’s dignity at the
end of life, they remain opposed to physician assisted suicide’.
The Court  then said that the New York State enacted the current
assisted suicide statutes in 1965 prohibiting assisted suicide.   Since then,
New York has acted several times to protect patient’s common law-rights to
refuse treatment.  Act of Aug 7, 1987, Ch 818, ss. 1,; 1987 NY Laws 3140
(‘Do not Resuscitate Orders’)(Codified as amended at NY Pub Health Law,
see 2960-2979 (McKinney 1994 U Supp. 1997); Act of July 22, 1990, Ch
752, sec 2, 1990 NY Law, 3547 (Health Care Agents and Proxies)(Codified
as amended NY Pub. Health Law, paras 2980-2994 (McKinney 1994 &
204

Suppl 1997).  In so doing, however, the State has neither endorsed a general
right to ‘hasten death’ nor approved physician assisted suicide.  Quite the
opposite: The State has reaffirmed the line between ‘killing’ and ‘letting
die’.  See NY Pub. Health Law Art 2989 (3)(McKinney 1994) (“This article
is not intended to permit or promote suicide, assisted suicide or euthanasia”)
….  More recently the New York Task Force on ‘life and the law’, studied
assisted suicide and euthanasia and, in 1994, unanimously recommended
against legalization….  In the Task Force’s view, ‘allowing decisions to
forego life sustaining treatment and allowing assisted suicide or euthanasia
have radically different consequences and meanings for public policy.”  
‘This Court has also recognized, at least implicitly, the distinction
between letting a patient die and making that patient die.  In  Cruzan vs.
Director, MO, Deptt. Of Health, 497 US 261, 278 p 1990), we concluded
that ‘the principle that a competent person has a constitutionally protected
liberty interest in refusing unwanted medical treatment may be inferred from
our  prior  decisions  and  we  assumed the  existence  of  such  a  right  for
purposes of that case.  But our assumption of a right to refuse treatment was
grounded not, as the Court of Appeals supposed,  on the proposition that
patients have a general and obtrusive (right to hasten death), but on well-
established,  traditional  rights to  bodily  integrity  and  freedom  from
unwanted touching….  In fact, we observed that ‘the majority of States in
this  country  have  laws  imposing  criminal  penalties  on  one  who  assists
another to commit suicide.  Cruzan therefore provided no support for the
notion that refusing life sustaining medical treatment is ‘nothing more nor
less than suicide’.
205

The Court declared that they were disagreeing with the respondent’s
claim that the distinction between refusing life saving medical treatment and
assisted suicide is ‘arbitrary’ and ‘irrational’.  Granted, in some cases, the
line between the two may not be clear, but certainly is not required, even if
it were possible.  Logic and contemporary practice support New York’s
judgment  that  the  two  acts  are  different  and  New York  may therefore,
consistent  with  the  Constitution,  treat  them  differently.   By  permitting
everyone to refuse unwanted medical treatment while prohibiting anyone
from assisting a suicide, New York law follows a long standing and rational
distinction.
New York’s reasons for recognizing and acting on this distinction –
including  prohibitory  intentional  killing  and  preserving  life;  preventing
suicide; maintaining physician’s role as their patient’s healers; protecting
vulnerable  people  from  indifference,  prejudice  and  psychological  and
financial pressure to end their lives’ and avoiding a possible slide towards
euthanasia – are discussed in greater detail in the judgment in Washington
vs.  Glucksberg,  ante.  These  valid  and  important  public  interests  easily
satisfy the constitutional requirement that a legislative clarification bear a
rational relation to some legitimate end.”
For  the  above  reasons,  the  Supreme  Court  reversed  the  Court  of
Appeal and upheld the New York ban against assisted suicide.
4) Gonzales, Att. Gen et al v. Oregon et al: US (SC) (d. 17.1.2006)
206

The Supreme Court, in this case, upheld the Oregon law of 1994 on
assisted suicide not on merits but on the question of non-repugnancy with
Federal Law of 1970.
The Oregon Death With Dignity Act, 1994 exempts from civil or
criminal liability state-licensed physicians who, in compliance with the said
Act’s specific safeguards, dispense or prescribe a lethal dose of drugs upon
the request of a terminally ill-patient.   In 2001, the Attorney General of US
issued  an  Interpretative  Rule  to  address  the  implementation  and
enforcement of the Controlled Substances  Act, 1970 with respect to the
Oregon Act of 1994, declaring that using controlled substances to ‘assist
suicide’  is  not  a  legitimate  medical  practice  and  that  dispensing  or
prescribing them for this purpose is unlawful under the 1970 Act.
The State of Oregon, a physician, a pharmacist and some terminally
ill State residents challenge the Rule made by the AG.   The Ninth Circuit,
on  appeal,  invalidated  the  Rule,  reasoning  that  by  making  a  medical
procedure authorized under Oregon law a ‘federal offence’, it altered the
balance  between  the  States  and  the  Federal  Government  without  the
requisite clear statement that the 1970 Act authorized the action; and in the
alternative, that the Rule could not be squared with the plain language of the
1970 Act’, which targets only conventional drug abuse and excludes the
Attorney General from medical policy decisions.
It  may  be  noted  that  the  1970  Federal  Act’s  main  objectives  of
controlling drug abuse and controlling legitimate and illegitimate traffic in
controlled substances, criminalizes, inter alia, the unauthorized distribution
and dispensation of substances classified in any of its five schedules.   The
Attorney General  may add, remove, or reschedule  substances  only after
207

making particular findings, and on scientific and medical matters, he must
accept  the  findings  of  the  Secretary  of  Health  and  Human  Services
(Secretary).   These proceedings must be on the record after an opportunity
for comment.   The dispute here involves controlled substances listed in
Sch. II, which are generally available only by written prescription (21 USC
sec. 829 (a)).   A 1971 regulation promulgated by the Attorney General of
US  requires  that  such  prescriptions  be  used  “for  a  legitimate  medical
purpose  by  an  individual  practitioner  acting  in  the  usual  course  of  his
professional  practice”  21  CFR,  sec. 1306.04.   To prevent  diversion of
controlled substances, the 1970 Act regulates the activity of physicians, who
must register in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the
Attorney General.  He may deny, suspend, or revoke a registration that, (as
relevant here), would be ‘inconsistent with the public interest’.   (21 USC
sec. 824(a)(4) & 822(a)(2)).   In determining consistency with the public
interest,  he  must  consider  five  factors,  including  the  States
recommendations, compliance with State, federal and local law regarding
controlled substances, and ‘public health and safety’ (sec. 823(f)).   The
1970  Act  explicitly  contemplates  a  role  for  the  States  in  regulating
controlled substances (sec. 903).     So held the 9th Circuit.
The US Supreme Court (majority) held, in the appeal by the Attorney
General  US, that  the 1970  Act does  not allow the  Attorney General  to
prohibit  doctors  from  prescribing  regulated  drugs  for  use  in  physician-
assisted suicide under State law permitting the procedure.    The Appeal was
dismissed.
208

Some Legislations in US
(1) The Patient Self Determination Act, 1990: (42 USC 1395 cc(a))
Soon after Cruzan, the Federal Legislature of US passed the Patient
Self Determination Act, 1990 which came into force w.e.f. 1st December,
1991.  It applies to hospitals, nursing facilities, hospices, and health-care
providers receiving funds under the Plan.  It requires that these institutions
give patients information concerning their legal rights to make decisions
about the medical care and treatment they are about to receive.  (This Act
was part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1990).
Under  sec.  1902(2)(w)(1)  of  the  Act  (see  sec  1902),  the  above
institutions have: 
(1) (A) to provide to each adult individual receiving medical care by or
through the provider or organization, written information, concerning -
(i) an individual’s rights under State Law (whether statutory or as
recognized by the Courts of the State) to make decisions concerning
such medical care, including the right to accept or refuse medical or
surgical treatment and the right to formulate  advance directives) (as
defined in paragraph (3), and
(ii) the provider’s or organization’s written policies respecting the
implementation of such rights;
(B) to document in the individual’s medical record whether or not
the individual has executed an advance directive;
209

(C) not  to  condition  the  provisions  of  care  or  otherwise
discriminate against an individual based on whether or not the
individual has executed an advance directive;
(D) to ensure compliance with requirements of State law (whether
statutory or as recognized by the Courts of the State) respecting
advance directives; and
(E) to provide (individually or with others) for education for staff
and the community on issues concerning advance directives.
Subpara  (C)  (above)  shall  not  be  considered  as  requiring  the
provisions of care which conflicts with an advance directive.
(2) The  written  information  described  in  para  1(A)  shall  be
provided to an adult individual –
(A) in  the case  of a hospital, at the time of the  individual’s
admission as in patient,
(B) in the case of a nursing facility, at the time of ….
(C) in the case of a provider of home health, at the time of ….
(D) in the case of a hospice program, at the time of ….
(E) in the case of a health monitor program, at the time of….
(3) Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  constituted  to  prohibit  the
application of a State law which allows for an objection on the
basis of conscience for any health care provider or any agent of
210

such provider which, as a matter of conscience, cannot implement
an advance directive.
(4) In this subsection, the term ‘advance directive’ means a written
instruction, such as a living will or durable power of attorney for
health care, recognized under State Law (whether statutory or as
recognised  by  the  Courts  of  the  State)  and  relating  to  the
provisions of such care when the individual is incapacitated.
The  Act  also  provides  for  ‘information  respecting  advance  directives,
effective data, public education campaign etc.’
Thereafter,  certain  Regulations  called,  ‘The  Federal  Patient  Self-
Regulation Act, Final Regulations’ have been passed.
(2) National  Pain  Care  Policy  Act,  2005  (US)  (introduced  in  House
(Federal)
(http://thomas 10a.gov/cgi-him/query/F?c109:1:temp/nc 109nx4ks:e1070
Section  2  states  that  not  later  than  30.6.2006,  the  President  shall
convene a conference to be known as the ‘White House Conference on Pain
Care) – The purpose of the Conference shall be to
(1) increase  the  recognition  of  pain  as  a  significant  public  health
problem in US;
(2) assess the adequacy of diagnosis and treatment for primary and
secondary pain including acute, chronic, intractable and end-of-
life pain;
211

(3) identify barriers to appropriate pain care including –
(A) lack  of  understanding  and  education  among  employees,
patients, providers, Regulators and third party payers;
(B) barriers to access to care at the primary, specialty, and tertiary
care levels; and
(C) gaps in basic and clinical research on the symptoms and causes
of, and potential treatments to improve, pain care; and
(D) establish an agenda for action in both public and private sectors
that  will  reduce  such  barriers  and  significantly  improve  the
state of pain-care research, education and clinical care in US by
2010.
Section 3 proposes establishing a National Centre for Pain and Palliative
Research; section 4 refers to Pain Care Education and Training; section 5 to
Public Awareness Campaign on pain management, section 6 to Pain Care
initiative in military health Care facilities; section 7 to pain care standards in
Tricare Plans; section 9 to Annual Report on Medicare Expenditure for pain
care  services,  section  10 to  pain  care initiative  in  veteran’s  health  care
facilities.
The Act requires the Director of National Health Institute to establish
at least 6 regional pain research centres.  It permits Secretary to award
grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts to pubic and private entities,
to educate and train health professionals  in pain and palliative care.  It
directs the Secretary to implement a national campaign to inform the public
on  responsible  pain  management,  related  symptoms  management  and
212

palliative care.  It requires the Secretaries of Defence, Homeland Security,
and  Health  and  Human  Services  to  develop  and  implement  a pain-care
palliative initiative in all health care facilities of the uniformed services.  It
requires  Medicare  Advantage  Organisation  to  meet  certain  pain  care
standards.  It requires  the Secretary of Veterans Affairs  to develop  and
implement a pain-care initiative in all health care facilities of the Deptt. of
Veterans Affair.
(B) States in US
In the States in US, an ‘advance directive’ means a document which a
person must fill stating in advance what kind of treatment he wants or does
not want under special, or serious medical conditions.  Such a directive
allows a person to state his choices of health-care, or to name someone to
make those choices for him if he is unable to do so.  It enables the person to
make decisions about future medical treatment, to say yes to treatment he
wants or no to treatment he does not want.  An advance directive can limit
life-prolonging measures when an event occurs from which there is little or
no chance of recovery.
California
In  California,  there  are  two  types  of  instruments:  (see
http//www.network17.org/consumerarticles/ptselfd 4.htm).   The first one
refers to below delegates decision making to another while the second one
deals with the decision of the patient himself.
(i) Durable power of attorney for Health Care:  
213

In US, this is stated to be the best legal instrument to ensure that
one’s wishes will be followed.  It is a signed, dated and witnessed paper
naming  another  person  as  one’s  agent  or  proxy  to  make  ‘medical
decisions’ if one becomes unable to make them for oneself.  This might
be one’s husband or wife or son or daughter or a close friend.
An agent has to be chosen with care.  He should be somebody with
him one is comfortable to talk to, or is known closely, somebody with
whom one has  discussed  his  views on  these matters.  He should  be
someone who is available when needed.  He should be instructed about
any treatment one wishes to eliminate or avoid.
(ii) Natural Death Act declaration  :
The  type  of  living  will  recognized  in  California  is  called  the
Natural Death Act 1977 Declaration.  A person completes and signs the
form and that declaration tells the doctor and the staff that the person
does not want any treatment that would prolong his dying.  It tells the
doctor to stop (or not to start) any life sustaining treatment if the person
is terminally ill or permanently unconscious.
If  a  person  is  not  comfortable  with  a  Natural  Death  Act
Declaration, he can fill out a non-statutory living will to state when he
would or would not want to be treated.
A person is not limited to one or the other of these forms; he may
execute both of them if he wishes.  Once that has been done, one may
change them at any time by informing all the appropriate people that
there is a change in one’s mind.  The old copies can be destroyed.
214

The consent must be informed consent and hence following are
important  issues  one  has  to  consider.   For  example  in  the  case  of
dialysis, one has to consider the following aspects:
(1) What are the most important goals of dialysis treatment?
(2) Would I want dialysis to continue if it just seemed delaying death?
(3) Under what circumstances would I want it to be stopped?
(4) How much treatment would I want if there were little chance of
recovery from a serious side-effect?
(5) Would  I  want  dialysis  to  continue  if  I  were  permanently
conscious?
Some other issues which one should think in making decisions on treatment
are:
(1) Relief of pain
(2) Ability to think and communicate
(3) Financial costs
(4) Suffering and anxiety to others
(5) Control of bodily functions (bowel, bladder etc.)
(6) Ability to move about
(7) Religious needs
(8) Dependency
215

Some suggestions which patients may give to their family or friends are as
follows:
(1) In case of doubt, err on the side of life.
(2) I want those treatments that offer reasonable hope to restore me to
a condition that my loved ones think I would find acceptable.
(3) I do not want treatment that might postpone death but probably
would not restore me to a quality of life that I find acceptable.
(4) I do/do not want a treatment if there is some small, remote chance
that it might help me.
(5) I  want  treatment  decisions  made  with  a  view  to  my  overall
condition and the treatments’ ability to improve this.
(6) I want sufficient pain medication to keep me free of pain even if
the dosage may shorten my life.
(7) I  want  the  cost  of  treatment  and  its  financial  impact  on  my
family/community to be considered in making decisions.
(8) If I lose consciousness with no reasonable hope of ever regaining
it, I want all treatment stopped (including food and fluids).
(9) I want my loved ones/professionals to make decisions about my
care the way they think I would make them, were I able.
In California, an Advance Directive in the form of a Durable Power
of  Attorney  for  Heath  Care  is  available  from  the  California  medical
Association PO Box 7600, San Francisco or phone 415-882-5175 etc.  The
216

form has to be witnessed by two persons.  One of them has to be someone
who is not related and who is not named in any testamentary document as a
person who will inherit property of the patient.  A copy has to be given to
the  proxy/agent,  to  your  doctor  and  your  dialysis  head-nurse  or
administrator.  Original will remain with the patient in a safe place.
If one does not want to approve another to make decisions for him, he
can sign a National Death Act Declaration to direct that life-saving measure
may not be used if certain situations arise.
Other States in US:
Living wills are recognized bylaw in 40 States in US.  For example in
Arkansas, it is governed by the ‘Rights of Terminally Ill or Permanently
Unconscious Act.  (ACA, 20-17-201).  One must be 18 years or older to
execute a will.  One must sign the document or if physically unable, direct
another to sign.  Two witnesses are necessary.
South Carolina:
Living will under Death with Dignity Act
(http://www.state.sc.us/dmh/804-97.htm) 
The Death with Dignity Act authorizes competent adults to express
their wishes regarding the use or withholding of life-sustaining procedures,
including  artificial  nutrition  and  hydration,  in  the  event  they  are
incapacitated or otherwise unable to express their desires.  The Act creates a
statutory form for this purpose titled “Declaration of a Desire for Natural
Death’.  This document is commonly referred as a living will.  (see App. 1
of the Act)
217

(1) Health Care Power of Attorney:
Sections within South Caroline Probate Code authorizes competent
adults to designate another person to make decisions on their behalf about
their medical care in the event they become incapacitated.  The Code creates
a statutory form for this purpose entitled ‘Health Care Power of Attorney’.
The  Department  has  developed  a  form  entitled  ‘Statement  of  Desires
Regarding Mental Health Treatment and Care’ for use as an addendum to
the statutory ‘Health Care Power of Attorney’ form (App 2, 3)
(2) A “Do not Resuscitate Order” is a written physician’s order not to
begin the otherwise automatic initiation of Cardio-pulmonary resuscitation,
in the event the patient suffers cardiac or respiratory arrest.  It is appropriate
in situations involving a patient with a terminal condition or a patient in a
state  of  permanent  unconsciousness,  and  is  generally  entered  with  the
consent  of  the  patient  or  the  patient’s  substitute  decision  maker,  or  in
circumstances  where  resuscitative  efforts  are  inappropriate  or  medically
futile.  Although the entry of a ‘Do Not Resuscitate Order’ involves advance
planning  for  the  withholding  of  a  specific  health-care  procedures,  and
frequently involves consultation with the patient,  it is not considered an
Advance Directive for purposes of the Patient Self Determination Act or
this  Directive.   It  is  only  one  means  of  effecting  a  patient’s  Advance
Directive  for  the  withholding  of  life  sustaining  procedures  when  the
conditions set forth in the Advance Directive are met.
(C) US State Court judgments:
There are a very large number of Judgments of the US Courts and
statutes of the various States but we do not propose to refer to them.  We
218

have already referred to the leading judgments of the US Supreme Court.
Further, we are of the view that the ‘substituted judgment’ (of surrogate)
principles which are evolved in US are not suitable for India and, in fact, the
House of Lords in NHS Trust vs. Bland did not think it fit to introduce those
principles into English law.  For the same reason, we do not propose to refer
to the case law on ‘substituted judgments’ of the US State Courts.
We shall next move on to consider the position in Canada, Australia,
New Zealand.
219

Chapter –VI
Legal position in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and
South Africa
In this chapter, we shall refer to the case law and connected statutes
on  the  subject  of  withholding  or  withdrawing  medical  treatment  to
terminally ill patients in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
Canada
(1) Mallette vs.  Schulman: (1990) 72 O.R. (2d) 417(CA): 1991(2)Med
LR. 162.
In this case, a 57 years old woman who was seriously injured in a car
accident  was  taken  to  the  hospital  and  she  was unconscious.   A nurse
discovered  in  the  woman’s  handbag,  a  card  signed  by  the  woman
identifying  her  as  a  Jehovah’s  Witness  and  requesting  that  no  blood-
transfusions be given to her under any circumstances, that she fully realized
the implications of that position but did not object to the case of non-blood
alternatives.
The doctor was informed of the contents of the card but he personally
administered blood transfusion to the woman as he was of the opinion that it
was necessary to replace the blood that was lost and her life had to be saved.
The  woman  made  ‘a  very  good  recovery  from her  injuries’.   She  was
discharged from hospital  after 6 weeks.   She then sued the doctor for
negligence, assault, battery and religious discrimination.
220

The  trial  judge  Donnelly J  accepted  the  plea  of  battery only and
awarded damages of $20,000.  This was affirmed by the Court of Appeal.
The  case  demonstrates  that  doctors  must  respect  their  patient’s  wishes
provided that the patients were in a fit state to make it plain or indicate in
advance as to what treatment they do not want.  Doctors cannot substitute
their decision from a validly made decision of the patient.
(2) Nancy B vs. Hotel-Dieu de Quebec: (1992) 86 DLR (4th) 385 = 1992
DLR Lexis 1762 decided by the Quebec Supreme Court. (Dufour J)
The plaintiff, aged 25, suffered for two and a half years from Guillian –
Barre Syndrome, an incurable neurological disorder that left her incapable
of movement.  She could breathe only with the assistance of a respirator.
With it, of course, she could live a longer time, but without it, her life would
be  shorter.   Her  intellectual  capacity  and  mental  competence  were
unaffected.  She wanted discontinuance of the treatment.   To establish her
right  to  refuse  further  treatment,  (including  the  continued  use  of  the
respirator), she commenced an action for an injunction against the hospital
and as also her physician to require them to comply with her decision for
stopping the respiratory support.  The hospital entered appearance but did
not contest her claim. Her physician did not appear.  The Judge, of his own
motion, made the Attorney General of Quebec a party.  All other parties
were represented at the hearing.  
The  Court  held  that  the  plaintiff  was  entitled  to  the  injunction.
Permission should be given to her physician to cease treatment with the
221

respirator at a time chosen by the plaintiff.  The physician was entitled to
the assistance of the hospital.
The Court referred to the Articles of Civil Code and certain sections
of the Criminal Code.
Use  of  a respirator  to  maintain  life  is  a ‘treatment’ and  hence  is
something within the individual’s control.    As per Arts. 19, 19(1) of the
Civil  Code  of  Lower  Canada,  the  body  of  every  person  is  physically
inviolable except with the person’s consent or legal authority, and no one
need submit to any treatment, examination or other intervention (against his
or her will).  By virtue of Ethics of Physicians RRQ, C (1981, C.M-9, r 4
Arts 2.02.01, 2.03.02, 2.03.28), a person is entitled to autonomy in respect
of his or her body.  No treatment may be given to a person except with that
person’s consent or that of someone authorized by law.  A physician is
obliged under the Public Health Protection Act, R.S.Q 1977 (C. p 35) to
protect the health and well-being of an individual, but must obtain the free
and informed consent of the patient to any treatment.
It was held  that  the right  of the  individual  to  refuse  treatment  is
almost absolute, being subject only to a corresponding right of others.  The
individual may not threaten the life or health of others.  The individual has
the right to determine whether or not to accept treatment; and putting and
keeping  someone  on  a  respirator  without  an  informed  consent  is  an
improper  interference  with  the  person.   The  Criminal  Procedure  Code
(R.S.C. 1985, C. C-46) does not affect the case.    If treatment is withdrawn,
the  plaintiff’s death would be natural and would not involve homicide or
suicide.
222

The Court referred, among other decisions, to Cruzan decided by the
US Supreme Court.  
It may here be useful to refer to some of the statutory provisions of
Lower Canada referred to in the judgment.
Civil Code:
Art 18 of the Civil Code states that ‘every human being possesses
juridical personality.  Whether citizen or alien, he has the full enjoyment of
civil rights, except as otherwise expressly provided by law’.  Art 19 states
that the ‘human person is inviolable and no one may cause harm to the
person of another, without his consent or without being authorized by law to
do so.  Art 19.1 states that ‘no person may be made to undergo care of any
nature,  whether  for  examination,  specimen  taking,  removal  of  tissue,
treatment or any other act, except with his  consent.  Where the person
concerned is unable to consent to or refuse care, a person authorized by law
or by mandate shall replace him.  (Art 19.1 was added on 22nd June, 1989).
Even before Art 19.1 was inserted, one could infer from sec 42 of the
Public Health Protection Act, 1977 (RSQ 1977C  p.35) that an institution or
a  physician  had  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the  person  whose  life  was  in
danger, before providing care or treatment.
The Code of Ethics of Physician, RRQ. 1981, C.M-9, r 4 is clear in
this regard.  One also sees that the Code gives precedence to the patient’s
freedom of choice in any decision concerning himself over the duty of the
physician to protect his health and well-being.
223

Ethics:  Rule  4, paras: 2.02.01.   “The physician  must not,  by any
means,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  interfere  with  the  patient’s
freedom of choice of a physician.”
“2.03.28 Except  in  an  emergency,  a  physician  must,  before
undertaking an investigation, treatment or research, obtain informed
consent from the patient or his representative or any person whose
consent may be required by law.
2.03.29 A  physician  must  ensure  that  the  patient  or  his
representative or the person whose consent may be required by law,
receive  suitable  explanation  on  the  nature,   purpose  and  possible
consequences of the investigation, treatment or research which the
physician prepares to make.”
In Art 19.1 of the Civil Code, the legislature has made no distinction
between beneficial and non-beneficial care.
After referring to these provisions, the Judge in Nancy said that using
a respirator was part of ‘medical treatment’.  Putting a person on a respirator
and constantly keeping  her on it without her consent, surely constitutes
intrusion and interference which violates the person of Nancy B.  She can
require the respiratory system to be removed.
The Judge observed: “In any event, declining life-sustaining medical
treatment may not properly be viewed as an attempt to commit suicide.
Refusing medical intervention merely allows the disease to take its natural
course; if death were eventually to occur, it would be the result, primarily,
of the underlying disease, and not the result of a self-inflicted injury.”
224

The Judge referred to sec 217 of the Criminal Code, which says:
“217. Every one who undertakes to do an act is under a legal duty to
do it if any omission to do the act is or may be dangerous to life”.
In respect of sec. 217, (formerly sec 199 of the previous Criminal
Code), the  Law Reform Commission of Canada, in its Working Paper 28
(Euthanasia, Aiding Suicide and Cessation of Treatment) (1982) (p 17) had
stated:
“Section 199 of the Criminal Code, read in isolation, seems to imply
that a physician who has undertaken treatment is not permitted to
terminate it if this involves a risk to the life of the patient.  If this
were the case, the law would require the use of aggressive and useless
therapy.  It would have the effect, in many cases, of causing doctors
to  hesitate seriously  before undertaking  treatment,  for  fear of not
being permitted to terminate it later, when it no longer appears to be
useful.  If this were the actual implication of the rules, then the rule
would  be  absurd and  would  have  disastrous  effects  on  medical
practice.”
It should not be forgotten that sec 217 follows sec 216 which reads:
“Section 216.  Duty of persons undertaking acts dangerous to life:
Everyone who undertakes to administer surgical or medical treatment
to another person or to do any other lawful act that may endanger the
life of another person is, except in case of necessity, under a legal
duty to have and to use reasonable knowledge, skill and care in so
doing.”
225

Section 217 which comes immediately after sec. 216 cannot be read
independently  of  sec  216  which  requires  that  a  physician  act  with
reasonable  knowledge,  skill  and  care  when  he  undertakes  to  administer
surgical or medical treatment to another person or does any other lawful act
that may endanger the life of another person, sec 217 logically follows from
sec 216.
One must read sec 217 in conjunction with sec 45 and 219 of the
same Code:
“Section  45:  Surgical  Operations:  Everyone  is  protected  from
criminal responsibility for performing a surgical  operation  on any
person for the benefit of that person if:
(a) the operation is performed with reasonable care and skill;
(b) it is reasonable to perform the operation, having regard to
the state of health of the person at the time the operation is
performed and to all the circumstances of the case.”
Section 219: Criminal negligence: (1) Everyone  is  criminally
negligent who:
(a) in doing anything, or
(b) in omitting to do  anything  that  it  is  his  duty to  do;  shows
wanton or reckless disregard for the lives or safety of other
persons.
Definition of duty: (2) For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  ‘duty’
means a duty imposed by law.”
226

In the above section 219, the notion of conduct which shows wanton or
reckless disregard is introduced.
The Judge asked the question: ‘Can the conduct of a physician who
stops the respiratory support treatment of his patient – at the freely given
and informed request of the patient, and so that nature may take its course,
be characterized as unreasonable?   Or does  conduct denote  wanton  and
reckless disregard?’
The Judge answered: ‘I do not believe so’.
He then referred to ss 222 to 241 of the Criminal Code which deals with a
different form of homicide and he stated that what he had just reviewed was
sufficient to conclude that the person who would have to stop Nancy B’s
respiratory support treatment in order to allow nature to take its course,
would  not in any manner commit the crimes prohibited by these sections.
The same applied to sec 241, aiding suicide.
He adds, however, that homicide and suicide are not natural deaths,
whereas in the present case, if the plaintiff’s death takes place after the
respiratory support treatment is stopped at her request, it could be the result
of nature taking its own course.
. The Judge finally permitted the plaintiff’s attending physician, to stop
the respiratory support treatment being given to the patient, when she so
desires; her consent must however be checked once again before any act in
this regard is done.  He also permitted the physician to request from the
defendant hospital the necessary assistance in circumstances such as here,
so that everything can take place in a manner respecting the dignity of the
plaintiff.
227

3) Ciarlariello  vs.  Schacter:  1993(2)  SCR  119  (La  Forest,  Sopinka,
Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci JJ)
This is a judgment of the Canadian Supreme Court and deals with the
validity of consent given by patients during the course of the treatment.
Mrs. C was diagnosed with a suspected aneurism.  Her Neurologist
explained through an interpreter both the nature of the angiogram (X-raying
of a dye, leading to the brain) and the risks involved.  The first procedure
was performed by Dr. Mrs Keller, an experienced radiologist.  The patient
was again explained the procedure through an interpreter.  She appeared to
understand and gave her consent. Dr. Keller had some misgivings about the
patient’s complete comprehension.   She therefore destroyed the original
consent form and insisted that the patient be sent back to her own hospital
so that she could talk to her family about her test. She later returned to Dr.
Mrs. Keller herself with a consent form signed by her daughter.
The first cerebral angiogram failed to demonstrate a definite aneurism
and it was decided that a second was needed.  Before that could be done, a
‘re-bleed’  of  the  aneurism  was  diagnosed.  This  increased  the  risk  of
morbidity.  The patient  consented to a second cerebral angiogram.  Dr.
Greco, also an experienced radiologist, explained the nature of the tests and
risks and the patient appeared to understand and consented to the procedure.
During  the  test,  the  patient  experienced  discomfort  when
hyperventilated and, when she calmed down, she told the doctor to stop the
test.   The  doctors  determined  that  any symptoms she  experienced  were
caused by tetany.   The patient, when calm, instructed the doctors to finish
the test after they informed her that it would take another five minutes to
228

complete.  Dr. Keller, administered the final injection.  The patient suffered
an immediate reaction to the injection of the dye which rendered her a
quadriplegic.  Dr. Keller testified that such a reaction was extremely rare
and that never before or since, had she seen such a reaction.
The patient brought an action against the respondent physicians.  The
patient died subsequent to the trial and the appellants carried on the action
as her legal representatives.  The action and the appeal were dismissed.
The point in issue was the nature and extent of the duty of disclosure
owed by a doctor to a patient where the patient withdraws the consent given
to a medical procedure during the course of that procedure.
It was held by Cory J, speaking for the Canadian Supreme Court, that
there was a sound factual basis for concluding that the patient consented to
the  continuation  of  the  angiogram  and  that  she  was  giving  consent  to
continuing the procedure.  There was neither fraud nor misinformation in
obtaining  her consent.  The procedure was the one anticipated and was
identical to one performed a week earlier.
An objective approach should be taken in deciding whether a risk was
material and, therefore, one which should be explained to the patient.  The
crucial question in determining the issue was whether a reasonable person in
the  patient’s  position  would  want  to  know  of  the  risk.    The  doctors
involved conducted themselves in an exemplary manner.  All the possible
risks that could arise from the procedure  were fully explained on several
occasions to both the patient and her daughter.
Whether or not there has been a withdrawal of consent by a patient is
a question of fact.  The words used by a patient may be ambiguous.  Even if
229

they are apparently clear, the circumstances under which they are spoken
may render them ambiguous.  On some occasions, the doctors conducting
the process may reasonably take the words spoken by the patient to be an
expression of pain rather than a withdrawal of consent.
If there  is  any question  of a patient’s  withdrawal  of consent, the
doctor  must  ascertain  whether  the  consent  has  in  fact  been  withdrawn.
Every patient’s right to bodily integrity encompasses the right to determine
what medical procedure will be accepted and the extent to which they will
be accepted.  The right to decide what is to be done to one’s body includes
the right to be free from medical treatment to which the individual does not
consent.   The requirement that disclosure be made to the patient is based on
this concept of individual autonomy.
If during the course of a medical procedure a patient withdraws the
consent, then the doctors must halt the process unless the medical evidence
suggested that terminating the process would be either life-threatening or
pose immediate and serious problems to the health of the patient.
The  question  as  to  whether  or  not  a  consent  given  has  been
withdrawn  during  the  course  of  a  procedure will  depend  upon  the
circumstances of each case and may require the trial judge to make difficult
findings  of  fact.   Expert  medical  evidence,  while  relevant,  will  not
necessarily be determinative of the issue.  Indeed, in cases such as these,
where  the  patient  must  be  conscious  and  cooperative  in  order  for  the
procedure to be performed, it may well be beyond doubt that the patient was
capable of withdrawing consent.  The fact that the patient had withdrawn
consent at one stage was not in issue here but she later wanted the test to be
continued.
230

The  appropriate  approach  is  to  focus,  in  each  case,  on  what  the
patient would like to know concerning the continuation of the process, once
consent has been withdrawn.  Looking at it objectively, a patient would
want to know whether there had been any significant change in the risks
involved  or in the need  for the continuation  of  this  process  which  had
become apparent during the course of the procedure.  In addition, the patient
would want to know if there had been a material change in circumstances
which  could  alter  the  patient’s  assessment  of  the  costs  or  benefit  of
continuing  the  procedure.  Changes  may arise  during  the  course of the
procedure which are not at all relevant to the issue of consent.  Yet, the
crucial question would always be whether the patient would want to have
the information pertaining to those changes in order to decide whether to
continue treatment. The patient here was capable of giving her consent to
the continuation of the procedure based on the earlier disclosures and did
so.
The  doctor  must  bear  the  burden  of  showing  that  the  patient
understood the explanation and instructions, given.  The conclusion that the
patient  here  understood  and  had  given  valid  consent to  continue  the
procedure, notwithstanding the absence of an interpreter, could be drawn
from  her  demonstrated  ability  to  comprehend  the  language  adequately.
There was complete and proper disclosure made by the respondents of all
the risk involved in the procedure.  The appellant’s action in  negligence
must fail.
Cory  J,  after  referring  to  the  principles  governing  ‘liability  for
battering’ and considered the plea of negligence in the light of ‘standard of
disclosure’ expected and the consequences of withdrawal of consent.  He
231

quoted Robins JA in  Fleming vs.  Reid (1991) 4.C.R.(3d)74(CA) and said
that the ‘right to determine what shall or shall not be done to one’s body and
to be free from non-consensual medical treatment, is a right deep-rooted in
our common law.  This right underlines the doctrine of informed consent.
The fact that serious risks or consequences may result from a refusal of
medical treatment does not vitiate the right of medical self-determination.  It
is the patient, not the doctor, who ultimately must decide if treatment or any
treatment is to be administered.
On facts, it was held that the patient consented to both the angiograms
and  to  the  continuation  of  the  second  one.   There  was  no  fraud  in
representation.  The action must fail.
4) Rodriguez vs. The Attorney General of Canada and Others: (1993)(3)
SCR  519  (Lamer  CJ,  La  Forest,  L’Heureux  –  Dube,  Sopinka,
Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ)
The  case  is  very  important  and  deals  with  a  number  of  legal
principles.    It dealt with the challenge by a patient to a section in the
Criminal Code which prohibited ‘assisted-suicide’.
The appellant in the case was 42 years old and was suffering from
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  Her condition was rapidly deteriorating and
she would soon loose her ability to swallow, speak, walk and move her
body without assistance.  Thereafter she will lose the capacity to breathe
without  a  respirator,  to  eat  without  a  gastronomy  and  will  eventually
become confined to bed.  Her life expectancy was between 2 to 14 months.
The appellant did not wish to die so long as she still had the capacity
to enjoy life, but wished that a qualified physician be allowed to set up
232

technological means by which she might, when she will be no longer able to
enjoy life, by her own hand, at the time of her choosing, end her life.   She
wanted to be assisted in suicide.
She  applied  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  British  Columbia  for  a
declaration that sec 241(b) of the Criminal Code, which prohibits the giving
of  assistance to commit suicide, be declared invalid on the ground that it
violates her rights under ss 7, 12 and 15(1) of the Charter, and is therefore,
to  that  extent  it  precludes  a  terminally  ill-person  from  committing
‘physician-assisted’ suicide, of no force and effect by virtue of sec 52(1) of
the Constitution Act, 1982. (In Canada, as stated in judgment of Sopinka J,
attempt to commit suicide was not unlawful but abetment of suicide was an
offence.)
Sec. 241 of the Criminal Code (RSC 1985, c. C-46) reads as follows:
“sec. 241:  Every one who
(a) counsels a person to commit suicide, or
(b) aids or abets a person to commit suicide, whether suicide
ensues or not, 
is guilty of indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding fourteen years”
The plaintiff contended sec. 241(b) was invalid.
The Court dismissed the appellant’s application by majority (there
was dissent by Lamer CJ, L’Heureux Dube, Cory and McLachlin JJ) and the
validity of sec 241(b) was upheld.
233

The  relevant  provisions  of  the  Canadian  Charter  of  Rights  and
Freedoms are as follows:
“Article 1: The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees
the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable
limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and
democratic society.
Article 7: Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the
person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance
with the principles of fundamental justice.
Article 12: Everyone has the right not to be subjected to any cruel and
unusual treatment or punishment.
Article 15 (1): Every individual is equal before and under the law and
has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law
without dissemination and, in particular, without discrimination based
on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental
or physical disability.”
We shall refer to the majority judgment, which upheld the provisions
that made assisted suicide, an offence.
Sopinka  J,  speaking  for  the  majority,  observed  that  the  ‘right  to
security of person’, under Art 7 of the Charter cannot encompass a right to
take action that will end one’s life in as much as security of the person is
intrinsically concerned with the well-being of the living person.  This is
based on the notion generally held and deeply routed in our society that
human  life  is  sacred  and  inviolable  (which  terms  are  used  in  the  non-
234

religious sense described by Dworkin (in ‘Life’s Dominion: An argument
about Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom (1993) ) to mean that
human life is seen to have a deep intrinsic value of its own.  As members of
a society based on respect for the intrinsic value of human life and on the
inherent dignity of every human being, can we incorporate, he asked, within
the Constitution which embodies our most fundamental values, a right to
terminate  one’s  own  life  in  any  circumstances?   This  raises  issues  of
sanctity of life which includes notions of quality of life.
Sanctity of life has been understood as excluding freedom of choice
in the self-infliction of death and certainly in the involvement of others in
carrying out that choice.
It was argued that for the terminally ill, the choice was one of time
and  the  manner  of  death rather  than  death  itself  since  the  latter  was
inevitable.  Sopinka J disagreed stating that “it is one of choosing  death
instead of allowing natural forces to run their course.  The time and precise
manner of death remains unknown until death actually occurs.  There can be
no certainty in forecasting the precise circumstances of death.  Death is, for
all mortals,  inevitable.  Even  when  death appears  imminent,  seeking  to
control the manner and timing of one’s death constitutes a conscious choice
of death over life.  It follows that life, as a value, is engaged even in the case
of the terminally ill who seek to choose death over life.  Indeed, it has been
abundantly pointed out that such persons are  particularly vulnerable as to
their life and will to live and great concern has been expressed as to their
adequate protection, ….”
235

The Canadian case law leads to the conclusion that state interference
with bodily integrity and serious state-imposed psychological stress, at least
in the criminal law context, constitute a breach of the security of the person.
The learned Judge said:
“It is not necessary to determine whether the right extends further, to
protect other interests central to personal autonomy, such as right to
privacy,  or  interests  unrelated  to  criminal  justice.   Although  this
interference  with  physical  and  emotional  integrity  is  sufficient  in
itself  to  trigger  a  review  of  sec  251  against  the  principles  of
fundamental justice, the operation of the decision-making mechanism
set out in sec 251 creates additional glaring breaches of security of
the person.”    (There is no reference to language of sec. 251 in any
part of the judgment.)
The  judgments  of  the  Canadian  Supreme  Court  can  be  seen  to
encompass  a  notion  of  personal  autonomy  involving,  at  the  very  least,
control over  one’s body integrity free from State interference and freed
from State imposed psychological and emotional stress.  
The learned Judge stated:
“There is no question, then, that personal autonomy, at least with
respect to the right to make choices concerning one’s body, control
over  one’s  physical  and  psychological  integrity, and  basic  human
dignity are encompassed within security of the person, at least to the
extent of freedom from criminal prohibitions  which interfere with
these.”
236

It was further observed:
“The effect of the prohibition in sec. 241(b) is to prevent the appellant
from having assistance to commit suicide when she is no longer able
to do so on her own.  She fears that she will be required to live until
the deterioration from her disease is such that she will die as a result
of choking, suffocation or pneumonia caused by aspiration of food or
secretions.  She will be totally dependent upon machines to perform
her  bodily  functions  and  completely  dependent  upon  others.
Throughout this time, she will remain mentally competent and able to
appreciate all that is happening to her.  Although palliative-care may
be available to ease the pain and other physical discomfort which she
will experience, the appellant fears the sedating effect of such drugs
and argues in any event, that they will not prevent the psychological
and emotional distress which will result from being in a situation of
utter dependence and loss of dignity.  That there is a right to choose
how one’s body will be dealt with, even in the context of beneficial
medical treatment, has long been recognized by the common law. To
impose medical treatment on one who refuses it constitutes battering
and our common law has recognized the right to demand that medical
treatment which would extend life be withheld or withdrawn.   In my
view, these considerations lead to the conclusion that the prohibition
in sec 241(b), no doubt, deprives the appellant of autonomy over her
person and causes her physical pain and psychological stress in a
manner which infringes on the security of her person.”
But does this lead to any deprivation thereof that is not in accordance
with the principles of fundamental justice?
237

In approaching this step, the caveat of Prof L Tribe, in his American
Constitutional Law (2nd Ed, 1988, p 1370-71) is relevant:
“The right of a patient to accelerate death as such – rather than merely
to have medical procedures held in abeyance so that disease processes
can  work  their  natural  cause-depends  on  a  broader  conception  of
individual rights than any contained in common law principles.  A
right  to  determine  when  and  how  to  die  would  have  to  rest  on
constitutional  principles  of  privacy  and  personhood  or  on  broad,
perhaps, paradoxical conceptions of self-determination.”
Sopinka J then said:
“Although these notions have taken hold in the courts, the judiciary’s
silence regarding such constitutional principles probably reflects  a
concern that, once recognized, rights to die might be uncontainable
and might prove susceptible to grave abuse, more than it suggests that
courts cannot be persuaded that self-determination and personhood
may include a right to dictate the circumstances under which life is to
be ended. In any event, whatever the reason for the absence in the
courts of expansive notions  about self-determination, the resulting
deference to legislatures may prove wise in light of complex character
of the right at stake and the significant potential that, without careful
statutory  guidelines  and  gradually  evolved  procedural  controls,
legalizing euthanasia, rather then respecting people, may endanger
personhood.”
The learned Judge also stated that in this case, it is not disputed that, in
general, sec 241(b) is valid and is a desirable legislation which fulfils the
238

government’s objectives of preserving life and protecting the vulnerable.
The complaint is that the legislature is over-inclusive because it does not
exclude  from the  reach  of  the  prohibition  those  in  the  situation  of  the
appellant who are terminally ill, mentally incompetent, but cannot commit
suicide on their own.  It is also argued that the extension of the prohibition
to the appellant is arbitrary and unfair as suicide itself is not unlawful and
the common law allows a physician to withhold or withdraw life saving or
life-maintaining  treatment  on  the  patient’s  instruction  and  to  administer
palliative  care  which  has  the  effect  of  hastening  death.  The  issue  is
whether, given this legal context, the existence of a criminal prohibition on
assisting suicide for one in the appellant’s situation is contrary to principles
of fundamental justice.
The  words,  ‘except  in  accordance  with  principles  of  fundamental
justice’ occurring in Art 7 of the Charter  are to be interpreted in the light of
common  law  and  legislative  history  but  a  mere  common  law  rule  or
historical precept may not amount to principle of fundamental justice.
The appellant asserts that it is a principle of “fundamental justice”
that the human dignity and autonomy of individuals be respected and that to
subject her to needless suffering in this manner is to rob her of her dignity.
Respect for human dignity underlies many of the rights and freedoms in the
Canadian Charter.  A just balance has to be achieved between interests of
the individual and those of the State.  Both of which factors play a part in
assessing whether a particular law violates the principles of fundamental
justice.  The principles of fundamental justice are concerned not only with
the interest of the person who claims his liberty has been limited but with
239

the protection of society.  Fundamental justice requires that a fair balance be
struck between these interests both substantially and procedurally.
Question  is  whether the  blanket  prohibition  in  sec 241(b) against
assisted suicides is arbitrary or unfair in that it is unrelated to the state’s
interest in protecting the vulnerable, and that it lacks a foundation in the
legal tradition and societal beliefs which are said to be represented by the
prohibition.
Section 241(b) has as its purpose, the protection of the vulnerable
who might be induced in moments of weakness to commit suicide.  This
purpose is grounded in the State’s interest in protecting life and reflects the
policy of the state that human life should not be depreciated by allowing life
to be taken.  This policy finds expression not only in the Criminal Code
which prohibit murder and other violent acts against others notwithstanding
the consent of the victim, but also in the policy against capital punishment
and, until its repeal, attempted suicide.  This is not only a policy of the state,
however, but is part of a fundamental concept of sanctity of human life.
The  Law  Reform  Commission  (Canada)  expressed  this  philosophy
appropriately  in  its  Working  Paper  28,  Euthanasia,  Aiding  Suicide  and
Cessation of Treatment’ (1982) (at page 36):
“Preservation of human life is acknowledged  to be a fundamental
value of a society. Historically, our criminal law has changed very
little on this point.  Generally speaking, it sanctions the principle of
the sanctity of human life.  Over the years, however, law has come to
temper  the  apparent  absolutism  of  the  principle,  to  delineate  its
intrinsic limitations and to define its true dimensions.”
240

Sopinka J stated that the principle of sanctity of life is no longer seen to
require that all human life be preserved at all costs.  Rather, it has come to
be  understood,  atleast  by  some,  as  encompassing  quality  of  life
considerations, and to be subject to certain limitations and a qualification
reflective of personal autonomy and dignity.  An analysis of our legislative
and social policy in this area is necessary in order to determine whether
‘fundamental  principles’  have  evolved  such  that  they  conflict  with  the
validity of the balancing of interests undertaken by Parliament.
As to the history of suicide provisions, at common law, suicide is a
form of felony, homicide and offended against God and the king’s interest
in the life of his citizens (Blackstone’s Commentaries, 1769, Vol 4, p 189).
This  was  also  the  view  first  propounded  by Plato  and  Aristotle.  (M.G.
Velasquez, Defining Suicide, 1987, “3 issues, in Law and Medicine”, 37 at
40).
“So far as the contrary school of thought is concerned, there has been
no consensus, the Roman Stoics  supporting suicide (Velasquez at p 40)
while Chancellor Francis Bacon preferred leaving to the doctors the duty of
lessening or even ending, the suffering of their patients (L. Depaule, ‘Le
Droit a la mort: rapport juridique’, (1974), 7 Human Rights Journal 464 at p
467).”
Burial indignities were imposed in cases of suicide in France while in
England, the property of the person who committed suicide was to be taken
away and his body placed at the cross-roads of two highways with a stake
driven  through  it.   As  it  was  not  possible  to  punish  the  person  who
committed suicide successfully, the law tried to make attempted suicide an
offence. Then  the Suicide Act, 1961  (42) (cl. 60) of France created  an
241

offence of assisting suicide on the same lines as sec 241 of the Criminal
Code, 1985.   Attempted suicide as an offence as per sec 238 of the original
Code until its repeal by statute SO in 1972 (C 13, sec 16).  But the fact of
decriminalization of ‘attempted suicide’ has no bearing on protection of
assisted suicide.
So far as Medical Care at the end of life is concerned, Sopinka J
surveyed the Canadian position as follows:
“Medical Care at the end of life:  Canadian Courts have recognized a
common law right of patients to refuse consent to medical treatment,
or  to  demand  that  treatment,  once  commenced,  be  withdrawn  or
discontinued (Ciarlarielle vs. Schacter: 1993(2) S.C. R 119).  This
right has been specifically recognized to exist even if the withdrawal
or refusal of treatment may result in death (Nancy B vs. Hotel-Dieu
de Quebec (1992) 86 DLR (4th) 385 (Que. S.C.); and  Mallette vs.
Shulman (1990) 72. O.R. (2d) 417 (CA).   The United States Supreme
Court  has  also  recently  recognized  that  the  right  to  refuse  life-
sustaining  medical  treatment  is  an  aspect  of  the  liberty  interest
protected  by  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  in  Cruzan  vs.  Director,
Missori Health Dept (1990) III L. Ed 2d 224.  However, that Court
also enunciated the view that when a patient was unconscious and
thus  unable  to  express  her  own  view,  the  State  was  justified  in
requiring compelling evidence that withdrawal of treatment was, in
fact, what the patient would have requested, had she been competent.
The House of Lords has also had occasion very recently to
address the matter of withdrawal of treatment.  In Airedale NHS Trust
vs.  Bland 1993(2)  WLR  316,  their  Lordships  authorized  the
242

withdrawal of artificial feeding from a 17 year-old boy who was in a
persistent vegetative state as a result of injuries suffered in soccer
riots, upon the consent of his parents.  Persistence in a vegetative
state was found not to be beneficial to the patient and the principle of
sanctity of life, which was not absolute, was therefore, found not to
be violated by the withdrawal of treatment.
Although  the  issue  was  not  before  them,  their  Lordships
nevertheless  commented  on  the  distinction  between  withdrawal  of
treatment and active euthanasia.  Lord Keith stated (at p 362) that
though the principle of sanctity of life is not an absolute one, ‘it
forbids  the  taking  of  active  measures  to  cut  short  the  life  of  a
terminally ill patient.  Lord Goff also emphasized this distinction,
stressing that the law draws a crucial distinction between active and
passive euthanasia.”
Sopinka J then quoted from Lord Goff’s judgment at pp 368-369 and said:
“Following  Working  Paper  28,  the  Law  Reform  Commission
recommended in its (1983) Report to the Minister of Justice that the
Criminal Code be amended to provide that the homicide provisions
not  be  interpreted  as  requiring  a  physician  to  undertake  medical
treatment  against  the  wishes  of  a  patient,  or  to  continue  medical
treatment when such treatment “has become therapeutically useless”,
or  from requiring  a physician  to  “cease  administering  appropriate
palliative care intended to eliminate or to relieve the suffering of a
person, for the sole reason that such care or measures are likely to
shorten the life expectancy of this person” (Report 20, Euthanasia,
Aiding Suicide and Cessation of Treatment)(1983)(at pp 34-35)”.
243

Sopinka J continued:
“First of all, the prohibition in (sec 241) is not restricted solely to the
case  of  the  terminally  ill-patient,  for  whom  we  can  only  have
sympathy, or solely to his physician or a member of his family who
helps to put an end to his suffering.  The section is more general and
applies to a variety of situations for which it is much more difficult to
feel  sympathy…..  To  decriminalise  completely  the  act  of  aiding,
abetting  or  counseling  suicide  would  therefore  not  be  a  valid
legislative policy.  But could it be in the case of the terminally ill?
The  probable  reason  why legislation  has  not  been  made  an
exception for the terminally ill  lies in the fear of the excesses or
abuses to which liberalization of the existing law could lead.  As in
the  case  of  ‘compassionate  murder’,  decriminalization  of  aiding
suicide would  be based on the  humanitarian  nature of the motive
leading the person to provide such aid, counsel or encouragement.  As
in  the  case  of  compassionate  murder,  moreover,  the  law  may
legitimately  fear  the  difficulties  involved  in  determining  the  true
motivation of the person committing the act.
Aiding or counseling a person to commit suicide, on the one
hand, and homicide, on the other, are sometimes extremely closely
related…  There is reason to fear that homicide of the terminally ill
for ignoble motive may readily be disguised as aiding suicide.”
In its Working Paper (28) earlier referred to, the Law Reforms Commission
had  originally  recommended  that  the  consent  of  the  Attorney  General
should be required before prosecution could be brought under sec 241(b).
244

However,  after  negative  public  response,  the  Commission  retracted  this
recommendation in its final Report of 1983.
Sopinka J stated, that, therefore, while both the House of Lords and the Law
Reform Commission of Canada have great sympathy for the plight of those
who wish to end their lives so as to avoid significant suffering, neither has
been prepared to recognise that the active assistance of a third party in
carrying out this desire should be condoned, even for the terminally ill.  The
basis of this refusal is twofold, it seems – first, the active participation by
one individual in the death of another is intrinsically morally and legally
wrong, and second, there is no uncertainty that abuses can be prevented by
anything less than a complete prohibition.  Creating an exception for the
terminally ill might frustrate the purpose of the legislation of protecting the
vulnerable  because  adequate  guidelines  to  control  abuse  are  difficult  or
impossible to develop.”
Sopinka J then reviewed the legislation in other countries. He said nowhere
assisted suicide is expressly permitted and most countries have provisions
expressly dealing with assisted suicide which are atleast as restrictive as sec
241. – Austrian Penal Act, 1945 (sec 139b), Spanish Penal Code (Act 409),
Italian Penal Code of 1930 (Act 580).
The relevant provision of the Suicide Act, 1961 of UK punishes a
‘person who aids, abets, counsels or procures the suicide of another or an
attempt  by another, to  commit suicide’  and   the  form of prohibition  is
echoed  in  the  criminal  statutes  of  all  state  and  tribunal  jurisdictions  in
Australia.  (M. Otlowiki, ‘Mercy Killing cases in the Australian Criminal
Justice System’ (1993) 17 Crim LJ 10)  The UK provision is apparently the
only prohibition on assisted suicide which has been subjected to judicial
245

scrutiny  for  its  impact  on  human  rights  prior  to  the  present  case.   In
Application No 10083/82, R vs. UK, (4th July, 1983)(D.R. 33, at p 270), the
European Commission of Human Rights considered whether sec 2 of the
Suicide Act, violated either the right of privacy in Art 8 or freedom of
expression in Art 10 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and   Fundamental  Freedoms.   The  applicant,  who  was  a  member  of  a
voluntary euthanasia organisation, had been convicted on several counts of
conspiracy to aid and abet suicide for his actions in placing persons with a
desire to kill themselves in touch with his co-accused who then assisted
them in committing suicide.  The European Commission held (at pp 271-
272) that the acts of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring suicide  were
‘excluded from the concept of privacy by virtue of their trespass on the
public interest of protecting life, as reflected in the criminal provisions of
the  1961  Act’,  and  upheld  the  applicant’s  conviction  for  the  offence.
Further, the Commission upheld the restriction on the applicant’s freedom
of expression, recognizing (at p 272).
“…  the States legitimate interest in this case in taking measures to
protect, against criminal behaviour, the life of its citizens particularly
those who belong to especially  vulnerable categories by reason of
their age or infirmity.  It recognizes the right of the State under the
Convention  to  guard  against  the   inevitable  criminal  abuses that
would  occur, in the absence of legislation, against the aiding and
abetting of suicide.”
Although the factual scenario in that decision was somewhat different from
the  one  at  bar  in  (Canada),  it  is  significant  that  neither  the  European
Commission of Human Rights nor any other judicial tribunal has ever held
246

that the State is prohibited on constitutional or human rights grounds from
criminalizing assisted suicide.
Some  European  countries  have  mitigated  prohibitions  on  assisted
suicide which might render assistance in a case similar to that before the
Canadian  Supreme  Court  legal  in  those  countries.   In  the  Netherlands,
although  assisted  suicide  and  voluntary  active  euthanasia  are  officially
illegal, prosecutions will not be laid so long as there is compliance with
medically established guidelines.   Critics of the Dutch approach point to
evidence  suggesting  that  involuntary  active  euthanasia  (which  is  not
permitted by the guidelines) is being practised to an increasing degree.  This
worrisome  trend  supports  the  view  that  a  relaxation  of  the  absolute
prohibition  takes  us down ‘the slippery slope’.  Certain other European
countries, such as  Switzerland and Denmark, emphasise the motive of the
assistance in suicide, such that the Swiss Penal Code, Art 115, criminalizes
only those who incite or assist a suicide for a selfish motive and the Danish
Penal  Code,  Art  240,  while  punishing  all  assistance,  imposes  a  greater
penalty  upon  them  who  act  out  of  self-interest.   In  France,  while  no
provision  of the  Penal  Code  addresses  specifically the  issue  of assisted
suicide, failure to seek to prevent someone from committing suicide may
still lead to criminal sanctions under Art 63, para 2 (omission to provide
assistance  to  a person  in  danger)  or Art  319  of that  Code  (involuntary
homicide by negligence or carelessness).  Moreover, the Loi no. 87-1133 du
31 decembre 1987, introduced two new articles to the Penal Code, Arts 318-
1 and 318-2, which criminalize the  provocation of suicide.  This offence,
which requires a form of incitement over and above merely aiding in the
commission of a suicide, was adopted in response to the macabre impact of
the book ‘Suicide, mode d’emploi’ (1982).
247

Similarly, a few American jurisdictions take into account whether the
accused caused the victim to commit suicide by coercion, force, duress or
deception in deciding whether the charge should be murder, manslaughter
or assisted suicide (Connecticut, Maine and Pennsylavania), or whether the
person is guilty of even assisted suicide (Puerto Rico and Indiana).  (See C
D Shaffer, “Criminal Liability for Assisting Suicide’ (1986)8 Columbia L
Rev 348 (at pp 331-53) nn 25-26, 35-36.)  As is the case in Europe and the
Commonwealth,  however,  the  vast  majority  of  those  American  statutes
which have statutory provisions dealing specifically with assisted suicide,
have  no  intent  or  malice  requirement  beyond  the  intent  to  further  the
suicide,  and  those  States  which  do  not  deal  with  the  matter  statutorily
appear  to  have  the  common  law  authority  outlawing  assisted  suicide
(Shaffer, supra, at p 352; and M.M. Penrose, ‘Assisted Suicide: A Tough
Pill to Swallow’ (1993) 20 Pepp. L. Rev 689 (700-701).  It is notably, also
that recent movement in two American States to legalise physician-assisted
suicide in circumstances similar to those at bar, have been defeated by the
electorates  in  those  States.  On  Nov.  5,  1999,  Washington  State  voters
defeated  Initiative  119,  which  would  have  legalized  physician  assisted
suicide where two doctors certified that the patient would die in six months
and  two  disinterested  witnesses  certified  that  the  patient’s  choice  was
voluntary.  One year later, Proposition 161, which would have legalized
assisted  suicide  in California and  which  incorporated stricter safeguards
than did Initiative 119, was defeated by California voters (usually thought to
be the most accepting of such legal innovations), by the same margin as
resulted in Washington – 54 to 46 per cent.  In both States, the defeat of the
proposed legislation seems to have been due primarily to concern as to
248

whether  the  legislation  incorporated  adequate  safeguards  against  abuse
(Penrose, Supra, at pp 708-714).  
Sopinka J notes that, atleast in California, the conditions to be met
were more onerous than those set out by McEachern CJ (British Columbia
in  the  Court  below)  and  by  his  dissenting  colleagues  in  the  Canadian
Supreme Court, (dissenting), Chief Justice & Justice McLauchlin, in the
present case.
Overall, Sopinka J, says that  it appears  that a blanket  prohibition
against  assisted  suicide  similar  to  that  in  sec  241,  is  the  norm  among
Western democracies, and such a prohibition has never been adjudged to be
unconstitutional or contrary to fundamental human rights.  Recent attempts
to  alter  the  status  quo  in  USA  have  been  defeated  by  the  electorate,
suggesting  that  despite  a  recognition  that  a  blanket  prohibition  causes
suffering  in  certain  cases,  the  societal  concern  with  preserving  life  and
protecting the vulnerable, renders a blanket prohibition preferable to any
law which might not adequately prevent abuse.
Sopinka  J concludes  that sanctity of life as a general principle  is
recognized  in  Canada  and  Western  democracies  subject  to  limited  and
narrow exceptions in situations in which notions of personal autonomy and
dignity must prevail.  However, those societies continue to draw distinctions
between passive and active forms of intervention in the dying process, and
with very few exceptions, prohibit assisted suicide in situations akin to that
of Rodriguez.  The task then becomes to identify the rationales upon which
the distinctions are based and to determine whether they are constitutionally
supportable.  Sopinka J says:
249

“The  distinction  between  withdrawing  treatment upon  a  patient’s
request, such as occurred in the Nancy B case, on the one hand, and
assisted suicide on the other, has been criticized as resting on a legal
factor – that is, the distinction between active and passive forms of
treatment. The criticism is based on the fact that the  withdrawal of
life support  measures is  done with the knowledge  that death  will
ensue, just as is assisting suicide, and that death does, in fact, ensue
as  a  result  of  action  taken.   See,  for  example,  the  Harvard  Law
Review note ‘Physician Assisted Suicide and the Right to die with
Assistance’ (1992) 105 Harv L Rev. 2021 (at 2030-31).
Other  commentators,  however  upheld  the  distinction  on  the
basis that in the case of withdrawal of treatment, the death is ‘natural’
–  the  artificial  forces  of medical  technology which  have  kept  the
patient alive are removed and nature takes its course.  In the case of
assisted  suicide  or  euthanasia,  however,  the  course  of  nature  is
interrupted, and death results  directly from the human action taken.
((E.W. Keysenlingk, Sanctity of Life or Quality of Life in the context
of  Ethics,  Medicine  and  Law  (1979),  a Study  paper  for  the  Law
Reform Commission of Canada’s Protection of Life Services).  The
Law  Reform  Commission  (of  Canada)  calls  the  distinction
fundamental (at p 19 of the Working Paper 28).
Whether or not one agrees that the active vs passive distinction is
maintainable, however, the fact remains that under our common law,
the physician has no choice but to accept the patient’s instructions to
discontinue  treatment.   To  continue  to  treat  the  patient  when  the
patient has withdrawn consent to that treatment constitutes battery
250

(Ciarlariello  and  Nancy  B,  Supra).   The  doctor  is,  therefore,  not
required to make a choice which will result in the patient’s death as
he  would  be  if  he  chooses  to  assist  suicide  or  perform  active
euthanasia.
The  fact  that  doctors  may deliver  palliative  care  to  terminally  ill
patients without fear of sanction, it is argued, attenuates to an even
greater degree any legitimate distinction which can be drawn between
assisted suicide and what are currently acceptable forms of medical
treatment.  The administration of drugs designed for pain control in
dosages  which  the  physician  knows  will  hasten  death  constitutes
active  contribution  to  death  by  any  standard.   However,  the
distinction  drawn here is  one based  on intention  – in the case of
palliative care, the intention is to ease pain, which has the effect of
hastening death, while in the case of assisted suicide, the intention is
undeniably to cause death.  The Law Reform Commission, although it
recommended the continued criminal prohibition of both euthanasia
and assisted suicide, stated, at p 70 of the Working Paper, that a
doctor should never refuse palliative care to a terminally ill person
only because it may hasten death.  In my view,  distinctions based
upon intent are important, and, in fact, form the basis of our criminal
law.  While factually, the distinction may, at times, be difficult to
draw, legally it is clear.  The fact that in some cases, the third party
will, under the guise of palliative care commit euthanasia or assist in
suicide and go unsanctioned due to the difficulty of proof, cannot be
said to render the existence of the prohibition fundamentally unjust.”
251

Sopinka J also refers to guidelines of medical associations.  He says that the
official position of the Canadian, British Medical Association, the Council
of Ethical and Judicial Affairs of the American Medical Association, World
Medical Association and the American Nurses Association, are all against
decriminalizing  assisted suicide.  Given the concerns of abuse that have
been expressed and the great difficulty in creating appropriate safeguards to
prevent  these, it cannot  be  said  that  the  blanket prohibition  on  assisted
suicide  is  arbitrary or unfair,  or that  it is not reflective  of fundamental
values.   Art 24(h) is valid.
We are not referring to the dissenting judgments in Rodriguez.
Ontario Law Reform Commission:
The  Ontario  Law  Reform  Commission  issued  a  Study  Paper  on
‘Assisted Suicide, Euthanasia and Foregoing Treatment’ in 1996 (running
into 270 pages).  It deals, in various chapters, with the definition of death
(Ch.  2),  Common  Law  (Ch.  3),  Provincial  legislation  and  Professional
regulations (Ch. 4), Criminal Law (Ch. 5), Enforcing the Law: Criminal
Liability, inquests and professional discipline (Ch. 6); Constitutional Rights
(Ch. 7), Current  Legislation  and Judicial  Approaches  to Euthanasia  and
Assisted  Suicide:  (England  and  USA)  (Ch.  8);  Euthanasia  in  the
Netherlands (Ch. 9); Australia (Ch. 10), Health Care Consent Act: Applying
guiding principles (Ch. 11); Criminal Law; The Question of Reform (Ch.
12).  The Recommendations are contained in Chapter 13.   Some of them
proposed  accepting  assisted  suicide  or  Euthanasia,  in  certain  situations.
They are eleven in number and read as follows:
252

“(1) An exemption should be added to sec 241(b) of the Criminal
Code (i.e. Canada) to permit physicians (and the health care
professionals acting under the direction of a physician) to assist
in  another’s  individual  suicide.   The  person  must  be  either
terminally ill or suffering from a chronic, irreversible illness
and  experiencing  pain  and/or  suffering  that  he  or she  finds
unbearable and that cannot be alleviated or treated by means
acceptable  to  the  patient.   Assistance  in  suicide  only  be
provided under clearly defined limits and safeguards, including
a system of advance authorization.  Experience with assisted
suicide should be reviewed and assessed annually.
(2) Euthanasia should remain a criminal offence.
(3) The Criminal Code should be amended to provide for a less
severe penalty in cases  where an  offender who took life of
another individual acted out of compassion or mercy, either
through the creation of a separate offence or a third category of
murder, for which there would be a maximum penalty of life
imprisonment but no minimum sentence, as with manslaughter.
General rules for parole eligibility would apply.  Instances in
which motive could be taken into account in sentencing must
be narrowly defined.
(4) The question of whether policy to govern the laying of criminal
charges  can  be  developed  that  would  give  some  clearer
indication  of  how  the  general  factors  used  in  charging
decisions apply to circumstances in which investigation reveals
an individual, motivated by compassion, participated in causing
253

a  death,  should  be  considered  by  government.   Reiterating
existing law and restating the conundrum that, while society
has a responsibility to protect life, life need not be preserved or
continued at all cost, are important reminders but  are not a
clarification.
(5) The Criminal Code should be amended to confirm the legality
of   providing  necessary  treatment  for  the  purpose  of
eliminating or alleviating suffering, even if that treatment may
shorten life.  Any such amendment would only codify the law
as it already exists (Rodrigues vs. B.CAG (1993)(3) SCR 519
at 607).  However, concern over the legality of such measures
still seems to prevail to the point where it interferes with good
medical  care,  as  evidenced  particularly  by  inadequate
management of patient’s pain.  If a clear statement that the
practice is legal would ameliorate the substandard care many
patients  currently  receive,  then  it  would  be  advisable  to
incorporate one into the law.
(6) The office of the Public Guardian & Trustee should clarify its
policy on circumstances in which it considers it has jurisdiction to
consent or refuse consent to ‘Do Not Resuscitate Orders (DNR),
bearing in mind that a plan of treatment can legitimately provide
for ‘the withdrawing or withdrawal of treatment in the light of the
person’s  current  health  condition’.   (Health  Care  Consent  Act
1996,  sec  2(1)  being  Schedule  to  the  Advocacy,  Consent  and
Substitute  Decisions  Statute  Law  Amendment  Act,  1996,  S.O.
1996 C. 2).  This may require making decisions in advance of an
254

immediate need.  Such a policy should be clearly communicated to
physicians and other health-care professionals.
(7) Education and training about pain management and control should
be expanded and improved for health care professionals.  This
should  include  a  clear  statement  that  properly  managing  the
patient’s  pain  (subject  to  the  limits  of  what  can  currently  be
achieved), is a duty owed to the patient and one of the standards of
practice  of  the  profession.   Professional  guidelines  should  be
amended to reflect this position as well.
(8) The relevant professional associations  should be encouraged in
their development of clinical practice guidelines in this area, in
particular  relative  to  the  withholding  and  withdrawal of  life-
sustaining treatment and treatment at the end of life.
(9) The  government,  together  with  the  colleges  and  professional
associations concerned and other affected groups, need to develop
policies  with  respect  to  questions  of  futile  treatment.   The
development of clinical practice guidelines by a professional or
specialized  body  within  the  profession  is  important,  but  these
issues have a societal dimensions as well.  Public input should be
sought in this process.
(10) Palliative care   should be supported and expanded as an important
part of a comprehensive health care system.
(11) It is essential that needed health and social services are adequately
supported  by government.  A broad  based  approach  should be
adopted  in  identifying  determinants  of  health.   Regardless  of
255

whether assisted suicide is legalized in limited circumstances or
not, individuals must not be put in a position, where they may be
taking  end-of-life  treatment  decision  based  on  or  because  of
inadequate health care and social support.”
Subsequent events after Rodriguez
After  Rodriguez,  prescription  guidelines  were  amended  in  British
Columbia in November 1993, in regard to doctors who complied with a
patient’s request to hasten death.  Public interest guidelines were included.
A Special Committee of the Senate set up in the Feb 1994 examined
the legal, social and ethical issues relating to euthanasia and suicide.  The
Report called ‘Life and Death’ was tabled on 6 June 1995.  It contains
recommendations  relating  to  palliative  care,  pain  control  and  reduction
practices, withholding and withdrawal of life sustaining treatment, advance
directives, assisted suicide and euthanasia – non voluntary, voluntary and
involuntary.  ‘Active euthanasia’ means a deliberate act to end the life of a
terminal or incurable patient, which in fact results in the patient’s death.
‘Active Voluntary Euthanasia’ means, it is performed at the request of the
patient.   ‘Active  involuntary  euthanasia’  is  one  where  euthanasia  is
performed without the consent or against the will of a competent patient.
‘Active non-voluntary euthanasia’ means euthanasia performed on persons
who are incompetent and therefore not capable of giving consent.  ‘Passive
euthanasia’ is  the  deliberate  withholding  or  withdrawing  life-prolonging
medical  treatment  for  terminal  or  incurable  patient.   This  too  can  be
voluntary, involuntary or non-voluntary.
256

For recommendations of the Canadian Senate Committee on assisted
suicide  and  euthanasia  see  (http://www.aph.gov.au./library/pubs/rp/1996-
97/97rp4.htm)  (which  deals  with  the  development  of  law  in  several
countries, including Canada). 
Australia
In regard to Australia, we shall first refer to statutes and then to the
decided cases.
At the outset, it is necessary to refer to the fact that the Northern
Territory  enacted  the  ‘Rights  of  the  Terminally  Ill  Act,  1995’,  which
legalized voluntary euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide. It came into
force on 1st July, 1996.   Seven patients made use of the Act.  But soon the
law was invalidated by the Commonwealth statute passed on 25th March
1997,  called  the  Voluntary  Euthanasia  Laws  Act,  1997  stating  that
Territorial  Legislature  no  longer  has  the  power  to  pass  laws  legalizing
euthanasia.  (It did open the possibility of the Northern Territory enacting
laws regarding withholding life support.)
There are no statutes in New South Wales, Tasmania and Western
Australia  on  the  subject.   They  depend  only  on  ‘dying  with  dignity
guidelines’.  South Australia, Queensland and Victoria and Commonwealth
have laws which speak of ‘natural death’, providing for advanced directives
and for appointment of agents or medical powers of attorney.
With the non-enforceability of the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act,
1995 of the Northern Territory, as stated above, the most relevant legislation
257

that remained was the Natural Death Act, 1988 which permits a person to
make  a  direction  that  he  or  she  does  not  wish  to  have  ‘extraordinary
measures’ used if he or she is suffering from a terminal illness.  The Act
does not provide for the appointment of medical powers of attorney.
In criminal law, both euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide carry
heavy penalties.  A doctor found guilty of aiding or abetting suicide would
be liable for 10 years imprisonment under section 31C of the Crimes Act,
1900.  A doctor found guilty of engaging in active voluntary euthanasia
could be convicted of murder and liable for life imprisonment. (see section
19A).
Murder may have been committed by ‘acts’ or ‘omission’.  Under sec
18(1) of the above Act, “Murder shall be taken to have been committed
when the act of the accused, or thing by him or her assisted to be done,
causing the death charged, was done or assisted with reckless indifference
to human life, or with intent to kill…”  with the qualification under sec 18
(2) that ‘No act or omission which was not malicious, or for which the
accused had lawful cause or excuse, shall be within this section’.
In 1993, the NSW Health Deptt. issued guidelines called ‘Dying with
Dignity : Interim Guidelines on Management’.  In November 2000, it gave
the “Dying with Dignity : Revised draft guidelines for clinical decision-
making at the end of life, Discussion Document.”  See also, NSW Health
Dept,  Patient,  Patient  Information  and  Consent  to  Medical  Treatment
(Circular No. 99/10).
Since 1997, competent adults can now appoint ‘enduring guardians’
under ss 5, 6N of the Guardianship Act, 1987 (NSW).  These guardians can
258

make decisions about medical care and treatment on behalf of a person in
the event that person ceases to be competent to make decisions for him or
herself.  Part 5 establishes a hierarchy for determining who is the ‘person
responsible’ for a person unable to consent to treatment.  If the incompetent
person  is  not  under guardianship,  then  it  is  the enduring  guardian  who
makes decisions regarding medical care.  However, these arrangements are
unlikely  to  have  any  bearing  on  either  the  active  voluntary  euthanasia
debate or regarding decisions to withhold or withdraw treatment.  This is
because the purpose of the relevant provisions is to ensure that medical
treatment  is  carried  out  on  incompetent  persons  ‘for  the  purpose  of
promoting  and  maintaining  their  health  and  well  being’.   (sec  32(b)).
Neither the ending of a person’s life nor the discontinuance of holding back
treatment is contemplated by the Act.
What the NSW ‘interim guidelines’ say is as follows:
(a) the patient has a right to refuse treatment.
(b) If the patient cannot take part in the decisions, then his or
her advocate should be involved.
(c) The  contents  in  advance  directive  should  be  taken  into
account.
(d) Where there is a request for continuation of medically futile
treatment, the Attending  Medical Officer should consider
the request in the context of the overall management plan
and the best interests of the patient at that time.
259

(e) Where the  patient  is  not  capable  of involvement  and  no
advocate or advance-directive has been arranged, any views
that the patient was known to hold, should be taken into
consideration; and
(f) If  the  patients’  views  are  not  known  to  anyone,  then
decisions should be made at the discretion of the Attending
Medical Officer, after consultation with the family, in the
best interests of the patient.
As to Advance Directives, legislation in South Australia, Victoria and
the Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory confirm, in varying
extents,  the  legal  validity  of  an  adult  patient’s  anticipatory  refusal  of
medical  treatment.   The  statutes  do  them by recognizing  two different
mechanisms that can be used to express anticipatory refusals:
i) ‘advance  directives’,  often  referred  to  as  ‘living  wills’
(recognized by legislation in all the above four jurisdictions);
and
ii) ‘enduring  powers  of  attorney’  for  the  purpose  of  medical
decision making (recognized by legislation in South Australia,
Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory only).
The  advance  directive  provisions  in  these  jurisdictions  allow
competent  adults  to  execute  formal  written  directives  specifying  their
wishes concerning medical treatment.  (The legislation in the AC Territory
also  allows  competent  adults  to  make  appropriately  witnesses  oral
directives).  These directives are binding on health care professionals.
260

The advance directive legislation in Victoria and the AC Territory
recognizes a patient’s anticipatory refusal of treatment in a broad range of
circumstances. The legislation in South Australia and the Northern Territory
only recognizes advance directives in relation to medical treatment during
terminal illness and in South Australia during persistent vegetative state, but
allows a patient to express anticipatory consent to specified treatment as
well as recognizing anticipatory refusals of treatment.
In  South  Australia,  Victoria  and  AC  Territory,  there  are  also
legislative provisions enabling a competent adult (principal) to execute an
enduring  power of attorney, under  which  the principal  appoints  another
adult (agent) to make decisions about the principal’s medical treatment in
the event that  the  principal  becomes  incompetent.  These  decisions  can
include the decision to refuse or consent to most kinds of medical treatment,
including life-sustaining medical treatment.
In Victoria, NT and AC Territory, the relevant legislation expressly
states that it does not affect any right of a person under any other law to
refuse medical treatment.  It thus preserves the common law right.
The South Australia law on advance directives is in the Natural Death
Act, 1983 (SA).   It stated that it did not authorize ‘an act that causes or
accelerates death as distinct from an act that permits the dying process to
take its natural course’.   This Act was repealed and replaced in 1995 by the
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995 (SA) (w.e.f.
30.11.95).   That deals with advance directives more exhaustively and also
states that a medical practitioner or health care professional who complies
with such a directive is immune from civil and criminal liability in respect
of that compliance; provided that the person has also behaved in good faith
261

and  without  negligence;  and  in  accordance  with  proper  professional
standards  of  medical  practice  and  in  order  to  preserve  or  improve  the
patient’s quality of life.
The 1995 Act also introduces a regime of appointing agents to take
decisions and provides similar immunity to doctors as stated above.
The Northern Territory Act 1988 is virtually identical with the South
Australia Act, 1995.  It does not provide for ‘agents’.
Victoria directive provisions are contained in Medical Treatment Act,
1988 (vic) also deals with advance directive and provides for immunity of
doctors from civil or criminal liability or professional disciplinary action.
The Act also contains enduring power of attorney provisions.
Australia Capital Territory passed the Medical Treatment Act, 1994
(ACT) and is modelled on the Victoria statute of 1988.  It contains also
provisions for appointing agents.
Tasmania  does  not  have  any  legislation  for  ‘advance  directives’.
Similarly, Western Australia, New South Wales, Queensland, do not have
an such law.
There have been no criminal prosecution of doctors in Australia in
relation to their administration of pain relieving drugs that have hastened
death.  There is case law as in England which declares particular action of a
doctor as lawful.   Jurists have stated that a doctor may be criminally liable
if  he  had  knowledge that  the  patient  may die  as  a  result  of  the  drugs
administered for relieving pain if the drugs hastened the patient’s death.
262

The  limited  statutory  clarification  is  recommended  by  the  Law
Reform Commission of Western Australia that legislation be introduced to
protect doctors from liability for administering drugs or other treatment for
the purpose of controlling pain, even though the drugs or other treatment
may incidentally shorten the patient’s life provided that the consent of the
patient  is  obtained  and  that  the  administration  is  reasonable  in  all  the
circumstances (see Report on Medical Treatment of the Dying, Feb. 1991,
of the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia, pp. 25-27).  No such
legislation has, however, been enacted in Western Australia.
Only South Australia has statutory provisions that classify the law on
the issue.   The provisions reflect the English legal rules and the primary
initiative  of  the  doctor  to  relieve  pain.    Sec.  17(1) of  the  Consent  to
Medical  Treatment  and  Palliative  Care  Act,  1995  (SA)  applies  to  the
situation where a doctor or other health care professionals, acting under a
doctor’s supervision, administers medical treatment ‘with the intention of
relieving pain or distress’, even though ‘an incidental effect of the treatment
is to hasten the death of the patient’.   This section provides that the doctor
or other healthcare professional will incur no civil or criminal liability in
this situation provided he or she acts:
(a) with the consent of the patient or the patient’s representative; and
(b) in good faith and without negligence; and
(c) in accordance with proper professional standards of palliative care.
It also provides that the administration of medical treatment for the
relief of  pain  or  distress  in  accordance  with  these  conditions  ‘does  not
constitute an intervening cause of death’ for purposes of the law in S.A. law.
263

It may also be noted that medical treatment with intention of ending
patient’s life and indirectly authorize ‘active voluntary euthanasia’.
In Australia, attempted suicides are not an offence.  But the criminal
law  prohibits  physician-assisted  suicide  and  makes  a  doctor  criminally
liable.  Only in Northern Territory, physical assisted suicide was permitted
under the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act, 1995 (NT) but as stated earlier,
the federal legislation declared in 1997 (under sec. 122 of the Australian
Constitution) that the State Legislature had no power to pass the above law.
In Australia,  the  law prohibits  voluntary euthanasia  except  in  NT
during the time when the 1995 Act was in force.
(The  above  material  as  to  the  law  in  Australia  is  gathered  from  two
exhaustive Research Papers 3 and 4 by Ms Natash Lica, Consultant, Law
and Public Administration Group, on Passive Voluntary Euthanasia (Part 1)
and Active Voluntary Euthanasia (Part 2) and are available on the website
of  Parliamentary  Library  of  Australia.
http://www.aph.gov.au/library/pubs/rp/1996-97rp41.htm)
In Victoria, the Medical Treatment Act, 1988 (Vic) provides that its
operation  ‘does  not  affect  any  right,  power  or  duty  which  a  medical
practitioner or any other person has in relation to palliative care’.   The
definition of ‘palliative care’ includes ‘the provision of reasonable medical
procedures for the relief of pain, suffering and discomfort’.   The Victorian
law does not expressly provide for immunity from civil or criminal law.
The Natural Death Act, 1988 (NT) is also unhelpful in not providing
immunity.    It  provides  that  its  operation  ‘does  not  affect  the  legal
consequences  (if  any)  of  taking  therapeutic  measures  (not  being
264

extraordinary measures) in the case of a patient who is suffering from a
terminal illness whether or not the patient has made a directive under the
Act’.  ‘Therapeutic measures’ are not defined.   The Act in  its  Medical
Treatment Act, 1994 (ACT) does not also provide any immunity.
Queensland passed the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Qld) which provides
in  sec.  82  that  a  person  is  absolved  from  criminal  responsibility  for
providing ‘medical treatment’ (defined as including pain relief) when it is
provided ‘in good faith and with reasonable care and skill’ for the patient’s
benefit and is ‘reasonable, having regard to the patient’s state at the time of
and  all  the  circumstances’.     The  section  is  loosely  worded  and  may
authorize ‘shorter life’ in circumstances not fully within the ‘exceptions’
stated in English law.  Further, the words ‘doctor or any other person’ can
create problems.
Case law in Australia
1. Q vs.  Guardianship & Administrative Board & Pilgrim (1998) VS
(CA)  (17.9.98)  decided  by  the  Victorian  Court  of  Appeal  related  to  a
decision of the Board to appoint a ‘temporary guardian’, which proceeded to
override an ‘advance directive’ of the patient that blood products be not
given  to  her  “under  any  circumstances”.   Q  was  a  devoted  Jehovah’s
witness.  The ‘advance directive’ was not in compliance with the provision
of  the  Medical  Treatment  Act,  1988  (Victoria)  (MTA) which  created  a
statutory scheme for such document.  She was pregnant and admitted in
hospital  and  to  avoid  loss  of  blood,  an  emergency  hysterectomy  was
performed but still there was loss of blood.  The hospital could not proceed
to give blood transfusion in view of the advance directive.
265

But her husband, Mr. Q moved the Board for appointment of a Public
Guardian.  Persons can be placed under ‘limited guardianship’ when they
suffer disability and are not capable of reasonable judgment (sec 33 of the
Guardianship & Administrative Board Act, 1986).
The Board was not shown the advance directive but was shown an
earlier ‘enduring power of attorney’ which was not in accordance with the
MTA.  It was not told why Mrs. Q refused blood transfusion.  It was shown
a consent form executed in hospital but that was limited to administering
blood during anaesthesia.  They appointed a Public Advocate as temporary
guardian and made orders delegating the temporary guardianship to Mr. Q.
the Board said they were not auhorising blood transfusion but that they were
authorizing Mr. Q to decide on that.
She was given blood transfusion and recovered and then sued the
Board under sec 7 of the Administrative Law Act, 1970 (Vic) to set aside
the Board’s decision.  Beach J summarily dismissed it.
On appeal,  Wunneke  J  told  the  Board  had  justification  since  the
refusal contained in the consent form only related to the administering blood
during  anaesthesia.  That the Board could ignore.  The Board had only
auhorised Mr. Q.  The Court would be loath to create a rift between husband
and wife.
The decision has been criticized, on the basis of comparative law in
other  countries.   (see  (1999)  Melbourne  University Law Review  6),  by
Cameron Stewart in his article ‘Advanced Directives, the Right to Die and
the Common Law: Recent problems with Blood Transfusions).
266

2. Northridge  vs.  Central  Sydney  Area  Health  Service  (2000) 2000
NSW (SC) 1241 (O’Keefe J) (29.12.2000)
Mrs. Annette Northridge moved the Court at 2.56 pm on Sunday, 12th
March, 2000, seeking an order preventing the administration of the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital (RPAH) from withdrawing treatment and life support
from a patient, her brother, Mr. John Thompson, aged 75 years who she
claimed would die if not treated or supported.  The patient was admitted on
2.3.2000 in an unconscious state, having suffered a cardiac arrest as a result
of an overdose of heroin.
In the judgment dated 29th Dec, 2000,  Justice O’Keefe traced the
subsequent history of the disagreement between the Thompson family and
the RPAH medical staff regarding the termination of antibiotic treatment for
the patient on 9th March 2000 and subsequent health care decisions.  It was
explained that the medical staff had formed the view that Mr. Thompson
was in a ‘chronic vegetative state’ and that any further treatment would be
‘futile’.  Due to the Court’s intervention, treatment was resumed and at the
date of judgment the patient was ‘unarguably alive’.  The Court referred to
the Practice Note (1996 (4) ALL ER 766) of UK.
O’Keefe first referred to ‘jurisdiction’ of the Court and held that the
‘parens patriae’ jurisdiction was available to the Court to deal with person
and property of those under disability.  He referred to the history of this
jurisdiction and also relied on the judgment of the House of Lords in Re F
(Mental Patient: Sterilisation) 1990(2) AC. 11 in that behalf and applied to
unconscious patients.  He referred to Mariam’s case (1991-2) 175 CLR 218)
267

The  Judge  criticized  the  absence  of  guidelines  by  the  medical
profession  in  Australia  and  referred  to  the  exhaustive  guidelines  of  the
GMC (UK).  He held that the hospital had no explanation as to the criteria it
followed to hold that Mr. Thompson was in a ‘vegetative state’.  Dr. Danes
had stated that the patient was not ‘brain dead’ and that though the patient
could not take care of himself, there could be nursing care, as opposed to
intensive or other hospital care.  The family complained that the doctors
were not communicating with them and they stopped antibiotics and would
not feed him.  They suspected that the Hospital was interested in the organs
of the patient for transplantation.
The Judge held that the ‘evidence reveals a lack of communication, a
premature diagnosis, an inadequate adherence to the hospitals’ own policies
in  relation  to  consultation  with  relatives  and  an  absence  of  recognized
criteria for the making of the diagnosis of ‘vegetative state’.  Significantly,
it emerges as common ground that within a matter of days after admission
Mr. Thompson was dealt with on the basis that any treatment was futile.
This was far too short a time after his injury for these not to be a serious risk
of misdiagnosis, as provided to be the case.’
O’Keefe pointed out that it was ‘precisely because of such a risk that a
standard  and  guidelines  have  been  adopted  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
relation  to  vegetative  state,  continuing  vegetative  state and  permanent
vegetative state.”  “In addition, transferring Mr.  Thompson into a renal
transplant ward after treatment and ‘feeding had been discontinued and a
‘Not for Resuscitation order’ imposed,  could not help but give rise to a
268

perception that there was a conflict of interest in relation to his treatment
and management.  I hasten to add that I accept that there was no proposal by
the hospital or the doctor to use his organs as transplants after his death.
However, in life and death situation, it is important that any conflict of
interest or circumstance that may give rise to an apprehension of conflict of
interest be avoided, in the same way as bias and the apprehension of bias
must be avoided in relation to the judicial determination of the rights of the
individuals.”
The  Judge  found  that,  by 29th Dec. 2000,  the patient  admitted  in
March 2000 was still alive, he moves, responds, is able to walk, articulate
and to control a number of muscular and bodily functions.  According to the
material last put before the Court, he was then in a nursing home under the
control of the defendant (hospital).
The Judge deprecated the lack of medical standards in Australia to
infer if a patient was a ‘PVS’, for which in UK, detailed procedures were
formulated by the General Medical Council, UK.
In UK, there is scope for seeking a declaration that “the responsible
medical  practitioners…  may  lawfully  discontinue  all  life  sustaining
treatment and medical support measures, (including ventilation, nutrition
and hydration by artificial means) designed to keep (the patient) alive (his
or her) existing permanent vegetative state.”
The Practice Note 1996(4) All ER 766 points out that the standard
form of relief recognizes that there may be a material change in the existing
269

circumstances  before  such  withdrawal  by  providing  that  any  party  has
liberty  to  apply  for  such  or  other  declarations  or  order  as  may  be
appropriate.
The Judge held that there was a requirement to get court sanction in
every case where the ANH is proposed to be terminated (this appears to be
not correct in view of the Judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Burke in
2005).
He held on facts that the withdrawal of treatment and nutrition for
Mr. Thompson was premature.  A person to be PVS must be in that state for
a ‘lengthy period’ in which there is no change in the state of consciousness.
The subsequent treatment and his revival ‘highlight the wisdom of allowing
a sufficient time to pass between the trauma or other event giving rise to the
unconscious state of the patient and the making of a diagnosis of permanent
or  (chronic)  vegetative  state,  which may be a prelude  to  withdrawal  of
treatment, support and nutrition’.
The  Judge  directed  that  until  further  orders,  Mr.  Thompson  be
provided  appropriate  life  preserving  treatment,  and  that  no  ‘Not  for
Resuscitation Order’ be made without prior leave of Court.
3. Issac Messiha vs. South East Health = 2004 NSW SC 1061 (11th Nov
2004 (Howie J).
This  case led to  a result  contrary to the  one  in  Northridge.  The
opinion of the doctors was to withdraw treatment (and give only palliatives)
270

on  the  ground  that  the  patient  was  PVS  and  not  likely  to  revive,  was
accepted by the Court.  The Court accepted this view and the application on
behalf of the patient was rejected.
Mr. Messiha was admitted in ICU on 17th October, 2004.  He had
suffered an asystolic cardiac arrest: that is, his heart had completely stopped
beating, depriving his body, including his brain, of the supply of oxygen.
As a result, since his admission, he has been unconscious and apparently in
deep coma.  Dr. Mrs. Jacques, Director of the Unit of the respondent was of
the view that the current treatment regime of the patient should cease and
that he should be removed from the Unit and placed under palliative care.
She accepts that withdrawing treatment in the Unit will have the effect of
reducing  life  expectancy  from  possibly  weeks  to  possibly  days.   The
members of the family of the patient approached the Court to restrain Dr.
Jacques and other medical staff at the hospital from altering the patient’s
treatment.   The  family  believed  that  the  patient  would  improve  if  the
treatment was continued and he would live for a longer time.
The  learned  Judge  held,  following  Northridge that  the  Court  has
parens patria jurisdiction in such cases.
After considering the views of Dr. Jacques and other experts, the
Court held that there was no eye-movement observed and that the present
state was that the patient (a) was mechanically ventilated through a tube in
his mouth and passing down his trachea, (b) being fed and hydrated through
a tube in his mouth and through his arm, (c) was not able to pass urine
artificially, (d) incontinent of faeces, (e) was unable to swallow his own
271

saliva requiring suctioning of his mouth, nose and throat and (f) his eyes are
taped down in order to prevent corneal ulcers.  The medical evidence was
unanimous that there was no real prospect of recovery.  The Court was
satisfied that there was no medical evidence to say that he was not in a PVS
state.   The  application  by family members  to  restrain  the  doctors  from
withdrawing medical treatment was rejected.
272

New Zealand
In New Zealand, voluntary euthanasia is illegal.   The Death with
Dignity Bill, 2003 which intended to provide terminally and incurably ill
people to seek medical help to end their lives was defeated in Parliament on
30th July 2003.   (The Bill permitted ‘assisted suicide’)
Voluntary euthanasia is allowed only in two countries, Netherlands
and  Belgium  and  it  was  permissible  for  a  short  period  in  Australia’s
Northern Territory during 1996-97.  Oregon permitted physician-assisted
suicide in 1994.
Section 179 of the Crimes Act, 1961 (NZ) stipulated a prison term of
14 years to every person who 
(g) incites, counsels or procures any person to commit suicide,
if  that  person  commits  or attempts  to  commit  suicide  in
consequence thereof; or
(h) aids or abets any person in the commission of suicide.
Section 151stated that every one who has charge of any other person unable,
by  reason  of  detention,  age,  sickness,  insanity,  or  any  other  cause,  to
withdraw himself from such charge, and unable to provide himself with the
necessaries of life, is (whether such charge is undertaken by him under any
contract or is imposed upon him by law or by reason of his unlawful act or
otherwise howsoever) under a legal duty to supply that person with the
necessaries of life, and is criminally responsible for omitting without lawful
273

excuse to perform such duty if the death of that person is caused, or if his
life is endangered or his health is permanently injured, by such omission.
Under sec 8 of the NZ Bill of Rights Act, 1996, ‘No one shall be
deprived of life except on such grounds as are established by law and are
consistent with the principles of fundamental justice’.
We  shall  refer  to  a  case  in  New  Zealand  decided  by  Thomas  J,
interpreting the above sections.   This judgment of Thomas J received praise
at the hands of the House of Lords in Airedale.
Auckland Area Health Board vs.  Attorney General =1993(1) NZLR 235
(13.8.92)  (Thomas J)
This is one of the best judgments on the subject and received praise
from the House of Lords in Airedale.
A doctor of the ICU of Auckland Hospital made an application, along
with the Auckland Area Health Board, for a declaration clarifying whether,
in law, they would be guilty of culpable homicide under ss 151(1) or 164 of
the Crimes Act, 1961, if they were to withdraw the ventilatory support
system which maintained the breathing and heartbeat of a patient with an
extreme case of Guillian-Barre Syndrome.  The disease affected the nervous
system destroying the conductivity of the nerves between the brain and the
body.   The  result  was  to  leave  the  brain,  though  still  living,  entirely
disengaged from the body.  The patient survived in a state of ‘living death’,
totally  unable  to  move  or  communicate  and  there  was  no  prospect  of
274

recovery.  However, because the brain, though damaged, was not dead, the
patient was not medically ‘brain-stem dead’ as per the medical definition of
‘death.   The  patient  existed  in  that  condition  for  12  months.   Eight
specialists  were  unanimous  that  the  ventilatory  support  could  not  be
medically justified.  In that approach, the medical team had the informed
concurrence of the patient’s family and the approval of the hospital ethical
committee.   If  the  life  support  system was  withdrawn,  death  would  be
instantaneous.
The issue before the Court  was whether in the circumstances, the
doctors’ action in withdrawing the artificial ventilatory-support system from
Mr. L would make them guilty of culpable homicide.  As part of the issue,
the Court had also to consider whether a doctor was obliged to continue
treatment  which  had  no  therapeutic  benefit.   The  Court  had  also  to
determine  a  threshold  issue  as  to  the  appropriate  involvement  of  the
Attorney-General.
Thomas J held that, as the proceeding raised matters of general public
importance  and  the  relief  sought,  if  granted,  would  impinge  upon
prosecutorial  discretion  and  prerogatives  of  the  Crown,  leave  for  the
Attorney General to be heard as intervener be granted.   (Adams vs. Adams:
1970(3) All ER 572 applied)
It was also held that the Court had jurisdiction to grant a declaratory
relief even though the declaration related to a matter which could be the
subject  of  criminal  proceedings.   Such  jurisdiction  should  be  sparingly
exercised.  Any civil ruling on an issue which fell for consideration in any
275

criminal  proceedings  undertaken  in  respect  of  the  same  subject-matter
would  not  be  binding  on  the  Court  in  the  exercise  of  its  criminal
jurisdiction.   Any  unsatisfactory  features  relating  to  the  making  of  a
declaratory  order  were  outweighed  by  the  desirability  of  providing  the
doctors in the circumstances of the case with a ruling as to the lawfulness of
their action.  Any declaration could be worded in such a way as to overcome
the difficulty of the Court being asked to make a declaration relating to
future conduct.
Dyson vs.  vs. AG (1911)(1) K B 410 (CA)
Sankey vs. Whitlam: (1978) 142, CLRI
Imperial Tobacco vs. AG: 1980(1) All ER 866 (HL)
R vs. Sloan: 1990(1) NZLR 474.
Accepting the jurisdiction of Court but with a discretion to use it sparingly
is a better principle since there may be circumstances where it is clear that
the criminal process is being used vexatiously and the criminal proceeding
amounts to an abuse of process.  The Court must be prepared then to say so
and to step in and bring the vexatious proceeding to an end.  At other times,
as illustrated by the cases referred to, the Court can properly and usefully
resolve a legal issue in advance of a criminal proceeding.
It is true that the above cases involve offences of a regulatory nature.
Nevertheless, the offences have been properly regarded as ‘crimes’.  Nor is
there any reason to draw a distinction between crimes of a regulatory kind
and crimes which may involve an element of moral turpitude.  Any such
distinction  was  rejected  by  the  High  Court  of  Australia  in  Sankey vs.
276

Whitlam (1978) 142 CLR. 1, referred to with approval in R vs. Sloan (1990)
(1) NZLR 474 by Hardie Boys J.
It would be unsatisfactory to make the power of the Court depend
upon so arbitrary and uncertain a test.  Such matters are best left to be
considered by the Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction.
In exercising a discretion in a case like the present, there are a number
of matters which should be taken into account.  Two important matters,
may, however, require to be mentioned.
First is that a decision of the Court would tend to have the effect of
usurping the function of the criminal Court.  “In most cases, I agree, it
would be totally inappropriate to make a declaration in the Court’s civil
jurisdiction which would pre-empt a decision of the Court in its criminal
jurisdiction.  In this case, however, the doctors are in an invidious position.
On the one hand, they have that duty to their patient and their professional
responsibility to adhere to good medical practice; on the other hand, if they
act in accordance with their conscience, they face the threat of criminal
proceedings alleging that they are guilty of unlawful killing.  This point
outweighs  the  general  importance  of  not  intervening  in  a  criminal
proceeding in a manner which might displace or affect the exercise of the
Court’s criminal jurisdiction.”
Nevertheless,  a  civil  ruling  on  an  issue  which  will  fall  for
consideration in any criminal proceedings which are undertaken in respect
of the same subject matter will not be binding on the Court in the exercise
277

of its criminal jurisdiction.  Lord Lane put it in this way in Imperial Tobacco
Ltd. vs. AG: 1980(1) All ER 866 (HL):
“The criminal law would not be bound by the decision.  In practical
terms, it would simply have the inevitable effect of prejudicing the
criminal trial one way or another.”
Viscount  Dilhorne  also  spoke  of  the  use  which  might  be  made  at  the
criminal  trial  of  a  declaration  in  a  civil  Court  that  no  crime  had  been
committed.  It is clear from his Lordship’s remarks that he used the word
‘used’ in  the sense of ‘misuse’ and  considered  that the  integrity of the
criminal proceedings would be adversely affected.
The fact that a declaratory order of the Court would not be binding in
any criminal proceeding must be a telling factor against making any order at
all.  Nor is it appropriate that a ruling of the Court on its civil jurisdiction
should be available to be used or misused, by the combatants at the criminal
trial.   But,  these  unsatisfactory  features  are  again  outweighed  by  the
desirability of providing the doctors in the circumstances of this case, with a
ruling as to the lawfulness of their actions.
The  second factor  which  relates  to  the  exercise  of  the  Court’s
discretion  is  the  fact  that  “the  Court  would  be  effectively  making  a
declaration relating to future conduct.  The facts before the Court now need
not necessary be the facts which exist at the time the doctors withdraw the
ventilator-support system.  The imprudence of making a declaration on the
basis of future acts is well-established.  Yet, in this case, it is justified.  For
278

one thing, the facts are settled.  Mr. L is not going to recover, nor will his
condition even improve.  Moreover, it is expected that if there is a material
change  in  the  facts,  such  as  Mrs.  L  changing  her  mind  or  the  ethics
Committee  receiving  their  earlier  endorsement,  the  doctors  would  act
responsibly, any declaration can be worded in such a way as to overcome
the  difficulty.   Whatever  be  the  form,  the  doctors  are  entitled  to  an
indication from the Court as to whether or not their action will be lawful.”
The learned Judge then referred to ‘sanctity of life’ as a deep-rooted value
imminent in our society and its presentation as a fundamental humanitarian
precept.  He then referred to section 8 of the N.Z. Bill of Rights Act, 1990
which states:
“Section  8:   Right  not  to  be  deprived  of  life:   No  one  shall  be
deprived of life except on such grounds as are established by law and
are consistent with the principles of fundamental justice.”
The learned Judge observed that that was not to say that the sanctity of life
represented an absolute value.  Few, if any, value could be stated in absolute
terms.  The qualification in sec 8 itself conferred that to be the case. It was
also illustrated by the fact that a person might refuse medical treatment.
Section 11 of the N.Z. Bill of Rights Act, 1990 states: “Everyone has the
right to refuse to undergo any medical treatment”.  It has been held also that
where one cannot accord with the view that this right enabled a patient,
properly informed, to require life-support systems to be  discontinued.  In
Nancy B vs. Hotel – Dieu de Quebec (1992) 86 DLR (4th) 385, the Quebec
Supreme Court was faced with the same problem.  The patient suffered from
279

Guillan-Barre  syndrome  and  was  incapable  of  movement.   She  could
breathe only with the aid of a respirator.  But her intellectual capacity and
mental  competence  were  unaffected.   Her  condition  was  diagnosed  as
‘irreversible and incurable’ and she wanted it to be brought to an end.  She
commenced  an  action  seeking  injunction  against  the  hospital  and  her
physician requiring them to withdraw the respirator.  The injunction was
granted.  It was held that the use of respirator to sustain ‘life’ was medical
treatment  but  that  the  discontinuance  of  that  treatment  at  the  patient’s
request would not constitute a criminal act.  Rather, it “allowed nature to
take its course”.
Nancy B also highlights another set of values which are central to our
concept of life;  values  of human dignity and personal privacy.  See also
Matter of Nancy Ellen Jobes (1987) 529 A 2d 434.
The problem arises when life passes into death but obscurely.  It is a
problem made acute by the enormous advances in technology and medical
science  in  recent  decades.   With  the  use  of  sophisticated  life  support
systems,  life  may  be  perpetuated  well  beyond  the  reach  of  the  natural
disease.  The process of living can become the process of dying so that it is
unclear whether life is being sustained or death being deferred.
This is the plight of the irreversibly doomed patient.  Maintained by
mechanical means they exert suspended in a state of moribund inanimation.
Whether a body devoid of a mind or as in the case of Mr. L, a brain destitute
of a body, does not matter in any sensible way.
280

In their chronic and persistent vegetative condition, they lack self-
awareness or awareness of the surroundings in any cognitive sense.  They
are the ‘living dead’.  Whether, in such circumstances, or in this particular
case, it is fairer to say that life-support system is being used to sustain life or
being used to defer death is at the heart of the question.
The learned Judge then discussed the issue under the heading ‘The
living  dead’.   Over  time,  the  medical  community’s  perception  of  what
constitutes ‘death’ has changed.  The general community’s principles has
also  changed  but  has  lagged  somewhat  behind  that  of  the  doctor’s.
Originally, it was thought that the absence of the ‘vital functions’, (absence
of) a heart beat and breathing, signified death.  That is not the view doctors
share today.  With the advances in technology and medical skills which
have occurred, the medical profession has rejected the notion that death is to
be equated with the cessation of a person’s heartbeat.  In open heart surgery,
for example, the patient’s heart is temporarily stopped, but it is not thought
that he or she has died.  Instead, the medical community has preferred the
concept of what is called ‘brain death’.   In England, the Conference of
Medical Colleges and their Faculties of the UK has resolved that, when
irreversible brain damage is diagnosed and it is established by tests that
none of the vital centres in the brain system are still functioning, the patient
is to be accounted dead: (1979)(1) British Medical  Journal p 332).  Though
this definition is not formally adopted in New Zealand, it is widely accepted
throughout the medical profession as being a more accurate indication as to
when death occurs.
281

‘Brain  Death’  according  to  Ian  Kennedy  is  ‘the  state  which  has
traditionally been regarded as death in a human being is reached when the
brain, including the brain stem, is destroyed.  A person will not breathe, nor
will his heart beat, without a functioning brain-stem; and if this is destroyed,
he will never recover the ability to do so, since, once destroyed, brain cells
do  not  regenerate’   (‘Switching  off  Life  Support  Machines:  Legal
Implications’, ‘Treat me Right’) (1988) pp 351-352).
Breathing and heartbeat, however, can be mechanically induced.  This
is, of course, what occurs when an artificial respirator is applied.  Breathing
and  heartbeat  are maintained,  and  may be  maintained  indefinitely, even
though  the  person  is  medically  dead.   In  such  a  case,  the  ventilator  is
‘merely ventilating a corpse’ (ibid p 352).
So far as Mr. L is concerned, his upper brain is damaged, he is alive
but  the  nerve  complex  which  connects  his  brain  to  his  body  is  totally
destroyed and cannot be regenerated.  Spontaneous breathing and heartbeat
are  irreversibly  lost  as  if  he  were  brain-stem  dead.   Breathing  and
heartbeats,  the  outward  manifestations  of  life,  are  also  mechanically
induced.   The  difference  between  the  two  cases  is  a matter  of medical
description, but both descriptions are, perhaps, equally apt to describe the
‘living dead’.
Mr. L is ‘living dead’ but may not be ‘brain-stem dead’.
The learned Judge then referred to sec 151 of the (NZ) Crimes Act,
1961 which deals with ‘Duty to provide necessaries of life’.  It reads:
282

“Section 151: Duty to provide the necessaries of life: (1) Everyone
who has charge of any other person unable, by reason of detention,
age, sickness, insanity or any other cause, to withdraw himself from
such charge, and unable to provide himself with the necessaries of
life, is (whether such charge is undertaken by him under any contract
or is imposed upon him by law or by reason of his unlawful act or
otherwise howsoever) under a legal duty to supply that person with
the  necessaries  of  life,  and  is  criminally  responsible  for  omitting
without lawful excuse to perform such duty if the death of that person
is  caused,  or  if  his  life  is  endangered  of  his  health  permanently
injured, by such omission’.
After  referring  to  various  aspects  relating  to  moral  and  legal  duties  of
doctors and the wrong media-description of doctors’ decisions, the learned
Judge stated that the basic question was whether “the doctor was legally
justified in doing what he did.  Essentially, this is to ask whether the doctor
was  under  a  duty  to  continue  the  life-support  system or  had  a  ‘lawful
excuse’ for withdrawing it?
If the doctor was not under a legal duty to provide or continue with
life-support system, or he had a ‘lawful excuse, for discontinuing it, it may
then be said that he or she had not legally caused the death of the patient,
the Judge said.
As to the duty to provide ‘necessaries  of life’, sec 151 applies to
patients under medical care.  Medical treatment is included in ‘necessaries
283

of life’.  R vs.  Books : (1902)(9) BCR 13.  So is medical attention R vs.
Morre: (1954) NZLR.  But these are actions intended to ‘prevent, cure or
alleviate disease’ that threatened life of health:  R vs.  Tutton : (1989) 48
CCC (3d) 129.
No precedent is available which said that a ‘ventilator’ is a ‘necessary
of life’.  But, the question is not capable of absolute answer.  It must depend
on the facts.  A provision for artificial respirator may be regarded as a
necessary of life where it is required to ‘prevent, cure or alleviate a disease
that endangers the health or life of the patient’.  If, however, the patient is
‘beyond recovery’, a ventilator is not to be treated as a necessary of life.  “It
is repugnant that a doctor who has in good faith and with complete medical
preparatory  undertaken  treatment  which  has  failed,  should  be  held
responsible to continue that treatment on the basis that it is, or continues to
be, a necessary of life”.  Artificial ventilation may, in several cases, enable
the  patient  to  live  longer  and  recover.   It  has  therapeutic  or  medical
functions.
Even  if it could be said that doctors are under a duty to provide
ventilator, they are legally justified in withdrawing it if there was a ‘lawful
excuse’.  The Court of Appeal in R vs. Burney (1958) NZLR 745(CA) (at
753), accepted he following dicta of the Privy Council in Wang Pooh Yun
vs. Public Prosecutor: (1955) AC 93 (at 100).
“Their  Lordship’s  doubt  if  it  is  possible  to  define  the  expression
‘lawful excuse’ in a comprehensive and satisfactory manner and they
do not propose to make an attempt.  They agree with the Court of
284

Appeal  that  it  would  be  undesirable  to  do  so  and  that  each  case
requires to be examined on its individual facts.”
The  Judge  then  held  that  doctors  have  a  ‘lawful  excuse’  to
discontinue ventilation when there is no medical justification to continuing
that form of medical assistance or where there is no medical function or
purpose and where it serves ‘only to defer the death of a patient’.  It is not
the purpose of medical treatment to merely prolong the life of a person for
no  benefit.   It  is  not  unlawful  to  discontinue  the  support  ‘if  the
discontinuance  accords  with  good  medical  practice’.  The  words  ‘good
medical  practice’  cannot  again  be  defined  absolutely and  their  meaning
depends on the fact situation.  The words refer to a ‘bona fide’ decision on
the part of the attending doctors as to what, in that judgment, is in the ‘best
interests’  of  the  patient.   They  also  refer  to  the  ‘prevailing  medical
standards, practices, procedures and conditions which command the general
approval of the medical profession’.  All relevant tests need to be carried
out, special list opinions need to be taken, where necessary.  Medical body’s
ethics committees can be consulted.  The patient’s family or guardian must
also be informed.
In the present case, the decision to discontinue has been taken by a
number of medical specialists and others.  It was endorsed by the medical
ethical body.  Informed consent of family members was obtained.  Thus,
there is the assurance of ‘good medical practice’.
285

Such an approach was followed by the Supreme Court of New Jersey
in US in ‘In the matter of Karen Quilan’: (1976) 355 Azd 647.   See also
Barber vs. Superior Court of State of California (1983) 195 Cal Rep 484.
Question of ‘good medical practice’ forms the basis of a number of
decisions in UK too which enable the doctors to perform sterilisation upon
adults unable to consent to such operations because of mental disability.  I
vs.  I: (1988 (1) All ER 613; F vs. Bukhire Health Authority (1989)2 All ER
545.  There is also persuasive support for Re J (a minor) 1992  TLR 29 of
the UK Court of Appeal.
The realistic approach above mentioned has been accepted by leading
jurists.   Prof. Ian Kennedy has observed that death is not always necessarily
an  evil  to  be  prevented  and  that,  as  a  consequence,  a  doctor  may,  in
appropriate circumstances, be entitled to embark on conduct which involves
ceasing to seek to prevent death and could, as it happens, bring it about
(Kennedy, pp 361-367).   Again Prof. Williams (p 279) states:
“A doctor must not do anything actively to kill his patient, but he is
not bound to fight for the patient’s life  forever.  His duty in this
respect is to make reasonable efforts, having regard to the customary
practice  and  expectations,  and  in  particular,  having  regard  to  the
benefit to the patient to be expected from further exertions.  He need
not and should not crassly fix his attention upon mere heartbeats’.
Medical  science  and  technology  was  never  intended  that  it  be  used  to
prolong biological life in patients bereft of the prospect of returning to an
286

even limited exercise of human life.  Natural death may be deferred but it
need  not  be  postponed  indefinitely.   For  example,  in  case  of  patients
suffering  from cancer  where  there  is  no  hope  of  recovery,  doctors  can
administer palliative drugs even if they have the effect of hastening death.
Hence under sec 151, a doctor acting responsibly and in accordance
with good medical practice cannot be made liable for any criminal offence.
He must be taken as having had a ‘lawful excuse’.
Withdrawal of ventilator is not the cause of death as a matter of law if
and when two primary conditions are met: (a) the doctor acted under a duty
to provide ventilator as part of the necessaries of life or (b) that doctor has a
lawful excuse for declining to do so; both depend on whether he follows
good medical practice or guidelines or procedures which have been laid
down.
Section 164 of the Crime Act, 1961 speaks of ‘acceleration of death’.
It reads:
“Sec  164:  Acceleration  of  death.   Every  one  who  by  any  act  or
omission  causes  the  death  of  another  person  kills  that  person,
although the effect of the bodily injury caused to that person was
merely to hasten his death while labouring under some disorder or
disease arising from some other cause.”
If the ‘cause of death’ is not the criminal intent of the doctor but is based on
good medical practice and if that is good for sec 151, it is also good for sec
287

164.  The withdrawal of support is not an ‘unlawful’ act for purpose of sec
160 in determining whether a homicide is culpable or not.  It cannot be
regarded as an unlawful act when the doctors concerned are not in breach of
duty and have a lawful excuse.
Again,  the  victim  must  have,  for  purpose  of  sec  164,  suffered  a
‘bodily injury’ at the hands of the accused.  It strains sec 164 while applied
to a patient already in ‘irreversible’ condition.  A ventilator mechanically
ventilates, its withdrawal cannot be treated as inflicting ‘bodily injury’.
A doctor who decides to stop the ventilator on the basis of good
medical practice cannot be treated as having ‘hastened’ another’s death,
where that ‘treatment’ serves no therapeutic or medical purpose.
The Judge finally granted a declaration and declared that the action
did  not  amount  to  ‘culpable  homicide’ within  sections  151,  164  of the
Crimes Act, 1961.   He declared:
“If:
(i) the doctors responsible for the care of Mr. L, taking into
account a responsible body of medical opinion, conclude
that  there  is  no  reasonable  opportunity  of  Mr.  L  ever
recovering from his present condition;
(ii) there is no therapeutic or medical benefit to be gained by
continuing  to  maintain  Mr.  L  on  artificial  ventilatory
support, and to withdraw that support accords with good
288

medical  practice,  as  recognized  and  approved  within  the
medical profession; and
(iii) Mrs.  L  and  the  ethics  committee  of  the  Auckland  Area
Health  Board  concur  with  the  decision  to  withdraw  the
artificial ventilatory support;
then, ss 151 and/or sec 164 of the Crimes Act 1961, will not apply,
and the withdrawal of the artificial ventilatory support from Mr. L
will not constitute culpable homicide for the purposes of that Act.
The  order  prohibiting  publication  of  L’s  name  or  any  particulars
which might lead to his identification, is continued.”
The  Judge  also  directed,  in  his  judgment  dated  13th Aug.  1992,
prohibition of publication of any part of his judgment till 28 Aug., 1992.
We are of the view that these principles must be brought into the
proposed draft Bill in India.
 
South Africa:
In Nov. 1998, the South African Law Commission, gave a Report
(Project 86) on ‘Euthanasia and the artificial preservation of life’ (running
to 237 pages).
The Report was preceded by a Discussion Paper (No. 71) (Project 86)
of 1997 running into 86 pages.
289

The Report of 1998 contains six chapters.  Chapter I contains the
‘Introduction’; Chapter II deals with ‘Technology and Definitions’; Chapter
III deals with ‘Artificial Preservation of Life where  the patient is clinically
Dead’; Chapter IV deals with ‘Cases where the patient is competent to make
decisions’, and this chapter is divided in 5 parts: (A) cession of life-saving
medical treatment of the competent person, (B) Double effect, (C) Assisted
suicide, (D) Voluntary active euthanasia, (E) Involuntary active euthanasia;
Chapter V deals with ‘The Incompetent Patient who has no prospect of
recovery or improvement’ and is divided in three parts: (A) Cessation of
Life-sustaining  medical  treatment  where  there  is  an  advance-directive
(living will) or power of attorney, (B) cessation of life sustaining medical
treatment where there  is  no advance  directive  (living  will)  or power of
attorney, (C) Non-voluntary active euthanasia;  Chapter  VI contains draft
Bill on end of life decision; Annexure ‘A’ contains a list of respondents to
working paper 53; Annexure ‘B’ gives a list of respondents to discussion
Paper 71; Annexure ‘C’ contains a final draft Bill on end of life decision.
We  do  not  propose  to  discuss  the  Report  in  detail  but  the  final
recommendations in the Report are as follows:
Summary of Recommendations
The advances made in medical science and especially the application
of medical technology have resulted in patients living longer.  For some
patients this signifies a welcome prolongation of meaningful life, but for
others the result is a poor quality of life which inevitably raises the question
whether treatment is a benefit or a burden.
290

Worldwide  increased  importance  is  furthermore  being  attached  to
patient autonomy.  The need has therefore arisen to consider the protection
of a mentally competent patient’s right to refuse medical treatment or to
receive  assistance,  should  he  or  she  so  require,  in  ending  his  or  her
unbearable suffering by the administering or supplying of a lethal substance
to the patient.   The position of the incompetent patient, as well as the
patient who is clinically dead, has to be clarified as well.
Some matters concerning the treatment of terminally ill people are at
present being dealt with on a fairly ad hoc basis, there is some degree of
uncertainty in the minds of the general public and medical personnel about
the legal position in this regard.  Doctors and families want to act in the best
interest of the patient, but are unsure about the scope and content of their
obligation to provide care.  Doctors are furthermore afraid of being exposed
to civil claims, criminal prosecution and professional censure should they
withhold life support systems or prescribe drugs which may inadvertently or
otherwise shorten the patient’s life, even if they are merely complying with
the wishes of the patient.
The South African Law Commission recommended the enactment of
legislation to give effect to the following principles:
“A medical practitioner may, under specified circumstances, cease or
authorize the cessation of all further medical treatment of a patient
whose life functions are being maintained artificially while the person
291

has no spontaneous respiratory and circulatory functions or where his
or her brainstem does not register any impulse.
A competent person may refuse any life-sustaining medical treatment
with regard  to any specific illness  from which  he or she may be
suffering, even though such refusal may cause the death of such a
person.
A medical practitioner or, under specified circumstances, a nurse may
relieve  the  suffering  of  a  terminally  ill  patient  by  prescribing
sufficient drugs to control the pain of the patient adequately even
though the secondary effect of this conduct may be the shortening of
the patient’s life.
A  medical  practitioner  may,  under  specified  circumstances,  give
effect to an advance directive or enduring power of attorney of a
patient regarding the refusal or cessation of medical treatment or the
administering of palliative care, provided that these instructions have
been issued by the patient while mentally competent.
A medical practitioner may, under specified circumstances, cease or
authorize the cessation of all further medical treatment with regard to
terminally  ill  patients  who  are  unable  to  make  or  communicate
decisions concerning their medical treatment, provided that his or her
conduct is in accordance with the wishes of the family of the patient
or authorized by a court order.”
292

As regards ‘active voluntary euthanasia’, the Commission does not
make  a  specific  recommendation.   The  Commission  sets  out  different
options  to  deal  with  this  issue.   These  options  were  identified  through
comments received:
    “Option 1:  Confirmation of the present legal position:
The arguments in favour of legalising euthanasia are not sufficient
reason to weaken society’s prohibition of intentional killing since it is
considered  to  be  the  cornerstone  of  the  law  and  of  all  social
relationships.  Whilst  acknowledging that there may be individual
cases in which euthanasia may seem to be appropriate., these cannot
establish the foundation of a general pro-euthanasia policy.  It would
furthermore  be  impossible  to  establish  sufficient  safeguards  to
prevent abuse.
    Option 2: Decision making by the medical practitioner:
The practice of ‘active euthanasia’ is regulated through legislation in
terms of which a medical practitioner may give effect to the request of
a terminally ill, but mentally competent patient to make an end to the
patient’s unbearable suffering by administering or providing a lethal
agent to the patient.  The medical practitioner has to adhere to strict
safeguards in order to prevent abuse.
    Option 3: Decision making by a panel or committee:
293

The practice of ‘active euthanasia’ is regulated through legislation in
terms of which a multi-disciplinary panel or committee is instituted to
consider requests for euthanasia according to set criteria.”
294

Chapter VII
Legal Principles applicable in India and position
Under Indian Penal Code, 1860
As stated in the opening para of Chapter I, this Report is not intended
to legalise Euthanasia or Assisted Suicide.  This Report refers to a different
subject, namely, withholding or withdrawal of life support from competent
and incompetent patients who are terminally ill.  In the case of competent
patients, if they agree for such withholding or withdrawal on the basis of
their informed decision and in the case of incompetent patients, if doctors
consider  it  to  be in  their  best  interests,-  it  is  lawful  for  the  doctors  to
withhold or withdraw medical treatment, including artificial nutrition and
hydration.  Universally, in all countries, such action is treated as lawful and
as being different from Euthanasia or Assisted Suicide.
We have stated in Chapter I that in this Report, we do not propose to
follow  the  traditional  pattern  of  preparing  a Report,  nor  the  method  of
presentation that was being followed by other Law Commissions.  This, we
explained, was because of our desire to furnish as extensive information as
possible  on  the  facts  of  each  case  medical  case  where  life-support
withdrawing or withdrawal became important.  If we should merely refer
only to the abstract legal propositions and give citations of relevant case law
where some principle is decided by the Courts, then law makers, doctors,
hospital authorities, lawyers and Judges would find it difficult to know in
what factual background what medical decisions were taken and why such
medical decisions were either held valid or invalid by the Courts.  The issue
295

being one concerning ‘life’, serious concerns of human rights of the patient
arise.  The doctors and hospitals would want to know in what circumstances
they might become vulnerable to civil or criminal action.  In fact, unless the
factual background of each case is fully presented, the Report, if it merely
contained legal propositions, would not be of any help.
Therefore, we decided to present a new type of Report where the facts
of each case are dealt with in sufficient detail and then the legal principles
that are extracted at considerable length in each case.  We have done so in
the previous  chapters.   In this  Chapter,  we shall  refer  to  the  important
principles laid down in leading cases which, according to us, should be
applicable in our country.  These can be listed as follows:
Principles  which  are  proposed  to  be  discussed  in  this  Chapter  for
application in our country:
(1) Advances in science and technology and concepts of brain-stem
death.
(2) Euthanasia  and  Assisted  Suicide  are  and  shall  continue  to  be
criminal offences in India but not withholding or withdrawal of
life supporting systems.
(3) Adult  patients’  right  of  self  determination  and  right  to  refuse
treatment is binding on doctors if it is based on informed decision
process.
(4) Giving  invasive  medical  treatment  contrary  to  a  patient’s  will
amounts to battering or in some cases may amount to murder.
296

(5) Advance directives (living wills); and powers of attorney in favour
of surrogates to be invalid in our country;
(6) State’s interest in protecting life and principle of sanctity of life
are not absolute.
(7) Refusal to obtain medical treatment does not amount to ‘attempt to
commit  suicide’  and  withholding  or  withdrawing  medical
treatment by a doctor does not amount to ‘abetment of suicide’.
(8) Competent  and  incompetent  patients,  ‘informed  decision’  and
‘best interests’ of the patients, consultation with a body of three
experts before treatment is withheld or withdrawn. 
(9) Statutory body to prepare panel of experts.
(10) The Court has power, in appropriate cases, to grant declaration
that, on the facts of the particular case, the giving or withholding
or withdrawing invasive medical treatment is lawful.
(11) Does  the  Court’s  declaration  provide  immunity to  doctor from
civil or criminal action in subsequent litigation, civil and criminal.
(12) Palliative  care  can  be  given  to  patients  to  relieve  pain  and
sufferings even if, in some cases, it may adversely affect health of
the patient.
(13) Confidentiality to be maintained whether declaration is sought in
Court or not.
(14) Guidelines by the Medical Council of India in consultation with
experts and the Indian Society for Critical Medical Care.
(As to (8) above, for the purposes of ‘informed consent’, one may also
refer to a very good article by Prof. B.S. Venugopal, Vice-Principal, V.B.
College  of  Law, Udipi,  Karnataka  in  (2004)  Journal  of  Indian  Law
Institute, p 393).
297

(1) Advances  in  science  and  technology  and  concepts  of  brain-stem
death:
Science and technology developments in the last century have altered
concepts of life and death.  Today, a person who is in a persistent vegetative
state, whose sensory systems are dead can be kept alive by ventilators and
artificial  nutrition  for  years.   Heart  may  be  stopped  during  open-heart
surgery but the patient can be kept alive artificially.  In scientific parlance,
the body is treated as dead only if the ‘brain-stem’ becomes dead.  Once
brain stem is dead, the brain cells cannot be regenerated and it is at that
stage a person is treated as dead.
The  Indian  statute,  ‘Transplantation  of  Human  Organs  Act,  1994
defines ‘brain stem death’ in sec 2(d) as follows:
“2(d) ‘brain stem death’ means the stage at which all functions of the
brain-stem  have  permanently  and  irreversibly  ceased  and  is  so
certified under subsection (b) of section 3.”
This aspect of ‘brain stem death’ was first mentioned by Thomas J, in
the context of withdrawal of artificial respiration and nutrition in Auckland
Area  Health  Board vs.  Attorney  General:  1993(1)  NZLR  235  and  his
judgment received praise from the House of Lords in  Airedale NHS vs.
Bland: 1993(1) All ER 821 (HL).
The  House  of  Lords  stated  in  Airedale that  a  patient  may  be
unconscious, unable to see or hear or speak or have any sensory capacity but
as long as the brain-stem, which controls the reflective functions of the body
298

is able to make the heartbeat and allow breathing to go on and digestion to
take place, the person is not considered to be clinically dead.  In the eyes of
the medical world and of the law, a person is not clinically dead as long as
the brain-stem retains its functions.  A person may be alive, yet it may be a
case of a ‘living death’ or ‘ventilated corpse’.
As a result of developments in modern medicine and technology, a
person who is unconscious and is on the verge of death but whose brain-
stem has not become dead, but who is close to death, can be kept alive by
artificial  respiration  and  nutrition.   Ventilators  are  used  for  providing
artificial respiration and food can be sent into the body through the mouth,
nose or other procedures and the body can be kept alive.  Doctors no longer
associate death exclusively with breathing and heartbeat and it has come to
be accepted that death occurs when the brain and in particular the brain stem
has been  destroyed (See Prof. Ian Kennedy’s paper ‘Switching  off  Life
Support Medicine: The Legal Implications’ (Reprinted in ‘Treat Me Right’,
Essay in Medical Law and Ethics (1988)(pp 351-392).  
In USA, in McKay vs. Bugstedt: (1990) 801 P. ed. 617 (Nev Sup. Ct)
Kenneth, aged 31 years, who was suffering from tetraplegia from the age of
10 wanted to be released from being artificially kept alive by life sustaining
device of respirator.  Justice Steffen said (at p 5):
“One  of  the  verities  of  human  experience  is  that  all  life  will
eventually end in death.   As the seasons  of life  progress through
spring, summer and fall, to the winter of our years, the expression
unknown to youth is often heard evincing the wish to one might pass
299

away in the midst of a peaceful sleep.  It would appear, however, that
as the scientific community continues to increase human longevity
and promote ‘the greying of America”, prospects for slipping away
during peaceful slumber are decreasing.  And for significant number
of  citizens,  like  Kenneth,  misfortune  may rob  life of much  of its
quality long before the onset of winter.”
(quoted in  Ms B vs.  An NHS Hospital Trust: 2002 EWHC 429 by
Dame Butler-Sloss, P of Family Court)
The Supreme Court of Arizona in Rasmussen vs. Fleming (1987) 154
Ariz 207 stated in a beautiful passage as follows:
“Not long ago, the realms of life and death were delineated by a
bright  line.   Now  this  line  is  blurred  by  wondrous  advances  in
medical technology – advances that until recent years were only ideas
conceivable by such science fiction visionaries as Jules Verne and
H.G.  Wells.   Medical  technology  has  entered  a  twilight  zone  of
suspended  animation  where  death  commences  while  life,  in  some
form, continues.   Some patients,  however,  want  no  part  of a  life
sustained only by medical technology.  Instead, they prefer a plan of
medical treatment that allows nature to take its course and permits
them to die in dignity.”
(quoted by Justice O’Flaherty of the Ireland Supreme Court in Ward
of Court, Re a : (1995) ILRM 401)
In the light of these developments, legal, moral and ethical issues
have arisen as to whether a person who is under ventilator and artificial
nutrition  should  be  kept  alive  for  all  time  to  come  till  the  brain-stem
300

collapses or whether, in circumstances where an informed body of medical
opinion  states  that  there  are  no  chances  of  the  patient’s  recovery,  the
artificial support systems can be stopped.  If that is done, can the doctors be
held guilty of murder or abetment of suicide?  These questions have been
raised and decided in several countries and broad principles have been laid
down.  The case law in this behalf has been set out in Chapters II to V.  In
this  chapter,  we  propose  to  summarise  the  principles  under  various
headings.
(2) Euthanasia  and  Assisted  Suicide  are  and  continue  to  be  criminal
offences in India but not withdrawal of life support systems, under
certain circumstances.:
This aspect has been referred to in some measure in the Introductory
Chapter (Chapter I).  We propose to go into some more detail.
(A) ‘Euthanasia’ is defined generally as an act of killing somebody
painlessly, especially for relieving the suffering of a person from incurable
illness.  This is also called ‘mercy killing’.  The acts constituting Euthanasia
may be attributed to any person, including doctors.  Euthanasia is an offence
in almost all countries.  We shall here once again repeat what we stated in
Chapter I.
‘Euthanasia’  which  is  illegal  in  India  and  in  several  countries,  is
divided into four categories.  (1) passive voluntary euthanasia; (2) Active
voluntary  Euthanasia,  (3)  passive  involuntary  euthanasia;  (4)  active
involuntary euthanasia and (5) Active non-voluntary euthanasia.  The word
‘voluntary’ denotes a voluntary action of the patient himself.  The word
301

‘active’ means the positive act of another person.  The word ‘passive’ means
an  omission of another person which results in a patient’s death.
We shall refer in some detail about these five categories of Euthanasia..
(1) Passive  Voluntary  Euthanasia  :   Here  the  medical  treatment  is
withdrawn or withheld from a patient, at the patient’s request, in
order to end the patient’s life.  The word ‘passive’ denotes that
there will be ‘omission’ by another person to take measures to
prolong  a  patient’s  life.   ‘Voluntary’ means  it  is  the  patient’s
express wish based on his informed consent, to refuse life prolong
treatment.
(2) Active Voluntary Euthanasia  : Here, it is ‘active’ in the sense that
another person takes action.  It may be the patient’s desire for a
lethal  injection  be  given  to  him  by  another  person  and  that
decision is a conscious and rational decision.  It is not a case of
omission to get the treatment but a positive act.  It is ‘voluntary’
because it is done with the patient’s express and informed consent.
(3) Passive involuntary Euthanasia  : It is  a situation  where medical
treatment is withdrawn or withheld or is refused by another person
in order to end the life of the patient but it is not voluntary as in
the categories (1) and (2) above.  It is ‘involuntary’ as it is done
not at the instance of the patient but at the instance of the doctor or
others.  It is cessation of life-prolonging treatment to a conscious
and rational person but not against his will.  (This is based on
302

intention of the said third party and is different from ‘withdrawal
of life support’, where there is no such intention to kill).
(4) Active involuntary Euthanasia  :  Here there is a positive or active
medical intervention to end the patient’s life by a doctor or other
persons.  It is  not at the patient’s request.   Lethal injection  is
administered  to a conscious  and  rational  patient.  This  is  pure
‘Euthanasia’ in the absolute sense.
(5) Active  Non-voluntary  Euthanasia  :   Euthanasia  performed  on  a
person who is incompetent and therefore not capable of giving
consent.
(B)     ‘Assisted  Suicide’ is  different  from Euthanasia.   It is  basically
‘suicide’ because it is an act of the patient himself who puts an end to his
life, while Euthanasia is always the act or omission of a third party.  The
patient here, however, seeks the assistance of a doctor to suggest and give
him drugs which he can administer to himself in order to commit suicide.  In
a way, it may amount to ‘abetment’ of suicide.  In ‘assisted suicide’ the
doctor actively assists the patient and gives him the medicines which enable
the patient to use it to commit suicide.  The patient wants to commit suicide
because he is unable to bear the pain and suffering.
In  Euthanasia,  in  particular,  in  active  involuntary  euthanasia,  the
doctor injects the patient with a lethal dosage of medicine but in assisted
suicide, the doctor prescribes the lethal dose to the patient and the patient
takes it or administers it to himself.  In both, the ‘intention’ element is
important.
303

Passive Involuntary Euthanasia may appear to be close to ‘withdrawal
of life support system’ but, as pointed by Sopinke J in Rodriguez vs. British
Columbia  Attorney General 1993(3)  SCR  519,  the  difference  is  one  of
intention.  In the former, the person (who may also be a doctor) removes the
life support system of a patient, without the latter’s consent, but with an
intention to kill him.  But in the case of  ‘withdrawal of life support system’
by a doctor in respect of an incompetent person, the withdrawal is made as
being in the best interests of the patient, as accepted by a body of medical
experts, and not with an intention to kill the patient.  Hence it is not ‘Passive
Involuntary Euthanasia’, and not an offence.
In India, Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide are and will continue to be
unlawful.
Euthanasia however permitted in a few countries:
Only one or two States across the world have legalized Euthanasia or
Assisted  Suicide.   Netherlands  became  the  first  country  to  legalise
Euthanasia  on  April  10,  2001.   Active  Euthanasia  and  assisted  suicide
became part of Dutch medical procedures, though controlled by regulations
and limitations.  The law there gives importance to individual autonomy and
freedom  of  choice  when  faced  with  the  prospect  of  a  life  marked  by
suffering or deprived of hope.  The legislature in those countries allows
patients  experiencing  unbearable  suffering  to  request  euthanasia,  and
doctors who carry out such mercy killing are to be free from threats of
prosecution, provided they have followed the strict procedure.  Request to
die must be voluntary and after full consideration, and doctor and patient
304

must  be  convinced  that  there  is  no  other  solution.   A  second  medical
opinion must be obtained and life must be ended in a medically appropriate
way.
Belgium soon  followed  Netherlands  by enacting  a law w.e.f. 23rd
September,  2002,  permitting  Euthanasia.   While  the  Criminal  Code
remained the same, euthanasia is permitted subject to prescribed conditions.
Euthanasia is described under the new law as ‘an act on purpose, performed
by a third person, in order to end the life of a person who has requested for
this act’.  (i.e. it is voluntary active euthanasia).  Under the law, only a
doctor is permitted to perform euthanasia.  Euthanasia is permitted when:
(i) the patient is an adult or an emancipated minor, capable and
conscious at the time of his/her request;
(ii)the  request  is  made  voluntarily,  is  well  thought  out  and
reiterated, and is not the result of outside pressure;
(iii)the patient is in a hopeless medical condition and he complains
of  constant  and  unbearable  physical  or  mental  pain  which
cannot be relieved, and
(iv)he or she has complied with the conditions prescribed by the
new law.
There is a long list of obligations of the doctor in regard to what the parties
should be informed, and it is stated that patient’s will must be free, the
doctor must be sure about the suffering, a second independent doctor must
be consulted, there must be discussion with family members and the doctor
must even consult a psychiatrist.  The physician has to declare his decision
305

before a federal commission composed of eight physicians, four jurists, and
four others.
The  Northern  Territory  in  Australia  made  a  law  for  voluntary
euthanasia in 1996 but the same became unenforceable after the Federal
Parliament passed the Rights of Terminally Ill Act, 1998 on 27th March,
1998.
Assisted suicide permitted in Oregon:
Oregon in USA passed the Death With Dignity Act, 1994 by which it
legalized ‘assisted suicide’.  A patient could request for a prescription from
an attending physician that the patient has an incurable and irreversible
disease  and  that  he  may  die  in  six  months,  within  reasonable  medical
judgment.  The request must be voluntary.  The patients could be referred to
counseling also.  A second consulting physician must examine and confirm
the attending physician’s conclusions.  The doctors will then prescribe a
lethal dose of medicine.  Assisted Suicide is also legalized in Netherlands,
as stated earlier.
Barring then a few countries or States, there is clear jurisprudence
that euthanasia or assisted suicide is not permissible in almost all countries.
In some countries like UK, attempt to suicide has been decriminalized
but abetment of suicide remains an offence.  In India, attempt to suicide and
abetment of suicide are both offences under ss 309 and 306 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 respectively
(C) Withdrawal of Life support systems is not an offence under certain
circumstances
306

As  stated  in  Chapter  1,  and  in  this  Chapter,  ‘withdrawal  of  life
support systems’ is different for ‘Euthanasia’ or ‘Assisted Suicide’, we have
already stated that with advances in science and technology, it is possible to
prolong life by use of ventilator and artificial  nutrition.  In the case of
patients with serious diseases or in last stages of a disease, where a body of
medical experts is of opinion that the prolongation of life serves no purpose
and there are no chances of recovery, the doctors have no duty in law to
merely prolong life.  This principle is now accepted in all countries as part
of  the  common  law.   If,  in  such  cases,  the  treatment  is  withheld  or
withdrawn, and the patient is left to nature or the body is left to nature, there
is no criminal or civil liability in as much as there is no ‘duty’ in common
law, to keep a person alive if informed medical opinion is that there are
absolutely no chances of survival.
Withholding or withdrawing life support is today permitted in most
countries, in certain circumstances, on the ground that it is lawful for the
doctors or hospitals to do so.  Courts in several countries grant declarations
in individual cases that such withholding  or withdrawal is lawful.  The
various principles governing withdrawal or withholding life support systems
will be discussed under the various headings herein below.
Our Supreme Court in  Gian Kaur’s case 1996 (2) SCC 648 clearly
held that euthanasia and assisted suicide are not lawful in our country.  The
court, however, referred to the principles laid down by the House of Lords
in  Airedale 1993(1) All ER 821 (HL) where the House of Lords accepted
that withdrawal of life supporting systems on the basis of informed medical
opinion, would be lawful because such withdrawal would only allow the
patient who is beyond recovery to die a normal death, where there is no
307

longer any duty to prolong life.  Thus, it is accepted that this is different
from  euthanasia  and  assisted  suicide.   It  is  not  necessary  to  expressly
provide in the proposed Bill that Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide are not
lawful because that is the law, as settled by the Supreme Court in  Gian
Kaur.
But, it is necessary to make a provision that withholding life support
system in terminally ill patients will be treated as ‘lawful’.
3) Adult  patients’  right  of  self  determination  and  right  to  refuse
treatment is binding on doctors if based on informed consent
(a) Competent patients’ informed decision to have life support system,
withheld or withdrawn when he becomes terminally ill, is binding on
doctors in certain circumstances:
It is, however, settled that if a competent adult patient wants life
support systems not to be withheld or withdrawn, that decision is binding on
the doctors.  However, if a patient suggests a particular form of medical
treatment be administered to him which the doctors think is not appropriate,
then the doctors, if they do not follow the directive of the patient, they are
not  guilty  of  any  offence  or  wrong.   If  a competent  patient  wants  life
support system to be withheld or withdrawn, it is binding on the doctors
unless they come to the conclusion that the patient’s decision is not an
‘informed decision’ (As to what is an ‘informed decision’ we shall explain
later).  In such cases, the doctor has to take a decision in the ‘best interests’
of the patient.
(b) Incompetent  patients:  doctors  to  take  decision  for  withholding  or
withdrawing treatment if it is in best interests of patient:
308

If the patient is incompetent and it is a fit case where, in the best
interests of the patient, the life support system should be discontinued, if it
is  not  discontinued,  it  may  amount  to  battery.   It  was  so  observed  in
Airedale.
It is a well settled principle at common law that a patient has a right
to accept medical treatament or refuse it.  This is called the principle of self-
determination.
In Airedale: 1993(1) All ER 821 (HL), Lord Goff of Chiveley stated
that “it is established that the principle of self determination requires respect
must be given to the wishes of the patient, so that if any adult patient of
sound mind refuses, however unreasonably, to consent to treatment or care
by which his life would or might be prolonged,” it shall be obeyed.  The
doctors “must give effect to his wishes even though they do not consider it
to be in the best interests to do so.”  This principle was first stated by Justice
Cordozo in Schloendorff vs. Society of New York Hospital: (1914) 211 NY
125.  It has since been accepted in almost all countries.
In Airedale: 1993(1) All ER 821 (HL),  Lord Goff of Chiveley stated
that “it is established that the principle of self determination requires respect
must be given to the wishes of the patient, so that if any adult patient of
sound mind refuses, however unreasonably, to consent to treatment or care
by which his life would or might be prolonged.”  The doctors “must give
effect to his wishes even though they do not consider it to be in the best
interests to do so.”  This principle was first stated by Justice Cordozo in
Schloendorff vs. Society of New York Hospital: (1914) 211 NY 125.  it has
since been accepted in almost all countries.
309

Lord  Goff  further  stated  that  “there  is  nevertheless  no  absolute
obligation upon a doctor who has the patient in his care to prolong his life,
regardless of circumstances.  Indeed, it would be most startling, and could
lead to the most adverse and cruel effect upon patient, if any such absolute
rule were held to exist.  It is scarcely consistent with primacy given to the
principle of self-determination in those cases in which the patient of sound
mind has declined to give his consent.”
Lord President (Lord Hope) of the Court of Sessions Inner House, in
Law Hospital  NHS Trust vs.  Lord  Advocate (Scotland):  1996 SLT 848
stated that where the patient was of full age and capable of understanding
and was able to consent to the procedures if medical advice stated that the
treatment was for his or her benefit, a patient could refuse treatment on the
basis of the right to self-determination.
In Re T (Adult: refusal of medical treatment): 1992(4) All ER 649,
the Court held that ‘every adult had the right and capacity to decide whether
he or she would accept medical treatment even at the risk of permanent
injury to health or premature death, and regardless of whether the reasons
for refusal were rational or irrational, or were unknown or non-existent.
But, where the decision to refuse was taken by a person who was not in a
proper state of mind or did so under the influence of another person, then it
may not bind the doctor.  In Re T, the patient’s decision not to receive blood
transfusion after a caesarian operation was based more upon the influence of
her mother who belonged to the sect called Jehovah’s witnesses and was
held not binding on the doctors.
In Canada, in Mallette vs. Shulman (1990) 72 OR (2d) p 417 (Ontario
Court of Appeal) Robins JA stated (at p 432):
310

“The  issue here is the  freedom of the patient  as  an individual  to
exercise her right to refuse treatment and accept the consequences of
her own decision.  Competent adults, as I have sought to demonstrate,
are generally at liberty to refuse medical treatment even at the risk of
death.  The right to determine what shall be done with one’s body is a
fundamental right in our society.  The concepts inherent in this right
are the bedrock upon which the principles of self-determination and
individual  autonomy are  based.   Free  individual  choice  in  matter
affecting  this  right  should, in  my opinion,  be accorded  very high
priority.”
The C-Test and ‘competency’
In Re C (adult: refusal of medical treatment) 1994 (1) All ER 819, the
patient was suffering from schizophrenia, developed gangrene and doctors
opined that his leg below knee be amputated.  The patient refused.  The
hospital moved the Court for directions.
Thorpe J referred  to what  is  now known  as the  C-Test-, that  the
patient must have the ‘competency i.e. the capacity to understand and decide
the medical opinion.  But where his faculties are reduced on account of his
chronic  illness  and he  had not  sufficiently understood  his  state  and  the
medical opinion, his refusal is not binding and the doctors could approach
the court for directions.  The C-test deals with ‘competency’ and requires
that the ‘patient comprehended and retained information as to the proposed
treatment, had believed it and had weighed it in the balance when making a
choice’.
311

On facts, it was however held, that the patient’s faculties were not so
impaired  by  schizophrenia  and  that  the  presumption  in  favour  of  self-
determination  was  not  displaced.   Reference  was  made  to  Re  T (adult:
refusal of medical treatment) 1992 (4) All ER 649 and to Airedale: 1993 (1)
All ER 821 (HL).
In Re MB (Medical Treatment): 1997 (2) FLR 424, Dame Butler-
Sloss, was dealing with a case where a lady refused caesarian operation
while doctors wanted to perform it and save the foetus.  The patient had
‘needle phobia’.   Later the patient agreed but refused anaesthesia at 9 PM
on 18.2.97.  The local health authority applied to the Court at 9.25 PM.
Hollis J granted permission.   The decision was confirmed in Appeal.
In the Court of Appeal, Butler-Sloss LJ stated that a patient’s consent
is necessary for invasive medical treatment and that a mentally competent
person was entitled to refuse medical treatment, whether for good or rational
or  even  for  irrational  reasons  or  for no  reasons  at  all,  even  where  that
decision might lead to his death.  The only situation in which it is lawful for
the doctors to intervene was where ‘it is believed that the adult patient
lacked the capacity to decide  and the treatment was in the patient’s best
interests.  The court did not have to take into account the interests of the
unborn child  at risk  from refusal of a competent mother to consent for
medical intervention.  Of course, in situations of grave urgency, decision
can be taken by Court as in Re F (Mental Patient: Sterlisation) 1990 (2) AC
1.
312

The Court of Appeal held that the lady had a needle phobia and was
in panic and not capable of taking a decision and hence was to be treated as
‘temporarily incompetent’.   Caesarian operation allowed by Hollis J was
affirmed.  The operation was in best of medical interests of the patient.  The
Court of Appeal approved the principles laid down by Lord Donaldson in
Re T (An Adult) (Refusal of Medical Treatment): 1992 (4) All ER 649; Re
T (An Adult: Consent to Medical Treatment): 1992 (2) FCR 458 (case of
pregnant lady involved in car accident who required blood transfusion) and
by Justice Thorpe in Re C (Refusal of Medical Treatment): 1994 (1) All ER
819.
Butler-Sloss  LJ  considered  these  cases  again  in  Tameside  and
Glossap Acute Services Trust v. CH: 1996 (1) FLR 762.   Johnson J referred
to these principles in Norform and Norwich Health Care (NHS) Trust v. W:
1996 (2) FLR 613 – namely the C-Test which required a competent adult
and what the doctors felt was in best interests.
In  Re  L, Kinkwood  J  (unreported  Judgment  dated  5th Dec.  1996)
referred to in  Re  MB: 1997(2) FLR 426 held that the patient had needle
phobia and was not competent to refuse.
In Ms B v. An NHS Hospital Trust: 2002 EWHC 429, Dame Butler-
Sloss (P) of Family Court stated that the principle of ‘autonomy’ permitted
patients  to  refuse  treatment.   She  referred  to  a  large  number  of  cases
including  Cruzan v.  Director (1990) (110 S.Ct. 2841) decided in the US
Supreme Court when it said:
313

“No right is held more sacred, or is more carefully guarded … than
the right of every individual to the possession and control of his own
person, free from all restraint or interference of others, unless by clear
and unquestionable authority of law.”
The patient was wavering but the Court held on facts, that the patient was
competent.  Ten guidelines were laid down to judge competence.   They are
as follows:
“(i)There is a presumption that a patient has the mental capacity to
make decisions whether to consent to or refuse medical or surgical
treatment offered to him/her.
(ii)If mental capacity is not in issue and the patient, having been
given the relevant information and offered the available options,
chose to refuse the treatment, that decision has to be respected by
the doctors.  Considerations that the best interests of the patient
would indicate that the decision should be to consent to treatment
are irrelevant.
(iii)If there is concern or doubt about the mental capacity of the
patient,  that  doubt  should  be resolved  as  soon  as  possible,  by
doctors  within  the  hospital  or  NHS  Trust  or  by  other  normal
medical procedures.
(iv)In  the  meantime,  while  the  question  of  capacity  is  being
resolved, the patient must, of course, be cared for in accordance
with the judgment of the doctors as to the patient’s best interests.
314

(v)If  there  are  difficulties  in  deciding  whether  the  patient  has
sufficient  mental  capacity,  particularly  if  the  refusal  may have
grave consequences for the patient, it is most important that those
considering the issue should not confuse the question of mental
capacity  with  the  nature  of  the  decision  made  by  the  patient,
however grave the consequences.  The view of the patient may
reflect a difference in values rather than an absence of competence
and the assessment of capacity should be approached with this
firmly in  mind.    The  doctors  must  not  allow  their  emotional
reaction to or strong disagreement with the decision of the patient
to cloud their judgment in answering the primary question whether
the patient has the mental capacity to make the decision.
(vi)In  the  rare  case  where  disagreement  still  exists  about
competence, it is of the utmost importance that the patient is fully
informed of the steps being taken and made a part of the process.
If the option of enlisting independent outside expertise is being
considered, the doctor should discuss this with the patient so that
any referral to a doctor outside the hospital would be, if possible,
on a joint basis with the aim of helping both sides to resolve the
disagreement.    It may be crucial to  the prospects  of a good
outcome that the patient is involved before the referral is made and
feels equally engaged in the process.
(vii)If the hospital is faced with a dilemma which the doctors do
not know how to resolve, it must be recognized and further steps
taken as a matter of priority.   Those in charge must not allow a
situation of deadlock or drift to occur.
315

(viii)If there is no disagreement about competence but the doctors
are for any reason unable to carry out the wishes of the patient,
their duty is to find other doctors who will do so.
(ix)If all appropriate steps  to seek independent  assistance from
medical experts outside the hospital have failed, the NHS Hospital
Trust should not hesitate to make an application to the High Court
or seek the advice of the Official Solicitor.
(x)The treating clinicians and the hospital should always have in
mind that a seriously physically disabled patient who is mentally
competent has the same right to personal autonomy and to make
decisions as any other person with mental capacity.
In GMC v. Burke: (2005) EWCA (Civ) 1003 (CA), Lord Phillips of
Worth Matravers stated that autonomy and self determination ‘do not entitle
the patient to insist on receiving a particular medical treatment regardless of
nature of the treatment.   Insofar as a doctor has a legal objection to provide
treatment,  this  cannot  be  founded  simply  upon  the fact  that  the  patient
demands it.  The source of duty is elsewhere’ (i.e. best interest).
Summarising the position, while  patient’s right to refuse or consent
to medical treatment is fundamental and is binding on the doctors however
rational or irrational it may be, but the said principle applies only where the
patient is competent i.e. able to balance the advantages and disadvantages
and mentally in a position to take a decision and is able to take an ‘informed
decision’.  If he is not competent or not mentally in a position to take an
informed decision, his refusal or consent is not binding on the doctors and if
316

they take a decision which is in the best interests of the patient, it is lawful.
A patient  cannot  also  compel  a doctor  to  give  him a particular  line  of
treatment for it is for the doctors what treatment is necessary in the best
interests  of the patient.   These aspects  are proposed  to be brought into
proposed Bill.
(4) Giving  invasive  medical  treatment  contrary  to  a  patient’s  will
amounts to battery or in some cases, may amount to murder:
This issue is our off-shoot of the issue discussed under (3) above.
Under (3), we have referred to the right of self-determination of a patient
who  is  competent  and  who  is  in  a  mental  frame  to  take  an  informed
decision.  We have also referred to the exceptional cases where the patient’s
view will not be binding on the doctors, namely, where the patient is not
competent after weighing and balancing the advantages and disadvantages
of the treatment or where even if competent, his decision is not an informed
decision.   In that event, the doctors can take a decision keeping in mind
what is in the patient’s best interests.
Under  the  present  heading,  we  are  considering  the  cases  of  a
competent adult who is fit mentally to take an informed decision to refuse
medical treatment and as to what will be the consequences if the doctors
give invasive treatment against the will of the patient.
It is  now well-settled  that giving  invasive  medical  treatment  to  a
patient against his will, will amount to battery and in some cases, even to
317

murder – if it does not fall within the exception referred to under (3).  It is
so held in Airedale.   
In English law, actual infliction of bodily injury is called ‘battery’.
Under sec. 319 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, whoever ‘causes bodily
pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt’.
In  Airedale:  1993  (1)  All  ER  821  (HL),  Lord  Keith  of  Kinkel
observed that the giving of medical treatment will be unlawful both under
the law or torts and criminal law of battery, where the patient has refused
consent or where patient’s consent has not been obtained.   He referred to In
re F (Mental Patient: Sterlisation): 1990 (2) AC 1.   In the same case, Lord
Browne-Wilkinson stated that any treatment given by a doctor which is
invasive (i.e. involves any interference with the physical integrity of the
patient)  is  unlawful  unless  done  with  the  consent  of  the  patient.    It
constitutes the crime of battery and the tort of trespass to the person.
Thus the principal is clear enough that invasive treatment amounts to
battery if given against a patient’s will.  In some cases, it may even amount
to murder.  As the principle is well settled, no provision is necessary in the
proposed Bill in this behalf.
(5) Advance Directives (Living Wills); and Powers of Attorney in favour
of surrogates to be void in India, as a mater of public policy:
In several countries, it is permissible for a competent adult to execute
an Advance  Directive  (Living  Will)  as  to  whether  he  or she  should  or
318

should not be given medical treatment when he or she is terminally ill and
not in a position to take a medical decision.  
In  US,  there  is  also  a  further  statutorily  permitted  procedure  for
executing a Medical Power Of Attorney in favour of a close relative or
friend (surrogate) to take a medical decision in such situations.   These are
called  decisions  of  surrogates.    US  has  built  up  a  large  case  law  on
surrogates also apart from Advance Directives (Living Wills) because both
these systems are permitted in that country.  Needless to say, that both have
created a number of complex problems in practice.
But in UK, the House of Lords in Airedale 1993(1) All ER 821 (HL)
has rejected the Medical Power Of Attorney procedure and said it is not
recognized in UK.  In Ireland also O’Haherty did not approve powers of
attorney in Ward of Court, Re a: (1995) 1 LRM 401, in the particular case.
In U.K., advance directives are permissible and may or may not be
binding (as explained below), but  procedure by way of medical powers of
attorney delegating authority to surrogates to take medical decisions is not
accepted.
(A) Advance Directive (create complex problems):
So far as Advance Directives (Living Wills) are concerned, a patient
might give or refuse his consent to invasive medical treatment at or before
the time immediately before such treatment or he could, even much earlier,
decide in writing that such and such treatment should or should not be
319

given.  It can also be oral.   We are not dealing with such directions given at
the time of giving or omitting to give invasive treatment.  We are here
dealing with directives given at a distant point of time which are called
‘Advance Directives’.  
We  shall  refer  to  complicated  factual  issues  which  Advance
Directives have brought in U.K.
(1) In Airedale Lord Goff stated that “it has been held that a patient of
sound mind may, if properly informed, require that life support should be
discontinued (Nancy B v. Hotel-Dieu de Quebec: (1992) 86 DLR (4th) 385).
Moreover, the same principle applies  when the patient’s refusal to give
consent has been expressed  at an earlier date long before he had become
unconscious or he became incapable of communicating it.   In such cases, it
is necessary to take notice of such prior directives and are applicable in the
circumstances which have subsequently occurred.  (Re T (Adult): Refusal of
Treatment) 1992 (3) WLR 782 = 1992 (4) All ER 649.  If a patient had
decided not to have medical treatment, the patient is not guilty of suicide
and the doctors are not guilty of murder or abetment of suicide. 
(2) In  Re T above mentioned, which was referred to in  Airedale, the
patient’s mother was a Jehovah’s witness and the refusal of the patient for
treatment  was  not  accepted  by the  trial  Judge  and  the  Appellate  Court
because it was not an informed decision and had been influenced by her
mother.
320

In that  case,  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  sometimes  it  will  be
advantageous to the doctors to consult the patient’s close relatives so that
they could give information as to whether the patient was conscious when
the advance directive was given.
 
(3) In  Re  C:  1994  (1)  All  ER  819,  it  was  held  that  the  previously
expressed view of a patient will be an important component in the decision
of the doctors and the Court.
(4) HE vs. Hospital NHS and Anr: 2003 EWHC 1017 is an important
decision by Munby J on Advance Directives and their continued validity.
We get the hint from Airedale that the doctors or Court must see if an earlier
directive continues to be applicable or be valid in the circumstances that
might occur several years later.
In HE, the patient was born in a Muslim family, her parents separated,
her  mother  became a  Jehovah’s  witness  (who  did  not  agree  for  blood-
transfusion).   The patient suffered a heart problem, executed an Advance
Medical Directive on 13.2.2001, witnessed by two Church Ministers.   On
20.11.2003, she became ill and surgery was felt necessary by the doctors but
blood-transfusion  was  a  problem  because  of  the  2  year  old  Advance
Directive.  She was sedated on 20.4.2003 and while her mother and brother
opposed  blood  transfusion,  her  father,  who  continued  to  be  a  Muslim
applied to the Court on 2.5.2003 for permission to give blood transfusion.
Munby J permitted blood transfusion on 2.5.2003 when he heard the case
and gave judgment on 7.5.2003 notwithstanding the Advance Directive. 
321

Munby J initially referred to the efficacy of the Advance Directive as
follows: 
(1) A competent adult patient has an absolute right to refuse consent to
any medical treatment or invasive procedure, whether the reasons are
rational, irrational, unknown or non-existent, and even if the result of
refusal  is  the  certainty  of  death.   He  agreed  with  Prof.  Andrew
Grubb’s observation (see 2002 Med L Rev 201 at 203) that: ‘English
law could not be clearer.  A competent adult patient once properly
informed,  has  the  unassailable  right  to  refuse  any  or  all  medical
treatment or care’.
(2) Consistently with this, a competent adult patient’s anticipatory refusal
of consent (a so-called  advance-directive or a  living-will) remains
binding  and  effective  notwithstanding  that  the  patient  has
subsequently become and remained incompetent.
(iii)An adult is presumed to have capacity, so the burden of proof is on
those  who  seek  to  rebut  the  presumption  and  who  assert  a  lack  of
capacity.”
As to whether an Advance Directive given earlier remains applicable
and valid later, the matter is one of proof.  He laid down the principles
applicable to the burden of proof and to the standard of proof, as follows:
(i) While there is a presumption in favour of capacity and the
burden to prove incapacity is on those who dispute capacity,
there is another burden where there is an advance directive.
This burden is on those who rely on the advance directive to
322

prove its existence, its continuing validity and applicability.
If there is doubt, that doubt falls to be resolved in favour of
preservation of life.
(ii) As to standard of proof of the advance directive, it must be
clear and convincing, based on balance of probabilities as in
civil cases.  The more extreme the gravity of the matter in
issue, the stronger and more cogent the evidence must be.
When  life  is  at  stake  evidence  must  be  scrutinized  with
special care.  (In re H. (Minors)(Sexual Abuse: Standard of
Proof) 1996 AC 563 and dictum of Ungoed – Thomas J in
Re Dellow’s Will Trusts: 1964 (1) WLR 451 (455).  The
continuing  validity  and  applicability  of  the  advance
directive  must  be  established  by  clear  convincing  and
inherently reliable evidence.
(iii) Depending upon the lapse of time and the known changes in
the patient’s circumstances during that time, the validity of
the advance directive  has to be examined.  See  In re T:
(Adult:  Refusal  of  Treatment)  1993  Fam  95,  Lord
Donaldson MR (p 103) where he referred to two ‘ys’ for the
validity of an advance directive or anticipatory choice.  
Munby J stated that there is: 
“… a conflict between two interests, that of the patient and that of the
society in which he lives.  The patient’s interest consists of his right
to self-determination – his right to live his own life, how he wishes,
even  if it  will  damage his  health  or lead  to  his  premature  death.
Society’s interest is in upholding the concept that all human life is
323

sacred and that it should be preserved if at all possible.  It is well-
established  that  in  the  ultimate,  the  right  of  the  individual  is
paramount.  But this merely shifts the problem where the conflict
occurs and calls for a very careful examination of whether, and if so
the way in which, the individual is exercising that right.  In case of
doubt, that doubt falls to be resolved in favour of the preservation of
life for if the individual is to override the public interest, he must do
so in clear terms”.
Munby J referred to Lord Donaldson’s statement (at p 114) that an ‘advance
directive’ ‘may have been based upon an assumption’, which is falsified, in
which case, it is necessary to examine the assumption.    Lord Donaldson
said:
“If… the assumption upon which it is based is falsified, the refusal
ceases to be effective.  The doctors are then faced with a situation in
which the patient has made no decision and he by then being unable
to decide for himself, they have both the right and the duty to treat
him in accordance with what in the exercise of their clinical judgment
they consider to be in his best interests.”
Munby J referred to Francis & Johnston, ‘Medical treatment: Decisions and
the Law’ (Ed 2001) (para 1.29) that a patient’s consent to treatment will not
survive a material change of circumstances.  In the same way,  Munby J
stated that, a patient’s anticipatory refusal to treatment will not survive a
material change of circumstances.  He quoted Lord Goff in Bland (at p 864)
where  it  is  stated  that  an  advance  directive  must  be  considered  with
‘especial care’.  “…. Especial care may be necessary to ensure that the prior
324

refusal  of  consent  is  still  properly  to  be  regarded  as  applicable  in  the
circumstances which have subsequently occurred.”
Munby J also referred to what Hughes J said in Re AK: 2001(1) FLR
129 (p 134):
“…  in the case of an adult patient of full capacity, his refusal to
consent to treatment or care must in law be observed.  It is clear that
in  an  emergency,  a  doctor  is  entitled  in  law  to  treat  by invasive
means, if necessary, a patient who, by reason of the emergency, is
unable  to  consent,  on  the  ground  that  the  consent  can,  in  those
circumstances, be assumed. It is, however, also clearly the law that
the doctors are not entitled so to act if it is known that the patient,
provided he was of sound mind and full capacity, has let it be known
that he does not consent and that such treatment is against his wishes.
To this extent an advance indication of the wishes of a patient of full
capacity and sound mind are effective. Care will of course have to be
taken  to  ensure  that  such  anticipatory  declarations  of wishes  still
represent the wishes of the patient.  Care must be taken to investigate
how long ago the expression of wishes was made.  Care must be
taken to investigate with what knowledge the expression of wishes
was made.  All the circumstances in which the expression of wishes
was given will, of course, have to be investigated.”
Thus, Advance Directive can also create complex legal and factual issues.
(5) In NHS Trust v. T: 2004 EWHC 1279, Charles J was dealing with a
lady who  had psychological  problems and  would  cut  herself  for blood-
325

letting.  She  therefore  required  blood  transfusion  but  she  executed  an
Advance Directive (attested by a lawyer) refusing blood transfusion ‘unless
when she is subject to compulsory treatment under the Mental Health Act,
1983’.   She gave reasons that blood given was evil and if blood given
mixes  with  hers,  the  entire  blood  becomes  evil.    She  stated  she  was
mentally competent while writing the Advance Directive.
When she was in a collapsing state on 8.4.2004, Pauffley J by her
order dated 9.4.2004, permitted blood transfusion using minimum force.
She recovered on 13.4.2004 and on 16th her lawyer raised objections to the
blood transfusion.
Charles J held that the lady lacked capacity when she executed the
Advance Directive.
(6) More recently in  GMC v.  Burke: (2005) EWCA (Civ) 1003 (CA),
Lord Phillips stated that to keep a PVS (permanent vegetative state) patient
alive  merely  because  of  his  advance  directive,  will  violate  the  Mental
Capacity  Act,  2005.   He  said  that  under  sec.  26  of  this  Act,  though
compliance with reference to advance directive is necessary, still sec. 4 does
no  more  than  require  this  (the  Advance  Directive)  to  be  taken  into
consideration when considering what is in the best interests of a patient.
(7) Obviously, the Act of 2005 has made a change in the law by stating
that in the case of patients lacking mental capacity, the Advance Directive is
only a matter to be taken into account – but not implicitly obeyed – while
considering the best interests of a patient.
326

From  the  above,  it  is  clear  that  even  ‘Advance  Directives’  have
created serious factual and legal issues in U.K.
Question  arises  whether  Advance  Directives  (Living  will)  should  be
allowed legal sanctity in our country?
It is true that there is an inherent right of self-determination under
which an Advance Directive can be given, as a matter of common law.  It
can be in writing or oral.  If  the patient becomes incompetent at a later
stage on account of illness, the doctors will be bound to go by the Advance
Directive unless such directive has become inapplicable or invalid due to
passage  of  time  or  change  in  circumstances,  advances  in  medicine  and
technology, etc.  Question is, if such a right has given rise to serious issues
of law and fact in U.K., whether Advance Directives should be allowed to
be valid in our country.
In our view, if an Advance Directive can also be  oral, it can create
serious problems of proof and may also lead to serious abuse.  
Coming to Advance Directives in writing, we have seen the legal
position.  It must be proved that the Advance Directive was based upon
informed consent of the patient, with knowledge of state of his or her illness
and of the medicines or medical technology available.  This again requires
oral evidence to be adduced.  Then again, due to change in circumstances or
on account of delay or developments in medicine/technology which have
improved and which give scope for living longer without pain or suffering,
327

the earlier Directive may have been rendered inapplicable  or invalid  on
account  of  latter  circumstances.   There  may  also  be  oral  evidence  of
withdrawal  of a written  or  oral  directive.   This  can  also  create  serious
problems of proof.
In our view, there is not only scope for contentious  and complex
issues of fact and law being raised in every case relating to oral or written
Advance Directives, but in a country where there is considerable illiteracy
and lack of knowledge of developments in medicine and technology, there
is  scope  for  Advance  Directives  being  based  on  wrong  assumptions  or
requiring proof that they were, as a fact, made or that they continue to be
applicable and valid or have not been withdrawn and there is large scope for
abuse and litigation.  A lot of evidence will be oral and may be conflicting.
Doctor’s consequential actions can give rise to any amount of litigation.
In our view, as a matter of public policy in India, Advance Directives
oral or written are controversial and can lead to mischief and should be
made legally ineffective, overriding the common law right.
(A) Medical Powers of Attorney:
Equally, it is in our view, not desirable to make a statute, execution of
“medical powers of attorney” enabling surrogates to take medical decisions
on behalf of the patient.   Power of Attorney can create too many medical
and legal issues and for the reasons for which they have been rejected even
in U.K., they are not suitable even for our country.  Even in US, they have
created lot of legal problems and a large amount of case law.  In regard to
328

medical powers of attorney, Lord Goff in  Airedale, 1993 (1) All ER 821
rejected the delegation of decision making to power of attorney agents (see
In re Quinian : (1976) 355 A. 2d 647 and  Superintendent of Belchertown
State School v. Saikewicz: 370 NE 2d 417.  He stated:
“…. I do not consider that any such test forms of English law in
relation to incompetent adults on whose behalf nobody has power to
consent to medical treatment.   Certainly in In re F: (1990) (2) HCI,
your Lordship’s House adopted a straightforward test of best interests
of the patient.”
We are, therefore, of the view that both Advance Directives and Medical
Powers of Attorney should not be valid in our country on ground of public
policy.  A provision is proposed in this behalf to make them void.
(6) State’s interest in protecting life and principle of sanctity of life are
not absolute: Indian Penal Code affirms this view.
It is the law in all countries that the State is interested in protecting
life and treats life as sacrosanct.   Right to life includes right to live with
dignity.  Our Supreme Court said this in several cases while interpreting the
meaning  of  the  words  ‘right  to  life’  in  Art.  21  of  the  Constitution.
However, in all countries life is protected and the Penal codes which are
enacted contain a long list of criminal offences which deal with injury to the
body of another person or killing of human beings.   The Law of Torts also
provides civil remedies for compensation for bodily injury or death.   It is
one of the fundamental duties of the State to take steps to preserve and
329

maintain the health and well-being of its citizens.  The medical profession
has an important role in taking care of the health of the people.   The
profession is regulated by professional bodies like Medical Councils.
As pointed out earlier, only in a few countries there are laws which
permit voluntary termination of life.   In Netherlands, there is a law made
w.e.f. April 10, 2001, where Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide have been
legalized; in Belgium where w.e.f. 23.9.2002, euthanasia has been legalized;
the  Northern  Territory  of  Australia  made  a  law  in  1996  for  making
Euthanasia valid but it became unenforceable after the Federal legislature
passed the Rights of Terminally Ill Act, 1998 w.e.f. 27.3.1998.  In USA,
Oregon alone passed the Death with Dignity Act, 1994 legalising ‘Assisted
Suicide’.  These are exceptions.
In our country, the State prohibits ‘suicide’ and ‘abetment of suicide’.
(In  some  countries  like  UK,  the  suicide  has  been  decriminalized  but
‘abetment of suicide’ remains an offence).
As far as ‘attempt to commit suicide’ is concerned, sec. 309 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 prohibits the same.  It states:
“Sec. 309: Whoever attempts  to commit suicide and does  any act
towards  the  commission  of  such  offence  shall  be  punished  with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with
fine, or with both.”
330

(We shall deal with the question whether refusal to have medical
treatment amounts to ‘attempt to suicide’, separately).   
 Likewise, the Penal Code in sec. 306 also states that ‘abetment of
suicide’ is an offence.   Sec. 306 states as follows:
“Sec  306:  If  any  person  commits  suicide,  whoever  abets  the
commission of such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.”
‘Abetment’ of any offence is defined in sec. 107.  (We shall refer to it
separately in detail when we deal with the question whether the withholding
or withdrawing medical treatment amounts of abetment of suicide).
The State makes ‘murder’ an offence under sec. 302 of the Penal
Code, 1860.  Sec. 299 defines ‘culpable homicide’.  Sec. 300 defines when
‘culpable  homicide’  amounts  to  ‘murder’.    Sec.  304  mentions  about
punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
Thus, the Indian Penal Code, 1860 upholds the sanctity of life in
several respects.
In  Ms  B v.  An  NHS  Hospital  Trust:  2002  EWHC  429,  Dame
Elizabeth  Butler-Sloss  (President  of  Family  Court)  was  dealing  with  a
serious  case  of a lady who  suffered  damage  to  the  spinal  column  who
executed  a  living  will  for  discontinuance  of  medical  treatment  if  her
331

condition  became  life-threatening.    The  learned  Judge  held  that  the
principle of sanctity of life was not absolute but that it is still the concern of
the State including the judiciary.    At the same time, no medical officer can
be  compelled  to  treat  a  patient  against  his  wishes,  even  if  death  was
imminent.   The principle of sanctity of life was explained by Lord Keith
and Lord Goff in Airedale.    
In Nancy B v. Hotel-Diem de Quebec (1992) 86 DLR (4th) 385 where
in a case before the Quebec Supreme Court, a 25 year old woman with
incurable neurological disorder refused ventilation, the Court accepted her
prayer to stop ventilation.
In Gian Kaur’s case: 1996 (2) SCC 648,  adverting to PVS patients,
the Supreme Court of India quoted with approval the observations of the
House  of  Lords  in  Airedale that  the principle  of sanctity of life  is  not
absolute.    Lord  Keith  stated  in  Airedale: “Given  that  existence  in  the
persistent  vegetative  state  is  not  a  benefit  to  the  patient,  it  remains  to
consider whether the principle of the sanctity of life, which is the concern of
the State, and the judiciary as one of the arms of the State, to maintain,
requires this House to hold that the judgment of the Court of Appeal was
incorrect.   In my opinion it does not.   The principle is not an absolute one.
It does not compel a medical practitioner on pain of criminal sanctions to
treat a patient, who will die if he does not, contrary to the express wishes of
the patient.  It does not authorize forcible feeding of prisoners on hunger
strike. It does not compel the temporary keeping alive of patients who are
terminally ill where to do so would merely prolong their suffering.  On the
other hand, it forbids the taking of active measures to cut short the life of a
332

terminally ill-patient.       In  my judgment,  it  does  no  violence  to  the
principle to hold that it is lawful to cease to give medical treatment and care
to a PVS patient who has been in that state for over three years, considering
that to do so involves invasive manipulation of the patient’s body to which
he has not consented and which confers no benefit upon him.
Lord Goff also stated that the ‘principle of sanctity of life must yield
to  the  principle  of  self-determination  and  for  present  purposes  more
important, the doctor’s duty to act in the best interests of his patient must
likewise be qualified.  He also stated that there is  no absolute obligation
upon a doctor who has the patient in his care to prolong his life, regardless
of circumstances. 
In Re J (a minor: Wardship: medical treatment) 1990 (3) All ER 930,
the Judge was dealing with a child who suffered brain damage and was
epileptic, and who was likely to develop spastic quadriplegia, blindness and
deafness if life was prolonged.   He was ventilated but reventilation could
make him collapse.   The trial Judge refused reventilation.  The Court of
Appeal  affirmed  the  judgment  because  reventilation  would  lead  to  the
child’s collapse, or even survival may be very tortuous for the child.  Lord
Donaldson  quoted  the  judgment  of  the  British  Columbia  Court  in  Re
Superintendent of Family and Child Science and Dawson (1983) 145 DLR,
3d, 610.   There McKenzie J of the Supreme Court of British Columbia
(Canada) referred to the words of Asch J of the New York Court in  Re
Weberlist (1974) 360 NYS (2d) 783 (at 787) as follows:
333

“There is a strident cry in America to terminate the lives of other
people – deemed physically or mentally defective….    Assuredly, one
test of a civilization is its concern with the survival of the ‘unfittest’,
a reversal of Darwin’s formulation….   In this case, the Court must
decide what its ward would choose, if he were in a position to make
sound  judgment.”
A ward, with the type of future as was in store for J, would obviously not
invite reventilation and survival having regard to the future prospect of total
disability.   Therefore, the State’s right of preserving life is not absolute.
In GMC v. Burke: (2005) EWCA (Civ) 1003 (CA) Lord Phillips of
Worth Matravers MR stated that the Courts have accepted that where life
involves an extreme degree of pain, discomfort or indignity to a patient,
who is sentient but not competent and who has manifested no wish to be
kept alive, that circumstance may absolve the doctors of the positive duty to
keep the patient alive.  Equally, the Courts have recognized that there may
be no duty to keep alive a patient who is in a persistent vegetative state.
Referring  to  Re  J,  he  said  “there  are  tragic  cases  where  treatment  can
prolong life for an indeterminate period, but only at a cost of great suffering
while life continues”.
All these show that while life is sacrosanct and the State has a duty to
protect life, the principle is not absolute and there are, in reality, cases
where attempts to prolong life may amount to perpetrating acute suffering
on patients, and therefore in the case of incompetent patients, doctors can
take decision to stop life support systems if it is in the best interests of the
334

patient.  As to the manner of deciding what is in the ‘best interests’ of a
patient; we shall be discussing that aspect separately.
No provision is necessary in the proposed Bill to state that the State’s
interest in property lies or that principle of sanctity of life is not absolute.
7) Refusal to obtain medical treatment, in certain circumstances, does
not  amount  to  ‘attempt  to  commit  suicide’;  withholding  or
withdrawing medical treatment, in certain situations, does not amount
to ‘abetment of suicide’ proposed to be made in Bill treat such actions
as ‘justified by law’: (Indian Penal Code, 1860 considered).
This is the most important aspect on which considerable discussion
will be necessary.
Under the last heading, we have referred to the broad principle that
sanctity of life is not absolute and that while the State, of which judiciary is
a part, is also interested in prolonging life, there are grave cases in which
this principle has to be excepted.
 
We have referred to the patients’ right of self-determination where he
or she directs at or about the time when treatment is to be given that no
treatment be given to him or her when he is in a serious medical condition.
Where this is done by an adult who is competent and the decision is an
informed one, it is binding on the doctor.   In cases where such decision of
competent patients are not based on informed consent, and in the case of
minors or incompetent persons or persons in a persistent vegetative state,
the doctors can take medical decisions that it is not in the patients best
335

interests  to  live  longer  and  that  the  life  supporting  systems  could  be
withheld or withdrawn.
(i) In such situations, two questions arise.  So far as the patient who is an
adult and competent who refuses treatment, does it amount to ‘attempt to
commit suicide’?
(ii) So far as the doctors are concerned, in the case of an adult where they
obey the patient’s refusal or where in the case of competent patient whose
decision to refuse treatment is not an informed one and where the patient is
a minor or incompetent or a PVS they take a bona fide decision to stop
artificial life support, on the basis of ‘best interests’ of the patient, question
arises whether they are guilty of ‘abetment of suicide’?
Questions (i) and (ii) are answered by the decisions referred to by us
in  the  preceding  Chapters.   But  we  shall  briefly  recapitulate  the  cases
decided by our Supreme Court and other countries and summarise them.
The Supreme Court in  Gian Kaur v.  State of Punjab 1996 (2) SCC
648 while upholding the validity of sec. 309 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
which speaks of ‘attempt to commit suicide’, also considered, towards the
end of the judgment, the decision of the House of Lords in Airedale: 1993
(1) All ER 821 which related to a patient in a PVS state.  While declaring
that Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide are prohibited under our law and are
not lawful, the Supreme Court dealt with persons in a vegetative state, as in
Airedale, and held that sanctity of life is not absolute, and that in cases of
persons in persistent vegetative state where further living is of no benefit to
336

the patient, there is a distinction between euthanasia (mercy killing) and
cases where a patient has entered into a state close to death, a physician
decides  not to provide or continue to provide treatment which could or
might prolong the patient’s life without any possible state of revival’. These
observations made by the Supreme Court, in contrasting that situation with
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide, gives a clear indication that the Supreme
Court did not consider withdrawal or withholding medical treatment in such
cases as offences, on par with Euthanasia.  The Court also stated in  Gian
Kaur: 1996(2) SCC 648  after referring to Art. 21 as follows  (p 660):
“A  question  may  arise,  in  the  context  of  a  dying  man  who  is
terminally  ill  or  in  a  persistent  vegetative  state  that  he  may  be
permitted to terminate it by a premature extinction of his life in those
circumstances.   This category of cases may fall within the ambit of
the ‘right to die’ with dignity as a part of ‘right to live’ with dignity,
when death due to termination of natural life is certain and imminent
and the process of natural death has commenced.”
This passage from  Gian Kaur supports the view that stoppage of medical
treatment to allow the patient to ‘die with dignity’ is part of the ‘right to
life’ under Art. 21 and hence not unlawful.  It is not unlawful both for the
patient who wants to die by directing stoppage of treatment and it is not
unlawful for the doctor either to obey a directive of a competent patient or
to  take such  a decision  in the best interests  of a minor or incompetent
patient.   This is further clear from another passage in Gian Kaur, where the
distinction is made between ‘accelerating the process of natural death’ (by
337

not  administering  treatment)  and  positively  accelerating  death  by  a
physician who assists in a suicide, is referred to (at p.661):
“These are not cases of extinguishing life but only of accelerating
conclusion  of  the  process  of  natural  death  which  has  already
commenced.   The debate even in such cases to permit  physician-
assisted termination of life is inconclusive.   It is sufficient to reiterate
that the argument to support the view of permitting termination of life
in such cases to reduce the period of suffering during the process of
certain natural death is not available to interpret Art. 21 to include
therein the right to curtail the natural span of life.”
The last sentence obviously refers to physician-assisted suicide, which is
referred to in the previous sentence and which is not part of Art 21.  But the
first sentence, read with the passage at p 660, refers to the lawfulness of
withdrawal of life-support of a PVS patient, which is within Art 21.
Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  Gian  Kaur supports  the  principle  that
withholding or withdrawing life support system to PVS patients in whose
cases the process of death has started does not amount to an offence.
In  Airedale, the House of Lords clearly declared by affirming the
decision of the Court of Appeal that:
“despite the inability of the defendant to consent thereto, the plaintiff
and the responsible attending physicians:
338

(1) may lawfully discontinue all life sustaining treatment and medical
supportive measures designed to keep the defendant alive in his
existing persistent vegetative state including the termination of
ventilation, nutrition and hydration by artificial means; and
(2) may lawfully discontinue and thereafter need not furnish medical
treatment to the defendant except for the sole purpose of enabling
him to end his life and die with the greatest dignity and the least
pain, suffering and distress”
As  to  suicide  and  abetment  of  suicide,  in  such  cases  of  lawful
termination of medical treatment, Lord Goff said: “I wish to add that, in
cases of this kind, there is no question of the patient having committed
suicide nor, therefore, of the doctor having aided or abetted him to do so”.
Lord Goff said in Airedale that the ‘omission is not a breach of duty by the
doctor, because he is not obliged to continue in a hopeless case’ (quoting
Prof. Glanville Williams, Criminal Law, 2nd Ed (1983) (p.282).
An omission will not be unlawful unless there is a breach of duty
towards the patient.  If there is no such duty in respect of a patient who is in
dying state with no chances of recovery and, where nature is allowed to take
its course, it is lawful to discontinue the treatment.  It is lawful to allow a
patient in a dying state to die a natural death because the competent patients
want it or in the case of the incompetent patient (and the competent patient
whose decision is not informed), it is in the patient’s best interests.
Lord Browne-Wilkinson pointed out (p. 881) that ‘apart from the act
of removing the nasogastric tube, the mere failure to continue to do what
you have previously done, is  not, in any ordinary sense, to do anything
339

positive; on the contrary, it is by definition an omission to do what you have
previously  done….  If, instead of removing the nasogasric tube, it was left
in place but no further nutrients were provided for the tube to convey to the
patient’s stomach, that would not be an act of commission”. He refers to
Skegg, ‘Law, Ethics and Medicine’ (1984) (p 169) to state (see p 881) that
‘If switching off a ventilator were to be classified as a positive act, exactly
the same result can be achieved by installing a time-clock which requires to
be  re-set  every 12  hours;  the failure to  reset  the machine  could  not be
classified as a positive act’.  He also said that the ‘doctor cannot owe to the
patient any duty to maintain life where that life can only be sustained by
intrusive medical care to which the patient will not consent or in the case of
an incompetent patient,
“if there comes a stage where the responsible doctor comes to the
reasonable conclusion (which accords with the views of a responsible
body of medical opinion (Bolam Test), that further continuance of an
intensive  life  support  system  is  not  in  the  ‘best  interests’  of  the
patient, he can no longer lawfully continue that life support system; to
do so would constitute the crime of battery and the tort of trespass to
the person”.
Thus, while withholding or withdrawing life support do not amount attempt
to commit suicide or abetment to suicide, continuing treatment contrary to
patient’s wishes or where it serves no purpose and is not in the best interests
of the patient, can amount to the offence of battery or the tort of trespass to
the person. 
Hamilton CJ of the Ireland Supreme Court stated in Ward of Court,
Re a: 1995 (ILRM) 401, that 
340

“As the process of dying is part and an ultimate consequence of life,
the right to life necessarily implies the right to have  nature taking
course and to die a natural death.”
Thus, refusing treatment and allowing the body to die a natural death is also
not an offence.  In the same case, O’Flaherty J after referring to ‘right to
life’ and Art 2 and 6 of the European Convention and Art 6 of the ICCPR
stated:
‘This case is not about terminating a life but only to allow nature to
take its course which would have happened even a short number of
years  ago  and  still  in  places  where  medical  technology  has  not
advanced so much as in this country’.
He stated that in ‘irreversible incompetents’ right to self determination also
outweighs  the  State’s  interest  in  preserving  life,  preventing  suicide,
protecting third party defendants of the dying patient, and preserving the
ethical integrity of the medical profession.
In  Scotland,  in  Law  Hospital  NHS  Trust vs.  Lord  Advocate
(Scotland): 1996 SLT 848, Lord Hope referred to  Airedale.  The Courts
could grant a declaration that it was lawful to discontinue the treatment.
In  Gillick vs.  West Norfolk Wisbech Arce Health Authority: 1986
A.C. 112 (HL), it was stated that a doctor, who,  in exercise of his clinical
judgment gave contraceptive advice and treatment to a girl under 16 without
her parents’ consent, did not commit any offence under the Sexual Offences
Act, 1956 because of the bona fide exercise of clinical judgment by the
doctor  and  it  negated  mens  rea  which  is  an  essential  ingredient  of  the
341

offence.  ‘Gillick test’ depends on the stage of development of the child who
is given the advice.
In the Siamese twins case : Re A (Children): 2000 EWCA 254, Ward
LJ in the Court of Appeal summarized the principles laid down in Airedale.
Then he stated that “an omission to act would nonetheless be culpable, if
there was a duty to act’, there was no duty if treatment was not in the best
interests of the patient.
In  GMC vs.  Burke: (2005) EWCA (Cir) 1003(CA) Lord Philips of
Worth  Matravus  agreed  with  Munby J’s  observations  that  Art  2  of  the
European Convention does not entitle any one to continue life-prolonging
treatment where to do so would expose the patient to ‘inhuman or degrading
treatment’,  breaching  Art  3.   On  the  other  hand,  a  withdrawal  of  life
prolonging  treatment  which  satisfies  the  exacting  requirement  of  the
common law, including a proper application of the intolerability test, and in
a manner which is in all respects comparable with the patient’s rights under
Art 3 and Art 8, will not give rise to breach of Art 2”.
But Art 2 of the European  Convention  would be infringed  if the
doctor withdrew the treatment contrary to the patient’s wishes (i.e. advance
directive).  If English law permitted such a conduct, this would violate the
country’s positive obligation to enforce Art 2.  The English Criminal Law
would not countenance such conduct.
342

In Cruzan vs. Director MDH: (1990) 497 US 261 Scalia J said
that  omission  to  receive  treatment  to  incompetent  does  not  amount  to
‘suicide’.  Scalia J said:
“Suicide, it is said, consists of an affirmative act to end one’s life;
refusing  treatment  is  not  an  affirmative  act  ‘causing’  death,  but
merely a passive acceptance of the natural process of dying.  I readily
acknowledge  that  the  distinction  between  action  and  inaction  has
some bearing  upon  the  legislative  judgment  of what  ought  to  be
prevented  as  suicide  –  though  even  there,  it  would  seem  to  me
unreasonable to draw the line precisely between action and inaction,
rather than between various forms of inaction.  It would not make
much sense to say that one may not kill oneself by walking into the
sea, but may sit on the beach until submerged by the incoming tide, or
that one may not intentionally lock oneself into a cold storage locker
but  may refrain from coming indoors when the temperature drops
below freezing.  Even as a legislative matter, in other words, the
intelligent line does not fall between action and inaction, but between
those forms of inaction that consist of abstaining from ‘ordinary’ care
and  those  that  consist  of  abstaining  from  ‘excessive’  or  ‘heroic’
measures.  Unlike action vs inaction, that is not a life to be discerned
by logic or legal analyses and we should not pretend that it is.”
“It is not surprising, therefore, that the early cases considering the
claimed right to refuse medical treatment dismissed as specious, the
nice distinction between “passively submitting to death and actively
seeking it.  The distinction may be merely verbal, as it would be if an
adult sought death by starvation instead of a drug.  If the State may
343

interrupt one mode of self-destruction, it may with equal authority
interfere with the other.  John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital vs.
Heston (1971)  58  N.J.  576;  see  also  Application  of  President  &
Directors of Georgetown College Inc: (1964) 118 US App. DC-80:
331  F  2d  1000.    The  third  asserted  basis  of  distinction  –  that
frustrating Nancy Cruzan’s wish to die in the present case requires
interference  with  her  bodily  integrity  –  is  likewise  inadequate,
because  such  interference  is  impermissible  only  if  one  begs  the
question  whether refusal  to undergo the treatment  on her  own, is
suicide.  It has always been lawful not only for the State, but even for
private  citizens  to  interfere  with  bodily  integrity  to  prevent  a
felony….. That general rule has of course been applied to suicide.  At
Common Law, even a private person’s use of force to prevent suicide
was privileged…. It is not even reasonable, much less required by the
Constitution,  to  maintain  that, although  the  State  has  the  right  to
prevent a person from slashing his wrists, it does not have the powers
to apply physical force to prevent him from doing so, nor the power,
should  he  succeed,  to  apply,  coercively,  if  necessary,  medical
measures to stop the flow of blood.  The state-run hospital, I am
certain,  is  not  liable  under  42  U.S.C.  1983  for  violation  of
constitutional rights, nor the private hospital liable under general tort
law, if, in a state where suicide is unlawful, it pumps out the stomach
of a person who has intentionally taken an overdose of barbiturates,
despite that person’s wishes to the contrary”.
Scalia J then deals with the dissent by Brennan & Stevens JJ and says:
344

“…  the State has no such legitimate interest that could outweigh ‘the
person’s choice to put an end to her life”.….. the State must accede to
her ‘particularized and intense interest in self-determination in her
choice whether to continue living or die.”  For, insofar as balancing
the relative interests  of the State and  the individual  is concerned,
there is nothing distinctive about accepting death through the refusal
of ‘medical treatment”, as opposed to accepting it through the refusal
of food, or through the failure to shut off the engine and get out of the
car after parking in one’s garage after work.  Suppose that Nancy
Cruzan were in precisely the condition she is in today, except that she
could be fed and digest food and water without artificial assistance,
how is the State’s interest in keeping her alive thereby increased or
her  interest  in  deciding  whether  she  wants  to  continue  living
reduced?” (emphasis supplied)
He stated that he could not agree with Brennan & Stevens that a person
could make the choice of death.  That view the State has not yet taken.  The
Constitution does not say anything on the subject.
In Canada, in Nancy B vs. Hotel Dieu de Quebec (1992) 86 DLR (4th)
385, the Dufour J of the Quebec Supreme Court said that the plainiff’s death
would be natural and would not involve homicide or suicide.  He observed:
“In any event, declining life-sustaining medical treatment may not properly
be viewed as an attempt to commit suicide.”  The disease is allowed to take
a natural course and “if death were eventually to occur, it would be the
result, primarily, of the underlying disease, and not the result of a self-
inflicted injury”.
345

Sopinka  J  in  Rodriguez vs.  AG :  1993(3)  SCR  519  (Canada),
speaking for majority, quoted from Airedale where Lord Goff referred to the
Report of the Law Reform Commission (1983) (of Canada).  It was there
stated  that the  criminal codes  be amended  to provide that the homicide
provisions be not interpreted as requiring a physician “to undertake medical
treatment against the wishes of a patient, or to continue medical treatment
when such treatment ‘has become therapeutically useless”.
In New Zealand in  Auckland Area Health Board vs.  AG: 1993(1)
NZLR 235, Thomas J stated that if the doctor was justified in withdrawing
life support, there was ‘lawful excuse’ which was a defence if any criminal
action were to be taken against him. If the doctor was not under an absolute
legal duty to provide or continue with life support or he had a ‘lawful
excuse for discontinuing it, it may then be said that he or she had not legally
caused death of the patient.  Continuing medical treatment where it was
fruitless  was  ‘only  to  defer  the  death  of  patient’  and  nothing  more.
Discontinuance  accords  with  ‘good  medical  practice’.   Acting  under
principles of ‘good medical practice’ cannot make a doctor liable for any
criminal offence.  If the cause of death of the patient was not the criminal
intent of the doctor but was based on good medical practice and if that was
good for sec 151 of the NZ Crimes Act, 1961, it was also good for sec 164
which deals with the offence of ‘acceleration of death’.  The withdrawal of
life support is not an unlawful act for purposes of sec 160 in determining
whether  a  homicide  was  culpable  or  not.  It  cannot  be  regarded  as  an
unlawful act when the doctors concerned were not in breach of duty and had
a lawful excuse.
346

Summary
From the above principles almost uniformly laid down by the Courts
in  several  countries,  it  is  clear  that  (i)  in  the  case  of a patient  who  is
seriously ill, but competent, his refusal, not to take medical treatment and
allow nature to take its own course, it is lawful and does not amount to
‘attempt to commit suicide’, (ii)  Likewise, (a) where doctors do not start or
continue medical treatment in such cases because of such patients’ refusal,
they are not guilty of abetment of suicide or murder or culpable homicide
and (b) if  the patient is a minor or is incompetent or is in a permanent
vegetative state, or (c) if the patient was competent but his decision was not
an informed one, and if the doctors consider that there are no chances of
recovery and that it was in the best interests of the patient that medical
treatment be withheld or discontinued, the doctor’s action would be lawful
and they will not be guilty of any offence of abetting suicide or murder or
culpable homicide.
We will be dealing with these aspects, with particular reference to the
provisions of the Indian Penal Code and the Law of Torts towards the end
of this Chapter.  We propose a provision in the Bill that refusal for medical
treatment by the patient or withdrawal or withholding treatment by doctors
either  on  patient’s  instruction  or the  principle  of  best  interests,  will  be
treated as ‘lawful’
8. Competent  and  incompetent  patients  ‘informed  decision’  and  best
interests
347

We  shall  here  refer  to  he  distinction  between  ‘competent’  and
‘incompetent’ patients and as to what is meant by ‘best interests’.  In the
draft Bill, we propose to give definitions on the basis of decided cases.
These definitions are mostly based on the C-Test evolved by Justice Thorpe
in he case already referred to earlier in Re C 1994(1) All ER 819.
(1) Competent and incompetent patients
It is first necessary to define ‘incompetent patients’.
An ‘incompetent patient’ is (i) a minor or person of unsound mind or
(ii)  a patient  who  is  unable,  on  account  of  pain  or  suffering  (physical,
mental or psychological) to
(a) understand the information relevant to an informed decision
about him or his medical treatment,
(b) retain that information,
(c) use or weigh that information as part of the process of such
decision or
(d) to treat an informed decision because of the impairment of or a
disturbance in the functioning of his mind or brain
(e) to  communicate  his  or  her  informed  decision  (whether  by
speech, sign language or any other method).
In such cases, the decision will be of the medical practitioner to decide to
withhold or withdraw medical treatment, if that was in the best interests of
the patient.
A patient who is not an ‘incompetent patient’ is a ‘competent patient’.
348

As  stated  earlier,  in  the  case  of  a  terminally  ill  patient  who  is
competent, if he refuses treatment, it is binding on the doctors unless the
doctors  are  of  the  view  that  the  patient’s  decision  is  not  an  informed
decision.  If a competent patient requires medical treatment be continued, it
is not permissible for the doctor to stop or refuse medical treatment.
Such a question also arises in the case of all incompetent patients as
well as competent patients whose decision, to refuse medical treatment is
not an informed decision.
That is why it is necessary to define who is an ‘incompetent person’
first and define, in a negative way, who is a ‘competent person’.
(2) ‘Informed decision’
An ‘informed decision’ is a decision taken by a competent patient, i.e.
an adult  who  has  capacity  to  take  a  decision  as  to  his  or her  medical
treatment after understanding the gravity or otherwise of his disease, the
availability or otherwise of alternative medicine or technology to cure his
disease, the consequences of those forms of treatment and the consequences
of remaining untreated.  This definition is based on he decisions of the
English Courts of Butler Sloss P, Thorpe J and others, to which we have
made reference earlier.
(In  the  case  of  minors,  the  doctor’s  decision  as  to  ‘best  interests’  can
override the decision of the guardian.)
349

(3) ‘Best of interests’
Question of ‘best interests’ have to be decided by a doctor in the case
of (a) incompetent patients and (b) in the case of competent patients who are
unable to take an informed decision:
It is true, as stated in Lord Goff in Airedale 1993(1) All ER 821 (HL),
that on the principle of self-determination, if an adult patient of sound mind
refuses, however, unreasonably, to consent to treatment or care by which his
life could be prolonged, the doctors responsible for his care must give effect
to his wishes, even though they do not consider it to be in the best interests
of the patient, to do so.  To this extent, the principle of sanctity of life must
yield to the principle of self-determination.  Such refusal by a patient may
also be by way of an advance directive.
But, Lord Goff also stated, after referring to In re F (Mental Patient:
Sterilisation) 1990(2) AC 1 that, in the case of an unconscious patient, the
doctor may treat or continue to treat him if it is in the patient’s best interests.
The same principle applies when a doctor decides to stop the treatment in
the best interests of the patient.  He referred to Thomas J in Auckland Area
Health Authority vs. AG: 1993(1) NZLR 235 to say that if a doctor decides
in the case of a cancer patient, a particular surgery is not in the best interests
of the patient, but only palliatives have to be given, it is lawful for him not
to go for surgery.  When the doctor’s treatment of his patient is lawful, the
patient’s death is regarded as exclusively caused by the disease to which it
could be attributed.  After quoting from the opinion of Prof. Kennedy and
judgment of Thomas J, Lord Goff stated that the question is not whether the
350

doctor should take a course which would kill a patient, but the question is
“whether in the best interests of the patient that his life should be prolonged
by the continuance of this form of medical treatment and care”.  In the case
of an incompetent patient, the straight forward test laid down in  In re F
(1990)(2) AC1 was whether that was in the best interests of the patient.  
Lord Browne-Wilkinson also so stated in Airedale that In re F 1990
(2) AC 1, both Lord Brandon of Oakbrook (p 64) and Lord Goff (at p 75,
77) and made it clear that the right to administer invasive medical care is
wholly dependent upon such care being in the interests of the patient.  The
doctor’s decision whether invasive care is in the best interests of the patient
falls to be assessed by reference to the test laid down in  Bolam vs.  Frien
Hospital Management Committee: 1957(1) WLR 582, viz being a decision
taken in accordance with a practice accepted, at the time, by a responsible
body of medical opinion’.  He concluded that ‘if there comes a stage when
the responsible doctor comes to the reasonable conclusion (which accords
with  the  view  of  a  responsible  body  of  medical  opinion),  that  further
continuance of an intrusive life support system is not in the ‘best interests’
of the patient, he can no longer lawfully continue that life support system
for to do so would amount to crime of battery and the tort of trespass to the
person.
In Re J (a minor)(Wardship: medical treatment): 1990(3) All ER 930,
Lord  Donaldson  M.R.  stated  that  Court,  in  deciding  to  authorize  that
treatment need not be given, ‘the Court had to perform a balancing exercise
in assessing  the course to be adopted  in the best interests  of the child,
looked at from his point of view and giving the fullest possible weight to his
351

desire, if he were in a position to make similar judgment, to survive, and
taking into account ‘the pain and suffering and quality of  life’ which he
would  experience  if  life  was  to  be  prolonged  and  pain  and  suffering
involved  in the proposed  treatment.  Having  regard to the invasive  and
hazardous nature of re-ventilation, the risk of further deterioration of Mr. J
if he was subject to the extremely unfavourable progress with or without the
treatment, it was in J’s best interests  that authority for reventilation   is
withheld.
In re B (A minor)(Wardship: Sterilisation) 1988 (1) AC 199, in the
case of sterilization of a mentally retarded 17 year ward, who had only the
understanding capacity of a 6 year child, all the courts, upto the House of
Lords, were of the view that the child be sterilized in her best interests
because pregnancy and childbirth would be totally not in her interests.  It
was held that sterilization would be in the best interests of the 16 year old
child.
In re F (Mental Patient)(Sterilisation) 1990(2) AC 1,  (referred to in
Airedale), the patient was not a minor but even so, the Court’s inherent
jurisdiction was invoked (since the parens patriae jurisdiction was abolished
in UK by statute) and it was held that sterilization was in the best interests
of the patient.  At common law, a doctor could lawfully operate or give
other treatment to adults who were incapable of consenting to his doing so,
provided  the  operation  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  patient.   The
sterilization operation or treatment would be in their best interests only if it
is carried out in order either to save their lives or to ensure improvement or
prevent deterioration in their physical or mental health.
352

In  re T (adult: refusal  of medical treatment) 1992(2)  All  ER  649
(=1992(3) WLR 787) the patient T was a lady, injured in an accident and
she was pregnant and required blood transfusion.  She was brought up by
her mother who belonged to Jehovah’s witness school of thought.  The
patient refused blood transfusion.  But, it was held that that the said decision
was not her independent view, that she was more influenced by her mother,
and hence the decision was not binding on the doctors who felt that it was in
the best interests of the patient to be given blood transfusion.  In fact, at the
emergency stage, the patient herself did not object.  It was held that if an
adult  did  not  have  the  capacity,  at  the  time  of  purported  refusal  and
continued  not  to  have  the  capacity, or  if  his  or  her  capacity  to  take  a
decision had been over influenced by others, it was the duty of doctors to
treat him or her in whatever way they considered, in the exercise of their
clinical judgment, to be in his or her best interests.
Re  C:  (adult:  refusal  of  medical  treatment):  1994(1)  All  ER  819:
(competency of patient).
This case was decided by Thorpe J and lays down the C-Test. The
patient was 68 years old and was suffering from schizophrenia, developed
gangrene  and  his  leg  below  knee,  required  to  be  operated.   C  refused
amputation.  The Court considered whether his capacity to take a decision
was impaired by schizophrenia and that the presumption of lack of capacity
was  not  displaced  and  hence  his  refusal  was  not  binding.   In  fact,  we
propose to put these words into the definition of ‘incompetent patient’.
 
353

Frenchay Health Care NHS Trust vs.  S: 1994(2) All ER 403 (CA)
was a case where S a healthy adult took a drug overdose which resulted in
acute and extreme brain damage.  Medical treatment was of no avail.  He
was fed through a nasogastric tube, through the stomach.  At one stage that
was removed and re-insertion was likely to result in his death.  The hospital
moved the Court.  The Judge declared that in the patient’s interests, the tube
should not be re-inserted.  The same was affirmed by the Court of Appeal.
Lord  Bingham MR held  that  the Court had to  determine whether
discontinuance of the tube was in the best interests of the patient.  Though
the Court had power to review the medical opinion and was not bound to
accept it in all cases if circumstances placed before it did not warrant it, the
Court would be reluctant to place those treating the patient in a position of
having to carry out treatment which they considered to be contrary to the
patient’s best interests, unless the Court had real doubt about the reliability,
bona fide or correctness of the medical opinion in question.  The Court
followed Airedale.
In  re Y (Mental capacity: Bone Marrow Transplant) 1997(2) WLR
556, the question was whether the patient (plaintiff) a 25 year old suffering
from  cancer,  could  be  given  bone  marrow  transplant  from  her  sister
(defendant) who was severely handicapped both mentally and physically.
The plaintiff applied to the Court for transplant of bone marrow from her
sister.
Connel J observed initially that it was first necessary to consider what
was in the best interests of defendant.  The fact that the process would
354

benefit plaintiff was irrelevant, unless such transplant was also in the best
interests of the defendant.
But then, if the plaintiff daughter – suffering from cancer - died for
want of bone marrow transplant, the death would have an adverse affect on
their  mother  who  was  caring  for  both  daughters  and  then  the  mother’s
ability to take care of disabled defendant would also be seriously affected.
The  defendant  would  benefit,  if  the  plaintiff  survived,  because  of  their
emotional,  psychological  and  social  benefit.   The  disadvantages  to  the
defendant otherwise was small.  After referring to Airedale and Canan vs.
Bosze L  (1990)  566  NE  2d.  1319  (an  American  case  relating  to  bone
marrow harvesting decided by the Supreme Court of Illinois), the Court
permitted the bone-marrow transplant.  In the American case too, the donor
and the donee were brother and sister.  Connel J held  that the transplant
was good for all three of them, physically and psychologically.
In  Re MB (Medical Treatment): 1997 (2) FLR 426 the issue was
whether caesarean operation should be performed on a pregnant lady who
was  refusing  blood  on  account  of  ‘fear  of  needles’.   Butter-Sloss  LJ
speaking for the Court of Appeal held that where the patient lacked mental
capacity and it was in the best interests of the patient, the patient’s refusal to
treatment was not binding.  The patient here was suffering from a needle
phobia and was not competent to take a decision and her refusal was not
binding.  The Court applied the  C-Test laid down by Thorpe J in  Re C
(Refusal of Medical Treatment). 1994(1) All ER 819 to decide about her
competency.
355

Furthermore, since the mother (i.e. the pregnant lady) and the father
of the child in the womb wanted that the child be born and the mother was
likely to suffer long term damage if the child was born handicapped or dead,
it was decided that it was in her best interests that caesarean operation be
performed.  When the patient did not have the requisite capacity, the doctors
were free to decide what was in the patient’s best interests.
The  Court  also  held  that  the  best  interests  were  not  necessarily
medical but they also included the emotional and all other welfare issues.
In  Norfolk and Norwich Health Care (NHS) Trust vs.  W (1996(2)
FLR 613, the lady who was under psychiatric treatment was pregnant but
would deny she was pregnant.  The Court applied the  C-Test.  Johnson J
held that though she was not suffering from any mental disorder, within the
meaning  of  the  statute,  she  lacked  the  mental  competence  to  make  a
decision and the Court permitted forceps delivery or caesarean as it was,
according to doctors, in her best interests.
In Re D (Medical Treatment): 1998(2) FLR 10, the defendant, a man
of 49 years, suffered from longstanding psychiatric illness and though there
was  renal failure, haemodialysis  was  not favoured by the  doctors.  The
Court held that notwithstanding the defendant’s inability to consent or to
refuse consent to medical treatment, it was lawful that haemodialysis was
not given in the best interests of the patient.
Re L: (Medical Treatment: Gillick Competency) 1998(2) FLR 810,
the girl was 14 years old in life threatening condition, and she rejected
356

blood transfusion as she was a Jehovah’s witness.  The Court did not go by
her rejection of blood transfusion as it was only a ‘view’ of the patient and
‘not the constructive formulation of an opinion’ on her part which would
occur by way of adult experience.  She was still a child.  She was not given
all information to understand the seriousness of her condition.  Hence her
refusal  was  not  binding  and  it  was  in  her  interests  to  be  given  blood
transfusion.
In Re A (Male Sterilisation): 2000(1) FLR 55, Butter-Sloss LJ stated
that the ‘best interests encompass medical, emotional and all other welfare
issues’.   It  was  not  limited  to  ‘medical’  interests’.  This  principle  was
applied by Ward LJ in the Siamese Twins Case: Re A (Children) 2000 EW
CA 254 where the question was whether the twins be separated by surgery
to  save  one  of  them  while,  on  such  separation,  the  other  would  die
immediately.  In that case, separation was permitted by the Court. Parents’
wishes  were subordinate  to  the best  interests  of  the child.   (There was
discussion  in  this  case  as  to  how  far  the  parents’  views  should  be
considered).  The broad meaning of ‘best interests’ as stated above was also
reiterated in Simms Vs. An NHS Trust: 2002. EW HC 2734, in which they
referred to Re MB: 1997(2) FLN 426.
NHS Trust vs.  D: 2003 EWHC 2793, it was held that ‘where the
issues  of  capacity  and  best  interests  are  clear  and  beyond  doubt,  an
application to the Court is not necessary’.  Dame Elizabeth Butler-Sloss
referred to the ‘best interests’, sanctity of life and to Justice Thorpe’s dictum
in  Re A: 2000(1) FLR 549 as to how the Court should prepare a balance
sheet of the best interests of a patient, the potential gains and losses etc.
357

  These principles as to how the Court should prepare a balance sheet
of the best interests as laid down by Thorpe J in Re A were again applied by
Charles J in NHS Trust vs. T : 2004 EW HC 1279.  He also quoted Munby J
in  A vs.  A Health Authority 2002 (1) FLR 481 that adults’ best interests
involve a welfare appraisal in the widest sense of taking into account, where
appropriate,  a  wide  range  of  ethical,  social,  emotional  and  welfare
consideration.
In  Portsmouth NHS Trust vs.  Wyatt: 2004 EWHC 2247 Hedley J
observed that the child was born after 26 weeks gestation and was weighing
1 lb., and was placed in an incubator.  She required oxygen.  Kidneys were
deteriorating.  Parents wanted treatment to be given.  The Court gave certain
directions to the doctors as regards treatment.  In that context, it observed:
“infinite variety of the human considerations never cease to surprise and it
is that fact that defeats any attempt to be more precise in a definition of
best-interests”.  He, however, referred to Re A 2000(1) FLR 549 that ‘best
interests’ include medical, emotional and other interests.
In  GMC vs.  Burke 2005  EWCA (CA) 1003  (14) Lord Philips  of
Worth Matravers stated that autonomy and self-determination do not entitle
the patient to insist on receiving a particular medical treatment regardless of
the nature of the treatment.  The Court of Appeal approved Munby J’s
observations  in  the  Judgment  under  appeal  but  took  exception  to  two
sentences in regard to which the Court of Appeal stated thus:
358

“The  suggestion  that  the  touch-stone  of  ‘best  interests’  is  the
intolerability  of  continued  life  has,  understandably  given  rise  to
concern.  The test is whether it is in the best interests of the patient to
provide  or  continue   ANH  must  depend  upon  the  particular
circumstances.”
It said:
“We do not think it possible to attempt to define what is in the best
interests of a patient by a right test, applicable to all circumstances.”
Summary
From the above case law, it is clear that where a competent patient
who is adequately informed, refuses treatment, the doctors are bound by his
refusal.  But in cases of minors, incompetent persons and PVS patients, the
doctor  must  consider  whether  giving  or  continuing  or  withdrawing
treatment  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  patient.   A  balance  sheet  of
advantages and disadvantages has to be drawn as stated by Thorpe J in Re
A:  2000(1)  FLR  549.   The  best  interests  are  not  confined  to  medical
interests  but  encompass  ethical,  social,  emotional  and  welfare
considerations.   There  cannot  be  any single  test  of what  is  in  the  best
interests of an incompetent patient but it must depend upon a variety of
considerations depending upon the facts of the case.  Where a patient is not
competent, it is lawful for doctors to take a decision to give, withhold or
withdraw medical treatment if they consider that to be the appropriate action
to  be  taken  in  the  best  interests  of  the  patient.   We propose  to  define
‘competent’  and  ‘incompetent’  patients,  ‘informed  decision’  and  ‘best
interest’ in the proposed Bill.
359

9) Three experts to be consulted in the case incompetent persons (or
competent persons who did not make informed decision) to be drawn
from panel prepared by proposed statutory authority.
In our view, before the doctor takes a decision in ‘best interests’ of an
incompetent patient  or of a competent  patient  whose decision  is not  an
informed one, expert opinion of three experts must be obtained from experts
in the field.  Such experts must be drawn by from a panel prepared by a high
ranking authority.
While it is, according to us, mandatory for the doctors to consult three
specialists who are experts in the treatment of the particular disease from
which the terminally ill patient is suffering and while the three experts,
according to us, must have atleast 20 years experience, we cannot allow any
expert to be consulted at the choice of the above experts.  The experts must
be selected from a panel which has statutory force.  This is intended to
avoid  malpractices  and  abuse  of the  legal provisions.  Experts  who  are
under disciplinary action or have been found to be guilty of professional
misconduct have to be excluded from he panels.  The doctors are allowed to
select the experts from the panel prepared by the Director of Medical and
Health Services in each State or the Director-General of Medical and Health
Services from Union Territories.  The nomination of the three experts in a
given case need not be by the Director of Medical and Heath Services of the
States of the Director General of Medical and Health Services but can be
made by the attending doctor.
360

These  three  experts  to  be  empanelled  as  stated  above,  must  be
necessarily be medical experts in different subjects or disciplines relating to
medicine  and  surgery  with  atleast  20  years  experience.   We, therefore,
propose that the above authorities must prepare the panel of experts and that
the said authorities may review and modify the panels from time to time.
We  also  propose  provision  that  consultation  with  three  experts  is
mandatory.  If medical treatment is withheld or withdrawn without such
consultation, the action will not be lawful under the proposed law.  
10  &  11)  Court’s  power  to  grant  a  declaration  whether  the  giving  or
withholding  or  withdrawing  medical  treatment  is  ‘lawful’  and
whether  it  is  binding  on  a  civil  or  criminal  Court  in  latter
proceedings: Whether it is mandatory to seek declaration from Court
in every case?
In England and other countries, the doctors or hospitals approach the
Court  for  a  declaration  that  any  decision  by  hem  for  withholding  or
withdrawing medical treatment  be declared lawful.   Again, parents  of a
patient, whether the patient is minor or not, can also move the Court, if they
disagree with the doctor.  The parents may want the artificial treatment be
still continued or in some cases, discontinued.  They can also approach
Courts.
In Airedale, Lord Keith of Kinkel observed that it is permissible for
doctors  or hospitals  to seek  declarations  from Court  on the  question  of
lawfulness or otherwise of withdrawal of life-support systems.  Initially he
observed:
361

“It  is  of  some  comfort  to  observe  that  in  other  common-law
jurisdictions, particularly in the United States where there are many
cases on the subject, the Courts have, with near unanimity, concluded
that  it  is  not  unlawful  to  discontinue  medical  treatment  and  care,
including  artificial  feeding,  of  PVS  patients  and  other  in  similar
conditions.”
He then pointed out that it is permissible to move the Family Court seeking
a declaration, to protect the interests of patients, doctors and the families of
patients and as a matter of reassurance to the public.  This was necessary till
a  body  of  case  law  relating  to  just  ‘medical  practice’  containing  legal
principles is evolved.  He said:
“The decision whether or not the continued treatment and care of a
PVS patient confers  any benefit  on  him is essentially one for the
practitioners  in  charge  of  his  case.   The  question  is  whether  any
decision  that  it  does  not  and  that  the  treatment  and  care  should
therefore be discontinued as a matter of routine be brought before the
Family Division for endorsement or the reverse.  The view taken by
Sir Stephen Brown and the Court of Appeal was that it should, at
least for the time being and until a body of experience and practice
has been built up which might obviate the need for application in
every case.  As Sir Thomas Bingham MR said, this would be in the
interests of the protection of patients, the protection of doctors, the
reassurance of the patient’s families and reassurance of the pubic.   I
362

respectfully  agree  that  these  considerations  render  desirable  the
practice of application.”
In  Airedale case, the  declarations granted by the Court of Appeal,
which were affirmed by the House of Lords, were as follows:
“…. that despite the inability of (the defendant) to consent thereto, the
plaintiff and the responsible physicians:
(1) may lawfully discontinue all life-sustaining treatment and medical
support measures designed to keep (the defendant) alive on his
existing persistent vegetative  state including the termination of
ventilation, nutrition and hydration by artificial means; and
(2) may lawfully discontinue and thereafter need not furnish medical
treatment  to  (the  defendant)  except  for  the  sole  purpose  of
enabling (him) to end his life and die peacefully with the greatest
dignity and the least of pain, suffering and distress”
In Law Hospital NHS Trust v. Lord Advocate (Scotland) 1996 SLT
848, Lord Hope, the Lord President stated that in  Airedale, the House of
Lords observed that the Courts  give a declaration that a doctor’s action
would be declared as lawful.   The medical profession was entitled to look
to the Courts (see Scottish Law Commission Report on Incapable Adults
(No.151,  para  5.86).    Such  a  declaration  could  be  brought  as  per  the
Practice Note of March 1994 by the Official Solicitor (1994 (2) All ER
413). 
363

But Lord Hope went into the question whether such a declaration
would be binding on the criminal or civil Courts, when the issue arose
before them later.   The declaration, of course, was not one asking particular
act  to  be  declared  as  not  being  a  criminal  act.    “What  it  seeks  is  a
declaration  that  the  pursuers  and the  medical  practitioner ‘may lawfully
discontinue’  the  treatment”.   In  Airedale,  in  the  Family  Division,  Sir
Stephen  Browne  stated  (see  p.833  of  All  ER)  that  he  did  not  think  it
appropriate to grant a declaration that the action was not criminal.  ‘Lawful’
meant  lawful  according  to  civil  law.   Lord  Hope  also  referred  to  the
observation of Lord Goff of Chievely and Lord Mustill in the House of
Lords  in  Airedale   who  expressed  strong  reservations  about  granting  a
declaration as to criminality in a civil case.  Lord Mustill pointed out that
the decision, in any event, would not create an estoppel in the criminal
courts which would form a conclusive bar of prosecution.    Nevertheless,
they did proceed to decide the issue and “it is clear from all the speeches
that their Lordships were of the view that the conduct which was proposed
would not amount to crime according to the law of England”.
Having said this, Lord Hope doubted if any declaration that might be
granted would preclude the criminal Court from going into the question.  He
held that the Court could not give a declaration that the act was or was not
of a criminal nature.   The declaration may be useful in another civil case
but not in a criminal case.    He declared that any declaration which the
Court  of  Sessions,  Inner  House  may  make  in  this  matter  about  the
lawfulness  of  the  action  would  not  be  binding  on  the  High  Court  of
Justiciary.  (In Scotland, the Civil Jurisdiction is with the Court of Sessions,
Inner  House,  while  the  criminal  jurisdiction  is  with  the  High  Court  of
364

Justiciary).   Declaration about lawfulness of the action could be given by
the Court of Sessions for purposes of civil liability.
The Practice Directive in 1994 (2) All ER 413:  of the official Solicitor
spells out the form of declaration:
“The need for the prior sanction of a High Court Judge
1. The termination of artificial feeding and hydration for patients
in a persistent vegetative state (PVS) will in virtually all cases require
the prior sanction  of a High Court Judge:  Airedale NHS Trust v.
Bland (1993) 1 All ER 821 at 833, (1993) AC 789 at 805 per Sir
Stephen Brown P and Frenchay Healthcare NHS Trust v. S (1994) 2
All ER 403.
The Diagnosis
2. The  Medical  Ethics  Committee  of  the  British  Medical
Association issued guidelines on treatment decisions for patients in
persistent  vegetative  state  in  July 1993.   According  to  the BMA,
current methods of diagnosing PVS cannot be regarded as infallible.
Such a diagnosis should not be considered confirmed until the patient
has been insentient for at least 12 months.  Before then, as soon as the
patient’s  condition  has  stabilized,  rehabilitative  measures  such  as
coma arousal programmes should be instituted (see  Airedale NHS
Trust v. Bland (1993) 1 All ER 821 at 872, (1993) AC 789 at 871 per
Lord Goff). For a discussion of the diagnosis of PVS and of other
conditions with which it is sometimes confused, see App 4 (and paras
156-162,  251-258)  of  the  Report  of  the  House  of  Lords  Select
Committee on Medical Ethics (HL Paper (1993-94) 21-I).
365

Applications to Court
3. Applications to court should be by originating summons issued
in the Family Division of the High Court seeking a declaration in the
form set out in para 4 below.   Subject to specific provisions below,
the application should follow the procedure laid down for sterlisation
cases by the House of Lords in F v. West Berkshire Health Authority
(Mental Health Act Commission intervening) (1989) 2 All ER 545,
(1990) 2 AC 1 and in the Official Solicitor’s Practice Note of May
1993 [(1993) 3 All ER 222].
4. The originating summons should seek  relief in the following
form:
‘It is declared that despite the inability of X to give a valid
consent,  the  plaintiffs  and/or  the  responsible  medical
practitioners:  (i)  may lawfully discontinue  all  life-sustaining
treatment and medical support measures designed to keep X
alive in his existing persistent vegetative state including the
termination of ventilation, nutrition and hydration by artificial
means; and (ii) may lawfully discontinue and thereafter need
not furnish medical treatment to X except for the sole purpose
of enabling X to end his life and to die peacefully with the
greatest dignity and the least distress.
It  is  ordered  that  in  the  event  of  a  material  change  in  the
existing  circumstances  occurring  before  the  withdrawal  of
artificial feeding and hydration any party shall have liberty to
apply for such further or other declaration or order as may be
just.’
366

5. The  case  should  normally  be  heard  in  chambers and  the
judgment given in open court.
The parties
6. The applicants may be either the next of kin or the relevant area
health authority/NHS Trust (which in any event ought to be a party).
The views of the next of kin are very important and should be made
known to the court in every case.
7. The Official Solicitor should be invited to act as guardian ad
litem  of  the  patient,  who  will  inevitably  be  a  patient  within  the
meaning of RSC Ord 80.
The evidence
8. There should be at least two neurological reports on the patient,
one of which will be commissioned by the Official Solicitor.  Other
medical evidence, such as evidence about rehabilitation or nursing
care, may be necessary.
The views of the patient
9. The views of the patient may have been previously expressed,
either in writing or otherwise.  The High Court exercising its inherent
jurisdiction may determine the effect of a purported advance directive
as  to  future  medical  treatment:  Re  T (adult:  refusal  of  medical
treatment) (1992) 4 All ER 649, (1993) Fam 95, Re C (adult: refusal
of medical treatment) (1994) 1 All ER 819, (1994) 1 WLR 290.   In
summary,  the  patient’s  previously  expressed  views,  if  any,  will
always be a very important component in the decisions of the doctors
and the court.
Consultation:
367

10. Members of the Official Solicitor’s legal staff are prepared to
discuss  PVS cases before proceedings  have  been issued.  Contact
with the Official Solicitor may be made by telephoning 071-911-7127
during office hours.”
(b) Practice Note: 1996(4) All ER 766:
A  further  Practice  Note was  issued  by  the  official  Solicitor  on
withdrawal  of  treatment  in  cases  of  insensate  patients  and  patients  in
persistent  vegetative  state  –  Sanction  of  High  Court  required  before
treatment is terminated – confirmation of diagnosis – Form of Application -
Parties  to application  – Evidence – Views  of patients  consultation  with
official Recorder.
We may, however, point out hat in Burke (2005), the Court of Appeal
clarified that is not mandatory in every case to obtain Court sanction for
withholding or withdrawing treatment.  We have already referred to this
case.
Frenchay Healthcare NHS Trust v. S: 1994 (2) All ER 403 (CA)
In this case, decided in 1994, Sir Thomas Bingham MR held that
where a hospital seeks to discontinue treatment to a PVS, as a general rule,
the hospital must apply to the Court and obtain a declaration that it was
proper  to  do  so  and  such  an  application  should  be  preceded by a  full
investigation  with  an  opportunity  to  the  Official  Solicitor,  as  the
representative  of  the  patient,  to  explore  the  situation  fully,  to  obtain
368

independent medical opinion for himself and to ensure that proper material
is placed before the Court.  Nevertheless, emergency situations will arise in
which an application to the Court is not possible or where, although an
application  to  Court  is  possible,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  present  the
application  in  the  same leisurely way as  in  the  case  where  there  is  no
pressure of time.
In 1996, in Re S (Hospital Patient: Courts Jurisdiction) 1996 Jan 1,
Sir Thomas Bingham MR said (p.18) that ‘In cases of controversy and cases
involving momentous and irrevocable decisions, the Courts have treated as
justiciable any genuine question as to what the best interests of a patient
require or justify.  In making these decisions, the Courts have recognized
the desirability of informing those involved whether a proposed course of
conduct  will  render  them  criminally  or  civilly  liable,  they  have
acknowledged their duty to act  as a safeguard against malpractice, abuse
and unjustified action; and they have recognized the desirability, in the last
resort, of decisions being made by an impartial, independent tribunal’.
In 2003, in NHS Trust v. D: 2003 EWHC 2793, Coleridge J observed
that where there is a doubt about the capacity or best interest, an application
should be  made  to  the  Court.   In  particular  and  without  limiting  the
generality of the proposition, the following circumstances would ordinarily
warrant making an application (in pregnancy matters):
ii) where there is a dispute as to capacity, or where there is a realistic
prospect that the patient will regain capacity, following a response
369

to  treatment,  within  the  period  of  her  pregnancy  or  shortly
thereafter;
iii) where  there  is  lack  of  unanimity  amongst  the  medical
professionals as to the best interests of the patient;
iv) where the procedures under sec. 1 of the Abortion Act, 1967 have
not been followed (i.e. where two medical practitioners have not
provided a certificate);
v) where the patient, member of her immediate family or the foetus’
father  have  opposed  or  expressed  views  inconsistent  with  a
termination of the pregnancy; or
vi) where there are other exceptional circumstances (including where
the termination may be the patient’s last chance to bear a child.
Munby J in his judgment in  R (Burke) v.  The GMC 2004 EWHC
1879 (Admin) – referred to five situations where where it is proposed to
withhold or withdraw ANH, that Court approval must be obtained:
(i) where there is any doubt or disagreement as to the capacity
(competence) of the patient; or 
(ii) where  there  is  lack  of  unanimity  amongst  the  attending
medical professions as to either 
(a) the patient’s condition or prognosis; or
(b) the patient’s best interests; or
(c) the likely outcome of ANH being either withheld or
withdrawn; or
(d) otherwise  as  to  whether  or  not  ANH  should  be
withheld or withdrawn; or
370

(iii) where  there is evidence  that the  patient  when competent
would  have  wanted  ANH  to  continue  in  the  relevant
circumstances; or
(iv) where there is evidence that the patient (even if a child or
incompetent) resists or disputes the proposed withdrawal of
ANH; or
(v) where persons having a reasonable claim to have their views
or evidence  taken  into  account (such as parents  or close
relatives, partners, close friends, long term careers) assert
that withdrawal of ANH is contrary to the parents’ wishes or
not in the patient’s best interest.”
But, the Court of Appeal in  GMCU vs.  Burke: 2005(EWCA) (civ) 1003
(CA) did not agree that in each of these cases the parties  must resort to a
declaration before a Court of Law.   In practice, this is not feasible because
if these directives are followed at least 10 cases have to go to Court every
day, on an average, in England.   The Court of Appeal stated:
“… We do not consider that the Judge is right to postulate that there
is a legal duty to obtain Court approval to the withdrawal of ANH in
the circumstances that he identifies”
Summarising the judgment, it will be seen that while in Airedale, the
House of Lords permitted parties to resort to a declaration only as a matter
of “good medical practice”, till a body of “experience and practice” was
built up.  Plainly there would be occasions when it would be advisable for a
doctor  to  seek  the  Court’s  approval  before  withdrawing  ANH  in  other
371

circumstances,  but  there  was,  according  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,
justification in postulating that the doctor was under a legal duty to do so, in
all the above five contingencies.   Munby J had relied on Coleridge in D v.
NHS Trust 2003 EWHC (Fam) 2793.  The Court of Appeal distinguished
Coleridge J’s judgment stating that that was a case  of pregnancy of an
incompetent adult where, because the legitimacy of such treatment was in
doubt, it was ‘necessary’ to seek authorization from Court.  The view of
Coleridge J does not transform the requirement to seek Court approval from
a matter of ‘good practice’ into a legal requirement in all the above five
situations referred to by Munby J.
Also distinguishing the decision of the European Court in  Glass v.
UK: 2004 (1) FLR 1019: 2004 Lloyds Rep Med 76, Lord Phillips in the
Court of Appeal said:
“The true position is that the Court does not authorize treatment that
would otherwise be unlawful.  The court makes a declaration as to
whether or not proposed treatment, or withdrawal of treatment,  will
be lawful.  Good practice may require medical practitioners to seek
such a declaration where the legality of the proposed treatment is in
doubt.   This is not, however, something that they are required to do
as a matter of law.   Declaration 6 made by Munby J misstated the
law.”
In NHS Trust vs. D: 2003 EWHC 2793, it was held that “where the
issues  of  capacity  and  best  interests  are  clear  and  beyond  doubt,  an
application to the Court is not necessary.”
372

From the above, the circumstances under which doctors or others can
move a civil court for declaration are fairly clear.    It is not in every case
that it is necessary where there is a conflict of views etc. as stated by Munby
J.  The Court can be approached as a matter of ‘good medical practice’ to
initially build up healthy precedents till a body of ‘experience and practice’
is built up.  
It is necessary to provide in the proposed Bill that patients, parents,
hospitals  or  doctors  can  approach  the  Courts  either  on  the  question  of
withholding or withdrawing artificial medical treatment or starting or for
continuance of the said treatment.
13) Confidentiality:
For medical patients, privacy rights are quite important and, therefore,
it is essential, in the matter of serious cases involving life and death related
issues  which  come before the  Courts  seeking  declaratory remedies,  that
utmost  secrecy  has  to  be  maintained  with  regard  to  the  names  of  the
patients, their parents, the hospitals, opinions of experts or doctors, in the
judgments.
Even  where  the  parties  do  not  move  the  Courts,  the  media  may
publish the legal principles decided or directions given but cannot disclose
facts which will identify the patients, parents, relatives, doctors, experts, or
hospitals.
373

Lord Donaldson in  Re C (a Minor) (Wardship: medical treatment):
1989 (2) All ER 782 pointed out as follows:
“What  is  required  in  such  cases  is  that  the  Judge  should  give
judgment in open Court, taking all appropriate measures to preserve
the personal privacy of those concerned…..   Thus, in this judgment, I
have quoted extensively from the Professor’s advice without, I hope,
giving any clue as to his identity or that of C, her parents or the
authority involved”
In a subsequent order in the same case reported in  Re C (a minor)
(Wardship: medical treatment) No.2 (A): 1989 (2) All ER 791, the two
newspapers, Daily Mail and Mail Sunday filed applications before the Court
of  Appeal  to  review  the  above  judgment.    They  wanted  that  the
confidentiality directive in the above judgment regarding the identity of
patients, parents, doctors, hospital and medical advice be reconsidered and
the media be permitted to publish the details.
After an elaborate reconsideration, the Court of Appeal stated that
privacy of the patient was important and undue publicity about the medical
treatment of the ward could affect the quality of care given to the patient,
and that the public interest in ensuring proper quality of care required the
Court, in the best interests of the patient, to issue an injunction prohibiting
the identification of the patient, his or her parents, the medical information
etc.,  notwithstanding  that  the  patient  is  not  capable  of  noticing  such
identification or publicity.   Further, such an injunction would reinforce the
duty of confidentiality owed by those caring for her.   (Doctors are supposed
374

to maintain privacy so far as their patient’s name, address, parents’ name,
doctor’s  name,  medical  treatment  etc.  are  concerned).   The  injunction
against  identifying  the  parents  is  also  justified  in  order  to  protect  the
wardship jurisdiction since parents might refuse to make a child a ward of
Court  (or  an  incompetent  patient)  if  they  thought  that  they  might  be
identified and singled out for media attention.
The Court in the above case, prohibited external publication of the
names, but  it stated  that  the  doctors  and hospital  or the local  authority
(which is protecting the ward) must know the real name of the patient so
that the Court’s orders could be implemented.
In Law Hospital NHS Trust v. Lord Advocate (Scotland) (1996) SLT
848, the Lord President, Lord Hope stated that cases of such patients be
heard in  chambers without intimation on the notice board, unless public
interest requires.
It is proposed to have a provision in the Bill (a) for keeping  the
identity  of  the  patients,  parents,  doctors,  experts,  witnesses,  hospital  as
confidential, in he High Court where the petition will be filed by the patient,
parents or doctors and that they will e designated by English alphabets.  It is
proposed that the High Court should, at the stage of filing of the case, pass
an order giving he alphabetical designations and that while referring to the
Court orders, no person, law report, or media shall publish the names of the
above persons or hospital.  Breach of the order as to confidentiality may be
punished under the Contempt of Courts Act.  However, it is necessary that,
in the orders to be communicated to the above parties, doctors or hospital,
375

the  actual  name will  have  to  be  given  because  it  is  necessary that  the
identity of the patient and others be known to the above persons, doctors
and the hospital, so that the order can be implemented.  However, such
communications should be put in a sealed cover.
It is also proposed (b) that even in cases where the matters do not go
to Court none including the media should publish facts which will lead to
identification of the patients, parents, relatives, doctors, hospitals, experts
etc.
14) Position under Indian Penal Code & Law of Torts
 
In the light of the discussion in Chapters I to VI and this Chapter, we
now come to the crucial issues of criminal law and law of torts in regard to
which,  it  is  necessary to remove  certain  apprehensions  in the  minds  of
patients, doctors, hospitals and others.
We shall first deal with (A) the Criminal Law and then with (B) the
Law of Torts.
(A) Criminal Law:
We have, in a way dealt with the questions briefly in Chapter II where
we referred to Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab, 1996 (6) SCC 648.  We have
dealt  with  ‘Euthanasia’ and  its  various  forms  and  ‘Assisted  Suicide’ in
various  countries  in this  Chapter.  We have again  referred  in  the same
376

Chapter  VI  to  the  scope  and  effect  of  a  declaration  by  the  Court  that
withdrawal of life support systems, in certain circumstances is lawful.
We shall first  refer to the specific provisions  of the Indian  Penal
Code, 1860 which are relevant in this connection.
Inasmuch as the Supreme Court in Gian Kaur specifically stated that
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide are not lawful, it is obvious that so far as
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide are concerned, they will fall within one or
other of the penal provisions and continue to be unlawful and we do not
propose going to Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide.
We shall confine ourselves to discussing the cases of stoppage of life
sustaining treatment to patients.
As seen in the foregoing chapters, the issue arises  with regard to
different categories of patients as stated below:
(a) Competent patients:  position  o f patients  and doctors:  No offence
committed under Indian Penal Code, 1860:
 The discussion under (a) must necessarily start with the principle
repeatedly laid down in several countries that under common law that a
patient has to give his consent (informed consent) to medical treatment,
including  invasive  treatment.   Likewise,  if  a  patient  refuses  medical
treatment and wants nature to take its own course, his right to refuse such
377

treatment is accepted by the common law and is binding on the doctors,
provided the decision is an informed decision.  We shall elaborate..   
If a competent patient states that the medical treatment being given to
him or her is to be continued, the doctors are bound by the patient’s decision
and cannot discontinue the treatment.  At the same time, it is well settled
that it is not for the patient to require a doctor to give him a particular
medical  treatment  where  the  doctor  is  of  the  view  that  that  is  not  the
appropriate treatment.
When the patient is competent and wants withholding or withdrawal
of treatment, that decision is also binding on the doctors provided the doctor
is satisfied that the patient is competent and that this decision of the patient
is an informed one, i.e. that the patient has been informed about the granting
or otherwise of the ailment, and the medicine or treatment available, patient
is  able to retain the information, weigh the pros  and cons, and take an
informed decision.  But where the doctor is satisfied that the competent
patient’s decision is not an informed decision, or that it is based on wrong
assumption  or  prejudices,  phobia  or  hallucinations,  then  the  doctor  can
ignore the patient’s decision and decide what is in the best interests of the
patient according to the view of a body of medical experts.
The common law accepts that once the patient instructs the doctor
that he is not willing for treatment, that decision is binding on the doctor
and if a doctor attempts to treat or treats a patient against his will, it will
amount to battery and in some cases, if death ensures, he may also be liable
for the offence of murder.   While it is true that doctors have a duty by
378

virtue of their profession to treat a patient and omission to treat may, in
certain  circumstances,  be  an  offence  still,  where  the  doctor  obeys  the
competent patient’s instructions, he is absolved of his professional duty and
his omission will not be an offence.
In case the patient who refuses medical treatment and the doctor’s
precluded from administering medical treatment, the doctor must however
be satisfied that the patient has taken an informed decision or the decision is
voluntary.  We have seen cases where a patient refuses blood transfusion on
ground that such blood is evil, or because of needle phobia.  If such is the
case, the patient’s refusal is not binding on the doctor and if he thinks that
the best interests of the patient requires treatment, he is not committing any
offence even if the treatment is contrary to the patient’s desire.   There may
also be cases like Jehovah’s witnesses who abhor blood transfusion but if a
patient has no such faith but his parent belongs to that faith and has forced
his or her views on the patient, then the refusal of the patient is not binding.
With reference to competent patients under category (a), let us see if
the  patient  or  the  doctor  is  guilty  when  these  principles  are  correctly
applied.
Criminal Law
(A) Section 309: attempt to commit suicide (by patient):
So far as the patient is concerned, when he refuses treatment, is he
guilty of ‘attempt to commit suicide’?   
379

The definition of ‘attempt to commit suicide, is contained in sec. 309
which reads as follows:
“Sec. 309: Whoever attempts  to commit suicide and does  any act
towards  the  commission  of  such  offence,  shall  be  punished  with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with
fine or with both”
‘Suicide’ has not been separately defined but generally means ‘a deliberate
termination of one’s own physical existence’.   
But, that is different from a patient allowing nature to take its own
course. When a person is suffering from disease, he may take medicine to
cure himself.  There are different systems of medicine and he may feel that
none is good enough.  Further in the last four or five decades, medical
science  and  technology  have  progressed  so  much  but  medical  facilities
available in other countries may not be available in India, or those available
in India may not be available at the place where the patient is living and his
decision not to take medicine may be based on those facts.  Apart from these
considerations,  a patient  may decide  for  himself  that  he  will  allow  the
disease or illness to continue and be not bothered by taking medicines or
invasive procedures.  An attitude where a patient prefers nature to take its
course has been held in almost all leading countries governed by common
law, as pointed out in the preceding chapters, as not amounting to an act of
deliberate termination of one’s own physical existence.  It is not like an act
of  deliberate  or  intentional  hanging  or  shooting  one’s  self  to  death  or
attempting to drown in a well or a river or in the sea.  In view of the settled
380

law on this aspect, allowing nature to take its course and not taking medical
treatment is not an attempt to commit suicide.  Hence there is no offence
under sec. 309.   In fact, in Airedale the House of Lords clearly held it is not
suicide.
(B) Section  306:  abetment  to  commit  suicide:  (abetment  by doctor  in
relation to competent patients):
So far as the doctor is concerned, let us consider if sec. 306 which
deals with ‘abetment to commit suicide’ applies.   Sec. 306 deals with this
offence.   It reads:
“Sec.  306:   If  any  person  commits  suicide,  whoever  abets  the
commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
be liable to fine”
Once the competent patient decides not to take medicine and allows
nature  to  take  its  course,  the  doctor  has  to  obey  the  instructions.
Administering medicine contrary to the wishes of a patient is battery and is
an  offence.   The  omission  to  give  medicine  is  based  on  the  patient’s
direction and hence the doctor’s inaction is not an offence.  In fact, when
there is no attempt at suicide or suicide under sec 309, there can be no
abetment of suicide under sec 306.
© Even  under  sec  107  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  (which  we  have
extracted in Chapter II) which generally deals with ‘abetment’, the position
381

is the same.  Under that section ‘abetment’ may be by a positive act or even
by omission.  If a doctor omits to give medical treatment at the instructions
of a competent patient, he is not guilty of ‘abetment’ under sec 107, because
under sec 107 the omission must be “illegal”.  If under common law, the
doctor is bound by the patient’s instruction for stoppage of treatment, it is
binding on him and his omission is ‘legal’.  As there is no requirement
under  the  law  that  he  can  disobey  the  instruction,  he  is  not  guilty  of
abetting.  In fact, if he disobeys and continues the medical treatment it will
amount to battery or assault.
We have seen in Airedale (UK) and Cruzan (USA) the question of the
doctor’s omission has been considered elaborately and it has been held that
where there is no duty under common law to give or continue the medical
treatment, the omission of the doctor does not amount to an offence. Hence,
the doctor is not guilty of ‘abetment of suicide’ under sec. 306 IPC, even if
we read sec. 306 along with sec. 107 which deals generally with ‘abetment’.
(b) Doctors  action  in  respect  of  incompetent  patients  and  competent
patients who have not taken informed decision: If it amounts to an
offence, it clearly falls under exception in Indian Penal Code, 1860:
(A) Section 299: culpable homicide: 
Even if the cases under (a), where the adult patient who is competent
refuses treatment, on the basis of informed decision, does not involve the
offences of ‘attempt to suicide’ (sec. 309) and ‘abetment of suicide’ (sec.
306), it is still necessary  to consider whether the action of the doctor in
382

refusing to provide medical treatment, though with consent of the competent
patient,  amounts  to  ‘culpable  homicide’ not  amounting  to murder.  The
question  of  ‘culpable  homicide’  also  arises  where  in  the  cases  of
incompetent patients and competent patients who have not taken informed
decision, and the doctor takes a decision to withhold or withdraw treatment
in the best interests of the patient.
Sec. 299:  of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 reads as follows:
“Sec. 299: culpable homicide:
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of
causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such
act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.
Explanation 1: A person who causes bodily injury to another who is
labouring under a disorder, disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby
accelerates the death of that other, shall be deemed to have caused the
death.
Explanation 2: Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person
who causes such bodily injury shall be deemed to have caused the
death, although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment
the death might have been prevented.
Explanation  3: The causing  of the  death  of child  in the mother’s
womb is not homicide.   But it may amount to culpable homicide to
cause the death of a living child, if any part of that child has been
brought  forth,  though  the  child  may  not  have  breathed  or  been
completely born.”
383

Under sec. 299, whoever causes death by doing an act –
i) with the intention of causing death, or
ii) with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to
cause death, or
iii) with the knowledge that he is likely by such act   to cause death,
commits the offence of culpable homicide.
Therefore, if death is caused with the knowledge that he, the doctor,
is  likely. by such  act to cause death, then, the act amounts  to culpable
homicide not amounting to murder and is punishable under sec. 304 which
may extend upto ten years imprisonment, fine or both.  It will not be an
offence if the act comes within any exceptions provided in the Penal Code.
Elaborating the above, we may state again that under the main part of
sec 299, the doctor is not guilty because he had no intention to cause death
or bodily injury which is likely to cause death.  But where he knows that
withdrawal of life support will cause death, is he guilty under sec 299?
Now under this third part of sec 299, he will be guilty only if the knowledge
above mentioned was that the act of withdrawal would cause death.  This
third part gets attracted to the act of the doctor and he will be guilty of
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, punishable under Part II of sec
304.  We shall consider separately whether the exceptions in ss 76, 79, 81
and 88 of the Penal Code apply to protect the doctor.  We shall consider the
applicability of sec  299  in  the case  of  (i)  competent  patients,  informed
decision, (ii) competent patients, no informed decision and (iii) incompetent
patients, separately
384

(i) Competent patient: Informed decision:
Where a patient who is competent refuses medical treatment and the
doctor obeys and withholds or withdraws treatment, then does the doctor
commit an offence under sec 299?
The first and second parts of the section 299 do not apply because
there is no ‘intention’ either to cause death or bodily injury likely to cause
death.  But, the act may fall under the third part because the doctor has
‘knowledge’ that the act of withdrawal is likely to cause death.  Therefore,
there can be an offence under sec 299.  (As to exceptions,  we shall refer to
it lower down).
(ii) Competent patient: No informed decision:
When a patient is competent but the decision is not an informed one,
the doctor has to take a decision in the best interests of the patient.
Here too, he may not have the intention referred to in the first and
second parts of sec 299 but he has the ‘knowledge’ referred to the third part
of sec 299.  Therefore, he may be guilty of an offence under sec 299 (As to
exceptions, we shall refer to it lower down).
(iii) Incompetent patient:
385

Here the doctor is satisfied that the patient is incompetent and he
takes a decision to discontinue treatment, in the best interests of the patient.
Here too, there is no intention as referred to in the first and second
parts of sec 299, but he has the ‘knowledge’ referred to in third part of sec
299.   Here he may be liable for an offence under sec 299.  (As to exception,
we shall refer to them lower down.)
Exceptions:
Section 76 (Exception)
(B) Section 76reads as follows:
“Section 76: Act done by a person bound by mistake of fact believing
him bound by law :  Nothing is an offence which is done by a person
who is, cited by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a
mistake of law in good faith believe himself to be, bound by law to do
it.”
We are referring to this section because the “Guidelines for limiting
life-prolonging interventions and providing palliative care towards the end
of life  in Indian Intensive Care Units” (Extensive study of the Position
Statement  of  the  Ethics  Committee  of  India  Society  of  Critical  Care
Medicine)  contains  an  appendix  (Legal  Provisions  in  Indian  Law  for
Limiting Life Support), in which sec 76 has been discussed.  (Appendix was
prepared by Sri S. Balakrishnan, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court and Sri
R.K. Mani, Consultant Pulmunologist and Intensivist.
386

In our view, sec 76 is attracted to the case of doctors taking action to
withhold or withdraw treatment in the case of refusal to medical treatment
by a competent patient.  Such refusal being binding on the doctor (provided,
of  course,  the  doctor  is  satisfied  that  the  patient  is  competent  and  the
patient’s decision is an informed one).  In such cases sec 76 brings the
doctor’s action under the exception.
    
(C) Section 79: (exception)  
“Section 79:  Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who
is justified by law or by reason of mistake of fact and not by reason of
mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law in
doing it.”
The act of withholding or withdrawing medical treatment in all the cases (i),
(ii) and (iii) above will fall under the exception if the said act is “justified by
law”.
This section applies to the doctor’s action in the case of both competent and
incompetent patients.
In our view, in the light of the judgment in Gian Kaur     of the Supreme
Court, Airedale of the House of Lords and Cruzan of the American Supreme
Court and judgments in Canada, Australia and New Zealand, the common
law confers a duty on the doctor to withhold or withdraw treatment if so
instructed by a competent patient.   In the case of a competent patient who
has  not  taken  an  informed  decision  and  in  the  case  of an  incompetent
387

patient,  the  doctors  are  justified,  under  the  circumstances  to  withdraw
treatment if it is in the best interests of the patient.  Hence the action is
‘justified by law’ and in all cases (i), (ii) and (iii), he is protected by sec 79
first part.  If he is mistaken in his decision to withdraw life support, and the
decision is in good faith, he is protected by second part of sec 79, both in
the case of competent and incompetent patients.
In respect of sec 79,  Raj Kapoor vs.  Laxman: AIR 1980 SC 605
decided the meaning of the words “justified by law”.  It was observed:
“The position that emerges is this.  Jurisprudentially viewed, an act
may be an offence, definitionally speaking: but a forbidden act may
not  spell  inevitable  guilt  if  the  law  itself  declares  that  in  certain
circumstances, it is not to be regarded as an offence.  The Chapter on
General Exception operates in this provision.  Section 79 makes an
offence  a  non-offence.   When?   Only  when  the  offending  act  is
actually justified by law or is bona fide believed by mistake of fact to
be so justified.
It is also stated, after referring to dictionary that “Lexically the sense
is clear.  An act is justified by law if it is warranted, validated and
made blameless by law.”
In the light of the Judgment in Gian Kaur, Airedale, Cruzan & other
cases  referred  to  in  the  previous  Chaper  read  with  Raj  Kapoor,  the
withholding or withdrawal of life support system in the case of competent
patient on account of the patient’s refusal to treatment, and in the case of
388

incompetent  patients  (and  ‘competent  patients’  whose  decision  is  not
informed) if the action was in the patient’s best interests,- then the act of
omission of the doctor is lawful, i.e. ‘justified by law’.  Hence the doctors
are protected.
(D) Section 81: (exception)
“Section 81: Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent,
and to prevent other harm:
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with knowledge
that it is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal intention
to cause harm, and in good faith for the purposes preventing or avoiding
other harm to person or property.
Explanation: It is a question of act in such a case whether the harm
to be prevented or avoided was of such a nature and so imminent as to
justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that if was
likely to cause harm.”
This  section  may  be  applicable  both  in  cases  of  competent  or
incompetent patients but involves proof of several questions of fact, even if
there is no criminal intent.  In our view, ss 76 and 79 give far greater
protection than sec 81.  Further, this section covers cases of ,necessity’ and
only speaks of ‘harm to person or property’, whereas here we are dealing
with death.
(E) Section 88: (Exception)
389

Section 88:  Action not intended to cause death, done by consent in good
faith for person’s benefit
“Nothing which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of
any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, or be
known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for whose benefit
it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent whether express or
implied; to suffer that harm or to take the risk of that harm.”
This section applies to competent patients who give consent but the consent
is for acts which will cover ‘benefit’.  This section also requires several
facts to be proved and question is of ‘benefit’.  We must go to the extent of
saying that death relieves pain or suffering and is beneficial.
In our view, ss 76, 79 are more appropriate that sec 88 and there is no
offence under sec 299 read with sec 304 of the Penal Code.
Section 304A: (causing death by negligence): (position of doctor).
We next come to sec. 304A which deals with criminal negligence vis-
à-vis the position of doctors, the Supreme Court in Jacob Mathew State of
Punjab 2005 (6) SCC 1.
Sec. 304A speaks of ‘causing death by negligence’.   It says:
390

“Sec. 304A:  Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any
rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine or with both.”
The Supreme Court in Jacob Mathew’s case referred to ss. 88, 92, 93
and 304A of the Penal Code and stated that for purposes of criminal law, so
far as doctors are concerned, sec. 304A requires ‘gross negligence’ to be
proved.    The Court pointed out that it must be established that no medical
professional in his ordinary senses and prudences would have done or failed
to do the thing which was attributed to the accused-doctor.
In our view, where a medical practitioner is under a duty at common
law to obey the refusal of a patient who is an adult and who is competent, to
take medical treatment, he cannot be accused of gross negligence resulting
in the death of person within the above parameters.  Likewise in the case of
a competent patient, whose decision is not an informed one and in the case
of an incompetent patient, if the doctor decides to withhold or withdraw
treatment in the best interests of the patient and that is based upon the expert
opinion of a body of experts, then the action of withholding or withdrawal
cannot  be  said  to  be  a  grossly  negligent  act.   Hence  sec  304A  is  not
attracted.   The doctor is merely going by the wish of the patient to allow
nature to take its course.   Therefore, sec. 304A is not applicable.
Summary: 
391

Thus, the provisions of sec 299 even if attracted to the cases of the
doctor, ss 76 and 79 protect that action.  Sec 304A is not applicable. 
Civil Liability – Torts:
So  far  as  civil  liability  of  the  doctors  under  the  law  of  torts  is
concerned, the position as per the discussion in the previous chapters, is as
follows:
(a) Where the  competent patient who is afflicted by serious disease,
refuses treatment after being duly informed about all aspects of the
disease and treatment, the doctor is bound to obey the same and
withhold  or  withdraw  treatment.   There  is  no  duty to  start  or
continue  treatment,  if  a  properly  informed  patient  refuses  to
receive  medical  treatment.   If  death  ensues  on  account  of  the
doctor  obeying  the  patient’s  refusal,  then  there  is  no  cause  of
action to sue the doctor for negligence, seeking damages.
(b) Where the patient is incompetent, either being a minor or person
of unsound mind or is, on account of the pain and suffering or on
account of his being in a persistent vegetative state, unable to take
decisions  as  to  whether  he  would  or  would  not  have  medical
treatment, the doctor has to take a decision in the best interests of
the patient based upon an informed body of medical opinion of
experts.  In that case, as he is acting in good faith, his action in
withholding or withdrawing medical treatment is protected and he
is not liable in tort for damages.
392

(c) In the case of competent patient who has not taken an informed
decision,  the  doctor’s  action  taken  in  the  best  interests  of  the
patient is lawful and what we said under (b) equally applies here.
The civil liability of doctors in torts is discussed in several decisions
of the Supreme Court but suffice it to refer to the recent decision of the
Supreme Court in Jacob Mathew: 2005 (6) SCC page 1, State of Punjab vs.
Shiv Ram: 2005(7) SCC 1 and State of Haryana vs. Raj Rani: 2005(7) SCC
22.  The Supreme Court accepted the principles laid down in Bolam: 1957
(1) WLR 582 and the law is stated in Halsbury’s Laws of England (4th Ed,
Vol 30, para 35) as follows) so far as civil liability under the law of torts is
concerned:
“The practitioner must bring to his task a reasonable degree of skill
and  knowledge,  and  must  exercise  a  reasonable  degree  of  care.
Neither  the  very  highest  nor  a  very  low  degree  of  care  and
competence – judged in the light of the particular circumstances of
each case,- is what the law requires, and a person is not liable in
negligence  because  someone  else  of  greater  skill  and  knowledge
would have prescribed a different treatment or operated in a different
way; nor is he guilty of negligence if he has acted accordance with a
practice accepted as proper by a responsible body of medical men
skilled in that particular art, even though a body of adverse opinion
also existed among medical men.
Deviation  from  normal  practice  is  not  necessarily  evidence  of
negligence.  To establish liability on that basis, it must be shown (1)
that there is a usual and normal practice; (2) that the defendant has
393

not  adopted  it;  and  (3) that  the  course  in  fact  adopted  is  one no
professional man of ordinary skill would have taken, had he been
acting with ordinary care”
The Supreme Court in Jacob Mathew also stated something as to civil
liability which is particularly relevant in the present context.    It stated (p.
21 SCC):
“The usual practice prevalent nowadays is to obtain the consent of the
patient or of the person-in-charge of the patient if the patient is not in
a position to give consent before adopting a procedure.  So long as it
can be found that the procedure which was in fact adopted was one
which was acceptable to medical science as on that date, the medical
practitioner  cannot  be  held  negligent  merely  because  he  chose  to
follow one procedure and not another and the result was failure”
Summary:
In  the  light  of  the  above  principles,  the  decision  of  a  doctor  to
withhold or withdraw life saving treatment based upon the view of an expert
body of medical mean the particular field is therefore not actionable in tort.
Proposal in draft Bill:
We, however, propose a section, by way of abundant caution, that in
case of a doctor withholds or withdraws medical treatment, i.e. artificial
nutrition or hydration, in respect of terminally ill patients, then the act or
394

omission is lawful.  If it is ‘lawful’, it is ‘justified by law’ for purposes of
section 79:-
(a) in  the  case  of  competent  patient,  the  patient  has  refused
treatment unless the doctor is satisfied that the patient is not
competent  or  that  the  patient’s  decision  is  not  an  informed
decision.
(b) In the case of an incompetent patient, the doctor has acted in
the best interests of the patient and has consulted at least three
medical practitioners.
(c) In the case of a competent patient, the patient has not taken an
informed decision and the doctor has acted in his best interests,
the position is akin to (b).
In fact,  in  the  case  of  a  competent  patient  whose  decision  is  an
informed one, it is the duty of the doctor to go by the patient’s refusal as it is
binding on him.
14) a) Guidelines  by  Medical  Council  of  India  :  Provisions  in
proposed Bill is necessary
Medical Council may consult expert bodies including Indian Society
for Critical Care Medicine:
Medical Council of India has not issued any separate guidelines in
relation to the subject under study, except the following:-
395

The Medical Council of India in exercise of the powers conferred
under section 20A read with section 33(m) of the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956, with the previous approval of the Central Government, has made
Regulation relating to the Professional conduct, Etiquette and Ethics for
medical practitioners, namely, “The Indian Medical Council (Professional
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002.”  Chapter I deals with
Code of Medical Ethics.
Regulation 1.1deals with character of the Physician. According to it, a
physician  should  uphold  the  dignity  and  honour  of  his  profession.  The
prime object of the medical profession is to render service to humanity.
Regulation 1.2 deals with the need to maintain good medical practice.  It
states that he principle of the medical professional is to render service to
humanity with full respect for the dignity of profession and man. Physicians
should  merit  the  confidence  of  patients  entrusted  to  take  their  care,
rendering to each a full measure of service and devotion. Chapter 6 deals
with unethical acts.  It says that “a physician shall not aid or abet or commit
any  of  the  following  acts  which  shall  be  construed  as  unethical”.
Regulation 6.7 declares ‘euthanasia’ as an unethical act.  It reads as follows:
“6.7   Euthanasia:   Practicing  euthanasia  shall  constitute  unethical
conduct.  However on specific occasions, the question of withdrawing
supporting devices to sustain cardio-pulmonary function even after
brain death, shall be decided only by a team of doctors and not merely
by the  treating  physician  alone.  A team of  doctors  shall  declare
withdrawal of support-system. Such team shall consist of the doctors
in charge of the patient, Chief Medical Officer/Medical Officer In-
396

charge of the hospital and a doctor nominated by the in-charge of the
hospital staff in accordance with the provisions of the Transplantation
of Human Organ Act, 1994.”
As per Regulation 7.1, a physician, if he or she commits any violation of
these regulations, shall be guilty of professional misconduct and liable for
disciplinary action.
Ethics Committee of the Indian Society of Critical Care Medicines
has  made  ‘Guidelines  for  limiting  life  prolonging  interventions  and
providing palliative care towards the end of life in Indian Intensive care
Units.  These guidelines are eight in number and read as follows:
i. The  physician  has  a  duty  to  disclose  to  the  capable
patient  or  family,  the  patient’s  poor  prognosis  with
honesty  and  clarity  when  further  aggressive  support
appears  non-beneficial.   The  physician  should  initiate
discussions on the treatment options available including
the option of no specific treatment.
ii. When  the  fully  informed  capable  patient  or  family
desires to consider palliative care, the physician should
offer the available modalities of limiting life-prolonging
interventions.
iii. The physician must discuss the implications of forgoing
aggressive  interventions  through  formal  conferences
with the capable patient or family, and work towards a
shared  decision-making  process.   Thus,  he  accepts
397

patient’s  autonomy  in  making  an  informed  choice  of
therapy,  while  fulfilling  his/her  obligation  to  provide
beneficent care.
iv. Pending consensus decisions or in the event of conflicts
between  the  physician’s  recommendations  and  he
family’s  wishes,  all  existing  supportive  interventions
should continue.  The physician however, is not morally
obliged to institute new therapies against his/her better
clinical judgment.
v. The discussions leading up to the decision to withhold
life-sustaining therapies should be clearly documented in
the case  records,  to  ensure  transparency and  to  avoid
future misunderstandings.  Such documentation should
mention the persons who participated  in the decision-
making  process  and  the  treatments  withheld  or
withdrawn.
vi. The overall responsibility for the decision rests with the
attending physician/intensivist of the patient, who must
ensure that all members of the caregiver team including
the medical and nursing staff agree with and follow the
same approach to the care of the patient.
vii. if the capable patient or family consistently desires that
life  support  be  withdrawn,  in  situations  in  which  the
physician considers aggressive treatment non-beneficial,
the  treating  team  is  ethically  bound  to  consider
withdrawal within the limits of existing laws.
398

viii. In the event of withdrawal or withholding of support, it
is the physician’s obligation to provide compassionate
and  effective  palliative  care  to  the  patient  as  well  as
attend to the emotional needs of the family.
Proposal:
We propose a section in the Act requiring medical practitioners to be
guided by the Guidelines of the Medical Council of India for purposes of
the Act, and the Council may revise and modify the same from time to time.
The Guidelines must relate to the principles to be borne in mind by medical
practitioners as to the circumstances under which a medical practitioner may
withhold or withdraw medical treatment, including artificial nutrition and
hydration, in case of patients who are terminally ill. The Guidelines must
deal with competent and incompetent patients, informed decisions and best
interests and other aspects referred to in this Report and in the draft bill
annexed to this Report.
In the Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics)
Regulation 2002, a study of Reg. 6.7 gives an impression that a certain
procedure indicated there is to be followed.  The heading ‘Euthanasia’ is
referable only to the first sentence and does not apply to the rest of Reg. 6.7.
No distinction is made between competent and incompetent patients in Reg.
6.7.  In fact, it will be useful if a separate set of regulations dealing with
‘withholding and withdrawal of life support systems’ (which is different
from Euthanasia) is prepared and published.
399

We hope the medical Council of India will make a thorough study of
this Report of the Law Commission, the statutes and case law referred to in
this  Report  and  in  particular  in this  chapter,  before preparing  any such
guidelines. The guidelines must be consistent with the provisions of the
proposed Act.
While evolving guidelines, the Medical Council of India may consult
various  other expert  bodies like the Society for Critical Care Medicine,
India Chapter.
We propose a provision in the Bill requiring the Medical Council of
India to issue guidelines and publish the same in the Gazette of India.
Draft Medical Treatment (Protection of Patients, Doctors) Bill
We propose a draft of the Bill in the light of the preceding chapters
on  the  subject  of  ‘Medical  Treatment  (Protection  of  Patients,  Doctors).
While  preparing  this  draft,  we  have  kept  in  mind  the  Parliamentary
legislation on a connected subject, namely, the ‘Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Act, 1971’.
400

   Chapter VIII
Summary of Recommendations
In the previous chapters, we have considered various important issues
on the subject of withholding or withdrawing medical treatment (including
artificial nutrition and hydration) from terminally ill-patients.   In Chapter
VII, we have considered what is suitable for our country.   Various aspects
arise for consideration, namely, as to who are competent and incompetent
patients, as to what is meant by ‘informed decision’, what is meant by ‘best
interests’  of  a  patient,  whether  patients,  their  relations  or  doctors  or
hospitals  can move a Court of law seeking  a declaration that an act or
omission or a proposed act or omission of a doctor is lawful, if so, whether
such decisions will be binding on the parties and doctors, in future civil and
criminal proceedings etc.   Questions have arisen whether a patient who
refuses  treatment  is  guilty of attempt  to  commit suicide  or whether the
doctors  are  guilty  of  abetment  of  suicide  or  culpable  homicide  not
amounting to murder etc.   On these issues, we have given our views in
Chapter VII on a consideration of law and vast comparative literature.
In  this  chapter,  we  propose  to  give  a  summary  of  our
recommendations and the corresponding sections of the proposed Bill which
deal with each of the recommendations.    (The draft of the Bill is annexed
to this Report).   We shall now refer to our recommendations.
1) There is need to have a law to protect patients who are terminally ill,
when they take decisions to refuse medical treatment, including artificial
401

nutrition and hydration, so that they may not be considered guilty of the
offence of ‘attempt to commit suicide’ under sec. 309 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.   
It is also necessary to protect doctors (and those who act under their
directions) who obey the competent patient’s informed decision or who, in
the  case  of  (i)  incompetent  patients  or  (ii)  competent  patients  whose
decisions are not informed decisions, and decide that in the best interests of
such patients, the medical treatment needs to be withheld or withdrawn as it
is not likely to serve any purpose.   Such actions of doctors must be declared
by statute to be ‘lawful’ in order to protect doctors and those who act under
their directions if they are hauled up for the offence of ‘abetment of suicide’
under sections 305, 306 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, or for the offence
of culpable homicide not amounting to murder under sec. 299 read with sec.
304 of the Penal Code, 1860 or in actions under civil law.
2) Parliament is competent to make such a law under Entry 26 of List III
of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India in regard to patients
and medical practitioners.   The proposed law, in our view, should be called
‘The Medical Treatment of Terminally Ill Patients (Protection of Patients,
Medical Practitioners) Act.
3) So far as ‘definitions’ of certain important words are concerned, we
propose a number of definitions which will reflect the meaning of various
important words.
402

(a) There must be a definition of ‘patient’ as a patient who is suffering
from ‘terminal illness’, because we are concerned only with such patients in
this Report.   (See sec. 2(a))
(b) There must be a definition of a ‘competent patient’ and also of an
‘incompetent  patient’.    In  this  context,  we  felt  that  it  would  be
advantageous to give a detailed definition of an ‘incompetent patient’ (see
sec. 2(d)) and define a ‘competent patient’ (see sec. 2(c)) as one who is not
an ‘incompetent patient’.
So  far as  the  definition  of  an ‘incompetent  patient’  (sec. 2(d))  is
concerned, we are of the view that the definition must reflect the various
aspects covered by C-Test of Justice Thorpe.   The definition of ‘competent’
and ‘incompetent patients’ must, in our view, be as follows:
(a) “‘competent  patient’  means  a  patient  who  is  not  an  incompetent
patient.”
(b) “‘incompetent patient’ means a patient who is a minor or person of
unsound mind or a patient who is unable to
(i) understand the information relevant to an informed decision
about his or her medical treatment;
(ii) retain that information;
(iii) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making
his or her informed decision; 
(iv) make  an  informed  decision  because  of  impairment  of  or  a
disturbance in the functioning of his or her mind or brain; or
(v) communicate his or her informed decision (whether by speech,
sign, language or any other mode) as to medical treatment.”
403

(c) There must be a definition of ‘terminal illness’ because the question
of  withholding  or withdrawal  of medical  treatment  relates  only to  such
patients (see sec. 2(m)).  In our view, the definition must be as follows:
“‘terminal illness’ means 
(i) such  illness,  injury  or  degeneration  of  physical  or  mental
condition which is causing extreme pain and suffering to the patient
and which, according to reasonable medical opinion, will inevitably
cause the untimely death of the patient concerned, or 
(ii) which  has  caused  a  persistent  and  irreversible  vegetative
condition under which no meaningful existence of life is possible for
the patient.”
(d) The  definition  of  ‘medical  treatment’  (see  sec.  2(i))  as  given  to
terminally ill patients includes artificial nutrition and hydration. In our view,
the definition must be as follows:
“‘medical treatment’ means treatment intended to sustain, restore or
replace  vital functions  which, when  applied  to a patient  suffering
from terminal  illness, would serve  only to prolong  the process  of
dying and includes
(i) life-sustaining treatment by way of surgical operation or the
administration of medicine or the carrying out of any other medical
procedure and 
(ii) use  of  mechanical  or  artificial  means  such  as  ventilation,
artificial nutrition and hydration and cardiopulmonary resuscitation.”
404

(e) There must be a definition of an ‘informed decision’ (see sec. 2(e))
which a competent patient is supposed to take about his medical treatment.
It must reflect the various aspects referred to by us in the earlier chapters.
In our view, ‘informed decision’ must be defined as follows:
“‘informed decision’ means the decision as to starting or continuance
or withholding or withdrawing medical treatment taken by a patient
who is competent and who is, or has been informed about
(i) the nature of his or her illness, 
(ii) any alternative form of treatment that may be available, 
(iii) the consequences of those forms of treatment, and 
(iv) the consequences of remaining untreated.”
(f) There must be a definition of ‘best interests’ of the patient (see sec. 2
(b)) i.e. in regard to (i) an incompetent patient, in regard to whom the doctor
takes  a  medical  decision  in  the  patient’s  best  interests,  (ii)  competent
patients whose decision is not an informed one.   The definition should
reflect the meaning given by Justice Thorpe, Dame Butler-Sloss and others
in decided cases referred to by us where it is said that the best interests are
not  confined  to  medical  interests  but  include  the  ethical,  social,  moral,
emotional and other welfare considerations of the patient.
In our view, the definition of ‘best interests’ must be as follows:
“‘best interests’ include the best interests of a patient 
(i) who is an incompetent patient, or 
405

(ii) who is a competent patient but who has not taken an informed
decision, and 
are not limited to medical interests of the patient but include ethical,
social, moral, emotional and other welfare considerations.”
(g) ‘Palliative care’ (see sec. 2(k)) is permissible to be given by doctors
for securing relief from pain and suffering even where the doctor obeys the
informed  decision  of  a  competent  patient  to  withhold  or  withdraw  the
medical treatment.   This definition must also be applicable to ‘incompetent
patients’ who are conscious and who are not in a persistent vegetative state.
Hence, a definition of ‘palliative care’ is proposed to be included.
We are of  the  view  that  a  definition  of ‘palliative  care’ must  be
introduced as follows:
“‘palliative care’ includes
(i) the provision of reasonable medical and nursing procedures for
the relief of physical pain, suffering, discomfort or emotional and
psycho-social suffering.
(ii) the reasonable provision for food and water.”
(h) There should be a definition of ‘medical practitioner’ (see sec. 2(g)).
We are adopting the definition in the Medical Termination of Pregnancy
Act, 1971.    
It reads as follows:
“‘medical practitioner’ means a medical practitioner who possesses
any  recognized  medical  qualification  as  defined  in  clause  (h)  of
406

section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and
who is enrolled on a State Medical Register as defined in clause (k) of
that section.”
(i) There needs to be a definition of ‘minor’ (see sec. 2(j)) as defined in
the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (4/1875) because a patient who is a minor is
‘incompetent’.
“‘minor’  means  a  person  who,  under  the  provisions  of an  Indian
Majority Act, 1875 (4 of 1875) is to be deemed not to have attained
majority.”
(j) For  the  reasons  stated  in  the  last  chapter,  we  propose  to  declare
‘Advance  Medical  Directives’  as  well  as  ‘Medical  Powers  of  Attorney’
(Living Will) void for the reasons given in Chapter VII and hence both of
these need to be defined. (see sec. 2(a) and sec. 2(h))
‘Advance Medical Directive’ is to be defined as follows:
“‘advance medical directive’ (called living will) means a directive
given by a person that he or she, as the case may be, shall or shall not
be  given  medical  treatment  in  future  when  he  or  she  becomes
terminally ill.”
‘Medical Power of Attorney’ is to be defined as follows:
407

“‘medical power-of-attorney’ means a document executed by a person
delegating to another person (called a surrogate), the authority to take
decisions in future as to medical treatment which has to be given or
not to be given to him or her if he or she becomes terminally ill and
becomes an incompetent patient.”
Section  4  of  the  proposed  Bill  states  that  the  Advance  Medical
Directive and the Medical Power of Attorney being void and of no effect
and shall not be binding on the medical practitioner.
4) We next come to the substantive provisions of the proposed Bill.
Obviously,  the  first  thing  that  is  to  be  declared  is  that  every
‘competent patient’, who is suffering from terminal illness has a right to
refuse medical treatment (as defined i.e. including artificial nutrition and
respiration)  or  the  starting  or continuation  of  such  treatment  which  has
already been started.  (sec. 3(1))
If such informed decision  is taken by the competent patient, it is
binding on the doctor.   (see sec. 3(2))
At the same time, the doctor must be satisfied that the decision is
made by a competent patient and that it is an informed decision.  Such
informed  decision  must  be  one  taken  by  the  competent  patient
independently, all by himself i.e. without undue pressure or influence from
others.   This aspect will be contained in the proviso to sec. 3(2).
408

It  must  also  be  made  clear  that  the  doctor,  notwithstanding  the
withholding or withdrawal of treatment, is entitled to administer palliative
care  i.e.  to  relieve  pain  or  suffering  or  discomfort  or  emotional  and
psychological suffering to the incompetent patient (who is conscious) and
also to the competent patient who has refused medical treatment.   (sec. 9)
5) We  next  come  to  (a)  ‘incompetent  patients’  and  (b)  competent
patients whose decisions are not informed ones, in respect of whom the
doctor  is  entitled  to  take  a  decision  for  withholding  or  withdrawal  of
medical treatment provided it is in the ‘best interests’ of the patient.   (sec.
5)
Here it is necessary to be very careful so that appropriate decisions
are taken and the Act is not abused.   We propose to provide that the doctor
shall not withhold or withdraw treatment unless he has obtained opinion of
a body of three expert medical practitioners from a panel prepared by high
ranking Authority.   Such a safeguard is necessary in view of the judgment
in  Bolam.   We also wish to provide that where there is a difference of
opinion among the three experts, the majority opinion shall prevail.  (sec. 6)
We are also providing that the medical practitioner shall consult the
parents or close relatives (if any) of the patient but that their views shall not
be binding on the medical practitioner because it is the prerogative of the
medical  practitioner  to  take  a  clinical  decision  on  the  basis  of  expert
medical opinion.   (see sec. 5(2))
409

We also propose another important caution, namely, that the decision
to withhold or withdraw must be based on guidelines issued by the Medical
Council of India as to the circumstances under which medical treatment in
regard to the particular illness or disease, could be withdrawn or withheld.
Of course, these guidelines must be consistent with the provisions of the
proposed Act.   (see sec. 5(2) and sec. 14)
We  propose  in  sec.  14  that  it  will  be  necessary  for  the  Medical
Council of India to issue guidelines.   (The Medical Council of India could
consult other expert bodies dealing with critical care such as the Indian
Society for Critical Care Medicine which has also issued several guidelines
and which, in fact, has requested us to prepare a Report on the subject).  The
guidelines are to be published in the Gazette of India and on the website of
he Medical Council of India.
The attending physician cannot choose experts of his own choice.
Here too one has to be careful to see that the experts are duly qualified and
have necessary experience.  It is,  therefore, proposed  that  the attending
physician  must  choose  from  a  panel  prepared  by  a  recognized  public
authority.   This is necessary to ward off complaints of abuse of the system.
(sec. 7)
We propose that the panel of experts must be prepared and published
by  the  Director  General  of  Health  Services,  Central  Government  for
purposes  of the Union  Territories  and by the Directors  of Medicine  (or
authorities holding equivalent posts) in the States.  The panel must contain
names of medical  experts  in  different  fields  who can take  decisions  on
410

withholding or withdrawing medical treatment.  The experts must have at
least  20 years experience  and must be of good  repute.  Those who are
subject to disciplinary proceedings or who are found guilty of professional
misconduct should not be included by the above Authorities in such panels.
But, once the panels are prepared, in our view, the selection of the three
experts must be left to the attending medical practitioner.  (sec. 7)
The location of the  place of treatment will define the appropriate
panel of the relevant State or Union Territory for purposes of selection of
experts by the attending medical practitioner.   (sec. 7)
The panel prepared by the above Authorities will be published in the
Official Gazette of the Government of India or of the concerned State, as the
case may be and also on their respective websites.    (sec. 7)
It  shall  be  necessary  for  the  Medical  Practitioner  to  maintain  a
register where he obeys the patient’s refusal to have the medical treatment
or  where,  in  the  case  of  (i)  competent  or  incompetent  patient  or  (ii)  a
competent patient (who has or has not taken an informed decision) he takes
a decision to withhold or withdraw or starting or continuance of medical
treatment, he must refer to all these maters in the register.  The register shall
contain  the  reasons  as  to  why  he  thinks  the  patient  is  competent  or
incompetent, or what the experts  have opined,  as to why he  thinks  the
medical treatment has to be withheld or withdrawn in the best interests of
the patient.  He must also record age, sex, address and other particulars of
the patient or the expert advice given under sec. 6 from the panel referred to
in section 7.
411

Before withholding or withdrawing medical treatment under sec 5, in
the  case  of  incompetent  patients  and  patients  who  have  not  taken  an
informed decision, the medical practitioner, shall inform in writing to the
patient  (if  he  is  conscious),  parents  or  relatives,  about  the  decision  to
withhold or withdraw medical treatment in the patient’s best interests.
Where  such  patients,  parents  or  relatives  inform  the  medical
practitioner of their intention to move the High Court under sec 14, the
medical  practitioner  shall  postpone  such  withholding  or  withdrawal  for
fifteen days and if no orders are received from the High Court within that
period, he may proceed with the withholding or withdrawing of the medical
treatment.
A  photocopy  of  the  pages  of  the  register  should  be  lodged
immediately with the Director General of Health Services  or the Director of
Medical Services of the concerned State where the treatment is being given
or  proposed  or  is  proposed  to  be  withheld  or  withdrawn,  and
acknowledgment  obtained.    The  contents  of the  register  shall  be  kept
confidential and not revealed to the public or media.
The said authorities shall also maintain these photocopies in a register
but shall keep the information confidential and shall not reveal the same to
the public or media.
The said authorities may make rules for the purposes of sections 7
and 8 and publish the same in the appropriate Gazette.
412

6) We then come to the crucial provisions of the proposed Bill which
will  protect  the  patient in  his  decision  for  withholding  or  withdrawing
medical treatment and thereby allowing nature to take its own course.   A
patient  who  takes  a  decision  for  withdrawal  or  withholding  medical
treatment has to be protected from prosecution for the offence of ‘attempt to
commit suicide’ under sec. 309 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.   This
provision is by way of abundant caution because it is our view, as stated in
the last chapter, that the very provisions are not attracted and the common
law also says that a patient is entitled to allow nature to take its own course
and if he does so, he commits no offence.   (sec. 10)
Likewise, the doctors have to be protected if they are prosecuted for
‘abetment of suicide’ under sections 305, 306 of the Penal Code, 1860 or of
culpable homicide not amounting to murder under sec. 299 read with sec.
304  of  the  Penal  Code,  1860  when  they  take  decisions  to  withhold  or
withdraw life support and in the best interests of incompetent patients and
also in the case of competent patients  who have not taken an informed
decision.   Similarly, where doctors obey instructions of a competent patient
who  has  taken  an  informed  decision  for  withholding  or  withdrawing
treatment, they should be protected.  The hospital authorities should also get
the protection.   This provision is also by way of abundant caution and, in
fact, we have pointed out in the last chapter that the doctors are not guilty of
any of these offences under the above sections read with sections 76 and 79
of the Indian Penal Code as of today.    Their action clearly falls under the
exceptions in the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
413

We are also of the view that the doctors must be protected if civil and
criminal actions are instituted against them.    We, therefore, propose that if
the medical practitioner acts in accordance with the provisions of the Act
while withholding or withdrawing medical treatment, his action shall be
deemed to be ‘lawful’.    (sec. 11)
Our  proposal  to  treat  the  doctor’s  action,  in  the  circumstances
mentioned in the Act, as “lawful” requires, as a condition to be satisfied,
namely, that the doctor maintains a register as to why he thinks a patient is
competent  or incompetent,  or why a competent  patient’s  decision  is  an
informed one, what the opinion of the three experts is, and why withholding
or  withdrawing  medical  treatment  is  in  the  best  interests  according  to
experts and himself.   Maintenance of such record is mandatory and if such
record  is  not  maintained,  the  protection  afforded  under  this  Act  is  not
applicable  to  him.     We  are  proposing  this  provision  to  provide
transparency and to have necessary evidence as to why the doctor has acted
in a particular manner so that the Act is not abused.    (sec. 8)
7) In the United Kingdom and other common law countries, the patient,
parents or close relatives are entitled to seek declaratory relief in Courts for
preventing  the  doctors  or  hospitals  from  withholding  or  withdrawing
medical  treatment  or  sometimes  for  directing  such  withholding  or
withdrawal.
Such  declaratory  relief  is  granted  in  UK  and  other  common  law
countries when approached by doctors and hospitals where they are of the
414

opinion  that  it  is  necessary to  withhold  or withdraw  medical  treatment.
They seek a declaration that such action be declared ‘lawful’.
However,  in  Airedale (1993),  the  House  of  Lords  and  in  Burke
(2005), the Court of Appeal made it clear that it is not necessary in every
case for the doctors to seek a declaration that the proposed action is lawful.
Till a body or precedent is obtained, the medical profession may approach
the Courts so that Courts will lay down what is ‘good medical practice’ in
medical parlance.  It was also so stated by Thomas J in the New Zealand
case referred to by us (Auckland Area Health Board v. AG) (1993).  This
has already been done in UK.   
These  principles  are,  therefore,  proposed  to  be  substantially
incorporated in the proposed Act.  Therefore, we are of the view that only
an ‘enabling’ provision is necessary in this behalf but not a provision which
requires a declaratory relief to be obtained mandatorily in every case where
the medical treatment is proposed to be withheld or withdrawn.   The High
Court has to dispose of the original petition in the light of the provisions of
the proposed Bill.  (sec. 12)
We are also of the view that time is essence in the case of terminally
ill patients when decisions have to be taken under this enabling provision
for withholding or withdrawing treatment.   To avoid delays and appeals,
the Court which deals with these cases must, therefore, be a Division Bench
of the High Court and not the ordinary trial Courts.   The Division Bench
must deal with the matters with the greatest speed but, at the same time,
after hearing all concerned and after due consideration.    In England, we
415

find decisions are given sometimes almost immediately, soon after notices
are served and the declaration is given in 2 or 3 days.   Sometimes, reasons
are given later.   Therefore, we propose that these petitions be filed before a
Division  Bench  of  a  High  Court  and  should  be  disposed  of  within  a
maximum period of one month.    We propose a provision for the High
Court to call for further expert evidence or to examine further witnesses.
The High Court can also appoint an amicus curiae.   The High Court may
even pass orders first and give reasons later.     The High Court will be the
High Court within whose territorial jurisdiction the medical treatment is
proposed to be given or given or withheld or withdrawn.
There is yet another aspect debated in other countries. The question is
whether once a declaration is given by the Division Bench of the High
Court that such withholding or withdrawal is ‘lawful’, should it be binding
on the civil and criminal Courts in subsequent proceedings.   We have
referred to a  view of the House of Lords and of the other countries that
such declarations are not binding, at any rate, on criminal Courts.     We
have seen that in New Zealand judgment decided by Thomas J in Auckland
Area Health Board v. AG (1993), the learned Judge gave a declaration that
no criminal offence is committed under the particular section of the New
Zealand Criminal Code.
The High Court could be approached by the patient, parents, relatives,
doctors or hospitals.  The Court could hear all, including the next friend or
guardian ad litem as also the amicus curiae.
416

The declaration given by the High Court must benefit the patient, the
medical practitioner and the concerned hospital also.
According to our law of precedents, where there is already a decision
of a Division Bench of the High Court declaring the proposed action of
withholding or withdrawing medical treatment as lawful, such decisions of
the High Court are binding on the subordinate Courts, civil and criminal.
In order to prevent harassment in fresh litigation, we propose to make a
statutory provision that once a declaration is given by the Division Bench of
the High Court, that the action is lawful, it will be binding in subsequent
proceedings, civil and criminal.   This is permissible because the judgments
of  Division  Benches  of  High  Court  are  binding  precedents  on  all  trial
Courts, civil and criminal.   (sec. 12)
10)(a) There must be a provision preserving the privacy rights of patients
and the confidentiality of professional advice.   Once a petition is filed in
the High Court by patients, parents or relatives or doctors or hospitals, the
High Court must soon pass an order for keeping the identity of all persons,
including doctors, experts, hospital confidential.   In the proceedings  of
Court or in publications in the law reports or media, the identity of the
persons or hospital will not be disclosed and they will have to be described
by English alphabet letters as assigned by the High Court.  This prohibition
holds good during the pendency of the petition in the High Court and even
after it is disposed of. 
However, when the Court communicates its directions or decisions to
the patient, doctor or hospital or experts, it will be necessary to disclose real
417

identity of patient and others.  In such situations, the Court communications
shall be in sealed covers.   (sec. 13)
We  also  propose  that  if  any  person  or  body  breaches  the  above
provisions  as  to  confidentiality,  the  High  Court  may  take  action  for
contempt of Court.   (sec. 13)
(b) Even where the matter has not gone to the High Court, no person or
body including the media can publish the identity of the patient, doctor,
hospital, relatives or experts etc. and must keep identity confidential.   If
that is breached, they may be liable for civil or criminal action.
11) As stated earlier, while dealing with sections 5 and 7, there must be
provisions  mandating  the  Medical  Council  to  issue  guidelines  on  the
question of withholding or withdrawing medical treatment to competent or
incompetent patients suffering from terminal illness.   It may consult experts
and also experts in critical care medicine, before formulating the guidelines.
We are also providing that it can modify the same from time to time, and
they be published in the Official Gazette.   (sec. 14)
The above recommendations find place in the draft Bill prepared by
us and the Draft Bill is contained in the Annexure to this Report.
In the preparation of this Report, we place on record the important
suggestions  given  by  Sri  S.  Muralidhar,  Part-time  Member  of  the  Law
Commission.
418

We recommend accordingly.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
(K.N. Chaturvedi)
Member-Secretary
Dated: 31st March, 2006
419

Annexure
The Medical Treatment of Terminally ill Patients
(Protection of Patients and Medical Practitioners) Bill, 2006
A  Bill  to  provide  for  the  protection  of  patients  and  medical
practitioners from liability in the context of withholding or withdrawing
medical  treatment  including  life  support  systems  from patients  who  are
terminally ill.
Be it enacted in the Fifty Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. Short title, extent and commencement:  (1) This Act may be called the
Medical Treatment of Terminally ill  Patients (Protection of Patients and
Medical Practitioners) Act, 2006.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions:  unless the context otherwise requires,
420

(a) ‘advance  medical  directive’  (called  living  will)  means  a  directive
given by a person that he or she, as the case may be, shall or shall not be
given medical treatment in future when he or she becomes terminally ill.
(b) ‘best interests’ include the best interests of a patient 
(i) who is an incompetent patient, or 
(ii) who is a competent patient but who has not taken an informed
decision, and 
are not limited to medical interests of the patient but include ethical,
social, moral, emotional and other welfare considerations.
(c) ‘competent  patient’  means  a  patient  who  is  not  an  incompetent
patient.
(d) ‘incompetent patient’ means a patient who is a minor or person of
unsound mind or a patient who is unable to
(i) understand the information relevant to an informed decision
about his or her medical treatment;
(ii) retain that information;
(iii) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making
his or her informed decision; 
(iv) make  an  informed  decision  because  of  impairment  of  or  a
disturbance in the functioning of his or her mind or brain; or
(v) communicate his or her informed decision (whether by speech,
sign, language or any other mode) as to medical treatment.
421

(e) ‘informed  decision’  means  the  decision  as  to  continuance  or
withholding or withdrawing medical treatment taken by a patient who
is competent and who is, or has been informed about
(i) the nature of his or her illness, 
(ii) any alternative form of treatment that may be available, 
(iii) the consequences of those forms of treatment, and 
(iv) the consequences of remaining untreated.
(f) ‘Medical  Council  of  India’  means  the  Medical  Council  of  India
constituted  under  the  Indian  Medical  Council  Act,  1956  (102  of
1956).
(g) ‘medical  practitioner’ means  a medical  practitioner  who  possesses
any  recognized  medical  qualification  as  defined  in  clause  (h)  of
section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and
who is enrolled on a State Medical Register as defined in clause (k) of
that section.
(h) ‘medical power-of-attorney’ means a document executed by a person
delegating to another person (called a surrogate), the authority to take
decisions in future as to medical treatment which has to be given or
not to be given to him or her if he or she becomes terminally ill and
becomes an incompetent patient.
(i) ‘medical treatment’ means treatment intended to sustain, restore or
replace  vital functions  which, when  applied  to a patient  suffering
422

from terminal  illness, would serve  only to prolong  the process  of
dying and includes
(i) life-sustaining treatment by way of surgical operation or the
administration of medicine or the carrying out of any other medical
procedure and 
(ii) use  of  mechanical  or  artificial  means  such  as  ventilation,
artificial nutrition and hydration and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
(j) ‘minor’  means  a  person  who,  under  the  provisions  of  an  Indian
Majority Act, 1875 (4 of 1875) is to be deemed not to have attained
majority.
(k) ‘palliative care’ includes
(i) the provision of reasonable medical and nursing procedures for
the relief of physical pain, suffering, discomfort or emotional and
psycho-social suffering.
(ii) the reasonable provision for food and water.
(l) ‘Patient’ means a patient who is suffering from terminal illness.
(m) ‘terminal illness’ means 
(i) such  illness,  injury  or  degeneration  of  physical  or  mental
condition which is causing extreme pain and suffering to the patients
and which, according to reasonable medical opinion, will inevitably
cause the untimely death of the patient concerned, or 
423

(ii) which  has  caused  a  persistent  and  irreversible  vegetative
condition under which no meaningful existence of life is possible for
the patient.
3. Refusal of medical treatment by a competent patient and its binding
nature on medical practitioners:
(1) Every competent patient has a right to take a decision 
(i) for withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment to himself or
herself and to allow nature to take its own course, or
(ii) for starting or continuing medical treatment to himself or herself.
(2) When a patient referred to in subsection (1) communicates his or her
decision to the medical practitioner, such decision is binding on the
medical practitioner
Provided  that  the  medical  practitioner  is  satisfied  that  the
patient  is  a  competent  patient  and  that  the  patient  has  taken  an
informed decision based upon a free exercise of his or her free will.
4. Advance  Medical  Directives  as  to  medical  treatment  and  Medical
Power of Attorney to be void and not binding on medical practitioner:
Every  advance  medical  directive  (called  living  will)  or  medical
power-of-attorney executed by a person shall be void and of no effect and
shall not be binding on any medical practitioner.
424

5. Withholding  or  withdrawing  of  medical  treatment  by  medical
practitioner in relation to a competent patient who has not taken an
informed decision and in relation to an incompetent patient:
(1) Subject to compliance of the provisions of section 6, a medical
practitioner may take a decision to withhold  or withdraw medical
treatment
(a) from a competent patient who has not taken an informed
decision, or
(b) from an incompetent patient,
provided that the medical practitioner is of the opinion that the
medical treatment has to be withheld or withdrawn in the best
interests of the patient.
(2) The medical practitioner shall, while taking a decision under
subsection (1), 
(a) adhere to such guidelines as might have been issued by the
Medical Council of India under section 14 in relation to the
circumstances under which medical treatment to a patient in
respect  of  the  particular  illness  could  be  withheld  or
withdrawm, and
(b) consult the parents or relatives (if any) of the patient but
shall not be bound by their views.
6. Expert medical opinion to be obtained by medical practitioner for
purposes of section 5:
(1) No  decision  to  withhold  or  withdraw  medical  treatment  in
respect  of  patients  referred  to  in  section  5 shall  be taken  by any
425

medical practitioner unless such medical practitioner has consulted
and obtained  the opinion  in writing  of three medical practitioners
selected  by him from the  panel  of medical  experts  referred  to  in
section 7, who are experts in relation to the illness of the patient and
unless the majority opinion of the experts is in favour of withholding
or withdrawing the medical treatment.
(2) Where there is difference in the opinion of the three medical
experts, the majority opinion shall prevail.
7. Authority to prepare panel of medical experts for purposes of section
6:
(1) The Director General of Health Services, Central Government
and the Director of Medical Services (or officer holding equivalent
post)  in  each  State  shall,  prepare  a  panel  of  medical  experts  for
purposes of section 6.
(2) The panels referred to in subsection (1) shall include medical
experts  in various  branches  of medicine, surgery and critical care
medicine.
(3) The  medical  experts  referred  to  in  subsection  (1)  shall  be
experts with not less than twenty years experience.
(4) While  empanelling  medical  experts  on  the  panels,  the
authorities  mentioned  in  subsection  (1)  shall  keep  in  mind  the
reputation of the expert and shall exclude from the panel, experts
against  whom disciplinary proceedings  are pending with the State
Medical Council concerned or the Medical Council of India and those
experts who have been found guilty of professional misconduct.
426

(5) The panels prepared under subsection (1) shall be published in
the Official Gazette of the Central Government or the Official Gazette
of the State, as the case may be, and on the respective websites of the
said authorities and the panels may be reviewed and modified by the
authorities specified in subsection (1) from time to time and such
modifications shall also be published in the Gazettes as aforesaid, or
on the websites, as the case may be.
(6) The relevant panel for selection of experts will be the panel for
the State or Union Territory in which the medical treatment is being
given or is proposed or is proposed to be withheld or withdrawn.
8. Medical Practitioner to maintain register and inform patient, parents
etc:
(1) The medical practitioner who is bound to follow the decision of a
competent  patient  given  under  section  3 or who  takes  a decision  under
section 5, shall maintain a record in a register as to why he is satisfied that
(a) the patient is competent or incompetent;
(b) the competent patient has or has not taken an informed decision
about  withholding  or  withdrawing  or  starting  or  continuance  of
medical treatment;
(c) the best interests of an incompetent patient or of a competent
patient  who  has  not  taken  an  informed  decision,  require  medical
treatment to be withheld or withdrawn; and
shall maintain record of age, sex, address and other particulars of the
patient and as to the expert advice received by him under section 6
427

from the three experts selected by him out of the panel referred to in
section 7.
(2) Before withholding or withdrawing medical treatment under sec 5,
the medical practitioner shall inform in writing the patient (if he is
conscious),  his  parents  or  other  relatives  or  guardian  about  the
decision to withhold or withdraw such treatment in the patient’s best
interests.
(3) Where the patient, parents or relatives stated in subsection (2) inform
the medical practitioner of their intention to move the High Court
under  sec  14,  the  medical  practitioner  shall  postpone  such
withholding  or  withdrawal  by  fifteen  days  and  if  no  orders  are
received from the High within that period, he may proceed with the
withholding or withdrawing of the medical treatment.
(4) A photocopy of the pages in the register with regard to each such
patient shall be lodged immediately, as a matter of information, on the
same  date,  with  the  Director  General  of  Health  Services  or  the
Director of Medical Services of the Union Territory or State, as the
case may be, in which the medical treatment is being given or is
proposed  or  is  proposed  to  be  withheld  or  withdrawn  and
acknowledgement obtained and the contents of the register shall be
kept confidential by the medical practitioner and not revealed to the
public or media.
(5) The authorities referred to in subsection (2) shall on receipt of such
photo copies, maintain the said photocopies in a register in the offices of the
428

said authorities and shall keep the information confidential and shall not
reveal the same to the public or the media.
(6) The said Authorities may make Rules for the purposes of sections 7
and 8 and publish the said Rules in the appropriate Gazette or on their
websites.
9. Palliative care for competent and incompetent patients:
Even though medical treatment has been withheld or withdrawn by
the medical practitioner in the case of competent patients and incompetent
patients  in accordance  with  the provisions  of sections  3, 5 and 6, such
medical practitioner is not debarred from administering palliative care.
10. Protection  of  competent  patients  from  criminal  action  in  certain
circumstances:
Where  a  competent  patient  refuses  medical  treatment  in
circumstances mentioned in section 3, notwithstanding anything contained
in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), such a patient shall be deemed to be
not guilty of any offence under that Code or under any other law for the
time being in force.
11. Protection  of  medical  practitioners  and  others  acting  under  their
direction, in relation to competent and incompetent patients:
429

Where a medical practitioner or any other person acting under the
direction  of  the  medical  practitioner  withholds  or  withdraws  medical
treatment,
(a) in respect of a competent patient, on the basis of the informed
decision of such patient communicated to the medical practitioner
for such withholding or withdrawal, or
(b) (i)  in  respect  of  a  competent  patient  who  has  not  taken  an
informed decision, or
(ii) in respect of an incompetent patient, 
and the medical practitioner takes a decision in the best interests of
the patient for withholding or withdrawal of such treatment,
such action of the medical practitioner or those acting under his direction,
and of the hospital concerned, shall be deemed to be lawful, provided only
where the medical practitioner has complied with the of sections 5, 6 and 8.
12. Enabling provision for seeking declaratory relief before a Division
Bench of the High Court:
(1) Any patient or his or her parents or his or her relatives or next
friend may move an original petition before a Division Bench
of  the  High  Court  seeking  a  declaration  that  any  act  or
omission  or  proposed  act  or  omission  by  the  medical
practitioner  or  a  hospital  in  respect  of  withholding  or
withdrawing  medical  treatment  from  a  patient  is  lawful  or
unlawful and seeking such interim or final directions from the
said Court as they may deem fit.
430

Explanation:  ‘High Court’ in this section and section 13 means
the  High  Court  within  whose  territorial  jurisdiction  the
treatment  is  being  given  or  is  proposed  or  proposed  to  be
withheld or withdrawn.
(2) Any medical practitioner or a hospital may move an original
petition before a Division Bench of the High Court seeking a
declaration  that  any  act  or  omission  or  proposed  act  or
omission by the medical practitioner or the hospital in respect
of  withholding  or  withdrawing  medical  treatment  from  a
patient is lawful and seek such interim or final directions from
the said Court as he or it may deem fit.
(3) The Division Bench of the High Court may, wherever it deems
it necessary, appoint an amicus curiae to assist the Court and
where a patient is unrepresented, direct legal aid to be provided
to such patients.
(4) The Division Bench of the High Court shall dispose of such
petitions in the light of the provisions of this Act, after hearing
the  patient  if  he or  she  is  competent  or  hearing  his  or  her
parents or  relatives or next friend or guardian-ad-litem, the
medical  practitioners  or  the  hospital  authorities  treating  the
patient  and  the  amicus  curiae,  if  any,  and  after  receiving,
wherever necessary or appropriate, such  further  evidence of
witnesses including expert medical practitioners.
(5) Such original petitions shall be disposed of expeditiously and,
at any rate, within a period of thirty days from the date of filing
of the original petition.
431

(6) Where  the  High  Court  is  of  the  view  that  interim or  final
directions have to be passed and implemented urgently, it may
pass such operational orders initially and follow up the same by
giving its reasons therefor, soon thereafter.
(7) Any  declarations  or  final  directions  given  by  the  Division
Bench of the High Court in a petition filed under subsection (1)
or (2) shall be binding in all other actions civil or criminal
against the medical practitioner or the hospital, in relation to
the  said  act  or  omission  of  the  medical  practitioner  or  the
hospital, in relation to the said patient.
(8) Recourse to the  High Court for a declaratory relief and  for
directions under this section is not a condition precedent for
withholding  or  withdrawing  medical  treatment  if  such
withdrawal  or  withholding  is  done  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of this Act.
13. Confidentiality for purposes of sections 12 and 13:
(1)(i) The Division Bench of the High Court shall, whenever a petition
under section 12 is filed, direct that the identity of the patient and of
his  or  her  parents,  the  identity  of  the  medical  practitioner  and
hospitals, the identity of the medical experts, referred to in section 6,
or of other experts or witnesses consulted by the Court or who have
given  evidence  in  the  Court,  shall,  during  the  pendency  of  the
petition,  and  after  its  disposal,  be  kept  confidential  and  shall  be
referred only by the English alphabets as stated in clause (ii)..
432

(ii) As soon as the original petition is filed, the Division Bench of the
High  Court  shall  make  an  order  choosing  English  alphabets  for
identifying the patient, parents, doctors, hospitals or experts or other
witnesses referred to in sub clause (i) or other persons connected with
the medical treatment and shall direct that in the further proceedings
of the Court or in any publications in the law reports or in the print or
electronic media or audio-visual media, during and after disposal of
the  petition,  those  alphabets  alone  shall  be  used  to  refer  to  the
particular  patient,  person  or  hospital  and  that  the  identity  of  the
patient, person or hospital shall not be disclosed and the High Court
may, where necessary, hold all or any part of the hearing in camera.
(iii) It shall not be lawful for any person or body to refer to the identity of
the patient, person or hospital or other particulars or matters referred
to in sub clause (i) and (ii) in any law-report or publication in the
print  or  electronic  or  audio-visual  media,  and  the  alphabets
designated by the Division Bench of the High Court under subsection
(2) alone shall be referred to while publishing the proceedings of the
Court, during the pendency of the petition and after its disposal.
(iv) Any person or body acting in violation of the provisions of sub clause
(iii) may be held liable for contempt of Court for violation of the
orders of Court under sub clause (ii) and be dealt with accordingly.
(v) Notwithstanding  the  provision  of  clauses  (i)  to  (iv),  when  the
declarations  or  directions  given  by  the  High  Court  have  to  be
communicated to the patient, parents, medical practitioner, hospital or
433

experts concerned, it shall be permissible to refer to the true identity
of the patient, persons or hospital and such communications shall be
made in sealed covers to be delivered to these addresses so that the
declarations or directions made by the High Court are understood and
implemented as being with reference to the particular patient.
(vi) The High Court may make Rules of Procedure for the implementation
of provisions of section 12 and this section.
(2) No person or body including media shall, in cases which have not
gone to  the High Court  under subsection  (1), publish  the  names  of the
patients or other information which may disclose the identity of the patient,
relatives, doctor, hospital or experts and if these provisions are violated,
may be proceeded against by way of a civil or criminal action in accordance
with law.
14. Medical Council of India to issue Guidelines:
(1) Consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Medical Council
of India shall prepare and issue guidelines, from time to time for the
guidance  of medical  practitioners  in  the  matter  of withholding  or
withdrawing  of  medical  treatment  to  competent  or  incompetent
patients suffering from terminal illness.
(2) While preparing such guidelines, the Medical Council of India
may  consult  medical  experts  or  bodies  consisting  of  medical
practitioners  who  have  expertise  in  relation  to  withholding  or
434

withdrawing medical treatment to patients or experts or bodies having
experience in critical care medicine.
(3) The  Medical  Council  of  India  may  review  and  modify  the
guidelines from time to time.
(4) The  guidelines  and  modifications  thereto,  if  any,  shall  be
published in the Official Gazette of India and on its website.
………..
435