LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
199TH REPORT
ON
UNFAIR (PROCEDURAL & SUBSTANTIVE)
TERMS IN CONTRACT
AUGUST 2006

JUSTICE M. JAGANNADHA RAO LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
CHAIRMAN SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI-110001
TEL: 23384475
FAX: 23073864, 23388870
E-MAIL: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
RESIDENCE: 1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI-110011
TEL: 23019465
F.No.6(3)123/2006-LC(LS)                                                          31  st   August, 2006  
Dear Shri  Bhardwaj  Ji,
Sub: Report No.199 of the Law Commission on ‘Unfair (Procedural
and Substantive) Terms in Contracts’.
The  subject  of  ‘Unfair  Terms  In  Contract’  has  attained  grave
importance in recent times not only in relation to consumer contracts but
also in regard to other contracts.   In 1984, the 103rd Report of the Law
Commission was submitted and it was suggested that a single section (sec.
67A) be incorporated in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 with two subsections
invalidating exclusion of liability for negligence and for breach of contract.
That section, however, did not contain any general provision to deal with
unfairness.  
Recent Developments:
But, since 1984, there have been significant developments in other
countries and detailed statutes have been enacted or proposed and there are
voluminous Reports of the Law Commissions such as the Report of the Law
Commission  of  England  and  Scotland  (2004),  the  Report  of  the  South
African Law Commission, 1998, the Interim Report of the British Columbia
Law Institute, 2005, the Discussion Paper of the Standing Committee of
2

Officers of Consumer Affairs, Victoria (Australia), 2004, Report of the New
Zealand  Law Commission, 1990  and Ontario  Law Reform Commission,
1987,  etc.
In  view  of  these  developments  in  other  countries,  the  Law
Commission has taken up a detailed study of the subject suo motu.   The
Commission has referred to the statutes and Law Commission Reports of
various countries in relation to unfair terms.
Unfair terms of contract law will not affect foreign investment:
At the outset, we would like to refer to an argument that introduction
of a law on ‘unfair terms’ may prejudicially affect foreign investment in
India.    In this context, we may point out that the South African Law
Commission 1998 has strongly refuted such an argument and stated that
when  such  ‘unfair  terms’ laws  exist  in  several  countries  including  UK,
USA, Australia, New Zealand, Canada etc., a situation will be reached when
South Africa would suffer a great disadvantage if it did not have one such
law.   We are of the same opinion so far as India is concerned (see our
introductory chapter).   Our business and commerce will be put to serious
disadvantage if we do not have a law regulating unfair terms of contract.
Need for additional provisions apart from provisions of Indian Contract Act, 1872 and
Specific Relief Act, 1963:
We  have  discussed  in  detail  the  existing  provisions  as  regards
voidable and void contracts under the Indian Contract Act, 1872, as well as
non-enforcement  of  contracts  where  there  is  unfairness  or  hardship,  as
contained in the Specific Relief Act, 1963.    We have proposed that the
provisions  of  these  two  statutes  need  not  be  disturbed.   We, however,
propose, in addition, separate set of general provisions to deal with unfair
terms  of  contracts.   In  view  of  the  need  to  protect  consumers  and
particularly  to  grant  protection  from  the  disadvantages  of  extensive
introduction  of  standard  terms  of  contracts  which  are  one-sided,  it  has
become  necessary  to  evolve  general  principles  regulating  unfairness  in
contracts.   It is in this area that there are new legislations in other countries.
These  new  laws  on  unfairness  elsewhere  contain  several  important
provisions  intended  to  protect  the  weaker  party  against  the  stronger.
Further,  those  statutes  also  contain  a long  list  of guidelines  to  adjudge
unfairness.    The  UK  Bill  of  2004  annexed  to  the  Report  of  the  Law
3

Commission of UK and Scotland (2004) is perhaps the longest of any such
statutes and it divides the discussion of unfairness in relation to consumer
contracts, small businesses and other big businesses.   That Bill contains a
large number of schedules which deal with ‘do’s’ and ‘don’ts’.  
Therefore, it has become necessary to provide additional provisions
in  India  for  redressal  against  unfair  terms  of  contracts,  apart  from  the
existing provisions  contained in the Indian Contract Act and Specific Relief
Act.
‘Procedural’ and ‘substantive’ unfairness in contracts:
While a law to deal with unfairness in contracts is necessary, the more
important  aspect  is  the  division  of  unfairness  into  ‘procedural’  and
‘substantive’ unfairness.   Such a division has not been done in any country
so  far,  but  there  are  several  articles  by  jurists  that  such  a  division  is
necessary.   They point out that the laws in several countries have created a
lot  of  confusion  because  they  are  a  ‘mish-mash’  of  procedural  and
substantive  unfairness.    We  agree  that  such  a  division  is  absolutely
necessary.     With that in view, we have examined the statutes of various
countries and for our convenience and for purposes of our research, we have
segregated  the  provisions  in  those  countries  into  ‘procedural’  and
‘substantive’ ones with a view to have separate focus on those two aspects.
In this Report and the Bill annexed to this Report, we have, therefore,
defined ‘procedural unfairness’ and ‘substantive unfairness’ separately and
have also provided separate guidelines for each of them.   We shall briefly
refer to these proposals.    
General ‘procedural’ unfairness and guidelines thereto:
A contract or a term thereof is procedurally unfair if it has resulted in
an unjust advantage or unjust disadvantage to one party on account of the
conduct of the other party or the manner in which or the circumstances
under which the contract has been entered into or the term thereof has been
arrived at by the parties (see sec. 5 of the Bill).    
We have provided separate statutory guidelines in sec. 6 to enable the
Court to decide on procedural unfairness.
4

General ‘substantive’ unfairness and guidelines thereto:
We  have  likewise  introduced  a  provision  in  sec.  12  relating  to
‘general substantive unfairness’ which says that a contract or a term thereof
shall be treated as unfair if the contract or terms thereof are by themselves
harsh, oppressive or unconscionable.    
Sec. 13 contains guidelines to adjudge substantive unfairness.
In addition, we have referred to three specific situations in sections 9,
10,  11  of  the  proposed  Bill  where  “substantive”  unfairness  has  to  be
presumed.  (i) Sec. 9 of the Bill corresponds to sec. 67A as proposed in the
103rd Report of the Law Commission of India (1984) and it invalidates (a)
exclusion  or  restriction  of liability for negligence;  and  (b) exclusion  or
restriction of liability for breach of contract.   So far as exclusion of liability
for breach of contract is  concerned, we have added  the words “without
adequate justification” in the light of similar provisions abroad.   (ii) Then
we  have  proposed  sec.  10  in  the  Bill  and  that  section  deals  with  the
exclusion or restriction of the rights, duties or liabilities referred to in sec.
62 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 without adequate justification; and (iii)
We have  also proposed  sec. 11 in the Bill and it deals  with the unfair
practice  of  incorporating  choice  of  law  clauses  in  contracts  needlessly
requiring the application of a foreign law, despite the fact that the contract
has no foreign element at all.    These three sections 9, 10 and 11 deal with
specific  types  of  “substantive”  unfairness,  in  addition  to  the  general
provision of ‘substantive’ unfairness in sec. 12.
Burden of proof:
We have also proposed a provision in sec. 14 as regards burden of
proof in the case of ‘general substantive’ unfairness falling within clause (b)
of sec. 9 (exclusion of liability for breach of contract) and sec. 10 (exclusion
of liabilities etc. as are referred to in sec. 62 of Sale of Goods Act, 1930)
and  the  burden  will  be  on  the  person  relying  on  such  exclusions  or
restrictions  referred  to  in those  sections  to  prove  that  there is  adequate
justification for exclusion of liability.
5

Provisions to apply to executed contracts:
Another  provision  of  considerable  importance,  which  is  found  in
other countries is that the provisions of the proposed Act will apply also to
‘executed contracts’.   But, unlike similar provisions elsewhere, we have
stated that for that purpose, the Court will have to consider whether and to
what extent restitution is possible and where such restitution is not possible,
either wholly or partly, whether compensation can be granted.
Court to suo motu raise issues of unfairness of contract or terms: (sec. 16)
Yet another provision which is similar to the one abroad is the one
relating to the Court’s power to raise an issue of unfairness or a term thereof
on its own, even if the parties have not raised such a plea.
Reliefs to be granted by Court: (sec. 17)
We have proposed that the Court can grant various reliefs if there is
procedural or substantive unfairness.   The reliefs include non-enforcement
of contract or its terms, declaring the terms as not enforceable or void,
varying the terms so as to remove unfairness, refund of consideration or
price  paid,  compensation  or  damages  and  permanent  injunction  and
mandatory injunction etc.
Act not to apply to some contracts:
The  proposed  Act  will  not  apply  to  service  contracts  between
employer  and  workmen  under  the  labour  laws  in  force;  nor  to  public
employment under the Central Government or State Governments or their
instrumentalities  or employment under  local  authorities,  or under public
sector undertakings of the Central or State Governments, or to employment
under corporations or bodies established by or under any statutes made by
Parliament or State Legislatures, or to international treaties or agreements.
We  have  also  listed  the  existing  ‘procedural’  provisions  of  the
Contract Act, 1872 and Specific Relief Act, 1963 which are procedural in
6

nature in sections 3 and 4 and the existing ‘substantive’ provisions of those
Acts in sections 7 and 8.   Of course, those Acts are not disturbed.
Act to apply to matters in civil courts, consumer fora and arbitral tribunals:
It is proposed that the new provisions of the Act will be applicable to
civil courts, consumer fora under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and to
the arbitral tribunals under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.  
The proposal also is to make the Act applicable to contracts entered
into after the commencement of the proposed Act.
We hope that this Report and Bill which for the first time divides
unfair terms into ‘procedural’ and ‘substantive’ terms, will meet an urgent
need of persons who are parties to contracts in the markets today as well as
to other contractual transactions.
Yours sincerely,
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Shri H.R. Bhardwaj
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHI.
7

I N D E X
Chapter No. Title Page No.
I Introductory 3 to 9
II The Present State of Law in India and Need for
Improvement 10 to 47
III Standard Form Contracts and their nature 48 to 56
IV Judicial Pronouncements in India on Unfair 57 to 68
Terms
V Unfair Terms in Contract – A Comparative Study 69 to 113
VI Common Law: Unfairness in regard to specific
performance of contract terms 114 to 119
VII Need to have procedural and substantive divide 120 to 130
VIII Procedural Unfairness – Comparative Law 131 to 143
IX Substantive Unfairness: Comparative Law 144 to 169
X Segregating Procedural and Substantive 
Provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and
the Specific Relief Act, 1963 170 to 177
XI Need to define General Procedural Unfairness
and General Substantive Unfairness under the
Indian Law 178 to 186
XII Discussion and Recommendations for Draft
Bill (2006) on Unfair Terms (Procedural and
Substantive) 187 to
220
ANNEXURE Unfair (Procedural and Substantive) 
Terms in Contract Bill, 2006 221 to 233
8

                               CHAPTER-I
                        INTRODUCTORY
The  subject  of  ‘Unfair  (Procedural  and  Substantive)  Terms  of
Contract’  has  assumed  great  importance  currently  in  the  context  of
tremendous expansion in trade and business and consumer rights.  In the last
two decades, several countries have gone in for new laws on the subject in
order  to  protect  consumers  and  even  smaller  businessmen  from  bigger
commercial entities.  Several Law Commissions across the world have taken
up the subject for study and recommended new legislation.  The British and
Scottish Law Commission has prepared its latest Report in 2004 on ‘Unfair
Terms in Contracts’ (Law Com No. 292, Scot Law Com No. 199) with a
new draft Bill annexed to the Report after reviewing its earlier laws.  The
South African Law Commission, in its Report in 1998 on ‘Unreasonable
Stipulations in Contracts and the Rectification of Contracts’ has reviewed
the comparative law in several countries and has come forward with a draft
Bill.  The Discussion Paper of 2004 from Victoria (Australia) proposed by
the  Standing  Committee  of  Officials  of  Consumer  Affairs,  the  Interim
Report  of  2005  from  Canada  (British  Columbia)  prepared  by  British
Columbia  Law  Institute  and  the  Reports  of  the  New  Zealand  Law
Commission  and  Ontario  Law  Commission,  etc.  have  added  new
dimensions to the subject.
9

The Law Commission of India in its 103rd Report (1984) on “Unfair
Terms of Contract”, had dealt with the subject and proposed insertion of
section 67A into the Contract Act.  In as much as new concepts have been
built into the subject in the last two decades, the Law Commission of India
has taken up the subject afresh for further study.
The  main  highlight  of  this  Report  is  the  consideration  of  Unfair
Terms  of  Contract  by  separating  the  ‘procedural  unfairness’  and  the
‘substantive unfairness’ in the matter of contracts or their terms.  In the
statutes in force or Bills prepared by other Law Commissions, while it is
recognized that contracts or their terms may be unfair either on account of
‘procedural  unfairness’  or  on  account  of  ‘substantive  unfairness’,  the
discussion as well as the provisions of the statutes/Bills does not treat these
aspects  separately.   In  fact,  in  some  countries,  while  the  distinction  is
realized, there is no consideration of the concepts separately and the result
is that several sections combine ‘procedural unfairness’ and ‘substantive
unfairness’.  The specialty of our Report is that not only have we tried to
segregate the procedural and substantive unfair provisions of other countries
in separate chapters, we have also kept the concepts separately in the Bill
annexed to this Report.
What  we  mean  by  ‘procedural  unfairness’  is  whether  there  is
unfairness in the manner in which the terms of the contract are arrived at or
are actually entered into by the parties, or in the circumstances relating to
the  events  immediately  before  the  entering  into  the  contract,  or  in  the
conduct  of  the  parties,  their  relative  position,  or  literary knowledge,  or
10

whether one party had imposed standard terms on the other or whether the
terms  were  not  negotiated.   These  and  other  circumstances  relate  to
procedural unfairness.
What we mean by ‘substantive unfairness’ is that a term by itself may
be either one-sided, harsh or oppressive or unconscionable and therefore
unfair.  One party may have excluded liability for negligence or for breach
of contract or might have imposed terms on the other which are strictly not
necessary or might have given to himself power to vary the terms of the
contract unilaterally etc.   Such terms could be unfair by themselves.
The  Indian  Contract  Act,  1862  has  several  provisions  relating  to
‘viodable contracts’.  These provisions deal with undue influence, coercion,
fraud,  mistake,  misrepresentation  etc.     These  are  indeed  ‘procedural’
provisions already contained in the Act.  Likewise, the Contract Act deals
with ‘void’ contracts or ‘void’ terms.  These are ‘substantive’ provisions
already  contained  in  the  Act.   Similarly, the  Specific  Relief  Act,  1963
contains  provisions  for  granting  relief  where  there  is  procedural  or
substantive unfairness.
But, what is now proposed in this Report and the Bill is to provide
additional provisions of ‘procedural unfairness’ and ‘substantive unfairness’
and remedies for removing such types of unfairness.
These  new  remedies  can  be  granted  by  the  Civil  Courts,  arbitral
tribunals and the consumer fora under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
11

The British  and Scottish Law Commissions  have indeed  stated in
their  joint  Report  of  2004  referred  to  above  that  ‘both  substantive
unfairness’  (the  substance  and  effect  of  the  term)  and  ‘procedural
unfairness’ (the  circumstances  existing  at that  time) must be taken  into
account.
Goldring  and  others  have  complained  that  the  Australian  Unfair
Terms  statutes  have  failed  to  distinguish  between  procedural  and
substantive unconscionability.  The Discussion Paper, 2004 from Victoria
(Australia) refers to the above statutes and states that ‘the current regimes in
Australia have created some confusion in practice because of their failure to
distinguish  between  procedural  and  substantive  unfairness’.   The  Paper
states that in the Australian statutes such as the (NSW) Trade Practices Act,
Uniform Consumer Credit Code, “the list of factors to which the court is
required to have regard, in determining whether a contract is unjust, is a
mish mash of process-oriented and outcome-oriented considerations”.
The above Discussion Paper also states that whilst it has been argued
that there is probably sufficient coverage of the procedural aspect of unfair
contract terms, still the criticism noted earlier by Goldring et al, that current
Australian legislation is problematic in that it does not distinguish between
procedural and substantive issues, is considered to be valid.  In order to
create clarity,  the opportunity might be undertaken, whilst addressing the
issue  of  unfairness  of  contract  terms,  to  rectify  this  situation.  The
Discussion Paper also stated:
12

“There would be better Court outcomes for aggrieved individuals due
to the differentiation between procedural and substantive matters.”
Indeed, the earliest  source for distinguishing  between ‘procedural’
and ‘substantive’ unfairness is a paper of 1967 by Arthur Allen Leff, Asstt.
Prof. Washington University Law School, on ‘Unconscionability and the
Code – The Emperor’s New Clause’, published in (1967), University of
Pennsylvania Law Review, p 485.
Arthur Leff comments on Section 2-302 of the Uniform Commercial
Code (ESA) as follows:
“If reading this section makes anything clear, it is that reading his
section  alone  makes  nothing  clear  about  the  meaning  of
‘unconscionable’  except  perhaps  that  it  is  pejorative.   More
particularly, one cannot tell from the statute whether the key concept
is something to be predicated on the bargaining process or on the
bargain  or  on  some  combination  of  the  two,  that  is,  to  use  our
terminology, whether it is procedural or substantive…. The draftsman
failed fully to appreciate the significance  of the  unconscionability
concepts  necessary  “procedure  –  substantive”  dichotomy  and  that
such failure is one of the primary reasons for section 2-302’s final
amorphous  unintelligibility  and  its  accompanying  comment’s final
irrelevance.”
Unfair Terms legislation not an obstacle to foreign investment:
13

Our proposals for introducing unfair or unconscionable terms in India
would not isolate the contracting parties nor inhibit foreign investment and
trade.   Such  a  concern  was  raised  by  number  of  respondents  but  was
rejected  in  the  Report  given  by  South  African  Law  Commission  on
‘Unreasonable Stipulations In Contracts And The Rectification of Contracts
(1998)’ on the ground  that when several countries have made laws to curb
unreasonable contracts, South Africa would stand at a disadvantage if it did
not have such laws.  The Report stated:
“The Commission notes the concern in respect of the possibility that
foreign investors and contracting parties might be discouraged from
concluding contracts in South Africa should the law enable the courts
to review contracts in order to determine whether they comply with
principles of contractual fairness. The Commission notes that apart
from  there  being  local  calls  for  the  recognition  of  fairness  in
contracts,  measures  have  lately  been  adopted  and  existing  ones
extended in foreign jurisdictions who have recognized the need to
regulate unfair contracts.  In view of this factual situation it seems to
the Commission that the argument raised by some respondents that
the introduction of measures against unfair or unconscionable terms
would isolate South African contracting parties and inhibit foreign
investment and trade, should be critically evaluated.  It seems to the
Commission that South Africa would rather become the exception
and its law of contract would be deficient in comparison with those
countries which recognize and require compliance with the principle
of good faith in contracts.”
14

It is in the light of the above criticism in several countries that, we
have felt that it is necessary 
(1) to segregate the existing provisions of the Indian Contract Act,
1872 and the provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 in so far
as they relate to voidable contracts and void contracts, respectively
into ‘procedural provisions’ and ‘substantive provisions’, and
(2) to add to these 
(a) a  specific  definition  of  ‘procedural  unfairness’  and
provide  specific  guidelines  for  judging  if  there  is
procedural unfairness, and 
(b) a  specific  definition  of  ‘substantive  unfairness’  and
provide  specific  guidelines  for  judging  if  there  is
substantive unfairness.
(3) to  list  remedies  which  can  be  granted  to  relieve  parties  from
procedural and substantive unfairness.
The proposed Bill is a detailed one, which perhaps for the first time in
any  country  is  dealing  separately  with  ‘procedural’  and  ‘substantive’
unfairness.  That is why we have named this Report as “Unfair (Procedural
and Substantive) Terms in Contracts Report’.  The proposed Bill is named
“Unfair Terms (Procedural and Substantive) of Contracts Bill, 2006”.
15

CHAPTER-II
THE PRESENT STATE OF LAW IN INDIA AND
NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT:
At present, contracts could be declared void or voidable in a court of
law  only  if  it  falls  under  one  or  other  of  the  provisions  of  the  Indian
Contract Act, 1872 which make such terms void or voidable. There is, as of
today, no general statutory provision in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 or the
Sale  of  Goods  Act,  1930  whereby  the  courts  can  give  relief  to  the
consumer/weaker party by holding such terms in contracts as void on the
ground of their being unreasonable, or unconscionable or unfair. 
‘Unconscionable’ Contract Under Section 16 of the Indian Contract
Act, 1872:
One of the relevant provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which
refers to the inequality of bargaining power between parties and of unfair
advantage of one party over the other, is contained in section 16 dealing
with ‘undue influence’.   The situation is a mix up of procedural and
substantive unfairness and subsection (3) only raises a presumption.  We
shall presently refer to that section.
Section 16 has three subsections.  The first and second subsections
deal with procedural unfairness and reads as follows:
16

“Section 16 ‘Undue influence’ defined: (1) A contract is said to be
induced by ‘undue influence’ where the relations subsisting between
the parties are such that one of the parties is in a position to dominate
the  will of  the  other  and  use  that  position  to  obtain  an  unfair
advantage over the other.
(2)  In  particular  and  without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the
foregoing …, a person is deemed to be in a position to dominate the
will of another –
(a) when he holds a real or apparent authority over the
other or where he stands in a fiduciary relation to the
other; or
(b) where  he  makes  a  contract  with  a  person  whose
mental  capacity  is  temporarily  or  permanently
affected by reason of age, illness or mental or bodily
distress.”
 
(ii) Subsection (3) of sec 16:
The other relevant provision is sub-section (3) of section 16 which
refers to the aspect of burden of proof in ‘unconscionable transactions’
induced by ‘undue influence’.   Sub section (3) of section 16 and illustration
(c) are reproduced as under:-
17

"16(3) Where a person who is in a position to dominate the will
of  another,  enters  into  a  contract  with  him,  and  the  transaction
appears,  on  the  face  of  it  or  on  the  evidence  adduced,  to  be
unconscionable, the  burden of proving that such contract was not
induced by undue influence shall be upon the person in a position to
dominate the will of the other.
Nothing in sub section shall affect the provisions of section 111 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.”
“Illustration (c):   A being in debt to B, the money lender of his
village,  contracts  a  fresh  loan  on  terms  which  appear  to  be
unconscionable.   It  lies  on  B  to  prove  that  the  contract  was  not
induced by undue influence."
Thus, it will be seen that even sub-section (3) of section 16, deals
with unconscionability which is an aspect of ‘substantive’ unfairness but
links it up with ‘procedural’ unfairness of domination of will.  Sub-section
(3) of section 16, it must be noted,  does not enable the Court, to strike
down the unconscionable terms, but only enables raising a presumption.
What does the term “unconscionable” mean? We may look at the
Legal Glossary (Government of India 2001 P.351).  It defines the word
“unconscionable”  as  ‘irreconcilable  with  what  is  right  or  reasonable’.
Unconscionability, in relation to contracts, has generally been recognized to
include absence of a meaningful choice on the part of one of the parties to
avoid the contractual terms which unreasonably favour one party against the
other party.  Whether a meaningful choice is present in a particular case can
18

only be determined by consideration of all the circumstances surrounding
the transaction. 
Regarding this aspect of burden of proof, reference may be made to
the  103rd Report  of  the  Law  Commission  on  Unfair  Terms in  Contract
(1984), where the Commission pointed out that sub-section (3) of section 16
has  been  interpreted  by  the  Privy  Council  (Poosathurai v.  Kannappa
Chettair (1919) ILR 43 Mad 546 (PC)) as meaning that both the elements of
dominant position and the unconscionable nature of the contract will have
to be established, before the contract can be said to be brought about by
undue influence. This decision, though old, has not been departed from.
However, the Law Commission of India in the 13th Report on Contract Act,
1872 (at p 21) stated that there are some cases in which, on principles of
equity, relief has been given against hard and unconscionable bargains even
though there is no question of undue influence.  In an early Madras case, in
U. Kesavulu  Naidu v. Arithulai Ammal (1912) ILR 36 Mad 533 it was, in
fact, held  that unless  undue influence was  specifically proved, no relief
should be granted on the ground of unconscionable nature of a contract.
Can such a situation be allowed to continue?
Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872: Illegality and
public policy
One other relevant provision which needs to be discussed is Section
23  of  the   Contract  Act:  This  deals  with  ‘substantive’  matters  which
invalidate a contract but does not refer to ‘unconscionability’ specifically.  
19

Section 23: What considerations and objects are lawful and what not:
The consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless – 
it is forbidden by law; or
is  of  such  a  nature  that,  if  permitted,  it  would  defeat  the
provisions of any law; or
is fraudulent; or
involves or implies injury to the person or property of another,
or
the Court regards it as immoral or opposed to public policy.
The  section  does  not  speak  of  ‘unconscionability’  as  one  of  the
grounds.    In  each  of  these  cases,  the  consideration  or  object  of  an
agreement is said to be unlawful. Every agreement of which the object or
consideration is unlawful is void.
Section 23 provides that the consideration or object of an agreement
is lawful, unless it is forbidden by law or unless they are such a nature that
if permitted, they would defeat the provision of any law; or are fraudulent;
or involve or imply, injury to the person or property of another; or the court
regards it as immoral or opposed to public policy.  The last clause in section
23 thus declares that no man can lawfully do that which is opposed to public
policy. It comprehends the protection and promotion of public welfare.  It is
a principle of law under which freedom of contract or private dealings are
restricted by the law for the good of the community.  
20

The  Indian  Contract  Act  does  not  define  the  expression  ‘public
policy’ or what is meant by being ‘opposed to public policy’.  From the very
nature  of  things,  the  expressions  “public  policy”,  “opposed  to  public
policy”, or “contrary to public policy” are incapable of precise definitions. 
Unlike, in cases falling under section 16 which permits a party to
avoid a contract, section 23 enables a Court to hold clauses opposed to law
or public policy, to be void ab initio.
Section 23 and Public Policy 
The circumstances in which a contract is likely to be struck down as
one opposed to public policy are fairly well established in England.   Lord
Halsbury  refers  to  certain  contracts  such  as  “…  contract  of  marriage
brokerage,  the  creation  of  perpetuity,  a  contract  in  restraint  of  trade,  a
gaming or wagering contract, or what is relevant here, the assisting of the
King’s enemies, are all undoubtedly unlawful things”, and that these are
grounds of public policy  (Earl of Halsbury L.C. in Janson vs. Drienfontein
Consolidated Mines Ltd. [1902] A.C. 484 at 491-92).    
The ordinary function of the court is to rely on the well-settled heads
of public policy and to apply them to varying situations.  If the contract in
question fits into one or the other of these pigeons-holes, it may be declared
void   (Asquith J.,  Mank L and v. Jack Barclay Ltd. [1951] All ER 714 at
723).     The courts may, however, mould the well-settled categories of
public policy to suit new situations in a changing world. But may a court
invent a new head of public policy?  This question is still under debate.  
21

According  to  Lord  Halsbury  the  categories  of  public  policy  are
closed. “I deny”, he said that any court can invent a new head of public
policy”.   But, public policy is a vague and unsatisfactory term”. Even so,
“From time to time judges have uttered warning notes as to the danger of
permitting judicial tribunals to roam unchecked in this field.    Lord Atkin in
Fender V.  St. John  Mild  May 1938  AC 1 (p 12) further said  that  “the
doctrine should only be invoked in clear cases in which the harm to the
public  is  substantially  incontestable,  and  does  not  depend  upon  the
idiosyncratic inferences of a few judicial minds”.
In the same strain, about hundred eighty years ago in Richardson vs.
Mellish (1824) All ER 258, Burrough, J., protesting against public policy,
said that “it is a very unruly horse, and when once you get astride it, you
never know where it will carry you”. 
The orthodox view on public policy in India was explained nearly
fifty  years  ago,  by  Subba  Rao,  J.  (as  he  then  was)  in  Gherulal v.
Mahadeodas (AIR 1959 SC 781).   The Supreme Court cautioned  against
expansion of grounds in practice though in theory, they could be expanded.
It said:-
“Public policy or the policy of law is an elusive concept.  It has been
described  as  an  “untrustworthy guide”,  “variable  quality”, “unruly
horse”, etc; the primary duty of a court of law is to enforce a promise
which the parties have made and to uphold the sanctity of contracts
which forms the basis of society; but  in certain cases the court may
22

relieve them of their duty on a rule founded on what is called the
public policy……  though it is permissible for the courts to expand
public  policy and  apply them to  different  situations,  it  should  be
invoked  in  clear  and  incontestable  cases  of  harm  to   the  public;
though the heads are not closed and though theoretically it may be
permissible to evolve a new head under exceptional circumstances of
a changing world, it is advisable in the interest of stability of society
not to make any attempt to discover new heads in these days.”
However, a more flexible and liberal approach was advocated by the
Apex  Court  in  the  recent  case  in  Central  Inland  Water  Transport
Corporation case: AIR (1986) 1571 (at 1612).   The Supreme Court held
that: 
“public  policy  is  not  the  policy  of  a  particular  Government,  it
connotes  some matter which concerns the  public good and public
interest.   The concept of what is for the public good or in the public
interest or what would be injurious or lawful to the public good or the
public interest has varied from time to time.  As new concepts take
the place of old, transactions  which were once considered against
public policy are now being upheld by the courts and similarly where
there has been a well-recognized head of public policy, the courts
have not shirked from extending it to new transactions and changed
circumstances and have at times not even flinched from inventing a
new  head  of  public  policy.   It  is  thus  clear  that  the  principles
governing public policy must be and are capable on proper occasions
of expansion or modification.  If there is no head of public policy
23

which covers a case, then the court must in consonance with public
conscience  and  in  keeping  with  public  good  and  public  interest
declare such practice to be opposed to public policy.”
The meaning of ‘public policy’ has been referred to recently by the
Supreme Court in Zoroastrian Corp. Housing Society Ltd. vs. DC Registrar
of Cooperative Societies 2005(4) SCALE, page 156, and it was stated that
when the statute referred to public policy, it meant ‘public policy’ of the
particular Act which dealt with membership of cooperative society.
Whether public policy covers unconscionability?
 The Law Commission of India, in its 103rd Report (1984) (p 5), had
considered the question, whether there was a possibility of striking down an
“unconscionable bargain” by resorting to ‘public policy’ under Section 23
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.  The Commission was, however, of the
view  that  section  23  was  not  of  help  in  meeting  the  situation.  It  also
observed that courts have held (as the law in 1984 was) that the heads of
public policy cannot be extended to a new ground in general, with certain
exceptions, and that the terms of a contract exempting one party from all
liability was not opposed to public policy. 
Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act: Restraint in Trade:
Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, concerns a special category of
contracts which the law treats as void, namely, an agreement by which any
24

one is restrained from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of
any kind and is to that extent, the agreement is void.  However in India
(unlike UK), an agreement not to carry on, within the specified local limits,
a  business  similar  to  the  business  of  which  goodwill  is  sold,  can  be
enforced, provided the limits of the restraints are reasonable. This special
provision is contained in section 27. 
Section 27 reads as follows:
“Section 27: Agreement in restraint of trade void:  Every agreement
by which anyone is restrained from exercising a lawful profession,
trade or business of any kind, is to that extent void.
Exception 1:
Saving of agreement not to carry on business of which goodwill is
sold:
One who sells the goodwill of a business may agree with the buyer to
refrain from carrying on a similar business, within specified local
limits,  so  long  as  the  buyer,  or  any  person  deriving  title  to  the
goodwill from him, carrying on a like business therefrom, provided
that such limits  appear to the Court reasonable, regard being had to
the nature of the business.
An agreement which unnecessarily curtails the freedom of a person to
carry on a trade is against public policy. Restraining a person from carrying
on a trade generally aims at avoiding competition and has a monopolistic
tendency and this is both against an individual’s  interest as well as the
25

interest of the society and thus such restraints are discouraged by law. The
agreement  is  void  whether  it  imposes  total  restraint  or  partial  restraint.
However in UK, all agreements in restraint of trade are void unless there is
some justification for the restraint which could make it reasonable.  If the
restriction was reasonable in the interest of the contracting parties and also
in the interest of public, the agreement would be valid. The Indian law,
however, is stricter.  The agreement would be valid if it fell within any of
the statutory or judicially created exceptions.  Any agreement which is not
covered by any one of the recognized exceptions would be void.  
The Apex Court in the case of Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. V. Coca Cola
(1995) (5) SCC 545  has pointed out the difference in the position of law in
regard to restraint of trade in India and that in England. The rule now in
England is that  the restraints of trade whether  general or  partial, may be
good if they are “reasonable and necessary” for the purpose of freedom of
trade. In India, the question of reasonableness of restraint is outside the
purview of section 27 of the Indian Contract Act.  The courts have only to
consider the question whether the “contract” itself is or is not in restraint of
trade. The facts in the above were as follows: 
The agreement in question here was for the grant of franchise by
Coca  Cola  to  GBC  to  manufacture,  bottle,  sell  and  distribute  various
beverages for which the trade marks were acquired by Coca Cola.  It was
thus a commercial agreement whereunder both the parties had undertaken
obligations for promoting the trade in beverages for their mutual benefit.
The purpose of the negative stipulation contained in the agreement was that
GBC will work vigorously and diligently to promote and solicit the sale of
26

the products/beverages produced under the trade marks of Coca Cola.  This
would not be possible if GBC were to manufacture, bottle, sell, deal or
otherwise be concerned with the products, beverages or any other brands or
trade marks/trade names.  Thus, the purpose of the said agreement was to
promote the trade and the negative stipulation sought to achieve the said
purpose by requiring GBC to wholeheartedly apply itself to promoting the
sale of the products of Coca Cola.  Moreover, since the negative stipulation
was confined in its application to the period of subsistence of the agreement
and the restriction imposed therein was operative only during the period the
agreement was subsisting, the said stipulation, it was held, could not be
treated as being in restraint of trade so as to attract the bar of section 27 of
the Indian Contract Act.
  Section 28 of the Indian Contract Act: Ouster of Jurisdiction of
Courts to adjudicate.
Section 28 of the Contract Act states that agreements absolutely in
restraint of legal proceedings are void.  It is in two clauses and contains two
exceptions and reads as follows:
“Every agreement
(a) by which  any party  thereto  is  restricted  absolutely from
enforcing his rights or in respect of any contract, by the
usual legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which
limits the time within which he may thus enforce his rights;
or
(b) Which extinguishes the rights of any thereto, or discharges
any party thereto from any liability, under or in respect of
27

any contract on the expiry or a specified period so as to
restrict any party from enforcing his rights.”
Section 28 saves two types of contracts under the exceptions:
(1) It  does  not  render  void  a  contract  by  which  two  or  more
persons agree that any dispute which may arise between them shall be
referred  to  arbitration  and  that  only  the  amount  awarded  in  the
arbitration shall be recoverable.
(2) It does not also render void a contract to refer to arbitration
questions that have already arisen.
Section 28 will come into play when the restriction imposed upon the right
to sue is ‘absolute’ in the sense that the parties are wholly precluded from
pursuing their legal remedies in the ordinary tribunals. A partial restriction
will be valid as observed by Supreme Court in Hakam Singh v. Gammon
(India) Ltd. (AIR 1971 SC 740).   In this case a clause in the agreement
between the parties provided that “the court of law in the city of Bombay
alone shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate thereupon.”  The plaintiff filed a
suit at Varanasi, but the same was dismissed in view of the abovestated
agreement. The court held that agreement was not opposed to public policy
and it did not contravene section 28, and therefore, the suit filed at Varanasi
was rightly dismissed.
Under section 28 of Indian Contract Act, 1872, the citizen has the
right to have his legal position determined by the ordinary tribunals, except,
in the case of contracts to refer to arbitration disputes which may arise or
28

which have already arisen.    Section 28 affirms the common law and its
provisions appear to embody a general rule recognized in the English courts
which prohibits all agreement purporting to oust jurisdiction of the courts.
Section 28 was amended by Indian Contract (Amendment) Act, 1996 which
came into effect in 1997.  The amendment gave effect to the suggestions
made in the 97th Report of the Law Commission of India on “Section 28,
Indian Contract Act, 1872: Perspective Clauses in Contract” (1984).
The Supreme Court laid down as follows:
“It is not open to the parties by agreement to confer jurisdiction on a
court which it does not possess  under the Code.  But where two
courts or more have this Code of Civil Procedure jurisdiction to try a
suit or proceeding, an agreement between the parties that the dispute
between them shall be tried in one of such courts is not contrary to
public policy. Such agreement does not contravene section 28 of the
Contract Act.”
  A recent judgment of the Supreme Court requires mention in this
context:
In Shiv Satellite Public Co. v. M/s Jain Studios Ltd., 2006(2) SCALE
p.53, the arbitration clause stated that the Arbitrator’s determinations will be
‘final and binding between the parties’ and it declared that the parties have
waived the right of appeal or objection ‘in any Jurisdiction’.  It was argued
that  this  objectionable  clause  was  not  severable  from the  clause  which
29

enables disputes to be referred to arbitration and that the entire clause was
void.  The Supreme Court held that that part of the arbitration clause which
speaks of reference of disputes to arbitration is severable and was not void.
The Court noticed the concern of the opposite party that the portion
of the arbitration clause which stated that the ‘arbitration decision shall be
final and binding between the parties and the parties waive all rights of
appeal  or  objection  in  any  Jurisdiction’  was  unenforceable  because  of
section 28 of the Act.  It was argued to the respondent that the ensuing part
of the clause which requires disputes to be referred to arbitration was valid
and this contention was accepted.  The Court, however, referred to Coring
Oil Co. v. Koegles (1870) ILR 1 Cal 466 where a clause giving finality to
an arbitration award was held not enforceable but the rest of the clause was
held  valid.   The  position  in  Union  Contribution  Co.  (P)  Ltd.  v.  Chief
Engineer, Eastern Command, Lucknow & Anr., AIR 1960 All 72 was the
same when it was held that the clause giving finality to the award was held
to be unenforceable but separable from the arbitration clause.
Sale of Goods Act, 1930:
The Sale of Goods Act, 1930 creates a large number of rights, duties
and liabilities.   These include the warranties and guarantees implied by the
law, i.e. the Sale of Goods Act.
30

But sec. 62 of that Act permits exclusion of these rights, duties or
liabilities by express clause or on account of the course of dealings between
the parties, or by usage, if the usage is such as to bind both parties to the
contract.
In our view, it becomes necessary to examine sec. 62 and consider
whether, in the present context of substantive unfairness, such exclusion
should be deemed to be unfair.
Judicial Review of contracts entered by an authority which is a
‘State’ within Article 12 of the Constitution and application of
Art 14.
We have referred to this aspect in Chapter III.   Apart from sections
16, 23, 27 and 28 of the Indian Contract Act, the High Courts and the Apex
Court have invoked Article 14 to strike down certain unreasonable terms of
contract entered into by the Government or Public Sector Undertakings or
Statutory bodies which fall within the meaning of the word a  ‘State’ in
Article 12 of the Constitution of India.  Here these Courts are exercising
power of judicial review under articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution of
India.  The courts have confined the exercise of such power to strike down
clauses in public service employment contracts. However, the courts have
declared that they would not extend this principle to strike down clauses in
commercial contracts.   (See Inland Land Water case: AIR 1986 SC 1571
and DTC case: AIR 1991 SC 101)   
31

It has to be noted that the abovesaid method of invoking article 14 in
the last two decades by the Supreme Court was not available when the 103rd
Law Commission Report was submitted in 1984. The question naturally
arises as to why a similar wider beneficial statutory provision should not be
treated  as  necessary to  protect  parties  those  who  enter  into  commercial
contracts with “non-State” entities though Art. 14 is not applicable.
We may, however, point out that there are certain legislations, apart
from the Indian Contract Act, 1872, which prevent one party to a contract
from taking undue or unfair advantage of the other.  
Instances of this type of legislation are the Usurious Loans Act, 1918,
Industrial  Disputes  Act,  1947,  the  Monopolies  and  Restrictive  Trade
Practices Act, 1969, the Consumer (Protection) Act, 1986, the Competition
Act, 2002 and the Specific Relief Act, 1963, but as explained latter in this
chapter,  they  deal  with  specific  situation  or  special  types  of  contracts
whereas, in this Report, we are considering the need for general provisions
covering all types of contracts relating to unfairness.
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969
(MRTP Act)
The MRTP Act was enacted in 1969 and became effective from 1st
June, 1970. The aims and objects of the Act as stated in the preamble was
“an Act to provide that the operation of the economic system does not result
32

in the concentration of the economic power to the common detriment, for
the  control  of  monopolies,  for  the  prohibition  of  monopolistic  and
restrictive trade practices and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto”, which is identical with the preamble of the draft MRTP Bill 1965
prepared  by  the  MRTP  Commission.   However,  the  MRTP  Act,  1969
delinked  restrictive  trade  practices  from  the  concept  of  dominant
undertaking.  The Act has also elaborated the definition of monopolistic and
restrictive trade practices in more comprehensive terms.
The application and operation of the provisions of the MRTP Act, are
related to: (a) control and regulation of concentration of economic power
which was to the common detriment and (b) prohibition or regulation of
monopolistic  or restrictive trade practices, actually emanating out of the
Directive Principles of State Policy, particularly articles 39(b) and (c) and
the Act enjoys the umbrella of Article 31 specially after it has been put
under the IX Schedule of the Constitution.  There are certain provisions in
MRTP Act, 1969 dealing with specific types of contract.
Section 2(o) has laid down the principles and basis of determining
what is a ‘restrictive trade practice’ as under:
“(o)  “restrictive trade practice” means a trade practice which has, or
may  have,  the  effect  of  preventing,  distorting  or  restricting
competition in any manner and in particular, --
(i) which tends to obstruct the flow of capital
or resources into the stream of production,
or
33

(ii) which tends to bring about manipulation of
prices, or conditions of delivery or to affect
the flow of supplies in the market relating to
goods  or  services  in  such  manner  as  to
impose on the consumers unjustified costs
or restrictions.”
The MRTP Act was amended in 1984 by introducing the concept of ‘unfair
trade practices’ based on the recommendation of the high-powered Sachar
Committee,  and  these  are  intended  largely  to  protect  consumer  interest,
public interest and to prevent, lessen or eliminate competition. Under the
MRTP (Amendment) Act, 1984,  section 33 was amended to provide that
every  agreement  falling  within  one  or  more  of  the  categories  specified
therein  shall  be  deemed to  be  an agreement relating to  restrictive trade
practices and further, two new categories were added vide sub-clause (ja)
(jb) under the said section. Restrictive trade practices are not banned or
prohibited per se.  Section 33 of the Act lays down in specific terms various
‘restrictive  trade  practices’, which  are deemed  to  be restrictive (but  not
necessarily against public interest) which are as follows:
(a) any agreement which restricts, or is likely to restrict, by
any method the persons or classes of persons to whom
goods are sold or from, whom goods are bought;
(b) any  agreement  requiring  a  purchaser  of
goods, as a condition of such purchase, to
purchase some other goods;
34

(c) any agreement  restricting  in  any manner
the  purchaser  in  the  course  of  his  trade
from acquiring or otherwise dealing in any
goods other than those of the seller or any
other person;
(d) any agreement to purchase or sell goods or
to tender for the sale or purchase of goods
only  at  prices  or  on  terms  or  conditions
agreed  upon  between  the  sellers  or
purchasers;
(d) any  agreement  to  grant  or  allow
concessions  or  benefits,  including
allowances, discount, rebates or credit in
connection with, or by reason of dealings;
(e) any agreement to sell goods, on condition
that the prices to be charged on re-sale by
the purchaser shall be the prices stipulated
by the seller unless it is clearly stated that
prices  lower  than  those  prices  may  be
charged;
(f) any agreement to limit, restrict or withhold
the  output  or  supply  of  any  goods  or
35

allocate any area or market for the disposal
of the goods;
(g) any agreement not to employ or restrict the
employment of any method, machinery or
process in the manufacture of goods;
(h) any agreement for the exclusion from any
trade association of any person carrying on
or intending to carry on, in good faith the
trade  in  relation  to  which  the  trade
association is formed;
(i) any agreement to sell goods at such prices
as  would  have  the  effect  of  eliminating
competition or a competitor;
 (ja) any agreement restricting in any manner,
the  class  or  number  of  wholesalers,
producers  or  suppliers  from  whom  any
goods may be bought;
(jb) any agreement as to the bids which any of
the parties thereto may offer at an auction
for  the  sale  of  goods  or  any  agreement
whereby  any  party  thereto  agrees  to
36

abstain from bidding at any auction for the
sale of goods;
(j) any agreement not hereinbefore referred to
in  this  section  which  the  Central
Government may, by notification, specify
for the time being as being one relating to
a  restrictive  trade  practice  within  the
meaning  of  this  sub-section  pursuant  to
any  recommendation  made  by  the
Commission in this behalf;
(k) any agreement to enforce the carrying out
of any such agreement as is referred to in
this sub-section.”
The MRTP Act, 1969 was directed against restrictive or monopolistic
trade practices and had no provision for the protection of consumers against
false or misleading advertisement or other similar unfair trade practices till
the year 1984.  Thus by way of an amendment, section 36A was introduced
defining “unfair trade practices” which are of immediate concern to the
consumer.
A complaint relating to any unfair trade practice and restrictive trade
practice can be made by a consumer or trade association before MRTP
Commission under section 36B(a) or under section 10(a) of MRTP Act .The
Commission during the inquiry may grant a temporary injunction restraining
37

such person from carrying on any trade or unfair trade practice until further
orders.
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
In early years when welfare legislations like the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 did not exist, the maxim  caveat emptor (let the buyer beware)
governed the market.   Now with the opening of global markets, economies
and  progressive  removal  of  restrictions  on  international  trade,  there  is
increasing  competition  among  manufacturers  which  has  benefited
consumers in the form of improvement in quality of goods and services.
Now the maxim caveat emptor has been replaced by (let the seller beware).
In  spite  of  various  provisions  providing  protection  to  the  consumer  in
different  enactments  like  CPC  1908,  Indian  Contract  Act  1872,  Sale  of
Goods Act 1930, etc. very little could be achieved in the area of consumer
protection.  Though  the  MRTP  Act,  1969  has  provided  relief  to  the
consumers, yet it became necessary to protect consumers from exploitation
and to save  them from adulterated  and substandard goods  and deficient
services and unfair business practices.  The Consumer Protection Act, 1986
(CPA) was thus framed to protect consumers from unfair and undesirable
practices of business community.  The Act came into force in 1987 and was
further amended from time to time.
The preamble of the Act shows that it is “an Act to provide for better
protection  of  the  interest  of  consumers  and  for  that  purpose,  to  make
38

provision for establishment of consumer councils and other authorities for
the settlement of consumer disputes and for matters connected therewith.”
When  Act  was  enacted  in  1986,  it  did  not  originally  contain  the
definition of ‘unfair trade practice’.  The concept of unfair trade practice
was, however, interpreted according to definition of unfair trade practice,
given  in  the  MRTP  Act  of  1969.   However,  in  1993,  section  2(1)(r)
incorporated  an  exhaustive  definition  of ‘unfair  trade  practice’ as  given
under section  36A  of  MRTP  Act,  as  amended  in  1984  with  a  view  to
making  Consumer  (Protection)  Act,  1986  a  self-contained  Code  and  is
reproduced as under:
(r)  “unfair trade practice” means a trade practice which,
for the purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply of
goods or for the provision of any service, adopts  any
unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice including
any of the following practices, namely:
(1) the practice of making any statement, whether orally
or in writing or by visible representation which,--
(i) falsely represents that the goods are of a particular
standard,  quality,  quantity,  grade,  composition,
style or model;
(ii) falsely represents  that  the  services  are  of  a
particular standard, quality or grade;
39

(iii) falsely represents  any  re-built,  second-hand,
renovated,  reconditioned  or  old  goods  as  new
goods;
(iv) represents  that  the  goods  or  services  have
sponsorship,  approval,  performance,
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits which
such goods or services do not have;
(v) represents  that  the  seller  or  the  supplier  has  a
sponsorship or approval or affiliation which such
seller or supplier does not have;
(vi) makes  a  false or  misleading representation
concerning the need for, or the usefulness of, any
goods or services;
(vii) gives to the public any warranty or guarantee of
the  performance,  efficacy or length  of  life  of a
product or of any goods that is  not based on an
adequate or proper test thereof;
Provided  that  where  a  defence  is  raised  to  the
effect that such warranty or guarantee is based on
adequate or proper test, the  burden of proof of
40

such defence shall lie on the person raising such
defence;
(viii) makes to the public a  representation in a form
that purports to be-
(i) a warranty or guarantee of a product
or of any goods or services; or
(ii) a  promise  to  replace,  maintain  or
repair an article or any part thereof or
to repeat or continue a service until it
has achieved a specified result,
if such purported warranty or guarantee or promise
is  materially  misleading  or  if  there  is  no
reasonable prospect that such warranty, guarantee
or promise will be carried out;
(ix) materially  misleads the  public  concerning  the
price at which a product or like products or goods
or services, have been, or are, ordinarily sold or
provided, and, for this purpose, a representation as
to price shall be deemed to refer to the price at
which the product or goods or services has or have
been  sold  by  sellers  or  provided  by  suppliers
generally in the relevant market unless it is clearly
41

specified to be the price at which the product has
been sold or services have been provided by the
person  by  whom  or  on  whose  behalf  the
presentation is made;
(x) gives  false  or  misleading facts  disparaging  the
goods, services or trade of another person.
Explanation – For the purposes  of clause (1), a
statement that is –
(a) expressed on an article offered or displayed
for sale, or on its wrapper or container; or
(b) expressed on anything attached to, inserted
in, or accompanying, an article offered or
displayed for sale, or on anything on which
the article is mounted for display or sale; or
(c) contained  in  or  on  anything  that  is  sold,
sent, delivered, transmitted or in any other
manner  whatsoever  made  available  to  a
member of the public; shall be deemed to be
a statement made to the public by, and only
by, the person who had caused the statement
to be so expressed, made or contained;
42

(2) permits  the  publication  of  any  advertisement
whether in any newspaper or otherwise, for the sale or
supply at a bargain price, of goods or services that are
not  intended  to  be  offered  for  sale  or  supply  at  the
bargain price, or for a period that is, and in quantities
that are, reasonable, having regard to the nature of the
market in which the business is carried on, the nature and
size of business and the nature of the advertisement.
Explanation – For the  purpose of clause (2), ‘bargain
price’ means –
(a) a price that is stated in any advertisement to be a
bargain price, by reference to an ordinary price or
otherwise; or
(b) a price that a person who reads, hears or sees the
advertisement, would reasonably understand to be
a  bargain  price  having  regard  to  the  prices  at
which the product advertised or like products are
ordinarily sold;
(3) permits –
(a) the offering of gifts, prizes or other items with the
intention  of  not  providing  them  as  offered  or
creating  the  impression  that  something  is  being
43

given or offered free of charge when it is fully or
partly  covered  by  the  amount  charged  in  the
transaction as a whole;
(b) the conduct of any contest, lottery, game of chance
of skill, for the purpose of promoting, directly or
indirectly, the sale, use or supply of any product or
any business interest;
(4) permits the sale or supply of goods intended to be
used,  or  are  of  a  kind  likely  to  be  used,  by
consumers, knowing or having reason to believe
that the goods do not comply with the standards
prescribed  by  competent  authority  relating  to
performance,  composition,  contents,  design,
construction,  finishing  or  packaging  as  are
necessary to prevent or reduce the risk of injury to
the person using the goods;
(5) permits the hoarding or destruction  of goods or
refuses to sell the goods or to make them available
for sale, or to provide any service, if such hoarding
or destruction or refusal raises or tends to raise or
is  intended  to  raise,  the  cost  of  those  or  other
similar goods or services.
44

(2) Any reference in this Act to any other Act or provision
thereof which is not in force in any area to which this
Act applies shall be construed to have a reference to the
corresponding Act or provision thereof in force in such
area.”
Under the above Act of 1986, there is a three tier set up to enquire
into the allegation of unfair trade practice with each of three Authorities
having its own original pecuniary jurisdiction.  
The  complaint  lies  before  the  District  Forum  where  the  value  of
goods or services and for compensation claimed does not exceed rupees five
lakhs. The District Forum after the proceedings are conducted under section
13, is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of the
defects specified in the complaint about the services are proved, it shall
issue an order to the opposite party directing him to either remove the defect
pointed out to replace the goods with new ones, to remove the defects or
deficiencies in services in question, to return to the complainant the price, to
pay such amount as compensation for any loss suffered, to discontinue the
unfair trade practice or the restrictive trade practice, or not to repeat them,
etc.
Section  14  deals  with  the  reliefs  which  the  District  Forum  is
authorized to give to the aggrieved consumer.  The District Forum has to
record its satisfaction as regards the defects in goods, deficiency in service,
etc.  It is only after recording such satisfaction that the District Forum can
45

give direction in respect of the reliefs which it grants to consumers.  The
District Forum shall issue orders to discontinue the unfair trade practice or
the restrictive trade practice or not to repeat them.
Competition Act , 2002
There was substantial overlap in the provisions of MRTP Act, 1969
and Consumer (Protection) Act, 1986, though each has several distinctive
features with regard to composition of adjudication machinery, jurisdiction,
type  of  persons  who  may  seek  relief,  nature  and  scope  of  relief  and
administrative procedure. An aggrieved consumer can thus approach both
bodies for relief. It appears that the present provisions of the MRTP Act
1969 and Consumer (Protection) Act, 1986 are not sufficient to deal with
anti-competitive practices.   
Thus, a need has arose for a separate competition act.  The Report of
the  Raghavan  Committee  on  Competition  Law,  2000  categorically
mentioned that the right to free and fair competition could not be denied by
any  other  consideration.  The  ultimate  reason  d‘etre of  competition  will
continue to be “consumer interest”.  It is no longer the era of caveat emptor. 
The Competition Act, 2002 received the assent of the President on
13th January, 2003.  The preamble of the Act shows that “it is an Act to
provide, keeping in view of the economic development of the country, for
the  establishment  of  a  Commission  to  prevent  practices  having  adverse
46

effect on competition, to promote and sustain competition in markets, to
protect the interests of consumers and to ensure freedom of trade carried on
by  other  participants  in  markets,  in  India,  and  for  matters  connected
therewith or incidental thereto”.
The scope and ambit of Competition Act, is fairly wide. Section 3(1)
of the Act, prohibits anti-competitive agreements in respect of production,
supply, distribution, storage, acquisition or control of goods or provision of
services, which causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on
the competition within India. Any agreement entered into in contravention
of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be void.
The said Act repeals the Monopolistic and Restrictive Trade Practices Act,
1969.
Under  the  Act,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Competition  Commission  to
eliminate  practices having  adverse  effect  on  competition,  promote  and
sustain competition, protect the interests of consumers and ensure freedom
of  trade  carried  on  by  other  participants  in  markets  in  India.   The
Commission has the power to grant a temporary injunction, restraining any
party from carrying on such act in certain circumstances.  The Commission
may also order for award of compensation for the loss or damage caused to
the applicant as a result of any contravention of the provisions of chapter II
having been committed by such enterprise.  The person has to pay a penalty
for failure to comply with orders/directions of the Commission.
47

Specific Relief Act, 1963 merely grants discretion to Courts to
refuse specific performance:
Section 20 deals with discretion as to decreeing specific performance.
The court is not bound to grant relief merely because it is lawful to do so
but it is discretionary and the  discretion of the court is not arbitrary but
sound and reasonable guided by judicial principles.  
One of the cases in which the court may properly exercise discretion
not to decree specific performance has been enumerated in sub-section 20
(2)(a) to (c) if the agreement gives an unfair advantage to one party, or
involves hardship as it is inequitable to grant specific performance.
Usurious Loans Act, 1918: Reopening of transactions:
The Usurious Loans Act, 1918 is an Act to give additional powers to
courts to deal in certain cases with usurious loans of money or in kind.
Section 3 of the Act provides for reopening of transactions if the court has
reasons to believe –
(a) that the interest is excessive; and
(c) that the transaction was, as between the parties
thereto, substantially unfair, the Court may
48

exercise all or any of the following powers,
namely, may, --
(i) re-open  the  transaction,  take  an  account
between the parties, and relieve the debtor
of all liability in respect of any excessive
interest;
(ii) notwithstanding any agreement, purporting
to close previous dealings and to create a
new obligation, reopen any account already
taken between them and relieve the debtor
of all liability in respect of any excessive
interest,  and  if anything  has  been paid  or
allowed  on  account  in  respect  of  such
liability, order the creditor to repay any sum
which it considers to be repayable in respect
thereof;
(iii) Set aside either wholly or in part or revise or
alter any security given or agreement made
in respect of any loan, and if the creditor has
parted  with  the  security,  order  him  to
indemnify the debtor in such manner and to
such extent as it may deem just:
Provided that, in the exercise of these powers, the Court
shall not –
49

(i) re-open any agreement purporting to close
previous  dealings  and  to  create  a  new
obligation which has been entered into by
the parties or any persons from whom they
claim  at  a  date  more  than  [twelve]  years
from the date of the transaction;
(ii) do anything which affects any decree of a
Court.
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
Section 2 (ra) defines ‘unfair labour practices’ as any of the practices
specified in the Fifth Schedule such as discharging or dismissing a workman
for taking part in any strike (not being a strike which it deems to be an
illegal);  to  discharge   or  dismiss  workmen  not  in  good  faith,  but  in
colourable exercise of the employer’s rights; to refuse bargain collectively,
in good faith with the recognized trade unions.
Section 25U inserted by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982
deals with penalty for committing unfair labour practices.   Any person who
commits any unfair labour practice shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months or with fine, which may extend
to one thousand ruppes, or with both.
50

Provisions of Indian Contract Act, 1872 and other existing laws
referred to above are not sufficient to meet the problems of today
The Commission in its 103rd Report opined that the existing sections
of  the  Indian  Contract  Act,  do  not  seem to  be  capable  of  meeting  the
mischief caused by unfair terms incorporated in contracts.  It was stated that
“the Indian Contract Act” as it stands today cannot come to the protection of
a consumer who is clearly with big business. Further, the ad hoc solutions
given by courts in response to their innate sense of justice without reference
to a proper yardstick in the form of a specific provision of statute law or
known legal principle of law only produce uncertainty and ambiguity.’
The  recommendations  given  by the  Law Commission  in  its  103rd
Report is for the incorporation of the following provision in Chapter IVA.
That section reads as follows:-
“Section 67A : (1)Where the court, on the terms of the contract or on
the evidence adduced by the parties, comes to the conclusion that the
contract or any part of it is unconscionable, it  may refuse to enforce
the contract or the  part that it holds to be unconscionable.
(2)  Without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the  provisions  of  this
section, a contract or part of it is deemed to be unconscionable if it
exempts any party thereto from- (a) the liability for willful breach of
the contract, or (b) the consequences of negligence.”
51

While  section  67(A)(1)  is  general  in  nature,  dealing  with
‘unconscionability’,  section  67(2)  refers  to  two  particular  situations  in
which the law deems the provisions to be unconscionable.  Section 67(1) is
not restricted to the cases referred to in section 67(2).  It does not deal with
unfair contracts except those that are unconscionable.  It does not provide
any guidelines which a Court has to consider to judge unconscionability.
Several  States  in  other  countries  list  a  number  of  guidelines  to  judge
‘unfairness’.
Although the recommendation made by the Law Commission in the
Report  on  Unfair  Terms  in  Contract  in  the  103rd Report  (1984),  was
concerned with standard form contracts imposing unfair and unreasonable
terms upon unwilling consumers or persons who had no bargaining power,
the recommendation was wide, and did not restrict itself to any particular
type of  contract.  The Commission  recommended  the  addition  of  a  new
chapter  IV-A with  a  single  section  into  the  Indian  Contract  Act,  1872.
Before making the recommendations, the Commission had invited public
comments  on  its  proposal  to  insert  a  new  section  67A  into  the  Indian
Contract Act, 1872.  The Commission received replies from the Registrar,
Judges of High Courts, Law Departments, etc.  The Commission felt that it
was better to go step by step and the only step that could be taken in our
country to remedy the evils of unfair terms in standard form of contracts
was to enact a provisions into the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which would
combine the advantages of English Law of Unfair Contract Terms Act and
section 2.302 of Uniform Commercial Code of USA. The Commission did
not  think  it  proper  to  enact  a  separate  law  as
in U.K.  
52

We agree with  the  103rd Report  that  the  provisions  of the  Indian
Contract Act, 1872 and other laws are not sufficient to meet the problems of
today.   Not  only that, we feel further that we have to introduce more
provisions than were contemplated in the 103rd Report.
53

   
CHAPTER-III
STANDARD FORM CONTRACTS AND THEIR NATURE
The device of a new type of contract i.e. standard form contract, is
common  in  today’s  complex  structure  of  giant  corporations  with  vast
infrastructural organization. The use of standard terms and conditions is
confined not only to contracts in commercial transactions, but contracts with
public authorities, multinational corporations, or in banking and insurance
business etc.  Standard form contracts have become common place in the
trade practices of the 20th and 21st century. They are found in almost every
branch of industry and commerce, consumer contracts, employment, hire-
purchase,  insurance,  administration,  any  form  of  travel,  or  the  courier
services, or while downloading software contracts from the internet, etc. 
But there are also dangers inherent in standard form contracts.  First,
the bargain before parties contract, is not on equal terms and one party
invariably has to sign on the dotted line, with no opportunity for that party
to negotiate over the terms at all. Second, one party may be completely or
relatively unfamiliar with the terms or language employed by the other. This
may be compounded by the use of fine print and exclusionary clauses. Thus
the characteristics, usually and traditionally associated with a contract, such
as freedom of contract and  consensus ad idem are significantly absent in
these so-called standard form contracts. 
54

 The standard form contracts have varied names, the French call them
“Contracts d’adhesion”, and the Americans call them “adhesion contracts”
or  “contracts  of  adhesion”.   In  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  (7th Ed.  p.38),
‘Adhesion contracts’ are defined as follows:
“A standard-form contract prepared by one party, to be signed by the
party in a weaker position, usually a consumer, who has little choice
about  the  terms.   Also  termed  Contract  of  adhesion;  adhesory
contract;  adhesionary contract;  take it or leave it contract;  leonire
contract.
Some sets of trade and professional forms are extremely one-sided,
grossly  favouring  one  interest  group  against  others,  and  are
commonly referred to as contracts of adhesion.   From weakness in
bargaining position, ignorance or indifference, unfavoured parties are
willing  to  enter  transactions  controlled  by  these  lopsided  legal
documents”    Quinlin Johnstone and Dan Hopson, Ir, Lawyers and
Their Work, 329-30 (196).
Standard form contracts are usually pre-printed contracts that are only
“contracts”  in  name.  The  standard  terms  and  conditions  unilaterally
prepared by one party are offered to the other on a take it or leave it basis,
rather, the terms are forced on the other party.   The individual participation
consists  of  a  mere  adherence  to  the  document  drafted  unilaterally  and
insisted upon by the powerful enterprises who could abuse their position
under the garb of free will. The conditions imposed by one party on the
other are never put into discussion.  One has to just fill the blanks and sign
55

on the dotted line. Clever suppliers of goods and services-providers seek to
exclude or limit their possible legal liability by the insertion of exclusionary
clauses in the standard form contract offered by them.  
            In the case of a person who takes a mediclaim policy, if one looks at
its standard form, there is, for example, a restricting clause in the contract
which says that any pre-existing illness that the policy holder suffers from
will not be covered.  It is uncommon to find an individual aged above 65
years who does not suffer from some medical problem or other.  The policy
contains another clause in fine print that in case of any life threatening
situations  that  require  immediate  treatment  the  company  “could”  pay
insurance cover, which means that they may or may not pay. Then, there are
contracts where one party is authorized unilaterally either to enforce or not
to enforce the contract or to alter its terms wholly or within certain limits at
its free will.  Employment contracts contain certain clauses enabling the
employer  to  terminate  the  contract  without  assigning  any  reason
whatsoever.   Some  contracts  permit  one  party  to  nominate  its  own
employee, consultant or lawyer to act as arbitrator.  Such terms could never
be part of a contract, if parties were to negotiate the terms on an equal
footing. 
The standard form contract can be beneficial to both the parties if
the terms constitute a fair balance between them.  For example, use of such
standard  terms  can  enable  the  parties  to  make  complex  contracts  with
minimum  expense  of  time  and  trouble  in  negotiating  the  terms  to
standardize the risks they face.  Further, it takes advantage of lessons of
56

experience and enables a uniform interpretation of all similar contracts.  It is
believed that simplified planning and administration, makes the skill of the
draftsman  available  to  all  personnel  and  it  makes  risks  calculable  and
increases real security which is the necessary basis  of initiative and the
assumption of foreseeable risks. 
In Chitty on Contracts ‘General Principles’ (27th Ed) (vol. I, 1994),
the  following  passage  in  connection  with  the  standard  form  contracts
(paragraph No. 12.097) is referred to:
“Contracts  in  standard  form. -- A different  problem may arise  in
proving the terms of the agreement where it is sought to show that
they are contained in a contract in standard form, i.e. in some ticket,
receipt, or standard form document.  The other party may have signed
the document, in which case he is bound by its terms.  More often,
however,  it  is  simply  handed  to  him  at  the  time  of  making  the
contract,  and  the  question  will  then  arise  whether  the  printed
conditions which it contains have become terms of the contract.  The
party receiving the document will probably not trouble to read it, and
may even  be ignorant  that  it  contains  any conditions  at all.   Yet
standard  form  contracts  very  frequently  embody  clauses  which
purport to impose obligations on him or to exclude or restrict the
liability of the  person  supplying  the  document.   Thus  it becomes
important  to  determine  whether  these  clauses  should  be  given
contractual effect.”1
1 Quoted   in Pawan Alloys and Casting Pvt. Ltd Meerut etc. v. U.P. State Electricity Board, AIR 1997 SC
3910 at 3930 with approval.
57

 The Standard form contracts: original purpose disclosed:
In  Cheshire’s  Law  of  Contract,  14th Edn.  “Use  of  standard  form
contracts’ is dealt with at page 21 in the following terms:
“The process of mass production and distribution, which has largely
supplemented  if  it  has  not  supplanted  individual  effort,  has
introduced the mass contract -- uniform documents which must be
accepted  by  all  who  deal  with  large-scale  organizations.   Such
documents are not in themselves novelties: the classical lawyer of the
mid- Victorian years found himself struggling to adjust his simple
conceptions of contract to the demands of such powerful bodies as the
railway companies.  But in the present century, many corporations,
both public and private, have found it useful to adopt, as the basis of
their  transactions,  a  series  of  standard  forms  with  which  their
customers can do little but comply.”
Lord Diplock has pointed out in Schroeder Music Publishing Co V.
Macaulay (1974) 1 WLR 1308) that standard form of contracts are of two
kinds.  The first which are of very ancient origin are those which set out the
terms on which mercantile transactions of common occurrence are to be
carried  out.   Examples  are  bills  of  lading,  charter  parties,  policies  of
insurance, contracts of sale in the commodity markets.  The standard clauses
in  these  contracts  have  been  settled  over  the  years  by  negotiation  by
representatives of the commercial interests involved, and have been widely
adopted because experience has shown that they facilitate the conduct of
58

trade. Contracts of these kinds affect not only the actual parties to them but
also others who may have a commercial interest in the transactions to which
they  relate,  as,  buyers  or  sellers,  charterers  or  ship-owners,  insurers  or
bankers.  He then proceeded to state that if fairness or reasonableness were
relevant to their enforceability, the fact that they are widely used by parties
whose bargaining power is fairly matched would raise a strong presumption
that their terms are fair and reasonable.   Lord Diplock observed:
“The same presumption, however, does not apply to the other kind of
standard form of contract.  This is of comparatively modern origin.  It
is the result of the concentration of particular kind of business in
relatively few hands. The ticket cases in the 19th century provide what
are probably the first examples.  The terms of this kind of standard
form of contract have not been the subject of negotiation between the
parties  to  it,  or  approved  by  any  organization  representing  the
interests of the weaker party.  They have been dictated by that party
whose  bargaining  power,  either  exercised  alone  or  in  conjunction
with others providing similar goods or services, enables him to say:
‘If you want these goods or services at all, these are the only terms on
which they are obtainable.  Take it or leave it”.  (see also Cheshire,
Fifoot, & Furmston’s, Law of Contract, 14th Edn. 2001 pp.21-22) 
Interpretational issues in standard form contracts: 
In this context, it is to be noted that in Anson’s Law of Contracts, 26th
Edn.    (page 136), the learned author has dealt with the question pertaining
59

to construction of terms in a written contract which can create hurdles.  The
author states: 
“An agreement ought to receive that construction which its language
will admit, which will best effectuate the intention of the parties, to
be collected from the whole of the agreement, and greater regard is to
be had to the clear intent of the parties than to any particular words
which  they may have  used  in  the  expression  of  their  intent.  The
proper mode of construction is to take the instrument as a whole, to
collect the meaning of words and phrases from their general context,
and to try and give effect to every part of it.  However, if the words of
a  particular  clause  are  clear  and  unambiguous,  they  cannot  be
modified by reference to the other clauses in the agreement.” 
If this principle is to be applied to standard-form contracts, it will be
seen that even if the party having greater bargaining position has introduced
exemption clauses unilaterally in its own favour, the court's job is to give
full effect to those clauses which have been agreed upon, even if they are
unreasonable or unconscionable. The freedom of equal bargaining power, in
such cases, is thus largely an illusion.  The contracts in the standard forms
do  generally  contain  terms  and  conditions  which  are  unreasonable  and
unfair resulting from inequality of bargaining power or no bargaining power
at all.  The question arises as to the remedy against such unconscionable
clauses in contracts.
60

Supreme  Court  on  Contracts  by  Government  and  Public
Institutions and Art 14: Judicial Review  under Art 226 of the
Constitution:
Yet  another  angle  to  these  contracts  arises  not  only  from  the
traditional aspect of consent or unconscionability, but also from the point of
arbitrariness,  where  the  contract  is  entered  into  by  a  department  of
Government, or a public sector undertaking or other public body.  Here, in
as  much  as  the  party  so  stipulating  is  a  Government  or  public  sector
undertaking,  the question  can  arise  if  the  aggrieved  party  can  resort  to
Article 14 of the Constitution of India and the ‘arbitrariness’ doctrine laid
down in Royappa’s case (AIR 1974 SC 555).  But, here parties could go  to
the High Court under Art 226 of the Constitution or under Art 32 to the
Supreme  Court.   While  views  have  been  expressed,  particularly  in  the
Central Inland Water Transport Corporation case (AIR 1986 SC 1571), and
in  Delhi Transportation case (AIR 1991 SC 101), that such unreasonable
clauses in contracts of employment could be struck down by the courts, it
has, however, been stated in these very cases by the Supreme Court that the
Court  is  not  prepared  to  extend  the  principle  of  ‘arbitrariness’  to
‘commercial contracts’ in the same manner as it has extended the principle
to terms imposed unilaterally by a statutory employer on its employee. 
Other Contracts:
Apart  from  contracts  in  standard  form,  there  may  be  individual
contracts of an ad hoc nature, entered into between individual parties, which
61

are  not  like  multi-national  companies  or  big  commercial  houses  within
India,  where  one-sided  or  unreasonable  conditions  may  be  imposed  in
situations where the bargaining power is unequal.  Even in such cases, some
power must be given to the courts to remedy the situation.
Therefore, the ‘unfairness’, if any, in such standard form contracts,
falls for consideration in this Report.
62

CHAPTER-IV
JUDICIAL PROUNCEMENTS IN INDIA ON UNFAIR TERMS 
          We see from the preceding discussion in Chapters II and III that
though every standard form contract may not be an unconscionable one,
there are reasonable chances of some standard form contracts being tainted
with unfairness as there is very little scope for negotiations.    Further, the
existing provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 show that the legal
control under the said provisions is also not quite adequate to come to the
rescue of the weaker party against harsh contracts.  The judiciary in India
has, in several cases, indeed come to the rescue of parties from the menace
of unreasonable terms in standard form contracts. The experience has shown
however  that  in  the  majority  of  cases  where  the  weaker  party,  under
pressure of circumstances (generally economic or due to ignorance) arising
out of inequality of bargaining power, enters into such contracts, the courts
may not be able to help because all such cases do not fall within the four
corners of Sections 16, 23 or 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.  
The Central Inland Water Transport Corporation  Limited Case
(AIR 1986 SC 1571)
   The unfairness of contractual terms by ‘authorities’ which fall within
the meaning of the word ‘State’ in article 12 of the Constitution of India
figured  in  several  service  matters  before  the  Supreme  Court.   The
63

irrationality or arbitrariness of  clauses in such contracts was considered in
the context of article 14.   The apex court for the first time in 1986 in
Central  Inland  Water  Transport  Corporation Ltd. v.  Brojo  Nath
Ganguly (AIR 1986 SC 1571) made an attempt to broaden the applicability
of unconscionability outside the boundaries laid down by section 16 of the
Indian Contract Act.   We have referred to this briefly in the earlier chapters.
Here, we propose to go into the facts of the case also.
The appellant in this case was a Government company. Since another
company was carrying on the same business as the Central Inland Water
Transport Corporation (CIWTC), a scheme of arrangement was entered into
between the said Corporation and that company, with the approval of the
High Court. Under the scheme, an officer of the company could accept the
job in the corporation or in the alternative, leave the job and receive a
meagre amount by way of compensation.   Rule 9 (i) of the relevant Rules of
the Corporation provided that the services of officers could be terminated by
giving three months notice. The petitioner’s service was terminated in this
manner.  He  challenged  this  rule  as  arbitrary  under  article  14  of  the
Constitution and alleged that a term in a contract of employment of this kind
entered into by a private employer, which was unfair, unreasonable and
unconscionable was bad in law. This rule formed part of the contract of
employment and its validity fell to be tested by the principles of the law of
contracts. The Court read the principles of unconscionable bargain outside
the four corners of section 16 of the Indian Contract Act and held that such
a contract was void under section 23 of that Act. The Court emphasized on
the  requirement  of  'reasonableness’  in  the  terms  of  the  contract  by
discussing three principles namely- 'unconscionability', ‘distributive justice
64

and unreasonableness’ and ‘inequality of bargaining power' and considered
the issue under three headings: 
(1) Unconscionability:   To  explain  the  meaning  of
'unconscionability’,  the  apex  Court  relied  upon  the
“Restatement  of  the  Law  (Second)”  as  promulgated  and
adopted by the American Law Institute (Volume II) (dealing
with the law of contracts, in Section 208 at page 107).,  as
follows:
Section 208. Unconscionable Contracts Term: 
“If a contract or term thereof is unconscionable at the
time the contract is made, a Court may refuse to enforce
the  contract,  or  may  enforce  the  remainder  of  the
contract  without  the  unconscionable  term,  or  may  so
limit the application of any unconscionable term, as to
avoid any unconscionable result.”
The  Supreme  Court  referred  to  the  comments  given  under  that
section, where it is stated “Like the obligation of good faith and fair dealing
(S.205), the policy against unconscionable contracts or terms applies to a
wide variety of types of conduct. The determination that a term is or is not
unconscionable  is  made  in  the  light  of  its  setting,  purpose  and  effect.
Relevant factors include weaknesses in the contracting process like those
involved in more specific rules as to contractual capacity, fraud and other
invalidating  clauses;  the  policy  also  overlaps  with  rules  which  render
particular bargains  or terms unenforceable  on  grounds  of public policy.
65

Policing  against  unconscionable  contracts  or  terms  has  sometimes  been
accomplished by adverse construction of language, by manipulation of the
rules of offer and acceptance or by determinations that the clause is contrary
to public policy or to the dominant purpose of the contract.
The  Supreme  Court  also  referred  to  the  comment  under  Uniform
Commercial Code Section 2-302 which makes nice distinctions.  It says:
"A bargain is not unconscionable merely because the parties to it are
unequal  in  bargaining  position,  nor  even  because  the  inequality
results  in  an  allocation  of  risks  to  the  weaker  party.   But  gross
inequality  of  bargaining  power,  together  with  terms  unreasonably
favourable to the stronger party, may confirm indications  that the
transaction involved elements of deception or compulsion, or may
show  that  the  weaker  party  had  no  meaningful  choice,  no  real
alternative, or did not in fact assent or appear to assent to the unfair
terms” 
The Court also referred to the Reporter’s note to section 208, where it
is asserted that a contract of adhesion is not unconscionable per-se and that
all unconscionable contracts are not contracts of adhesion.  Nonetheless, the
more  standardized  the  agreement  and  the  less  a  party  may  bargain
meaningfully, the more susceptible, the contract or a term will be to a claim
of unconscionability.  
66

(2) Distributive  justice:  The  Court  explained  the  concept  of
'distributive justice' when it relied on its previous decision in the case
of  Lingappa Ponchanna Appelwar v.  State of Maharashtra.2 In that
case,  while  upholding  the  constitutionality  of  Maharashtra
Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act, 1974 the Apex court
said:
“The  present  legislation  is  a typical  illustration  of the  concept  of
distributive justice, as modern jurisprudence knows it.  Legislators,
judges  and  administrators  are  now  familiar  with  the  concept  of
distributive justice.  Our Constitution permits and even directs the
State to administer what may be termed ‘distributive justice’.  The
concept of distributive justice in the sphere of law making connotes,
inter-alia, the  removal  of economic  inequalities  and  rectifying  the
injustice resulting from dealings or transactions between unequals in
society.  Law should be used as an instrument of distributive justice
to achieve a fair division of wealth among the members of society
based upon the principle: ‘From each according to his capacity, to
each according to his needs’.  Distributive justice comprehends more
than  achieving  lessening  of  inequalities  by  differential  taxation,
giving debt relief or distribution of property owned by one to many
who have none by imposing ceiling on holdings, both agricultural and
urban,  or  by  direct  regulation  of  contractual  transactions  by
forbidding certain transactions and perhaps, by requiring others.  It
also means that those who have been deprived of their properties by
unconscionable bargains should be restored their property.  All such
2 (1985) 1 SCC, 499
67

laws may take the form of forced redistribution of wealth as a means
of achieving a fair division of material resources among the members
of society or there may be legislative control of unfair agreements.”
(emphasis supplied)
(3) Inequality  of  bargaining  power:   The  Court  explained  the
concept  of  'unreasonableness  and  inequality  of  bargaining  power’
with the help of several English decisions (Gillespie Brothers and Co
Ltd v. Roy Bowles Transport Ltd (1973) Q.B.400; Llyods Bank Ltd.
v.  Bundy  (1974) 3 ALL. ER 757;  Schroeder Music Publishing Co
Ltd. v.  Macaulay  (1974) 3 ALL ER 616  etc.).   After discussing
various judgments of English courts, and the law in U.K., USA and
Germany, the court observed that there might be myriad situations
which  result  in  unfair  and  unreasonable  bargains  between  parties
possessing wholly disproportionate and unequal  bargaining power.
These cases can neither be enumerated nor fully illustrated.  The court
must judge each case on its own facts and circumstances.  The above
principle would apply, the court reiterated, “where the in-equality of
bargaining power is the result of the great disparity in the economic
strength of the contracting parties or where the inequality is the result
of circumstances, whether of the creation of the parties or not, or
where the weaker party is in a position in which he could obtain
goods or services or means of livelihood only upon the terms imposed
by the stronger party or go without them or where a man had no
choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his assent to a
contract or to sign on the dotted line in prescribed or standard form or
to  accept  a  set  of  rules  as  part  of  the  contract,  however,  unfair,
68

unreasonable and unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or
rules  might  be.  The  court,  however, reiterated  that this  principle
would  not  apply  where  the  bargaining  power  of  the  contracting
parties is equal or almost equal. The contracts of this type to which
the principle formulated above applied were not just contracts which
were tainted with illegality, but were so unfair and unreasonable that
they shock the conscience of the Court.    According to the court, this
principle may not apply where both parties are businessman and the
contract is a commercial transaction.
A  question  also  arose  here  as  to  under  which  head  would  an
unconscionable bargain fall under the Contract law?  If it fell under the head
of undue influence, it would be voidable, but if it fell under the head of
being opposed to public policy, it would be void.  The Court answered that
such contracts would rarely be induced by undue influence, even though at
times  they  were  between  parties  one  of  whom  held  a  real  or  apparent
authority over the other. Very often in vast majority of cases such contracts
were entered  into by the weaker party under pressure of circumstances,
generally  economic,  resulting  in  inequality  of  bargaining  power.   Such
contracts did not fall within the four corners of the definition of ‘undue
influence’ given in section 16 (1) of the Indian Contract Act, and ought not
to be held voidable, because it would compel each person with whom the
party with superior bargaining power had contracted, to go to the court to
have the contract adjudged voidable. This would only result in multiplicity
of litigation which no court should encourage. Such a contract or such a
clause in the contract ought, therefore to be adjudged void as being opposed
to public policy under section 23.
69

In the above case, Justice Madon considered the development of law
and held that an instrumentality of the State cannot impose unconstitutional
conditions in service rules vis-à-vis its employer to terminate the services of
a permanent employee without reasons merely on a three months notice and
found  the  clause  to  be  unconscionable,  unfair  unreasonable  and  against
public policy and public interest and thus violative of article 14.  
 Uptron’s case: (AIR 1998 SC 1681)
In  Uptron India Ltd v.  Shanni Bhan, the conferment of permanent
status on an employee guaranteed security of tenure was in issue.   It was
stated that it is now well settled that the services of a permanent employee,
whether  employed  by  the  Government  or  Government  company  or
Government  instrumentality    or  statutory  corporation  or  any  other
‘Authority’ within the meaning of article 12 of the Constitution, cannot be
terminated abruptly and arbitrarily either by giving him a months or three
months notice or pay in lieu thereof or even without notice, notwithstanding
that there may be a stipulation to that effect either in the contract of service
or in the certified standing orders.
Delhi Transport Corporation’s case:   (AIR 1991 SC 101)  :
The ratio of  Central Inland Water case, above referred to, was upheld
per  majority  in  Delhi  Transport  Corporation v.  D.T.C.  Mazdoor
Corporation.    The central question involved in the group of cases was
70

whether the clauses permitting the employers or the authorities concerned to
terminate the employment of the regular or permanent employees by giving
reasonable notice or pay in lieu of notice but without holding any enquiry
are  constitutionally  valid?  If  not,  what  would  be  the  consequences  of
termination by virtue of such clauses or powers, and further whether such
powers and clauses could be so read down with such implied conditions
which would make such powers constitutionally and legally valid. 
 In  that  case,  the  respondents  who  were  permanent  employees,
allegedly became inefficient in their works and started inciting other staff
members not to perform their duties.  They were served with termination
notices  under  Regulation  9(b)  of  the  Delhi  Road  Transport  Authority
(Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regulations, 1952.  In the writ
petition, the constitutional validity of the Regulation was challenged. The
Constitution  Bench  held  that  Regulation  9  (b)  whereby  service  of  a
permanent  employee  could  be  terminated  by  issuing  a  month’s  notice
without  assigning  any  reasons  was  arbitrary,  unfair,  unjust  and
unreasonable.  It was also opposed to public policy and thereby void under
Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
Reliance was placed by the court on the decision in  West Bengal
State Electricity  Board     v. Desh Bandhu Ghosh 1985 (3) SCC 116, where
the   court  was  concerned  with   Regulations  of  the  West  Bengal  State
Electricity Board which said that in the  case of a permanent employee, his
services may be terminated  by serving 3 month’s  notice or on payment of
salary for the corresponding period in lieu thereof.  The court was of the
71

view that it was naked “hire and fire” rule, and thus struck down Regulation
34.  
        However,  the  Court  was  cautious  to  let  the  question  of
unreasonableness, inequality of bargaining power and public policy remain
flexible and observed that the meaning and scope of these may change by
passage of time.
LIC v. Consumer Education & Research Center: 1995 (5) SCC
482
We next come to a case not involving service conditions.  A case of
unequal bargaining power arose in the context of a life insurance policy in
LIC India v.  Consumer Education & Research Center.  The Supreme
Court interpreted an insurance policy issued by Life Insurance Corporation
of  India  by  bringing  in  certain  elements  of  public  purpose.  The  court
declared a term in the policy, pertaining to restricting the benefit of the
policy  only  to  those  people  employed  in  the  Government,  quasi-
Government or reputed commercial firms as void under article 14 of the
Constitution. 
It was stated that it is settled law that if a contract or a clause in a
contract is found unreasonable or unfair or irrational, one must look to the
relative bargaining power of the contracting parties.  In dotted line contracts
there would be no occasion for a weaker party to bargain as to assume to
have equal bargaining power.  He has either to accept or leave the service or
72

goods in terms of the dotted line contract. His option would be either to
accept the unreasonable or unfair terms or forgo the service for ever. With a
view to have the services of the goods, the party enters into a contract with
unreasonable or unfair terms contained therein and he would be left with no
option  but  to  sign  the  contract.   An  unfair  and  untenable  or  irrational
contract executed by a public authority is unjust and amenable to judicial
review.    LIC  being  a  State  within  the  meaning  of  article  12  of  the
Constitution, the court invoked article 14 of the Constitution and, in para
27, it further stated:
“In the sphere of contractual relations the state its instrumentality,
public authorities or those whose acts bear insignia of public element,
action to public duty or obligation are enjoined to act in a manner i.e.
fair,  just  and  equitable,  after  taking  objectively  all  the  relevant
options into consideration and in a manner that is reasonable, relevant
and germane to effectuate the purpose for public good and in general
public interest and it must not take any irrelevant or irrational factors
into consideration or be arbitrary in its decision.  Duty to act fairly is
part of fair procedure envisages under Articles 14 and 21.  Every
activity of public authority or those under public duty or obligation
must be informed by reason and guided by the public interest.”
Pawan  Alloys Case, AIR 1997 SC 3910:
We shall next refer to a business transaction where section 23 of the
Contract Act was applied.   In  M/s Pawan Alloys & Casting Pvt. Ltd.
Meerut v.  U.P.S.E.B., the three notifications of Electricity Board giving
73

incentive  development  rebate  to  new  industries  in  the  State  of  UP  in
exercise of its statutory powers under section 49 of the Electricity (Supply)
Act, 1948 read with section 78A were challenged. The appellant industries
established on basis of said promise in the notification by signing standard
agreement  for  supply  of  electricity.   The  Board  then  arbitrarily  and
prematurely withdrew this rebate.  The court held that incentive to new
industries by way of tax holiday or tax exemption could validly form the
subject matter  of promissory estoppel as it would not  be against  public
policy but in so far as any representation seeks to enable the promisee to get
refund of the collected sales tax it would remain unconstitutional  being
violative of the taxation scheme and would be contrary to public policy and
thus void under section 23 of Contract Act.
Conclusion: 
It will be seen that the Apex Court either applied Article 14 in cases
where unreasonable term were imposed by an entity which was a ‘State’
within Article 12, or applied section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
The only substantive development was that the Court was not confined to
existing heads of public policy. Though in certain cases, it was observed
that Article 14 could not be applied to commercial contracts entered by
entities which were a ‘State’ within Article 12 of the Constitution, in some
cases section 23 was invoked against such entities  to grant relief.  The
various  decisions  rendered  by  the  Court  would  reveal  that  the  above
procedures were adopted because the court was otherwise handicapped in
74

giving relief because of the absence of a general power given by a statute to
strike down ‘unreasonable clauses’.  
75

CHAPTER-V
UNFAIR TERMS IN CONTRACT - A COMPARATIVE STUDY
The law relating to unfairness, arising from inequality of bargaining
power was developed  around  the globe, as a separate ground on which
contracts can be set aside.  Classical legal theory viewed standard form
contracts no differently than individually negotiated contracts, and enforced
them according to their terms, no matter how harsh or unjust the terms were.
Under the classical theory, courts created a conclusive presumption that the
signing party understood the terms. This result was based on the “duty to
read”  doctrine,  which  was  also  developed  out  of  the  paradigm  of
individually  negotiated  contracts.   However,  legal  scholars  and  courts
recognized  the fundamental  differences  between  standard form contracts
and the classical models  of individually negotiated  contracts.  Professor
Karl Llewellyn [Book Review, 52 Harvard Law Review 700, 704 (1939)]
noted  the  importance  of  protecting  the  weaker  party’s  reasonable
expectations when interpreting standard form contracts:
“Free contract presupposes free bargain; and free bargain presupposes
free  bargaining;  and  that  where  bargaining  is  absent  in  fact,  the
conditions and clauses to be read into bargain are not those which
happen to be printed on the unread paper, but are those which a sane
man might reasonably expect to find on that paper.”
76

Position in U.S.A. : American Restatement (Second Edition) and
UCC: Unconscionability:
 The notion of unconscionability in contracts is by no means new in
U.S.A.  As  stated  in  Chapter  III,  it  has  taken  a  new  life  since  it  was
embodied  as  a test  of  enforceability  in  the  Uniform Commercial  Code,
1977, (hereinafter called UCC). The general doctrine of unconscionability
was developed in that country largely through judicial decisions.   We have
already  referred  to  the  position  under  the  American  Law  as  stated  in
Restatement of Law (second edition) in Section 208 as referred to by the
Supreme Court in Inland Waters case, AIR 1998 SC 151.   It stated:
“If a  contract  or  terms  thereof  is  unconscionable  at  the  time  the
contract is made a court may refuse to enforce the contract, or may
enforce  the  remainder  of  the  contract  without  the  unconscionable
term, or may so limit the application of any unconscionable term as to
avoid any unconscionable result”.
The doctrine of unconscionability has also been included in the UCC,
though it was applicable only to contracts relating to sales of goods.  It has
been applied by analogy or as a general doctrine to other kinds of contract.
Section 2 - 302 of the UCC provides:-
“If the court as a matter of law finds the contract or any clause of the
contract to have been unconscionable at the time it was made, the
court  may  refuse  to  enforce  the  contract,  or  it  may  enforce  the
77

remainder of the contract without the unconscionable clause, or it
may so limit the application of any unconscionable clause as to avoid
any unconscionable result”.
The comment to this section, extracted below, to the extent relevant
describes the purpose of this section, as follows:
“This  section  is  intended  to enable  the  courts  to  police  explicitly
against the contracts or clauses which they find to be unconscionable.
In  the  past  such  policing  has  been  accomplished  by  adverse
construction of language by manipulation of the rules of offer and
acceptance or by determinations that the clause is contrary to public
policy or to the dominant purpose of the contract….”
Since Section 2-302 referred to above is addressed to the Court in as
much as the unconscionability must be determined by the court as the matter
of law.  Under this provision when it is claimed or appears to the court that
the contract or any clause thereof may be unconscionable, the parties shall
be  afforded  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  present  evidence  as  to  its
commercial  setting,  purpose  and  the  effect  in  order  to  aid  the  court  in
making the determination. The relief granted by the courts could be refusal
to  enforce  the  entire  contract  or  the  particular  clauses  found  to  be
unconscionable.
The comment to section 2-302 further states as follows:
78

"A bargain is not unconscionable merely because the parties to it are
unequal in bargaining power, nor even because the inequality results
in an allocation of risks to the weaker party.  But gross inequality of
bargaining power, together with terms unreasonably favourable to the
stronger party may confirm indications that the transaction involved
elements of deception or compulsion, or may show that the weaker
party had no meaningful choice, no real alternative, or did not in fact,
assent or appear to assent to the unfair terms". 
Thus,  though  the  mere  inequality  of  bargaining  power  does  not
suffice and the courts ‘recognize that the parties are often required to make
their contracts quickly even if their bargaining power may rarely be equal
still the court has power to interfere in cases falling within the provisions.  It
is  quite  clear  that  in  U.S.,  there  is  a  statutory  bar  on  unconscionable
contracts  and  the  interest  of  the  parties  prejudiced  by  inequality  of
bargaining  power.   The  UCC  does  not  define  unconscionability  but
indicates  in the comment the basic  test,  whether in the light of general
commercial background and the commercial needs of the particular trade or
case, the clauses involved are so one-sided as to be unconscionable under
the circumstances existing at the time of the making of the contract.  The
principle is one of oppression and unfair surprise (Campbell Soup Co. v.
Wentz) (referred to hereinafter) and not of disturbance of allocation of risks
because of superior bargaining power, Prof. M.A. Eisenbergs “The Bargain
Principle and its Limits” (1982) 95 Harv. LR. p.741.
Wentz’s Case
79

The case of  Campbell Soup Co. v.  Wentz,  172 F. 2d 80, 3d cir,
(1948) (as cited in Fansworth – Contracts, p. 419), is cited in comment 1 to
UCC 2-302.   The case concerned a standard form-carrot-grower contract.
The defendant had committed his entire crop of carrots to Campbell for a
price of not more than $ 30 a ton.  At the time of delivery, a scarcity had
developed and such goods were virtually unobtainable and their price had
also risen to at least $ 90 a ton.  Campbell’s supplier began to sell some of
their crops to others and Campbell brought an action to enjoin further sales
elsewhere by the defendant and for specific performance.   The Court of
Appeals found several provisions of the contract to be objectionable and
refused to grant equitable relief.   It said that the contract was obviously
“drawn by skilful draftsmen with the buyer’s interests in mind”, and that it
was  too  hard  a  bargain  to  entitle  the  plaintiff  to  relief  in  a  court  of
conscience.
New Principles of procedural and Substantive Unconscionability
(USA):
The definition of ‘unconscionability’ as stated in Williams v. Walker
Thomas Furniture Co. (350 F.2d. 445C D.C. Cir 965) has been generally
accepted  in  absence  of  definition  in  the  UCC.  That  case  defines:
“Unconscionability” to include the absence of “meaningful choice” on the
part  of  one  of  the  parties  together  with  contract  terms  which  are
unreasonably favourable to the other party. Whether a meaningful choice is
present in a particular case or not can only be determined by consideration
of all the circumstances surrounding the transaction.  In many cases, the
80

meaningful choice is negated by gross inequality of bargaining power. A
contract or a clause in a contract will be said to be unconscionable, if it
satisfies  the  test  of  procedural as  well  as  substantive unconscionability,
indicated  respectively by the words  ‘absence of meaningful choice’ and
‘terms unreasonably favourable’ in the above definition; and where more of
one is present, less of the other is required.  Procedural unconscionability
arises when there is an element of oppression or wrong doing in the process
of  the  making  of  the  contract  and  would  include,  use  of  fine  print  or
technical language, lack of knowledge or understanding and inequality of
bargaining  power.   “Substantive  unconscionability”  on  the  other  hand
affects the actual substance of the contract and its terms and will include
wide exclusion clauses, or excessive prices etc.
We have referred to this dichotomy in Chapter I.   We shall also be
referring to these concepts in latter chapters.
 AUSTRALIA
New South Wales (NSW) has a legislation in relation to unfair or
unjust consumer contracts in general. 
The Contract Review Act, 1980 (New South Wales):
81

The Contract Review Act, 1980 (CRA) protects persons from using
unjust contracts or provisions. Section 6(2) states that relief under the Act is
not available so far as contracts entered into in the course of or for the
purpose of a trade, business or profession carried on or proposed to be
carried on by the person, other than a farming undertaking in New South
Wales. Under Section 7, there are various avenues available to the Court on
a finding of an unjust contract or contractual provisions. The CRA provides
that a court can grant relief in relation to a consumer contract if it finds the
contract  or  a  provision  of  the  contract  to  have  been  “unjust”  in  the
circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made.  The court can
refuse to enforce any or all of the provisions of the contract and declare the
contract void, in whole or in part; make an order varying the provisions of
the instrument or terminating or otherwise affecting its operation or effects.
The CRA operates concurrently with the Uniform Consumer Credit Code
(UCCC).  (See Unfair Contract Terms, A Discussion Paper, January 2004)
(Queensland and Victoria).
“Unjust” is defined in the CRA as including what is unconscionable,
harsh or oppressive.
Section 9(1) of the CRA sets out the matters which the court must
consider in determining if the contract or a term is unjust: the public interest
and  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  including  such  consequences  or
results as those arising in the event of:
(a) compliance with any or all of the provisions of the
contract, or
82

(b) non-compliance with, or contravention of, any or all
of the provisions of the contract.
Under section 9(2) wherever relevant, the Court is also to have regard
to  procedural  issues such  as  material  inequality  of  bargaining  power,
relative economic circumstances, educational background, literacy of the
parties,  any  unfair  pressure,  whether  or  not  legal  or  expert  advice  was
sought, but also substantive issues such as:
(d) whether or not any provisions of the contract impose
conditions which are unreasonably difficult to comply
with or not reasonably necessary for the protection of
the legitimate interests of any party to the contract;
and
………………………………………………………
………….
(g) where the contract is wholly or partly in writing, the
physical form of the contract, and the intelligibility of
the language in which it is expressed.
Section 9 which bears the title ‘Matters to be considered by the Court’
reads  as follows:
“9 Matters to be considered by Court
(1) In determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is
unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it
was made, the Court shall have regard to the public interest and
83

to  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  including  such
consequences or results as those arising in the event of:
(a) compliance with any or all of the provisions
of the contract, or
(b) non-compliance  with,  or  contravention  of,
any or all of the provisions of the contract.
(2) Without in anyway affecting the generality of subsection (1),
the matters to which the Court shall have regard shall, to the
extent that they are relevant to the circumstances, including the
following:
(a) whether  or  not  there  was  any  material  inequality  in
bargaining power between the parties to the contract,
(b) whether or not prior to or at the time the contract was
made its provisions were the subject of negotiation,
(c) whether or not it was reasonably practicable for the party
seeking  relief  under  this  Act  to  negotiate  for  the
alteration  of or to reject any of the  provisions  of  the
contract,
(d) whether  or  not  any provisions  of the  contract  impose
conditions  which are unreasonably difficult to comply
with or not reasonably necessary for the protection of the
legitimate interests of any party to the contract, 
(e) whether or not:
(i) any party to the contract (other than a corporation)
was  not  reasonably  able  to  protect  his  or  her
interests, or
84

(ii) any person who represented any of the parties to
the contract was not reasonably able to protect the
interests of any party whom he or she represented,
because of his or her age or the state of his or her
physical or mental capacity,
(f) the  relative  economic  circumstances,  educational
background and literacy of:
(i) the  parties  to  the  contract  (other  than  a
corporation), and
(ii) any person who represented any of the parties to
the contract,
(g) where  the contract  is  wholly or partly in  writing,  the
physical form of the contract, and the intelligibility of
the language in which it is expressed,
(h) whether  or  not  and  when  independent  legal  or  other
expert advice was obtained by the party seeking relief
under this Act,
(i) the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract
and  their  legal  and  practical  effect  were  accurately
explained by any person to the party seeking relief under
this Act, and whether or not that party understood the
provisions and their effect,
(j) whether any undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair
tactics were exerted on or used against the party seeking
relief under this Act:
(i) by any other party to the contract,
85

(ii) by any person acting or appearing or purporting to
act  for  or  on  behalf  of  any  other  party  to  the
contract, or
(iii) by any person to the knowledge (at the time the
contract  was  made)  of  any  other  party  to  the
contract or of any person acting or appearing or
purporting  to  act  for  or on  behalf  of any other
party to the contract,
(k) courses of dealing to which any of them has been a party,
and
(l) the commercial or other setting, purpose and effect of the
contract.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), a person shall be deemed to
have represented a party to a contract if the person represented the
party, or assisted the party to a significant degree, in negotiations
prior to or at the time the contract was made.
(4) In determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is
unjust, the Court shall not have regard to any injustice arising
from circumstances  that were not reasonably foreseeable at the
time the contract was made.
(5) In determining whether it is just to grant relief in respect of a
contract or a provision of a contract that is found to be unjust, the
Court  may  have  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  parties  to  the
proceedings in relation to the performance of the contract since it
was made.
86

Section  7  which  deals  with  ‘principal  relief  in  respect  of  unjust
contracts reads as follows:
“Principal relief:
(1) Where the Court finds a contract or a provision of a contract to
have been unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at
the time it was made, the Court may, if it considers it just to do
so, and for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an
unjust  consequence  or  result,  do  any  one  or  more  of  the
following:
(a) it  may  decide  to  refuse  to  enforce  any  or  all  of  the
provisions of the contract,
(b) it  may make  an  order  declaring  the  contract  void,  in
whole or in part,
(c) it may make an order varying, in whole or in part, any
provision of the contract,
(d) it may, in relation to a land instrument, make an order for
or  with  respect  to  requiring  the  execution  of  an
instrument that:
(i) varies, or has the effect of varying, the provisions
of the land instrument, or
(ii) terminates or otherwise affects, or has the effect of
terminating or otherwise affecting, the operation
or effect of the land instrument.
(2) where the Court makes an order under subsection (1)(b) or (c),
the declaration or variation shall have effect as from the time
87

when the contact was made or (as to the whole or any part  or
parts  of  the  contract)  from  some  other  time  or  times  as
specified in the order.
(3) The operation of this section is subject to the provisions of
section 19”.
Section 8 refers to ancillary relief which could by granted by a Court.
Section 8 reads as follows:-
“Ancillary relief
Schedule 1 has the effect with respect to the ancillary relief that may
be granted by the Court in relation to an application for relief under
this Act.”
The CRA (NSW) is not limited to “standard” terms although whether
a term was negotiated or not is a consideration for the court. Sections 9(2)
(d) and (g) in particular lean towards the substantive issues. A person’s
rights under the Act cannot be excluded or restricted in any way.
The  Act  also  provides  a  mechanism  for  relief  by  an  individual
consumer on a case by case basis, and for grant of systemic relief is possible
under section 10 as under:
“Where the  Supreme Court  is  satisfied,  on  the  application  of  the
Minister  or  the  Attorney  General,  or  both,  that  a  person  has
embarked, or is likely to embark, on a course of conduct leading to
88

the  formation  of  unjust  contracts,  it  may,  by  order,  prescribe  or
otherwise restrict, the terms upon which that person may enter into
contracts of a specified class.”
The  Act  vests  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  District  Court  with
jurisdiction to consider contracts under the Act (while the jurisdiction of the
Local  Court  and  the  Consumer,  Trader  and  Tenancy  Tribunal  is  more
limited).  The  District  Court’s  jurisdiction  depends  on  its  monetary
jurisdictional  limit. In general, the provisions  of the CRA may be used
either in actions commenced specifically or by way of defence in other
proceedings arising out of, or in relation to, the contract.
While  it  appears  that  the  NSW  Court  described  the  Act  as  a
‘revolutionary  legislation  whose  evident  purpose  is  to  overcome  the
common law’s failure to provide a comprehensive doctrinal framework to
deal with ‘unjust’ contracts (West v. AGC (Advances) (1986)(5) NSWCR
610, the Act was criticized for failing to distinguish between procedural and
substantive unconscionability as ‘the list of fact or, to which the Court is
required to have regard, in determining whether a contract is unjust, is a
mish-mash  of  process-oriented  and  outcome  oriented  considerations’
(Duggan (1991)17 Mon LR’ some reflection s on common provision and the
law reform process”.
Trade Practices Act, 1974 (Australia):
At the federal level, the Trade Practices Act, 1974 implies various
provisions into consumer contracts for sale, exchange, lease, hire or hire
89

purchase. Any term that attempts to exclude these provisions is treated as
void. 
Section 51AB of TPA, together with its mirror provisions in State and
the  National  Capital  Territory  fair  trading  legislation,  prohibits  conduct
which is, in all the circumstances, unconscionable, in relation to certain
defined situations. In deciding whether the conduct in a particular case is
unconscionable, the court may have regard to matters such as:
• the relative bargaining strength of the parties; 
• whether  undue  influence  or  pressure  was  exerted  or
unfair tactics used;
• whether  the  consumer  was  required  to  comply  with
conditions which were not reasonably necessary for the
protection of legitimate interests of the supplier; and
• the  amount  for  which,  and  the  circumstances  under
which,  the  consumer  could  have  acquired  equivalent
goods or services from another party.
On finding  unconscionable  conduct, the court  can  either grant  an
injunction or it can make certain other orders if it considers that they will
compensate a party, in whole or, in part, for loss or damage or will prevent
or reduce any loss or damage.
90

Uniform  Consumer  Credit  Code  (UCCC)  (Australia)  (w.e.f.
1.1.1996):
In 1993, the States and Territories made the Uniform Credit Laws
Agreement. The Queensland Parliament passed the template legislation in
1994.  Other  jurisdictions  followed  and  the  uniform  system,  hereinafter
referred to as “UCCC”, came into effect across Australia on 1 November
1996.  (See  Uniform  Contracts  Terms,  Discussion  Paper,  Jan  2004)
(Victoria).
The UCCC in general applies to the provision of credit to a natural
person or strata corporation by a credit provider who provides credit in the
course of, or incidental to, a business where a charge is made for providing
the credit so long as the credit is predominantly for personal, domestic or
household purposes. The UCCC also applies to consumer leases, related
insurance contracts and related sales contracts (as defined).
Unjust contracts can be re-opened under Section 70. The definition of
“unjust” is the same as that in the Contract Review Act, 1980 (NSW), that
is, it includes unconscionable, harsh or oppressive contracts.
Section 70 of UCCC referred to above is concerned with procedural
and  substantive injustice.  The list of matters which may be taken into
account by the court under Section 70(2) are very similar to those which the
court must take into account under Section 9(2) Contract Review Act, 1980
(NSW). Whether or not a term was the subject of negotiation is a matter for
the court to consider.
91

If the  court  considers  that  a  matter  is  unjust,  it  may re-open  the
transaction that gave rise to the contract.  It may then, inter-alia, re-open an
account,  relieve  the  debtor  from  payment  to  the  extent  it  considers
reasonable, set aside wholly or in part or revise or alter an agreement, make
an order for payment of an amount it thinks is justly due to the party under
the contract as per Section 71. Action is only available to the individual
debtor.
Under section 72, the court may review unconscionable interest, fees
or other charges. 
Fair Trading Act, 1999 (Victoria):
Fair Trading (Amendment) Act, 2003 (Victoria):
Victoria amended the Fair Trading Act, 1999 which came into force
on 9th October, 2003. It included provisions to address unfair contract terms.
The  provisions  draw  heavily  on  the  United  Kingdom  Unfair  Terms  in
Consumer  Contracts  Regulations.  (See  Uniform  Contracts  Terms,  A
Discussion Paper, Jan 2004) (Queensland and Victoria).
The provisions cover “consumer contract”, which is defined as: ‘an
agreement whether or not in writing and whether of specific or general use,
to  supply  goods  or  services  of a  kind  ordinarily acquired  for  personal,
domestic  or  household  use,  for  the  purposes  of  the  ordinary  personal,
92

household or domestic use of those goods or services.’ The summary of the
Act is as follows:
(1) A term in a consumer contract is unfair if contrary
to  the  requirement  of  good  faith  and  in  all  the
circumstances it causes a significant imbalance in
the  parties’  rights  and  obligations  under  the
contract, to the detriment of the consumer;
(2) If a consumer believes a term to be unfair, he or
she can take the issue to court; a term found to be
unfair is void: the rest of the contract continues to
bind the parties if it is capable of existing without
the term;
(3) In assessing whether a term is unfair, the court can
have regard to whether the term was individually
negotiated;  whether it is  a  prescribed  term; and
whether it has an object or effect set out in the Act.
(4) Standard form contracts terms can be prescribed
by regulation to be unfair and it is an offence to
use or recommend the use of a prescribed term;
(5) The  Director  can  apply  to  the  Tribunal  for  an
injunction  where  it  is  believed  that  a person  is
using or recommending the use of an unfair term
in  a  consumer  contract  or  a  prescribed  term in
standard form contracts as per section 32-ZA.
An  oral  contract  is  covered  with  respect  to  common  contracts;  a  term
relating to price is covered by the provisions; a contract to which the UCCC
93

(referred  to  earlier)  applies,  is  not  covered,  and  business  to  business
contracts are not covered.
Whilst the individual consumer can take their contract to court, the
Victorian  Civil  and  Administrative  Tribunal  can  deal  with  matters
systemically  in  relation  to  standard  form  contracts.  Unlike  the  United
Kingdom, Victoria has the ability to develop a ‘black’ list of terms through
regulations which prescribe unfair terms and is also able to prosecute if
these are used.
Under section 163, a general provision in the (Victorian) Fair Trading
Act, 1999, states that a written contract must be easily legible, in a minimum
of 10 point if printed and must be clearly expressed. The Director can apply
to the (Victorian) Civil and Administrative Tribunal if it is believed that a
term  does  not  comply  with  this  section.  The  Tribunal  can  prohibit  the
supplier using the provision and there is a penalty for failure to comply with
the order.
“Unconscionability”  has  proved  popular  in  Commonwealth
jurisdictions where it has undergone something of a renaissance in the
last decade especially in Australia. The concept of unconscionability
although expressed in wide terms, the courts exercise an “equitable
jurisdiction”  according  to  recognized  principles.  This  equitable
jurisdiction, exists when one of the parties, ‘suffers from some special
disability  or  is  placed  in  some  special  situation  of  disadvantage,
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v. Amadio (1983) 151 CLR 447,
as cited in Mulla’s  Indian Contract and Specific Relief Acts, 12th
94

edn.  Vol.-I  p.479.  The  courts  do  not  set  aside  bargains  simply
because they appear to be unfair, harsh or unconscionable in the eyes
of Judges” Louth v. Diprose (1992) 175 CLR 621, as cited in Mulla’s
Indian Contract and Specific Relief Acts, 12th edn. Vol. 1, p. 479.
Amadio’s case
In Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd. Vs. Amadio   (1983),   all the
five  Judges  of  the  High  Court  confirmed  the  existence  of  an  equitable
jurisdiction to set aside contracts on the basis of unconscionable dealings.
The facts of the case are: Two elderly Italian migrants to Australia
who were not familiar with the English Language, executed, at the request
of their son, a mortgage in favour of a bank over their land for securing an
overdraft of a company which the son controlled.    The son had represented
to his parents that the mortgage would be limited to $50,000 and for six
months.  The bank did not disclose to the couple that the bank had been
selectively dishonoring the company’s cheques, and that they had agreed
that the overdraft was to be reduced and cleared within a short time.  The
couple signed the mortgage believing it to be for an amount of $50,000 and
for six months, but the documents actually signed by the couple included a
guarantee containing an ‘all moneys’ clause, securing all amounts owing or
which might be owed by the company to the bank.  The bank was aware that
the couple was misinformed about the instrument.
The majority found that the Amadios were under a special disability,
were not given full information about the extent of the guarantee and were
95

ignorant about the perilous financial state of the company.  Their son, who
could have assisted them, had deceived them.  Applying the objective test,
the majority held that the bank was aware of the need of the Amadios to
have independent advice, and in proceeding with the transaction in the light
of this knowledge, the bank had acted unconscionably. The principle of
unconscionable dealings which was applied was summarized as follows:
“The  jurisdiction  is  long  established  as  extending  generally  to
circumstances  in  which:  (i)  a  party  to  a  transaction  was  under  a
special disability in dealing with the other party with the consequence
that  there  was  an  absence  of  any  reasonable  degree  of  equality
between them; and (ii) the disability was sufficiently evident to the
stronger party to make it prima facie unfair or ‘unconscientious’ when
he procures, or accepts, the weaker party’s assent to the impugned
transaction in circumstances which are shown to have existed and  an
onus is cast upon the stronger party to show that the transaction was
fair, just and reasonable.”
Under the Amadio approach, the weaker party emphasised mainly to
the manner in which the transaction was concluded.  This is the procedural
unconscionability in which a party must show that the stronger party acted
unconscionably.  On the other hand, the questions of substance, namely, the
nature  of  the  terms,  would  be  concerned  at  the  second  stage  of  the
proceedings when the onus is cast on the stronger party to show that the
transaction was ‘fair, just and reasonable’.
Position in United Kingdom:
96

In U.K., the laws relating to contracts accept the basic principle of
freedom of contract i.e. the parties should be free to agree on any terms that
they like provided that their agreement is not illegal or otherwise contrary to
public policy.  In practice, however, there have been restrictions on this
principle.  The restrictions are justified by the fact that parties may not have
sufficient  bargaining  power  to  protect  their  interests  or  parties  are  not
always sufficiently well informed. 
The  principal  control  over  unfair  terms  until  1994  centred  on
“exclusion” and “limitation of liability” clauses though some legislation to
combat with this problem was first passed in the 19th century. The doctrine
of common law and the Court of equity were inadequate to deal with the
problem that emerged with the development of standard form contracts,
essentially the pre-printed contracts drawn up in advance by one party for
use on more than one occasion.
Unconscionability  and  equity  jurisdiction  of  Courts  in  United
Kingdom
There  is  long-established  jurisdiction  to  set  aside  harsh  and
unconscionable bargains.  Courts of equity, in the eighteenth century often
set aside express contractual provisions on grounds of unconscionability.
However, nearly all these cases  fell  into  certain  special classes,  that  is,
mortgages and bonds and the sale of mortgage of revisionary interests.  The
equity jurisdiction was used to be unduly exercised to reopen all bargains.
The equity jurisdiction was invoked to setting aside grossly unfair contracts
97

entered  into  by  poor  and  ignorant  persons.   Towards  the  end  of  the
nineteenth century, the equitable jurisdiction fell into disuse partly because
conditions changed and partly because the Moneylenders Act of 1900 gave
statutory control over some of the activities formerly regulated by the equity
jurisdiction.  The equity jurisdiction seemed contrary to the fundamental
basis of classical contract theory.
In modern times attempts have been made to revive the old equitable
jurisdiction.   Lord  Denning  in  Lloyd’s  Bank (1974(3)  All  ER  757)
suggested  that  there  was  a  general  equitable  jurisdiction  to  set  aside
contracts where the parties were of unequal bargaining power and one of
them had  used  his  superior bargaining  power to  extract  some unfair or
unconscionable advantage.  Equity has never proclaimed any general power
to relieve from bargains and its jurisdiction to interfere has traditionally
been limited to cases where it would be unconscionable for a plaintiff to
rely strictly upon his legal rights.
Unconscionability at Common Law in United Kingdom
The  medieval  common  law  provided  some  form  of  remedy  upon
many informal agreements by the use of the writs of debt and detinue.  The
evolution of the action on the case of an assumpsit, and the action on the
case of a debt also permitted certain agreements of an informal character to
be sued upon at common law. The law in the U.K. about unconscionability
bargains has been stated in Halsbury’s Laws of England (4th Edn. Reissue,
vol. 16, Equity, para 673) as follows:
98

“Where by reason of the unfair manner in which it was brought into
existence (‘procedural unfairness’) as where it was induced by undue
influence, or where it came into being through an unconscientious use
of the power arising out of the circumstances and conditions of the
contradicting parties; in such cases equity may give a remedy; but
where by reason of the fact that the terms of the contract are more
unfavourable to one party than to the other (‘contractual imbalance’),
contractual or inadequacy of consideration is not, however, in itself a
ground for relief in equity, but it may be an element in establishing
such fraud as will avoid the transaction, or the transaction may be so
unconscionable as to afford in itself evidence of fraud. A bargain
cannot  be  unfair  and  unconscionable,  however,  unless  one  of  the
parties  to  it  has  imposed  the  objectionable  terms  in  a  morally
reprehensible  manner,  that  is  to  say  in  a  way  which  affects  his
conscience, as by taking advantage of the weakness or necessity of
the other.”
Lord Denning M.R. was the propounder or perhaps the originator at
least in U.K. of this theory in  Gillespie Bros & Co. Ltd. v.  Roy Bowles
Transport Ltd. (1973 Q.B. 400 at 416) where Lord Denning for the first
time  construed  an  unreasonable  indemnity  clause  in  a  contract  and
questioned: are the courts to permit party to enforce unreasonable clause,
even  when  it  is  so  unreasonable,  or  applied  so  unreasonably,  as  to  be
unconscious, and stated:
“When it gets to this point, I would say, as I said many years ago, ‘….
There  is  the vigilance  of the  common law which, while allowing
99

freedom of contract, watches to see that it is not abused’.  It will not
allow a party to exempt himself from his liability at common law
when it would be quite unconscionable for him to do so.”
It was in  Lloyds Bank Ltd. v.  Bundy (1974 (3) All ER 757) that
Lord Denning M.R. then enunciated his theory of “inequality of bargaining
power”.  By virtue of it, the English Law gives relief to one who enters into
a  contract  on  terms  which  are  very  unfair  or  transfers  property  for  a
consideration which is grossly inadequate, when his bargaining power is
grievously impaired by reason of his own needs or desires, or by his own
ignorance or infirmity.  The one who stipulates for an unfair advantage may
be moved solely by his own self-interest, unconscious of the distress he is
bringing to the other. One who is in extreme need may knowingly consent
to a most improvident bargain, solely to relieve the strains in which he finds
himself.  It would not be meant to suggest that every transaction is saved by
independent advice.  But the absence of it may be fatal.
In  the  House  of  Lords,  Lord  Diplock  outlined  the  theory  of
unreasonableness or unfairness of a bargain and the need to relieve a party
from a contract, where the relative bargaining power of the parties was not
equal.  In A. Schroeder Music Publishing Co. Ltd. v. Macaulay (1974 (3)
All ER 616) the song writer had contracted with the publisher on terms
more onerous to him and favourable to the publisher. The song writer was
relieved  from the bargain of the contract on the theory of the restraint of
trade which was opposed to public policy.  The distinction was made even
in respect of standard forms of contract emphasizing that when parties in a
commercial transaction having equal bargaining power have adopted the
100

standard form of contract, it was intended to be binding to the parties.  The
court would not relieve the party from such a contract but the contracts are
between the parties to it, or approved by any organization representing the
interests of the weaker party, they have been directed by that party whose
bargaining  power,  either  exercised  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  others
providing similar goods or services, enables him to say: If you want these
goods  or  services  at  all,  these  are  the  only  terms  on  which  they  are
obtainable. “Take it or leave it.”
The  observations  of  Lord  Denning  in  Levison v.  Patent  Steam
Carpet Cleaning Co. Ltd. (1977 (3) All ER 490) are also useful as they
reiterated that unreasonable clauses in the contract would be applied to the
standard form contract where  there was inequality of bargaining  power.
The judgment in Alec Lob Garages) Ltd. v. Total Oil GB Ltd. (1983 (1)
All ER 944) support the recognition of a general principle entitling a court
to intervene on the grounds of unconscionable bargains where agreements
to  set  aside  transaction  on  the  ground  of  their  being  unconscionable
bargains was not accepted. Three elements of unconscionability which have
to be invariably present before the court can interfere, were formulated as:
First, one party has been at a serious disadvantage to the other; whether
through poverty, or ignorance, etc.; second, the weakness of one party has
been exploited by the other party in some morally culpable manner; and
third, the resulting transaction has been not merely hard or improvident, but
overreaching and oppressive.
The judgment hints at requiring subjective knowledge on the part of
the stronger party both of the weakness of the other party, and of the fact
101

that a bargain was obtained.  The general principle has not been accepted in
the  English  law,  because  the  doctrine  of  undue  influence  has  been
considered as a preferable technique.
 
Legislation in United Kingdom:
The Canals and Railways Act of 1854 is said to be the first statute
invalidating  such  clauses  in  a  contract.   Over  the  years,  various  other
legislative controls were provided in the Hire Purchase Act, 1938.  Wider
control even of the exclusion and limitation of liability clauses, did not
come until the  1970s.  In 1962,  the Final  Report  of the Committee on
Consumer  Protection  (the  Malony  Committee)  had  recommended  a
prohibition  on  sellers  in  consumers  contract  “contracting  out”  of  their
implied obligations under the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 (SGA).  In 1966 the
matter was referred to the Law Commission, which in 1969 published the
First Report, recommending number of changes to the Sale of Goods Act,
1893. The recommendations were put into effect by the Supply of Goods
(Implied  Terms) Act  1973  (SOGITA),  which  prevented  any seller  from
excluding or restricting liability. In consumer sales, sellers were prevented
from excluding  or  restricting  their  liability  under  sections  13-15  of  the
SOGITA  1973  (merchantability,  fitness  for  particular  purpose  and
corresponding with description or sample):  in other sales those liabilities
could be excluded or restricted, but only to the extent that it could be shown
to be fair and reasonable to allow reliance on the exclusion or restriction.
In  1975  Law  Commissions  published  Exemption  Clauses  Second
Report (Law Com. No.69; Scot Law Com. No. 39), which recommended
102

wider controls over exclusion and limitation of liability clauses in contracts
between businessmen and consumers, businessmen and businessmen and
private contracts.  This resulted in enactment of the Unfair Contract Terms
Act  1977,  (hereinafter  called  UCTA)  which  incorporated  in  slightly
modified form, the controls in SOGITA.  In 1999 came the Unfair Terms in
Consumer Contracts Regulations, 1999 (UTCCR) and applied to terms that
exclude or restrict obligations or liabilities.
The  basic features  of Unfair  Contract Terms Act, 1977  (UK):
(UCTA)
The UCTA has separate provision for England and Scotland.  It does
not apply to all contracts but applies to both consumer contracts (sections 4
& 5) and contracts between business [section 6(1) and (3) – (s.20 (i), 20(2)
(ii)] and also to terms and notices excluding certain liability in tort.  The Act
applies only to exclusion and limitation of liability clauses (and indemnity
clauses in consumer contracts).  The Act makes certain exemption clause
automatically ineffective, as with attempts to exclude or restrict liability for
negligently caused death  or personal  injury but for most part it renders
exemption  clauses  ineffective  unless  they  satisfy  the  requirement  of
“reasonableness” as per section 11 of the act. Whether a contract satisfies
the requirement of reasonableness, regard shall be had in particular to the
matters specified in Schedule 2 of the Act.  The burden of proof is on the
party  claiming  that  the  exemption  clauses  satisfies  the  requirement  of
reasonableness.   
103

The  basic  features  of  Unfair  Terms  in  Consumer  Contracts
Regulation, 1999 (UTCCR):
UTCCR are only concerned with contracts between consumers and
sellers or suppliers.  There are no terms that are automatically of no effect.
Basically,  the  Regulations  apply  a  ‘fairness’  test  to  terms  in  contracts
between  ‘consumers’  and  ‘sellers’  or  ‘suppliers’,  which  have  not  been
individually negotiated and any unfair term does not bind the consumer.
The test of unfairness (under Regulation 5) requires that contrary to the
requirement  of  good  faith,  there  should  be  significant  imbalance  in  the
parties’ rights and obligations arising under the contract, to the detriment of
the consumer.  In addition, Schedule 2 under Regulation 5(5) contains an
indicative  and  non-exhaustive  list  of  terms,  which  may  be  regarded  as
unfair.  Certain ‘Core’ terms are excluded from being the subject matter of
fairness test, provided they are in plain intelligible language.  The Director
General of Fair  Trading and qualifying bodies are given powers to try to
prevent the continued use of unfair term drawn up for general use.  Under
the Regulation it is always for the consumer to prove that the term is unfair.
U.K. Law Commission's Consultation Paper (2002):
The UCTA and UTCCR are completely unrelated to each other and
use  different  concepts  and  terminologies  resulting  in  complexity  and
inconsistency  between  the  two.  The  UCTA  despite  its  name,  is  not
concerned with unfair terms.  Whether a term is unfair is not a test of its
validity under this Act.  Some terms are simply struck out, other terms are
104

valid, if reasonable. Similarly, the regulations can be used to attack any term
which can be argued to be unfair. 
Therefore, in January, 2001, the U.K. Law Commission and Scottish
Law  Commission  received  a  joint  reference  from the  Parliament  Under
Secretary for State and Consumers and Corporate Affairs to consider the
desirability and feasibility of replacing the two legal regimes with a unified
regime which would be consistent with Council’s Directive, more accessible
and clearer to the reader. 
The  Law  Commissions  thus  on  3rd July,  2002  issued  a  joint
consultation paper No.166 on ‘Unfair Terms in Contracts’ inviting public
views  on  the  provisional  proposals  suggested  therein.  The  U.K.  Law
Commission proposed a single piece of legislation for the whole of U.K.
Protection against unfair terms is envisaged for both consumers as well as
business  contracts.   The  envisaged  unified  legislation  would  subject  all
terms to a fair and reasonable test. The basic test in the new legislation on
what is ‘fair and reasonable’ should be whether, judged by reference to the
time, the contract was made.  The new legislation also contains detailed
guidelines relating both to fairness in substance and to procedural fairness.
(See paras 4.96 - 4.99-4.101).  The Commissions invited public views on
the question whether the burden should either (i) be on the party claiming
that the term is fair and reasonable to show that it is; or  (ii) be on the party
claiming that it is not fair and reasonable to show that it is not, unless it falls
within Schedule-2, in which case it is for the party claiming that the term is
fair and reasonable to show that it is.
105

The U.K. Law Commission: Final Report (No.292) (2004):
The issue of unfair terms in contract continues to engage the attention
of law reform agencies, courts and of the legislature. In United Kingdom,
the Law Commission and the Scottish Law Commission presented to the
Parliament  on  February, 2004  its  Report  (Law Commission  No.292)  on
Unfair Terms in Contract. The Report considered two major legislations
dealing with Unfair Contract Terms, viz. The Unfair Contract Terms Act,
1977 and the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulation, 1999. The
Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977 extends to all contracts, i.e. consumer
contracts, business contracts, employment contracts and private contracts.
The Act, however, focuses primarily on exemption  clauses. It strikes  at
clauses excluding or restricting liability in certain clauses of contract and
also  introduces  the  test  of  reasonableness.  The  reasonableness  would
depend upon the unfairness of the terms in the light of the circumstances,
which ought to have been known, or in the contemplation of the party. It
puts the burden of proving that a term is reasonable on the party seeking to
rely on the clause. The Unfair Terms in Consumer Contract Regulations,
1999 (which implements the European Council Directive on Unfair Terms
in Consumer Contracts) apply to consumer contracts  of all kinds in the
whole of the United Kingdom and subjects the terms to a fairness test. It
does not contain detailed guidelines as to how the test should be applied but
contains a list of terms, which may be regarded as unfair.
106

Law Commission took up the task to consider as how to replace these
two legislations with a single unified Act that will set out the law on unfair
contract  terms  in  a  clear  and  accessible  way.  The  Commission  set  out
recommendations for a unified regime to apply to consumer contracts, for
business contracts in general, and extending the wider controls of the Unfair
Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations to contracts with small business.
The Report also addresses upon the issues relating to employment contracts,
international  contracts  and  choice  of  law.  (Summary  of  Records  are
contained in paras 8.2 to 8.89.  Appendix 1 thereof contains Draft Bill with
Explanatory Notes in 35 sections and number of Schedules).
Part  1 deals  with  ‘Business  Liability  for  Negligence’,  Section  1.
Section 2 deal with Exceptions and Section 3 with Voluntary Acceptance of
Risk;
Part  2 deals  with  ‘Consumer  Contracts’  –  contracts  in  general.
Section  4  refers  to  terms  of  which  are  of  no  effect  unless  fair  and
reasonable; section 5 to sale or supply to consumer, section 6 to sale or
supply to business, section 7 to Regulations and enforcement, section 8 to
ambiguity;
Part 3 deals with ‘Non Consumer Contracts’ i.e. Business Contracts.
Section 9 deals with standard forms, section 10 to sale or supply of goods,
section 11 to non-negotiated terms, section 12 to Written standard terms,
section 13 to sale or supply of goods;
107

Part  4  deals  with  the  ‘Fair  and  Reasonable’  Test.  (section  16).
Burden  of  proof  is  contained  in  section  15  in  Consumers  Liability  for
negligence;  section  16  in  Consumer  Contracts;  section  17  in  business
contracts;
Part 5 deals with Choice of Law.  Section 18 deals with “Consumer
Contracts, section 19 to business contacts, section 20 with small business
contracts;
Part 6 is ‘Miscellaneous & Supplementary’.  Section 21 deals with
unfairness issue raised by Court; section 22 with exceptions; section 23 with
secondary contracts; section 24 with effect of unfair terms on contracts;
section 25 deals with interpretation, i.e. definition of ‘consumer contract’
and  business  contract  (section  26);  section  27  defines  ‘small  business;
section 28 defines ‘associated person’; section 29 defines ‘small business
contract’ and section 30 with ‘excluding or restricting liability’; section 31
defines  ‘hire purchase’ or hire; section 32 refers to general interpretation of
various terms. Sections 33 to 35 are general.
Consumer Contracts: The Commissions recommended legislation to allow
a consumer to challenge any kind of term that is not a ‘core’ term, whether
or not a term was negotiated. ‘Core’ terms are those terms in consumer
contracts that set the price or define the product or service being supplied.
The terms other than core term should be subject to the fair and reasonable
test.  Further,  the  burden  of  proving  that  a  term  is  fair  will  be  on  the
business.
108

Business  Contracts: The  Commission  recommended  a  comprehensive
regime for non-consumer contracts. It provides for the review of terms in
business contracts where one party deals on the written standard terms of
business of the other party. As regards small business contracts, the class of
terms that can be challenged by small businesses is significantly narrower.
The small businesses have further to bear the burden of proving that the
term is not fair and reasonable.
Employment  Contracts: Unfair  Contract  Terms  Act,  1997  has  been
applied  to  employment  contracts  by  the  Courts  either  by  treating  the
employee  as  a consumer  or by treating  the employment  contract  as  the
employer’s  written  standard  terms  of  business.  The  Commission
recommended  that  the  employee  could  challenge  the  relevant  term  of
employment only where the relevant term is a part of the employer’s written
standard terms of business. In other words, where the employment is on the
employers standard terms, a term that purports to exclude or restrict the
employers  liability  or  to  allow  the  employer  to  render  a  performance
substantially different from that reasonably expected will be subject to the
fair and reasonable test. 
European  Council  Directive  (1993)  Applicable  to  UK  and  the
Regulations of 1994, 1999 and 2001:
However,  in  1993  the  European  Council  of  Ministers  passed  the
Directive  on  Unfair  Terms on  Consumer  Contracts  which  applies  (with
limited exceptions) to Unfair Terms on any type in consumer contracts.  The
Directive  was  implemented  in  U.K.  by  the  Unfair  Terms  in  Consumer
109

Contracts Regulations 1994 (herein after called UTCCR) which have now
been  repealed  and  replaced  by  the  UTCCR,  1999.   This  was  further
amended  by  the  Unfair  Terms  in  Consumer  Contracts  (Amendment)
Regulations 2001.   The1999 Regulations set out to transcribe the spirit and
details  of the  Directive  into  the  English  law.  The Regulations  did  not
amend or repeal UCTA; they provided an additional set of controls.  
The Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts (Amendment) Regulations,
2001 amended the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999
("the principal Regulations") by adding the Financial Services Authority to
the list of qualifying bodies in Part One of Schedule 1. These Regulations
also amend the principal Regulations to reflect changes in the names of
certain of the qualifying bodies listed in Part One of Schedule1, and to
reflect  the  fact  that  the functions  of the  Director  General  of Electricity
Supply and of the Director General of Gas Supply have been transferred to
the Gas and Electricity Markets Authority under Part I of the Utilities Act
2000.
The principal Regulations provide a power for the Director General
and the public qualifying bodies to require traders to produce copies of their
standard  contracts,  and  give  information  about  their  use,  in  order  to
facilitate  investigation  of  complaints  and  ensure  compliance  with
undertakings or court.
Thus, in the field of Contract Law in UK, the Unfair Contract Terms
Act,  1977  (UCTA)  and  the  Unfair  Terms  of  Consumer  Contracts
Regulations, 1999, (UTCCR) are probably the two single most pieces of
110

legislations.  What the Law Commissions have now proposed in 2004, to be
integrated into a single Act.
CANADA
In Canadian jurisdictions unconscionable conduct is an offence. All
common law Provinces have an Unconscionable Transactions Relief Act,
which allows for the re-opening of unfair credit transactions. 
(A) The Ontario Business Practices Act, 1990 deems “an unconscionable
consumer representation” to be an unfair practice.  Unconscionability would
include  the  procedural  matters  such  as  physical  infirmity,  ignorance,
illiteracy, and inability to understand the language of an agreement, but
also:
2.2.ii. that the price grossly exceeds the price at which
similar  goods  or services  are readily available  to  like
consumers;
2.2.v. that the proposed transaction is excessively one-
sided in favour of someone other than the consumer; and
2.2.vi.that  the  terms  or  conditions  of  the  proposed
transaction  are  so  adverse  to  the  consumer  as  to  be
inequitable.
(See Discussion Paper, Unfair Contract Terms) (2004)
(Victoria)
(B)  The  Saskatchewan  Consumer  Protection  Act,  1996 also  prohibits
unfair practices and section 6(q) refers to:
111

“Taking  advantage  of  a  consumer  by  including  in  a
consumer agreement terms or conditions that are harsh,
oppressive or excessively one sided.”
(C) The  Alberta  Fair  Trading  Act,  1998  includes  in  a  list  of  unfair
practices:
Sec.6(2)(d) refers  to  charging  a  price  for  goods  or  services  that
grossly  exceeds  the  price  at  which  similar  goods  or  services  are
readily available without informing the consumer of the difference in
price and the reason for the difference; and 
Sec. 6(3)(c) to include in a consumer transaction terms or conditions
that are harsh, oppressive or excessively one-sided.
(D) In the British Columbia the substantive provisions of  the Business
Practices and Consumer Protection Act, 2004 that address unfair contract
terms are, in large part, a restatement of the law as it was set out in the
British  Columbia’s  two former Consumer Protection  Statutes, the  Trade
Practice Act, 1996 and the Consumer Protection Act, 1`996.  The Trade
Practice Act, 1996 of British Columbia, in determining whether an act or
practice is unconscionable, requires a court to consider all the surrounding
circumstances  of  which  the  supplier  knew  or  ought  to  have  known,
including procedural matters and Sec. 4(3)(c) that, at the time the consumer
transaction  was  entered,  the  price  grossly  exceeded  the  price  at  which
similar subjects of similar consumer transactions were readily obtainable by
similar  consumers;  and  Sec.  3(3)(e)  that  the  terms or  conditions  on,  or
112

subject to, which the consumer transaction was entered by the consumer are
so harsh or adverse to the consumer as to be inequitable.
The Business Practices and Consumer Protection Act, 2004 adopts
the approach of the Trade Practice Act which contained a provision that was
intended  to  be  statutory  embodiment  of  the  judicial  doctrine  of
unconscionability.  Broadly, the provisions of the Business Practices and
Consumer Protection Act, 2004 relate to the consolidation and regulatory
structure  rather  than  the  substantive  law.   The  British  Columbia Law
Institute in its recent Report on Unfair Contract Terms [BCLI Report No.35,
February, 2005] studied various options to reform the law of unfair contract
terms.  However, it did not recommend any legislative change in respect of
unfair contract terms.
(E) Quebec Civil Code (1991) has a different approach to the Common
Law Jurisdiction (sections 1432 to 1438).
NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand does not have a single specific piece of legislation,
which protects against unfair terms in consumer contracts. The two main
pieces of consumer legislation in New Zealand are  the Fair Trading Act,
1986 (NZ  FTA)  and  the  Consumer  Guarantees  Act,  1993 (CGA).  (See
Unfair Contract Terms, Discussion Paper, Victoria, 2004).
113

The (NZ) FTA covers  misleading  and deceptive conduct  in trade,
trade  descriptions,  unfair  practices,  consumer  information  and  product
safety. Liability is strict (as the breach may be innocent). The type and
amount of any awarded civil remedy is discretionary. Unlike the TPA, 1974
(Australia) on which it is largely based, it does not have unconscionable
conduct provisions.
The (NZ) CGA applies to the supply of goods or services which are
intended for ordinary household use. The Act provides consumers with a
number  of  implied  guarantees.  It  imposes  obligations  on  sellers  and
manufacturers and provides a number of remedies that enable the consumer
to pursue the manufacturer or seller of the goods or services.
There are a number of New Zealand statutes that reform the Common
Law approach to contractual relationships.
The Contractual Remedies Act, 1979 allows a party to a contract to
recover  damages  (assessed  as  if  the  representation  was  a  term  of  the
contract) for an innocent or negligent misrepresentation, which induced the
contract and also governs the circumstances in which a party is entitled to
cancel  a contract.  Cancellation  of a  contract  results  in all  parties  being
relieved from further performance but the Act also provides the courts with
broad discretionary powers to grant remedial relief to any party to prevent
injustice when a contract is cancelled.
114

The Contractual Mistakes Act, 1977 and the  Illegal Contracts Act,
1970 largely codify the established Common Law rules relating to contracts
which  are  entered  into  by  mistake  or  contrary  to  law.  Both  statutes,
however, confer on the court a broad statutory discretion to grant remedial
relief in respect of contracts subject to those Acts.
South African Law Commission
Discussion Paper 65 on Unreasonable Stipulations in Contracts
and the Rectification of Contracts (1996) amd Final Report (1998)
The object of project 47 of S.A. Law Commission was to consider
whether the courts should be enabled to remedy contracts or contractual
terms that are unjust or unconscionable and then to modify the application
to particular situations before the courts of such contracts or terms so as to
avoid the injustice which would otherwise ensue. The next question was
whether  the  review  power  of  the  courts  should  extend  to  all  types  of
contracts, to non-consumer transactions, to international agreements or to
standard term contracts only.
This Discussion Paper 65, was published in 1996 in order to inform
the public of the prima facie views of the Commission and participation of
readers  in  the  debate  and  eventual  formulation  of  a  legislation,  if  it  is
deemed  necessary. The Working  Committee however,  in  the  Discussion
Paper 65, proposed that courts should be empowered to rescind or amend a
contract or any terms thereof or to make such other order as may in the
115

opinion of the court be necessary to prevent the effect of the contract being
unreasonably  prejudicial  or  oppressive  to  any  of  the  parties  vide  para
(2.4.11)  establishing  an  ombudsperson  to  ensure  that  pre-formulated
standard contract terms are not unreasonable, unconscionable or oppressive.
The Commission gave the report in April 1998 after considering the
view of the participants and the legal position in various countries.  The
Commission  was  of the view  that  there was  a need  to legislate  against
contractual  unfairness,  unreasonableness,  unconscionability  or
oppressiveness  in  all  contractual  phases,  namely  at  the  stages  when  a
contract  comes  into  being,  when  it  is  executed  or  when  its  terms  are
enforced.
The  Commission  thus  proposed  a  Bill  on  the  control  of
unreasonableness unconscionableness or oppressiveness in contracts:-.  To
provide that a court may determine whether contractual orders of contracts
are unreasonable, unconscionable or oppressive; to set down the powers of
the  High  Court  in  regard  with  terms  which  are  unreasonable,
unconscionable or oppressive; to establish the office of ombudsperson; to
set down the powers of the ombudsperson; to provide for appointment of
officers  and  staff  to  the  office  of  the  Ombudsperson;  and  for  matters
connected therewith. The Commission also felt the need to provide some
definition  to  the  concepts  of  unreasonableness,  unconscionability  and
oppressiveness by setting out guidelines in proposed legislation. 
116

The final Report (1998) gives the summary of its recommendations in
parts (xiii) to (xx) (para 1.1 to para 1.12).
Chapter 1 refers to the ‘problem as defined in Discussion Paper 65.
Chapter  2  contains  para  2.1  to  2.9.5  (pages  30  to  213)  on  the
following:
(a) desirability of enacting legislation (para 2.3)
(b) should  courts  and/or  tribunals  be  empowered  to  act
against unfair or unconscionable contracts? (para 2.3)
(c) shortcomings in providing redress in courts (para 2.3.4)
(d) powers to be granted to courts (para 2.4) (comparative
study)
(e) the fairness criterion (para 2.5)
(f) guidelines (para 2.6) (comparative study)
117

(g) scope  of  proposed  legislation  (para  2.7)  (comparative
study)
(h) changed circumstances after the conclusion of contract
(para 2.8)
(i) parole  evidence rule (para 2.9)
Annexure  A contains  the  South  African  Law Commission’s
Bill in the context of unreasonableness, unconscionableness or
oppressiveness in contracts or terms.
The  Bill  (1998)  contains  6  sections  bearing  the  titles  referred  to
below:
Section 1: Court may determine whether contractual terms are
unreasonable,  unconscionable  or  oppressive  and  issue
appropriate orders.
Section  2:  A  Court  may  take  guidelines  into  account  for
determining  unreasonableness,  unconscionableness  or
oppressiveness in contracts or terms.
It has clauses (a) to (z).
118

Section 3: Application of Act (i.e. to all contracts).
Section 4: Taking into account circumstances which existed at
the  time  of  conclusion  of  the  contract  and  the  effect  of
subsequent changes of circumstances.
Section  5:  Admissible  evidence  to  assist  interpretation  of  a
contract.
Section 6: Ombudsman
The section enumerates the powers of ombudsman, to
receive complaint, require information, regulate, prepare draft
cores, to give direction to parties to come up with undertakings
and in failure of the parties, to apply to the High Court for
directions.
119

CHAPTER-VI
COMMON LAW: UNFAIRNESS IN REGARD TO SPECIFIC
PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACT TERMS
In this Chapter, we shall refer to common law principles relating to
specific performance of contracts in the context of Unfair Terms.
(a) Common-law: ‘Unfairness’ in ‘Specific Performance’ of contracts:
Under  common-law,  if  a  term  is  unfair,  the  Court  may  exercise
discretion not to enforce the terms or the contract but the Court  cannot
declare the terms or contract as void.
The  question  is  as  to  what  we  mean  by  the  word  ‘fairness’  in
Contracts which requires to be protected by Courts  in suits for specific
performance.
Under common-law, ‘fairness’ was always a necessary condition for
specific performance of contracts.  Lord Hardwicke stated in  Buston vs.
Lista (3 Atk 386):
“Nothing is more established in this Court than that every agreement
of this kind ought to be certain, fair, and just in all its parts.  If any of
those ingredients are wanting in the case, this Court will not decree
specific performance.”
120

In  Lord  Walpole vs.  Lord  Orford (3  Ves  420),  Lord  Loughborough
(afterwards Lord Rosslyn) stated:
“I lay it down as a general proposition to which I know no limitation,
that all agreements, in order to be executed in this Court, must be
certain and defined:  Secondly, they must be equal and fair; for this
Court,  unless they are fair, will not execute them; and thirdly, they
must be proved in such manner as the law requires”.
We shall next refer to the common law principles as to ‘fairness’ in
contracts
(b) Common law: Fry on “procedural” and “substantive” unfairness and
“hardship” in contracts relevant to specific performance: 
Fry, in his celebrated commentary on ‘Specific Performance’ (6th Ed.,
1921) (Indian reprint 1997) deals exclusively (see para 387) with ‘Want of
Fairness in the Contract’ in Chapter V of his work.  He says that there are
many instances in which, “though there is nothing that actually amounts to
fraud,  there  is  nevertheless  a  want  of  that  equality  and  fairness in  the
contract which, as we have seen, are essential in order that the Court may
exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction in specific performance.  In cases of
fraud, the Court will not only not perform the contract, but will rescind it;
but  there  are  many  cases  in  which  the  Court  in  the  exercise  of  the
jurisdiction in specific performance will stand still, and interfere neither for
this one purpose nor the other. (Willan vs. Willan) (16 ves 83).
121

But under the modern concept of ‘unfairness’ of a contract or a term,
the Court can declare the contract or term not only as unenforceable but also
as invalid or void.   However, that was not so under the common law which
only gave discretion to the Court not to enforce ‘unfair’ terms or contracts.
Unfairness, according to Fry, (see para 388) may be either in the
terms of the contract itself, (which today we call ‘Substantive’ unfairness),
or it may be in matters extrinsic and the circumstances under which it was
made (which to day we call ‘procedural’ unfairness):  with regard to the
latter, parol evidence is of course admissible.
A principle which has been in vogue over centuries is that the (see
para 309 of Fry) ‘fairness’ of the contract, like all other qualities, must be
judged of as at the time the contract was entered into, or at least when the
contract becomes absolute, and not by subsequent events, for the fact that
events, uncertain at the time of the contract, may afterwards happen in a
manner contrary to the expectation of one or both of the parties, is no reason
for holding the contract to have been unfair.  This aspect also has been and
requires to be considered in the present debate.
But, states Fry (see para 393) in order to bring a contract within this
principle, the uncertainty as to the subject matter of the contract must, at the
time of the contract, have been a real one to both parties, either from the
nature of things or from the state of knowledge of both parties.  Further (see
para  393)  the  principle  will  not  apply  where,  though  the  terms  of  the
contract may express an uncertainty, that uncertainty was not understood by
the parties to comprise the event which actually happened.
122

Again, in contracts to sell at a price (see Fry para 396) to be fixed by
a third person, the Court would no doubt consider the unfairness of the
valuer’s  conduct as a bar to the right to specific performance.
In judging the fairness (i.e. procedural fairness) of a contract (says
Fry in para 399), the Court will look not merely at the terms of the contract
itself, but at all the surrounding circumstances such as intimidation and
duress of the defendant, the mental incapacity of the parties, though falling
short of insanity, their age or poverty and the manner in which the contract
was  executed.  The circumstance that the parties  were acting without a
solicitor, that the property was reversionary or that the price was not the full
value are relevant.  Thereafter, he says:  (see para 400) 
“whenever there are evidences of distress in the party against whom
performance is sought, or he is an illiterate person, or whenever there
are circumstances of surprise, or want of advice, or anything which
seems to impart that there was not a full, entire and intelligent consent
to the contract, the Court is extremely cautious in carrying it into
effect.  Still, it is not the doctrine of the Court that a man cannot
contract without his solicitor at his elbow, or that a man in insolvent
circumstances, or in prison, is disabled from selling his estate; and if
a  contract  made  under  such  circumstances  will  bear  the  careful
examination  of  the  Court  and  the  full  light  of  day,  it  will  be
specifically enforced.”
123

It is not necessary to prove ‘intentional’ unfairness or dishonesty it is
sufficient if unfairness is proved (see para 401 of Fry).
Unfairness arising out of misstatement of facts is considered as part
of  misrepresentation  (para  402  of  Fry); and cases  relating  to  silence  or
suppression of fact by one party are considered as part of fraud; but yet, it
seems possible that there may be cases where silence is not fraudulent but
yet creates such a case of hardship as prevents Court’s assistance.  Courts
may also not enforce an agreement (see para 404) which may be injurious to
third parties.  Likewise, the Court will not (see para 407 of Fry) generally
exercise  its  power  to  enforce  an  agreement,  where  to  do  so  would
necessitate breach of trust or of a prior contract with a third person or would
compel a person to do what he is not lawfully competent to do, even though
at the time of contract, the act might have been lawful.
On ‘hardship’ (which is part of sec. 20 of the Indian Specific Relief
Act, 1930), Fry devoted a full chapter (Chapter VI) in his celebrated work.
Hardship may or may not be related to unfair terms.    While it is the
principle that ‘hardship’ is to be generally judged as at the time of the
contract, he says (para 425) that in considering the hardship which may flow
from the execution of a contract, the Court will consider whether it is the
result obviously flowing from the terms of the contract, so that it must have
been present at the time of the contract in the minds of the contracting
parties or whether it arises from something collateral and so far concealed
and latent, as that it might not have been thus present in their minds.   It is
obvious, he says, that a far higher degree of hardship must be present in the
124

former, than in the latter class of cases, for it to  operate on the discretion of
the Court.
The above are the general principles under common law in regard to
specific performance of contracts.
125

CHAPTER-VII
NEED TO HAVE PROCEDURAL AND SUBSTANTIVE DIVIDE
Several authors have criticized existing statutes as not having met the
challenge  of  dealing  with  ‘procedural  unfairness’  and  ‘substantive
unfairness’ separately and in not defining these  words  nor in providing
separate guidelines for judging each of them.  We have referred to this
aspect in Chapter I.
Most  statutes  do  refer  in  the  same  sections  to  substantive  and
unfairness aspects of the contract, though there is no independent treatment.
Courts are, therefore, unable to focus upon these issues in depth or lay down
clear-cut principles.   That is why in Chapter VIII, we propose to segregate
the  procedurally  unfair  provisions  in  statutes  of  other  countries  and  in
Chapter IX, the substantive unfair provisions in those countries.   In Chapter
X, we propose to list out the procedural unfair provisions of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872 and of the Specific Relief Act, 1930.
In this  chapter,  we  shall  deal  with  the  criticism  in  regard  to  the
absence of separate statutory focus on these two concepts.  
(a) The UK and Scottish Law Commission Report 2004, does not refer to
this distinction except in one place while dealing with its comments on
Clause 14 of he Bill prepared by it.  Section 14(1)(b) of the Bill attached to
the UK and Scottish Law Commissions Report, 2004 refers to this aspect in
126

the Explanatory Notes, Part 4 (para 42) which deals with clause 14 and
Schedule 2 of the ‘fair and reasonable test’.  Para 42 reads as follows:
“42.   Paragraph  (b)  of  clause  14(1)  and  (2)  requires  that  in
determining whether in an individual case, the term or notice was fair
and reasonable, both  substantive fairness (the circumstances of the
term) and procedural fairness (the circumstances existing at that time)
be taken into account.”
(b) The Tasmania Law Reform Commission explained in its ‘Report on
Harsh and Unconscionable Contracts’ (Report 71) that
“procedural  unconscionability  relates  to  bargaining  process  of the
transaction  and  the  particular  conduct  of  the  parties,  whereas
substantive unconscionability focuses on the content of the contract.”
(c) The Report of the New Zealand Law Commission while referring to
the guidelines drafted by it states that ‘the contract be substantively as well
as procedurally fair’.
(d) In the Discussion Paper on Unfair Contract Terms, 2004 of Victoria
(Australia), prepared by the Standing Committee of Officials of Consumer
Affairs, it is stated in the Executive Summary:
“The Courts have tended to require that there must be some aspect of
procedural  unfairness  (a  problem  surrounding  the  circumstances
leading up to and at the time of making the contract).”
127

and the Paper further states (at para 2.1.1) that
“there  are  two  contrasting  aspects  of  unconscionable  conduct  as
related to contracts:
firstly,  procedural  unfairness  which  is  concerned  with  the
circumstances leading upto and at the time of making of the contract;
and  secondly,  substantive  unfairness  which  is  concerned  with  the
unfairness  of  the  terms  of  the  contract  themselves  which  lead  to
injustice.”
The  Paper  points  out  that  “the  common  law  was  more  concerned  with
‘procedural  injustice’  while  sec  51AB  of  the  (Commonwealth)  Trade
Practices Act, 1974 enumerated, apart from the bargaining strength, undue
influence  or  pressure  and  capacity  to  understand  provisions  (which  are
procedural), the following substantive aspects:
a. Whether the consumer was required to comply with conditions
which were not reasonably necessary for the protection of the
interests of the supplier; and
b. The amount for which, and the circumstances under which, the
consumer  could  have  acquired  equivalent  goods  or  services
from another party”.
The Paper refers to the following comments by Parkinson (Laws of
Australia) in regard to sec. 51AB of the (Commonwealth) Trade Practices
Act, 1974:
128

“There  is  a  question  whether  and  to  what  extent  sec  51AB  is
concerned with the bargaining process and/or contractual outcomes.
The equitable doctrine is confined to procedural unconscionability,
that is, unfairness in the bargaining process, but the statute is not
limited in that way and may permit relief from contracts which are
unfair in their terms,  despite the absence of any unfairness in the
bargaining process.  No policy choice is made plain in the legislation
on this point.  The section directs the Court’s attention to a number of
factors,  some  of  which  go  to  the  negotiations  and  others  to  the
outcome of them.  The factors in ss 51AB(2)(b) and (e) suggest that
the Court may have regard to unfairness in the Contract (substantive)
….”
The Paper points out that the (New South Wales) Contracts Review Act,
1980  also  refers  in  sec  92  to  the  ‘procedural’  issues  such  as  material
inequality  of  bargaining  power;  relative  economic  circumstances;
educational background; literacy of the parties; any unfair pressure; whether
or not legal or expert advice was sought.  It also refers in clauses (d) and (g)
to substantive issues such as:
(d) whether  or  not  any provisions  of the  contract  impose
conditions which are unreasonably difficult to comply with or
are not reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate
interests of any party to the contract; and
129

(g) where  the contract  is  wholly or partly in  writing,  the
physical  form  of  the  contract  and  the  intelligibility  of  the
language in which it is expressed.’
It  says  that  the  Contracts  Review  Act,  1980  (NSW)  is  not  limited  to
‘standard’  terms  although  whether  a  term  was  negotiated  or  not  is  a
consideration for the Court.  Sub-sections 9(2)(d) and (g) referred to above,
in particular lean towards the substantive.  A person’s rights under the Act
cannot be excluded or restricted in any way.
The Paper refers to the fact that Goldring et al (Quoting Duggan,
‘Some Reflections on Consumer Protection and the Law Reform Process’
(1991)17 Mon LR at 274), that in the TPA and the Uniform Consumer
Credit Code, there was failure to treat procedural and substantive unfairness
separately.  They said:
“The Contracts Review Act and by inference, the other legislation
(TPA and Uniform Consumer Credit Code) has been criticized  for
failing  to  distinguish  between  procedural  and  substantive
unconscionability as ‘the list of factors to which the Court is required
to have regard, in determining whether a contract is unjust, is a mish-
mash of process-oriented and outcome-oriented considerations.”
One of the conclusions of the Discussion Paper of Victoria at the end
of Part A is that ‘the current statutory regimes in Australia have created
some confusion in practice because of their failure to distinguish between
procedural  and  substantive  unfairness (per  Goldring  et  al  and  Duggan).
130

Again in Chapter 4 (para 4.5) of the Paper it is stated that “whilst it has been
argued that there is probably sufficient coverage of the procedural aspect of
unfair  contract  terms, the  criticism noted  earlier by Goldring et al,  that
current Australian legislation is problematic in that it does not distinguish
between procedural and substantive issues, is considered to be valid.  In
order  to  create  clarity,  the  opportunity  might  be  undertaken,  whilst
addressing the issue of unfair contract terms, to rectify this situation”.  At
the end of the para, it is stated,
“There would be better Court outcomes for aggrieved individuals due
to the differentiation between procedural and substantive matters.”
(e) A Paper on ‘Why we must regulate Unfair Contract Terms’ prepared
under the auspices of the Consumer’s Federation of Australia in conjunction
with the Australian Consumers’ Association, states under the heading ‘the
current laws fail consumers’ that unfortunately,
“unconscionable  conduct  laws  are  focused  on  procedural,  not
substantive unfairness.  Procedural fairness looks at the actions of the
parties to the contract at the time of signing and the circumstances in
which the contract was entered into.  The fact that a person may have
had a disability at the time of signing a contract is a good example of
procedural unfairness.  Substantive unfairness looks at what is written
on the contract itself – what the nature of the bargain is… Paying ten
times the market value of something is a good example of substantive
unfairness.
131

Because  they  are  procedurally  focused,  unconscionable
contract laws must consider the individual circumstances of particular
cases if they are to be applied, and therefore, can only deal with cases
at one time.  This means that they are no good fighting the systematic
use of unfair terms in standard form of contracts, which is how most
unfair contract terms are used.
Because they depend on ‘oral evidence’ about ‘who said what’
and ‘what happened when’, cases based on procedural unfairness are
difficult to fight in the Courts, where well-resourced businesses can
quickly outgun a battling consumer.  A case based on  substantive
unfairness is easier, because the only relevant evidence is a copy of
the unfair contract itself.”
The  Paper  states  that  in  UK,  the  Office  of  Fair  Trading  (OFT)
received more than 1000 complaints  during  2002-2003 alone and 1,477
contract terms were abandoned or deleted as a result of OFT enforcement
action.
The Australian Paper above referred under the heading ‘What must be
done’, says that the “variety of consumer protection laws that focus either
wholly or predominantly on  procedural unfairness, and operate  poorly or
not all in the context of substantive unfairness.  As a result, a wide range of
markets  regularly  employ  contracts  that  contain  unfair  contract  terms,
against which consumers are given no adequate or accessible remedies.”
132

The Paper further states that “While procedural unfairness is already
regulated, that regulation is neither unfair nor consistent.  There is likely to
be great benefit to all market participants in codifying  what matters are
likely to constitute unfair conduct, and clarify what remedies are available
to  consumers  who  are  induced  to  enter  into  unfair  or  unconscionable
transactions.  We support unfair regulations of consumer contracts in their
entirety. 
(f) The  source  of  the  labels  ‘procedural  unconscionability’  and
‘substantive unconscionability’ is an American law review article by Arthur
Allen  Leff,  Asst.  Prof.  Washington  University  Law  School,  on
‘Unconscionability and the Code – The Emperor’s New Clause’. (1967) 115
University of Pennsylvania Law Review, p. 485.  We have referred to his
views in Chapter I.
Prof. Leff starts in his lengthy paper by a criticism of s. 2.302 of the
Uniform Commercial Code.  He says:
“If reading this section makes anything clear, it is that reading this
section  alone  makes  nothing  clear  about  the  meaning  of
‘unconscionable’  except  perhaps  that  it  is  pejorative.    More
particularly, one cannot tell from the statute whether the key concept
is something to be predicated on the bargaining process or on the
bargain  or  on  some  combination  of  the  two,  that  is,  to  use  our
terminology whether it is procedural or substantive.   Nonetheless,
determining whether the section’s target is a species of quasi-fraud or
133

quasi-duress, or whether it is a species of quasi-illegality, is obviously
the key to the bite and scope of the provision.
One central thesis of this essay is that the draftsman failed fully to
appreciate  the  significance  of  the  unconscionability  concepts’
necessary procedure-substance dichotomy and that such failure is one
of  the  primary  reasons  for  section  2-302’s  final  amorphous
unintelligibility and its accompanying commentary’s irrelevance”
He observed (p. 539):
“To  summarise,  there  are  two  separate  social  policies which  are
embodied in the equity unconscionability doctrine.  The first is that
bargaining naughtiness, once it reaches a certain level, ought to avail
the  practitioner  naught.    The  second  is  directed  not  against
bargaining conduct (except in so far as certain results often are strong
evidence of certain conduct otherwise approved) but against results,
and embodies the doctrine (also present in  laisio enormis statutes)
that the infliction of serious hardship demands special justification”
(g) This distinction between the two concepts was highlighted by Lord
Brightman in the Privy Council in Hart vs. O’Connor :1985 A.C. 1000 at p
1017-18 (1985(2) All ER 880 at 887).  He said:
“If a contract is stigmatised as ‘unfair’, it may be unfair in one of two
ways.  It may be unfair by reason of the unfair manner in which it was
brought  into  existence;  a  contract  induced  by  undue  influence  is
unfair  in  this  sense.   It  will  be  convenient  to  call  it  ‘procedural
134

unfairness’.  It may also, in some contents, be described (accurately or
inaccurately) as ‘unfair’ by reason of the fact that the terms of the
contract are more favourable to one party than to the other.  In order
to distinguish this ‘unfairness’ from procedural unfairness, it will be
convenient to call it ‘contractual imbalance’.  The two concepts may
overlap.   Contractual  imbalance  may be  so  extreme as  to  raise  a
presumption of procedural unfairness,  such as undue influence or
some other form of victimization.  Equity will relieve a party from a
contract  which  he  has  been  induced  to  make  as  a  result  of
victimization.  Equity will not relieve a party from a contract on the
ground  only that  there  is  contractual  imbalance  not  amounting  to
unconscionable dealing.  Of  the three indicia of unfairness relied
upon  by  the  Judge  in  Archer vs.  Cutler (1980)(1)  NZLR  386
(assuming  unfairness  to  have  existed),  the  first  was  contractual
imbalance and the second and third were procedural unfairness’.
It is because Equity may not grant relief in case of ‘contractual imbalance’
i.e.  substantive  unfairness,  that  the  legislatures  have  come  forward  to
remedy not only procedural unfairness but also substantive unfairness’.
(h) The distinction between ‘procedural’ and ‘substantive’ unfairness was
also explained in the Judgment of the New South Wales Supreme Court by
McHugh JA in West vs. AGC (Advances) Ltd. (1986)(5) NSWLR 610.
135

Summary:
In the light of the views expressed as above, it appears to us that if
any legislation is to be more effective and realistic, it is necessary to make
separate provisions dealing with ‘procedural’ and ‘substantive’ unfairness.
We are aware that in certain quarters it has been considered that it is
difficult to put these concepts in separate compartments in a statute but we
do not agree.   We have not found any difficulty.   In fact, as pointed by
several  authors,  the  focus  should  not  be  confined  only  to  ‘procedural
unfairness’ and we must move forward to deal with ‘substantive unfairness’
also rather than merely state that where parties have signed contracts with
the eyes wide open, if such contracts contained a term which was unfair in
itself, the party had himself or itself to blame.   This was the method of
interpretation  of  contracts  at  a  time  when  principles  of  substantive
unfairness were not effectively developed.   Today, we find in practice that
there are a large number of substantively unfair terms in different types of
contracts i.e. contracts or terms which are by themselves unfair.   Therefore,
the law must be reformed to be able to stretch its hands to rectify such
substantive unfairness.
136

CHAPTER-VIII
PROCEDURAL UNFAIRNESS: COMPARATIVE LAW
In  this  chapter  we  propose  a  closer  focus  on  the  ‘procedural’
unfairness provisions dealt with in various countries, though they have not
been expressly segregated in any particular statute.
United Kingdom: procedural unfairness:
UCTA (1977): (procedural unfairness)
The (UK) Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977 (UCTA) came forward
with a test of ‘reasonableness’ in sec. 11.   Sec. 11(1) stated that the term
must be ‘fair and reasonable’ having regard to the circumstances  which
were or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in contemplation of the
parties when the contract was made.    This relates obviously to ‘procedural’
unfairness.
UK  ‘guidelines’  in  Schedule  2  of  the  1977  Act  also  contain
provisions which deal partly with procedural and partly with substantive
unfairness, though they are mixed up.   Those that refer to ‘procedural’
unfairness are  clauses (a), (b), (c).  Clause (a) refers to the strength of the
bargaining  position,  clause  (b)  as  to  whether  the  customer  received
inducement to agree to a term, and clause (c) to whether the customer knew
or ought to have known of the existence of the term.
137

UTCCR (1999): (procedural unfairness)
Under the (UK) Unfair Terms Consumer Contracts Regulation, 1999,
(UTCCR) - Regulation 5(1) stated that a ‘contractual term which has not
been  individually  negotiated  shall  be  regarded  as  unfair  if,  contrary  to
requirement of good faith, it causes a significant imbalance in the party’s
rights and obligations under the contract, to the detriment of the consumer.
Regulation 5(2) states that a term shall always be regarded as not having
been individually negotiated where it has been drafted in advance and the
consumer has therefore not been able to influence the substance of the term.
Regulation 5(4) puts the onus on the supplier to prove that a term was
individually negotiated to show that it was no unfair.
Regulation  6  refers  to  the  need  to  consider  the  circumstances
attending the conclusion of the contract and to all the other terms of the
contract or of another contract on which it was dependent.  
Schedule  2  of  the  Regulation  refers  to  several  guidelines  to  be
considered  while  judging  unfairness  but  they  all  deal  with  substantive
unfairness.  (In the UK Law Commission Report, 2004, in para 3.91, it was
suggested that ‘good faith’ clause has to be omitted).
The New Draft Bill, 2004 (UK & Scottish Law Commission): (procedural
unfairness)
The Draft Bill, 2004 annexed to the Law Commission Report deals
with several matters concerning procedural unfairness.
138

Part 1 deals with ‘Business Liability for Negligence’; Part 2 with
‘Consumer Contracts’; Part 3 with ‘Non-Consumer Contracts’ which deals
with Business Contracts, small Business Contracts, Employment Contracts
and Private Contracts; Part 4 deals with ‘the ‘Fair and Reasonable’ Test;
Part  5  deals  with  Choice  of  Law;  Part  6  with  “Miscellaneous  and
Supplementary”.
Schedule 1 deals with ‘Consumer Contract Terms etc.: Regulation
and Enforcement’; Schedule 2 deals with ‘contract terms which may be
regarded  as  not  fair  and  reasonable’;  Schedule  3  deals  with  Exception;
Schedule 4 deals with calculating the number of employees in a Business;
Schedule 5 deals with ‘minor and consequential amendments’.
We shall, however, refer to a few provisions of the Bill which deal
with ‘procedural’ unfairness.
Terms as to subject matter, price:
Sub-sections (2) to (4) of sec. 4 of the Bill require that in respect of
‘Consumer’ contracts, the subject matter and the price are unfair if they are
not transparent and as reasonably expected by the consumer.   These are
procedural safeguards.  
139

Fair and Reasonable Test: (procedural)
Sec. 14 of the Bill refers to the ‘fair and reasonable test’ and contains
the  manner  in  which  both  ‘procedural’  and  ‘substantive’  aspects  of
unfairness have to be tested.  So far as the procedural aspects are concerned
sec 14(4) refers to the following:
“Section 14(4)(l): the  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  party
adversely affected by the term; and 
(i) the strength of the parties’ bargaining position,
(rest of the clauses (a), (b) of subsection (1), clauses (a) and (b) of
subsection (2), (a) to (d) of clause (3), clause (a) to (g) and (j) of
subsection (4) deal with ‘substantive fairness’ which we shall refer to
in the next chapter).
As  far  as  the  time  at  which  fairness  or  reasonableness  is  to  be
reckoned, para 3.96 of the Report reiterates that it is the time of the contract
that is relevant and one has to take into account the substance and effect of
the terms in all the circumstances of the contract.
Non-negotiated terms:
In  regard  to  non-negotiated  terms  included  in  a  standard  term
contract, sec. 11 of the Bill states that if a term not negotiated is detrimental
to a party, the other party cannot rely on it unless it is ‘fair and reasonable’.
140

The ‘fair and reasonable’ test is to be treated as satisfied if the term is (a)
transparent,  (b)  substantially  the  same  as  the  other  party  reasonably
expected etc.  These are procedural in nature.
South Africa
Procedural unfairness:
In  South  Africa,  ‘procedural’  unfairness  is  referred  by  the  Law
Commission  in  its  Report  1998  (Project  No.47)  in  ‘Unreasonable
Stipulations  in  Contracts  and  the  Rectification  of  Contracts’.   The  Bill
attached thereto contains important procedural provisions.  
Sec. 1 of the Draft Bill states that
“(1) If a Court is of the opinion that
(a) the  way in  which  a contract  between  the  parties  or  a term
thereof came into being; or
(b) --- --- ---
(c) the execution of a contract, or
(d) --- --- ---
is unreasonable, unconsiderable or oppressive, the Court may declare
that the alleged contract
(aa) did not come into existence; or
(bb) came into existence, existed for a period, and then, before the
action was brought, came to an end; or
(cc) is in existence at the time the action is brought, and it may then
141

(i) limit  the  sphere  of  operation  and/or  the  period  of
operation of the contract; and/or
(ii) suspend  the  operation  of  the  contract  for  a  specified
period or until specified circumstances are present; or
(iii) until such other order as may in the opinion of the Court
be necessary to prevent the effect of the contract being
unreasonable, unconscionable or oppressive to any of the
parties”
These are procedural aspects in the Bill.
Guidelines to Court: Procedural aspects:
Sec. 20 of the Draft Bill in South Africa provides that a Court may
take  certain  guidelines into  account  for  determining  unreasonableness,
unconscionableness  or oppressiveness  in  contracts  or  terms.   They are
listed.   The ‘procedural’ ones are as follows:
“2(a) the bargaining strength of the parties to the contract relative to
each other;
(b) ……………………….
(c) ……………………….
(d) in relation to commercial contracts, reasonable standards of fair
dealing  or  in  relation  to  consumer  contracts,  commonly
accepted standards of fair dealing;
(e) whether or not, prior to or at the time of contract was made, its
provisions were subject to negotiation;
142

(f) whether  or  not  it  was  reasonably  practicable  for  the  party
seeking relief under this Act to negotiate for the alternation of
the contract or to reject any of the provisions thereof;
(g) whether Latin expressions are contained in a term or whether
the  term  of  a  contract  is  otherwise  difficult  to  read  or
understand;
(h) ………………………….
…………………..
(x) ……………………..
(y) the context of the contract as a whole, in which case the Court
may take into account:
the identity of the parties and their relative bargaining position,
the circumstances in which the contract was made,
the  existence  and  course  of  and  negotiations  between  the
parties,
any usual provisions in contracts of the kind, or
any other factor which, in the opinion of the Court, should be
taken into account.
Canada (procedural unfairness):
Ontario Law  Commission  was  of  the  view  that  the  distinction
between procedural and substantive unfairness is too rigid and can lead to a
sterile debate.  We do not agree.    We have referred to our reasons in
Chapter VII as to why such a division has to be made.
143

Ontario Business Practices Act, 1990 applies to consumer contracts
and refers to ‘unconscionability’ as including procedural matters such as
infirmity, ignorance, illiteracy and inability to understand the language of
the agreement.
In the  Report  of the British  Columbia Law Institute (2005) titled
‘Unfair Contract Terms: An Interim Report’, there is elaborate discussion in
Chapter  II  of  specific  cases  dealing  with  unfair  contracts  –  such  as
automatic  renewals,  acceleration  clauses,  terms  excluding  or  limiting
liability; in Chapter III to the currently available tools in British Columbia
to  deal  with  Unfair  Contract  Terms  and  in  Chapter  IV  to  Options  for
Reform.
There is a very useful discussion on the procedural and substantive
divide in the terms of contracts in several countries.  As the Report is an
Interim Report, there are no final conclusions.    We have referred to this
Report in Chapter VII.
Australia (procedural unfairness):
In  Australia,  as  far  as  ‘procedural’  unfairness  is  concerned,  the
Discussion  Paper  (2004)  of  the  Standing  Committee  of  Officials  of
Consumer  Affairs  concluded  that  the  Australian  Law  had  responded  to
procedural unfairness, that is to the circumstances leading up to and/or at
the time of making of the contract which create unfairness (but that the
Courts have been reluctant to find unfairness on substantive grounds) and
that the current statutory regimes have created some confusion in practice
144

because of their failure to distinguish between procedural and substantive
unfairness. 
The  NSW  Contract  Review  Act,  1980,  has,  as  already  stated  in
Chapter VII, been commented upon in the Discussion Paper as having failed
to distinguish between procedural and substantive unconscionability.   Sec.
9 of that Act refers to matters to be considered by the court and so far as
‘procedural’ unfairness is concerned, subsection (2) thereof states:
“Sec. 9(2):
(a) whether or not there was any material inequality in bargaining
power between the parties to the contract,
(b) whether or not, prior to or at the time the contract was made, its
provisions were the subject of negotiation,
(c) whether  or  not,  it  was  reasonably  practicable  for  a  party
seeking relief under the Act to negotiate for the alternative of
or to reject any of the provisions of the contract,
(d) … … … …. …..
(e) whether or not
(i) any party to the contract (other than a corporate) was not
reasonably able to protect his or her interests, or
(ii) any person  who  represented  any of the  parties  to  the
contract was not reasonably able to protect the interests of any
party whom he or she represented,
because of his or her age or the state of his or her physical or
mental capacity,
145

(f) the relative economic circumstances, educational background
and literacy of:
(i) the parties to the contract (other than a corporate) and 
(ii) any person  who  represented  any of the  parties  to  the
contract.
(h) whether  or  not  and  when  independent  legal  or other  expert
advice was obtained by the party seeking relief under this Act,
(i) the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract and
their legal and practical effect were accurately explained by any
person to the party seeking relief under this Act and whether or
not that party understood the provisions and their effect,
(j) whether undue influence, unfair pressures or unfair tactics were
exerted on or used against the party seeking relief under this
Act:
(i) by any other party to the contract,
(ii) by any other person acting or appearing or purporting to
act for or on behalf of any other party to the contract, or
(iii) by any person to the knowledge (at the time the contract
was made) of any other party to the contract or of any person
acting or appearing or purporting to act for or on behalf of any
other party to the contract,
(k) the  conduct  of the  parties  to  the  proceedings  in  relation  to
similar contracts or courses of dealing to which any of them
has been a party, and
(l) the commercial or other setting and effect of the contract.
146

(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), a person shall be deemed to
have represented a party to a contract if the person represented the
party, or assisted the party to a significant degree, in negotiation prior
to or at the time the contract was made.
(4) In determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is
unjust, the Court should not have regard to any injustice arising from
circumstances  that  were not  reasonably forseeable  at the  time the
contract was made.
(5) In determining whether it is just to grant relief in respect of a
contract or a provision of a contract that is found to be unjust, the
Court  may  have  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  parties  to  the
proceedings in relation to the performance of the contract since it was
made.
Section 14: Executed Contracts:
Sec. 14 states that the Court may grant relief in accordance with this
Act  in  relation  to  a  contract,  notwithstanding  that  the  contract  is  fully
executed.
In  1993,  the  States  Territories  in  Australia made  the  Uniform
Consumer Credit Code which applies to credit agreements and it defined the
word ‘unjust’ as in the 1980 Act, by including in the definition what is
‘unconscionable, harsh or oppressive’.   Sec. 70 concerned both aspects of
procedural and substantive injustice.  The list of matters which the Court
147

was to take into account under that Act is similar to sec. 9(2) of the 1980
Act (these are all ‘procedural’ in nature).  The court was granted power to
reopen the transaction that gave rise to the agreement, set aside wholly or
partly or revise or alter the agreement.
Under the Fair  Trading  Act, 2003  (Victoria), the  provisions  were
similar  to  UK Unfair  Terms  in  Consumer  Contracts  Regulations,  1999.
‘Good faith’ was a circumstance if it created a significant imbalance in
rights and obligations of parties, to the detriment of the consumer and the
Court should have regard to whether the term was individually negotiated,
whether it was in a  prescribed form and whether it was within the object set
out in the Act.
New Zealand (procedural unfairness):
New  Zealand  Law  Commission in  1990  proposed  guidelines  and
among them the ‘procedural’ ones are as follows:
“A contract or a term in a contract, maybe unfair, if a party to the
contract is seriously disadvantaged in relation to another party to the
contract because he or she
(a) is  unable  to  appreciate  adequately  the  provisions  or  the
implications of the contract by reason of age, sickness, mental,
educational  or  linguistic  disability,  emotional  distress,  or
ignorance of business affairs; or
148

(b) is in need of the benefits for which he or she contracted, to such a
degree as to have no real choice whether or not to enter into the
contract; or
(c) is legally or in fact dependant upon or subject to the influence of,
the  other  party  or  persons  connected  with  the  other  party  in
deciding whether to enter into the contract; or
(d) reasonably relies on the skill, care or advice of the other party or
a  person  connected  with  the  other  party  in  entering  into  the
contract; or
(e) has been induced to enter into the contract by oppressive means,
including threats, harassment or improper pressure; or
(f) is for any other reason, in the opinion of the Court, or a serious
disadvantage;
and  that  the  other  party  knows  or  ought  to  know  of  the  facts
constituting that advantage or the facts from which that disadvantage
can reasonably be informed.”
The Court, under another provision, is required to see whether the
disadvantaged party received appropriate legal advice or other professional
advice.
We  have  thus  focussed  separately  on  the  ‘procedural’  aspects  of
unfairness in contracts in different countries.   In the next chapter (Chapter
IX),  we  shall  likewise  separately  focus  on  the  ‘substantive’  aspects  of
unfairness of contracts in several countries.
149

CHAPTER-IX
SUBSTANTIVE UNFAIRNESS: COMPARATIVE LAW
In this chapter, we shall refer to the ‘substantive’ unfairness provision
in several countries, though they have not been expressly segregated in any
particular statute.
 
United Kingdom
UCTA (1977) (substantive unfairness)
Section 2: Relevant matters
Schedule 2 of the UK Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977 (UCTA) stated that
among relevant matters are the following:
“(d) Where the term includes  or restricts any relevant liability if
some condition is not complied with, whether it was reasonable at the
time of the  contract to expect  that  compliance with the  condition
would be practicable.”
150

UTCCR, 1999: (substantive unfairness)
In  the  Unfair  Terms  of  Consumer  Contracts  Regulations,  1999,
Regulation 7 states that a seller or supplier shall ensure that any written term
of a contract is expressed in plain, intelligible language.
Schedule 2 of the Regulation enumerates in sec. 1 to a numberof
guidelines  for  judging  unfairness.   All  the  clauses  (a)  to  (q)  refer  to
substantive unfairness.  The term is one which terms: 
(a) deals with exclusion or limiting liability of a seller or supplier in
the event of death of a consumer or personal injury to him on
account of acts or omissions of the seller or supplier,
(b) inappropriately excluding or limiting legal rights of consumer in
the event of breach,
(c) imposing conditions which depend on the sole will of seller or
supplier,
(d) retention of consumer’s money without delivering goods,
(e) requiring  consumer  to  pay  disproportionately  upon  the  latter’s
breach,
(f) authorize  seller  or  supplier  to  breach  the  contract  unilaterally
without a corresponding right given to consumer,
(g) enabling seller or supplier to terminate the contract according to
his discretion,
(h) automatically extending a contract of fixed duration,
(i) irrevocably  binding  consumer  to  terms  for  which  he  had  no
opportunity to become acquainted,
151

(j) enabling the seller or supplier to alter the terms of the contract
unilaterally without a valid reason,
(k) enabling  the  seller  or  supplier  to  alter  unilaterally  the
charactercistics of the goods or service to be provided,
(l) allowing seller or supplier to unilaterally increase price of goods,
(m) giving unilateral right to seller or supplier to determine whether
the goods or services are in conformity with the contract,
(n) limiting seller’s or supplier’s obligation in respect of commitments
undertaken by their agents,
(o) obliging consumer to perform obligations even if seller or supplier
does not,
(p) giving  seller  or  supplier  opportunity  to  transfer  his  rights  or
obligations to the detriment of consumer,
(q) excluding the rights of consumer to take legal action.
Bill  of  2004  prepared  by  UK  and  Scottish  Law  Commissions:
(substantive unfairness)
(a) Exclusion of liability for negligence: (a) exclusion in case of death or
injury void; (b) exclusion in other cases must be fair and reasonable:
On ‘substantive’ unfairness, the Bill attached to the UK and Scots
Law Commission Report 2004, refers in Part 1 to ‘Business liability for
negligence’.   It says:
“Sec.1:  Business liability for negligence
152

(1) Business  liability  for  death  or  personal  injury resulting
from  negligence  cannot  be  excluded  or  restricted by  a
contract term or a notice.
(2) Business  liability  for  other  liability for  loss  or  damage
resulting from negligence cannot be excluded or restricted
by a contract term or a notice unless the term or notice is
fair and reasonable.
(3) ‘Business liability’ means liability arising from –
(a) anything  that  was  or  should  have  been  done  for
purposes related to a business, or
(b) the occupation of premises used for purposes related to
the occupier’s business.
(4) The  reference  in  subsection  (3)(a)  to  anything  done  for
purposes related to a business includes anything done by
an  employee  of  that  business  within  the  scope  of  his
employment.
(5) ‘Negligence’ means the breach of –
(a) an  obligation  to  take  reasonable  care  or  exercise
reasonable skill in the performance of a contract where
the obligation arises from an express or implied term
of the contract,
(b) a common law duty to take reasonable care or exercise
reasonable skill,
(c) the common duty of care imposed by the Occupiers’
Liability  Act,  1957  or  the  Occupiers  Liability  Act
(Northern Ireland), 1957, or
153

(d) the duty of reasonable care imposed by sec. 2(1) of the
Occupiers’ Liability (Scotland) Act, 1960.
(6) It does not matter –
(a) whether a breach of obligation or duty was, or was not,
inadvertent, or
(b) whether liability for it arises directly or vicariously. 
Section 30 referred to herein below explains the meaning of ‘excluding or
restricting’ liability.
(b) Section 2: Exceptions to sec. 1:
(1) Sec.  1  does  not  prevent  an  employee  from  excluding  or
restricting his liability for negligence to his employer.
(2) Sec. 1 does not apply to the business liability of an occupier of
premises  to  a  person  who  obtains  access  to  the  premises  for
recreational or educational purposes if – 
(a) that person suffers loss or damage because of the dangerous state
of the premises, and
(b) allowing that person access to those premises for those purposes is
not within the purposes of the occupiers liability.
(c) Section 3: Voluntary acceptance of risk:
The defence that a person voluntarily accepted a risk cannot be used
against him just because he agreed to or knew about a contract term, or a
154

notice, appearing to exclude or restrict business liability for negligence in
the case in question.
(d) Terms of no effect unless fair and reasonable:
Section  4:  Sec.  4(1)  declares  terms  to  be  of  no  effect  unless  fair  and
reasonable.    Sec. 4(2) states that subsection (1) does not apply to a  term
which  defines  the  main  subject  matter  of  a  consumer  contract,  if  the
definition is
(a) transparent, and
(b) substantially  the  same  as  the  definition  of  the  consumer
reasonably expected.
Other subsections (3) to (6) refer to the same conditions in the matter
of price or other clauses if they are as in (a), (b) above and we do not
propose to detail them.
(e) Section 8: Interpretation:
As far as ‘interpretation’ is concerned, sec. 8 refers to ‘Ambiguity’ in
consumer contracts and states as follows:
(1) If it is reasonable to read a written term of a consumer contract
in two (or more) ways, the term is to be read in whichever of those
ways it is reasonable to the …. the more (or the most) favourable to
the consumer.
155

(2) ……..
(f) Section 9: Written standard terms (consumer contracts):
Sec. 9(1) which applies to non-consumer business contracts refers to
‘written standard terms’ and says (subsection (2)) that ‘unless the term is
fair and reasonable, it cannot be relied upon to exclude or restrict liability
for breach of contract.   Subsection (3) states that unless the term is fair and
reasonable, a party to it cannot rely on any of those terms to claim that it has
the right –
(a) to  carry  out  its  obligations  under  the  contract  in  a  way
substantially  different  from  the  way  in  which  the  other  party
reasonably expected them to be carried out or
(b) not to carry out all or part of those obligations.
(g) Section 10: Sale or supply of goods:
“Sec. 10 : sale or supply of goods:
(1) In the case of a business contract for the sale of goods, the
seller cannot rely on a term of the contract  to exclude or restrict
liability arising under sec. 12 of the 1979 Act (implied term that seller
entitled to sell)
(2) In  the  case  of  a  business  contract  for  the  hire-purchase  of
goods, the supplier cannot rely on a term of the contract to exclude or
restrict liability arising under sec. 8 of the 1973 Act (implied term
that supplier entitled to supply)
156

(3) In the case of any other business contract for the transfer of
property in goods, the supplier cannot rely on a term of the contract to
exclude liability arising under sec. 2 or 11B of the 1982 Act (implied
term that supplier entitled to supply)”
(Note:  Act of 1979 is Sale of Goods Act, 1979; Act of 1973 is Supply of
Goods  (Implied  Term)  Act,  1973;  Act  of  1982  is  Sale  of  Goods  and
Services Act, 1982.   These provisions deal with seller title or right to sell
goods to the purchaser.  The purport of sec. 10 as proposed is that the seller
cannot stipulate that he is not liable if it found that he has no right to sell).
(We have already referred to sec. 11 of the proposed UK Bill which
refers to ‘non-negotiated terms’ while dealing with ‘procedural’ unfairness).
(h) Fair and Reasonable Test: Substantive:
We have referred to sec. 14 of the proposed Bill which refers to the
‘Fair and Reasonable Test’.   Subsections (1), (2), (3) and some clauses of
subsection (4) deal with ‘substantive’ fairness.   These are as follows:
“Sec. 14 : The test:
(1) Whether  a  contract  term  is  fair  and  reasonable  is  to  be
determined taking into account -
(a) the extent to which the term is transparent, and
(b) the  substance  and  effect  of  the  term,  and  all  the
circumstances existing at the time it was agreed.
157

(2) Whether a notice is fair and reasonable is to be determined by
taking into account -
(a) the extent to which the notice is transparent and
(b) the  substance  and  effect  of  the  notice,  and  all  the
circumstances existing at the time the liability arise (or, but
for the notice, would have arisen)
(3) ‘Transparent’ means -
(a) expressed in reasonably plain language,
(b) legible,
(c) presented clearly, and
(d) readily available to any person likely to be affected by the
contract term or notice in question.
(4) Matters relating to the substance and effect of a contract term,
and  to  all  the  circumstances  existing  at  the  time  it  was  agreed,
including the following:
(a) the other terms of the contract,
(b) the  terms  of  any  other  contract  on  which  the  contract
depends,
(c) the balance of the parties’ interests,
(d) the risks to the party adversely affected by the term,
(e) the possibility and probability of insurance,
(f) other  ways  in  which  the  interests  of  the  party  adversely
affected by the term might have been protected,
(g) the extent to which the term (whether alone or with others)
differs from what would have been the case in its absence,
(h) ………………………………..
(i) ………………………………..
158

(j) the nature of the goods or services to which the contract
relates.”
(Notice referred in subsection (2) refers to notices given after the contract,
excluding liability for tort for negligence) (sec. 14(4)(h) & (i) deal with
‘procedural’ fairness and have already been referred to).
(i) Section 15: Burden of proof: business liability exclusion:
Sec. 15 relates to burden of proof and states that in the matter of
Business liability for negligence under sec. 1(2) (i.e. for negligence other
than for death or personal injury), it is for the person wishing to rely on a
contract term or a notice which purports to exclude or restrict liability of the
kind mentioned in sec. 1(2) to prove that the term or notice is fair and
reasonable.
(j) Sections 16. 17:  burden of proof: consumer contracts and business
contracts.
In  sec.  16  and  17,  respectively  relate  to  consumer  contracts  and
business contracts.  While subsection (1) of each of them lays the burden of
proof to prove fairness of any term is on the person relying thereon, and
there is an exception in the case respectively of ‘regulation and enforcement
of  consumer  contracts’  and  ‘non-negotiated  terms  in  small  business
contracts’ that it is for the person who is claiming that the term is not fair
and reasonable to prove that it is not.
159

(k) Section 21: unfairness issues raised by Court:
Sec. 21 is important and refers to ‘unfairness issue raised by Court’
(i.e. suo motu).    It reads :
“A court may, in proceedings before it, raise an issue about whether a
contract term or a notice is fair and reasonable even if none of the
parties  to the proceedings  has raised the issue or indicated that it
intends to said it.”
(l) Section 24: effect of certain terms being declared unfair:
Sec. 24 states the ‘effect of unfair term on contract’.   It says that
‘where a contract term cannot be relied on by a person as a result of this
Act, the contract continues, as far as practicable, to have effect in every
other respect’.
(m) Section 30: excluding or restricting liability:
Sec. 30 defines ‘excluding or restricting liability’ as follows:
“Sec. 30: A reference to excluding or restricting a liability includes –
(a) making a right or remedy in respect of the liability subject to
restrictive or onerous condition;
(b) excluding or restricting a right or remedy in respect of a liability;
(c) putting a person at a disadvantage if he pursues a right or remedy
in respect of a liability;
160

(d) excluding or restricting rules of evidence or procedure.
(2) ……………………………………….
(3) A written agreement to submit current  or future disputes  to
arbitration is  not  to  be  regarded  as  excluding  or  restricting  the
liability in question.”
Schedule 2, Part 2 lists items 2 to 21, as example of unfair terms and
Part 3 refers to exceptions etc.   Schedule 3 also refers to exceptions.   There
are other schedules which go into various details.
There  are  the  provisions  of  the  UK  Bill,  2004  dealing  with
‘substantive’ unfairness.
South  Africa: Provisions  of the Draft Bill attached to the S.A. Law
Commission Report, 1998 (p 47):  (substantive unfairness)
Section 1(1): ‘substantive unfairness’: What reliefs can be granted
Sec. 1 (1) If a Court is of the opinion that
(a) …………………..
(b) the form or the content of a contract or
(c) …………………..
(d) the enforcement of a contract is
unreasonable, unconscionable or oppressive, the Court may declare
that the alleged contract
161

(aa) did not come into existence; or
(bb) came into existence, existed for a period, and then before action
was brought, came to an end; or
(bb) is in existence at the time action is brought and it may then
(i) limit  the  sphere  of  operation  and/or  the  period  of
operation of the contract; and/or
(ii) suspend  the  operation  of  the  contract  for a period  or
unit/specified circumstances are present; or
(iii) make such other order as may in the opinion of the Court
be necessary to prevent the effect of the contract being
unreasonable, unconscionable or oppressive to any of the
parties.
Section 1(3): Preventing unfairness:
Preventive action is proposed in sec. 1(3) 
“1(3) where the High Court is satisfied, for the application of any
organization or any body or person, that a person has embarked, or is
likely to embark, on a course of conduct leading to the formation of
contracts  or  terms  which  are  unreasonable,  unconscionable  or
oppressive, it may, by order, prescribe or otherwise restrict, the terms
upon which that person may enter into contracts of a specified class”
Section 2: Guidelines to Court: Substantive
162

Among the ‘substantive’ guidelines in sec. 2 which a Court may take
into  account  for  judging  whether  a  contract  or  term  is  unreasonable,
unconscionable or oppressive, are the following:
“2 (a) … … …
(b) whether  the  goods  or  services  in  question  could  have  been
obtained elsewhere without the term objected to;
(c) any prices, costs or other expenses that might reasonably be
expected to have been incurred if the contract had been concluded on
terms and conditions other than those on which it was concluded:
provided  that  a  Court  shall  not  find  a  contract  or  term
unreasonable, unconscionable or oppressive for the purposes of this
Act solely because it imposes onerous obligations on a party; or the
term or contract does not result in substantial or real benefit to a
party; or a party may have been able to conclude a similar contract
with another person on more favourable terms or conditions;
(d) … … …
(e) … … …
(f) … … …
(g) whether  one  sided  limitations  are  imposed  on  the  right  of
recourse of the party against whom the term is preferred.
(h) … … …
(i) whether the manner in which a term states the legal position
that applies is one-sided or misleading;
(j) whether the party preferring the term is authorized to make a
performance materially different from that agreed upon, without the
party against whom the term is proferred in that event being able to
163

cancel  the  contract  by  returning  that  which  has  already  been
performed, without incurring any additional obligation;
(k) whether prejudicial time limits are imposed on the other party;
(l) whether the term will cause a prejudicial transfer of the normal
trade risk to the party against whom the term is preferred;
(m) whether  a  term  is  unduly  difficult  to  fulfill  or  imposes
obligations  or  liabilities  on  a  party  which  are  not  reasonably
necessary to protect the party;
(n) whether the contract or term excludes or limits the obligations
or liabilities of a party to an extent that is not reasonably necessary to
protect his or her interests;
(o) whether there is a lack of reciprocity in an otherwise reciprocal
contract;
(p) whether the competence of the party against whom the term is
proferred to adduce evidence of any matter which may be necessary
to the contract or the execution thereof is excluded or limited and
whether the normal incidence of burden of proof is altered to the
detriment of the party against whom the term is proferred;
(q) whether the term provides that a party against whom the term is
proferred shall be deemed to have made or not made a statement to
his detriment if he or she does or fails to do something, unless
(i) a suitable period of time is granted to him or her for the making
of an express declaration thereon and
(ii) at the commencement of the period, the party proferring the
term  undertakes  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  party  against
whom  the  term  is  proferred,  to  the  meaning  that  will  be
attached to his or her conduct;
164

(r) whether a term provides that a statement made by the party
proferring the term which is of particular interest to the party against
who the term is proferred, shall be deemed to have reached the party
against whom the term is proferred, unless such statement has been
sent by prepaid registered post to the chosen address of the party
against whom the term is proferred;
(s) whether a term provides that a party against whom the term is
proferred shall, in any circumstances absolutely and unconditionally
forfeit his or her competence to demand performance;
(t) whether a party’s right of denial is taken away or restricted;
(u) whether the party proferring the term is made the judge of the
soundness  of  his  or  her  own  performance,  or  whether  the  party
against whom the term is proferred is compelled to sue a third party
first before he will be able to act against the party proferring the term;
(v) whether the term directly or indirectly amounts to a waiver or
limitation of the competence of the party against whom the term is
proferred to apply set off;
(w) whether to the prejudice of the party against whom the term is
proferred,  the  party  proferring  the  term  is  otherwise  placed  in  a
position substantially better than that in which the party proferring the
term would have been under the regulatory law, had it not been for
the term in question;
(x) the degree to which the contract requires a party to waive rights
to which he or she would otherwise be entitled;
(y) … … …
(z) any other fact  which in the opinion of the Court  should be
taken into account.
165

Section 3: Applicability of the Act
So far as the applicability of the Act is concerned, the provision of
sec. 3(1) state that (subject to subsection (2)), the provision apply to all
contracts concluded after the commencement of this Act and between all
contracting parties.
Sub-section (2) of section 3 excludes
(a) contractual acts and relations which arise out of or in connection
with the Labour Relations Act (60 of 1995) or which arise out of
the application of that Act;
(b) contractual acts which arise out of or in connection with or out of
the application of the Bills of Exchange Act (Act 34 of 1964);
(c) contractual acts to which the Companies Act (Act 61/63) or the
Core Companies Act (Act 69 of 1984) apply or which arise out of
the application of these Acts;
(d) contractual terms in respect of which measures are provided in
international treaties to which the Republic of South Africa is a
signatory and which depart from the provisions of this Act.”
Section 3(3): Overriding effect:
Sec. 3(3) otherwise give overriding offer to the Act. It says that any
provision on contractual term purporting to exclude the provisions of this
Act or to limit the application thereof, shall be void.
166

Section 3(4): Act binding on State:
Sec. 3(4) is important.  It says that the ‘Act shall be binding upon the
State’.    This is consistent with the principle laid down by Courts in several
cases that the State should be an ideal for others to follow.
Section 4: Subsequent change in circumstances:
One other new innovation in the South African Bill is as to the ‘effect
of subsequent change in the circumstances’.   After considerable discussion
that normally the conditions obtaining at the contract alone be taken into
account,  the SA Law Commission  made  an  important  exception  to  this
principle when it stated in sec. 4 that the exception is not to be given effect
to if it become ‘excessively onerous’ as opposed to ‘more onerous’.   It says:
“Sec.4:  Taking into account circumstances which existed at the time
of  the  conclusion  of  the  contract  and  the  effect  of  a  subsequent
change of circumstances:
4(1) In the application of this Act, the circumstances which existed
at the time of the conclusion of contract shall be taken into account
and a party is bound to fulfill his or her obligations under the contract
even if performance has become more onerous, whether because the
cost  of  performance  has  increased  or  because  the  value  of  the
performance he or she receives has diminished.
(2) If, however, performance of the contract becomes excessively
onerous because of a change of circumstances, the parties are bound
167

to enter into  negotiations  with a view to adapting the contract  or
terminating it, provided that -
(a) the  change  of  circumstances  occurred  after  the  time  of
conclusion of the contract, or had already occurred at that
time  but  was  not  and  could  not  reasonably  have  been
known to the parties; and
(b) the possibility of a change of circumstances was not one
which could reasonably have been taken into account at the
time of conclusion of the contract; and
(c) the risk of the change of circumstances is not one which,
according  to  the  contract,  the  party  affected  should  be
required to bear.
(3) If the parties fail to reach agreement within reasonable period,
the Court may -
(a) terminate  the  contract  at  a  date  and  on  terms  to  be
determined by the Court, or
(b) adapt the contract to distribute between the parties in a just
and equitable manner, the losses or gains resulting from the
change of circumstances; and
(c) in either case  , award damages for the loss suffered through
the  other  party  refusing  to  negotiate  or  breaking  off
negotiations in bad faith.”
Section 5: Admissibility of evidence
As to the type of evidence that can be adduced, sec. 5 deals with
“admissibility of evidence to assist in the interpretation of a contract”.
168

“Sec. 5: Whether or not the words of the contract appear to be
ambiguous, evidence of what passed during negotiations between the
parties  and  after  the  execution  of  the  contract  and  surrounding
circumstances,  is  admissible  to  assist  in  the  interpretation  of  any
contract.”
The above provisions proposed in the Bill accompanying the 1998
Report of the South Africa Law Commission indeed contain certain special
features not found in other countries.
Canada: (substantive unfairness)
The British Columbia Law Institute, in its Interim Report on ‘Unfair
Contract Terms’ (2005) stated that the Report will concern itself with two
questions:
a. review of specific contract terms, and 
b. applications  of principles  of contractual  fairness  in
areas other than consumer protection.
The Report employs the word ‘unfair’ in the place of ‘unconscionable’.   It
treats cases of automatic renewals, acceleration clauses (i.e. payment of an
amount on the happening of an event), terms excluding or limiting liability
as substantively unfair.  It also requires that it is the duty of the party which
takes advantage of onerous terms to put the other party on special notice of
such terms.  Fundamental breach of a contract regulates the enforcement of
169

contract-terms  that  limit  or  exclude  liability  by presenting  a  party  who
breaches a contract from relying on those contract terms.   Whenever a
Court determined that a fundamental breach occurred, the contract would be
‘brought to an end’ and the rule of law would operate.   The Interim Report
refers to various options –
All the common law provinces have an Unconscionable Transaction
Relief Act which allows for the reopening of unfair credit transactions.  In
Canadian jurisdictions unconscionable conduct is an offence.
Ontario Business  Practices  Act, 1990 states that unconscionability
includes where
“(i) the price grossly exceeds  the price at which similar goods or
services are readily available to consumers,
(ii) the proposed transaction is excessively one-sided in favour of
someone other than the consumer or
(iii) the  terms  or  conditions  of  the  proposed  transaction  are  so
adverse to the consumer as to be inequitable.”
The Sasketchewan Consumer Protection Act, 1998 prohibits unfair
practices and refers to (a) the ‘taking advantage of a consumer by including
in a consumer agreement terms or conditions that are harsh, oppressive or
excessively one-sided; and (b) include in a consumer transaction terms or
conditions that are harsh, oppressive or excessively one-sided.
170

The  Trade  Practices  Act,  1996  of  British  Columbia,  apart  from
procedural matters include where
(a) at the time the consumer transaction was entered, the price grossly
exceeded the price at which similar subjects of similar consumer
transactions were readily obtainable by similar consumers; and
(b) the  terms or  conditions  on, or subject  to, which  the  consumer
transactions were entered into by the consumers are so harsh or
adverse to the consumer as to be inequitable.
The Quebec Civil Code, 1991, states in sec. 1435 that in a consumer
contract or a contract of adhesion, however, an external clause is null, if, at
the time of formation of the contract, it was not expressly brought to the
attention of the consumer or adhering party, unless the other party proves
that the consumer or adhering party otherwise knew it.
Sec. 1436 refers to clauses which are illegible or incomprehensible to
a  reasonable  person  unless  the  other  party  proves  that  an  adequate
explanation of the nature and scope of the clause was given to the consumer
or adhering party.
Sec. 1437 describes an ‘abusive’ clause as one which is excessively
and unreasonably detrimental to the consumer or the adhering party and is,
therefore, not in good faith; in particular, a clause which so departs from the
fundamental  obligations  arising  from  the  rules  normally  governing  the
contract that it changes the nature of the case.   Such clauses can be declared
null or the obligations may be reduced.
171

Australia: (substantive unfairness)
Under the (NSW) Contract Review Act, 1980, though sec. 6(2) states
that a person may not be granted relief under the Act in relation to a contract
so far as the contract was entered in the course for the purpose of a trade,
business or profession – other than a farming undertaking – still, some of
the provisions are quite useful.
Sec.  4  defines  ‘unjust’  as  including  unconscionable,  harsh  or
oppressive terms and ‘injustice’ is also to be considered in a corresponding
manner.
Sec. 9 refers to matters to be considered by the Court in determining
whether a ‘contract’ is ‘unjust’ and the matters relevant to ‘substantive’
unfairness.
Subsection  (1)  generally states  that  the  Court will  have regard to
‘public interest’ and all the circumstances of the case and to the following:
“Sec. (2):
(a) … … …
(b) … … …
(c) … … …
(d) whether or not any of the provisions of the contract impose
conditions which are unreasonably difficult to comply with or not
172

reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of
any party to the contract;
(e) … … …
(f) … … …
(g) where the contract is wholly or partly in writing, the physical
form of the contract and the intelligibility of the language in which it
is expressed;
(h) … … …
(l) … … …”
Executed contracts:
As already stated, sec. 14, the Act applies ‘fully executed’ contracts.
Exclusion of provision of the Act is void under sec. 17 and an offence under
sec. 18.
Uniform Consumer Credit Code 1993 is applicable to all States and
Territories.   It applies to credit transactions where credit is given for a
variety of purposes including for real purposes ‘unjust’ contracts can be
reopened.   ‘Unjust’ includes ‘unconscionable, harsh or oppressive’.   Sec.
70 contains procedural and substantive matters.   List is similar to sec. 9(2)
of  the  1980  Act.   The  court  can  reopen  transaction  and  set  aside  the
contract wholly or partly.  Sec. 72 applies to unconscionable interest, fees or
charges.
The Fair Trading Amendment Act 2003 (Victoria) amended the Fair
Trading Act, 1999 and introduced provision similar to those in (UK) Unfair
173

Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations.   A term is unfair is contrary to
good faith (The UK Law Commission in its Report 2004, omitted good faith
criteria).    ‘Standard  form’  contracts  can  be  prescribed  as  unfair  by
regulation and it is an offence to use or recommend the use of a prescribed
term.
Trade Practices Act, 1974 defines ‘unconscionable’ conduct in sec.
51AB(2) to
(a) … … …
(b) whether, as a result of conduct engaged in by the corporation,
the consumer was required to comply with conditions that were not
necessary  for  the  protection  of  the  legitimate  interests  of  the
corporation;
(c) … … …
(d) … … …
(e) the amount for which and the circumstances under which, the
consumer  could  have  acquired  identical  or  equivalent  goods  or
services from a person other than the corporation.
Sec. 51AC(3) contains similar provisions.
New Zealand: (substantive unfairness)
New  Zealand  Law  Commission,  1990  in  the  Report  on  ‘unfair’
contracts (Nu11) proposed a definition as follows:
174

“(1) A term of a contract is also unfair if, in the context of the
contract as a whole, it is oppressive;
(2) A term of a contract is oppressive if it:
(a) imposes a burdensome obligation or liability which is not
reasonably necessary to protect the interests of the other
party; and
(b) is contrary to commonly accepted standards of fair dealing.
(3) A transaction that consists of two or more contracts is to be
treated as a single contract if it is in substance and effect a single
transaction.”
The  Commission  gave  a  number  of  examples  of  ‘substantive’
unfairness.
It also stated that a contract is not unfair unless, in the context of the
contract as a whole,
(a) it results in a substantially unequal exchange of values; or
(b) the  benefits  received  by  a  disadvantaged  party  are  manifestly
inappropriate to his or her circumstances; or
(c) the disadvantaged party was in a fiduciary relationship with the
other party.
The above are the ‘substantive’ unfair terms in contract or guidelines
relating thereto, which are found in other countries. 
175

CHAPTER-X
SEGREGATING PROCEDURAL AND SUBSTANTIVE
PROVISIONS OF THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872
AND THE SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1963
In this Chapter, we shall try to segregate the existing provisions of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872 and the Specific Relief Act, 1963, in so far as
procedural and unfairness of contracts is concerned.
Before we refer to Indian statutes on ‘unfairness’ we shall make a
brief reference to Ramanatha Iyer’s Law Lexicon.
The author states that the word ‘unfair’ means ‘not fair, marked by
injustice, partiality or deception; not equitable in business dealings.  (sec. 16
(1) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872)
He defines  ‘Unconscionable bargain’ as one which no man in his
senses, not under a delusion, would make on the one hand, and which no
fair and honest man would accept on the other.  Irreconcilable with what is
right or reasonable.   (sec. 16(3) illustration (c) of Indian Contract Act,
1872)
‘Oppressive’ means unjustly severe, rigorous or harsh.   (sec. 397 of
Indian Companies Act, 1956 and Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908)    An act or omission may amount to oppressive conduct if
176

it is designed to achieve an unfair advantage:  (In re Five Minutes Car Wash
Service Ltd: 1966 (1) All ER 242, Oppression means ‘burdensome, or harsh
or wrongful’ according to Lord Simonds in Scottish Cognitive Society Ltd
v.  Meyar 1958 (3) All ER 66, as followed by the Orissa High Court in
Shantiprasad Jain v. Kalinga Tubes, AIR 1962 Orissa 202)
(A) Procedural unfairness: Indian statute law:
(a) Indian Contract Act, 1872 (Procedural unfairness):
The Indian Contract Act, 1872 refers to several aspects of procedural
unfairness.  Sec. 13 requires consent of all the parties to a contract for its
formation.
Sec. 14 deals with ‘free consent’ and states that a ‘consent’ is free
where it is not caused by
(1) coercion, as defined in sec. 15, or
(2) undue influence, as defined in sec. 16, or
(3) fraud, as defined in sec. 17, or
(4) misrepresentation, as defined in sec. 18, or
(5) mistake, subject to sections 20, 21 and 22, or
(6) undue influence as defined in sec. 19A.
Sec.  19  states  that  contracts  vitiated  by  coercion,  fraud  or
misrepresentation are ‘voidable’.   In this section, ‘undue influence’ was
initially there but was deleted by sec. 3 of Act 6 of 1889 and under the same
177

Act of 1889, sec. 19A was inserted to say that any contract vitiated by
‘undue influence’ may be set aside either wholly or subject to conditions.
Sec. 20 states that a contract is ‘void’ if both parties are under a mistake as
to a matter of fact.
These are provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which deal
with ‘procedural’ unfairness.
(b) Specific Relief Act, 1963 (Procedural unfairness):
Principles of ‘fairness’ are the basis of sec. 20 of the Specific Relief
Act,  1963 which  deals  with  the  ‘Discretion  as  to  decreeing  specific
performance’.   Discretion, says subsection (1) is not to be arbitrary but
sound  and  reasonably  guided  by  judicial  principles.    Subsection  (2)
enumerates certain guidelines in which the Court may properly exercise not
to decree specific performance.  Clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (2) of sec
20 deal with procedural unfairness and refer to the following situations:
(a) where ……………… the conduct of the parties  at  the  time of
entering into the contract or the other circumstances under which
the contract was entered into are such that the contract, though not
voidable,  gives  the  plaintiff  an  unfair advantage,  over  the
defendant; or
(b) where the defendant entered into the contract under circumstances
which  though  not  render  the  contract  voidable,  makes  it
inequitable to enforce specific performance.”
178

There  are  two  Explanations  below  sub-section  (2)  of  sec.  20.
Explanation I states that mere inadequacy of consideration or the mere fact
that the contract is onerous to the defendant or improvident in its nature,
shall not be deemed to constitute an unfair advantage within the meaning of
clause (a) or  hardship within clause (b).    Explanation II states that the
question  whether the performance of a contract would involve hardship on
the defendant within the meaning of clause (b) shall, except in cases where
the  hardship has resulted from any act of the plaintiff subsequent to the
contract, be determined with reference to the circumstances existing at the
time of the contract.
Subsection (3) of sec. 20 states that the ‘Court may properly exercise
discretion to decree specific performance in any case where the plaintiff has
done substantial acts or suffered losses in consequence of a contract capable
of specific performance’.
Subsection (4) of sec. 20 states that the ‘Court shall not refuse to any
party specific  performance  of a contract  merely on  the  ground  that  the
contract is not enforceable at the instance of the other party’.
(B) Substantive unfairness: Indian Statute Law:
(a) Indian Contract Act, 1872: (substantive unfairness)
There are several provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which
deal with substantive unfairness of the terms of a contract.  There are terms
which are by themselves unfair.
179

Section 10 states that all agreements are contracts if they are made by
the free consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration
and with a lawful object and are not expressly declared to be void.  
Section 23 says that the consideration or object of an agreement is
lawful, unless it is forbidden by or is of such a nature, that, if permitted, it
would defeat the provisions of law; or is fraudulent, or involves or implies
injury  to  the  person  or  property  of  another;  or  the  Court  regard  it  as
immoral, or opposed to public policy.  Such agreements whose object or
consideration is unlawful are void.
Section 24 states that if any part of a single consideration for one or
more objects or any one or any part of any one of several considerations for
a single object, is unlawful, the agreement is void.
Under section 20, an agreement is void where both parties are under a
mistake of fact; sec 21 states that a contract is not voidable because it was
caused by a mistake of law in force in India; but a mistake as to a law not in
force in India has the same effect as a mistake of fact.  Section 22 states that
a contract is not voidable because of mistake of fact of one of the parties.
Under sec. 25, an agreement without consideration is void, unless it is
in writing and registered, or is a promise to compensate for something done
or is a promise to pay a debt barred by limitation law.   
Sec. 26 states that an agreement in restraint of marriage is void.   
180

Sec. 27 states that an agreement in restraint of trade is void.   
Sec. 28 states that agreement in restraint of legal proceedings is void.
Sec. 29 states that agreements the meaning of which is uncertain or is
not capable of being made certain, are void.   
Sec. 30 makes agreement by way of wager void.  
Sec. 56 deals with contracts ‘frustrated’ and thereby become void.  
These are provisions in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which can be
said to deal with substantive unfairness.
(b) Specific Relief Act, 1963 (Substantive unfairness):
There are two provisions in sec 20 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 in
part of cl.(a) and in cl.(b), which relate to substantive unfairness and they
are as follows:
Under clause (a) of sub section (2) of sec 20
(a) Where the terms of the Contract are such that  the contract,
though  not voidable, gives  the plaintiff an  unfair  advantage
over the defendant; or
181

Under Clause (b) of sub section (2) of sec 20:
(b) When  the  performance  of  the  contract  would  involve  some
hardship on the defendant which he did not foresee, whereas its non
performance would involve no such hardship on the plaintiff.
Are the above provisions of Indian law as to ‘procedural’ and ‘substantive’
unfairness sufficient?
It will be seen that the sections of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
which  deal  with  procedural  unfairness,  while  they  do  deal  with  undue
influence, coercion, fraud, and misrepresentation and those of sec 20 of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963, do not deal with other circumstances under which
a contract is entered into which may lead to an unfair advantage to one
party, thereby making it unfair, such as 
(a) where the terms are not negotiated or
(b) where they are contained in standard terms of contract or
(c) where the terms are in small print or are camouflaged and not
transparent and other situations.    
These and other aspects, in our opinion, require to be considered
in depth for the purpose of ‘procedural’ fairness.
Likewise, in the matter of ‘substantive’ unfairness, the sections 10, 21
to 30 of the Contract Act, deal with several types of ‘void’ contracts and sec
20  of the  Specific  Relief  Act, 1963  with  other  situations,  but  not  with
contracts  or  terms  which  are  otherwise  oppressive,  harsh  or  cast
182

unreasonable burden on one of the parties.  Such provisions require to be
considered and added.
Nor  does  sec  67A  as  proposed  in  the  103rd Report  of  the  Law
Commission  (1984)  deal  with  the  other  ‘procedural’  and  ‘substantive’
aspects of unfairness which today have been brought into the law in several
countries.   We  have  already  segregated  the  ‘procedural’  unfairness
provisions in other countries from the ‘substantive’ unfairness provisions in
those countries in Chapters VIII and IX, with a view to consider which of
them can be brought into our law with such modifications as may suit our
country.
It  is,  therefore,  proposed  to  deal  with  certain  new  provisions
regarding unfairness, both procedural and substantive, which require to be
incorporated into the statute law, in addition to what are contained in the
Contract Act, 1872  and the Specific Relief Act, 1963 and such general
provisions of unfairness, procedural and substantive, will be dealt with in
Chapter XI.
183

CHAPTER-XI
NEED TO DEFINE ‘GENERAL PROCEDURAL UNFAIRNESS’
AND ‘GENERAL SUBSTANTIVE UNFAIRNESS’ UNDER
THE INDIAN LAW
No  country  in  its  legislation  has  so  far  enacted  procedural  and
substantive aspects of unfairness distinctively in its statutes.  Several writers
have stated that legislations have to focus on these aspects separately than to
make a “mish mash” of both in each section.  We have referred to these
views in Chapter VII.
We shall first give a brief sketch of how we want to go about such
segregation in the proposed Bill.
(a) Existing “procedural” provisions of the Contract Act, 1872 and of 
the Specific Relief Act, 1963 to be “listed” in the Bill:
Several sections of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 deal with ‘voidable
contracts’ (procedural unfairness) as referred to in Chapter X are as follows:
(a) section 15 which deals with coercion,
(b) section 16 which deals with undue influence,
(c) section 17 which deals with fraud,
(d) section 18 which deals with misrepresentation,
(e) section 19A which deals with undue influence.
184

Similarly, so far as procedural provisions are concerned, the  Specific
Relief Act, 1963, contains some provisions which refer to the manner of
enforcement of voidable contracts in
(a) second part of clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 20,
(b) clause (6) of subsection (2) of section 20
(c) clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 27.
We have deliberately used the word ‘listed’ because we propose just
to highlight the ‘procedural’ or ‘substantive’ nature of the provisions of
these two statutes.  We do not propose to interfere with them or involve
them in the ‘unfairness’ principle.   We merely propose to refer to these as
‘procedural provisions’.
(b) Existing provisions of Contract Act, 1872 and Specific Relief Act,
1963 are not exhaustive:
In our view, there can be other situations than those in these acts
where, due to the conduct of the parties or the circumstances under which
the terms of the contract are arrived at or the contract is entered into which
may have resulted in some unfair advantage or unfair disadvantage to one of
the parties.   This we propose to describe as ‘general procedural unfairness’
in the Bill.
(a) Several such  circumstances  have  been referred to in Chapter VIII
“Comparative Law – Procedural Unfairness” and Chapter IX ‘Comparative
185

Law  -  Substantive  Unfairness’.   We  do  not  want  to  repeat  all  those
circumstances referred to in Chapter V, namely, the statutes or Bills in UK,
Canada,  Australia,  New  Zealand  and  South  Africa  and  so  on.   Such
circumstances are equally in existence in India.
As stated in Mulla’s commentary on the Indian Contract Act, 1872
and Specific Relief Act, 1963, in the Preliminary Chapter,
“The Contract Act does not profess to be a complete Code dealing
with the law relating to contracts.  As appears from the preamble, the
Act purports to do no more than define and amend certain parts of
that law.    It treats some particular contracts in separate chapters, but
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  Legislature  intended  to  deal
exhaustively with any particular chapter or subdivision of the law
relating to contracts.”
In Irrawady Flotilla Co. vs. ILR 18 Cal. 620 (PC), the Privy Council
observed:
“But there is nothing to show that the legislature intended to deal
exhaustively with any particular chapter of subdivision relating to the
law of contracts.”
But, it has been also held that “to the extent it deals with a subject, it
is exhaustive upon the same and it is not permissible to import the principles
of  English  law  or  the  statutory  provisions”.   (Satyabrata  Ghose vs.
Mugneeram Bangur & Co.: AIR 1954 SC 44), unless the statute is such that
186

it cannot be  understood  without the  aid  of English  Law (State of West
Bengal vs. B.K.Mondal AIR 1962 SC 779).
(b) Likewise, if we take up the procedural unfairness provision of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963, as pointed again in Mulla’s Commentary on the
Contract  Act  and  Specific  Relief  Act  in  the  preliminary  Chapter,  the
Specific Relief Act, 1963 is also not exhaustive.
Immediately after the passage referred to above from that treatise, it
was further stated therein 
“The same view was taken if the similarity worded preamble of the
Specific Relief Act (Act 1 of 1877) Ramdas Khaitan & Co. vs. Atlas
Mills Ltd AIR 1931 Bom 151;  Meghu Mian vs.  Kishan Ram AIR
(1954) pat 477”.
The provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 are, therefore, not
again exhaustive.  In fact, dealing with section 20 of that Act, the Supreme
Court  in  Sardar  Singh vs.  Krishna  Dev 1994(4)  SCC, it  stated  that the
circumstances specified in sec 20 are only ‘illustrative and not exhaustive.
The Court would take into consideration the circumstances in each case, the
conduct of the parties and the respective interest under the Contract Act.
If the provisions of the Contract Act, 1872 are not exhaustive on
‘procedurally  unfairness’,  it  follows  that  the  provisions  of  the  Specific
Relief Act, 1963 are equally not exhaustive.
187

(c) ‘General  procedural  unfairness’  to  be  defined  in  the  Bill  and
Guidelines be given:
Therefore,  while  we  propose  that  the  law  relating  to  voidable
contracts under the Contract Act, 1872 and the Specific Relief Act, 1963,
need not be disturbed, it will be necessary and will be permissible to add
new provisions for purpose of ‘general procedural unfairness’ referred to in
the situations stated in Chapter VII.
We have referred to he meaning of ‘procedural fairness’ in the earlier
chapters.  In addition we shall refer to Blake’s Law Dictionary, 7th Ed.
(1999).  It defines ‘procedure unconscionability’ as follows:
“procedural  unconscionability”  as  ‘unconscionability  by  resulting
from  improprieties  in  Contract  formation  (such  as  oral
misrepresentations or disparities in bargaining position) rather than
from the terms of the contract itself.  This type of unconscionability
suggests that there was no meeting of the minds.
(d) The  general  provision as  to  ‘procedural  unfairness’  will  give  a
general definition of ‘procedural unfairness’.  
(e) To supplement that new provision, we propose to add another section
which will give a non-exhaustive list of guidelines drawn from Chapter VII
which may help in deciding whether a particular contract or term is vitiated
on account of ‘procedural unfairness’.
188

We  propose  to  define  ‘general  procedural  unfairness’  (without
prejudice to the specific provisions of the Contract Act, 1872 and Specific
Relief Act, 1963, referred to above), in the following words:
“a contract or a term is  procedurally unfair if it has resulted in an
unjust advantage or unjust disadvantage to one party on account of
the  conduct  of  the  other  party,  or  the  manner  in  which  or  the
circumstances under which the contract has been entered into or the
term thereof has been arrived at by the parties”
(d) Existing  ‘substantive’  provisions  of  the  Contract  Act,  1872  and
Specific Relief Act, 1963 are not exhaustive:
Several sections of the Contract Act, 1872 are substantive in nature
and they refer to ‘void’ contracts.    These are to be listed in the Bill.  They
are:
(a) sections 10, 23, 24:  Under which the consideration or objects of a
contract are not lawful or the parties are not competent to contract.
(b) Section 20:  under which an agreement can be void where both
parties to an agreement are under a mistake.
(c) Section 25:  under which an agreement is without consideration.
(d) Section 26:  under which an agreement is in restraint of marriage
of any person, other than a minor.
(e) Section 27:  under which an agreement is in restraint of trade.
(f) Section 28:  under which an agreement  is in restraint  of legal
proceedings.
189

(g) Section 29:  under which an agreement is uncertain.
(h) Section 30: under which an agreement is by way of wager.
(i) Section56: under which an agreement to do an act impossible in
itself is void and a contract to do acts after becoming impossible
or unlawful becomes void.
We propose,- without modifying these provisions, - to just “list” them as
examples of the class of contracts which are substantive.
Likewise,  in  the  Specific  Relief  Act,  1963,  there  is  again  need,
without disturbing the provisions, to classify certain provisions as relating
to the class of contracts which are substantive.  These are:
(a) under sec 18, certain terms have come into the contract which
were not agreed to:
(b) the first part of clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 20, of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963 where the terms of a contract give the
plaintiff an unfair advantage over the defendant.
(c) Where, as stated in clause (b) of sub section (2) of section 20 of
the same Act, the performance of the contract would involve some
hardships on the defendant which he had not foreseen, where its
non-performance would involve no such hardships on the plaintiff.
(e) General ‘substantive’ unfairness to be defined in the Bill and guidelines
be given:
190

We shall refer to what we mean by ‘substantive unfairness’ in earlier
chapters.   Here  we  shall  refer  to  Black’s  Law  Dictionary.   It  defines
‘substantive unconscionability’ as unconscionability resulting from actual
contract  terms  that  are  unduly  harsh,  commercially  unreasonable,  and
grossly unfair given the existing circumstances.
We  have  referred  to  various  other  situations  in  Chapter  VIII  –
‘Comparative  Law  –  Substantive  Unfairness’  which  makes  a  contract
‘substantively  unfair’.   We  do  not  again  propose  to  repeat  all  those
circumstances referred to in Chapter VIII, namely, the provisions of the
statutes or Bills in UK, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa
and so on.  Such circumstances are equally in existence in contracts in India.
We propose to list existing substantive provisions of the two Acts,
Contract Act, 1872 and Specific Relief Act, 1963 merely as  “substantive
provisions”.
We also propose to have a new and separate provision  - which deals
with ‘general substantive unfairness’.  To supplement the same we propose
another section which will give guidelines which have to be considered for
deciding if a contract or term is ‘substantively unfair’.
We propose to define ‘general substantive unfairness’ as referring, -
(without prejudice to the specific provisions of the Contract Act, 1872 and
the Specific Relief Act, 1963) - in the following words:
191

“a contract or a term thereof is substantively unfair if such contract or
the term thereof is in itself harsh, oppressive or unconscionable to one
of the parties.”
In the next chapter, we shall give our recommendations along with
the corresponding provisions of the Bill.
192

CHAPTER-XII
DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DRAFT BILL
(2006) ON UNFAIR TERMS (PROCEDURAL AND SUBSTANTIVE)
We have referred in Chapter No. XI to some of the provisions of the
proposed Bill.  We have stated that we shall bring in new provisions to deal
with ‘procedural’ and ‘substantive’ unfairness, and that, at the same time,
we do not propose to disturb the existing provisions of the Indian Contract
Act, 1872 and of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.  In fact, as stated earlier, we
propose  to merely list existing  procedural and substantive provisions  of
these Acts for purpose of mere classification and will not disturb them.
However, we propose to have ‘general provisions’ both for ‘procedural’ and
‘substantive’ unfairness in the new Bill, as stated earlier.  We now proceed
to explain certain aspects of the proposed Bill.
Initially, we propose to give certain general definitions of ‘procedural
unfairness’ and ‘substantive unfairness’ but so far as the existing procedural
provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and Specific Relief Act, 1963,
are concerned, we do not want to use the word ‘unfairness’ lest it may be
wrongly  understood  that  the  existing  provisions  are  subject  to  the  new
definitions.   Instead,  as  stated  above,  we  propose  just  to  describe  the
respective provisions as merely ‘procedural’ and ‘substantive’ and we shall
eschew using the word ‘unfairness’ while referring to these sections.
193

(A) Chapter I of the Bill will contain definitions.  There are a few words
which require definitions.
(a) ‘contract’:
The  Indian  Contract  Act,  1872  defines  both  ‘agreement’  and
‘contract’  separately  and  several  sections  too  use  these  words
separately.
Section 2(e) of the Contract Act defines an ‘agreement’ as follows:
“2(e):   Every  promise  and  every  set  of  promises,  forming
consideration for each other, is an ‘agreement’.
“  Section 2(h)   defines a ‘contract’ as follows:
“  2(h)  :  an agreement enforceable by law is a “contract”.
Section 10 of the Contract Act states as to ‘what agreements are contracts’
while several other sections use the word ‘contract’.     Section 19 refers to
‘validity of agreement without consent’, sec 20 deals with void agreements,
so do sections 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 and 30.
Section 2(i) defines ‘voidable contract’ as follows:
“2(i) An agreement which is enforceable by law at the option of one
or more of the parties thereto, but not at the option of the other or
others, is a viodable contract”.
194

Section 2(j) defines ‘void contracts’ as follows:
“2(j): A contract which ceases to be enforceable by law becomes void
when it ceases to be enforceable”.
For  the  purpose  of  definition  of  ‘contract’,  we  have  considered
whether it is sufficient merely to define contract as defined in sec 2(h) of the
Contract Act or whether it should include the word ‘agreement’.
We found  that  sections  15, 16,  17,  18,  19,  19A which  deal  with
‘voidable  contracts’  i.e.  if  they  are  vitiated  by  ‘coercion’,  ‘undue
influence’’, ‘fraud’, ‘misrepresentation’,- they all say that the ‘agreement’
which is a ‘contract’ is voidable.  These deal with ‘procedural unfairness’ of
contracts.
On the other hand, sections 10, 20, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and
56 deal with ‘void’ agreements.  This is obviously because they are not
enforceable and are distinct from enforceable agreements which are called
contracts  but  which  contracts  are  voidable.   These  sections  deal  with
agreements which are void because of absence of consideration or due to
mutual mistake, unlawful consideration, or are agreements in restraint of
marriage, or in restraint of trade, or in restraint of legal proceedings, or
agreements  which  are  uncertain,  or  by  way  of  wager  or  impossible  of
performance.     These deal with ‘substantive unfairness’ of agreements.
195

In order therefore to cover both ‘procedural’ and ‘substantive’ aspects
in a single definition, we have proposed to define ‘contract’, for the purpose
of  this  Act,  as  covering  both  ‘contracts’,   (i.e.  agreements  which  are
enforceable) and ‘agreements’ simpliciter which are void.  When we deal
with ‘procedural’ aspects, the word will mean ‘contract’ and when we deal
with ‘substantive’ aspects, the word will mean ‘agreement’.
Our definition of ‘contract’ in sec 2(a) of the Bill will be as follows:
“Section 2(a):  ‘Contract’ means a contract as defined in clause (h) of
section 2 of the Indian Contract  Act, 1872 (9 of 1872) and includes
an agreement as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of that Act.
(b) ‘Court’:  
So far as the definition of ‘Court’ is concerned, obviously it must
include civil courts of competent jurisdiction.  The definition must
include ‘arbitral tribunals’ also which enforce contracts.  At one time,
there was some doubt if an arbitral tribunal could direct or refuse
specific performance.   But the decision of the Supreme Court in
Olympus Superstructures Pvt. Ltd. vs. Meena Vijay Khatain : (1999
(5) SCC 652) has clearly held that though there is an element of
discretion  involved,  the  arbitral  tribunal  is  competent  to  exercise
discretion and direct or refuse specific performance.  The judgment of
the Calcutta High Court was approved and the judgment of Delhi
High Court was overruled.
196

So far as the various consumer fora under the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 are concerned, we are of the view that the said fora must have the
benefit of the provisions relating to ‘general procedural unfairness’ in sec. 5
and to the guidelines in sec. 6 and so far as ‘substantive unfairness’ is
concerned, to sections 9, 10, 11, 12 and the guidelines in sec. 13 and the
burden of proof in sec. 14.   In fact, in several countries, the unfair terms
contract provisions are applied to consumer contracts.  In UK, there is a
separate chapter for consumer contracts and in some countries there are
such statutes separately for consumer contracts.
Hence, we propose to define ‘Court’ in sec 2(b) as follows:
“2(b):  ‘Court’ means a Civil Court of competent jurisdiction and
includes every Consumer Dispute Redressal Agency referred to in
section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) and an
arbitral tribunal referred to clause (d) of sub section (1) of sec 2 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996).”
In addition, we propose sec. 2(c) to say that ‘words and expressions
not defined in this Act and define in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of
1872) shall have the meanings assigned to them in respectively in that Act’.
The scheme of the Bill is that ‘procedural provisions and procedural
unfairness’ are dealt with together in Chapter II.  Procedural provisions are
in sec 3, 4 while procedural unfairness is in sec 5.  
197

Section 3 deals with mere listing of the ‘procedural provisions’ of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, namely sections 15, 16, (19A), 17, 18, 19 which
deal with ‘voidable contracts’ – that is, contracts which may be avoided if
they are vitiated by coercion, undue influence, fraud, misrepresentation or
absence of free consent.   We nowhere use the word ‘unfair’ in this section.
Likewise, we propose sec. 4 to merely list the existing procedural
provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 – which deal with avoidance of
contracts – namely, sec 20(2)(a) (second part), sec 20 (2)(c) and sec 27(1)
(a).  Here too, we do not use the word unfairness.
After stating that sections 3 and 4 deal with ‘procedural provisions’
of the above said two enactments and taking care to see that we do not use
the words ‘procedural unfairness’, we next come to the crucial provision,
dealing  with  ‘general  procedural  unfairness’  under  the  proposed  law  in
Chapter II.
We propose sec 5 to deal with the concept of ‘general procedural
unfairness’, a concept which we propose to introduce for the first time.  The
103th  Report  of  the  Law  Commission  (1984)  though  it  dealt  with  the
concept of ‘unfair terms’, did not refer to the dichotomy of ‘procedural’ and
‘substantive’ unfairness.  Section 67A as proposed in that report used the
words  ‘unconscionable’  in  the  first  sub  section  which  combined  both
procedure and substantive aspects.  The second subsection 67(2) dealt with
substantive  unfairness.   The  present  definition  in  this  Bill  is  more
comprehensive.
198

Procedural unfairness separately defined in  sec. 5:
What we mean by ‘procedural unfairness’ is set out in sec 5 of the
Bill as follows:
“Section 5: Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 3 and 4, a
contract or a term thereof is procedurally unfair if it has resulted in an
unjust advantage or unjust disadvantage to one party on account of
the  conduct  of  the  other  party  or  the  manner  in  which  or
circumstances under which the contract has been entered into or the
term thereof has been arrived at by the parties.”
It  will  be  noticed  from  the  previous  chapter  that  such  a  general
statement  of  what  is  ‘procedurally  unfair’  has  been  attempted  in  other
jurisdictions also though no statute precisely devises a full separate section
for giving the meaning of these said words.
Here, one important fact has to be noticed.  Under the Indian Contract
Act, 1872, it is provided in sec 19 that certain contracts are voidable and be
avoided.  It is also stated that the party concerned may, avoid the contract or
he may, 
199

“insist that the contract shall be performed and that he shall be put in
the position in which he would have been if the representations made
had been true.
The fact remains that if the party wants to avoid a voidable contract,
he has under sec 19 of the Contract Act, 1862 only to prove one or other of
the  grounds,  namely,  that  his  consent  to  the  agreement  was  caused  by
coercion, fraud or misrepresentation.  He need not necessarily prove that
any unjust advantage has been gained by the other party or that he has
suffered an unjust disadvantage as we are now proposing in section 5.
However, sec 19A of the Contract Act, 1872 which deals with ‘undue
influence’, while permitting avoidance of a contract, states that “Any such
contract may be set aside either absolutely or, if the party who was entitled
to  avoid  it  has  received  any  benefit  thereunder,  upon  such  terms  and
conditions as to the Court may seem just”.
But, what  we propose  under  sec 5  is  not  at par  with  sec  19  but
somewhat  on  par  with  sec  19A.   We  propose  that  where  procedural
unfairness  is  alleged,  i.e.  facts  relating  to  the  conduct  or  manner  or
circumstances under which the contract is entered into or a term is arrived
at, then in addition, the party seeking to avoid has to prove unjust advantage
to the opposite party or unjust disadvantage to himself.
Debate whether mere proof of procedural unfairness has to be coupled with
some unfair advantage or unfair disadvantage:
200

There is considerable debate on the question whether it is sufficient
for a party to merely prove for purposes of sec 5  “procedural unfairness”,
conduct or circumstances and manner in which the contract or its terms have
been arrived at or entered into or whether, something more has to be proved.
In the USA, while some courts have taken the view that where there
is  procedural  unconscionability, it is  not  necessary to  prove substantive
unconscionability also, while some other Courts have taken the view that it
is  necessary  to  prove  substantive  unfairness  also.   On  the  converse
proposition  whether  procedural  and  substantive  unfairness,  if  proved,
whether it is alone sufficient, there is again a conflict of views.  These
divergent views have been referred to recently in  Strand vs.  U.S. Bank
National Association ND (Supreme Court of Dakota) 2005 ND 68 = 693
N.W. 2d. 918 (2005).  Kapsner J, speaking for the Court, summarized the
position in US as follows:
“In  Construction  Assocs:  446  N.W.  2d  (at  242-44),  however,  we
impliedly held that some measure of both procedural and substantive
unconscionability must be shown to allow a Court to refuse to enforce
unconscionable provisions….. … … …
Courts in other jurisdictions have reached varying results on
this issue.  Some Courts hold that a showing of either procedural or
substantive  unconscionability is  sufficient  to  invalidate  a contract.
See  Luna vs.  Household Fin Corp III, 236 F Supra 2d 1166 (1174)
(W.D.  Wash.  2002).   Other  Courts  have  held  that  procedural
unconscionability  by  itself  is  not  enough,  but  substantive
unconscionability  by itself  may be  (See  Maxwell vs.  Fidelity Fin
201

Servs,  Inc 184  Ariz  82,  907  P.  2d.  51  (58-60)  (Ariz  1995);  see
Gillman vs. Chase Manhattan Bank N.A.: 73 N.Y. 2d1 = 534 NE. 2d
824  (828-29)  537  NYS  2d.  787  (N.Y.  1988)  (noting  that  a
“determination of unconscionability generally requires a showing that
the contract was both procedurally and substantively unconscionable
when made”, but recognizing that “there have been exceptional cases
where  a  provision  of  the  contract  is  so  outrageous  as  to  warrant
holding  it  unenforceable  on  the  ground  of  substantive
unconscionability alone”.)   The majority of Courts, however, have
held  that  a  showing  of  some  measure  of  both  procedural  and
substantive unconscionabiliy is required, and courts are to employ a
balancing test looking at the totality of circumstances to determine
whether a particular provision is unconscionable and unenforceable.
See  Roussalis vs.  Wyoming Med Ctr., Inc, 4 P 3d. 209 (246)(Wyo
2000) (“most courts require a quantum of both and take a balancing
approach in applying them”); 1 James J. White & Robert Summers,
Uniform Commercial Code para 4-7 (4th Ed. 1995) (“Most Courts
take a “balancing approach” to the unconscionability question, and to
tip scales in favour of unconscionability, most courts seem to require
a  certain  quantum  of  procedural,  plus  a  certain  quantum  of
substantive unconscionability”).
The  learned  Judge  referred  to  what  Richard  A.  Lord  stated  in  the
Commentary on, Williston on Contracts (4th Ed) (1998):
“The  concept  of  unconscionability  was  meant  to  counteract  two
generic  forms  of  abuses:  the  first  of  which  relates  to  procedural
202

deficiencies in the contract formation process, such as deception or a
refusal to bargain over contract terms, today often analysed in terms
of  whether  the  imposed-upon  party  had  meaningful  choice  about
whether and how to enter  into the transaction;  and the second of
which  relates  to  the  substantive  contract  terms  themselves  and
whether  those  terms  are  unreasonably  favourable  to  the  more
powerful  party,  such  as  terms  that  impair  the  integrity  of  the
bargaining  process  or  otherwise  contravene  the  public  interest  or
public policy; terms (usually of an adhesion or boilerplate nature) that
attempt  to  alter  in  an  impermissible  manner,  fundamental  duties
otherwise imposed by the law, fine-print terms or provisions that seek
to negate the reasonable expectations of the non-drafting party, or
unreasonably and unexpectedly harsh terms having to do with price or
other central aspects of the transaction.”
The learned Judge referred to the views of the above authors further as
follows:
“It has been said that this formulation requires a showing that the
contract  was  both  procedurally  and  substantively  unconscionable
when made. It has often been suggested hat a finding of a procedural
abuse, inherent in the formation process, must be coupled as well
with a substantive abuse, such as an unfair or unreasonably harsh
contractual term which benefits the drafting party at the other party’s
expense.  Another way of viewing this problem is that the fact that a
contract  is  one  of  adhesion  does  not  itself  render  the  contract
unconscionable.  The distinction between procedural and substantive
203

abuses,  however,  may  become  quite  blurred;  overwhelming
bargaining strength or use of fine print or incomprehensible legalese
may reflect  procedural  unfairness  in  that  it  takes  advantage  of or
surprises  the  victim of  the  clause, yet the  terms  contained  in  the
resulting contract – whether in fine print or legal ‘gobbledygook’-
would hardly be of concern unless they were substantively harmful to
the non-drafting party as well.  Thus, the regularity of the bargaining
procedure  may  be  of  less  importance  if  it  results  in  harsh  or
unreasonable substantive terms, or substantive unconscionability may
be sufficient in itself even though procedurally unconscionability is
not.”
In our view, the last part of the above analysis is more true.  Though
the  cases  of  procedurally  voidable  situations  referred  to  in  the  Indian
Contract Act, 1862 do not require any substantive unfairness to be proved,
and we do not disturb that state of the law, still our formulation of sec 5 is
that  “procedural  unfairness”  as  now  defined  requires  some  ‘unfair
advantage’ or ‘unfair disadvantage’ to one party to be proved.   But, so far a
substantive unfairness is concerned, it can lead to unenforceability without
it being simultaneously unfair procedurally.   Whereas on our formulation of
not  only  procedural  aspects  but  ‘substantive  unfairness’  in  sec  12  is
therefore that
“a contract or a term thereof is substantively unfair if it is in itself
harsh, oppressive or unconscionable to one of the parties”. 
204

whereas our formulation of ‘procedural unfairness’ in sec 5 requires not
only  procedural  aspects  but  some  substantive  aspects  such  as  unjust
advantage or unjust disadvantage.
We shall refer to some more views elsewhere.
The British Columbia Law Institute in its Interim Report on ‘Unfair
Contract Terms’ (Feb. 2005) has referred to  Morrison vs.  Coast Finance
Ltd.: (1965)  55  DLR  (2d)  710  (B.C.C.A),  which  refers  to  proof  of
inequality, ignorance, need or distress of one party but also to proof of
unfairness of the bargain.  Likewise  Harry vs.  Kreutziger (1978)95 DLR
(3d) 231 (CA) also speaks of the need for proof on both:
“where a claim is made that a bargain is unconscionable, it must be
shown for success that there was inequality in the position of the
parties due to ignorance, need or distress of the weaker, which would
leave  him  in  the  power  of  the  stronger,  coupled  with  proof  of
substantial unfairness in the bargain.” (per Mc Intyre JA)
That would mean that in the case of procedural unfairness, apart from the
circumstances prevailing at the time when the contract was entered into,
substantial unconscionability of the terms must also be proved.
The  Report  of  the  British  Columbia  Institute  further  traces  the
inequality of bargaining principle to what Lord Denning stated in  Lloyds
Bank Ltd.vs. Bundy: 1974(3) All ER 757(CA).  The Report observes stating
that  in  British  Columbia,  as  far  as  unconscionability  is  concerned,  the
205

emphasis is still more on procedural unfairness leading to unfair terms but
(see  p.  35  of  the  Report)  “the  application  of  that  doctrine  in  British
Columbia has not proved effective in dealing with substantive unfairness.
Its  focus  has  been  on  protecting  vulnerable  people  from  procedural
unfairness.  This approach may fall wide of the mark in dealing with the
issues raised in the Report”.  It concludes stating (see p. 38):
“The  options  to  reform the  law  of  unfair  terms  discussed  in  this
Report remain starting points for discussion at this time.  Tellingly,
they were not engaged in any substantive way by the respondents to
our consultation.”
We shall next refer to the Discussion Paper on ‘Unfair Contract Terms’
(2004)  of  the  Standing  Committee  of  Officials  of  Consumer  Affairs,
Victoria (Australia).   It discussed various models, including those which
deal with procedural unfairness and substantive unfairness or both.  The
Australian law in sec 51AB of the Trade Practices Act, 1974 concentrates
on procedural unfairness as was the position under Common law except for
two  clauses  (b)  and  (e)  of  52AB(2)  which  deal  independently  with
substantive unfairness.   The Paper says: “However, in practice, Courts have
been reluctant to base a decision on 51AB solely on substantive grounds”.
The Report says (para 2.1.2) that in New South Wales, under the
Contract  Review  Act,  1980  while  the  emphasis  is  again  on  procedural
unfairness,  except  in  clauses  (d)  and  (g)  of  sec.  9  which  deal  with
substantive issues.     Analysis of case law of 20 years by T. Carlin (vol. 23)
(Sydney Law Review, p. 133) revealed that out of 160 cases, only in one
206

case  was  substantive  unfairness  applied  by  the  Courts  independently.
Goldring et al have criticized the above Act for not dealing separately with
substantive unfairness.  In UK, though guidelines relating to procedural and
substantive unfairness are contained in the statute, the sections have mixed
up both concepts instead of dealing with them separately.  
The  Report  observed  (para  2.2)  that  in  UK,  the  focus  is  on
‘substantive’ unfairness rather than procedural.   The UK Law Commission
Paper  notes  (see  para  2.2.2)  that  “it  must  be  the  case  that  substantive
unfairness alone can be a term unfair under (the UK Regulations)”.  
The Report (para 2.3.2) says that in US, sec 2.302 mixed up both
concepts. 
In Canada, the position according to the Report (para 2.3.3) is that the
position is same as in Australia.   It says:
“However, similar to Australia, it would seem that Canadian common
law  jurisdictions  have  not  differentiated  between  substantive  or
procedural matters.”
Courts  in  Australia,  the  Report  says,  are  reluctant  to  apply  substantive
unfairness alone.
It is in the above background of various authorities that in sec 5 we
have  proposed  that  so  far as  ‘procedural  unfairness’ is  concerned,  it  is
necessary to prove some unfair advantage or unfair disadvantage to one of
207

the parties.   For that purpose, we have provided guidelines in sec. 6 for
deciding whether there is procedural unfairness. 
(So far as ‘substantive unfairness’ as proposed in sec. 12 is concerned, in
our view, if the contract or terms are oppressive, harsh or unconscionable,
they must independently be declared unenforceable and it is not necessary
to also prove procedural unfairness.)
Guidelines: for procedural unfairness: section 6
We have culled out a number of guidelines for judging whether a
contract  or  its  terms  are  ‘procedurally  unfair’  from  the  available  legal
literature set out in Chapter VIII.
They are as follows as stated in sec. 6:
“6. For  the  purposes  of  section  5,  the  Court  may  take  into
account the following circumstances, namely:-
(a) the knowledge and understanding of the promisee in relation to the
meaning of the terms thereof or their effect;
(b) the bargaining strength of the parties to the contract relative to
each other;
(c) reasonable  standards  of  fair  dealing  or  commonly  accepted
standards of dealing;
208

(d) whether, or not, prior to or at the time of entering into the contract,
the terms were subject to negotiation or were part of a standard
terms contract;
(e) whether or not it was reasonably practicable for the party seeking
relief  to  negotiate  for  the  alteration  of  the  contract  or  a  term
thereof or to reject the contract or a term thereof;
(f) whether expressions contained in the contract are in fine print or
are difficult to read or understand;
(g) whether or not, even if he or she had the competency to enter into
the contract based on his or her capacity and soundness of mind,
he or she 
(i) was not reasonably able to protect his or her own interests
or  of those  whom he or she  represented  at the  time the
contract was entered;
(ii) suffered serious disadvantages in relation to other parties
because he or she was unable to appreciate adequately the
contract or a term thereof or their implications by reason of
age,  sickness,  physical,  mental,  educational  or  linguistic
disability,  emotional  distress  or  ignorance  of  business
affairs.
(h) whether  or  not  independent  legal  or  other  expert  advice  was
obtained by the party seeking relief under this Act;
(i) the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract or a term
thereof or their legal or practical effect were accurately explained
by any person, to the party seeking relief under this Act;
209

(j) the conduct of the parties to the contract in relation to similar
contracts or courses of dealing to which any of them had been
party; or
(k) whether a party relied on the skill, care or advice of the other party
or a person connected with the other party in entering into the
contract.”
General substantive fairness: section 12
As stated earlier, we have defined ‘substantive unfairness’ as follows:
“a contract or a term thereof is substantively unfair if such contract or
the term thereof is in itself harsh, oppressive or unconscionable to one
of the parties”
Guidelines for substantive unfairness: section 13
We have also culled out in sec 13, several guidelines to judge if a
contract or its terms are substantively unfair.  They are as follows:
“13. For the purposes of sections 9 to 12, the court may take into
account the following circumstances, namely:-
(a) whether  or  not  the  contract  or  a  term  thereof  imposed
conditions which are,–
(i) unreasonably difficult to comply with, or 
210

(ii) are not reasonably necessary for the protection of the
legitimate interests of any party to the contract;
(b) whether the contract is oral or wholly or partly in writing; 
(c) whether the contract is in standard form;
(d) whether  the  contract  or  a  term  thereof  is  contrary  to
reasonable standards of fair dealing or commonly accepted
standards of dealing;
(e) whether  the  contract,  agreement  or  a  term  thereof  has
resulted in a substantially unequal exchange  of monetary
values or in a substantive imbalance between the parties;
(f) whether the benefits to be received by the disadvantaged
party are manifestly disproportionate or inappropriate to his
or her circumstances; 
(g) whether  the  disadvantaged  party  was  in  a  fiduciary
relationship with the other party; or
(h) whether the contract or a term thereof
(i) requires  manifestly  excessive  security  for  the
performance of contractual obligations; or
(ii) imposes penalties which are disproportionate to the
consequences of a breach of contract; or
(iii) denies or penalises the early repayment of debts; or
(iv) entitles a party to terminate the contract unilaterally
without good reason or without paying reasonable
compensation; or
(v) entitles a party to modify the terms of a contract
unilaterally.”
211

It will be seen that there may be some guidelines in sections 6 and 13
which  are  common  to  both  procedural  unfairness  and  substantive
unfairness.  That is quite real.
Special  provisions  as  to  substantive  unfairness:  exclusion  of  certain
liabilities to be substantively unfair:
Apart from the ‘general substantive unfairness’ defined in sec. 12
upon which the Court may have to decide on facts, we have formulated
sections 9, 10, 11 as special provisions where the very existence of certain
terms is sufficient to declare them as substantively unfair.
The 103rd Report of the Law Commission, formulated sec 67A to be
introduced  into  the  Contract  Act,  1872,  and  while  subsection  (1)  was
general, subsection (2) proposed:
“Section  67A(2):   Without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the
provisions of this section, a contract or part of it is deemed to be
unconscionable, if it exempts any party thereto from
(a)      the liability for wilful breach of the contract, or  
(b) the consequences of negligence  ”
Such a provision is also contained in sec 3 of the (UK) Unfair Contract
Terms Act, 1977 which stated that liability arising in contract cannot be
212

excluded or restricted except in so far as the term satisfies the requirement
of reasonableness.
Such provisions are also contained in the UK Regulations, 1999 and
are also found in Bill attached to the UK and Scottish Law Commission
Report of 2004.
It should not be permissible for excluding liability for negligence.   It
should not be permissible to exclude liabilities for breach of contract so far
as one party is concerned, without justifiable reasons.
We have proposed section 9 as follows:
“Exclusion or restriction of liability to be substantially unfair:
9.  A contract or a term thereof shall be deemed to be substantively
unfair and void if it
(a) excludes or restricts liability for negligence;
(b) excludes or restricts liability for breach of express or implied
terms of contract without adequate justification.”
In clause (b), we have added the words ‘without adequate justification’ in as
much  as  in  our  opinion,  it  is  permissible,  where  there  is  adequate
justification to exclude or restrict liability for breach of express or implied
terms of contracts.
We next come to the proposed sec. 10 of the Bill which deals with
another situation concerning sec. 62 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930.
213

Section 62 of the Sale of Goods Act states:
“Section 62:  Exclusion of implied terms and conditions:
Where any right, duty or liability would arise under a contract of sale
by  implication  of  law,  it  may be  negatived  or  varied  by  express
agreement  or by the  course  of dealing  between  the  parties  or by
usage, if the usage is such as to bind both parties to the contract.”
The provision in UK and other countries do not permit one party to
exclude the various rights, duties or liabilities of one or other parties under
contracts, particularly in relation to sale of goods.   Even terms implied by
course of dealing or usage will be subject to section 9.   The Sale of Goods
Act, 1930 which is generally applicable to most contracts relating to goods
sold or supplied to consumers permits one party to escape from its duties
and liabilities or exclude rights of consumers which are contained in that
Act.   Such provisions are considered inherently obnoxious, unless there is
adequate justification.
We, therefore, propose sec. 10 as follows:
“Exclusion or restriction of rights, duties or liabilities referred to in
section  62  of  the  Sale  of  Goods  Act,  1930  (3  of  1930)  to  be
substantively unfair unless there is adequate justification
10. In  contracts  to  which  this  Act  applies  as  stated  in  sub-
section (1) of section 18, any exclusion or restriction of the rights, duties
214

or liabilities referred to in section 62 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (3
of  1930)  shall  be  deemed  to  be  substantively  unfair  unless  there  is
adequate justification therefor.”
The Zimbabwe Consumer Contracts Act contains guidelines in sec 5
(1)(d) as follows:
“(d)   If  the  consumer  contract  excludes  or  limits  obligations  or
liabilities of a party to an extent that is not reasonably necessary to
protect its interest.”
In the Schedule to the Act, it is stated that ‘any provision whereby the seller
or supplier of goods, other than used goods, excludes or limits his liability
for  latent  defects  in  the  goods’  may be treated  as  unfair  by the  Court.
Likewise if it excludes or limits liability of seller or supplier of goods or
service.
Such a provision is also contained in Article 3(3)(b) of the European
Directive which refers to “inappropriately excluding or limiting the legal
rights of the consumer vis-à-vis the seller or supplier or another party in the
event of total or partial non performance or inadequate performance by the
seller or supplier, of any contractual obligations.
(The above provision is on the lines  contained in sec  13(2) of the Bill
attached to the UK & Scottish Law Commission’s Report, 2004).
Choice of Law:
215

We next come to  choice of law issue.   This aspect is dealt with in
sec. 
11. It is well known that whenever a foreign element is involved in a
contract, choice of law issues arise.  Here obviously, we are concerned with
the law applicable to the substance of the contract.  Parties should not be
allowed to choose a law excluding the laws of India where there is no
foreign element at all involved in the contract.  It is sometimes common for
one party to say that a foreign law would apply to the substantive rights of
the parties  and such stipulation is made even where there is no foreign
element i.e. none of the parties is a foreigner, the contract is not entered in a
foreign country, nor its performance is in a foreign country etc.   If there is
no foreign element, it should not be permissible to impose a foreign law and
exclude applicability of Indian law.
The (UK) Unfair Contract of Terms Act, 1977 contained a slightly
different  provision  which  stated  in  sec  27(2)(a)  that  the  protective
provisions  of  the  Act  apply  notwithstanding  any  choice  of  foreign  law
where
‘the term appears to the Courts… to have been imposed wholly or
mainly for the purpose of enabling the party to evade the operation of
the Act’.
The said provision was criticized as being “highly subjective” (see paras
7.31 to 7.34 of the UK & Scottish Law Commission’s Report, 2004).    A
new  provision  is  formulated  now  by  the  UK  and  Scottish  Law
216

Commissions.   As regard sec 27(2)(a) of the UCTA, the Commissions
stated as follows:
“7.31 This  section  has  been  criticized  on  the  grounds  that  it
introduces a highly subjective element into the law.  We felt that it is
important  to  investigate  alternative  means  by  which  inappropriate
evasion  of  the  new  legislation  might  be  prevented.   Following  a
suggestion made by Dr. Simon Whittakar in his Report to DTI, we
looked at the possibility of introducing a provision along the lines of
Art 3(3) of the Rome Convention.  That Article provides that the
application  of  the  mandatory  rules  of  the  country  with  which  a
‘situation’ is wholly connected shall not be prejudiced by the parties’
different choice of law clause in the contract.
7.32 Although adding a welcome degree of objectivity, the approach
might allow businesses to evade the controls of the new legislations
in a wider range of circumstances than section 27(2)(a) would do.
Depending on the circumstances of the case, section 27(2)(a) could
potentially apply in any case  where the parties  adopt  a choice of
foreign law.  On the other hand, a provision modeled on Article 3(3)
would only prevent evasion in those cases where the contract, apart
from the choice of law, is wholly connected to the UK.
7.33 We  decided  that  the  possible  objection  did  not  offer  a
compelling reason for rejecting the proposed approach.  Given that
we  are  recommending  stricter  controls  over  contracts  with  small
businesses which will make it harder to evade the protective regime
217

by a choice of foreign law, we think that a small degree of relaxation
in the controls over contracts between larger businesses is acceptable.
This is particularly compelling where there is a foreign element to the
contract, as there must be for the contract to fall outside the terms of
the proposed anti-avoidance provision.  We found support for this
view in the fact that we are not aware of any authorities in which
section  27(2)(a)  has  played  a key  role  in  determining  the  party’s
contractual rights.   If the parties seeking to bring themselves within
UCTA  (1977)’s  protection  do  not  now  rely  upon  the  broader
provisions of section 27(2)(a), it should not matter if those provisions
are restricted.  Therefore, we recommend that the revised UCTA-type
regime which is instituted by the business contract clauses of the new
legislation  should  apply, notwithstanding  a choice  of foreign  law,
where the contract is otherwise wholly connected to the UK.
7.34 We  recommend  that  the  business  contract  part  of  the  new
legislation  should  apply,  notwithstanding  a  choice  of  foreign  law
where the contract is, in every other respect, wholly connected to the
U.K.”
Section 19(2) of the Draft Bill, 2004 prepared by the Commission on the
basis of this recommendation reads thus:        
“Section 19(2):  This Act has effect in relation to a business contract
despite a term of the contract which applies (or appears to apply) the
law of somewhere outside the United Kingdom if the contract is in
every respect wholly connected with the United Kingdom.”
218

We agree that this format is better than sec 27(2)(a) of the UCTA 1977 and
further, according to well settled principles  applicable to choice of law,
where a contract, otherwise governed by Indian law, contains absolutely no
foreign element, it should not be permissible for parties to agree that a
foreign law will be applicable to the substance of the contract.
On these lines, we propose sec 11 as follows:
“Choice of law clauses
11. Where  a  contract  contains  terms  applying  or  purporting  to
apply the law of a foreign country, despite he contract being in
every  respect  wholly  unconnected  with  the  foreign  country,
such terms shall be deemed to be substantively unfair.
Burden of Proof
We next come to the question of burden of proof in cases falling
under the head of substantive unfairness under clause (b) of sec 10 and sec
11.  This will be referred to in sec 14 of the proposed Bill.  
We have noted that under clause (b) of sec 9, if a contract or a term
excludes or restricts liability for breach of express or implied terms of a
contract without adequate justification therefore, the contract or term shall
be deemed to be substantially unfair.  Likewise, under sec 10, any exclusion
of the rights, duties or liabilities referred to in sec. 62 of the Sale of Goods
Act  shall  be  substantively  unfair  unless  there  is  adequate  justification
219

therefore.  In these two provisions, we have used the qualification that such
exclusion must be for adequate justification.
The purport of sec 14 as proposed will be to place the burden of proof
of adequate justification of such exclusions on the party who or which relies
on such exclusion.
It will be noted that under sec 11(5) and 24(4) of the (UK) UCTA,
1977 the burden of proving that a contract or term is fair or reasonable is on
the party claiming it to be reasonable.  There was no provision in the (UK)
regulation UTCCR, 1999.
The Law Commission of UK and Scotland in their Joint Report 2004
(see paras  3.124 to 3.130) recommended that “where an issue has been
raised whether a term is fair and reasonable, the burden will be on the
business, i.e. on the seller or supplier.
We, however, recommend such a special provision only for purposes
of clause (b) of sec 9 which deals with exclusion or restriction of liability
for express or implied term of a contract without adequate justification or
under sec 10 which deals with exclusion or restriction of the rights, duties or
liabilities referred to in sec 62 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 because of the
need for proof of adequate justification for such exclusion or restriction.
We, therefore, propose sec 14 in the following language:
Section 14: Burden of Proof
220

“If a contract or a term thereof excludes or restricts liability as stated
in  clause  (b)  of  sec  9  or  excludes  or  restricts  rights,  duties  and
liabilities referred to in sec. 62 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, as
stated in sec 10, it is for the person relying on such exclusion or
restriction, to prove that it is not without adequate justification.”
Section 15: Act to apply to executed contracts
Another  important  aspect  of  the  Bill  is  whether  the  unfairness
provisions,  both  procedural and  substantive, must apply not only at the
stage the implementation of the contract but also at any later stage when the
contract  is  either  partly  or  fully  executed.   The  benefit  of  relief  from
unfairness  must,  therefore,  extended  upto  the  execution  of  the  contract,
either in part or in full but this is naturally subject to a rider that the Court
“may” grant relief on the basis of sections 5, 6, 9 to 14 and for that purpose,
“it may consider whether and to what extent restitution is possible in
the facts and circumstances of the case and where such restitution is
not  possible either wholly or partly, whether any compensation is
payable.”
Such a provision applying the provisions of an unfair term of contract
law to executed contracts is available under sec 14 of the Contract Review
Act, 1980 of New South Wales (Australia).  However, we have put some
qualifications  which are not found in that  Act, which  are underlined  as
above.
221

Section 16: Court’s power to raise an issue of unfairness of a contract or
term thereof.
We have felt it necessary to confer power on the Court, i.e. civil
court, consumer fora and also the tribunal, to raise an issue of unfairness on
its own under sections 5, 9 to 12 even if none of the parties has raised it in
his or its pleadings.  There is such a provision recommended by the UK and
Scottish Law Commission and is contained in sec. 21 of the Draft Bill, 2004
prepared by them.
Section 17:  Reliefs to be granted by Court
As already stated in the definition of ‘Court’, Court means a Civil
Court of competent jurisdiction and includes the consumer fora under the
Consumer  Protection  Act,  1986  and  arbitration  tribunals  under  the
Arbitration of Conciliation Act, 1996.
“17(1) Without  prejudice  to  the  provisions  in  the  Indian
Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of
1963), Sale of Goods Act (3 of 1930) or to the provisions of any other
law  for  the  time  being  in  force,  where  the  Court  comes  to  the
conclusion having regard to sections 5, 6, 9 to 14 that a contract or a
term thereof is either procedurally or substantively unfair or both, the
Court may grant any one or more of the following reliefs:-
(a) refusing to enforce the contract or the term thereof;
222

(b) declaring the contract or the term is unenforceable or void;
(c) varying the terms of contract so as to remove the unfairness;
(d) refund of the consideration or price paid;
(e) compensation or damages; 
(f)  permanent injunction;
(g)  mandatory injunction; or
(h)  any  other  relief  which  the  interests  of  justice  require  as  a
consequence of the non-enforcement of the contract or  the term
thereof which is unfair
provided that where the contract or its term is procedurally unfair
as stated in section 5, the person who suffers the disadvantage
may,  at  his  option,  insist  that  the  contract  or  term  shall  be
performed, and that he shall be put in the position in which he
would have been if the conduct, manner or circumstances referred
to in that section did not permit the disadvantageous term to form
part of the contract.
(2)  For the purpose of granting the reliefs under subsection (1), the
Court may determine if any of the terms of the contract which are unfair
are severable and thereafter whether and to what extent and in what
manner, the remaining terms of the contract can be enforced or given
effect to.”
The Court under sec 17 can grant one or more of the reliefs on the
basis of the provisions (other than 3, 4, 7, 8) i.e. unfairness:
223

(a) refusing to enforce the contract or the term thereof;
(b) declaring the contract or the term void;
(c) varying  the  terms  of  the  contract  so  as  to  remove  the
unfairness;
(d) refund of the consideration or price paid;
(e) compensation or damages;
(f) permanent injunction;
(g) mandatory injunction; or
(h) any other relief which the interests of justice require.
As in sec 19 of the Contract Act, 1872, we have added a proviso in sec 17 as
follows:
“provided that where the contract or its term is procedurally unfair as
stated in section 5, the person who suffers the disadvantage may, in
his option, insist that the contract or term shall be performed, and that
he  shall  be put  in  the  position  in  which  would  have  been  if  the
conduct, manner or circumstances referred to in that section did not
permit the disadvantage term to form part of the contract.”
Sub section (2) of sec 17 deals with severability of terms.
“18. The provisions of this Act (other than sections 3, 4, 7 and 8) 
(1) shall  apply  to  all  contracts  entered  into  after  the
commencement of this Act; and
224

(2) shall not apply to
(a) contracts  and relations  between  employers  and workmen
under the labour laws in force;
(b) public  employment  under  the  Central  Government  or  a
State Government or their instrumentalities or under local
authorities;
(c) employment  under  public  sector  undertakings  of  the
Central Government or a State Government;
(d) employment under corporations or bodies established by or
under statutes made by Parliament or State Legislatures;
(e) contractual  terms  in  respect  of  which  measures  are
provided  in  international  treaties  or  agreements  with
foreign  countries  to  which  the  Central  Government  is  a
signatory.”
Section 18” applicability of the Act and exemptions:
In  as  much  as  we  have  introduced  new  concepts  of  unfairness,
procedural and substantive in sections 5, 6, 9 to 14 it is but necessary to say
that the proposed Act shall be prospective in operation in the sense that it
will apply only to contracts entered into after the commencement of this
Act.
In addition,  we  have  suggested  certain  exemptions  which,  in  our
view, are very much necessary.  They are:
225

(a) contracts and relations between employers and workmen under
the labour laws in force;
(b) public employment under the Central Government or a State
Government  or  their  instrumentalities  or  under  local
authorities;
(c) employment under public sector undertakings  of the Central
Government or a State Government;
(d) employment  under  corporations  or  bodies  established  by  or
under statutes made by Parliament or State Legislatures;
(e) contractual terms in respect of which measures are provided in
international treaties or agreements with foreign countries to
which the Central Government is a signatory.
We recommend accordingly.
Draft Bill is annexed herewith.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
Chairman
(R.L. Meena)
Vice-Chairman
(Dr. D.P. Sharma)
Member-Secretary
226

Dated: 31.8.2006
227

ANNEXURE
     Unfair (Procedural and Substantive) Terms in Contract Bill, 2006
A Bill to declare certain provisions of the laws relating to contracts
and specific performance, as procedural and substantive, to further define
unfairness in contracts, as procedural and substantive, to determine impact
of unfairness on contracts, to provide guidelines for such determination and
to enable Courts to grant certain reliefs to relieve parties from the effect of
unfairness in contracts.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty Seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:-
Chapter I
Preliminary
Short title, extent and commencement
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unfair (Procedural and Substantive)
Terms of Contracts Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
228

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may [by notification in the Official Gazette] appoint.
Definitions
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
(a) ‘contract’ means a contract as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of
the  Indian  Contract  Act,  1872  (9  of  1872)  and  includes  an
agreement as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of that Act.
(b) ‘Court’  means  a  Civil  Court  of  competent  jurisdiction  and
includes every Consumer Dispute Redressal Agency referred to in
section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) and
an Arbitral Tribunal referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 2 of the Arbitration and Conciliation  Act, 1996 (26 of
1996).
(c) words and expressions not defined in this Act and defined in the
Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872) shall have the meanings
assigned to them respectively in that Act.
Chapter II
Procedural Provisions and Procedural Unfairness
Procedural  provisions  of  the  Indian  Contract  Act,  1872  (9  of
1872)
229

3. The  following  provisions  of  the  Indian  Contract  Act,  1872  (9  of
1872) are procedural, namely:- 
(a) Section 15 which deals with coercion,
(b) Sections 16 and 19A which deal with undue influence,
(c) Section 17 which deals with fraud,
(d) Section 18 which deals with misrepresentation,
(e) Section 19 which deals with agreements without free consent.
Procedural provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963)
4. The  following  provisions  of the  Specific Relief  Act,  1963  (47  of
1963) are procedural, namely:-
(a) clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 20 in so far as it deals with
the conduct of the parties at the time of entering into the contract
or the other circumstances under which the contract was entered
into  are such  that the contract,  though  not  voidable, gives  the
plaintiff an unfair advantage over the defendant.
(b) clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 20 which deals with a
defendant  who  entered  into  the  contract  under  circumstances
which  though  not  rendering  the  contract  voidable,  makes  it
inequitable to enforce specific performance.
(c) clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 27 which deals with a
contract voidable or terminable by the plaintiff and where any
person interested in the contract sues to have it rescinded and such
rescission is adjudged.
230

General procedural unfairness 
5. Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 3 and 4, a contract or
a term thereof is procedurally unfair if it has resulted in an unjust advantage
or unjust disadvantage to one party on account of the conduct of the other
party or the manner in which or circumstances under which the contract has
been entered into or the term thereof has been arrived at by the parties.
Guidelines for purposes of determining general procedural
unfairness under section 5
6. For the purposes of section 5, the Court may take into account the
following circumstances, namely:-
(l) the knowledge and understanding of the promisee in relation to the
meaning of the terms thereof or their effect;
(m) the bargaining strength of the parties to the contract relative to
each other;
(n) reasonable  standards  of  fair  dealing  or  commonly  accepted
standards of dealing;
(o) whether, or not, prior to or at the time of entering into the contract,
the terms were subject to negotiation or were part of a standard
terms contract;
231

(p) whether or not it was reasonably practicable for the party seeking
relief  to  negotiate  for  the  alteration  of  the  contract  or  a  term
thereof or to reject the contract or a term thereof;
(q) whether expressions contained in the contract are in fine print or
are difficult to read or understand;
(r) whether or not, even if he or she had the competency to enter into
the contract based on his or her capacity and soundness of mind,
he or she 
(i) was not reasonably able to protect his or her own interests
or  of those  whom he or she  represented  at the  time the
contract was entered;
(ii) suffered serious disadvantages in relation to other parties
because he or she was unable to appreciate adequately the
contract or a term thereof or their implications by reason of
age,  sickness,  physical,  mental,  educational  or  linguistic
disability,  emotional  distress  or  ignorance  of  business
affairs.
(s) whether  or  not  independent  legal  or  other  expert  advice  was
obtained by the party seeking relief under this Act;
(t) the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract or a term
thereof or their legal or practical effect were accurately explained
by any person, to the party seeking relief under this Act;
(u) the conduct of the parties to the contract in relation to similar
contracts or courses of dealing to which any of them had been
party; or
232

(v) whether a party relied on the skill, care or advice of the other party
or a person connected with the other party in entering into the
contract.
Chapter III
Substantive provisions and substantive unfairness
Substantive  provisions  of the  Indian  Contract  Act, 1872  (9  of
1872)
7. The following provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of
1872) are substantive, namely:-
(a) Section 10 which deals with agreements which are contracts if made
by  free  consent  of  parties  competent  to  contract,  for  a  lawful
consideration  and  with  a  lawful  object,  not  otherwise  expressly
declared to be void,
(b) Section 20 which deals with both the parties to an agreement who are
under a mistake,
(c) Sections 23 and 24 which deal with consideration or objects of an
agreement which are not unlawful,
(d) Section 25 which deals with an agreement without consideration,
(e) Section 26 which deals with an agreement in restraint of marriage of
any person, other than a minor,
233

(f) Section 27 which deals with an agreement in restraint of trade,
(g) Section  28  which  deals  with  an  agreement  in  restraint  of  legal
proceedings,
(h) Section 29 which deals with an agreement which is uncertain,
(i) Section 30 which deals with an agreement by way of wager, and
(j) Section 56 which deals with an agreement to do an act impossible in
itself.
Substantive provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of
1963)
8. The  following  provisions  of the  Specific Relief  Act,  1963  (47  of
1963) are substantive, namely:-
(a) Clause (a) of section 18 where on account of fraud, mistake of fact or
misrepresentation,  the  written  contract  of  which  performance  is
sought, is in terms or effect different from what the parties agreed to,
or does not contain all the terms agreed to between the parties on the
basis of which the defendant entered into the contract, 
(b) Clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 20 in so far as it deals with the
terms of a contract which gives the plaintiff an unfair advantage over
the defendant,
(c) Clause  (b)  of  subsection  (2)  of  section  20  which  deals  with  the
performance of a contract which would involve some hardship on the
defendant  which  he  had  not  foreseen,  where  its  non-performance
would involve no such hardship on the plaintiff.
234

Exclusion or restriction of certain liabilities to be substantively
unfair
9. A contract  or a term thereof shall  be deemed to  be  substantively
unfair if it
(a) excludes or restricts liability for negligence;
(b) excludes  or  restricts  liability  for  breach  of  express  or
implied terms of a contract without adequate justification
therefor.
Exclusion or restriction of rights, duties or liabilities referred to in
section  62  of  the  Sale  of  Goods  Act,  1930  (3  of  1930)  to  be
substantively unfair unless there is adequate justification
10. In contracts to which this Act applies as stated in sub-section (1) of
section 18, any exclusion or restriction of the rights, duties or liabilities
referred to in section 62 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930) shall be
deemed  to  be  substantively  unfair  unless  there  is  adequate  justification
therefor.
Choice of law clauses
11. Where a contract contains terms applying or purporting to apply the
law of a foreign country despite the contract being in every respect wholly
unconnected with the foreign country, such terms shall be deemed to be
substantively unfair.
235

General substantive unfairness
12. Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 7 and 8, a contract or
a term thereof is substantively unfair if such contract or the term thereof is
in itself harsh, oppressive or unconscionable to one of the parties.
Guidelines  for  purposes  of  determining  general  substantive
unfairness under sections 9 to 12
13. For the purposes of sections 9 to 12, the court may take into account
the following circumstances, namely:-
(i) whether  or  not  the  contract  or  a  term  thereof  imposed
conditions which are,–
(i) unreasonably difficult to comply with, or 
(ii) are not reasonably necessary for the protection of the
legitimate interests of any party to the contract;
(j) whether the contract is oral or wholly or partly in writing; 
(k) whether the contract is in standard form;
(l) whether  the  contract  or  a  term  thereof  is  contrary  to
reasonable standards of fair dealing or commonly accepted
standards of dealing;
(m) whether  the  contract,  agreement  or  a  term  thereof  has
resulted in a substantially unequal exchange  of monetary
values or in a substantive imbalance between the parties;
236

(n) whether the benefits to be received by the disadvantaged
party are manifestly disproportionate or inappropriate to his
or her circumstances; 
(o) whether  the  disadvantaged  party  was  in  a  fiduciary
relationship with the other party; or
(p) whether the contract or a term thereof
(i) requires  manifestly  excessive  security  for  the
performance of contractual obligations; or
(ii) imposes penalties which are disproportionate to the
consequences of a breach of contract; or
(iii) denies or penalises the early repayment of debts; or
(iv) entitles a party to terminate the contract unilaterally
without good reason or without paying reasonable
compensation; or
(v) entitles a party to modify the terms of a contract
unilaterally.
Burden of proof
14. If a contract or a term thereof excludes or restricts liability as stated in
clause (b) of section 9 or excludes rights, duties and liabilities referred to in
section 62 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930) as stated in section
10, it is for the person relying on such exclusion or restriction to prove that
it is not without adequate justification.
237

           Provisions of the Act to apply for executed contracts
15.           The Court may grant relief on the basis of sections 5, 6, 9 to 14 of
this Act in relation to a contract notwithstanding that the contract has been
wholly or partly executed and for that purpose it may consider whether and
to what extent restitution is possible in the facts and circumstances of the
case and where such  restitution  is  not, either wholly or partly possible,
whether any compensation is payable.
Court’s power to raise an issue of unfairness of contract or a term
thereof
16. A Court may, in proceedings before it, raise an issue as to whether a
contract or its terms are unfair under sections 5, 9 to 12, even if none of the
parties has raised the issue in its pleadings.
      Relief that may be granted by Court
17(1) Without prejudice to the provisions in the Indian Contract Act,
1872 (9 of 1872), Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963), Sale of Goods Act
(3 of 1930) or to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force,
where the Court comes to the conclusion having regard to sections 5, 6, 9 to
14 that a contract or a term thereof is either procedurally or substantively
unfair  or both,  the  Court  may grant  any one  or  more of  the  following
reliefs:-
(b) refusing to enforce the contract or the term thereof;
238

(b) declaring the contract or the term is unenforceable or void;
(c) varying the terms of contract so as to remove the unfairness;
(d) refund of the consideration or price paid;
(e) compensation or damages; 
(f)  permanent injunction;
(g)  mandatory injunction; or
(h)  any  other  relief  which  the  interests  of  justice  require  as  a
consequence of the non-enforcement of the contract or  the term
thereof which is unfair
provided that where the contract or its term is procedurally unfair
as stated in section 5, the person who suffers the disadvantage
may,  at  his  option,  insist  that  the  contract  or  term  shall  be
performed, and that he shall be put in the position in which he
would have been if the conduct, manner or circumstances referred
to in that section did not permit the disadvantageous term to form
part of the contract.
(2)  For the purpose of granting the reliefs under subsection (1), the
Court may determine if any of the terms of the contract which are unfair
are severable and thereafter whether and to what extent and in what
manner, the remaining terms of the contract can be enforced or given
effect to.
Applicability of the Act and exemptions
18. The provisions of this Act (other than sections 3, 4, 7 and 8) 
239

(1) shall  apply  to  all  contracts  entered  into  after  the
commencement of this Act; and
(2) shall not apply to
(f) contracts  and relations  between  employers  and workmen
under the labour laws in force;
(g) public  employment  under  the  Central  Government  or  a
State Government or their instrumentalities or under local
authorities;
(h) employment  under  public  sector  undertakings  of  the
Central Government or a State Government;
(i) employment under corporations or bodies established by or
under statutes made by Parliament or State Legislatures;
(j) contractual  terms  in  respect  of  which  measures  are
provided  in  international  treaties  or  agreements  with
foreign  countries  to  which  the  Central  Government  is  a
signatory.
240