and abr nof rk

“CONFIDENTIAL—Not for Publication,”

Baha जयते

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

SECOND REPORT
(PARLIAMENTARY LEGISLATION RELATING TO SALES TAX)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW.


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION.

New छापा;
July 2, 1956.

Shri C. 0. Biswas,
Minister of Law &
Minority Affairs,

p NEW DELHI.

i Dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Second Re-
port of the Law Commission dealing with the principles to be
“embodied in Parlizmentary legislation relating to Sales-tax

.2- On the 23rd March 1956 the Ministry of Law referred to the
‘ommission the question of the principles that should be formu-
ed by Parliamentary legislation for determining when a sale of
takes place (a) outside a particuler State, (b) in the course
import or export, or (c) in the course of inter-State trade or

“8. The reference was considered at a meeting of the Statute
evision Section of the Commission held on the 14th April 1956
d a Committee consisting of Sri G.S. Pathak and Sri G.N. Joshi
appointed to make a preliminary study of the question. The
bject was again discussed at the next mecting of the Section
| on the 11th May 1956. Thereafter a note prepared by the
ittee was circulated to all Members of the Commission and
views invited thereon. The views solicited and the note pre-
ed. by the Committee were fully and finally discussed at a
ting of the Statute Revision Section held on the 9th and 10th
1956. Certain conclusions were reached at that meeting and
left to the Chairman to prepare the Report in the light of

‘legislation might be expedited, the Report is being sub-

gh it has not yet been formally signed by the Mem-
Report has, however, been circulated to all the Members
concurrence of all the Members excepting that of


ii

Sri S. M. Sikri who is out of the country has been oblained. The
Report will be signed by the Members at the ensuing meeting of
the Commission to be held on the 21st July 1956. Dr. N. C. Sen
Gupta will sign the Report subject to

a seperate note a copy of *
which has been annexed to the Report.

5. The Commision wishes to acknowledge the services render-
ed by its Joint Secretaries Sri K. Srinivasan and Sri D. Basu in
connection with the preparation of the Report.

Yours sincerely,

(Sd.) M. C. Setalvad.


REPORT
I, PRELIMINARY

1. The Law Commission was invited to offer its suggestions for
formulating principles for determining when a sale of goods takes

place—
7 (i) outside a State;

5 (i) in the course of the import of the goods into, or export
of the goods out of, the territory of India;

(iii) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

, 2 At the date of the reference to the Commission the Consti-
tution (Tenth Amendment) Bill had been introduced in Parlia-

६ and under it Parliament was to be empowered to formulate
on Jaw principles for determining when a sale or purchase of
SGdods takes place in any of the ways mentioned above. The Bill
since been passed by both Houses of Parliament.

ie: Broadly speaking, the proposed Constitutional Amendment
ks to curtail the power of States to levy taxes on the sale or
hase of goods other than newspapers by providing that that
er is to be subject to the power of the Union to levy taxes on the
or purchase of goods other than newspapers where such sale
urchase taxes place in the course of inter-State trade or com-
ree. The taxes levied by the Union in exercise of this added
er are to be assigned to the States. The Amendment secks to
wer Parliament by law to formulate principles not only for
termining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the

e of inter-State trade or commerce but also for determining
en a sale or purchase takes place in the course of import into,
export out of the territory of India or outside a particular

. The proposed Constitutional Amendment closely follows

recommendations of the Taxation Enquiry Commission in
s respect. Their main purpose jn recommending that Parliament
id: have power to tax inter-State transactions and that it be
powered by Jaw to determine the principles ebove mentioned

to ensure that the tax, if any, on these transactions should
५ exceed limits which Parliament in the interest of the country

whole considers reasgnable and that the principles laid down


2

not having the rigidity of Constitutional provisions may be varied
in accordance with the economic needs of the country from time
to time. (Report of the Taxation Enquiry Commission, Vol. II,
pp. 48-60, paras. 7-22).

II. Sates on Purciiases iv THE Course or Import or Export.

5. It is convenient to take first the question of the appropriate
principles to determine when a sale or purchase takes place in the
course of import or export. The formulation of these principles
presents the least difficulty.

6. In the Tranvancore-Cochin Cases |(1952) S.C.R. 1112 and
(1954) S.C.R. 53] the Supreme Court considered Article 286 (1) (b)
and held that the clause covered two classes of cases: (i) sales and
purchases which themselves occasioned the import or export, (ii)
sales or purchases effected by a transfer of shipping documents
when the goods are beyond the customs frontiers of India.

7. The interpretation put by the Supreme Court on the clause
was considered by the Taxation Enquiry Commission who stated
that the position arising from the interpretotion put by the Sup-
reme Court was “prefectly satisfactory so far as forcign trade is
concerned”. (T.E.C. Report, p. 48, para 7). The Law Commission had
also before it the views of the Ministry of Finance on this ques-
tion. The Ministry was of the view that the decision given by the
Supreme. Court had been accepted by almost all the States and
no difficulties were reported to have ariscn as a result of the Sup-
reme Court judgment.

8. Reference may here be made to the view expressed by DAS
J. in his dissenting judgment in the second Travancore-Cochin
Case (1954 S.C.R. 53) that a sale or purchese in the course of im-
port or export includes the first sale after import except by a re-
tailer and the last purchase preceding the export. This view was
based partly on an interpretation which laid stress on the word
“course” in the expression “in the course of import or export” used
in the Constitution. It also arose from a desire not to impede the
import or export trade of the country by subjecting sales or pur-
chases linked with the importing sale or exporting purchase to
the burden of the sales-tax. In so far as the letter consideration
is concerned the views of the Taxation Enquiry Commission and
the Finance Ministry would seem to show that the apprehension
that the import or export trade of the country would be impeded
if the majority interpretation of the clause were accepted is not
welfounded. In so far as the view is based on the interpretation
of the word “course”, in our opinion that approach, if logically


ursued, will not stop with the sale following the import or the
preceding the export. The stream of export may legiti-
ly be said to commence even at the stage of the production of

In this connection the following observations of
in’ Heisler v. Thomas Collery Co. made in
dealing with the question of inter-State commerce are pertinent:
‘[(1922) 260 U.S. 245) —

“If the possibility or, indeed certainty, of exportation of a
product er article from a State, determines it to be in
inter-State commerce before the commencement of
its movement from the State, it would seem to follow
that it is in such commerce from the instant of its
growth or production; an in the case of coals, as
they lie on the ground”.

पे “do not, therefore, sec any justification for recommending the
‘Adoption of this view.

9, The Ministry of Commerce and Industry has mentioned the
sirability of including the last purchase preceding the export as
transaction in the course of export on the ground that the ex-
m of such transactions from tax will stimulate exports. It
ot, however, suggested that a similar exemption should be
ited to the first sale following the import. It appears to us
somewhat illogical that the last purchase preceding the
port should be exempt whereas the first sale following the import

d not be exempted. We are, therefore, unable to accept this
gestion.

10. Under this head, we, therefore, recommend the acceptance
ythe principles laid down by the Supreme Court. We would ex-
ess them in the following manner: —

A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place
: in che cgurse of export of the gopds out of the terri-
tory of India, only if the sale or purchase either occa-
sions such export or is effected by a transfer of docu-
ments of title to the goods after the goods have cross-
ed the customs frontiers of India.

sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place
in the course of import of the goods into the territory
of India, only if the sale or purchase either occasions
such import or is effected by 2 transfer of documents
of title to the goods before the goods have crossed
the customs frontiers of India.


4

Til. InTER-STATE SALES OR PURCHASES.

11, In considering the principles for determining when a sale
or purchase takes place in the course of inter-Stale trade or com-
merce, two important aspects have to be borne in mind. First,
such a sale or purchase is not to be exempt from tax as in the case
of a sale or purchase in the course of import or export. It is to be
taxed by the Union. Secondly, the proceeds of such a tax are un-
der the amended article 269 to be assigned to the States. These
sales have to bear the burden of the sales-tax but the burden is-to
be strictly limited by the Union in the interest of trade and com-
merce throughout the territory of India which has, according to
the policy underlying the Constitution, to be free and unrestricted.

12, No doubt the expression “in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce” has a very wide connotation. In India we are, how-
ever, not concerned with the regulation of commerce generally
among several States as under the commerce clause in the Ameri-
can Constitution. What we have to determine is what is a sale
or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. The
problem, therefore, is to ascertain what transactions of sale or
purchase can fairly be said to erise in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce. For this purpose we have to fix upon some
characteristics of these transactions which can well be said to stamp
them with an inter-State character. In the large mass of American
decisions under the commerce clause the one element which is stated
to be an indispensable incident of commerce between the States is
the movement of the goods which are the subject-matter of the
sale or purchase from one State into another. We may refer in
this connection to the definition of “inter-State commerce” given
by Rottschafer in his “Constitutional Law” (1939 Ed. p. 299):—

“The activities of buying and selling constitute inter-State
commerce if the contracts therefor ccntemplate the
movement of goods in inter-State commerce”.

Later he adds (p. 235):

“The decisive factor that renders making a contract an act
of inter-State commerce’ is that it contemplates or
necessarily involves the movement of goods in inter-
State commerce, and this test applies whether it be a
contract to buy or one to sell”.


19, It will be noticed that in the American view even a contem-
80 movement of goods which in fect may not have taken place
invest the transaction of sale or purchase with an inter-
aracter. Such a wide view based on the intention of the
[6४ to the contract may, we think, well lead to uncertainty
i Fqifficulties in administration and conflicting legal views. We
ould, therefore. recommend a simpler and a more certain test to
fermine whether a transaction of sale or purchase is an inter-
te transaction, Only a transaction which hes in fact occasioned
movement of goods from one State into another should be re-
led as an inter-State transaction. Such a test would be easy
i -epply by the authorities administering the law as what will
five to be ascertained will be the physical movement of the goods
m one State into another in consequence of the transaction.
a test has the added advantage of being similar to and paral-
‘with the test which we have proposed for determining when
sactions take place in the course of import into or export out
the territory of India. As a sale or purchese which has occasion-
import or export is one in the course of import or export so is
ale which has occasioned movement of the goods from one State
another a sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

B14, Such a test will avoid the necessity of entering into the diffi
question as to when inter-State trade or commerce begins and
en it ends, a subject on which there is a mass of decisions of
‘American courts.

के [5, A sale or purchase should itself have occasioned the move-
int of the goods from one State into another in order that it may
ve an inter-State character. If a purchaser in State A completes

purchase of sending the goods to State B and does in fact do so.
sale made to him or the purchase made by him has not occa-
ed the movement of the goods from one State into another.
nilarly if a purchaser from State A goes to State B and pur-
Shases goods in State B the transaction again will be of an intra-
State character though the purchaser may have purchased the
Is with a view to send them to State A and does in fact do so.
@ sale to him or purchase by him has again not occasioned the
Syement of the goods from State B into State A. When, however,
sequence of a sale or purchase goods are delivered to a car-
far or other bailee for transmission to another State the transac-
would clearly be of an inter-State nature.

16. The question whether on the analogy of the principles
91९60 in connection with sales or purchases in the course of


8

import or export a sale effected by the transfer of documents dur-
ing the movement of goods from one State to another should be
regarded as an inter-State sale or purchase has received our care-
ful consideration. We are of the view that such sales or purchases
should be regarded as inter-State transactions. It was suggested
that if the rate of inter-State tax happened to be lower than the
soi te of the tax levied by the State on intra-State transactions the

ption of this principle might lead to attempts by dealers to
evade the higher tax of the State by giving intra-State transactions
the appearance of inter-State transactions by the creation of fictitious
records showing the movement of the goods from one State into
another. We are not inclined to attach much importance to this
suggestion as in any case the sale or purchase will not escape taxa-
tion altogether and it is unlikely that dealers would resort to such
attempts in order to save the difference between the inter-State and
the intra-State tax. Moreover, if this principle is not applied consi-
derable administrative and other difficulties will arise. We are,
therefore, of the view that sales and purchases effected by a transfer
of documents during the movement of goods from one State to
another should be regarded as inter-State transactions.

17. For the limited purpose of the principle mentioned in the
preceding paragraph it will become necessary to provide when
the movement of the goods is to be regarded as having commenced
and terminated in cases where goods are delivered to a carrier or
other bailee for transmission to another State. For this purpose
‘we propose to frame.a principle based on the provisions of section
51 of the Sale of Goods Act.

18, The principles for determining when a sale or purchase takes
place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce may be framed
in the following manner:—

“A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place in
the course of inter-State trade or commerce, only if the
_ sale or purchase—

{a) occasions the movement of the goods from one State
to another, or

(b) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the
goods during their movement from one State to another.

Explanation —Where goods are delivered to a carrier or other
bailee for transmission, the movement of the goods shall,
for the purposes of sub-clause (b), be deemed to com-
mence at the time of such delivery and terminate at the
time when delivery is taken from such carrier or bailee.”


a

IV. Sates or Purcwases Outsie A State.

E- The laying down of principles for determining when a sale
urchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or com-
does not relieve us of the necessity of laying down principles
for determining when a sale or purchase takes place outside a State.
Sethe Taxation Enquiry Commission has pointed out that all trans.
s'actions of sale or purchase not made in the course of import into
mor export out of the territory of India should suffer sales-tax which
4g increasingly becoming one of the main sources of the revenues
‘of States. At the same time provisions have to be framed to prevent
the same transaction of sale or purchase being taxed by more than
ne State. The main purpose of Article 286(1) (a) is to prevent the
= taxation of a single transaction. A test which can be
“applied with little difficulty in order to determine whether a trans-
"action of sale or purchase is without or within a State can alone
Sprevent such overlapping taxation.

ee
#20, As stated by the Supreme Court, the general law of. the sale
Sot goods while it lays down when a sale takes place nowhere
Ep rovides were a sale is deemed to take place. The problem of
E fate hs a situs to a sale is not free from difficulty. A transaction of
sale has several ingredients. The essential ingredients are:

(a) the conclusion of the contract of sale,

(b) the appropriation of the goods to the contract,

(c) the passing of the property in the goods,

(d) the payment of the price, and

(e) the delivery of the goods.

SOne or more of these ingredients have been used in the ‘legislation
Penacted by the States for fixing the situs of a sale within a parti-
cular State. The question for consideration is which out of these
redients affords a certain and easily workable basis for fixing the
itus of a sale.

21, The Explanation to Article 286(1) (a) which is now proposed
be omitted attempted to fix as the situs of a sale the State in
goods were actually delivered for consumption. That attempt
d to numerous difficulties. Controversies arose as to what consti-
actual delivery and consumption. In effect that provision

down that the tax should go with consumption and that the
orting State should not be entitled to levy any part of it. As


8

pointed out by the Taxation Enquiry Commission the Constitutional
‘Provision as interpreted placed the exporting States and States with
a backward economy in a disadvantageous position. (TE.C. Report,
p. 48, para. 8). In selecting the appropriate ingredient with
reference to which the situs of a sale may be dctermined these
considerations will have to be borne in mind.

22. We are of the view that the location of the goods will be a
very suitable test to apply in determining the situs of a sale. The
physical existence of the goods at a place at a particular time is
easily capable of ascertainment and such a test will avoid legal
controversies. The difficulty, however, is in fixing the point of time
at which the location of the goods should be taken as determining
the situs of the sale. Is it to be the time of the making of the con-
tract or the appropriation of the goods to the contract or the passing
of the property in the goods or the delivery of the goods? We have
given very careful consideration to the various questions which
would arise in the event of one or the other of these points of time
being taken with reference to the location of the goods as indicative
of the situs of a sale. We have come 10 the conclusion that in the
case of all sales of specific or ascertained goods their location at the
time of the making of the contract of sale should determine their
situs for the purpose of article 286(1) (a). In regard to unascertained
or future goods two views were considered by us. It was suggested
that in regard to such sales the location of the goods at the time
when the goods first became ascertained should be taken as the
situs of the sale. The other suggestion was that the location of the
goods at the time of their appropriation to the contract of sale
should be regarded as the situs of the sale. We rejected the former
view as the ascertainment of goods with reference to contracts for
the sale of unascertained or future goods is not a distinct legal con-
cept. Ascertainment is but a part of the process of appropriation
which is a well-accepted legal concept and which results, generally
speaking, in the passing of property in the goods. We are, there-
fore, of the view that in the case of sales of unascertained or future
goods their location at the time of their appropriation to the con-
tract of sale should be the test for determining the situs of the sale.

23. In some cases of the sale of unascertained or future goods it
may happen that the seller or the buyer may make an appropriation
of the goods without the assent of the other party and put them into
the course of transit. It may in such cases happen that the location
of the goods when the assent of the buyer or seller is given to the
appropriation may be different from their location at the time when
the seller or the buyer made the appropriation. We do not know

» whether such cases would arise frequently in practice. But in order


9

rovide for them we have in framing the principle used language
ich makes it clear that the location of the goods at the time of
Zz by the seller or the buyer irrespective of their
tion at the time when the assent of the other party is given to
appropriation should be the decisive factor in determining the
tus of the sale.

24, We have thought it necessary also to provide for cases where
Ya single contract of sale comprises goods located in different States.
In order to obviate difficulties in determining the situs of the sale
Eby reference to the location of the goods in such cases we have
‘suggested that such contracts of sale or purchase should be regarded
separate contracts in respect of the goods situated at different

places.
4

= 95. Article 286(1) (a) of the Constitution prohibits a State from
* taxing a sale outside the State. The principles we have suggested
will indicate the State within which the sale has taken place. It
will, therefore, have further to be provided that as soon as a sale is
= deemed to have taken place within a State it shall be deemed to
ehave taken place outside all other States. It will be recalled that
= absence of such a provision in Article 286(1) (a) read with the
“Explanation proposed to be deleted caused a great deal of con-
‘troversy and resulted in varying interpretations being put on that
ge Atticle read with the Explanation.

26. The principles we enunciate under this head are as follows:—

“1, A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place
where the goods are—

(a) in the case of specific or ascertained goods, at the time
the contract of sale is made; and

(b) in the case of unascertained or future goods, at the
time of their appropriation to the contract of sale, by
the seller or by the buyer whether the assent of the
other party is prior or subsequent to such appropriation.

Explanation—Where there is a single contract of sale or
purchase of goods situated at more places than one, the
above provision shall apply as if there were separate
contracts in respect of the goods at each of such places.

2, When a sale or purchase of goods is determined in accord-
ance with sub-clause (1) to be within a State, such sale
or purchase shall be deemed to have taken place outside
all other States,”


10
V. ConcLusion

27, We may. point out that we have not before us the draft of the
proposed Parliamentary legislation and the principles indicated by
us in the foregoing paragraphs do not purport to be draft of the
sections of the proposed Bill.

M..C. SETALVAD
(Chairman),

M. 0. CHAGLA,

. N. WANCHOO,

. N. DAS,

SATYANARAYANA RAO,

C. SEN GUPTA,

V. हू. T. CHARI,

D. NARSA RAJU,

G.

G.

ZyOR

. 8. PATHAK,
. N. JOSHI.
(Members).

K, SRINIVASAN,
DURGA DAS BASU,

Joint Secretaries.

Bompay;
The 2ist July, 1956.

*Dr. Sen Gupta has signed the report, subject to the note
led below. i


SEPARATE NOTE ON INTER-STATE SALES TAX

regret that I have to differ from some of the conclusions of the
ajority of my colleagues. I wish to make it clear also that I do
t concur in all their arguments for the other conclusions from
hich I do not disagree.

“The laws regarding sales “in the course of import or export” and

the course of Inter-State trade” have been sufficiently com-
dicated by the four decisions of the Supreme Court where judg-
ments proceed to discuss a multitude of matters. What is wanted
iow is a simpler and more clear-cut definition of the principles for
deciding the matter. In considering the principles we should not
‘be too much influenced by the fear that some transactions may
escape taxation, if a particular view is taken, That may or may

t be,—though I should add that so far as export and import are
Sconcerned, there are very good reasons for thinking that there would
no case of escaping taxation altogether. Export and import are
-most cases subject to another tax, the customs duty; and if by
ance the goods exported or imported happen to escape the imposi-
n of sales tax, that would not mean that the goods will necessarily
“free of tax altogether. I am mentioning this as the majority
port refers to this apprehension in the course of its reasons,

The Chief consideration in laying down the principles of taxation
ought to be the interest of the trade and the consumers generally.
EEvery taxation of goods adds to the burden that the consumer has
to bear. With the rising prices and the many factors contributing
Rto inflation, it would be far from wrong to desire that the burden
pShould not be unnecessarily increased and that the trader should
not be required to submit, not only to the payment of tax but also
the harassment inevitable in connection with the assessment of the
tax, more than is necessary.

.A further and no less important aspect of the question is the
aring of the States’ powers of taxation on the larger pclicy
garding foreign trade. Foreign trade is regulated by the Union,
ith reference to the current needs of the country as a whole, in
rt by manipulating the customs duties. There are occasions, due,
instance, to the overstocking of a particular commodity in India,
to the need for earning foreign exchange, when export of a
modity should be promoted by removing or reducing export

il


12

duties and conversely, import of commodities in short supply may
have to be promoted by manipulating import duties. The powers of
States to tax sales for such commodities by a too narrow limitation
of sales in the course of “export or import” may casily hamper the
freedom of the Union to influence prices by necessary manipulation
of tariffs and may enable the States to frustrate the Union's policy.
The power of States which they still retain after the Constitutional
amendment to tax intra-State sales should not be so extended over
commodities of foreign trade as to narrow the power of the Union
to regulate prices for export and import from time to time as may
happen when States are enabled to frustrate or nullify any act of
the Union in the wider interests of the country, e.g. for reducing
prices, by regulations for internal taxation on sales of the commo-
dities which may wholly out-balance the effect of tariff changes on
prices.

What is wanted is a simpler and more perfectly intelligible set
of rules which will have regard to the interests not only of the
finances of the State but also in a much larger measure to the
interests of the trade ang the consumers and the interest of the
Union in respect of foreign trade. This will have to be specifically
considered at the time of legislating under the new powers given 1o
the Parliament by the Constitution, But we should bear in mind
these principles in laying down the general principles also,

In the light of these remarks I should have the report modified
in the following respects:

1. With regard to the sale in the course of export or import, the
decision of the Travancore-Cochin case is purported to be followed
with a rider which, in my opinion, makes the rule largely infructuous
to prevent State taxation of sales in the course of export or import.
I fully endorse the opinion of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry
that the last purchase preceding the export should also be considered
to be a sale or purchase in the course of export or import. which,
incidentally appears to have been the view put forward by the
Attorney General in the first Trevancore-Cochin case. His argu-
ment is thus summarised in the judgment of the Chief Justice in
ALR, 1952 8. ९. at 9. 367:

“In addition to the sales and purchases of the kind described
above, the exemption covers the last purchase by the
exporter and the first sale by the importer, if any, 50
directly and proximately connected with the export sale
or import purchase as to form part of the same trans-
action. This view was sponsored by the Attorney-
General.”


13

This interpretation accords more with the commonsense view
expression “in the course of export or import”,

Prhe words “in the course of” must be given a proper meaning and
d extend to transactions intimately connected with the export
mport. There will be very few cases indeed in which a sale is
le by a person who has the goods in stock and forthwith books
Rfefor export when alone the sale may be said to have ‘occasioned’
“export or import in terms of the opinion of the majority. In
of the commercial transactions a contract with a foreign agency
export or import of goods is made and on the strength of that,
exporter purchases goods from others and sells or the importer
tracts to sell. Among other parties, the Government of India,

e time ago used to export large quantities of jute goods and it
still exporting other commodities without ever having a stock.
en there is an agreement with a foreign State like the U.S.A.

places the orders with the Jute Mills and they deliver the
ds at the Ship’s side and look to the Government of India for
yyment and it does not “oceasion” the export, but it is the purchase
Bimmediately prior to the export which is made by the Government,

majority report objects that if this is exempted, it will be
gical not to exclude the whole stream of transactions preceding
sexport and an American judgment is cited in support. But in
lating, the legislature is not bound to be logical. It can put
. n limited construction upon the words used and it is no criticism
Reva legislation that if logical, it ought to extend to other items.
een a consideration of grounds of policy and other matters, the
Bpplication is limited to less than what might be logically deduced,
ere will be no harm done. In my opinion, the same principle
¢ to apply to the first sale after import, if, as a matter of fact,
‘sale was made in pursuance to a contract prior to importation.
ms to me, therefore, that the draft in paragraph 10 of the
on of a sale or purchase in the course of export and import
० narrow. If this definition is given, there will be very few
actions in which the State imposition of sales tax would be

- With regard to sales in the course of Inter-State trade or
erce, the meaning of the words, “In the course of Inter-State
or commerce” appear to me to be unduly restricted. Un-
tedly if a sale is effected, which directly occasions the move-
of goods or is effected by a transfer of documents of title
the movement from one State to another, it would be a sale
ter-State trade. This definition, however, again makes the
“Gn the course of” practically infructuous. No attempt should

Argentina for the export of that quantity, the Government comes 4


14:

be made to limit “the course” of trade to the only two possible
alternatives, There are other ways in which a sale may be effected
Inter-State. For instancg, a trader in Assam sends jute or tea to a
warehouse in Calcutta in expectation of prospective Sale. There-
after the seller enters into a transaction of sale of the goods in
Assam .when, the goods are located in the Calcutta warchouse and
gives a firm delivery order to the purchaser and the purchaser takes
delivery from the warehouse in Calcutta. In this case it is un-
doubtedly a case of Inter-State sale between Bengal and Assam,
but it would not come under either of the clauses (a) and (b), as
drafted, because the movement has not been occasioned by the
sale but has preceded it and the transfer of documents has not
taken place during the movement of one Stale from another but
after it. The definition proposed would thus be, in my opinion,
too narrow. I would prefer an interpretation as in the passages
quoted from Rottschafer in paragraph 12—with the proviso that
the movement of goods should have taken place in pursuance to the
contract. That would leave it to the court, with reference to the
facts of a particular case to determine whether the sale contem-
plated and in fact was followed by the movement of goods from one
State to another.

Ill. With regard to the question of the situs of sale also I find it
difficult to agree fully in the conclusion that a sale should be deemed
to take place where the goods are at the time the contract of sale
is made or in the case of unascertained goods when the goods are
appropriated to the contract. There will be difficulty in applying
this test in some cases, for instance in the case where goods have
been shipped by boat from a station in Assam to Calcutta to be
warehoused there and a sale is effected before the boat arrives in
Calcutta. In such a case it would be difficult to locate the place
where the goods are at the date of the contract, assuming it to be
specified goods. The difficulty is intensified by the fact that the
boat which carries the jute passes through a foreign territory, that
is, Pakistan and it may well be that at the date of the contract, the
goods are in Pekistan, I think a simpler definition would be to say
that a sale takes place outside a State when either the contract for
sale or the delivery of the goods takes place outside the State. That
would be a simple and easy test to apply, and it would violate no
principle whatsoever, now that Article 286(2) is out of the way. I
therefore sign the report,—subject to these comments,

(Sd.) N. 0. Sen Gupta.