LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

TWENTIETH REPORT
{REPORT ON THE LAW. OF HIRE-PURCHASE)

MAY, x961

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA: MINISTRY OF LAW

253 M. of L.—1


No. F.1(2)/59-L.C. Pt. YE.

CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION.
New Delhi—3,
June 790, 10961.
Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Dethi.

My DEAR MINISTER, हि
I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Twentieth
Report of the Law Commission on the law of Hire-purchase.

2. The Law Commission had recommended in its Eighth
Report (Report on the Sale of Goods Act) that there should be a
separate enactment regulating hire-purchase transactions. Agree-
ably to this recommendation, I took up the subject, and had a
draft Report prepared. That was considered by the Commission
‘at.its meeting held on the 5th and 6th February, 1960, and revised
in the light of the decisions taken. The revised draft was circulated
for opinion to the State Governments, High Courts, Bar Associa-'
tions, Chambers of Commerce and other bodies and persons
interested in the subject. After the receipt of their-comments, the,
Commission decided to hear oral representations. On the 14th and
15th October, 1960, three witnesses were examined, and a further
opportunity was given to the public to make representations, oral
or written. In response to this, further written comments were
received, but no witnesses appeared before us. The draft Report
was finally considered by the Commission at its meeting held on -
the 6th and 7th January, 1961, and revised and finalised in the
light of the written representations and oral evidence given before.
us. The Report has been drawn up in accordance with the decisions
‘taken at the meeting.

3. The Commission desires to express its appreciation of the
services rendered by Shri D. Basu, Joint Secretary, and by
‘Shri P. M. Bakshi, Deputy Draftsman, in the preparation of the
Bill and the Notes.

Yours sincerely,
व. L, VENKATARAMA AIYAR.


REPORT ON HIRE-PURCHASE

CONTENTS
PARAGRAPHS PAGE
1. Need for Jegislation—recommendation in the Eighth
Report . . - पु . . + : पु I
2. Legislation in England पु + . . न पु ११
3. Legislation in other countries. . . . . 2
4. Scope of the English Acts . . . . . . 2
5. Sales on credit woo. . . . . 3
6. Maximum limit for application of the Act 5
7 Assignment by hiter . E
8 to 11. Insolvency of hirer. . . . . . 7
12. Condition of title 9
13. Sections of the English Act . . eo. ‘ 16
14. Minor changes . . . . . . . . 16
Is. _ Appendices पु ees . . Ly 16
APPENDICES -
Appendix I (showing the proposals in the form of a draft Bil) . 17
(Detailed index has been given at the beginning of the Appendix)
Appendix II (Notes on clauses). : . . . . 33

Appendix III (List of witnesses examined by the Commission) 50
Appendix TV (Recommendations in respect of other Acts) . st


REPORT ON THE LAW OF HIRE-PURCHASE

1, The Law Commission has, in its Report on the regen — for
Sale of Goods Act, observed as follows: — हे legislation
“There is no provision in the Act regulating a Eighih ee
transaction of hire-purchase, which is also a port,
method of selling goods, It is a transaction of hire
at the inception with an option to purchase.

“In the English Sale of Goods Act of 1893,
there was no provision for such a transaction.
Hence provision was made by a separate Act,
namely, the Hire-Purchase Act of 1938 (1 and 2
Geo. 6, ९. 53), with 3 view to affording protection
to the buyer of the goods on hire-purchase, or on
similar terms, against certain abuses which had
become apparent in the practice of hire-purchase
trading. The Act has been supplemented by the
Hire-Purchase Act, 1954 (2 and 3 Eliz. 2, ¢. 51).

“In our opinion, it ig desirable that a separate
Act on the lines of the English Hire-Purchase Acts
and other similar laws should be enacted in India
to regulate hire-p: urthage transactions. The Com-
mission will ‘@ Hs recommendations in this
connection in 8 separate report.”.

This Report has been prepared in accordance with
‘the above suggestion.

2, The hire-purchase agreement represents a fairly res,
modern phase in the development of commerce. In in
England when the Sale of Gaods Act, 1893, was enacted,
it had not aequited sper importance ‘as to call for
special कण hoe though it was fairly well-known in
‘the world of Husigess. “ But’ subsequent thereto, as a .
result, it is stated,-of large-scale production of | goods
and competition 1221 manufacturers to find a
market or them, there Had’ an enormous expan-
sion of business on the hase system, and at-

-tendant thereon, there d certain evils, which
are brought out in gre: ail in the हरे eens in

Parliament relatiag to the enactment of the
Purchase Act, 1988 (2 and:2 Geo. 6, c. 53) known as
Miss Wilicinson’s Act. eee med Birer who wanted , to
minate the agreement lo so on payment
of a minimum amdunt, whiéh in many canes was penal
and exorbitant. The hite-pirchase agreements con-
ferred on the owrer power to seize*the goods, when
-default occurred ini ed india pa of any instalment, and
this power was often exe istd, even after substantial
payments had been made by the hirer, with the result
‘that the latter forfeited all Payments made and lost

~ABighth Report, page 4, pas iz. Report, page 4, para. 12. ह


Legislation .
in other
countries.

1 goope of the
English Acts.

pas

the goods as well. It also appeared that not seldom per-
sons entered into successive hire-purchase agreements
with reference to different goods and the later agree-
ments provided that for the amounts न कप there-
under, the goods covered by the earlier agreements
were also liable, and, as a result of this linking up,
those goods were also seized when there was any de-
fault in payment of any of the instalments due under
the other agreements, even though all the hire payable
in respect of those goods had been paid. Miss Wilkin-
son’s Act was enacted with a view to removing those
and other defects. The provisions of this Act were
supplemented by the Hire-Purchase Act, 1954 (2 and 3
Elia. 2, ९. 51). पु

3. In Australia, every State has its own legislation
on the subject of hire-purchase agreements, the latest
being an Act of the State of Victoria of the year 1959.2
The provisions of these Acts are designed to give relief
10 the hirer against harkh and ungonscionable terms in
the agreements. Hire-purchdse ,agreements form a
substantial segment cf American business. In 1918,
the National Conference of Commissioners on Uni-
form State Laws compiled the “Uniform Conditional
Sales Act”, with reference to hire-purchase agreements,
and that has, in general, been adopted by many of the
States, while some of them have; their own legislation
on the subject. While faicing into consideration all the
above materials, we have adapted the English Acts of
1938 and 1954 as the bgsis fot the present draft, intro-
ducing therein such alterations 1 as would seem to be
called for in the conditions prevalent in this country.
And these we proceed to explain,

4, At the very 9०७६६ it shouja be stated that ..the
English statutes afaresaid do co uxport to codify the

“law on the subject of e Hue e agreements. They
8

merely enact certain eh ‘0 tended to give relief
to hirers against penal tergag 10, 006 agreements and
against oppressive conduct ‘op the part of the owners.
All other matters relating to the agreement, however,
such as whether the parties the = had the capacity to
enter into it, whether कहा '€! wag free consent for it,
whether it is Bad as bain ‘lite immoral or opposed
to public policy and th¢ like ¥ eat ‘overned by the ordi-
nary law relating |, to; contr Our proposals are,
likewise, not intended ‘to be exhpustive of the law on
the subject. Their pi uur pose 40 -to define and regu-
late the rights of the ers hirers and of persons
claiming under them jn certain pircumstances, In all
other respects, .the ai ne epts, be governed. by
the law in force relating to: te In other words,
it is not proposed by thi: asia ion to codify the law

SE SSS aR

\The Hise-Purchase Agmemesdty Act, '1959 Victoria), A Bilt
on hire-purchase agreements was introduced in the Jagislature of New
South 28 in 1959 . पु


3

relating to hire-purchase agreements, but only to
amend it.

5. The Hire-purchase Act, 1938, applies not only to Sales on
transactions of hire-purchase but also to certain sales credit.
on credit, One of the questions which we had to deter-
mine was, whether the present legislation should be
limited to hire-purchase agreements, or whether it

- should extend also to credit-sale agreements. In Eng-
land, the term hire-purchase is applied to denote not
only transactions which are hire-purchases strictly and
properly so-called, but also credit-sale agreements, that
is, agreements to purchase goods under which price is
to be paid by instalments and the title is to pass only
when all the instalments are paid.! There is, in law, a
well-defined distinction between agreements of hire-
purchase and credit sales. A hire-purchase agreement
is a form of bailment. The hirer is given the right to
purchase the goods on certain conditions. That, how-
ever, is an option, not an obligation to purchase. The
hirer may elect to purchase the goods, and when he
does that and fulfils all the conditions prescribed in the
agreement, the title to the goods will pass to him. But
he may elect not to doso, andin that event he is
entitled to return the goods and terminate the agree-
ment in the manner provided therein. In an agreement
of credit-sale on the other hand, the purchaser has no
right to terminate it at his option, If he did that, he
would be in breach of the contract and would be liable,
in law, in damages, vide Lee v. Butler,? Helby v.
Matthews; Auto Suppl; 2५% v. Ras hunath Chetti”, In
Halsbury'’s Laws of England, the distinction between
hire-purchases and credit-sales is stated to be that
‘“mder the latter type of contract there is a binding
obligation on the hirer to buy and the hirer can there-
fore pass a good title to a purchaser or pledgee dealing
with him in good faith and without notice of the rights
of the true owner, whereas in the case of a contract
which merely confers an option to purchase there is no
binding obligation on the hirer to buy, and a purchaser
or pledgee can obtain no better title than the hirer had,
except in the case of a sale in market overt”*

Hire-purchase agreements and credit-sale contratts
being thus fundamentally different in their character
and in their legal incidents, the question.is whether the
present legislation should apply also to the latter. The
argument in support of their inclusion is, that the two
classes of agreements have so many features in
common, that it may not always be possible to

1Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd edition, Volume 19, page $10,
para, 823.

71893) 2 Q.B.D 318.

31895) A.C. 471.

ILL.R. 52 Mad. 829

‘Hlalsbury’s Lawa of England, 3rd edition, Volume 19, pages
$10-511, para. 823.

253 M. of L—2


है

distin; ufuish between them, that if these transactions are’
excluded from the operation of this legislation, it will
be easy for the owner to circumvent it by disguising
hire-purchase agreements under the trappings of
credit-sale agreements, and the legislation will be be-
reft of much of its utility, That, no doubt, is a result.
which must be avoided. But the question to be con-
sidered is whether, for achieving this object, it is:
necessary to bring credit-sale agreements within the |
purview of this legislation. There should be no diffi-
culty in distinguishing .an agreement of hire-purchase
from a credit-sale agreement, when it is understood
that the cardinal point of distinction between the two
is whether the so-called hirer or purchaser has an
option to purchase or not, If he has not such an option,
then it can only be a credit-sale agreement. The fact
that the price is payable by iristalments or that the title
is to pass after all of them are paid, are matters on
which the parties are free to enter into their own
agreement, vide section 19{1) and section 32 of the
Sale of Goods Act, 1930, and cannot affect the character
of the transaction as an agreement of sale. Nor is it
material how the parties label the transaction or
whether the instalments to be paid are described as
hire or rent or as price. It is the substance of the trans-
action that determines its true character, and if on a
reading of the agreement “it is found that the pur-
chaser has no option to withdraw from the contract,
then it can only be construed as a credit-sale agree-
ment. हर

Credit-sale agreements are now governed oy the
Sale of Goods Act, 1930, which is a self-contained code
defining the rights of parties, and the inclusion of
these agreements within the purview of this enactment.
must lead to complications and result in confusion. It
may be mentioned that though credit-sale agreements
are within the purview of the English Hire-Purchase
Act, 1938, the only sections that are made applicable to
them are sections 3, 5(e} and 6. Section 3 prescribes
the formalities to be complied with when a credit-sale
agreement is entered into; section 5(e) provides that
the owner is liable for the acts or defaults of his agents
in connection with the formation or conclusion of a
credit-sale agreement; and section 6 imposes on an
owner an obligation to supply to the other party, on.
demand, a copy of the agreement and a statement of
particulars relating thereto. Thus they all relate to
matters of form and not of substantive rights of the
parties under the agreement, which will be governed
by the Sale of Goods Act, 1893, It is true that in s«me
of the Australian States the provisions of the Hire-
Purchase Acts applicable to credit-sale agreements
refer not only to formalities but also to substantive
tights. But even among these States, the law varies
“owing”, it has been said, “to the divergent opinion of


5

Governments on the control which should be exere
cised over this type of contract”! The conditions of
business in this country do not seem to require any
special control over credit-sale agreements, the pro-
visions of the Contract ‘Act, 1872, and the Sale of
Goods Act, 1930, being ample to give relief to pur-
chasers under credit-sale agreements; and in this
respect we have preferred to follow the precedent of
the English ire-Purchase Acts, 1938 and 1954, to the
enactments in some of the ‘Australian States. While
circulating the draft Bill for opinion, we had sent 2
questionnaire in which one of the questions was whe-
ther credit-sale agreements should be included within
legislation. The opinion is overwhelming against
such inclusion. We have therefore decided to exclude
them from this legislation. Tf it should become neces-
sary at any time, owing to the exigencies of business,
to enact Jegislation for granting relief to purchasers
under credit-sale agreements, that should, in our view,
‘be more appropriately | done, by inserting special provi-
sions in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930.

There is, however, one aspect of the matter which
may be cleared up. Some of the hire-purchase agree-

instalments the hirer might exercise his option to pur-
chase the goods, while others merely provide that on
payment of the instalments the title will automatically
vest in the hirer. A doubt was expressed whether the
latter kinds of agreements could be classed as hire-
purchase agreements, because on payment of the last
instalment title will pass to the hirer, without his
having to exercise any option. But the essence of a
hire-purchase agreement is the option on the part of
the hirer to purchase the goods, that is, the right to
withdraw from the transaction at any time, and where
that option is granted to the hirer, it would not affect
the character of the transaction as a hire-purchase
agreement, whether the title is to vest automatically
on the payment of all the instalments or whether the
hirer has to express his intention to become the owner.
With a view to clarifying the position. we have defined
hire-purchase agreements so as to cover all agreements
under which the hirer takes the goods on bailment and
under which he could either purchase the goods or
terminate the agreement, at his option, whether the
title is to pass to him on payment of the instalments
and fulfilment of the conditions automatically or on the
further exercise of option by the hirer.

6. We should refer to another point on which the Maximum
present draft differs from the English Act. The Hire- limi: tor
Purchase Act. 1938. as amended in 1954. does not apply application
to agreements in which the hire-purchase price ex- ° Act,

ceeds, in the case of live-stock, £1,000, and, in other

3७ “ Australian Mercantile Law ”, Yorstos Fe
9७ oe ee by Yorston and Fortescue



6

eases, £300. We have considered the question whether
we should likewise impose a maximum pecuniary limit
on the transactions to which this legislation should
apply. There is, among the op inions received, some
support for the view that the Act should be restricted
in its application to hire-purchase agreements below a
certain pecuniary limit. But as against this, it has been
urged that this country has just entered on an era of
industrial expansion, that hire-purchase transactions
would greatly facilitate such expansion, and that
therefore we should not impose any such restriction.
The main ground on which the demand for prescribing
pecuniary limit was based had reference to the provi-
sion in the draft which was circulated that the owner
could not seize the goods in case of default. when one-
third of the hire-purchase amount had been paid. It
was said that this provision would act harshly on the
owner, when high-priced goods such as trucks and
lorries were given on hire-purchase agreements. This
objection 105९5 much of its force, now that we have
provided! that the owner cannot exercise his right to
seize the goods otherwise than through court where
the hire-purchase price exceeds Rs. 15,000 when three-
fourths thereof had been paid, and where it is
Rs, 15,000 or less, when half of it had been paid. This
provision will give, in our opinion, sufficient protection
to the owner. To barthe application of the Act
altogether when the hire-purchase price exceeds a
limit would, in our opinion, impede the expansion
of industrialisation, and we have accordingly decided
that the legislation should apply to all hire-purchase
agreements, whatever the amount payable thereunder.

‘Assignment 7, The Hire-Purchase Act, 1938, is silent on the
by hirer ‘. question of assignment of hire-purchase agreements,

which will therefore be governed by the Common
Law. According to that law, in a contract of bailment
pure and simple, the bailee gets no property in the
goods, and he has therefore no right to transfer them
by sale or pledge. But a person who has an option to
purchase goods, has a kind of proprietary interest
therein, and that is capable, in law, of being trans-
ferred, unless there is a prohibition against it in the
agreement, .

As a hire-purchase agreement is a composite trans-
action involving elements both of bailment and of sale,
the validity of the assignment of the rights there-
under or of the goods comprised therein must be
judged on the principles stated above. It has accord-
ingly been held that when the hirer assigns his rights
under a hire-purchase agreement, the assignee suc-
ceeds to all his rights and his obligations, vide Whitley
vy. Hilt,? and that that is the position even thoug! h there
is a restriction on the right to assign the goods, vide
Belsize Motor Co. v. Cox: but that where there is in

*$ee Appendix I, clause 18.

1918) 2 K.B, 808.
"(1914 ) LK.B.244.



7

the agreement a prohibition against assignment there-
of, a transfer of the goods by the hirer conferred no
rights on the assignee, vide Trust Commercial Ltd. v.
Parkway Motors Ltd.‘ In the draft which was circu-
lated for opinion it was proposed that, notwith-
standing any restriction contained in the agreement, a
third person who obtains bona fide a transfer of the
goods from the hirer without any notice of the hire-
purchase agreement should have the same rights and
be subject to the same obligations as the hirer, and
that should be without prejudice to the rights of the
owner as against the hirer and his surety. But as there
was some opposition to this proposal we decided, on
reconsideration, to drop it, The result is that, under
this legislation as under the English Act, when there
js an assignment of a hire-purchase agreement, the
rights of the parties will be governed by the general
Jaw. To this, however, we have provided one excep-
tioa,? departing, in that particular, from the English
Act. It is, that the hirer could assign the agreement,
notwithstanding any prohibition contained therein, if
the owner unreasonably withholds his consent there-
to. Such a provision is to be found in the Australian
Acts, and is calculated to do justice. It might happen
that a hirer who had made considerable payments
under a hire-purchase agreement may not be in a posi-
tion to go on with it, either because he is in financial
difficulties or because he wants to close down his busi-
ness. In such a case if he can assign the agreement, he
will have a chance of realizing at least part cf his
investments, But if there is a prohibition against
assignment in the agreement; and that is to be strictly
enforced, he would have no option but to surrender
the goods and lose all the payments made. A provision
such as the one now proposed to be inserted would
give relief to the hirer in such cases, while the owner
will not be prejudiced thereby as he can insist on all
the amounts due to him being paid before the assign-
ment is recognised, and further, neither the hirer nor
the surety is discharged from their obligations te him
under the agreement by reason of the assignment.

8 An allied question which calls for consideration Insolvency
is as to the rights of parties when the hirer is adjudged of hirer.
insolvent. According to the law of England, goods
which are in the possession of the insolvent in trade or
business on the date of the petition with the consent of
the true owner and under such circumstances that he
is the reputed owner thereof, would vest in the
Official Receiver and be divisible among the creditors.

Under this doctrine, hire-purchase goods will also pass
to the Official Receiver, provided, of course, the other
conditions are satisfied. Section 16 of the Hire-
Purchase Act, 1938, provides that where the Court
postpones the operation of an order for the specific
11955) 2 ALELR. 557.
286६ Appendix I, clause 22.



delivery of goods under the Act, then the goods shall
not be treated as being in the possession of the insol-
vent with the consent of the true owner. Subject to
this exception, the general law as to reputed owner-
ship will apply to hire-purchase goods in the possession
of the hirer. The result is that the owner loses his
property, his only right being to prove in insolvency
for the value of the goods. Vide, Ex parte Haviside,
Re Button.’

9. Now, the doctrine of reputed ownership is a
serious invasion on the rights of an owner, and_ the
tendency of the Courts in England has been to limit
its application within narrow limits. A series of
exceptions have been recognised on the ground that it
ig the well-known custom of a particular trade that
the goods in the possession of the trader are taken by
him under a hire-purchase agreement, and that that
excludes reputation of ownership in the hirer. Thus,
when the proprietor of a hotel was adjudged insolvent
the furniture therein was held not to have passed to
the trustee-in-bankruptcy, as it was a notorious
custom of the trade that hotels were furnished on
hire-purchase system, and similar decisions have been
given in respect of several other trades. An attempt
to get out of the mischief of the reputed ownership
doctrine has sometimes been made in England, by
inserting a clause in the agreement, that the consent
of the owner to possession by the hirer will stand re-
voked when he commits an act of insolvency. If this
provision is valid, then the goods would cease to be in
the possession of the hirer with the consent of the
owner and the reputed ownership clause will not
apply. The validity of this clause, however, has not
been tested in Courts.

10. The doctrine of reputed ownership forms part of
the law of this country, and, therefore, goods in the
possession of a hirer, taken on a hire-purchase agree-
ment, will vest in his assignee in bankruptcy. The
question is, whether the law as to reputed ownership
requires to be changed, in so far as it applies to go
which are covered by hire-purchase agreements. In
our opinion, it does. It is common knowledge that
having regard to the exigendies of modern business,
many traders carry on with goods taken on hire-
purchase system, and acco! ly the foundation on
which the doctrine of (रा ownership rests has

tically no existence. The following observations
in “Williams on Bankruptcy” are illuminating: —

“Tn considering the decided cases on reputation of
ownership, the widespread prevalence in recent times

(1907) 2 KB, 180.

*Re, Parker, Haparte Turquand, (1885) 14 Q.B.D. 636, C.A, and
the other decisions cited in ‘fincas ca Bankruptcy, 17th Edn. page
310.



9

of the practice of obtaining on hire-purchase almost all
goods must be borne’ in mind. Reputation is a matter
necessarily dependent on the habits of society and
varies therewith, and the extension of the ‘hire-
purchase system has already considerably reduced
the efficacy of the reputed ownership clause."" We
accordingly recommend that a provision may be in-
serted in the Insolvency Acts, to the effect that goods
taken on hire-purchase system are not subject to the
doctrine of reputed ownership. So far as the Hire
‘Purchase Act is concerned, it would be sufficient to
provide that the Official Receiver shall have the same
Tights and obligations in respect of them as the hirer
had.*

11. We think that the Official Receiver should be
authorised to assign the hirer’s rights under the hire-
purchase agreement, even if there is a prohibition in
the agreement against such assignment. The reason
is, that the Official Receiver, very often, might not
have sufficient funds for paying the instalments of the
hire-purchase price and would find it more convenient
‘to transfer the rights.to a third person. We have
-accordingly provided that the Official Receiver might
vassign the hire-purchase agreement with the permis-
sion of the Court, notwithstanding any prohibition con-
tained therein.”

12, Section 8(1)(b) of the Hire-Purchase Act, 1938, Condition
provides that in a hire-purchase agreement there °f Title.
shall be implied a condition that the owner will have
the right to sell the goods at the time when property
‘is to pass. This provision was adopted in the draft
-which was circulated, but in the questionnaire which,
we issued we called for opfhion, as to whether we
sshould provide that the owner should have the right
to sell eyen at the date of the agreement. Quite a
large number of opinions was received, and théy
revealed a sharp conflict. Though the majority
opinion was decidedly in favour of the provision ia.
the draft, out of deférence to the opinion contra, we
re-examined the question from all poirits of view, 7
vand came to the conclusio that there was no need
to depart from the view embodied in section 8(1)(b)

-of the English Act, 1938, which we had adopted. We
now proceed to state the grounds of our décision.

The matter may be considéred under thrée heads:
(1) nature of the transaction; (2) the law of hire-
-purchase as adopted in other countries; and (3) the
consequences of adopting one view or the other, on
the rights of parties, and. on the prospects of the
‘business,

‘Williams on Bankruptcy, 17th Edn., page 315. °
3568 Appendix 1, clause 23.
*Appendix I, claise 25.


Nature of
* the transac~
tion.

Law in other

countries,j

10

(1) A hire-purchase agreement is, as already
stated,’ a composite transaction, made up of two ele
ments—bailment and sale. Viewing it as a contract
ot bailment, the question of title is wholly foreign to it,
the bailee being estopped from disputing the title
of the bailor. There is in such a contract no covenant
for title, but the bailor is liable to the bailee for any
loss which may result by reason of the fact that he is
not entitled to make the bailment. Then there is the
element of sale. In a contract for the sale of goods
simpliciter, the condition as to title operates at the
time when the property is to pass and not when the
agreement is made, vide section 12(1) of the English
Sale of Goods Act, 1893, and section 14(a) of the
Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930. The rights of a hirer
under a hire-purchase agreement cannot be higher
than those of a purchaser under an agreement to sell,
because it is only when the hirer exercises his option
and fulfils all the conditions laid down in the agree-
ment that he becomes entitled to call upon the owner
to convey the property in the goods to him. It would,
therefore, be foginal to provide that the condition as
to title should operate in a hire-purchase agreement,
as in an agreement of sale, only when the property
is to pass. What purpose is served by insisting that
the owner should have title even at the date of the
agreement, if in fact the hirer may not choose to
purchase the property, or may be unable to do so?
Having regard, therefore, to the nature of the trans-
action, it would seem (proper to provide? that the
owner must have title only when the property is io
pass.

(2) It will be now instructive to examine the law
on this question in countries where hire-purchase
transactions have been largely in vogue. In the
Australian States, the law as te condition of title is
the same as under section 8(1)(b) of the English Act,
1938, In America, section 2 of the Uniform Condi-
tional Sales Act which applies to hire-purchase
agreements contains the following as regards the
rights of the hirer or the intending buyer:—

“The buyer shall have the right when not mn
default to retain possession of the goods, and he
shall also have the right to acquire the property
in the goods on the performance of the conditions
of the contract.”

The commentary on this section runs as follows:-—
“The section states the fundamental rights of

the conditional buyer, recognised everywhere,

namely, the right to possession when ~ not in

default, and the right to title on performance of

the condition”.* Then again, “the buyer has the

Vide para, 7, supra.
"See Appendix I, clause 6(2)(a).
*‘JIniform Laws Annotated (Bogert). Vol. aA, page 28.

ivi


il

right that title to the goods shall pass to him
the instant he performs, or tenders performance
of, the conditions precedent to the passage of
property”! Subject to these provisions, the
general law relating to sales applies? Thus the
law “recognised everywhere” insists only on the
owner making out title at the time when the
property is to pass.

It must be mentioned that in Karflex Lid v.
Poole,’ Goddard J., as he then was, took a differ-
ent view. There, the hirer having defaulted in
the payment of instalments, the owners seized
the goods and sued for compensation as provided
in the agreement. On the facts it was found that
the plaintiffs had purchased the goods from a
person who had got them by theft, and that
accordingly they had no title to them at the date
of the agreement, and even at the date of the
action. There was in that agreement an express
condition that the owner had title to the goods
at that time, and in view of that, it was held by
the court consisting of Acton and Goddard JJ.,
that as there was a breach of the condition as to
title on which the agreement was based, no claim
for compensation based on that agreement could
be maintained. So far this decision is no authority
for the proposition that apart from agreement
there is to be implied in hire-purchase agree-
ments a condition that the owner had title at the
date of the agreement. But Goddard J., after
basing his conclusion on the terms of the agree-
ment, went on to observe that “where a person
is letting out chattels of any description on hire-
purchase, he does thereby impliedly contract, not
that he will at sometime become possessed of
that property during the currency of the agree-
ment, but that he is the owner of the property
at the time when he lets it out’* No authority
in support of this view was cited in the judgment
or in the argument, nor is any such statement
of law to be found in the English decisions or
authoritative text-books or in Halsbury'’s Laws of
England,* First Edition, Volume 1, pages 554556,
where this subject is dealt with. The precise
scope of the observations in Karflex Ltd. v. Poole,
quoted above, came up for elucidation before the
same learned Judge, in Mercantile Union Gua-
rantee Corporation v. Wheatly.* There the owner
had not acquired the goods on the date of the
hire-purchase agreement, but before they were

"Uniform Laws Annotated, Vol. 2A, page 30.

3Section 29 of the Uniform Laws Annotated, Vol. 2, page 41.
#(1933) 2 KB. 251.

(1933) 2 K.B. 251, 263.

‘Published in 1907,

*(1937) 4 AER. 913, 718,
253 M of L—8.


B ffect on
sights of
parties.

12

actually put into the possession of the hirer he had
acquired them. The hirer having committed
default, the owner sued him for damages and
was met by the plea that by reason of the defect
in title at the date of the agreement the suit was
not maintainable, and the decision in Karflex Ltd.
हू, Poole was relied on. Goddard व. observed.
that he adhered to his slatement of the law in
Karflex Lid. v. Poole, but that decision had no
application because “the material time was
when the bailment took place, not the actual
moment of signing the agreement”. The bailment
no doubt took effect when possession was given,
but the right to possession arose under the hire-
purchase agreement. Tt was that agreement that
fixed the rights of parties and that came into
foree when it was signed. It is understandable
that a condition as to title should be implied at
the date of the agreement, though it would be
more logical to imply it when the title is 10 pass.
But it is difficult to see how if a condition as to
title is not to be implied at the date of agreement,
it could be implied at the date of bailment. With
respect, it would be a mismatch to link up a
condition as to title with bailment. It is unneces-
sary to pursue the discussions, further because,
shortly after these decisions, the English Hire-
Purchase Act was passed in 1938, and the view
that the condition of title operates at the time
when the title 10 the goods is to pass was adopted.
This provision has stood all these years without
question, and the jaw may therefore be taken to
be generally accepted that it is sufficient if the
condition operates when the title is to pass.

(3) We may now consider how the adopting cf one
view or the other would react on the rights of parties
and the business in hire-purchase agreements. The
question can be of practical importance only when
the owner had no title at the date of the agrcement,
but had acquired it before it had to pass to the hirer.
In such cases, will it result in hardship or injustice
to the hirer, if the condition is that the owner should
have title when the property is to pass? There are
two different classes of cases with reference to which
this question might be considered: (a) Where the
transaction of hire-purchase is directly between the
dealer and the hirer, and (b) where it is done through
a financier.

(a) Taking up, first, cases of direct dealing between
the dealer and the hirer, while a provision that the
owner should have title at the time of the transaction
would in general work satisfactorily in such cases, it
is conceivable that it might work hardship in some
cases. The reported cases show that the owner net
infrequently acquires goods bona fide and for consi-
deration in'the full belief that he is getting good title,


18

but eventually it turns out that the person who sells
them to him has had himself no title! In such-cases,
if he is able to acquire title from the true owner
before it is to pass to the hirer, no hardship is likely
to bo caused to the hirer, The acquisition of title
by the owner in the interim period would be effective
to protect all his rights under the agreement. It
should also be borne in mind that where the owner
is unable to acquire the title at the time when the
title to the goods is to pass, it will make ne difference
in the position of the hirer or in the quantum of bis
rights whether the condition for title operates as on
the date of the agreement or on the date on which
the title is to pass. He has the right to claim damages
far breach of the agreement to convey property, and
all monies paid under the agreement would be
returnable by way of damages. Where there is a
simple agreement to sell goods and the seller is
unablé to convey title, the law is that, “in addition
to recovering the difference between the market and
contract pricc on that date, the buyer may also
recover the price pre-paid with interest." Vide also
Ramesiwerdas Poddar v. Paper Sales Ltd* The
position is the same when the owner in-a hire-pur-
chase agreement is unable to pass title when the hirer
becomes entitled tc it. It was so decided in Warman’s
case,* where it was further held that the hirer was
not even liable on the principle of quantum meruit
to pay reasonable hire for his enjoyment of the pro-
perty. Therefore. in this class of cases, a provision
that the condition should operate as on the date
when the title is to pass is not likely to resuli in any
injustice to the hirer. On the other hand a provision
that the condition is to operate on the dats of the
agreement will result in injustice to a bona fide dealer
who has himself been deceived and has incurred fur-
ther expenses in acquiring a good title.

(0) Then there is the second class of cases in
which hire-purchase agreements are entered * into
through financiers. It appears that large-scale and
wholesale dealers do not carry on business on hire
purchase system because that would oblige them to
deal in second-hand goods, and throw additional
burden on them in having to maintain a branch for
hire-purchase business. That is how financiers
become an essential factor in hire-purchase business.
‘We must now examine how the financiers cunduct
the business. A financing company starts with some
capital, but that will be too small to enable it to

'Vide Karflex Ltd. y, Poole. (1933) 2K. B. 2513 Warman
Scuthern Counties Car Finance Corporation Ltd. (1949) 1 All
711; Mercantile Union Guarantee Corporation v. Wheatly, (1937)
4 ABR. 713.

*Pollack and Mulla, Sale of Goods Act, 2nd Bdn., page 246,

*A.LR, (1945) Bom. 21.

> ‘Warman v. Southern Counties Car Finance Corporation Led.
(1949) 1 AER. 771. दर om



14

purchase from the dealer all the goods which it pro-
poses to give on hire. If every financing company
were required to find its own funds for acquiring
goods from dealers, the business of hire-purchase will
cease to be paying, especially having regard to the
risks with the hirers. What the company actually
does is to adopt one of two courses. It arranges for
overdraft with some bank, purchases the goods from
the dealer on payment of the full price, and gives
them on hire-purchase, the bank being given a general.
security over the agreements. In this class of cases,
the financier becomes the full owner, and that pre-
sents no problems. But there is another mode by
which finance companies do business. They do not
pay the full price of the goods to the dealer, but take
them under an arrangement which gives them the
right to immediate possession and the right to pur-
chase them in due course, but the title to the goods
does not pass to them at that time. When in turn the
financiers enter into a hire-purchase agreement with
the hirer, they lawfully transfer to him the right to
immediate possession and the right to purchase the
goods which on fulfilment of all the conditions they
themselves have. In practice, the amounts received
by the financiers from the hirer are in turn paid over
to the dealers, and by the time the hirer qualifies
himself to obtain a purchase by payment of all the
instalments, the financiers would have obtained a
clean title to the goods. If we are now to provide
that the condition as to title should operate as on the
date of hire-purchase agreement, we would be striking
at this class of business. Now a good portion of the
business in hire-purchase system is said to be carried
on in this mode, and what is more, the consumer
goods are mostly dealt with in this manner. The
object of this legislation being the expansion of
indusirialisation, that object would clearly be defeated
if we are to provide that the condition as to title ~
should operate as on the date of the agreement.

It may be argued against the above mode of busi-
ness that it may result in serious injustice to the
hirer, because it might happen that though he has
paid all the instalments regularly to the financier, the
latter might make default in paying them to the
dealer, and that the latter would then seize the gocds
in he hands of the hirer. We consider that if regard
is had to the normal course of business, this objection
will be found to be groundless. Financing, as a
regular business, is done not by individuals—-because
it will be beyond their capacity—but by companies
who have a subscribed capital, and carry on business
in accordance with rules. They provide a regular
machinery to collect the instalments and pay them
over to the dealer. The company itself being liable
to the dealer for the value of the goods, it is incon-
ceivable that the instalments received by it would
not be paid by it to the dealer. It is again an


15

important factor to be taken into accouni, that the
dealers have themselves a controlling hand in the
management of the companies, and it is by reason of
this fact that they extend to them the facilities of
delivering goods with a view to being dealt with
uunder hire-purchase agreements. That being the
recognised course of business, the possibility of the
dealer seizing the goods of the hirer in opposition to
the financiers is a mere theoretical possibility, far
removed from the realm of actualities. It should be
added that if the hirer is in fact deprived of the goods
iby the dealer for the defaults of the financier, he is
in law entitled to damages from the latter. Thus,
whether we view the question as a matter of law or
as a practical proposition, the hirer cannot suffer if
the condition as to title is to operate when the
property in the goods is to pass, whereas if it is to
operate on the date of the agreement, it is bound io
result in the closure of a large section of the financing
system.

Then it is said, that if the condition as to title is
to operate not at the date of the agreement but when
-title is to pass, that would result in fraudulent trans-
:actions by persons who do not own propertics. The
position must be examined, ‘A’ has in his possession
goods which do not belong to him. Then he enters
‘into a hire-purchase agreement with reference to
them fraudulently, that is to say, with the knowledge
that he has no title ta them. In that case, the hirer
B will be unable to acquire the title even though he
pays all the instalments, and he might also be depriv-
-ed of the possession of the properties by the real
owner. Bis thus damnified, and has to proceed
against A to recover compensation. This, it is said,
Should be prevented. But then the question is, can
this be prevented by providing that the condition
‘Should operate not at the date when the title is to
pass but at the time of the agreement? Exhypothesi
we are dealing with a person who wants to commit a
fraud. Is euch a person scared away from his frau-
dulent schemes by a provision in the statute that the
condition of title ०] ‘tes ai the time of the agree-
sment itself? It would make no difference to him
whether it operates at the date of the agreement or
vat the time of the passing of title, because he has no
‘thought of giving a good title at any time. Thus a
provision that the condition should ‘operate cn the
date of the agreement will have no effect on a
fraudulent person, but may hit hard a bona fide
-dealer. .

To sum up, the provision ‘in the draft: that the
-owner should have the right to sell when property in
‘the goods is to pass is in consonance with the charac-
-ter of the transaction. It has been adopted as law
4in other countries. While this provision cannot result

‘Appendix I, clause 6{2\a).



16

in any injustice to the hirer, a provision that the
owner should have title to the goods on the date of
the agreement might work hardship on bona fide
dealers and hamper the growth of. hire-purchase
business. The preponderance of opinion, especially
of Governments, of Chambers of Commerce, and of
other mercantile interests, supports our view.

Sections of 143. Such sections of the English Act as have been
the Engl found useful, have been adopted by us2 We do’ not
. think it necessary to adopt the following provisions
of that Act:—
Section 1.
Section 2(1}.
Section 2(2) (०).
Section 3.
Section 5(a), (c), (व) and fe)
Section 16.
Section 18.
Section 19.
The Schedule.
{Sections 12 to 14 have been adopted in a simpli-
fied form.)
Minor 14, We have explained the important proposals
Changes. above. Our conclusions on minor matters arising
from the English Act or otherwise relating to the
subject are explained in the notes on clauses.
Appendices, 15. In order to give a concrete shape to our pro-
posals, we have, in Appendix I, put them in the form
of a draft Bill, _
: The notes on clauses (in Appendix II) explain,
with reference to each clause in Appendix I, any
points that might need elucidation.
Appendix ITI contains a list of witnesses examined
by us. - a
Appendix IV contains our recommendations in
respect of other Acts.
3. T, L. VENKATARAMA AITYAR—Chairman.
2. 7. SATYANARAYANA RAO 4
3. L. 5. MISRA
4. G. R. RAJAGOPAUL Members
5. 5. CHAUDHURI oe
6. N, A. PALKHIVALA
D. BASU,
Joint Secretary.
New DELHI :

The 5th May, 1961.

“These, have been cited in the margin against each clause in


INDEX TO APPENDIX I

CLAUSE SupjJECT-MATTER . PAGE
Nos.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
i Short title, extent and commencement
a” 2. Definitions ’ . . . न .
CHAPTER II

FORM AND CONTENTS OF HIRE-PURCHASE AGREEMENTS

3. Hite-Purchase agreements to be in writing and signed by

all parties
4. Contents of hire-purchase agreements - पु न न
5. Two or more agreements when treated as a single hire-
purchase agreement . . .

CHAPTER III
WARRANTS AND CONDITIONS, AND PASSING OF PROPERTY

6. Warranties and conditichs to be implied in hire-purchase
agreements पु .

7. Passing of property
CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF HIRER

8. Right of hirer to purchase at any time with rebate
9. Right of hirer to terminate agreement at any time +
n 10. Right of hirer to appropriate payments in respect of two
of more agreements .
In Right of hirer to assign his right, title and interest under
the agreement .
‘ 12. Obligations of hirer to comply with the agreement
13. Obligation of hirer in respect of care to be taken of goods
14 Obligation of hirer in respect of use of goods .
15. Obligation of hirer to give information as to whereabouts
of goods .

17


18

CLAUSE SupJect-MATTER Pace
Nos.

a तह: /ण |

CHAPTER V

RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF OWNER
16. ight of owner to terminate hire-purhase agreement for
default in payment of hire or unauthorised act of breach
of express conditions . . न . . .
17. Rights of owner on termination - पु न न .
18. Restriction on owner's right to recover possession of goods
otherwise than through court. . . . .

19. Relief against termination for non-payment of hire .

20, Relief against termination for unauthorised act or breach

of express condition . . . . . .
21. Obligation of owner to supply copies and information
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS

22. Discharge of price otherwise than by. payment of money .

23. Insolvency of hirer - . . . . . .
24. Successive hire-purchase agreements between the same
parties » पु . * . . . .

25. Evidence of adverse detention in suit or petition to recover
possession of the goods . . . . .
26. Birer’s refusal to surrender goods not to be conversion in

27. Service of notice . . . न . . .
28. Act not to apply 10 existing agreements पु पु .

Explanation of abbreviations used in Appendix I,
The (English) Hire-Purchase Act, 1938.

HLP.A. 1938
(1 and 2 Geo. 6, Ch. 53).

ELPA. 1954 The (English) Hire-Purchase Act, 1954,
(2 & 3 Eliz. 2, Ch. 51).

L.A. पु . . . . The Indien Contract Act, 1872.

ISGA . पु ‘ . . The Indian Sale of Goods Act; 1930

New South Wales Bill, 1959 . The Hire-Purchase Bill, 1959 (bei cing the
Uniform Hire-Purchase Bin as finally

settled at conferences in Melbourne on
17th and 18th June, 1959).



"APPENDIX 1
Proposals as shown in the ferm of a droft Bill.
(This is a tentative draft only.]

[Corresponding sections of the paisting Act are noted
in the margin.]

253 M of L-—4.


Short title,
cent and
commence=

Definitions.

weal
1938.

f. 8. 126,
en.

Contrast
8. 242X(6)

/HPA.

cof “ins-
takment®,
‘Contrast
58. हा 1)
HY.

THE HIRE-PURCHASS, BILL, 1961
Ok
BILL
to amend the law relating to the hire-purchase of goods,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year
of the Republic of India as follows: —
CHAPTER I
- PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Hire-Purchase
Act, 1961

{2) It extends to the whole of India except the State
of Jammu and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint.

2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise

requires,—

(०) “contract of gui
hire-purchase ag) a ‘
guarantees the perf ol ape
hirer’s obligations unde :
ment; and the expression “:
trued accordingly; .

(b) “hire” means the | rable periodically
by the hirer under’ a hiré-pi 91936 agreement;

| in relation to any
ms a contract, whi
f all or any of the

(९) “hire-purcliase it” means an agree-
ment under whic! cbt let on hire and under
which the hirer h ase them in
accordance with the tems of the agreement:

and includes it under which-—

(2) possessjon coli is delivered. to an-
other person, it he pays an
agreed amount in instalments, and

(ii) the prpperty; io fhe goods is to pass to
such person prbperty nt of the last of such
instal [nents,

| ®t

at


2 .
(ii) suigh person has-a right to terminate a

the agreement at anytime before the property o4e
- sa passes; © pps मु :

(d) “hire-purchase price” means the total sum
payable by the hirer under a hire-purchase agree-
ment in order to complete the purchase of the goods of a. antx
to which the agreement relates; as ae है

and includes any sum payable by the hirer
‘under the hire-purchase agreement by way of a
deposit or other iitial payment, or credited or to
be credited to him a under such an agreement on 4
account of any such depesit or payment, whether
that sum is to be or has heen paid to the owner or
to any other person or is to be or has been discharg-
ed by a payment of money or by the transfer or
delivery of goods or by any other means;

but doés not include any sum payable as a
penalty or as compensation or ‘damages for a breach
of the agreement; -

(e) “hirer” means the person who obtains oF
has obtained- ppsseasion of goods from an owner दि
under a hire-parchase agreement, and includes ag, a. 211),
person to whom the’ higer’s rights or. liabilities Aes 19H: 5
under the agreement haWve passed by assignment
or by operation of law; 1
. (f) “owner” meags the person who lets or has
let goods to a hirer under a hire-purchase wees Gy a.
-ment, and inehjdes a;person. to whom the owner's 5 ee
Property in the goods or any of the owner's rights rpg."
or Liabilities under the agreement has passed by | हे
assignment.or hy opetatign of law; and .

{g) all_ words ing ssions used and not 3 of 1930. 1
defined in. {his at Find ES in the Indian peo a i
of Goods Act, 1| 'bave the meanings respec- = a
tively assigned ‘ta them in that Act.’ 1957 Cato |

. to: बकरा
| CHAPTER गा
Form AND CONTENTS Gf माक-एएएएत1/58 AGREZMENTS
3. (1) Every hire-purdhase agreement shall be— a के
(a) in writing, in हे

1

pita
(b) signed by all the parties thereto.

po: ok .
2) A hire-purchase’ ‘force t shali be void if in,

reaeeht thereo! oh ७ ig juirements ‘specified in

sub-section (1) has:not beer complied’ with.

ate; Ror campie, of 22h ah Ped 2G) and 12), ८४० 12) and 1263), LEG tee nit



22

(3) Where there is a contract of guarantee, the hire-
purchase agreement shall be signed by the surety also,
and if the hire-purchase agreement is not so signed,
the hire-purchase agreement: shall be voidable at the
option of the owner. हु

Contents of 4. (1) Every hire-purchase agreement shall state—
hire-pur-

chase

agreements.

हु, 8. 2(2) (a) the hire-purchase price of the goods to
(रह which the agreement relates;

Cf. 8. 2(7) (b) the cash price of the goods, that is to say,

a fe? the market value of the goods on the date of the
1938. agreement;

(c) the date on which the agreement shall be
deemed to have commenced;

Cf. 8 2(2)(b), (d) the number of the instalments by which

HLP.A.y 1938, the hire-purchase price is to be paid, the amount
of each of those instalments, and the date, or the
mode of determining the date, upon which it is
payable, and the person to whom and the place
where it is payable; and

89507 (९) the goods to which the agreement relates,
1938. in a manner sufficient to identify them.

&. (2) (2) Where any part of the consideration for 4 hire-
@. Nes purchase agreement is or is to be provided otherwise
South Wales than in cash, the hire-purchase agreement shall contain

Bill, 1959. a description of that part of the consideration.

Contrast (3) Where any of the requirements specified in sub-
8. 2(2)s lines SeCtion (1) or sub-section (2) has not been complied
WPA.” with, the hirer may institute a suit for getting the hire-
1938. purchase agreement rescinded; and the court may, if it
is satisfied that the failure to comply with any such
requirement has prejudiced the hirer, rescind the
agreement on such terms as it thinks just, or pass such
other order as it thinks fit in the circumstances of the
case. .
re की 5. Where by virtue of two or more agreements in
ments when Writing, none of which by itself constitutes a hire-
treated as a purchase agreement, there is a bailment of goods and
vee the bailee has an option to purchase the goods, and
igpeement, the documents taken together comply with the require-
५. ments specified in sections 3 and 4, the agreements
8. 21(1)— __ shall be treated for the purposes of this Act as a single
कप oF hire-purchase agreement made at the time when the
chase agree- 1@St Of the agreements was made.
ment.”,

latter part,
५ HP.A., 1938


23
CHAPTER III
WARRANTIES AND CONDITIONS, AND PASSING OF PROPERTY

6. (1) Notwithstanding any agreement to the
contrary, in every hire-purchase agreement there shall
be an implied warranty—

(a) that the hirer shall have and enjoy quiet
possession of the goods, and

(9) that the goods shall be‘ free from any
charge or encumbrance in favour of any third
party at any time when the property is to pass.

(2) Notwithstanding any agreement to the con-
trary, in every hire-purchase agreement there shall
be—

(a) an implied condition on the part of the
owner that he shall have a right to sell the goods
at any time when the property is to pass;

(b) an implied condition that the goods shall
be of merchantable quality, but no such condition
shall be implied by virtue of this clause—

(i) as regards defects of which the owner
could not reasonably have been aware at the
time when the agreement was made, or

(ii) where the hirer has examined the
goods or a-sample thereof, as regards defects
which the examination ought to have revealed,
or

(iti) if the goods are second-hand goods
and the agreement contains a statement to that

ect.

(3) Where the hirer expressly or by implication
makes known the particular purpose for which the
goods are required, there shall be an implied condition
in every hire-purchase agreement that the goods shall
be reasonably fit for such purpose.

(4) An owner shall not be entitled to rely on any
provision in a hire-purchase agreement excluding or

modifying the condition set out in sub-section (3)-

unless he proves that before the agreement was made
the provision was brought to the notice of the hirer
and its effect made clear to him. .

(5) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the
operation of any other enactment or rule of law
whereby any condition or warranty is to be implied in
any hire-purchase agreement.

‘Warranties
and condi-
tions to be
implied in
ire-pur=
chase agree-
ments.

Compare
s. 8, H.P.A.,
1938.

Cf. On
em

Cf. 8. 74(०,
or eae

Cf. 5.
een

Cf. 8. 16(2)
55800

Cf. 8. 1601),

S.G.A. and
5. 15 \
LCA.

Mp my


Passing of
property.

Right of
hirer to
purchase at
any time
with rebate.

Right of
hirer to
terminate -
agreement
at any time.
Contrast s. 4
(1), HLP.A.,
1938.

24

7. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the property
in the goods to which the hire-purchase agreement
relates shall pass to the hirer only on the completion
of the purchase in the manner provided in the agree-
ment.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE HIRER

8. (1) The hirer may, at any time during the
continuance of the hire-purchase agreement and after
giving to the owner not less than fourteen days’ notice
in writing of his intention so to do, purchase the goods
to which the agreement relates on payment of the hire-
purchase price as reduced by the amounts already paid
by him to the owner towards the hire-purchase price
and as further reduced by a rebate calculated in the
manner provided in sub-section (2).

(2) The rebate for the purposes of sub-section (1)
shall be equal to two-thirds of an amount which bears
to the hire-purchase charges the same proportion as
the balance of the hire-purchase price not yet due
bears to the hire-purchase price.’

Explanation—Iin this sub-section, “hire-purchase
charges” means the difference between the _hire-
purchase price and the cash price as stated in the hire-
purchase agreement.

(3) The provisions of this section shall have effect
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
the hire-purchase agreement, but where the terms of
the agreement entitle the hirer to a rebate higher than
that allowed by this section the hirer shall be entitled
to the rebate provided by the agreement. दर

(4) The Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, declare that this section shall
not apply or shall apply with such modifications as
may be specified in the notification, to any goods or
classes of goods, where it is satisfied that having regard
to the fact that such goods or classes of goods are in
short supply or are subject to restrictions in respect of
import or similar considerations, such declaration. is
necessary in the public interest.

9. (1) The hirer may, at any time before the final
payment under the hire-purchase agreement falls due,
and after giving not less than fourteen days’ notice in
writing of his intention so to do and re-delivering the
goods to the owner or tendering them to the owner,
terminate the hire-purchase agreement by payment or

1This can be expressed in the following formula :—
Hire purchase x Number of instalments
charges not due

Number of total instalments.

Rebate=


25

tender to the owner of the amounts which have accru-
ed due towards the hire-purchase price and have not
been paid by him, including the sum, if any, which he
is liable to pay under sub-section (2).

(2) Where the hirer terminates the agreement
under sub-section (1), and the agreement provides for
the payment of a sum named on account of such termi-
nation, the liability of the hirer to pay that sum shall
be subject to the following conditions:—

(a) where the total of the sums paid and the
sums due in respect of the hire-purchase price
immediately before the termination exceeds one-
half of the hire-purchase price, the hirer shall not
be liable to pay the sum so named;

(b) where the total of the sums paid and the
sums due in respect of the hire-purchase price
immediately before the termination does not
exceed one-half of the hire-purchase price, the
hirer shall be liable to pay the difference between
the said total and the said one-half, or such less
sum as may be named in the agreement;

(c) nothing in this sub-section shall prejudice
any liability of the hirer for any hire which might
have accrued due before the termination.

(3) Any provision in any agreement, wherdby the Cf. 5; OF
right conferred on a hirer by this section to terminate HP.A.,1938.

the hire-purchase agreement is excluded or restricted,
or whereby any liability in addition to the liability
imposed by this Act is imposed on a hirer by reason
of the termination of the hire-purchase agreement by
him under this section, shall be void."

(4) Nothing in this section shall prejudice any right cy, 5.-4 (4)

of a hirer to terminate a_ hire-purchase agreement and 240)

otherwise than by virtue of this section.

1938.

“3

10. A hirer who is liable to make payments in res- Right of
pect, of two or more hire-purchase agreements to the hirer to.

same owner shall, notwithstanding any agreement to ements

the contrary, be entitled, on making any payment in Lon

respect

in
of

respect of the agreements which is not sufficient to dis- two or more
charge the total amount then due under all the agree- sreements.

ments, to appropriate the sum so paid by him in or
towards the satisfaction of the sum due under any one
of the agreements,sr in or towards the satisfaction of
the sums due under any two or more of the agree-
ments in such proportions as he thinks fit, and, if he
fails to make any such appropriation as aforesaid, the

4Sections 5(a), [prohibition against entry by owner etc,], 5 ७2)
[nullifying any provision whereby a person acting on behalf of
owner is treated as_hirer’s agent] and s(e) [nullifying any provision
relieving an owner from Tiabill ity for the acts of his agent etc.) of the
H.P.A., 1938, have been omitted, as such elaborate provisions appear
to be unnecessary in India.

Sction 5(c) of the H.P.A., 1938, in effect extends the beneficial
provisions to termination of the agreement by any mode. This has
been regarded as too wide and has, therefore, been omitted.

. 9
31938.


Right of
hirer t0
assign bis
right, title
and interest
under the
agreement.

Cf. New
South Wales
Bill, Clause
9

26

sum so paid shall, by virtue of this section, stand
appropriated towards the satisfaction of the sums due
under the respective hire-purchase agreements in the
order in which the agreements were entered into.

11. (1) The right, title and interest of a hirer under
a hire-purchase agreement may be assigned with the
consent of the owner or, if his consent is unreasonably
withheld, without his consent.

(2) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no
payment or other consideration shall be required by
an owner for his consent for such an assignment as is
mentioned in sub-section (1), and where an owner
requires any such payment or any other consideration
for his consent, that consent shall be deemed to be
unreasonably withheld.

(3) Where on a request for his consent thereto
being made by a hirer the owner fails or refuses to
give his consent to such an assignment as is mentioned
in sub-section (1), the hirer-may app ly by petition to
the court for an order declaring that the consent of
the owner to the assignment has been unreasonably
withheld, and where such an order is made that con-

_ sent shall be deemed to be unreasonably withheld.

Obligations
of the hirer
to comply
the
agreement.

Explanation.—In this section “court” means a court
which would have jurisdiction to entertain a suit for
the relief claimed in the petition.

(4) As a condition of granting such consent, the
owner may stipulate that all defaults under the hire-
purchase agreement shall be made. good and may
require the hirer and the assignee to execute and
deliver to the owner an assignment agreement, in a
form approved by the owner, whereby, without preju-
dicing or affecting the continuing personal liab: lity of
the hirer in such respects the assignee agrees with the
owner to be personally liable to pay the instalments of
hire remaining unpaid and to perform and observe all
other stipulations and conditions of the hire-purchase
agreement during the residue of the term thereof and
whereby the assignee indemnifies the hirer in respect
of such liabilities. .

(5) The provisions of this section shall apply not-
withstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
hire-purchase agreement.

12, Subject to the provisions of this Act, the hirer
shall be bound—

(a) to pay the hire in accordance with the
agreement, and

(b) otherwise to comply with the terms of the
agreement.


27

13. (1) The hirer is, in the absence of a contract to Obligation ०
the contrary,— bier of का
to be taken
of goods.
(a) bound to take as much care of the goods Cf. s. 151,
to which the hire-purchase agreement relates as a LCA.
man of ordinary prudence would, under similar
circumstances, take of his own goods of the same
bulk, quality and value; and
(b) not responsible for the loss, destruction Cf. s. 1525
or deterioration of the goods, if he has taken the }C.A.
amount of care thereof described in clause (a).

(2) The hirer is liable to make compensation to the
owner for any damage caused by failure to take care
of the goods in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (1).

14. If the hirer makes any use of the goods to which Obligation
the hire-purchase agreement relates which is not of hirer in
according to the conditions of the agreement, the hirer respett of ds,
shall be liable to make compensation to the owner for use of goods.
any damage arising to the goods from or during such Cf. s. 154,
use of them. LCA,

15. (1) Where by virtue of a hire-purchase agree- Obligation
ment a hirer is under a duty to keep the goods com- of ‘hirer to
prised in the agreement in his possession or control, the fnation as to
hirer shall, on receipt of a request in writing from the whereabouts
owner, inform the owner where the goods are at the of goods.
time when the information is given or, if it is sent by cy ५. 7,
post, at the time of posting. LP.A., 1938

(2) If a hirer fails without reasonable cause to give
the said information within fourteen days of the
receipt of the notice, he shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to two hundred rupees.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE OWNER

16. Where the hirer— Right of
owner to
terminate
hire-pur-

(a) makes default in the payment of hire as chase ane

provided in the hire-purchase agreement; or default in
payment of
hire or un
authorised
act or
breach of
express
conditions

_(b) does any act with regard to the goods toAs 0 ७)
which the agreement relates which is inconsistent {4° "53?
with any of the terms of the agreement; or


28

as to @ __ (0) breaks an express condition which pro-
se Transfer vides that, on the breach thereof, the owner may
@,,Transfe terminate the agreement;

Act. the owner shall, subject to the provisions of sections

19 and 20, be entitled to terminate the agreement by
giving to the hirer notice of termination in writing.

Rights of 17. Where a hire-purchase agreement is terminated
termination, Under this Act, then the owner shall be entitled,—

(a) to retain the hire which has accrued due
and which has already been paid;

(b) to recover the arrears of hire due;

(c) subject to the provisions of sub-section (2)
of section 9, to forfeit the initial deposit, if so pro-
vided in the agreement;

(d) subject to the provisions of section 18, and
subject to any contract to the contrary, to seize the
goods;

(e) subject to the provisions of sections 19 and
20, to recover possession of the goods by suit or by
petition under section 18; and

(f) to damages for non-delivery of the goods,
from the date on which the termination is effec-
tive, to the date on which the goods are delivered
to or seized by the owner.

Restriction 18. (1) Where goods have been let under a hire-
tight to re- purchase agreement and the statutory proportion of
cover pos- the hire-purchase price has been paid, whether in pur-
session of | suance of a judgment or otherwise, or tendered by or
goods other- on behalf of the hirer or any surety, the owner shall
throug ise than not enforce any right to recover possession of the goods
Court. from the hirer otherwise than by petition under sub-

Cf.s. 1, section (3) or by suit.
HPA. Explanation.—In this section, “statutory proportion”
means—
(a) one-half, where the hire-purchase price is
fifteen thousand rupees or less, and
(b) three-fourth, in other cases.

(2) If the owner recovers possession of goods in con-
travention of the provisions of sub-section (1), the hire-
purchase agreement, if not previously terminated, shall
terminate, and—

(a) the hirer shall be released from all liability
under the agreement and shall be entitled to re-
cover from the owner’ all sums paid by the hirer
under the agreement or under any security given
by him in respect thereof; and

(b) any surety shall be entitled to recover from.
the owner’ all sums paid by him under the con-

19:

14 The words “in a suit for money had and received” occurring
in the English Act have been omitted, as unnecessary.


29

tract of guarantee or under any security given by
him in respect thereof.

(3) Where, by virtue of the provisions of sub-section
(1), the owner is precluded from enforcing a right to
recover possession of the goods, he may present a peti-
tion for recovery of possession of the goods to any
court having jurisdiction to entertain a suit for the
same relief.

(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply in
any case in which the hirer has terminated the agree-
ment! by virtue of any right vested in him.

19. Where the owner, after he has terminated the Relief ter
hire-purchase agreement in accordance with the provi- कक for
sions of clause (a) of section 16, institutes any suit or non-payment
presents any petition against the hirer for the recovery of hire.
of the goods, and at the hearing of the suit or petition, Bey tad
the hirer pays or tenders to the owner the hire in with s. rr
arrears, together with such interest thereon as may (1) HPA.
be payable under the terms of the agreement and his 7936.
full costs of the suit or petition and complies with such , ae
other conditions, if any, as the court may think fit to Transfer of
impose, the court may, in lieu of making a decree or Property
order for specific delivery, pass an order relieving the Ast 1882.
hirer against the termination; and thereupon the hirer enn
shall continue in possession of the goods as if the HP.A., 2
agreement had not been terminated. 1938.

20. (1) Where a hire-purchase agreement has been Relief against
terminated in accordance with the provisions of clause for unau-
(b) or clause (c) of section 16, no suit or petition by thorised
the owner against the hirer for the recovery of the act or
goods shall lie unless and until the owner has served breach of

on the hirer a notice in writing— Condition.
Cf. 8. 114A,
(a) specifying the particular breach or act are ‘mal
complained of; and Fransfer of
Property

(b) if the breach or act is capable of remedy, Act, 1882.
requiring the hirer to remedy it;

and the hirer fails, within a period of fourteen days
from the date of the service of the notice, to remedy
the breach or act if it is capable of remedy.

(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to an express cf. s, 114A,
condition relating to termination in case of non- last para.,
payment of hire.* Pransfer of

*roperty
Act, 1882.

1The words “or the bailment” occurring in the English Act,
have been omitted, as unnecessary.

4As to assignment, etc., see clause 11. In view of the provisions
of that clause, breach of a term prohibiting assignment is not mentioned
in this clause.


Obligation
of owner to
supply cop-
ies and
information.

है ५ 3. 6,
2.8...
7938.

30

21. (1) It shall be the duty of the owner to supply,
free of cost, a true copy of the hire-purchase agree-
ment, signed by the owner,—

(a) to the hirer, as soon as may be after execu-
tion of the agreement; and

(b) where there is a contract of guarantee, to
the surety, on demand made at any time before the
final payment has been made under the agreement.

(2) It shall also be the duty of the owner, at any
time before the final payment has been made under
the hire-purchase agreement, to supply to the hirer,
within fourteen days after the owner receives a request
in writing from the hirer in this behalf and the hirer
tenders to the owner the sum of one rupee for ex-
penses, a statement signed by the owner or his agent
showing—

(a) the amount paid by or on behalf of the
hirer;

(b) the amount which has become due under
the agreement but remains unpaid, and the date
upon which each unpaid instalment became due,
and the amount of each such instalment; and

(c) the amount which is to become payable
under the agreement, and the date or the mode of
determining the date upon, which each future ins-
talment is to become payable, and the amount of
each such instalment.

(3) Where there is a failure without reasonable
cause to carry out the duties imposed by sub-section
(1), or sub-section (2), then, while the "default con-
tinues,—

(a) the owner shall not be entitled to enforce
the agreement against the hirer or to enforce any
contract of guarantee relating to the agreement,
or to enforce any right to recover the goods from
the hirer, and

(b) no security given by the hirer in respect
of money payable under the agreement or given
by a surety in respect of money payable under such
a contract of guarantee ag aforesaid shall be
enforceable against the hirer or the surety by any
holder thereof;

-and, if the default continues for a period of one month,
the defaulter shall be punishable with fine which may
vextend to two hundred rupees.


5 of 1920

31
CHAPTER VI

MISCELLANEOUS,

22. Where an owner has agreed that any part of the Discharge of
hire-purchase price may be discharged otherwise than rice other-
by the payment of money, any such discharge shall, py payment
for the purposes of sections 8, 9, 18 and 21, be deemed of money.

to be a payment of that part of the hire-purchase price. 11 / मर 21(2)>

1938.

23. (1) Where, during the continuance of the hire- Insolvency
purchase agreement, the hirer is adjudged insolvent of hirer.
under any law relating to insolvency for the time being
in force, the Official Receiver shall have, in respect of
the goods which are in the possession of the hirer under
the agreement, the same rights and obligations as the
hirer had in relation thereto.

(2) The Official Receiver may, with the permission
of the Insolvency Court, and notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in the hire-purchase agree-
ment, assign the rights of the hirer under the agree-
ment, to any other person, and the assignee shall have
all the rights and be subject to all the obligations of
the hirer under the agreement.

Explanation.—In this section, “Official Receiver”
means an Official Receiver appointed under the Pro-
vincial Insolvency Act, 1920, and includes any person
holding a similar office under any other law relating
to insolvency for the time being in force.

24. Where goods have been let under a hire-purchase successive
agreement, and at any time thereafter the owner makes hire-purchase
a further hire-purchase agreement with the hirer re- agreements
lating to other goods, any such further hire-purchase between ne.
agreement shall not have effect in so far as it affects
prejudicially any right which the hirer would have Gf.s. 15,
had by virtue of section 18 under the first-mentioned ae
agreement, if such further hire-purchase agreement *
had not been made.

25. (1) Where, in a suit or petition by an owner of Evidence of
goods which have been let under a hire-purchase adverse
agreement to enforce a right to recover possession of detention in
the goods from the hirer, the owner proves that, before petition to
the commencement of the suit or petition and after the recover
right to recover possession of the goods accrued, the possesion
owner made a request in writing to the hirer to surren- goods.
der the goods, the hirer’s possession of the goods shall.
for the purpose of the owner's claim to recover posses- Cf. $. 10,
sion thereof, be deemed to be adverse to the owner. ELPA. 1938.

(2) Nothing in this section shall affect a claim for
damages for conversion.


32

Hirer’s Te- 26. If, whilst by virtue of this Act the enforcement
fusal to कि by an owner of a right to recover possession of goods
goods not to from a hirer is subject to any restriction, the hirer

be conver- refuses to give up possession of the goods to the owner,

sion in the hirer shall not, by reason only of the refusal, be
oe 656, liable to the owner for conversion of the goods.
० S. 17:

fea,
1938.
Service of 27. Any notice required or authorised to be served
notice. .
Cf. cl on or given to an owner or a hirer under this Act may
a, New be so served or given—
South hi (a) by delivering it to him personally; or

s Hire- rn हि हि
purchase (b) by posting it addressed to him at his last
Bill, 1959. known place of residence or business.
Act not to 28. This Act shall not apply in relation to any hire-

apply to purchase agreement made before the commencement

existing
agreements, Of this Act.

Contrast,
$. 20,
HPA,
1938.


APPENDIX II

NortEs ON CLAUSES
Clause 1
The clause does not need any comments.
Clause 2

Para (a)—“contract of guarantee”.—(i) The defini-
tion of contract of guarantee does not use the words
“at the request expressed or implied of the hirer”. The
omission of these words is intended to maintain ccn-
formity with the definition of “consideration” in sec-
tion 2(d) of the Indian Contract Act, which says, that
when at the desire of the promisor the promisee etc.
has done ete. something, such act etc. is called consi-
deration. (Under section 127 of the Indian Contract
Act, anything done or any promise made for the benefit
of the principal debtor is sufficient consideration to be
surety for giving the guarantee).

(ii) As the Indian Contract Act uses the expression
“surety” that has been adopted here, instead of
“guarantor”.

(iii) In other respects, the English Act has been
followed.

Para (b)—“hire”.—The provision in the English Act
[section 2(2)(b)], which speaks of ‘instalment’ seems
rather technical. The definition adopted here gives a
more concrete picture. Obviously, hire is paid for
possession or use of the goods—a proposition which
need not be incorporated in the definition.

Para (c)—“hire-purchase agreement’.—The defini-
tion of hire-purchase agreement in the English Act does
not give a vivid description of the nature of the agree-
ment. A hire-purchase agreement is an agreement—

(i) for hire at the inception,
(ii) with an option to purchase.
The definition in the draft clause is intended to

bring out the true nature and character of the
transaction.

(A hire-purchase transaction constituted by two or
more separate agreements has been dealt with
separately).'

12566 clause 5.

33


34

The case where without an overt act by the hirer
the property automatically passes to the hirer would
not be covered merely by the words “option to pur-
chase” and an attempt has been made to cover such
cases 8180.1-2,

Para (d)—“hire-purchase price”.—This follows the
English Act, in substance.

The inclusive provision has been taken from sec-
tion 3(1) of the (English) Hire-Purchase Act, 1954.
This provision was not there originally in the 1938
Act. The words “whether that sum is to be or has
been paid to the owner or to any other person” appear
to have been intended partly to nullify the decision
of the Court of Appeal,’ wherein it was held that a
payment made to a third person (that is, a person other
than the owner of the goods) could not be regarded
as a part of the hire-purchase price. It was argued
in that case that such a payment formed a part of the
hire-purchase price, thus increasing the amount of the
hire-purchase price and taking it above the maximum
to which the Act then applied. This argument was
negatived, and in consequence it was held that the
1938 Act was applicable to the facts of this case. While
the provision in the English Act which lays down the
maximum limit for the application of the Act‘ has not
been adopted in the draft, it is felt that the inclusive
provision can safely be retained as serving a useful
purpose for governing the scope of the expression
“hire-purchase price” occurring at other places in the
draft clauses.

The definition has been framed so as to begin with
the meaning of the expression; it then states what is
included (by reason of the provision already discussed
above), and then states what is excluded. It is felt that
this scheme is better than that adopted in the English
Act.

Para (e)—“hirer”,—This follows the English Act.
Para (f)—“owner”.—This follows the English Act.
Para (g)—This will be useful for expressions like
“condition”, “warranty”, “delivery”, etc.
Clause 3

Section 2 of the English Act contains elaborate
prescriptions as to requirements of a hire-purchase
agreement.

*See Uniform Laws Annotated, Vol. 2A, page 2 (Annotation by
Bogert).

?See also the body of the Report, para. 5.

Menzies v. United Motor Finance Corpn. Ltd. (1940) 1 All. ER.
549 (Court of Appeal).

“Section 1, clauses (6) and (०) of the (English) Hire-Purchase Acr,
1938, as amended by the 1954 Act.


35

In order to simplify it, the provision has been split
up into two clauses in the draft. The requirements
relating to form have been incorporated in the clause
under discussion, while the requirements relating to
contents have been set out in a separate clause.!

The clause provides that the agreement must be in
writing and signed by the parties. It is felt that these
safeguards are necessary for preventing fraud etc.

It has been made clear that a breach of the require-
ments relating to form will make the agreement void.
In this respect, the clause goes further than section
2(2) (a) of the English Act, which makes it unenforce-
able, but not totally void.

Where the agreement is not signed by the surety,
it is considered that the agreement need not be made
void or voidable in relation to the hirer. It need not
also be made void or voidable at the instance of the
surety; in such cases, it is considered, it should be
sufficient to provide that the agreement is voidable at
the owner’s instance. The only person who is likely
to be prejudiced by the surety’s not signing the hire-
purchase agreement is the owner.

Clause 4

Sub-clause (1)—As already explained,’ the provi-
sions relating to contents have been separated from
those relating to form, and have been placed in this
clause.

The clause, in substance, follows the English Act,
but an attempt has been made to make it simpler by
dividing the requirements into items (a), (b), etc.

It is considered that the agreement should state
particulars regarding the person to whom the instal-
ments are payable, the number of instalments etc. and
the date on which the hiring should be deemed to have
commenced. Further, as regards the “cash price” it is
considered that the agreement should, as cash price,
state the market value of the goods on the date of the
agreement. The reason is, that where the person who
lets out the goods is not the owner but only a financier,
it would not be appropriate to speak of the price at
which the goods “may be purchased” by the hirer,
because the financier would not always be in a position
himself to sell the goods to the hirer at that stage. The
only object behind requiring a statement of the cash
price is simply to have a rough idea of the market
price, so that the difference between the hire-purchase
price and the cash price can be ascertained, and the
profit made by the owner gauged. This object would
continue to be achieved by the words proposed to be
used.

1See clause 4.
3866 notes to clause 3.


36

Sub-clause (2).—Where the consideration is in the
form of kind, it would be useful to mention it in the
hire-purchase agreement. Hence this provision.

Sub-clause (3)—Where the owner does not state in
the hire-purchase agreement the particulars required
to be stated by this clause, it would suffice if the hirer
is given an option to avoid the agreement through
Court. Section 2(2), opening lines, of the English Act,
in such circumstances, provides that the owner shall
not be entitled to enforce the hire-purchase agreement
or any contract of guarantee or any right to recover
the goods from the hirer etc. (There is a proviso allow-
ing the Court to dispense with a particular require-
ment). It is considered that this goes too far, and may
work hardship on the owner in a large number of
cases. To make the agreement completely unenforce-
able and even to bar the right to recover the goods
from the hirer appear to be sanctions which are rather
harsh for a provision relating to contents of an agree-
ment. The hirer can go to Court, and the Court can
give relief according to the justice of the case.

Clause 5

Substance—Sometimes the parties instead of
entering into a single hire-purchase agreement, exe-
cute two or more agreements which, taken together,
amount to a hire-purchase agreement. (In such cases,
there is a separate agreement of hire and a separate
agreement of purchase). With reference to such
agreements, four possible courses can be adopted:—

(a) Such agreements may be allowed, pro-
vided they conform to the other provisions of the
Act. That is the course adopted in the English
Act, vide the definition of “hire-purchase agree-
ment” in section 21(1). H.P.A., 1938.

(9) The agreement for hire may be allowed
to stand and the agreement for purchase may be
declared to be void.

(c) Both the agreements may be allowed to
stand, but they may be treated as not falling
within the Act and as not constituting or having
the effect of a hire-purchase agreement. Compare
the treatment accorded to mortgages by condi-
tional sale under section 58(c), proviso, of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

(d) Both the agreements may be declared to
be void.

The course at (a) above has been adopted, as in the
English Act, as just to all parties and as not likely to
raise difficulty too often.

The course at (b) above has been rejected, because
that would be contrary to the real intentions of the
parties and would give the owner an advantage which
was not agreed to by the parties.


37

The course at (c) above has been rejected, since it
would enable many persons to evade the application
of the proposed Act by splitting up the transaction into
two agreements.

The course at (d) above has been rejected, as too
drastic.

Form:—The language of the English Act has been
followed with two changes:—

(i) the words “either the bailee......... may
pass to the bailee” have been replaced by “the
bailee has an option to purchase the goods”, in
consonance with the definition of ‘hire-purchase
agreement’ as proposed.!

(ii) It has been made clear that the agree-
ments taken together should satisfy the conditions
of validity.

(iii) Instead of “single” agreement, the words
“single hire-purchase agreement” have been used,
for precision.

[In view of (ii) above, this is not likely to create
any complications.]

Clause 6

General.—Section 8 of the English Act sets out the
conditions and warranties which are to be implied in
hire-purchase agreements, and that has, in general,
been adopted in this clause,

Condition for title—when owner should have title

It will be seen that under the draft, the condition as
to the title of the owner is to operate at the time when
the property in the goods is to pass.”

Sale of Goods Act

Though some of the warranties and conditions dealt
with in this clause are also dealt with in gome pr rovi-
sions of the Indian statute law, still, for the sake of
comprehensiveness they have been included in the
draft, on the lines of the English Act.

Structure of clause

The structural arrangement of clauses given in the
English Act has been departed from, in order to deal
separately with warranties, conditions other than those
of fitness, and condition of fitness.

3866 clause 2—“‘ hire-purchase agreement”.

*For a detailed discussion see the body of the Report, paragraph.
12.

*These have been cited in the margin against the clause,


38

“At any time when the property is to pass”.

The words “at any time when the property is to
pass” have been used (instead of “at the time when
the property is to pass”) to leave no doubt that the
clause applies both (i) when the property passes under
the agreement, and (ii) when it passes by virtue of the
Act—by premature purchase.

Clause 7

Though the English Act does not contain any provi-
sion as to the point of time at which property passes
to the hirer, it is felt that such a provision would be
useful. The property does not pass to the hirer imme-
diately on the execution of the agreement,’ and the
clause under discussion is intended to make this clear.
The exact date on which the property passes will, of
course, depend on the terms of the agreement,” but the
clause will serve the purpose of removing any mis-
apprehension to the effect that property passes at an
earlier stage.

Clause 8
Purchase at any time

1. The hirer need not wait until the last instalment
matures. He can accelerate the purchase of the goods
at any time during the subsistence of the agreement,
so that he need not wait until the full span of the in-
stalments is exhausted.*

Rebate for early purchase

2. The question, however, arises whether the law
should stop here. That would mean that the owner
gets the full hire-purchase price. The concession that
the hirer gets is merely in point of time and not in
point of money. The hire-purchase price would include
interest ete. also, and by getting the full hire-purchase
price, the owner would be able to invest it and again
earn interest thereon—a position which would be of
advantage only to the owner. After careful consider-
ation, it is felt that the hirer should be allowed some
rebate, when the owner gets the whole balance in
lump sum.

+See Benjamin on Sale, Eighth Edition, page 314.

2Cf. .Exparte Crawcour, (1878) 9 Ch. D-419= 47 L.J. Bkcy,
94 (C.A.).

As has been held in Lancashire Waggon Co. v. Nuttall, (1880)
42 L.T. 465 C.A. cited in Benjamin on Sale, 8th edition, Page 315,
the provision for payment by instalments is for buyer’s benefit ;_he
may anticipate the payments, so as to vest the property in him on full
payment.


39

Rebate and “hire-purchase charges”

3. The next question is, if a rebate is to be given,
how should it be calculated. Opinion is almost un-
animous, that the calculation should be with refer-
ence to the difference between the hire-purchase price
and the cash price. This difference is known in busi-
ness practice as “hire-purchase charges”. The rebate
should be related to the hire-purchase charges.

Fraction of hire-purchase charges

4. But the question is, should the rebate be given
for the whole hire-purchase charges or should it be
given only for a fraction thereof? From the evidence
taken by the Commission, it would appear that while
interest and similar charges may be distributable and
apportionable over the whole period, expenses like
office charges and establishment expenses are not so
distributable as these are incurred once and far all for
every transaction. Therefore, some deduction has to
be made on this account while allowing rebate, and the
draft proposes a reduction of one-third as representing
office charges, i.e., so much of hire-purchase charges
as represents office charges—(one-third according to
the draft) will be excluded in giving rebate.

Period of hire-purchase charges to be taken into
account

5. Then the next question that remains to be con-
sidered is, whether the hire-purchase charges for the
whole period should be taken into account, or the hire-
purchase charges proportionate to the unexpired period
should be the basis. In fairness to the owner, the
latter should be regarded as the correct basis, and has
been adopted.

6. Where the provision in the agreement is more
favourable to the hirer and allows a higher rebate, that
will prevail, and that has been made clear. Further,
where the goods are in short supply or subject to
import restrictions, or similar circumstances exist
whereby early purchase of the goods may not be in the
public interest, the Central Government should have
power to exempt such goods from the clause or modify
the application of the clause in relation to such goods.
Necessary provision has been made.

“Balance not yet due”

The rebate has to be linked up with the balance. If
the purchase is made early, the balance will be high,
and correspondingly, the rebate will also be high. But
this balance, it should be noted, means the amount “not
yet due”. It should be added that if the words “not
yet paid” are adopted it would make a difference. If
the amount has become due, it no longer forms part of
the balance, whether it is paid or it is not paid. To link


40

up the rebate with the balance “not paid”, might create
an unintended consequence, because the hirer may
postpone the payment and thereby earn a higher re-
bate. For example, if, out of the total hire-purchase
price of Rs. 10,000, Rs. 8,000 has become due but only
Rs. 6,000 has been paid, the balance “not due” is
Rs. 2,000 but the balance “not paid” is Rs. 4,000. It
would be to the advantage of the hirer, if the test
“unpaid balance” is adopted. The hirer would thus
benefit by his own default—which is not the intention.

Summary of the various formulas suggested

7. For convenience of study, the possible formulas
for rebate suggested by or to the Commission in the
course of the evidence or in the written comments are
collected below: —

No rebate

(i) Hirer may purchase at any time on pay-
ment of the hire-purchase price less the amount
already paid towards the hire-purchase price.
(This was the provision embodied in the Draft Bill
as originally circulated. Arithmetically speaking,
there is no rebate here. The provision merely gives
a right to the hirer to purchase straightaway with-
out waiting till the expiry of the full time con-
templated by the agreement).

Rebate=} hire-purchase charges for whole period

(ii) If the hirer purchases the goods within a
very short period—say three months—rebate of
one-half of the difference between the cash price
and the hire-purchase price should be allowed.
This was the question put as Question No. 2(b)
while circulating the Draft Report.

Rebate=hire-purchase charges for unexpired period

(iii) The rebate should be linked up with the
balance of the hire-purchase price. This is in effect
the suggestion of the Allahabad High Court (S. No.
58 in the file of the Commission). This can be ex-
pressed in the following formula (substituting
amount in place of period) :—

“The hirer (provided he has paid all the in-
stalments due) shall pay an amount which bears
to the cash price the same proportion as the
balance of the hire-purchase price bears to the
hire-purchase price.”


Al

Here, in effect, the rebate amounts to the hire-
purchase charges proportionate to the balance,
that is, for unexpired period.

(iv) Clause 11 (2) of the New South Wales
Hire-Purchase Bill, 1959, read with the definition
of “statutory rebate”, expressed in simple manner,
would be found to lay down that the rebate is
equal to the hire-purchase charges multiplied by
the number of months still to go and then divided
by the total number of months contemplated by
the agreement. In other words, the rebate is
limited to the hire-purchase charges for the un-
expired period. This is in effect the same as that
suggested by the Allahabad High Court.

Rebate=} hire-purchase charges for unexpired period

(v) The test suggested in the course of
evidence by Witness No. 2—The Upper-India
Hire-Purchase Companies Association Ltd. New
Delhi—was that the rebate should not exceed one-
half of the hire-purchase charges for the unexpired
period. This is more stringent than the New South
Wales Bill, because in the New South Wales Bill
the whole hire-purchase charges for the unexpired
period are allowed, while under the test suggested
by the witness even the hire-purchase charges pro-
portionate to the unexpired period have to be
halved. [This is also different from the test sug-
gested by the Commission in the Questionnaire,
because the Commission suggested one-half of the
difference between the cash price and the hire-
purchase price, that is to say, one-half of the
hire-purchase charges for the whole period.]

3 hire-purchase charges

(vi) Witness No. 3—The Bombay Transport
Financiers Association Ltd. Bombay—after stress-
ing the fact that rebate depends on personal con-
siderations, ultimately agreed to a formula based
on the one-third to one-half of the difference be-
tween the cash price and the hire-purchase price.

(vii) Witness No, 1—The Sundaram Finance
Ltd. Madras—stressed the fact that it would be
very difficult to lay down a proportion by statute
or to provide for a sliding scale, because the re-
bate to be given very often depends on the rela-
tions of the company with the party, the stage at
which the rebate is asked for, etc. Towards the
end the witness suggested that if the hirer paid
the whole balance after one-half of the period has
expired, then one-third of the financing charges for
the unexpired period may be given as a rebate.


42
Clause 9

Section 4 of the English Act deals with the right of
a hirer to terminate the agreement. Under the law he
is entitled to do so at any time, and return the goods,
and in that event he should properly be liable only for
the hire upto that date. But the agreements generally
provide that when the hirer terminates them, he
should pay an amount specified therein and that, as
already stated,! was often penal and exhorbitant. This
was one of the evils sought to be redressed by the Act.
Dealing with this matter, section 4 provides that on
termination of the agreement the hirer shall “be liable,
without prejudice to any liability which has accrued
before termination, to pay the amount, if any, by which
one-half of the hire-purchase price exceeds the total of
the sums paid and the sums due in respect of hire-
purchase price immediately before the termination, or
such less amount as may be specified in the agreement”.
The result of this section is, that if the minimum
amount specified in the agreement exceeds one-half, the
hirer is liable to pay only one-half and not more.

In adopting the principle of this section, the clause
under discussion tries to express it in a language which
deals with each situation separately—namely (i) where
the amount paid exceeds 4 and (ii) other cases. Where
there is, under the agreement, no minimum payment
to be made, nothing need be paid as penalty. This is
also clear from the language of the draft.

It is also provided that the hirer should give notice
to the owner (before termination) and deliver the
goods and pay up the amounts due.

Section 4(2) of the English Act deals with the
hirer’s liability to pay damages for not taking reason-
able care. This subject has been dealt within a
separate clause”, and does not, therefore, find a place
in the clause under discussion.

According to section 5(b) of the English Act, any
agreement which bars the right conferred by the Act
on the hirer is void, and that has been adopted in this
clause also.

Clause 10

Section 9 of the English Act deals with the question
of appropriation of payments made by a hirer when he
has entered into successive _ agreements cf hire-
purchase with the same owner. The section enables a

3866 the body of the Report, para. 2.

*See clause 13.


43

hirer to appropriate his payments towards the agree-
ments in such manner as he decides so as to enable him
to save some of the goods at.least, if he cannot save
all of them.

The clause under discussion follows this section.
The wording, “the sum shall stand appropriated”
has been used for clarity. हु

One important change, however, as compared with
the English Act is, that while under the English Act in
the absence of appropriation by the hirer, the payments
are appropriated towards the sums due under the
various hire-purchase agreements in the proportions
which those sums bear to one another, under the draft
proposed the amounts would be appropriated in the
order in which the agreements were entered into. This
is considered to be more fair to the owner and follows
section 6 of the Hire Purchase Act, 1958 of Western
Australia (55 of 1958).

It is considered unnecessary to incorporate the
further refinements appearing in section 61 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, regarding (i) limitation and
(ii) situations where the amounts are of equal standing.

Clause 11

This clause is intended to lay down the position
regarding assignment of the hirer’s rights un: der the
agreement. It is considered that assignments should
be allowed with the owner’s consent, but that if he
unreasonably withholds his consent, the hirer should
be free to go to the court and obtain a declaration that
the consent has been unreasonably withheld.*

It is considered that the owner should not charge
any consideration for the consent, except the making
good of past defaults and the execution of an agree-
ment which continues the liability of the original hirer
and also makes the assignee liable for future while
indemnifying the hirer.

Clause 12

This is intended merely to state the obligations of
the hirer and has been inserted to make the Bill
complete, पु

1866 also the discussion in the body of the Report, paragraph
1


a4
Clause. 13

This deals with the care to be taken of goods and
follows similar provisions’ in the Contract Act.

The Law Commission has, in its Report on the Con-
ivact Act,? recommended that section 151 of the Indian
Contract Act may be made subject to a contract to the
contrary. In conformity with this recommendation,
sub-clause (1), paragraph (b) has been made subject
to a contract to the contrary.

[Section 152 of the Contract Act, which corresponds
to sub-clause (1), paragraph (a), is already subject to
a contract to the contrary.]

Clause 14

This embodies provisions as to the use to which the
hirer can put the goods. The clause mainly follows
section 154, Indian Contract Act.

Clause 15
This follows the English Act.

Clause 16

Para (a).—This embodies the rule that if the hirer
suakes a default in the payment of hire the owner may
terminate the agreement. Though such provisions are
usually found in the agreement, it has been considered
proper to place this right of the owner on a statutory
footing

(There is no such provision in the English Act).

Para (b).—If the bailee does any act with regard to
‘the goods bailed which is inconsistent with the condi-
tions of bailment, the owner has, under section 153 of
the Indian Contract Act,.the right to terminate bail-

ment. That has been embodied here, with suitable
verbal modifications.

Para (c).—This enunciates the rule that if the hirer
commits breach of an express condition providing for
termination of the agreement providing for its breach,
the owner may terminate the agreement.

Section 111(g) of the Transfer of Property Act has
been followed as a model, and it has been provided
that the termination will be by a notice in writing.

(There is no such provision in the English Act).

1Cited in the margin against the clause.
*13th Report (Contract Act), pages 59-60, paragraph 121.


45

Clause 17

For the sake of comprehensiveness, the rights that
flow to the owner on termination of the agreement
have been enumerated here.

(There is no such provision in the English Act).

The owner’s right to seize the goods extra-judicially
will be operative in all cases unless there is a specific
contract to the contrary. The right will, of course, be
subject to the provision meant for cases where a cer-
tain proportion of the hire-purchase price has been
paid."

Clause 18

General.—This is intended to prevent oppressive
exercise by the owner of the power to seize the goods
where there is a default in the payment of instalments.

Section 11 of the English Act provides that where
instalments amounting to one-third of the hire-purchase
price have been paid by the hirer, the owner cannot
himself seize the goods and must file a suit to enforce
his right. The English Act, however, is limited to hire-
purchase agreements upto a certain value only, and
there is no such restriction there for hire-purchase
agreements where the hire-purchase price exceeds
£ 300 (or £ 1000 in the case of livestock).

The comments received and the opinions expressed
in the course of oral evidence recorded on this clause
reveal a sharp difference of opinion as to the expe-
diency of this provision. In the draft which was circu-
lated by the Commission to the State Governments,
High Courts, interested bodies and persons, the provi-
sion suggested was that where Ohe-third of the hire-
purchase price has been paid, the extra-judicial re-
covery of the goods should be.barred. In the com-
ments received on this clause, at one extreme stosd the
view that the proportion given in the draft was fair,
and at the other extreme stood the view that the hire-
purchase business in India was in its infancy and any
restrictior. on the seizure of the goods by the owner
would hamper the recovery of the goods and would dis-
courage owners from giving out goods on hire-purchase.
The point made was, that while the owners did not
actually in practice use this right of seizure, the aprre-
hension that it may be used constituted a very valu-
able sanction for the punctual payment of instalments.
As between these two extremes, a number of inter-
mediate proportions were suggested, for example, one-
half, two-thirds, three-fourths, etc. of the hire-purchase
price. The Commission appreciated that the right to
seize goods constituted a useful safeguard for the

See clause 18.


46

owner’s interest; at the same time, it must be noted
that the goods given out on hire-purchase very often
constitute the main source of livelihood of the hirer,
and to leave the owner free to deprive the hirer of
the possession of such goods without going to Court
would cause serious hardship to the hirer.

Having regard to the fact that the main opposition
to the proportion of one-third came from business in-
terests concerned with motor-vehicles, particularly
trucks and lorries, in respect of which the hire-pur-
chase price would usually exceed Rs. 15,000, it appear-
ed that the best solution was to fix the proportion at
one-half for goods below Rs. 15,000 and three-fourths
in other cases."

Sub-clause (1)—This does not need any further
comments than those made under ‘general’ above.

Sub-clause (2).—In the opening portion, the article
“the” seems to be more appropriate than the article
“an” used in the English Act, and has been preferred.

Sub-clause (3).—Proceedings by way of suit for re-
covery of goods take a long time. As the clause under
discussion imposes a_ restriction on extra-judicial
seizure, it is considered that the proceedings should be
by way of petition, so that the matter may be disposed
of quickly and without much expense to the parties.
Proceedings by way of suit take time and that must
necessarily result in prejudice both to the owner and
to the hirer. The owner suffers, because he does not
get the goods, which may deteriorate in the meantime
by the hirer’s carelessness and indifference, while the
hirer’s interests are prejudiced because if the owner
obtains from the court an order for the appointment
of receiver or similar order, he loses the benefit of
enjoyment of the goods, which may be his only source
of livelihood.

Clause 19

Sections 12 to 16 of the English Act contain elabo-
rate provisions as to the procedure to be followed by
a court when the owner files a suit against the hirer
for recovery of the goods on termination of the agree-
ment for default in payment. These provisions are too
complicated and cumbersome for Indian conditions.
Instead, a simple provision has been proposed in the
draft, giving power to the court to grant relief against
forfeiture in such cases. Section 114 of the Transfer
of Property Act has been taken as a model.

It has been considered proper to add that the hirer
must also comply with such conditions as the Court
may think fit to impose. (The conditions may be in
the shape of security for future instalments or any
other provision. That need not be specified).

3866 also the body of the Report, paragraph 6.



47

Clause 20

This is intended to afford the hirer relief against
termination for the breach of express conditions (other
than those relating to payment of hire) or for unautho-
rised act. It has been modelled, generally, on section
114A of the Transfer of Property Act, after omitting
certain portions which do not fit in with the scheme of
the Bill.

In sub-clause (2), instead of “reasonable time”
allowed by the Transfer of Property Act, a definite
period of two weeks has been specified, since there is
no harm if, looking to the nature of the transactions to
which the Act will apply, a period is specified.

Clause 21

Sub-clause (1)(a) is not found in the English Act
end is intended to give the hirer a copy of the agree-
ment, free of cost, as soon as the agreement is
executed.

Sub-clause (1)(b) is also not found in the English
Act and is intended 10 give the surety a right to cbtain
a copy of agreement at any time, on demand made.
These will be particularly useful in cases where the
surety has not retained a copy with him at the time
when he signed the guarantee.

Sub-clause (2) follows section 6 of the English Act.
"The period has been put as 14 days, as in section 7 of
the English Act.

Sub-clause (3) also follows the English Act.

Clause 22

This follows section 21(2) of the English Act. Its
proper place, it is felt, is not in the interpretation
clause, but under “Miscellaneous”.

Clause 23

This deals with insolvency of the hirer and the con-
sequences that flow from that. The question is fully
discussed in the body of the Report.’

Clause 24

The problem of successive hire-purchase agreemenis
er.tered into by the same hirer with the same owner
has been dealt with here. It happens often that goods
X are hired under oné agreement, and subsequently,
while hiring goods Z from the same owner, the hirer
is made to agree to a term under which goods X will
also be subject to the obligations created by the subse-
quent agreement. This may sometimes affect prejudi-
cially any right which the hirer would otherwise

3866 body of the Report, para 8 et seq.


48

acquire on payment of a certain proportion.’ The
clause provides that any such modification of the rights,
etc. of the hirer under the first agreement would not.
be effective.

The present clause deals generally with successive
agreements. The specific question of appropriation of
payments has been dealt with in a separate clause.”

It may be noted that the clause as drafted is differ-
ent from section 15 of the (English) Hire-Purchase Act,
1938, on the following points: —

(i) Under the English Act, the protection one-
rates only if one-third of the hire-purchase price
has already been paid and thereafter, the further
agreement is made. Under the clause under dis-
cussion, on the other hand, this condition is not
necessary. The clause under discussion will,
therefore, operate irrespective of the point of time
when the subsequent agreement is made.

(ii) The English Act, in relation to the further
hire-purchase agreement, uses the words “compris-
ing those goods.” Under the clause under discus-
sion, the subsequent hire-purchase agreement has
been described as “relating to other goods”, since
usually it is in the guise of an agreement covering
other goods (whether along-with the original goods
or otherwise) that attempts are made to prejudice
the rights of the hirer.

(iii) In the English Act, the words used are
“the provisions of section .................. shall have
effect in relation to that further agreement as from
the commencement thereof”. The clause under
discussion is more clear, by specifically providing
that any right which the hirer would otherwise
have had will not be prejudiced by the further
agreement.

Clause 25

This follows the English Act. The word “petition”
is added to deal with the petitions under the Bill.*

Clause 26
This follows the English Act.
Clause 27

The object is to make an elaborate provision as to
the mode of serving notices under the Act. In the com-
ments received on the draft report when it was circu-
lated, requests were made for the insertion of such

2866 clause 18.
2866 clause 10.
3866 clause 18.


49

a provision because in many cases, the hirer, it was
said, would be moving about and personal service might
be difficult. It is considered that if service by post is
allowed, that will be sufficient.

Clause 28

Section 20 of the English Act contains elaborate pro-
visions as to which section of the Act will apply to
agreements entered into before the Act and which not.
The conditions in this country do not require that any
of the provisions of this Bill should retrospectively
apply to agreements entered into before this Bill. The
clause makes this clear.


APPENDIX III

List oF WITNESSES EXAMINED BY THE COMMISSION.
New Delhi (14th and 15th October, 1960).

Witmess No. Name of witness

1 2 .

i Shri Champakesa Iyengar | Representing the Sundaram
Shri G. H. Raman f Finance Private, Ltd., Madras.

2. Shri Ved Prakash Representing the Upper India
Shri B. K. Bedi .Hire-Purchase Companies As-

sociation Ltd., New Delhi.

3३... Shri S. S. More 1 Representing The Bombay

Shri Thakur Jaswant Singh Transport Financiers Associa-
J tion, Bombay.

56


APPENDIX IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER ACTS.
(i) Insolvency Acts.

A provision may be inserted in the Insolvency Acts
to the effect that goods taken on hire-purchase are not
subject to the doctrine of reputed ownership.

7866 the body of the Report, para 10.

51
‘GMGIPND—TSWing—253 M of Law—6-9-61—2,5¢0.