LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
200TH REPORT
ON
TRIAL BY MEDIA
FREE SPEECH AND FAIR TRIAL UNDER
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973
AUGUST 2006
1

JUSTICE M. JAGANNADHA RAO              LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA  
CHAIRMAN SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI-110001
TEL: 23384475
FAX: 23073864, 23388870
E-MAIL: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
RESIDENCE: 1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI-110011
TEL: 23019465
F.No.6(3)/124/2006-LC(LS) 31st August, 2006
Dear
I have great pleasure in presenting to you the 200th Report of the Law
Commission on “Trial by Media: Free Speech Vs. Fair Trial Under Criminal
Procedure (Amendments to the Contempt of Court Act, 1971)”.  The subject
was taken up suo motu having regard to the extensive prejudicial coverage
of crime and information about suspects and accused, both in the print and
electronic media.  There is today a feeling that in view of the extensive use
of the television and cable services, the whole pattern of publication of
news  has  changed  and  several  such  publications  are  likely  to  have
prejudicial impact on the suspects, accused, witnesses and even Judges and
in  general,  on  the  administration  of  justice.    According  to  our  law,  a
suspect/accused  is  entitled  to  a  fair  procedure  and  is  presumed  to  be
innocent till proved guilty in a Court of law.    None can be allowed to
prejudge or prejudice his case by the time it goes to trial.
Art.  19(1)(a)  of  the  Constitution  of  India  guarantees  freedom  of
speech and expression and Art. 19(2) permits reasonable restrictions to be
imposed by statute for the purposes of various matters including ‘Contempt
of  Court’.   Art. 19(2)  does  not  refer  to  ‘administration  of justice’ but
interference  of the  administration  of justice  is  clearly referred to  in  the
definition of ‘criminal contempt’ in sec. 2 of the Contempt of Courts Act,
1971  and  in  sec.  3  thereof  as  amounting  to  contempt.     Therefore,
publications which interfere or tend to interfere with the administration of
justice  amount  to  criminal  contempt  under  that  Act  and  if  in  order  to
2

preclude such interference, the provisions of that Act impose reasonable
restrictions on freedom of speech, such restrictions would be valid.
At present, under sec. 3(2) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 read
with the Explanation below it, full immunity is granted to publications even
if they prejudicially interfere with the course of justice in a criminal case, if
by  the  date  of  publication,  a  chargesheet  or  challan  is  not filed  or  if
summons or warrant are not issued.   Such publications would be contempt
only  if  a  criminal  proceeding  is  actually  pending  i.e.  if  chargesheet  or
challan is filed or summons or warrant are issued by the Court by the date of
publication.   Question is whether this can be allowed to remain so under
our Constitution or whether publications  relating  to suspects  or accused
from the date of their arrest should be regulated?
Supreme Court and House of Lords accept that prejudicial publications may
affect Judges subconsciously:
The Supreme Court and the House of Lords have, as pointed out in
Chapter III of our Report, observed that publications which are prejudicial
to a suspect or accused may affect Judges also subconsciously.    This can
be at the stage of granting or refusing bail or at the trial.
Supreme Court holds prejudicial publication after ‘arrest’ can be criminal
contempt:
Under the Contempt of Courts Acts of 1926 and 1952, unlike the Act
of 1971, there was no specific definition of ‘civil’ or ‘criminal’ contempt.
Further  before  1971,  the  common  law  principles  were  applied  to  treat
prejudicial  publications  made  even  before  the  ‘arrest’  of  a  person  as
contempt.   In  fact,  some  Courts  were  treating  as  ‘criminal  contempt’,
prejudicial publications even if they were made after the filing of a First
Information Report (FIR).   But the Supreme Court, in Surendra Mohanty v.
State of Orissa (Crl. App. 107/56 dt. 23.1.1961) however, held that filing of
an FIR could not  be the starting  point of pendency of a criminal  case.
Because of that judgment, a prejudicial publication made after the filing of
the FIR gained immunity from law of contempt.   But in 1969, the Supreme
Court held in  A.K. Gopalan v.  Noordeen 1969 (2) SCC 734 (15th Sept.,
1969) that a publication made after ‘arrest’ of a person could be contempt if
it was prejudicial to the suspect or accused.   This continues to be the law as
of today so far as Art. 19(1)(a), 19(2) and Art. 21 are concerned.
3

Sanyal  Committee’s  (1963)  proposal  accepting  ‘arrest’  as  starting  point
dropped by Joint Committee:
In the meantime from 1963, efforts were made to make a new law of
contempt.  The  Sanyal  Committee  (1963)  which  was  appointed  for  this
purpose, while observing  that our country is  very vast  and publications
made at one place do not reach other places, however, recommended that so
far as criminal matters are concerned, the date of “arrest” is crucial, and that
should  be  treated  as  the  starting  point  of  ‘pendency’  of  a  criminal
proceeding.    It conceded that filing of an FIR could not be the starting
point.  The Sanyal Committee prepared a Bill, 1963 stating that prejudicial
publications  could  be  criminal  contempt  if  criminal  proceedings  were
‘imminent’.   But thereafter, nothing happened for six years.
The Bill of 1963 prepared by the Sanyal Committee was reviewed by a Joint
Committee  of  Parliament  (1969-70)  (Bhargava  Committee)  and  after  some  brief
discussion, the Joint Committee decided to drop reference to ‘imminent’ proceedings.
This was done for two reasons (1) that the word ‘imminent’ was vague and (2) such a
vague  expression  may  unduly  restrict  the  freedom  of  speech  if  the  law  applied  to
‘imminent’ criminal proceedings.   The recommendations of the Joint Committee resulted
in the 1971 Act which omitted all references to ‘imminent’ proceedings or to ‘arrest’ as
the starting point of pendency of a criminal proceeding.
Joint Committee’s reasons are flawed:
The attention of the Joint Committee was not drawn to the decision of
the Supreme Court in A.K. Gopalan v. Noordeen (1969 (2) SCC 734) dated
15th September, 1969 when it gave its Report on 23rd February, 1970.   Once
the Supreme Court judgment fixed the date of ‘arrest’ as the starting point
for treating a criminal proceeding as pending, there remained no vagueness
in the law.   In that case, the Supreme Court has also balanced the rights of
the suspect and accused on the one hand and the rights of the media for
publication.   In fact, in A.K. Gopalan’s case, the editor of the Newspaper
and others who made prejudicial publication after arrest were convicted for
contempt, while Mr. A.K. Gopalan who made the statement after FIR but
before arrest was exonerated by the Supreme Court. 
Apart from the declaration of law and fair balancing of the competing
rights as above by the Supreme Court in A.K. Gopalan v. Noordeen (1969),
the date of arrest is the starting point under the UK Contempt of Court Act,
4

1981  and  the  Bill  of  2003  prepared  by  the  New  South  Wales  Law
Commission.    Case  law  in  Scotland,  Ireland,  Australia  or  the  Law
Commission Reports of those countries have also declared that if a person is
arrested or if criminal proceedings are imminent, prejudicial publications
will be criminal contempt.  The leading judgment in  Hall v.  Associated
Newspaper,  1978  SLT  241  (Scotland)  has  been  followed  in  other
jurisdictions and is the basis of the provision in the UK Act of 1981 for
fixing ‘arrest’ as the starting point of pendency of a criminal case.  
The 24 hour rule:
According to  Hall, once a person is arrested, he comes within the
‘care’ and protection of the Court as he has to be produced in Court in 24
hours.   In India, this is a guarantee under Art. 22(2) of the Constitution.
The reason for fixing arrest as the starting point is that, if a publication is
made after arrest referring to the person’s character, previous conviction or
confessions  etc.,  the  person’s  case  will  be  prejudiced  even  in  bail
proceedings when issues arise as to whether bail is to be granted or refused,
or as to what conditions are to be imposed and whether there should be
police remand or judicial remand.   Such publications may also affect the
trial  when  it  takes  place  later.   Basing  on  this,  in  England  and  other
countries, “arrest” and “imminent” proceedings are treated as sufficient and
are  not  treated  as  vague.    In  this  context,  we  have  referred  to  the
comparative law in several countries where the Constitutions  guarantees
protection to freedom of speech as also the liberty of suspects or accused. 
Another important point here is that, in the year 1978, the Supreme
Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597 has altered
the law as it stood before 1978 to say that so far as liberty referred to in Art.
21 is concerned, ‘procedure established by law’ in Art. 21 must be a fair,
just and reasonable procedure.    This was not the law in 1970 when the
Joint Committee gave its report nor when the 1971 Act was enacted.
Hence, the Joint Committee’s observations and its omitting the word
‘imminent’ and its not treating ‘arrest’ as starting point, do not appear to be
constitutionally valid.
Starting point of pendency should be ‘arrest’ and not filing of chargesheet:
Explanation to sec. 3 to be amended:
5

In view of the changes in the constitutional law of our country as
declared by the Supreme Court in A.K. Gopalan v. Noordeen (1969 (2) SCC
734) in  so  far as  Art. 19(1)(a)  and  Art. 21  are concerned  and  Maneka
Gandhi case (AIR 1978 SC 597) in so far as Art. 21 is concerned, the two
reasons  given  by  the  Joint  Committee  in  1970  for  omitting  the  word
‘imminent’ and for not treating ‘arrest’ as the starting point, are no longer
tenable.  Sec. 3(2) of the Act and Explanation below sec. 3 as of now, treat a
criminal proceeding as pending only if a chargesheet or challan is filed or if
summons or warrant is issued and the time of ‘arrest’.   This has to be
rectified by adding a clause ‘arrest’ in the Explanation below sec. 3 as being
the starting point to reckon ‘pendency’ of a criminal proceeding as in the
UK  Act  of  1981  and  as  proposed  by  other  Law  Reform  Commission
proposals in other countries.  Further, when such an amendment is made, it
is not as if that no publications are permitted after arrest.   Only those which
are prejudicial publications are not permitted.   In addition, publications
made without knowledge of arrest, or filing challan or without knowledge
of summons or warrant, remain protected.
In this Report, we have also exhaustively discussed the Sunday Times
judgment of the European Court 1979 (2) EHRR 245 which related to prior
restraint of publications relating to a “civil” case and there the restraint was
absolute and not temporary.   That case is not a precedent in the present
context.
The  above  amendment  as  to  ‘arrest’  as  being  starting  point  is
proposed by using the word ‘active’ criminal proceeding in sec. 3, rather
than ‘pending criminal proceeding’ and inserting the word ‘arrest’ in the
Explanation below sec. 3.
High Court to be approached directly than by reference from subordinate
Court:
Again,  as  at  present, if  there  is  criminal  contempt  of subordinate
Courts, the subordinate Courts have to make a reference to the High Court.
This procedure applies to scandalizing the Judges (sec. 2(c)(i)) as also to
publications interfering with administration of justice under sec. 2(c)(ii) and
(iii).     So  far  as  contempt  of  prejudicial  publications  is  concerned,  a
procedure  of  reference  by  the  subordinate  Court  to  the  High  Court  is
cumbersome and time consuming.    We have, therefore, proposed sec. 10A
6

that so far as criminal contempt of subordinate Courts under sec. 2(c)(ii) and
(iii) by way of publication is concerned, there is no need for a reference by
the  subordinate  Courts,  but  that  the  High  Court  could  be  approached
directly without consent of the Advocate General.   This is provided in sec.
10A of the Bill.
High Court to be empowered to pass ‘postponement’ orders on the lines of
sec. 4(2) of the UK Act, 1981:
In  addition,  there  is  need  to  empower  the  Courts  to  pass
‘postponement’  orders  as to publication.    While  Courts  have  held  that
conditions for passing orders of prior restraint should be permitted only
under  stringent  conditions,  it  is,  however,  accepted  that  temporary
postponement of publication can be passed.  This is accepted in several
jurisdictions across the world.    For passing of ‘postponement orders’, the
UK Act of 1981 requires special proof of ‘serious risk of prejudice’ to be
shown.  We have proposed clearer words that ‘real risk of serious prejudice’
has to be proved before any ‘postponement’ orders are issued.  We have
proposed this in sec. 14A.   Any breach of a postponement order will be
contempt under sec. 14B.   Such a procedure exists in UK too.
Enumeration of publications in the media which could be prejudicial stated
in Ch. IX of the Report:
The Report also mentions in Chapter IX what publications can be
prejudicial if made after a person is arrested.   It is recognized in several
countries  and  also  in  India  that  publications  which  refer  to  character,
previous convictions, confessions could be criminal contempt.   Publishing
photographs may hinder proper identification in an identification parade.
There are various other aspects such as judging the guilt or innocence of the
accused or discrediting witnesses etc. which could be contempt.  We have
referred to these aspects as a matter of information to the media.   We have
also  discussed  the  recent  phenomenon  of  media  interviewing  potential
witnesses and about publicity that is given by police and about investigative
journalism.
We have also annexed a Draft Bill.
Journalists to be trained in certain aspects of law:
7

We have  also recommended that journalists  need to be trained in
certain aspects of law relating to freedom of speech in Art. 9(1)(a) and the
restrictions  which  are  permissible  under  Art.  19(2)  of  the  Constitution,
human rights, law of defamation and contempt.  We have also suggested
that these subjects be included in the syllabus for journalism and special
diploma or degree courses on journalism and law be started.
The Report is important and is also exhaustive on the issues which
today are crucial in our country so far as criminal justice is concerned and
we are of the view that, as at present, there is considerable interference with
the due administration of criminal justice and this will have to be remedied
by Parliament.
Yours sincerely,
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Shri H.R. Bhardwaj
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi.
8

INDEX
Chapter   Title                       Page
I. Introductory          4 to 12
II. Human Rights Convention, Madrid Principles, 
Indian Constitution and Contempt of Court Act       13 to 38
III. Do publications in the media subconsciously
affect the Judges        39 to 54
IV. How ‘imminent’ criminal proceedings came to be
Excluded from the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971     55 to 73
V. Whether Joint Committee was right in stating
that the word ‘imminent’ is vague?                          74 to 89
VI. Does ‘A.K. Gopalan’ vs. ‘Noordeen’ (1869)(SC)
make ‘imminence’ relevant only in respect of
arrest for serious offences?  What is the effect
of the 24 hour rule?      90 to 112
VII. Freedom of expression Contempt of Court, 
Due Process to protect liberty              113
to 153
VIII. Postponement of publications by Court:
Whether substantial risk of prejudice as in
UK inappropriate    154
to 188
IX. What categories of media publications
are recognized as prejudicial to a suspect
or accused    189 to 215
X. Recommendations for amending the 
Provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 
1971
9

(using ‘active’ and ‘arrest’ in sec 3 and 
‘real risk of serious prejudice’ in new sec 14A  216 to 226
Annexure I:  Draft Bill
  Contempt of Court (Amendment) Bill, 2006   227 to 233
 
10

Chapter I
Introductory
The subject of ‘Trial by Media’ is discussed by civil rights activists,
constitutional  lawyers,  judges  and  academics  almost  everyday  in  recent
times.  With the coming into being of the television and cable-channels, the
amount of publicity which any crime or suspect or accused gets in the media
has reached alarming proportions.  Innocents may be condemned for no
reason or those who are guilty may not get a fair trial or may get a higher
sentence  after trial  than  they deserved.  There  appears  to be very little
restraint in the media in so far as the administration of criminal justice is
concerned.
We are  aware that  in  a democratic  country like  ours,  freedom of
expression is an important right but such aright is not absolute in as much as
the Constitution itself, while it grants the freedom under Article 19(1)(a),
permitted the legislature to impose reasonable restriction on the right, in the
interests of various matters, one of which is the fair administration of justice
as protected by the Contempt of Courts Act,  1971.
If media exercises an unrestricted or rather unregulated freedom in
publishing information about a criminal case and prejudices the mind of the
11

public and those who are to adjudicate on the guilt of the accused and if it
projects a suspect or an accused as if he has already been adjudged guilty
well before the trial in court, there can be serious prejudice to the accused.
In fact, even if ultimately the person is acquitted after the due process in
courts, such an acquittal may not help the accused to rebuild his lost image
in society. 
If excessive publicity in the media about a suspect or an accused
before trial prejudices a fair trial or results in characterizing him as a person
who had indeed committed the crime, it amounts to undue interference with
the “administration of justice”, calling for proceedings for contempt of court
against the media.  Other issues about the privacy rights of individuals or
defendants  may  also  arise.   Public  figures,  with  slender  rights  against
defamation are more in danger and more vulnerable in the hands of the
media. after the judgment in R. Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu :AIR 1995
SC 264.
The UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Opinion
received a submission from the British Irish Watch against a very sustained
attack by the press on Mrs. Bernadette and Mr. Michael McKevitt who had
been advocating national sovereignty  for Ireland and who were claiming
12

the Irish people’s right to self-determination through a Committee.  It was
the media which started linking these two persons to the Omagh bombing of
15th August,1998 which killed 29 people.  The media attack started even
before  the  police  questioned  these  two  persons.  The  contents  of  the
representation  to  the  U.N.Rapporteur  by the  British  Irish  Watch  quoted
below, fits well into what is happening with the media in our own country.
The representation stated:
“Guilt by association is an invidious device.  In the case of Bernadette
and  Michael  McKevitt,  the  media  have  created  a  situation  where
almost no one in Ireland is prepared to countenance the possibility
that they may be innocent, notwithstanding the fact that neither of
them has even been questioned by the police in connection with the
Omagh  bombing.   They  have  demonized,  …  …  …   such  media
campaigns are self-defeating.  If the media repeatedly accuses people
of crimes without producing any evidence against them, they create
such certainty of their guilt in the minds of the public that, if these
persons are even actually charged and tried, they have no hope of
obtaining a fair trial.  When such trials collapse, the victims of the
crime are left without redress.  Equally, defendants may be acquitted
13

but they have lost their good name”.  
(see The Blanket, Journal of Protest and Dissent, November 2000).
The observations of Mr. Andrew Belsey in his article ‘Journalism and
Ethics,  can  they co-exist’  (published  in Media Ethics  : A Philosophical
Approach, edited by Mathew Kieran) quoted by the Delhi High Court in
Mother Dairy Foods & Processing Ltd v. Zee Telefilms (IA 8185/2003 in
Suit No. 1543/2003 dated 24.1.2005) aptly describe the state of affairs of
today’s  media.   He  says  that  journalism  and  ethics  stand  apart.  While
journalists are distinctive facilitators for the democratic process to function
without hindrance the media has to follow the virtues of ‘accuracy, honesty,
truth,  objectivity,  fairness,  balanced  reporting,  respect  or  autonomy  of
ordinary people’.  These are all part of the democratic process.  But practical
considerations,  namely,  pursuit  of  successful  career,  promotion  to  be
obtained, compulsion of meeting deadlines and satisfying Media Managers
by meeting growth targets, are recognized as factors for the ‘temptation to
print trivial stories salaciously presented’.  In the temptation to sell stories,
what is presented is what ‘public is interested in’ rather than ‘what is in
public interest’.
14

Suspects and accused apart, even victims and witnesses suffer from
excessive  publicity  and  invasion  of  their  privacy  rights.   Police  are
presented in poor light by the media and their morale too suffers.  The day
after the report of crime is published, media says ‘Police have no cue’.
Then, whatever gossip the media gathers about the line of investigation by
the official agencies, it gives such publicity in respect of the information
that the person who has indeed committed the crime, can move away to
safer places. The pressure on the police from media day by day builds up
and reaches a stage where police feel compelled to say something or the
other in public to protect their reputation.  Sometimes  when, under such
pressure, police come forward with a story that they have nabbed a suspect
and that he has confessed, the ‘Breaking News’ items start and few in the
media  appear  to  know  that  under  the  law,  confession  to  police  is  not
admissible in a criminal trial. Once the confession is published by both the
police and the media, the suspect’s future is finished. When he retracts from
the confession before the Magistrate, the public imagine that the person is a
liar.  The whole  procedure of due process  is  thus getting distorted  and
confused. 
15

The media also creates other problems for witnesses.  If the identity
of witnesses is published, there is danger of the witnesses coming under
pressure both from the accused or his associates as well as from the police.
At the earliest stage, the witnesses want to retract and get out of the muddle.
Witness protection is then a serious casualty.  This leads to the question
about the admissibility of hostile witness evidence and whether the law
should be amended to prevent witnesses changing their statements.  Again,
if the suspect’s pictures are shown in the media, problems can arise during
‘identification parades’ conducted under the Code of Criminal Procedure for
identifying the accused. 
Sometimes, the media conducts parallel investigations and points its
finger at persons who may indeed be innocent.  It tries to find fault with the
investigation process even before it is completed and this raises suspicions
in the minds of the public about the efficiency of the official investigation
machinery. 
The print and electronic media have gone into fierce competition, that
a multitude of cameras are flashed at the suspects or the accused and the
police  are not  even  allowed  to  take  the suspects  or accused  from their
16

transport vehicles into the courts or vice versa.  The Press Council of India
issues guidelines from time to time and in some cases, it does take action.
But, even if apologies are directed to be published, they are published in
such a way that either they are not apologies or the apologies are published
in the papers at places which are not very prominent. 
Apart  from these circumstances,  basically there is  greater need  to
strike a right balance between freedom of speech and expression  of the
media  on  the  one  hand  and  the  due  process  rights  of  the  suspect  and
accused.  Art 19(1)(a), 19(2), Art 21 and Art 14 of the Constitution play a
very important role in striking an even balance.  As we shall be showing in
the ensuing chapters, the present Contempt of Court Act, 1971 requires
some changes in view of the law that has been declared by the Supreme
Court at least in two leading cases, one is A.K. Gopalan vs. Noordeen 1969
(2) SCC 734 and the other is Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India AIR 1978
SC  597.   These  judgments  have  struck  a  balance  between  competing
fundamental rights which were not noticed or available at the time when the
Joint Parliament Committee (1969) made some drastic changes in the Bill
prepared  by  the  Sanyal  Committee  (1963).   These  issues  fall  for
consideration.
17

In addition, we have the judgment in Sunday Times case decided by
the  European  Court  on  prior  restraint  on  press  publications,  the  (UK)
Contempt  of Court  Act,  1981  and  the  Reports  of Law Commissions  in
Canada, Australia, New Zealand and other countries which have tried to
strike an even balance between competing fundamental rights.
It is in the light of the problems mentioned, the drastic changes in the
interpretation of Arts 14, 19, 21 of the Constitution of India that have come
about  on  account  of  judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  reforms
brought in or proposed in other jurisdictions, that we have taken up the
subject suo motu.
We shall be discussing a number of important issues relating to the
freedom of speech and expression and the right to due process for a fair trial
under the criminal law, in the ensuing chapters.
(In this Chapter and in the ensuing Chapters, wherever we use the word ‘due
process’  for  fair  trial  in  a  criminal  proceeding,  we  mean  a  procedure
established by law under Art 21 which is fair, just and reasonable and not 
18

arbitrary or violative of Art 14 of the Constitution of India as decided by the
Supreme Court in (Maneka Gandhi’s case above referred to).
 
19

                                                   CHAPTER II
Human Right Conventions, Madrid Principles, 
Indian Constitution and Contempt 
of Courts Act, 1971
Our criminal law and criminal jurisprudence are based on the premise
that the guilt of any person charged in a court of law has to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt and that the accused is presumed to be innocent
unless the contrary is proved in public, in a court of law, observing all the
legal safeguards to an accused.  Not only that, the accused has a basic right
to silence.  That right stems from the constitutional right of the accused
common to several constitutions that the accused cannot be compelled to
incriminate himself.  That is also the reason why confessions to the police
are inadmissible in a court of law.  
The right to silence  has been considered in detail in our 180th Report,
(2001)  titled  “Art  20(3)  of  the  Constitution  of  India  and  the  Right  to
Silence”.   At  the  outset,  it  is  necessary  to  go  into  some  fundamental
concepts relating to human rights as contained in International Conventions,
20

the Madrid Principles and our Constitution and Contempt of Court Act,
1971.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)
There  are  certain  rights  of  suspects  and  accused  which  are  basic
human rights.  They are  expressly referred to  in various  articles  of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948).  
Article 3 of that Declaration states that everyone has right to life,
liberty and security of person. 
Article 10 deals with the right of an accused “in full equality to a fair
and  public  hearing  by  an  independent  and  impartial  tribunal  in  the
determination  of  his  rights  and  obligations  and  of  any  criminal  charge
against him”. 
Article 11 of the Universal Declaration deals with the right to be
presumed innocent and reads thus:
“Article 11 (1)  Everyone charged with a penal offence has the
right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to
21

law  in  a  public  trial at  which  he  has  all  the  guarantees
necessary for his defence.
(2)  No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account
of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offence,
under  national  or  international  law,  at  the  time  it  was
committed.  Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the
one  that  is  applicable  at  the  time  the  penal  offence  is
committed.”
         Article 12 deals with the person’s privacy rights and reads thus:
  “Article 12 :  No one shall be subject to arbitrary interference
with  his  privacy,  family,  home  or  correspondence,  nor  to
attacks upon his honour and reputation.  Everyone has the right
to protection of the law against such interference and attacks.”
Besides  these, Article 9 states  that “No one shall  be subjected  to
arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.”
So  far  as  freedom  of  expression  is  concerned,  Article  19  of  the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights reads:
“Article 19: Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and
expression  :  this  right  includes  freedom  to  hold  opinions
22

without  interference  and  to  seek,  receive  and  impart
information  and  ideas  through  any  media  and  regardless  of
frontiers.” 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 
          The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966
(ICCPR) was ratified by India in 1976 and it states  in Article 14(2) as
follows:
“Article  14(2) :  Everyone  charged  with  a criminal  offence
shall have the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty
according to law.”
Article 14(3) clause (g) refers to the important right of a person “Not
to be compelled to testify against himself or to confess guilt”.
In a criminal trial, there are a number of other safeguards listed apart
from the above clause (g) in Article 14(3) of the ICCPR:
“Article 14(3) : In the determination of any criminal charge
against  him,  everyone  shall  be  entitled  to  the  following
minimum guarantees, in full equality:
23

(a) to be informed promptly and in detail in a language which
he  understands  of  the  nature  and  cause  of  the  charge
against him;
(b) to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of
his defence and to communicate with counsel of his own
choosing;
(c) to be tried without undue delay;
(d) to be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in person
or  through  legal  assistance  of  his  own  choosing;  to  be
informed, if he does not have legal assistance, of this right;
and to have legal assistance assigned to him, in any case
where  the  interests  of  justice  so  require,  and  without
payment  by him in  any  such  case  if  he  does  not  have
sufficient means to pay it;
(e) to examine, or have examined the witnesses against him
and to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses
on  his  behalf  under  the  same  conditions  as  witnesses
against him;
(f) to  have  free  assistance  of  an  interpreter  if  he  cannot
understand or speak the language used in court;
24

(g) not to be compelled to testify against himself or to confess  
guilt.”
           Article 4 refers to the special rights of juveniles and states:
 “Article 4 :  In the case of juvenile persons, the procedure shall
be such as will take account of their age and the desirability of
promoting their rehabilitation.”
           Article 15 requires that “no person shall be punished for an act which
was not an offence when it was committed”.
 
European Convention
 The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms 1950 declares in Article 10(1), the same right as to
freedom  of  expression,  on  the  lines  of  Article  19  of  the  Universal
Declaration. But, Article 10(2) deals with the restrictions:
“10(2) :  The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries duties
and  responsibilities,  may  be  subject  to  such  formalities,
conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law
and are necessary in a democratic  society in the interest of
national security territorial integrity or public safety ,for the
prevention of disorder  or crime ,for the protection of health or
25

morals for the protection of reputation of others , for preventing
the disclosure  of information  received  in  confidence,  or for
maintaining the authority and in particularly of the judiciary”.
The above right in Article 10(1) as to freedom of expression has to be read
along with the following Articles of that Convention:-
(a)  Article 2:  Right to Life : (1)  Everyone’s right to life shall be protected
by  law.  No  one  shall  be  deprived  of  his  life  intentionally  save  in  the
execution of a sentence of a Court following his conviction of a crime for
which this penalty is provided by law. 
(b) Article 5:  Right to Liberty and Security :  (1)  Everyone has the right to
liberty and security of person.  No one shall be deprived of his liberty save
in  the  following  cases  and  in  accordance  with  as  prescribed  by  law:
Clause  (a)  refers  to  lawful  detention  of  a person  after  conviction  by a
competent  court.   Clauses  (b)  to  (f)  deal  with  manner  of  arrest  and
detention. 
Article 5(2) deals with the right of the person arrested to be informed
promptly, in a language which he understands, of the reasons for his arrest
and of any charge against him. 
Article 5(3) to (5) refer to rights incidental to arrest and detention.
(c) Article 6:  Right to Fair Trial : It reads:
26

 “(1)  In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any
criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing
within  a  reasonable  time  by  an  independent  and  impartial  tribunal
established by law …  …   …   …   …   …   …      ….           …      ….    …
…       …        …         …           ….            …          ….                   …    ..
(2) Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent
until proved guilty according to law.  
(3)  Everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following minimum
rights:
(a) to be informed promptly, in a language which he understands and in
detail, of the nature and cause of the accusation against him;
(b) to  have   adequate  time  and  facilities  for  the  preparation  of  his
defence. 
(c) to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own
choosing  or,  if  he  has  not  sufficient  means  to  pay  for  legal
assistance, to be given it free when the interests of justice so require.
(d) to examine or have examined witnesses against him and to obtain
the attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalf under the
same conditions as witnesses against him;
27

(e) to have the free assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand
or speak the language used in court. 
Article 7:  
“(1)  No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of
any act or omission which did not constitute a criminal offence under
national or international law at the time when it was committed  …  …
(2)  …  …     …            …                ….            …         …                …” 
Article 8:  Right to Respect for Private and Family Life :
“(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his
home and his correspondence. 
(1) There  shall  be  no  interference  by  a  public  authority  with  the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
security, public safety or economic well-being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of the
rights and freedom of others.”
There  are  similar  provisions  in  the  American  Convention  on  Human
Rights,1969 and the African Charter of Human Rights and People’s Rights,
1981. 
28

The  Madrid  Principles  on  the  Relationship  Between  the  Media  and
Judicial Independence      (1994)   
A group of 40 distinguished Legal Experts and Media representatives,
convened by the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), at its Centre for
the Independence of Judges and Lawyers (CIJL) and the Spanish Committee
of  UNICEF  met  in  Madrid,  Spain  between  18-20,  January  1994.   The
objectives of the meeting were:
(1) to  examine  the  relationship  between  the  media  and  judicial
independence as guaranteed by the  1985 UN Principles on the
Independence of Judiciary.
(2) To  formulate  principles  addressing  the  relationship  between
freedom of expression and judicial independence. 
    The group of media representatives and jurists while stating in the
‘Preamble’ that the ‘freedom of the media, which is an integral part of
freedom of expression, is essential in a democratic society governed by
the  Rule  of  Law  and  that  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Judges  to
recognize and give effect to freedom of the media by applying a basic
presumption in their favour and by permitting only such restrictions on
freedom of the media as are authorized by the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (“International Covenant”) and are specified in
precise law, emphasized that :
29

“The  media  have  an  obligation  to  respect  the  rights  of
individuals, protected by the International Covenant and the
independence of the judiciary”.
It refers to the principles which are drafted as “minimum” standards of
protection of the freedom of expression. 
The Basic Principle :  
(1) Freedom of expression (as defined in Article 19 of the Covenant),
including the freedom of the media – constitutes one of the essential
foundations of every society which claims to be democratic.  It is
the function and right of the media to gather and convey information
to  the  public  and  to  comment on  the  administration  of  justice,
including cases before, during and after trial, without violating the
presumption of innocence.
(2) This  principle  can  only  be  departed  from  in  the  circumstances
envisaged  in  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political
Rights,  as  interpreted  by  the  1984  Siracusa  Principles on  the
Limitation and Derogation Provisions in the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (U.N. Document E/CN/4/1984/4).
(3) The right to comment on the administration of justice shall not be
subject to any special restrictions. 
30

Scope of the Basic Principle :  (deals with media rights during investigation
into a crime)
(1) .. .. .. .. .. ..
(2) .. .. .. .. .. ..
(3) .. .. .. .. .. ..
(4) The Basic Principle does not exclude the preservation by law of
secrecy during the investigation of crime even when investigation
forms part of the judicial process.  Secrecy in such circumstances
must be regarded as being mainly for the benefit of persons who
are  suspected  or  accused  and  to  preserve  the  presumption  of
innocence. It shall not restrict the right of any such person to
communicate to the press, information about the investigation or
the circumstances being investigated. 
(5) The Basic Principle  does not exclude the holding  in camera of
proceedings  intended  to  achieve  conciliation  or  settlement  of
private disputes. 
(6) The Basic Principle does not require a right to broadcast or record
court proceedings.  Where this is permitted, the Basic Principle
shall remain applicable. 
Restrictions :
31

(7) Any restriction of the Basic Principle must be strictly prescribed
by law.  Where any such law confers a discretion or power, that
discretion or power must be exercised by a Judge.
(8) Where a Judge has a power to restrict the Basic Principle and is
contemplating the exercise of that power, the media(as well as
any other person affected) shall have the right to be heard for the
purpose of objecting to the course of that power and, if exercised,
a right of appeal. 
(9) Laws  may authorize  restrictions  of  the  Basic  Principle  to  the
extent  necessary in  a  democratic  society for the  protection  of
minors  and  members  of  other  groups  in  need  of  special
protection. 
(10)  Laws may restrict the Basic Principle in relation to the criminal
proceedings in the interest of the administration of justice to the
extent necessary in a democratic society:
a. for the prevention of serious prejudice to a defendant  ;
b. for  the  prevention  of  serious  harm    to  or  improper  pressure
being placed upon a witness, a member of a Jury or a victim.
(11) Where  a  restriction  of  the  Basic  Principle  is  sought  on  the
grounds of national security, this should not jeopardize the rights
of the parties, including the rights of the defence. The defence
32

and the media shall have the right, to the greatest extent  possible,
to know the grounds on which the restriction is sought (subject, if
necessary,  to  a  duty  of  confidentiality  if  the  restriction  is
imposed) and shall have the right to contest this restriction. 
(12) In civil proceedings, restrictions of the Basic Principle may be
imposed  if  authorized  by  law  to  the  extent  necessary  in  a
democratic  society  to  prevent  serious  harm  to  the  legitimate
interests of a private party. 
(13) No restriction shall be imposed in an arbitrary or discriminatory
manner. 
(14) No restriction shall be imposed except strictly to the minimum
extent  and  for  the  minimum  time  necessary  to  achieve  its
purpose, and no restriction shall be imposed if a more limited
restriction would be likely to achieve that purpose.  The burden of
proof shall rest on the party requesting the restriction.  Moreover,
the order to restrict shall be subject to review by a Judge. 
Strategies for Implementation :
       Para 1 states that the Judge should receive guidance in dealing with
the  press  and  the  Judge  shall  be  encouraged  to  assist  the  press  by
33

providing summary of long or complete judgment of matters of public
interest.
     Para 2 says that Judges shall not be forbidden to answer questions
from the press etc.
      Para 3 is important and states:
      “3.  The balance between independence of judiciary, freedom of the
press and respect of the rights of the individual – particularly of minors
and other persons in need of special protection – is difficult to achieve.
Consequently,  it  is  indispensable  that  one or more of the following
measures are placed at the disposal of affected persons or groups; legal
recourse,  Press  Council,  Ombudsman  for  the  Press,  with  the
understanding that such circumstances can be avoided to a large extent
by  establishing  a  Code  of  Ethics for  the  media  which  should  be
elaborated by the profession itself.
Siracusa Principles : (referred to in Para 2 of Basic Principle of Madrid
Principles)
     The following are extracts from the Siracusa Principles on the Limitation
and  Derogation  Provision  in  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
Political Rights. (UN Document E/UN4/1984/4)
34

The principle refers to Limitation Clauses, under several headings
dealing with the method of interpretation, the meaning of ‘prescribed by
law’, ‘a democratic society’, ‘public order’, ‘public health’, ‘public morals’
‘national security’, ‘public safety’, ‘rights and freedom of others’ or ‘rights
or reputation of others’, which are used by the ICCPR. 
So far as the media and criminal law is concerned the following item
‘restrictions on public trial’ is relevant. It says:
“(IX) Restrictions on Public Trial :
 38.  All  trials  shall  be  public  unless  the  Court  determines  in
accordance with law that:
(a) the press or the public should be excluded from all or part
of a trial on the basis of specific findings announced in
open Court showing that the interest of private lives of the
parties or their families or of juveniles so requires; or
(b) the  exclusion  is  strictly  necessary   to  avoid  publicity
prejudicial to the fairness of the trial or endangering public
morals, public order  or national security in a democratic
society.” 
35

Constitution of India: Rights of suspects and accused and freedom of
speech:     
Our Constitution does not separately refer to the freedom of the press
or of the electronic media in Part III but these rights are treated by the law
as part of the ‘Freedom of speech and expression’ guaranteed by Article 19
(1)(a) of the Constitution of India.  The guarantee is subject to ‘reasonable
restrictions’ which can be made by legislation to the extent permitted by
Article 19(2).  The Article reads thus:
       “Article 19(1):  All citizens shall have the right
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) …  …   …  
(g)
(2)  Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of
any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as
such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by the said sub-clause,
in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India,
the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States,
public order, decency or morality, or 
in relation to contempt of court, defamation or 
incitement to an offence”.
‘Contempt  of  Court  law’  deals  with  non-interference  with  the
“administration of justice” and that is how the “due course of justice” that is
36

required for a fair trial, can require imposition of limitations on the freedom
of speech and expression.
Article 20, clause (1) of the Constitution states that no person shall be
convicted of any offence except for violation of the law in force at the time
of the commission of the act charged as an offence and not be subjected to a
penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in
force at the time of the commission of the offence.  Art 20, clause (2) states
that no person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more
than once.  Art 20, clause (3) is important and it deals with the right against
self-incrimination.  It states:
“Art 20(3): No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to
be a witness against himself.”
Art 21 is the crucial article which guarantees the right to life and
liberty.  It reads:
“Art. 21: No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
except according to procedure established by law’.
Article 22(2) requires that a person who is arrested has to be produced
before a Magistrate within 24 hours of the arrest. 
The Supreme Court in Maneka Gandhi’s case (AIR 1978 SC 597 has
interpreted the words ‘according to procedure established by law’ in Art
37

21as  requiring  a  procedure  which  is  fair,  just  and  equitable  and  not
arbitrary.
The Supreme Court of India, in Life Insurance Corporation of India v.
Manubhai D Shah (1992  (3) SCC 637)  has  stated that  the “freedom of
speech and expression” in Article 19(1)(a) means the right to express one’s
convictions  and  opinions  freely,  by  word  of  mouth,  writing,  printing,
pictures or electronic media or in any other manner. 
In Romesh Thapar v.  State of Madras : 1950 SCR 594, it was held
that  the  freedom  includes  the  freedom  of  ideas,  their  publication  and
circulation.  It was stated in Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India : 1960
(2) SCR 671, that the right includes the right to acquire and impart ideas and
information about matters of common interest.
The right to telecast includes the right to educate, to inform and to
entertain  and also the right to be educated, be informed and be entertained.
The former is the right of the telecaster, while the latter is the right of the
viewers  (Secretary,  Ministry  of  Information  &  Broadcasting v.  Cricket
Association of West Bengal : 1995(2) SCC 161.  The right under Art 19(1)
38

(a) includes the right to information and the right to disseminate through all
types of media, whether print, electronic or audio-visual : (ibid).
The Supreme Court has held that a trial by press, electronic media or
by way of a public agitation is the very anti-thesis of rule of law and can
lead to miscarriage of justice.  A Judge is to guard himself against such
pressure (State of Maharashtra v.  Rajendra Jawanmal Gandhi  : 1997 (8)
SCC 386.
In Anukul Chandra Pradhan vs. Union of India, 1996(6) SCC 354, the
Supreme Court observed that “No occasion should arise for an impression
that the publicity attached to these matters (the hawala transactions) has
tended to dilute the emphasis on the essentials of a fair trial and the basic
principles of jurisprudence including the presumption of innocence of the
accused unless found guilty at the end of the trial”
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971:
So far as interference with criminal law is concerned, Sections 2 and
3 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 are relevant   Section 2(c) defines
‘Criminal Contempt’ as:
39

“Section 2(c):  ‘Criminal contempt’ means the publication, (whether
by  words,  spoken  or  written  or  by  signs,  or  by  visible
representations, or otherwise), of any matter or the doing of any
other act whatsoever which 
 (i)        …     …     …    …
(ii) prejudices or interferes or tends to interfere   with the due course
of any judicial proceedings; or
(iii)  interferes or  tends to interfere with or obstructs or tends to
obstruct, the administration of justice in any manner”.
Section 3(1), however, exempts the following:
“innocent  publication,  if  the  publisher  had  no  reasonable
grounds for believing that the proceeding was pending”.
We shall refer to the provisions of sec 3 in extenso. 
“3. Innocent  publication  and  distribution  of  matter  not
contempt.- (1) A person shall not be guilty of contempt of Court
on the ground that he has published (whether by words spoken or
written or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise) any
matter which interferes or tends to interfere with, or obstructs or tends
40

to  obstruct,  the  course  of  justice  in  connection  with  any  civil  or
criminal proceeding pending at the time of publication, if at that time
he had no reasonable grounds for believing that the proceeding was
pending.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act
or any other law for the time being in force, the  publication of any
such matter as is mentioned in sub-section (1) in connection with any
civil or criminal proceedings  which is not  pending at the time of
publication and shall not be deemed to constitute contempt of Court.
(3) A  person  shall  not  be  guilty  of  contempt  of  Court  on  the
ground  that  he  has  distributed  a  publication  containing  any  such
matter as is mentioned in sub-section(1), if at the time of distribution
he had no reasonable grounds for believing that it contained or was
likely to contain any such matter as aforesaid:
provided that this sub-section shall not apply in respect of the
distribution of –
(i) any publication which is a book or paper printed or published
otherwise than in conformity with the rules contained in Section 3 of
the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867;
41

(ii) any publication which is a book or paper printed or published
otherwise than in conformity with the rules contained in Section 5 of
the said Act.
Explanation.-  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  a  judicial
proceedings-
(a) is said to be pending –
(A) in case of a civil proceeding, when it is instituted by the filing
of a plaint or otherwise;
(B) in the case of a criminal proceeding under the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1898, or any other law-
(i) where  it relates  to the commission of an offence, when the
charge-sheet or challan is filed , or when the Court issues summons or
warrant, as the case may be, against the accused, and
(ii) in  any  other  case,  when  the  Court  takes  cognizance  of  the
matter to which the proceeding relates, and
in the case of a civil or criminal proceedings,
shall be deemed to continue  to be pending  until  it  is heard and finally
decided, that is to say, in a case where an appeal or revision is competent,
until the appeal or revision is heard and finally decided or, where no appeal
or revision is preferred, until the period of limitation prescribed for such
appeal or revision has expired;
42

(b) which has been heard and finally decided shall not be deemed
to be pending merely by reason of the fact that proceedings for
the execution of the decree, order or sentence passed therein
are pending.”
Section 4 of the Act protects fair and accurate reporting of judicial
proceedings.
Section  7  states  when  publication  of  information  relating  to
proceedings in chambers or  in camera is not contempt, except in certain
cases which are enumerated in that section.
Pre-trial  publications  granted  immunity  under  sec  3(2)  &
Explanation:
It will be seen from the Explanation below sec 3, the starting point
for deeming a criminal proceeding as pending, it is sufficient if a charge
sheet or challan is filed or Court summons or warrant are issued.  Thus so
far as criminal contempt is concerned, the ‘pre-trial’ period has not been
given the required importance under the Court of Contempts Act, 1971.
‘Pendency’ under the Explanation to sec 3 starts, in a criminal case, only
from the time when the charge sheet or challan is filed or summon or
43

warrant is issued by the criminal Court and not even from date of arrest,
even though from the time of arrest, a person comes within the protection
of the Court for he has to be brought before a Court within 24 hours under
Art 22(2) of the Constitution of India.  If there are prejudicial publications
after arrest and before the person is brought before Court or his plea for
bail is considered, there are serious risks in his getting released on bail.
 
Certain acts like publications in the media at the pre-trial stage, can
affect the rights of the accused for a fair trial.  Such publications may relate
to previous convictions of the accused, or about his general character or
about his alleged confessions to the police etc.
In  the  context  of  a  parallel  investigation  which  was  undertaken
pending arrest and trial in the court, the Supreme Court referred to ‘trial by
press’.  This was, of course, before 1971 Act was enacted.  In  Saibal v.
B.K. Sen (AIR 1961 SC 633) it said:
“It would be mischievous for a newspaper to systematically
conduct an independent investigation into a crime for which a
man  has  been  arrested and  to  publish  the  results  of  the
investigation.  This is because, trial by newspapers, when a trial
by one of the regular tribunal is going on, must be prevented.
44

The basis for this view is that such action on  the part of the
newspaper tends to interfere with the course of justice”.
The  words  “tends  to interfere  with  the  course  of justice” used  by the
Supreme Court in the above case are quite significant.
In the light of the human rights concepts referred to above and the
provisions of our Constitution and the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, the
question arises whether any publication of matters regarding suspect or
accused can amount to contempt of Court not only when it is made during
the pendeny of a criminal case (i.e. after the charge sheet is filed) but
before that event, e.g. once a person is arrested and criminal proceedings
are “imminent”.  This issue requires a very detailed examination and will
be considered in the ensuing chapters.
45

Chapter – III
Do publications in the media subconsciously affect the Judges?
There  is  then  a  nice  question  whether  a  media  publication  can
‘unconsciously’ influence Judges or Juries and whether Judges, as human
beings  are  not  susceptible  to  such  indirect  influences,  at  least
subconsciously or unconsciously ?  
The American view appears to be that Jurors and Judges are not liable
to be influenced by media publication, while the Anglo-Saxon view is that
Judges, at any rate may still be  subconsciously (though not consciously)
influenced  and  members  of  the  public  may  think  that  Judges  are
influenced by such publications and such a situation, it has been held,
attracts the principle that ‘justice must not only be done but must be seen
to be done’.  The Anglo-Saxon view appears to have been accepted by the
Supreme Court as can be seen by a close reading of the Judgment in
Reliance Petrochemicals v.  Proprietor of Indian Express : 1988(4) SCC
592.  If one  carefully analyses that judgment, in the light of an earlier
46

judgment of the Court in P.C. Sen (in Re) :AIR 1970 SC 1821, this view
of the Supreme Court appears to be clear.  
In P.C. Sen in re the Supreme Court observed: (p 1829)
“No distinction is, in our judgment, warranted that comment on a
pending case or abuse of a party may amount to contempt when the
case is triable with the aid of a Jury and not when it is triable by a
Judge or Judges.”
It appears that it was accepted by the Supreme Court that Judges are
likely to be “subconsciously” influenced .  That was also the view of Justice
Frankfurter of U.S. Supreme Court (in his dissent) and of Lord Scarman and
Lord Dilhorne of the House of Lords.  We shall presently refer to these
views.  
 P.C. Sen (in Re)  (AIR 1970 SC 1821) was, no doubt, a case where
a civil action by way of a writ was pending in the High Court.  There was
a broadcast by the Chief Minister of West Bengal, who had knowledge of
the challenge to the West Bengal Milk Products Control Order, 1965 in a
Writ Petition that was pending in the Calcutta High Court, and the High
47

Court held him to be guilty of contempt for justifying the Control Order in
his radio broadcast but let him off without punishment. 
On appeal, the Supreme Court agreed that the speech of the Chief
Minister  was  ex facie calculated  to  interfere  with  the  administration  of
justice.  In the course of the judgment, it was stated that no distinction can
be made on the ground whether a case is triable by a Judge or Jury.  If an
action tends to influence the Jury, it may also tend to influence a Judge. 
In Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd. vs.  Proprietors of Indian Express
1988(4) SCC 592, an order of prior restraint was passed by the Supreme
Court initially while a civil case was pending adjudication.  There there
was a public issue of the commercial company, the company started the
public issue after obtaining sanction of the Controller of Capital Issues.
The sanction was under challenge by various parties in different High
Courts and the company filed a transfer petition in the Supreme Court to
bring all the matters before the Supreme Court. 
In that case which related to transfer of all similar cases to one Court,
initially, at the instance of Reliance Petrochemicals, the Supreme Court
passed  an  order  restraining  the  Indian  Express  Newspapers  from
publishing  any  article,  comment,  report  or  editorial  on  the  subject  of
48

public issue by the company.  The Indian Express applied for vacating the
order and while vacating the order, the Supreme Court considered the case
law pertaining to publications which could be prejudicial and referred to
the exceptions. 
The Supreme Court referred to Article 19(1)(a) which deals with
freedom of speech and expression and the restrictions stated in Article 19
(2).  It pointed out that the American Constitution does not contain any
provision for imposition of reasonable restrictions by law.
It adverted to the absolute terms in which the U.S First Amendment
dealing  with freedom of speech and expression  is couched and to the
theory of ‘real and present danger’ which was evolved by the U.S Courts
as the only inherent limitation on that right in that country.  The Supreme
Court in Reliance case stated that the position in India was different, here
the right of freedom of speech and expression was not absolute as in USA.
The Court observed (see para 10, p.602):
“Our Constitution is not absolute with respect to freedom
of speech and expression as enshrined by the First Amendment
to the American Constitution.”
49

The Court again stated (see para 12, p.603,) that it was not dealing
with a case of publication by press affecting ‘judicial administration’ in
the  context  of  Contempt  of  court  but  was  examining  the  question  of
publication as a matter relating to ‘public interest’.  After referring to the
First Amendment to the US Constitution which is in absolute terms, the
Court stated (p.605, para 15):
“In  America,  in  view  of  the  absolute  terms  of  the  First
Amendment, unlike the conditional right of  freedom of speech
under  Article   19(1)(a)  of  our  Constitution,  it  would  be
worthwhile to bear in mind the ‘present and imminent danger’
theory”. 
The Supreme Court then referred to the observations of Justice Frankfurter
in John D. Pennekamp v. State of Florida (1946) 328 US 331) to the effect
that  ‘the clear  and  present  danger’  concept  was  never stated  by Justice
Holmes  in  Abrams v.  U.S : (1919)  250  US 616  to express  a  technical
doctrine or convey a formula for adjudicating cases.  It was a literary phrase
not to be distorted by being taken out from its context.  The Judiciary,
according to Justice Frankfurter could not function properly if what the
press does is reasonably calculated to disturb the judicial judgment in its
duty and capacity to act solely on the basis of what is before the Court.  The
judiciary  is  not  independent  unless  Courts  of  Justice  are  enabled  to
50

administer law by absence of pressure from without, or the presence of
disfavour. 
There  is  yet  another  celebrated  passage  in  the  said  judgment  of
Justice Frankfurter (not quoted by our Supreme Court) to which we may
refer:-
“No Judge fit to be one is likely to be influenced consciously,
except  by  what  he  sees  or  hears  in  Court  and  by  what  is
judicially appropriate for his deliberations.  However,  Judges
are also human and we know better than did our forbears how
powerful is the  pull of the unconscious and how treacherous
the rational process … and since Judges, however stalwart, are
human, the delicate task of administering justice ought not to
be made unduly difficult by irresponsible print.  The power to
punish for  contempt of court is a safeguard not for Judges as
persons  but  for  the  functions  which  they  exercise.  It  is  a
condition of that function – indispensable in a free society –
that  in  a particular  controversy  pending  before  a court  and
awaiting judgment, human beings, however strong, should not
be torn from their moorings of impartiality by the undertone of
extraneous  influence.   In  securing  freedom  of  speech,  the
51

Constitution  hardly  meant  to  create  the  right  to  influence
Judges and Jurors.”
The Supreme Court next referred to Nebraska Press Association v.
Hugh Stuart : (1976) 427 US 539 where the American Supreme Court
vacated  a prior-restraint  order  passed  by the  trial  Judge  in  a multiple
murder case while that case was pending, on the ground that the view of
the  trial  Judge  that  Jurors  are  likely  to  be  influenced  by  the  press
publications, was speculative.  The US Supreme Court stated that the trial
court should have resorted to alternative remedies such as – change of
venue, postponement of trial, a searching  voir dire of the Jury panel for
bias, and sequestration of jurors – before passing a restraint order.  After
referring to Nebraska, our Supreme Court observed that (p.607, para 21):-
“We must examine the gravity of the evil.  In other words, a
balance of convenience in the conventional phrase of Anglo-
Saxon  Common  Law  Jurisprudence  would,  perhaps,  be  the
proper test to follow.”
 After thus referring to the US First Amendment as being absolute and to the
test of ‘real and present danger’ evolved in US and after holding that the
position in India was different because here Article 19(1)(a) granted only a
conditional  right,  the  Supreme  Court  turned  to  the  Anglo-Saxon
Jurisprudence and examined the English cases.  
52

The Supreme Court referred to Attorney General v. BBC : 1981 A.C
303 (HL).  In that case the Attorney General had brought proceedings for an
injunction  to  restrain  the  defendants  from  broadcasting  a  programme
dealing with matters which related to an appeal pending before a Local
Valuation Court on the ground that the broadcast would amount to contempt
of court.   In that context, (though the House of Lords held that contempt
law did not apply to the Valuation  Court), Lord Scarman observed that
‘administration  of  justice’  should  not  at  all  be  hampered  with.   Lord
Denning in the Court of Appeal had observed that professionally trained
Judges are not easily influenced by publications. But, disagreeing with that
view of Lord Denning, Lord Dilhorne stated (pp 335) in yet other oft-quoted
passage as follows:
“It is  sometimes  asserted  that  no  Judge  will  be  influenced  in  his
Judgment by anything said by the media and consequently that the
need to prevent the publication of matter prejudicial to the hearing of
a case only exists where the decision rests with laymen.  This claim to
judicial  superiority  over  human  frailty  is  one  that  I  find  some
difficulty in accepting.  Every holder of a Judicial Office does his
utmost not to let his mind be affected by what he has seen or heard or
read  outside  the  Court  and  he  will  not  knowingly  let  himself  be
influenced in any way by the media, nor in my view will any layman
53

experienced  in  the  discharge  of  Judicial  duties.   Nevertheless,  it
should, I think, be recognized that a man may not be able to put that
which he has seen, heard or read entirely out of his mind and that he
may be subconsciously affected by it. It is the law, and it remains the
law until it is changed by Parliament, that the publications of matter
likely to prejudice the hearing of a case before a court of law will
constitute contempt of court punishable by fine or imprisonment or
both”.
No doubt, as stated above, Lord Denning M.R stated in the Court of
Appeal that Judges will not be influenced by the media publicity (Att Gen v.
BBC : 1981 AC 303 (315) CA), a view which was not accepted in the Houe
of Lords in Att Gen vs. BBC  1981 AC 303 (HL).
In fact, Borrie and Lowe in their Commentary on Contempt of Court
(3rd Edn, 1996) state that Lord Denning’s view is “more a statement of
policy rather than literal truth”.
Cardozo, one of the greatest Judges of the American  Supreme Court,
in his ‘Nature of the Judicial Process’ (Lecture IV, Adherence to Precedent.
The Subconscious Element in the Judicial Process) (1921) (Yale University
Press) referring to the “forces which enter into the conclusions of Judges”
observed that “the great tides and currents which engulf the rest of men, do
not turn aside in their curse and pass the Judges by”.
54

The full text of the passage in the above essay of Cardozo reads thus:
“Even these forces are seldom fully in consciousness. They lie
so near the surface, however, that their existence and influence
are not likely to be disclaimed.  But the subject is not exhausted
with the recognition of their power.  Deep below consciousness
are other forces, the likes and the dislikes, the predilections and
the prejudices, the complex instincts and emotion and habits
and convictions, which make the man, whether he be litigant or
Judge … … … There has been a certain lack of candor in much
of the discussions of the theme or rather perhaps in the refusal
to discuss it, as if Judges must lose respect and confidence by
the reminder that they are subject to human limitations ..  …” 
Cardozo then stated in a very famous quotation,
“None the less, if there is anything of reality in my analysis of
the Judicial Process, they do not stand aloof on these chill and
distant heights;  … The great tides and currents which engulf
the rest of men, do not turn aside in their course, and pass the
Judges by”.
The  New  South  Wales  Law  Commission  in  its  Discussion  Paper
(2000) (No.43) on ‘Contempt by Publication’ stated (see para4.50) that most
55

law reform bodies “tended to take the view that Judicial officers should
generally  be  assumed  capable  of  resisting  any  significant  influence  by
media publicity.   Despite this, they have not gone so far as to exclude
altogether as a possible ground of liability for sub-judice contempt, the risk
of influence on a Judicial officer.  The justification for this approach is two-
fold  :   first,  it  is  always  possible  that  a  Judicial  officer  may  be
subconsciously influenced; and secondly,  it is just as important to protect
the public perception of Judges’ impartiality as to protect against risk of
bias”.   The Discussion Paper notes that in UK, the Phillmore Committee
noted that Judges are generally capable of putting extraneous matter out of
their minds but, in its recommendations, the Committee did not exclude
influence on Judicial officers as a ground for liability.
The NSW Law Commission referred to an article by S. Landsman and
R.Rakos  “A  Preliminary  Inquiry  into  the  effect  of  potentially  biasing
information  on  Judges  and  Jurors  in  Civil  Litigation”  (1994)  (  12
Behavioral Sciences and the Law 113), which concluded that  there is no
empirical data to support or refute the assertion that Judicial officers are not
likely to be significantly influenced by media publicity.  We cannot forget
the  Common  Law  rule  laid  down  in  R v.  Sussex  Justices  :  Exparte
McCarthy : 1924(1) KB 256 that 
56

“Justice  should  not  only  be  done,  it  should  manifestly  and
undoubtedly be seen to be done”.
The Irish Law Commission in its Consultation paper (1991) (p 115)
on  Contempt  of  Court  observed  similarly.   The  Canadian  Law  Reform
Commission  also  took  the  view  that,  while  Judges  may  generally  be
impervious to influence, the possibility of such influence could not be ruled
out altogether, and that in the case of Judicial officers, the sub-judice rule
served an important function of protecting public perception of impartiality
(see Canadian  Law Reform Commission, Contempt of Court  : Offences
against Administration of Justice {Working Paper 20, 1977, p 42-43} and
Report 17 (1982) at p 30).
In Union of India v. Naveen Jindal : 2004(2) SCC 510, it was clearly
held that the US First Amendment is in absolute whereas  the right under
Article 19(1)(a) can be restricted as permitted in Article 19(2)(a), echoing
what was stated in Reliance Petrochemicals. 
In M.P. Lohia v. State of West Bengal : 2005(2) SCC 686, the facts
were that a woman committed suicide in Calcutta in her parents’ house but a
case was filed against the husband and in-laws under the Indian Penal Code
for  murder  alleging  that  it  was  a  case  of  dowry  death.   The  husband
(appellant in the Supreme Court) had filed a number of documents to prove
that the woman was a schizophrenic psychotic patient. The parents of the
57

woman filed documents to prove their allegations of demand for dowry by
the accused.  The trial was yet to commence.  The Courts below refused
bail. 
The Supreme Court granted interim bail to the accused and while
passing the final orders, referred very critically to certain news items in the
Calcutta magazine.  The Court deprecated, two articles published in the
magazine in a one-sided manner setting out only the allegations made by the
woman’s parents but not referring to the documents filed by the accused to
prove that the lady was a schizophrenic.  The Supreme Court observed:-
“These type of articles appearing in the media would  certainly
interfere with the course of administration of justice.”   
The Court deprecated the articles and cautioned the Publisher, Editor and
Journalist who were responsible for the said articles against 
“indulging in such trial by media when the issue is sub-judice.”
and observed that all others should take note of the displeasure expressed by
the Court.
The Punjab High Court in Rao Harnarain v. Gumori Ram : AIR 1958
Punjab  273  stated  that  ‘Liberty  of  the  press  is  subordinate   to  the
administration of justice.  The plain duty of a journalist is the reporting and
58

not the adjudication of cases.’  The Orissa High Court in  Bijoyananda v.
Bala Kush (AIR 1953 Orissa 249) observed that –
“the responsibility of the press is greater than the responsibility
of an individual because the press has a larger audience.  The
freedom of the press should not degenerate into a licence to
attack litigants and close the door of justice nor can it include
any unrestricted liberty to damage the reputation of respectable
persons.”      
In  Harijai Singh v.  Vijay Kumar : 1996(6) SCC 466, the Supreme
Court stated that the press or journalists enjoy no special right of freedom of
expression and the guarantee of this freedom was the same as available to
every citizen. The press does not enjoy any special privilege or immunity
from law.
Summarizing the position, it will be seen that the right to free speech
in  US is  absolute  and  no  restraint  order against  publication  is  possible
unless there is ‘clear and present danger’ to the right itself. 
 But, the position in India is different.  The right to free speech is not
absolute  as  in  US  but  is  conditional  and  restricted  by  Article  19(2).
Treating  a publication  as  criminal  contempt  under  Section   2(c) of  the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 where the Court comes to the conclusion that
59

the publication as to matters pending in Court ‘tends’ to interfere {vide
Section 2(c)(iii)} with the administration of justice, amounts to a reasonable
restriction on free speech.  The view obtaining in USA that trained Judges
or even jurors are not influenced by publication in the media as stated by the
majority in Nebraska (1976) 427 US 539) was not accepted in England in
Attorney General v. BBC 1981 AC 303 (HL) by Lord Dilhorne who stated
that Judges and Jurors may be influenced subconsciously and Judges could
not claim to be super human was quoted by the Supreme Court in Reliance
Petrochemicals.  In what manner they are so influenced may not be visible
from their judgment, but they may be influenced subconsciously.  Even in
US, Justice Frankfurter has accepted that Judges and Jurors are likely to be
influenced.  The view of the Indian Supreme Court even earlier in P.C. Sen
In re : AIR 1970 SC 1821 was that Judges  and Jurors are likely to be
influenced and that view in the Anglo-Saxon law appears to have been
preferred by the Supreme Court in Reliance case. That  Judges  are
subconsciously influenced by several forces was also the view of Justice
Cardozo and of the various Law Commissions referred to above. 
60

CHAPTER IV
How ‘imminent’ criminal proceedings came to be excluded from the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971: A historical and important perspective
Section  3(2)  of  the  Contempt  of  Court  Act,  1971  read  with  the
Explanation below the section (see Chapter II of this Report) excludes from
criminal contempt, all publications made, before the filing of charge sheet
or challan in court or before issue of summons or warrant, even if such
publications interfere or tend to interfere with the course of justice.
In  King v.  Mirror 1927(1)  KB  845, the  accused  was  arrested  on
January 9, and within 24 hours, brought before the Court on January 10 and
investigation started and on January 13, an identification parade was held.
Offending photographs  were published on January 17.  It was held that
proceedings  have  begun.  But  the  question  of  imminence  of  criminal
proceedings was not decided. 
61

In King v. Parke : (1903) 2 KB 432, it was held that there would be
contempt of the assize Court even though no committal had taken place and
a bill  had been filed.  What possible difference can it make, whether a
particular Court which is thus sought to be deprived of its independence and
its power of effecting the great end for which it is created, be it at the
moment in session or even actually constituted or not?  It was in this case
that Wills J. made the famous observation:
“It is possible very effectively to poison the fountain of justice before
it begins to flow.  It is not possible to do so when the stream has
ceased.”
(See Law of Contempt of Court by K.J. Aiyer, 6th Ed, 1983 for the above
analysis of Indian case law.  But, today this is not good law, the date of
arrest rather than the filing of first information report, is the starting point of
‘pendency’ as per judgment of our Supreme Court.)
Question  is whether such exclusion amounts  to over-protection of
freedom of expression and dilution of the protection of due process for fair
criminal trials?
It is first necessary to go into the historical basis of the exclusion of
prejudicial publications made prior to filing of charge sheet or challan from
62

the purview of Contempt of Court Act, 1971.  A historical perspective will
lay bear how such exclusion, as stated above, from contempt liability come
into being and whether such exclusion was justified?
Law prior to 1971:
Under both the Contempt of Courts Act, 1926 and 1952, there was no
definition  of civil contempt and criminal contempt.  Further, Courts did
apply contempt law to publications which interfered or tended to interfere
with administration of justice if criminal proceedings were “imminent” and
the person ‘knew or should have known’ that a proceeding was imminent
(see Subrahmanyam in re : AIR 1943 Lah 329 (335); Tulja Ram v. Reserve
Bank : AIR 1939 Mad 257; State v. Radhagobinda : AIR 195 4 Orissa 1.
State v. Editor etc. of Matrubhumi : AIR 1955 Orissa 36; Le Roy Frey v. R.
Presad : AIR 1958 Punjab 377; Emperor v. Kustalchar : AIR 1947 Lah 206).
In  Smt. Padmavati Devi v.  R.K. Karanjia AIR 1963 MP 61, it was
held that to attract the jurisdiction of contempt, it was not necessary that the
trial  of  the  accused  must  be  imminent  in  the  sense  that  committal
proceedings must have been instituted.  The filing of the first information
report was sufficient.  At any rate, by the production of the arrested person
before a Magistrate for remand, the criminal case was actually pending in a
63

criminal court competent to deal with it judicially.  In criminal cases, such a
step could be taken in the case of a non-cognisable offence, by the filing of
a complaint in the Court and in the case of a cognisable offence by the
making of a  first information report.  Arrest of the accused by the police
during investigation could, therefore, be “during” the pendency of the cause.
It  may  be  that  thereafter  the  investigation  may  prove  abortive,  the
prosecution may be dropped or the accused may be released and orders may
be passed granting protection to the prosecution and to the accused from
unjustified attacks as long as the investigation has not ended. There is no
justification for distinction between the English law and the Indian law on
the point.  In England also, a person may be arrested without warrant and
after an arrest, the prosecution may be dropped for paucity of evidence but
that has never been considered to be a good reason for not considering the
criminal cause as pending.  
This is so far as ‘arrest’ is concerned even where a charge sheet or
challan was not filed before the 1971 Act.
But, before the 1971 Act, it has  been held in Smt. Padmavathi Devi’s
case and in the following cases  that as soon as a complaint is lodged in the
police station and an investigation is started, the matter becomes sub-judice
64

attracting  the  judicial  power  of  the  Court  to  punish  for  contempt.
(Diwanchand v. Narender : AIR 1950 East Punjab 366, Rao Narain Singh v.
Gumani Ram : AIR 1958 Punjab 273; Emperor v. Chowdhary : AIR 1947
Cal 414; Mankad v. Shet Pannalal : AIR 1954 Kutch 2; State v. Editor etc.,
Matrubhumi : AIR 1955 Orissa 36; R.K. Garg v. S.A. Azad : AIR 1967 All
37.)   But this is not good law in view of the decision in A.K. Gopalan vs.
Noordeen (1969) referred to below.
A.K. Gopalan vs. Noordeen: (1969)
In A.K. Gopalan v. Noordeen : (AIR 1969(2) SCC 734) (decided on
15th September, 1969 before the 1971 Act), the Supreme Court held that a
criminal proceeding is imminent only when an arrest had taken place.  In
that case, a person lost his life in an incident and first information report
was  lodged  on  the  same  day.  About  a  week  later,  Mr.  A.K. Gopalan
(appellant) made a statement and three days later, the respondent and his
brother were arrested and remanded to police custody. The statement was
published in a newspaper after the arrest. The respondent moved the High
Court for contempt against the appellant, editor, printer and publisher of
newspaper. The High Court held them all guilty of contempt of Court as the
statement  on  publications  were  after  the  filing  of  the  first  information
65

report.  The Supreme Court allowed the appeal of Mr. A.K. Gopalan but
dismissed the appeal of the editor.   The Court held:
(i) Committal for contempt is not a matter of course. It is a matter
of discretion of the Court and such discretion must be exercised
with  caution.   The  power  must  be  exercised  with
circumspection and restraint and only when it is necessary.
(ii) The publication to constitute contempt must be shown to be
such that it would substantially interfere with the due course of
justice.
(iii) On the date on which the first appellant made his statement, it
could not be said that any proceedings in a criminal court were
imminent merely because a first information report has been
lodged.  The accused were not arrested till after his statement is
made  and  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  imminence  of
proceedings,  and  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  the  first
appellant was instrumental in getting the statement published
after the arrest.
(iv) The  fundamental right to freedom of speech will be unduly
restrained if it is held that there should be no comment on a
case even before an arrest had been made.  In fact, in cases of
public scandals involving companies, it is the duty of free press
to comment on such topics and draw the attention of the public.
(v) As regards  the  editor, the proceedings  in the criminal court
were  imminent,  because  by  the  date  the  statement  was
published,  the  accused  was  arrested,  and  remanded  by  the
66

magistrate,  which  shows  that  proceedings  in  a  court  were
imminent. The possibility of the accused being released after
further investigation is there, but is remote.  Even though the
name of the accused was not mentioned, it was indicated that
the person who committed murder was acting in pursuance of a
conspiracy, and that would certainly put the public against the
accused.
(The dissenting Judge Mitter J, held that even the first appellant was
guilty of contempt of court.)
We have earlier referred to  Smt. Padmavatti Devi v.  R.K. Karanjia,
AIR  1963  MP  61,  and  other  cases  where  it  was  held  that  the  law  of
contempt should be available in cognisable offences from the time when the
first information report is filed.  This view should be regarded as having
been  superseded  by  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  A.K.  Gopalan v.
Noordeen to the extent it said that the criminal proceedings must be treated
as imminent from the date of filing of first information report and even
before any arrest is made.
The Supreme Court judgment in A.K. Gopalan is quite important in
that it decides –
67

(1) that criminal proceeding must be deemed to be imminent if the
suspect is arrested;
(2) that if a prejudicial publication is made regarding a person who
has been arrested by the police, then the right to freedom of
speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) must give way to
the right of the person to a fair trial to be conducted without
any prejudice and any prejudicial publication in the press after
arrest  may  cause  substantial  prejudice  in  the  criminal
proceedings which must be taken to be imminent, irrespective
of whether the person is released later.
The Sanyal Committee, 1963:  date of arrest should be starting point:
Long before the 1971 Act was passed, the Government appointed the
Sanyal Committee to go into the 1952 Act and suggest changes.  The Sanyal
Committee gave its Report in 1963.  It did not have the benefit of the
Supreme Court judgment of 1969 in A.K. Gopalan’s case.
The  Sanyal  Committee  has  observed  in  chapter  VI  “Contempt  in
relation to imminent proceedings” as follows:
“(1) .. .. .. .. ..
 (2) Precise statement of the law and reform:
The  conclusion  we  have  arrived  at  raises  the  immediate
question  whether  it  is  possible  to  state  the  law  relating  to
68

imminent proceedings in precise terms and how far it can be
clarified  or  modified.   Courts  have,  by  and  large,  tried  to
exercise their powers in this respect in such a way that the law
of  contempt  does  not  seriously  interfere  with  freedom  of
speech  because  they  have  themselves  realised  that  it  is
extremely  difficult  to  draw  the  lines  between  cases  where
proceedings may be said to be imminent and cases where they
may not be.  For instance, the mere filing of a first information
report may not be conclusive that proceedings are imminent
although stern logic may demand that the line should be drawn
at that point.  Even where an arrest has taken place, it may not
always  be  followed  up by a judicial  proceeding.   The  only
guidance that we obtain from decided cases is that the question
will depend upon the facts of each case (Foot Note 1 extracted
below).  Are  we to  leave  the  law  in  this  unsatisfactory and
imprecise  state,  particularly  as  fundamental  rights  are
involved?
(3) Civil cases: .. .. ..
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
(4) Criminal cases  :  In respect of criminal matters, however, a slightly
different  approach  is  necessary.   As  in  the  case  of  pending
69

proceedings, if a person is able to prove that he has no reasonable
grounds for believing that the proceeding is  imminent, it should
completely  absolve  him  from  liability  for  contempt  of  court,
perhaps  such  a  defence  is  already  available  to  an  alleged
contemnor, but  we would prefer to give a statutory expression
particularly as under English law, from which our law of contempt
is derived, lack of knowledge would not excuse a contempt though
it may have a bearing  on the punishment to be inflicted.   We
would also like to go a little further and provide certain additional
safeguards.  It has  been  observed  in  several  cases  that  once  a
person is arrested, it would be legitimate to infer that proceedings
are imminent (see Foot Note 2 extracted below).  But in actual fact
that result may not invariably follow.  We have already said that it
should be a valid defence for an alleged contemnor to prove that
he had no reasonable grounds for believing that a proceeding was
imminent.  To this, we would like to add that where no arrest has
been  made,  a  presumption  should  be  drawn  in  favour  of  the
alleged contemnor that no proceedings are imminent (Foot Note 3
extracted below).”
We shall refer to the Footnotes 1, 2, 3 now:
Foot  Note  1:  “See  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
Surendra Mohanty v.  State of Orissa: (CrL App. No.107/56
dated 23.1.1961.  In Smt. Padmavathi Devi  v.  R.K. Karanjia
AIR 1963 MP 61, it appears to be suggested that the law should
70

extend its protection, in the case of cognisable cases, where the
first information report is made because in the Courts’ view,
the  interest  of  justice  would  be  better  served  by  giving
protection  as  long  as  the  investigation  has  not  ended.  This
proposition appears to be widely stated.  For example, the First
Information Report may contain no names.
Foot Note 2:  In fact the cases relied on are cases where arrests
have taken place.
Foot Note 3: R v. Oldham Press Ltd.: 1957 (1) QB 73; the law
in England has already been modified by the Administration of
Justice Act, 1960].
It is clear that the Sanyal Committee accepted that in criminal matters,
date of arrest could be treated as starting point of pendency for the purpose
of contempt law.
To  that  extent,  the  Sanyal  Report  of  1963  is  consistent  with  the
judgment of the Supreme Court in A.K. Gopalan’s case decided in 1970. 
71

Bill  of  1963  prepared  by  Sanyal  Committee  refers  to  ‘imminent’
proceedings:
In the Contempt of Courts Bill, 1963 annexed to the Report of the
Sanyal  Committee,  section  3  deals  with  “Innocent  publication  and
distribution of matter not contempt” and refers to “any criminal proceeding
pending  or imminent”  at the  time of publication  which  is  calculated  to
interfere with the course of justice. 
Section 3 in that Bill reads thus:
“Section  3:  Innocent  Publication  and  distribution  of  matter  not
contempt:
(1) A person shall not be guilty of contempt of court on the ground
that he has published any matter calculated to interfere with the
course of justice in connection with
(a) any criminal proceeding pending or imminent at the time
of publication, if at the time he had no reasonable grounds for
believing that the proceeding was pending or, as the case may
be, imminent;
(b) any civil proceeding pending at the time of publication,
if at that time he had no reasonable grounds for believing
that the proceeding was pending.
72

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time
being in force, a person shall not be guilty of contempt of court
on  the  ground  that  he  has  published  any such  matter  as  is
mentioned  in  subsection  (1)  in  connection  with  any  civil
proceeding imminent at the time of publication, merely because
the proceeding was imminent.
(3) A  person  shall  not  be  guilty  of  Contempt  of  Court  on  the
ground  that  he  has  distributed  a  publication  containing  any
such matter as is mentioned in subsection (1), if at the time of
distribution he had no reasonable grounds for believing that it
contained any such matter as aforesaid or that it was likely to
do so.
(4) The burden of proving any fact to establish on defence afforded
by this section to any person in proceedings for Contempt of
Court shall be upon that person.
Provided  that,  where  in  respect  of  the  commission  of  an
offence  no  arrest  has  been  made,  it  shall  be  presumed  until  the
contrary is proved that a person accused of Contempt of Court in
relation  thereto  had  no  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  any
proceeding in respect thereof was imminent.
Explanation:  For the purposes of this section, a judicial proceeding –
(a) is said to be pending until it is heard and finally decided, that is
to say, in a case where an appeal or revision is competent, until
the appeal or revision is heard and finally decided or where no
73

appeal or revision is preferred, until the period of limitation
prescribed for such appeal or revision has expired.
(b) which has been heard and finally decided shall not be deemed
to  be  pending  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  proceedings  for
execution of the decree, order or sentence passed therein are
pending.”
Thus, the Sanyal Committee specifically protected the interests of the
suspect where criminal proceedings were pending or imminent, if the person
who made the publication had no reasonable grounds for believing that the
proceeding  was  pending  or  imminent.  Under subsection  (3),  if  he  had
reasonable grounds for believing that the publication did not contain any
matters as aforesaid calculated to interfere with the course of justice, there
was no contempt.  The proviso to section 3(4) stated that if no  arrest has
been made, it shall be presumed that there are no reasonable grounds for
believing that proceedings are imminent.
But this  position, as to date  of arrest, was given up by the Joint
Committee of Parliament in 1968-70.
Joint Committee of Parliament (1968-1970): drops the word ‘imminent’ and
requires actual ‘pendency’ in Court
74

The Joint Committee of Parliament (the Bhargava Committee) gave
its Report on 23.2.1970.  It prepared a draft Bill and published it in the
Gazette in February, 1968 and invited responses.  After receiving responses,
the Bill  was  finalized.   It provided  any definition  of ‘contempt’ but  in
clauses 3 to 7 stated what will not be contempt.  The Report stated in para
15 as follows:
“15 .. .. .. .. ..
The Law of Contempt of Courts touches upon citizens’ fundamental
rights to personal liberty and to freedom of expression and therefore,
it  is  essential  that  all  should  have  a  clear  idea  about  it.   The
Committee were, however, aware that it would be difficult to define
in precise terms the concept of Contempt of Court, nevertheless, it
was not beyond human ingenuity to frame or formulate a suitable
definition thereof.  The Committee have, therefore, after giving a very
anxious and elaborate thought to this aspect in the Bill, evolved a
definition of the expression ‘Contempt of Court’ in clause 2 of the
Bill.  While doing so, the Committee have followed the well-known
and  familiar  classification  of  contempts  into  ‘civil  contempt’  and
‘criminal  contempt’  and  have  given  essential  indications  and
75

ingredients of each class or category of contempt.  The Committee
hopes that the proposed definitions will go a long way in enabling the
public to know what contempt of court  means  so that they could
avoid  it;  and  the  courts  would  find  it  easy  to  administer  it.  The
proposed  definition  would  also,  the  Committee  trust,  remove
uncertainties  arising  out  of  an  undefined  law  and  help  the
development of the law of contempt on healthier lines.”
But in para 16, the Committee referred to the “other principal changes
by the Committee in the Bill”. They said that  reasons therefor are set out in
the “succeeding” paragraph and that reads as follows:
Clause 3
“.. .. .. .. .. ..
Paragraph  (1)  (original):   The  Committee  felt  that  the  word
‘imminent’ in relation to an impending proceeding is  vague and is
likely to unduly interfere with the freedom of speech and expression.
The Committee are of the view that it is very difficult to draw a line
between cases where proceedings may be said to be  imminent and
cases  where  they  may not  be,  especially  in  criminal  cases.   The
Committee  have,  therefore,  deleted  the  reference  to  imminent
76

proceedings  from the  clause  and sub-clause  (1) has  been  suitably
modified’.
Sub-clause  (2)  (Original):   The  sub-cluase  has  been  omitted
consequent on the deletion of the reference to imminent proceedings
as mentioned earlier.
Sub-clause (2) (New):  The Committee have added a new sub-clause
to make it clear that no publication of any matter should be deemed to
constitute  contempt of court  if it is  made in connection  with  any
proceeding which is not pending in a court at the time of publication.
Sub-clause (3): .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
Sub-clause (4) (Original):  The  proviso to this sub-clause relating to
the  burden  of  proof  in  imminent  proceedings  have  been  omitted
consequent upon deletion of the reference to imminent proceedings
from sub-clause (1).  In view of this, the Committee felt that this sub-
clause  which  otherwise  reproduces  the  rule  in  section  105  of the
Evidence  Act,  1872  is  unnecessary  and  the  Committee  have,
therefore, deleted the sub-clause.
Explanation to clause (3):  The original Explanation  pertaining  to
pending judicial proceeding covered the period of time upto which a
proceeding is said to be pending without laying down the time from
which proceeding is said to commence.  The Committee are of the
77

view that the stage or stages from which pendency starts should also
be provided in the Explanation, and a proceeding should be deemed
to  be  pending  when  the  case  actually goes  before a Court and it
becomes  seized  of  the  matter.   The  Committee  has,  therefore,
redrafted paragraph (a) of the Explanation and indicated therein the
steps after taking which a civil or a criminal case should be deemed to
commence.”
Question  is whether the changes  made by Joint Committee in 1970 are
consistent  with  law  declared  by  Supreme  Court  in  A.K.  Gopalan v.
Noordeen & Maneka Gandhi case ?
The validity of the changes brought about by the Joint Committee in
1970,  in  the  draft  Bill  prepared  by  the  Sanyal  Committee  in  1963,  by
dropping  the  word  ‘imminent’,  and  by  excluding  all  publications  made
before the date of filing of the charge sheet or challan, even if the person
had been arrested by the date of publication, will have to be considered in
the light of due process of law as decided in Maneka Gandhi’s case 1978 (1)
SCC 248 and the fundamental right to life and liberty declared in Article 21,
and in the light of the view expressed in A.K. Gopalan v. Noordeen, AIR
1970 SC 1694 as to how liberty and freedom of expression require to be
balanced. 
78

The first reason given by the Joint Committee for omitting the word
‘imminent’ is that that word is ‘vague.   This aspect will be considered in
Chapter V.
The second reason given by the Joint Committee is that if imminent
criminal  proceedings  are  to  be  taken  into  account  for  considering  the
question of prejudice, then freedom of expression may be unduly restricted.
This will be considered in Chapter VII.
79

Chapter V
Whether Joint Committee of Parliament was right in stating that the
word ‘imminent’ is vague?
In this Chapter, we shall deal with the view of the Joint Committee
(1969) that the word ‘imminent’ used by he Sanyal Committee in the 1963
is ‘vague’.
Before  going  into  the  aspect  whether  the  Joint  Committee  of
Parliament was right in stating that the word ‘imminent’, as used by the
Sanyal Committee in 1963 was vague, we shall refer to another statement by
the Sanyal Committee that India is a vast country and what is published in
one part is not accessible to people in another part of the country.
Whether publications in one part of India do not reach other parts, as stated
by Sanyal Committee (1963):
Though the Sanyal Committee, in its Report of 1963, was in favour of
the  date  of  arrest  being  the  starting  point  for  defining  ‘pendency’ of a
criminal case, and used the word ‘imminent’ in the Bill, still it made some
80

observations that publication made in one part of the country by the media
do not reach other parts of the country, because our country is so vast.  That
was the position in 1963.
But, in our view, this observation is no longer tenable today in view
of the revolutionary changes that have come about in media publications in
the last two decades. The new technology has ushered in the television, and
cable services, and internet which are today accessible by millions of people
in cities, towns and villages.  Print media and the radio services too have
tremendously  increased.   News  in  internet  is  available  globally.
Dissemination of news by the electronic media and internet is so fast that
the moment a crime of some significance is alleged to have been committed
and somebody is suspected, every News Channel rushes to the place and
covers the item within minutes. The suspect is shown on the television or in
the internet and almost a parallel inquiry starts. Most newspapers publish
their daily newspaper summaries on the web.
By 2002, there have been in India, about 49,000 newspapers of which
about  20,000  are  in  Hindi,  over  130  million  (13  crores)  combined
circulation  of newspapers all put together, 120 million (12 crores) radio
81

sets with 20% of population regularly listening, 65 million television sets of
whom 50% regularly watch the channels, over 35 million households with
cable  television  connections,  21%  of  population  covered  by  FM  radio,
nearly 35 million telephones, over 10 million mobile phones, over 5 million
computers  and  internet  subscribers.   (see  article  by  Dr.  Jaya  Prakash
Narayan in 2002 National Press Day Souvenir published by Press Council
of India).  in the last 4 years, these figures have galloped further higher.
It is reported in Hindu (30th August, 2006) that according to National
Readership Study (NRS 2006), as on 2006, there are 203.6 million readers
of daily newspapers, and together with magazines, it touches 222 million
readers.   Satellite  television  has  230  million  viewers  and television  has
reached 112 million Indian homes.  The number of houses having cable and
satellite television has gone up to 68 million.  Internet use has reached 9.4
million  and  has  touched  12.6  million  in  the  last  three  months.   Radio
reaches 27% of the one billion population.
A  new  development  today  is  that  the  suspect  goes  before  a  TV
channel or to the Press and makes statements of his innocence and this is
obviously intended to prevent the police from claiming that the suspect has
82

voluntarily surrendered and confessed to his guilt. Similarly, victims and
potential  witnesses  are  also  interviewed  by  the  news  channels.   These
technological developments in the media and types of behaviour were not
there when the Sanyal Committee in its Report in 1963 stated in one para
that our country is so vast that events relating to a crime in one part of the
country do not get spread to other parts of the country. This reasoning is no
longer tenable.  Some of the television channels are national and some are
local, in the sense they publish news in local languages but are part of the
same cable network and these channels are accessible in other parts of the
country too.  Today, cable TV system displays regional TV channels in
vernacular languages in various states to cater to the customers who hail
from the particular region speaking that local language.  In Punjab, you can
see news from Kerala or Andhra Pradesh or Tamil Nadu, from language
channels which cater to those who hail from these states and vice-versa.
National  channels  pick  up  news  from  regional  channels  and  regional
channels  pick  up  news  from  National  channels.   Newspapers  too  have
increased circulation than what was in 1970 and another feature is their
coverage of news from the states in National dailies and the coverage of
District news in local State newspapers.  Above all newspapers publish their
news items on the world wide web.  Hence, the observations of Sanyal
83

Committee are no longer valid.
Why the Joint  Committee in its Report 1111(1969-70) is  not correct in
stating that the word ‘imminent’ used by Sanyal Committee ink the Bill of
1963 is ‘vague’:
The  reasoning  of  the  Joint  Committee  (1969-70)  that  the  word
‘imminent’ criminal proceeding used by the Sanyal Committee in its draft
Bill of 1963 is “vague” and is likely to lead to uncertainty is no longer
acceptable.   In  fact,  by  the  date  the  Committee  submitted  its  Report,
Supreme Court had decided in  A.K. Gopalan v.  Noorudin AIR 1970 SC
1694: (1969(2) SCC 734) that the word ‘imminent’ meant the time when a
person was arrested, though pendency was not to be reckoned from the time
when a first information report was filed.  That starting point was fixed by
the Supreme Court for the purpose of balancing the freedom of speech and
expression in Article 19(1)(a) (read with Article 19(2)) on the one hand and
liberty of the person under Article 21 which guarantees due process.  There
is  express  reference  to  the  freedom  of  speech  and  expression  in  that
judgment.   Therefore,  the  argument  of  the  Joint  Committee  as  to
‘vagueness’  is  no  longer  available  and  perhaps  the  attention  of  the
Committee was not invited to the judgment of the Supreme Court which was
already there by the date of its Report.  It appears that the last sitting of the
84

Committee was on 5th October, 1969 while the Report was submitted on 20th
February, 1970.  The judgment in  Gopalan’s case was delivered on 15th
September, 1969.
Further, the fact that the word ‘imminent’ is not vague is clear from
what has been done in other countries.  In several countries, date of arrest
which may be anterior to first information report, is treated as the starting
point for treating a criminal proceeding as ‘pendency’ even if no charge
sheet or challan is filed by the police in the court.
(a) United Kingdom: date of arrest accepted as starting point:
Section 1 of the U.K. Contempt of Court Act, 1981 introduces the
‘strict liability rule’ which means that “the rule of law whereby conduct may
be treated as a contempt of court as tendency to interfere with the course of
justice in particular legal proceeding regardless of intent to do so”. Section
2(1) states that any publication, including broadcast, cable programme or
other communications in whatever form”, which is addressed to the public
at large or any section of the public, will be contempt if it –
“creates a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings
in question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced”.
85

Sub-section (3) states that the strict liability rule applies to a publication
only if the proceedings in question are  active within the meaning of this
section at the time of publication. Sub-section (4) of section 2 is important
and it states:
“Section 2(4):  Schedule 1 applies for determining the times at which
proceedings are to be treated as  active within the meaning of this
section.”
Schedule 1 (clause 3) states that ‘criminal proceedings’ are  active
from the relevant initial step specified in paragraph 4 until concluded as
described  in  para  5.   Clause  (4)  refers  to  the  initial steps  in  criminal
proceedings as follows:
“(a) arrest without warrant;
(a) the issue, or in Scotland the grant of a warrant for arrest;
(b) the issue of summons to appear, or in Scotland, the grant of a
warrant to cite;
(c) the service of an indictment or other document specifying the
charge,
(d) except in Scotland, oral charge.
Clause 5 refers to conclusion of criminal proceedings as follows:
(a) by acquittal, or as the case may be, by sentence.
86

(b) by any other verdict, finding, order or decision which puts an
end to the proceeding;
(c) by discontinuance or by operation of law.
Clause 11 states that criminal proceedings which become  active on
the issue of grant of a warrant for his arrest cease to be active at the end of
the period of twelve months beginning with the date of the warrant unless
he has been arrested within that period, but become active again if he is
subsequently arrested.
In UK, more recently, Lord Hope stated in ‘Montgomery v.  H.M.
Advocate’ (2001 (2) WLR 779) (PC) as follows:
”The  right  of  an  accused  to  a  fair  trial  by  an  independent  and
impartial tribunal is unqualified.  It is not to be subordinated to the
public interest  to the detection and suppression  of crime.  In this
respect, it might be said that the Convention right is superior to the
common law right.”
(b) Australia: (New South Wales) : Date of arrest as starting point.
The Report of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(Report 100) 2003 (issued after Discussion Paper 43 (2000) on ‘Contempt
87

of Court’ contains a Draft Bill which refers to potential jurors, potential
witnesses and potential parties and applies criminal contempt to “active”
criminal proceedings.  
Prejudice to ‘imminent’ proceedings by publication is part of the law
in New South Wales (Australia). The publication must have a tendency to
prejudice the framing of proceedings.  Sections 7(d), 8(d), 9(c) of the Bill
annexed to the Report require that the publication creates substantial risk,
according  to  the  circumstances  at  the  time  of  publication,  that  jurior,
witnesses or parties or potential jurors or potential witnesses or potential
parties may be influenced.
Schedule 1 describes when criminal proceedings are active and reads
as follows:-
“Ch.1. Part 1
1. When is a criminal proceeding active?
(1) A criminal proceeding is active for the purposes of section 7:
(a) from the earliest of the following:
(i) the arrest of a person   in New South Wales or in
another State or Territory,
(ii) the laying of a charge,
88

(iii) the issue of a court attendance notice and its filing
in the registry of the relevant court,
(iv) the filing of an ex-officio indictment,
(v) the making  of an order in  a country other than
Australia that a person be extradited to New South
Wales for the trial of an offence.
(c) New Zealand: Case law accepts date of arrest as starting point.
Under the New Zealand Bill of Rights, 1990, section 25(a) protects
the  right  to  a  fair  and  public  hearing  by  an  independent  tribunal  and
section25(c) the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according
to law.  Section 24(e) protects  the right of an accused charged with an
offence to a trial before a jury when the penalty for the offence may be
imprisonment  for  more than  three  months.   Section  138(2) of  the  New
Zealand Criminal Justice Act, 1985 empowers the courts to make orders
precluding  the press  from reporting  on  criminal  proceedings  when  it  is
considered that the interests of justice, public morality, the reputation of the
victim of a sexual offence or extortion, or the security of New Zealand
require such order to be passed.
There are several cases which refer to date of arrest as the starting
point to consider the question of prejudice by publicaions.  It is stated that it
89

is incidental to the right to trial by jury that “a person accused of a crime is
entitled to have the …. cases presented to such a jury with their minds open
and unprejudiced and untrammelled by anything which any newspaper, for
the benefit of its readers, … takes upon itself to publish before any part of
the case has been heard” (Attorney General v.  Tonks : 1934 NZLR 141
(149) (FC).  In that case it was held that publication of photographs before
trial of person who is arrested will be prejudicial if identification was likely
to be an issue, and would amount to contempt. Blair J. observed:
“If a  photograph of an accused person is  broadcast in a newspaper
immediately he is arrested, then such of the witnesses who have not
then seen him, may quite unconsciously be led into the belief that the
accused  as  photographed  is  the  person  they saw.  The  fact  that  a
witness  claiming  to  identify  the  accused  person,  has  seen  a
photograph  of  him  before  identifying  him,  gives  the  defence  an
excuse for questioning the soundness of the witness’s identification.” 
Tonks decided  in  New  Zealand  in  1934  was  recently  followed  by  the
Australian Court in  Attorney General (NSW) v.  Time Inc. Magazine Co.
Ltd. (unrep.CA 40331/94 dated 15th September 1994) in a case arising from
the  publication  of  the  photo  of  one  Ivan  Milat,  the  accused  in  the
backpacker  serial  murders’  case.  The  weekly  magazine  ‘Who’  had
90

published Milat’s photo on its front page following his arrest.  Referring to
the danger such actions created, Gleeson CJ observed:
“One of the particular problems about  identification evidence is the
difficulty that exists  where a person, before  performing an act of
identification of an accused, has  been shown a photograph of the
accused.  If for example, prior to identifying an accused person in a
police  line-up,  a  witness  had  been  shown  by  a  police  officer  a
photograph of the accused, then it would be strongly argued that the
identification in the line-up was useless, or at least of very limited
value.   It  would  be  argued  that,  because  of  what  is  sometimes
described as the displacement effect, there was a high risk that at the
time of the line-up, the witness was performing an act of recognition,
not of a person who had been seen by the witness on some previous
occasion, but of the person in the photograph.”
In New Zealand, publicity given to confessions allegedly made to the
police can create serious prejudice to a suspect or accused.  The confession
may later be ruled inadmissible, in which case, recollection by a juror of a
report  of  a  confession  could  be  highly  prejudicial.   Reports  of  the
psychiatric history of an accused tending to show a person as dangerous
could similarly affect the trial. 
91

In Solicitor General v. Wellington Newspapers Ltd.: 1995(1) NZ LR
45,  Gisborne  Herald  and  two  other  newspaper  publishers  had  been
convicted of contempt for reporting the previous convictions of John Giles
at the time of his arrest  in Gisborne on charges of attempted murder of a
police constable.
In  Solicitor General v. Television New Zealand : 1989(1) NZ LR
page 1 (CA), the Court of Appeal rejected the defence that the court could
not grant an injunction to prevent prejudice to imminent court proceedings.
It observed:
“In our opinion, the law of New Zealand must recognise that in cases
where the commencement of criminal proceedings is  highly likely,
the court has inherent jurisdiction to prevent the risk of contempt of
court by granting an  injunction.  But, the freedom of the press and
other media is not lightly to be interfered with and it must be shown
that there is a  real likelihood of a publication of material that will
seriously prejudice the fairness of the trial (Cooke J)
92

On facts,  no  action  was  taken  as  the  publication  did  not  contain
details.  In   Attorney General v. Sports Newspapers Ltd. : 1992 (1) NZLR
503,  the  NZ  Divisional  Court  held  that  criminal  proceedings  must  be
pending or  imminent.  In  Television New Zealand case, instead of basing
the judgment on whether the criminal proceedings were imminent, the court
laid down the test of ‘real likelihood of a publication of material that will
seriously prejudice the fairness of the trial’.
(d) Australia:  Case  law  and  Law  Reform  Commission  prejudice  on
account of ‘imminent’ proceedings: accepted in Australia:
Western Australia has a provision in section 11A of the Evidence
Act, 1906 which authorises a Judge to restrict publication of evidence in
any proceeding  where  the  Judge  considers  that publication  may tend to
prejudice any prosecution that has been or may be brought against a person.
The  Law  Reform  Commission  of  Australia  issued  a  number  of
discussion papers addressing the issues of contempt by publication in 1986,
1987 and 2000.  These papers assert that contempt arises when there has
been publication of prejudicial material, regardless of whether or not there
was an intention to interfere consciously with an imminent or ongoing court
case.  Typical examples of prejudicial publicity include publication of a
93

prior  criminal  record  of  an  alleged  offender,  or  insinuations  of  the
offender’s guilt or innocence, and reporting a confession (Australian Law
Reform  Commission,  1987;  Pearson,  1997)  (as  quoted  by  Keylene  M.
Douglas  in  his  article  “Pre-trial  publicity  in  Australian  print  media  :
Eliciting bias effects on Juror decision making (2002)”).
We shall next  refer to the peculiar case  of  Glennon in Australia.
Glennon’s case related to pending criminal proceedings but it is relevant in
the present context.
Summary
We  are,  therefore,  of  opinion  that  the  word  ‘imminent’  criminal
proceedings is no longer vague in as much as the Supreme Court in  A.K.
Gopalan v. Noordeen AIR 1970 SC 1694 has stated that publications made
after ‘arrest’ of a person and before the filing of a charge sheet, can be the
starting point of ‘pendency’.  Any publications which are prejudicial to the
suspect who has been arrested before filing of charge sheet/challan can be
contempt under section 3 if they interfere or tend to interfere with the cause
of justice.  In our view, the word ‘imminent’, if it is so defined, cannot be
94

said to be any longer vague.  In fact, in UK, in New South Wales, date of
arrest is treated as the starting point while in Australia and New Zealand,
the  fact  that  criminal  proceedings  are  ‘imminent’  is  a  sufficient
consideration. 
For all these reasons, we are firmly of the view that though section 3
(2) may be retained so as to exclude from contempt certain publications, the
Explanation below section 3 requires to be modified, so far as clause (B)
relating to criminal proceedings is concerned, so as to include the arrest of a
person in addition to filing of charge sheet or challan or issue of summons
or warrant against the accused.
95

   CHAPTER VI  
Does  ‘A.K.  Gopalan     v.  Noordeen”  (1969)(SC)  make  ‘imminence’  
relevant only in respect of arrests for serious offences ?  What is the
effect of the 24 hour rule?
In this Chapter we shall deal with an editorial comment in the SCC
report  of  A.K.  Gopalan vs.  Noordeen:  1969(2)  SCC  734  where  it  is
observed that that case held criminal proceedings are imminent because it
was a case of arrest in a murder case.  If the offence is not serious, arrest
does not mean criminal proceedings are imminent.
We propose to discuss this view critically.  We have, as will be seen
at  the  end  of  this  Chapter,  come  to  the  conclusion  on  an  exhaustive
discussion,  that  there  can be no question of criminal proceedings  being
‘imminent’  after  arrest  only  in  case  of  ‘serious’  offences.   No  such
distinction between ‘serious’ and ‘less serious’ offences can be recognized
nor has been recognized in any country for deciding if criminal proceedings
are ‘imminent’ after an arrest.
96

We  start  our  discussion  with  the  two  Supreme  Court  judgments
dealing with the word ‘imminent’.
The first case on the subject is Surendra Mohanty v. State of Orissa
(Criminal Appeal No. 107 of 1956 : Judgment dated 23.1.1961) and the
second one  is  A.K.Gopalan v.  Noordeen  1969(2) SCC 734 to which we
have already referred..
(a) In the first case in  Surendra Mohanty, (unreported, quoted in extenso
in  A.K. Gopalan’s case) the Supreme Court  examined the question as to
whether the prejudicial publication of a statement in the media at a time
when the only step taken was the recording of first information report under
Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1898, could be contempt of
court. Kapur, J observed:
            “Before the publication of the comments complained of,
only  the  first  information  report  was  filed in which  though
some persons  were  mentioned  as  being  suspected  of  being
responsible for causing the breach in the Bund, there was no
definite allegation against any one of them. In the charge-sheet
subsequently filed by the police these suspects do not appear
amongst the persons accused. It was, therefore, argued that by
the publication there could not be any tendency or likelihood to
interfere with the due course of justice. The learned Additional
Solicitor-General for the State submitted on the other hand that
if  there  is  a  reasonable  probability  of  a  prosecution  being
launched against any person and such prosecution be merely
imminent, the publication would be a contempt of court.
97

The  Contempt  of  Courts  Act  (1952)  confers  on  the  High
Courts the power to punish for the contempt of inferior courts.
This power is both wide and has been termed arbitrary. The
courts must exercise this power with circumspection, carefully
and with restraint and only in cases where it is necessary for
maintaining the course of justice pure and unaffected. It must
be  shown  that  it  was  probable  that  the  publication  would
substantially  interfere with  the  due  course  of  justice;
commitment for contempt is not a matter of course but within
the  discretion  of  the  court  which  must  be  exercised  with
caution. To constitute contempt is not necessary to show that as
a  matter  of  fact  a  judge  or  jury  will  be  prejudiced  by  the
offending publication but the essence of the offence is conduct
calculated to produce an atmosphere of prejudice in the midst
of which the proceedings will have to go on and a tendency to
interfere with the due course of justice or to prejudice mankind
against persons who are on trial or who may be brought to trial.
It must be used to preserve citizen’s rights to have a fair trial of
their  causes  and  proceeding  in  an  atmosphere  free  of  all
prejudice or prepossession. It will be contempt if there is a
publication of any news or comments which have a tendency to
or are calculated to or are likely to prejudice the parties or their
causes or to interfere with the due course of justice.
      As to  when the  proceedings  begin  or  when  they are
imminent for the purposes of the offence of contempt of court
must depend upon the circumstances  of each case, and it is
unnecessary in this case to define the exact boundaries within
which they are to be confined.
      The filing of a first information report does not, by itself,
establish that proceedings in a court of law are  imminent. In
order to do this various facts will have to be proved and in each
case that question would depend on the facts proved.”
Kapur J further observed:
     “In the present case all that happened was that there was a
first information report made to the police in which  certain
suspects were named; they were not arrested; investigation was
98

started  and  on  the  date  when  the  offending  article  was
published  no  judicial  proceedings  had  been  taken  or  were
contemplated  against  the  persons  named in  the  information
report. Indeed after the investigation the suspects named in that
report were not sent up for trial. At the date of this offending
publication was made, there was no proceeding pending in a
court of law nor was any such proceeding imminent.”
A reading of the above observations shows that the date of filing of a
first  information  report  under  Section  154  of  the  Code  of  Criminal
Procedure  Code  cannot  be  the  starting  point  for  treating  a  criminal
proceeding as pending, still there could be contempt if criminal proceedings
are ‘imminent’.  In that case in the charge sheet, some of the names referred
to  in  the  first  information  report  were  not  included.   In  order  that
publications are in contempt, they must  be such as would “substantially”
interfere with the due course of justice.  It is not necessary to show that as a
matter  of  fact  a  Judge  or  Jury  will  be  prejudiced  by  the  offending
publication but the essence is whether the publication was calculated to
produce an atmosphere of prejudice in the midst of which the proceeding
will have to go on and has a tendency to interfere with the due course of
justice or to prejudice mankind against persons who are on trial or who may
be brought to trial.  It must be used to preserve citizens’ right to have a fair
trial of their causes and that the proceedings arecarried in an atmosphere
99

free of all prejudice or prepossession.  It will be contempt if there is a
publication  of any news or comments which have a tendency to or are
calculated  to  or  are  likely  to  prejudice  the  parties  or their  cause  or  to
interfere with course of justice.  As to when proceedings begin or when they
are imminent must depend upon the circumstances of each case.  It was felt
that the exact boundaries do not fall for decision in the case.  Apart from the
facts in information report, various other facts have to be proved. In the
above case, the first information report alone was there but, it was stated,
that none was arrested as on the date of the publication.  Nor was any
proceeding pending in Court.
(b) In the second case in  A.K. Gopalan v.  Noordeen 1969(2) SCC 734
already referred to, an investigation was going on against a person into a
charge of murder.  We have referred to the case earlier but, we shall discuss
the judgment in greater detail in the context of the editorial note in SCCin
that case.  
The  accused  was  arrested  on  September  23,1967.   While  the
statement of Mr.A.K. Gopalan about the arrested person was made on 20th
September 1967, the first information was lodged on 11th September 1967
but the accused was not arrested while by the date of publication in the
newspaper,  they  were  arrested.   The  Supreme Court  held  that  Mr.A.K.
Gopalan was not guilty of contempt and so far as the printers and publishers
100

were concerned, the Court took the view that the question was whether
proceedings in a court were imminent?  The Court “referred” to arrest in a
serious cognizable case i.e. one of alleged murder, and stated that ‘arrest’
means that the police was prima facie on the right track.  It also referred to
the fact  that  the  accused  must  have  been  produced  before  a Magistrate
within  24  hours  of  the  arrest  in  accordance  with  Article  22  of  the
Constitution and the Magistrate must have authorized further detention of
the accused.
The Court stated “In these circumstances, it is difficult to say that any
proceedings in a court were not imminent”.  
Not only that, the Supreme Court stated further:
“The fact that the police may have, after investigation, come to
the conclusion that the accused was innocent does not make the
proceedings any the less imminent”.
          Why publication could subvert the course of justice was: 
“because it would tend to encourage public investigation of a
crime and a public discussion of the character and antecedents
of an accused in detention.”
           The Court also observed that it is not in every case when a person is
arrested, a proceeding in a court can be said to be imminent because there
101

could be delay in the scrutiny of accounts may take time.  If it is a case
against a company, a large number of accounts may have to be investigated
by the police and criminal proceedings may not be imminent in spite of
arrest.  On that ground the Court said :
“as observed by this Court, it is difficult to  lay down any
inflexible rule”.
 It then said :
“But,  as  far  as  an  investigation  of  a  charge  of  murder  is
concerned, once an accused has been arrested proceedings in
Court should be treated as imminent”.
      (Mitter, J however, held even Mr.A.K. Gopalan guilty of contempt.)
It is the above observations that appear to be the basis of the editorial
comment in SCC.  
However, it appears to be the law declared by the Supreme Court in
A.K.  Gopalan’s case that  the fact that an arrest under Section 41 of the
Cr.PC has been made may be  prima facie proof that criminal proceedings
are ‘imminent’.
102

But, it is true the Court made an observation that there can still be
exceptions where notwithstanding an arrest, criminal proceedings may not
be imminent such as where a mass of accounts of a company are to be
scrutinized or investigated before charge sheet is filed under Section 173.
Those observations deal with a delayed time factor but that does not, in our
opinion, mean that in the case of  (say) arrest of a company’s Director, there
can be prejudicial publications  because of delay in the filing of charge-
sheet.  This requires a proper meaning being given to the word ‘imminent’. 
In our view, the word ‘imminent’ does  not mean merely that the
charge sheet must be filed in Court “immediately” after arrest.  ‘Imminent’
here mans the ‘reasonable likelihood’ of the filing of charge sheet whether
immediately or in a reasonable time.  If the word ‘imminent’ should mean
“immediate”, then in all cases where there are delays in investigation such
as when investigation is entrusted to the CBI or the ACB in the States, there
could be a free licence to issue prejudicial publications.  That cannot be the
law.  ‘Imminence’, in our view, really means  ‘reasonable likelihood’ of
filing of charge sheet.
103

But we are not saying that once arrest is made, the media is obliged to
make no publications at all.  What the law requires is that they should not,
while making publications, prejudice the case of the suspect by referring to
his character, prior convictions, confessions, photographs (where identity is
in question) or describe him as guilty or innocent (see Chapter IX).  Further,
sec  3  grants  immunity  to  publications  made  without  knowledge  of  the
pendency of the criminal proceeding.
Nor  is  the  editorial  note  correct  in  suggesting  that  the  word
‘imminence’ requires a person who wants to make a prejudicial publication
to go to the police station or to somehow find out if the police had come to a
preliminary conclusion to file a charge sheet.  Such an interpretation of the
word ‘imminent’ is a highly unreasonable one and impracticable.  We do
not  see any problem in  understanding  that  ‘imminence’ in  respect  of a
person who is ‘arrested’ means that he is “most likely” to be charge sheeted.
Further, as stated below, ‘arrest’ is important in another sense because
of the 24 hour rule which we shall presently discuss.  This is a constitutional
requirement that a person arrested has to be produced before a magistrate
within 24 hours of the arrest. Today, the word ‘imminent’ is understood as
104

being a stage when a person comes within the constitutional protection of a
Court after arrest.  (see heading ‘B’ below).
(A) Prejudice  to  the  suspect  means  prejudice  irrespective  of  whether
offence is a serious one or nor:
In A.K. Gopalan’s case, no doubt, the Court uses the words ‘serious’
offence  of  murder.   But,  in  our  opinion,  when  we  are  considering  the
prejudice to the suspect, then prejudice may occur whether offence is a
serious one or not.  Prejudice must be viewed from the point of view of the
personal right of the suspect for a fair trial when he is arrested and not from
the point of view whether the arrest was for a serious offence.  Prejudice is
in relation to a person and is not in relation to the offence  with which the
person is charged.
No country has made a distinction between a serious offence and a
non-serious offence, for judging whether a publication regarding the offence
has caused prejudice to the suspect or accused. 
(B) Care and protection of Court under Article 22(2) of the Constitution
and Sections 57 & 76 of the Code of Criminal Procedure are sufficient to
show court proceedings are imminent: 
       The entire argument based on possible delay in filing charge sheet after
arrest is without basis for it ignores Art 22(2) of the Constitution under
105

which soon after arrest, a person comes under the protection of the Court.
This  according  to  Court  judgments  and  other  authorities  is  the  proper
meaning  of  the  word  ‘imminent’.   Whether  a  person  is  arrested  in  a
cognizable case by the police without warrant on the basis of ‘reasonable
suspicion’ or by a warrant from the Court in the case of non-cognizable case
where the Magistrate applies his mind as to whether arrest is necessary and
under Sections 57 and 76 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a person
arrested has to be brought before a Magistrate within 24 hours of the arrest.
That is imperative under Article 22(2) of the Constitution of India. Once
arrest is made, the person arrested comes  within the care and protection of
the  Court and  such  a  relationship  with  the  court  has  been  treated  as
sufficient  to show that ‘court proceedings’ are ‘imminent’. This is clear
from  the  decision  in  Hall v.  Associated  Newspapers :  1978  SLT  241
decided  by  the  Court  in  Scotland  (to  which  we  shall  be  referring
hereinbelow).  That, according to Borrie and Lowe, (Contempt of Court) (3rd
Ed) (1996) (p 247, 256), is the basis of the UK Act, 1981 for treating a
criminal  proceeding  as  ‘active’  from  the  time  of  arrest  (see  discussion
below).  That is also the view of  other leading authorities.
It is, therefore, not correct to think that prejudice to the suspect starts
only after the charge sheet or challan is filed under Section 173(2) of the
106

Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, when the police come to the conclusion
that “an offence appears to have been committed”. 
 (C) UK – Hall vs. Assorted Newspapers: “24 hour rule”:       
The  crucial  decision  which  is  the  basis  for the UK Act  of 1981,
according to the authors Borrie and Lowe (1996, 3rd Ed, (page 247, 256) is
Hall v.  Associated Newspapers : 1978 S.L.T 241 (248).  In that case, the
Scotland Court referred to the test as to whether proceedings have reached
the stage when it can be said “that the court has become seized of a duty of
care towards individuals who have been brought into a relationship with the
court”.  Applying that test, it was held (at page 247 of Hall) that contempt
applied “from the  moment of arrest or (obiter) from the moment when a
warrant for an arrest has been granted. With regards to arrest, it was felt hat,
at that time, the person arrested is within the protection of the court since he
is vested with rights (for example he must be informed of the charge and
must be brought before a magistrate within 24 hours) which he can invoke
and  which the court is under a duty to enforce.”
(D) New South Wales (Australia): 24 hour rule applied:
The above judgment of the Scotland Court was followed by A.G for
NSW v. T.C.N.Channel Nine Pty Ltd : (1990)20 NSWLR 368 in which a
107

film of an arrested man being led around the scene of the crime by the
police was shown on television with a commentary which clearly implied
that he had confessed to a number of murders (which was indeed the case).
At the time of the broadcast, the man had been arrested and charge had not
yet been brought before the court.  The New South Wales Court of Appeal
thought that as held in Hall v. Associated Newspapers, “from the moment of
arrest,  the  person  arrested  is  in  a  very  real  sense  under  the  care  and
protection  of  the  court”.  The  N.S.W.Court  concluded  that   the  critical
moment for contempt was the time of arrest from that moment : (p 378)  
“The  process  and  procedures  of  the  Criminal  Justice
system, with all the safeguards they carry with them, applied to
him and for his benefit, and …. Publications with a tendency to
reduce  those  processes,  procedures  and  safeguards  to
impotence are liable to attract punishment as being in contempt
of court.”
and applied  the principle in R v. Parke : 1903(2) KB 432 which stated that
‘fountain of justice’ can be polluted at its source.
Thus, the Australian position appears also to be that contempt law
applies from the stage of arrest whether the offence is a serious one or not,
because the arrested person comes within the protection of Court.
108

(E) New Zealand: Case law refers to ‘arrest’ or ‘imminent’ stage:
In New Zealand,  in  Television New Zealand Ltd v.  S.G (1989) 1
NZLR 1, the Court of Appeal initially granted an injunction at the instance
of  the  Solicitor  General,  to  prevent  a  television  news  broadcast  which
included comments and opinions about the man-hunt for a named man but
no charge had yet been laid for his arrest. The court later rescinded the order
on  the  ground  that  the  material  sought  to  be  published  did  not  have
prejudicial content.  The court said:
“In our opinion, the law of New Zealand must recognize that in
cases  where  the  commencement  of  criminal  proceeding  is
highly likely, the Court has inherent jurisdiction to prevent the
risk of contempt of court by granting injunction.”
We have already referred, in the previous Chapter, to a number of
decisions of the New Zealand Courts where either ‘arrest’ or ‘imminence’ of
criminal proceedings was treated as sufficient to grant protection against
publications.  (Attorney General vs. Tonks: 1934 NZRL 141 (FC): Solicior
General vs. Willington Newspapers: NZRL 45; Attorney General vs. Sports
Newspapers 1992(1) NZRL 503.
109

(F) Canada: ‘arrest’ is given importance
        In Canada, according to Stuart M. Robertson, Courts and the Media
(1981)  Butterworth,Toronto)  p  48  (quoted  by Borrie  and  Lowe,  3rd Ed,
1999, p 249) it is stated that the ‘sub judice’ rule begins to apply when the
court obtains jurisdiction over the matter
“and in criminal cases, that is when information is sworn before
a Justice of the Peace upon which either a summons or warrant
is issued or where a person is arrested by a police officer.” 
Canadian Law Reform Commission : refers to ‘arrest’:
The  Canadian  Law  Reforms  Commission  (1977,  Working  Paper,
No.20, p 44 & 1982 Report No.17, p 44, 54-6) was also impressed by the
need  for  certainty  but  it  too  rejected the  Phillmore  Committee
recommendations  and  proposed  instead  that  the  sub  judice  period  must
begin at the moment an information is laid (i.e. first information report). The
Australian  Law  Reforms  Commission  (Report  No.  35,  para  296)
recommended that contempt should apply from the time when a warrant for
arrest has  been  issued,  a  person  has  been  arrested without  warrant,  or
charges  have  been  laid,  whichever  is  the  earliest.   However,  it  also
recommended that if a person ‘implicated’ in a publication at an earlier
point acted with  the  intention of prejudicing  the relevant trial, so as  to
110

amount to an attempt to prevent the course of justice, he should be liable to
be prosecuted for that offence under Section 43 of the Crimes Act, 1914)
(Cmth).  This has echos of the position reached in the United Kingdom after
Contempt of Court Act,1981. 
We have already referred to the views of the New South Wales Law
Commission in the previous Chapter.
(G) Irish  Law  Reforms  Commission:  refer  to  ‘imminent  or  virtually
certain’:
The  Irish  Law  Reforms  Commission(1991,  July,  p  321)  has
commended two tests.  The first, which would apply in ‘normal’ cases,
namely to ‘active’ proceedings as defined in the UK Contempt of Court Act
of 1981.  The second would apply contempt to ‘the rare case where, in
relation to proceedings which are not active but are  imminent, a person
publishes  material  when  he  is  actually  aware  of  facts  which,  to  his
knowledge, render it certain, or virtually certain, to cause serious prejudice
to  a  person  whose  imminent involvement  in  criminal  or  civil  legal
proceedings is certain or virtually certain”.
(H) Borrie & Lowe
111

Borrie and Lowe (pp 253, 254) refer to the need for a definite point of
time and refer to the views of Law Commissions in UK, Canada, Australia
and Ireland as to the need for fixing a definite point of time  and as to when
proceedings can be said to be “imminent” so that the vagueness concept
built up by the Phillmore Committee (1974) could be easily surmounted and
they say that finally, the UK Act of 1981, by giving the criteria in Sch 1,
para 4, (i.e. date of arrest etc.) virtually adopting the Scotland decision in
Hall v. Associated Newspapers Ltd 1978 SLT 241, the ‘vagueness’ obstacle
has indeed been surmounted.  The authors say that confining the contempt
law to publication made only after filing a charge in court, results in an
unjust superior position being granted to freedom of speech and expression
as against liberty.  The above views of the authors are quite important and
we shall refer to the crucial paragraphs from that book.
The authors say under the heading “Proposals for Reform”, as follows (pp
253,254):
       
Starting Point : 
The Phillmore Committee (1974, Cmnl 5794, para 113) could see no
case  for  retaining  the  concept  of  ‘imminence’  since  it  defies
definition and could apply arbitrarily depending on the chance of
outcome  of  events.  As  the  Committee  said,  the  vagueness  of
112

‘imminence’ has ‘an inhibiting effect on the freedom of the press
which  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  any  value  there  may  be  in
preserving it.’
Moving away from the concept of ‘imminence’ does not resolve the
difficulty of deciding when contempt ought to begin to apply.  There
remains  the  problem  of  selecting  a  starting  point that  is  both
sufficiently certain and early enough to afford real protection to any
ensuing  trial.   The  Phillmore  Committee (paras  123,  216)
recommended  that  for  criminal  proceedings,  the  starting  point
should be (a) in England and Wales, when the accused person is
charged or a summons served and (b) in Scotland, when the person
is publicly charged on petition or otherwise or at the first calling in
court  of  a  summary complaint.   Had  this  recommendation  been
implemented , it is suggested that it would have tipped the balance
too far in favour of freedom of speech.  Quite simply, the suggested
starting point would have been late to afford real and necessary
protection to the accused.”  
The  authors  say  that  a  subsequent  Government  Discussion
Paper (1978, (Cmnd 7145, para 14) seemed to take a similar view.
As it said:
113

“charges  often  follow  shortly  after  a  serious  crime
becomes known; and indeed, from the point of view of an
accused person, it may be as important to have protection
from prejudicial comment during the period immediately
before he is charged, when media and public intent in the
crime is strong, as it is after a charge has been formally
laid”.
                  The Government Discussion Paper concluded that on that
footing, “there is ground for the view that the  Phillmore recommendation
goes too far in allowing prejudicial publication before a formal charge is
made, so endangering the fair trial of accused persons”.
       The authors Borrie and Lowe say (see p 254) that the UK Law was
reformed  with  an  earlier  starting  point  than  the  one  recommended  by
Phillmore.
In the Schedule I, para 4, of the UK Act of 1981 so far as criminal
proceedings are concerned, it is stated that the criminal proceedings become
‘active’ upon 
“(a) arrest without warrant;
(b) the issue of summons to appear, or in Scotland, the grant of a
warrant; 
114

(c) the service of an indictment or other document specifying the
charge;
(d) except in Scotland, oral charge.”
Borrie & Lowe state (p 256) that para 4 of Sch. 1 “is a virtual enactment of
the  starting  point  in  Scotland  as  laid  down  by  Hall v.  Associated
Newspapers Ltd (1978 SLT 241) and in any event, closely corresponds to
what the Common Law in England and elsewhere understand as ‘pending’
proceedings.” 
However, under Section 3 of the UK Act, a publisher can defend
himself stating that at the time of publication, he had taken all reasonable
care but he neither knew nor suspected that the relevant proceedings were
active and (probably) that he published in good faith. Borrie and Lowe state
(p 258) that Section 3 might not provide a complete answer but it goes a
long way to meet the fears of the Phillimore Committee.
It is significant that in A.K. Gopalan vs. Noordeen (1969(1) SCC 734
at page 741 the Supreme Court indeed referred to the 24 hour rule and
observed, while stating the facts, as follows:
“Arrest means that the police was prima facie on the right track.  The
accused  must  have  been  produced  before  a  Magistrate  within  24
hours  of  the  arrest  in  accordance  with  Art  21  (Art  22)  of  the
115

Constitution, and Magistrate must have authorized further detention
of the accused.”
But  from  Hall,  it  is  clear  that  coming  under  care  of  the  Magistrate  is
sufficient  and  it  is  not  necessary  that  Magistrate  must  have  authorized
arrest. 
The following observations of Borrie &  Lowe (see p 258) are quite
important in the context in India of balancing Article 19(1)(a) and Article
21.  The authors say:  
  “The timing provisions under para 4 are not as generous to the
news  media  as  the  Phillimore  Committee  recommendations,
which was that the sub-judice period should begin only when the
person was charged or a summons served.  However, despite the
difficulties adverted to above, it is submitted that the Act gets the
timing about right.  Paragraph 4 strikes a reasonable compromise
between the Phillimore Committee’s proposals, which would not
have protected a trial from the real risk of prejudice that publicity
prior to the charge can cause, and the undesirable uncertainty of
the Common Law position.   Indeed,  it  was  the  extraordinary
publicity which followed the arrest of Peter Sutcliffe in January,
116

1981, which began even before he had been charged with the
‘Yorkshire Ripper’ murders, which doomed any attempt in the
later  stages  of  the  Bill  to  ease  the  sub-judice  provision  and
follow the Phillimore recommendation.  Paragraph 4 should have
had the advantage of creating a uniform and reasonably certain
starting point applicable to England and Wales, Scotland and
Northern  Ireland.   However,  as  we  have  seen,  this  statutory
certainty has been undermined by the continuing operation of the
Common Law, with  its  concept  of  ‘imminent’ for  intentional
contempt.” 
Summary: Editorial Note in 1969(2) SCC 734 is not correct:
               The above discussion of the meaning of the word ‘imminent’ leads
us  to the conclusion  that  the time of arrest  can  be reasonably taken  as
starting  point,  whether  the  offence  is  a  serious  one  or  otherwise.   The
moment an arrest is made, the person comes within the protection of the
Court for he has to be produced in Court within twenty four hours.  This
reason is given by the Scotland Court in Hall’s case (1978) as above stated
117

and is the basis of Schedule 1 of the UK Act of 1981.This reason is also
accepted by the New South Wales (1990).  
We do not, therefore, accept the editorial comments given below A.K.
Gopalan’s case in 1969(2) SCC 734  that that case treats  ‘arrest’ as  the
starting point of ‘imminence’ in a criminal case when publications are made
in relation to ‘serious’ offences like ‘murder’ and that only in such case
there is likelihood of charge sheet being filed.  In our view, from the point
of the person arrested, whether the arrest is for a serious offence or not, the
prejudicial publication affects the process of a fair trial.
118

CHAPTER VII
Freedom of expression, Contempt of Court, 
Due Process to Protect Liberty
The  Chapter  deals  with  the  second  reason  given  by  the  Joint
Committee of Parliament for rejecting the word ‘imminent’ as used in the
Bill by the Sanyal Committee.  The Joint Committee felt that the word
‘imminent’ was vague and would unduly restrict freedom of expression.
We have  already  stated  that  now,  after  A.K.  Gopalan’s case,  the  word
‘imminent’  is  not  vague.   It  remains  to  consider  whether  freedom  of
expression is unduly restricted if the date of ‘arrest’ is treated as starting
point.
Article 19 and Art 14, 21: Balancing rights of free speech and due process: 
In Express Newspapers vs. Union of India 1959 SCR 12, the Supreme
Court exhaustively dealt with freedom of the press but stated that it can not
be unbridled.  Like other freedoms, it can also suffer reasonable restrictions.
119

The  subject  of  ‘trial  by  media’  or  prejudice  due  to  ‘pre-trial’
publications  by the  media is  closely linked  with  Article  19(1)(a) which
guarantees the fundamental right of ‘freedom of speech and expression’,
and the extent to which that right can be reasonably restricted under Article
19(2) by law for the purpose of Contempt of Court and for maintaining the
due  process  to  protect  liberty.   The  basic  issue  is  about  balancing  the
freedom of speech and expression on the one hand and undue interference
with administration  of justice within  the framework of the  Contempt of
Courts  Act, 1971,  as  permitted  by Article  19(2).   That  should  be  done
without unduly restricting the rights of suspects/accused under Article 21 of
the Constitution of India for a fair trial.
There  is  no  difficulty  in  stating  that  under  our  Constitution,  the
fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression  can, by law, be
restricted for purposes of contempt of Court.  However, this can be done
only  by  law  passed  by  the  Legislature  and  the  restrictions  that  can  be
imposed on the freedom must be “reasonable”.  If the restriction imposed by
any law relating to contempt of Court is unreasonable, it is liable to the
struck  down  by  the  Courts  on  the  ground  that  the  restriction  is  not
proportionate to the object sought to be achieved by the restriction.
120

  As at present, the provisions of Section 3 of the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971 restrict the freedom of speech and expression – which includes
the freedom of the media, both print and electronic – if any publication
interferes with or obstructs or tends to obstruct, the course of justice in
connection with any civil or criminal proceeding which is actually ‘pending’
(i.e. when charge-sheet or challan is filed, or summon or warrant is issued).
Further Section 3(1) protects the publication, if the person who made the
publication had no reasonable grounds for believing that the proceeding was
pending.  
In our view, the provisions of sec 3(2),  now allow totally unrestricted
freedom  to  make  publications,  granting  full  immunity  even  if  criminal
contempt is committed, even  if they interfere or tend to interfere with the
criminal proceeding, if such proceedings are not actually ‘pending’ in a
Court  at the time of the publication.  The Explanation below sec 3 defines
‘pendency’ of a judicial proceeding.  So far as a criminal proceeding is
concerned, we have to refer to sub clause (B) of clause (a) of Explanation
which reads:
   “(B)  In the case of a criminal proceeding, under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) or any other law –
(i) where  it relates  to the commission of an offence, when the
charge-sheet or challan is filed; or 
121

when the court issues summons or warrant, as the case may be,
against the accused, and 
(ii) in any other case, when the court takes cognizance of the 
matter     to which the proceedings relates …         …         ….
….   …       …          …          …            …             …         …”
Therefore under sec 3 of the Act, the starting point of the pendency of
the case is only from the stage where the court actually gets involved when
a charge-sheet or challan is filed under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure,1973  or  when  the  criminal  court  issues  summons  or  warrant
against the accused.  Any publication before such events if it interferes or
tends to interfere with rights of suspects or accused for a fair trial, is not
contempt because Section 3(2) starts with the words, 
  “Notwithstanding anything to contrary contained in this Act or
any other law for the time being in force”.
Two questions arise for consideration:
(1) Whether the provisions of Section 3 (2) of the Contempt of Courts
Act,1971  read  with  the  Explanation  below  that  section  are  in
violation  of  due  process  as  guaranteed  by  Article  21  of  the
Constitution of India, in so far as they grant immunity to prejudicial
publication made before the filing of the charge sheet/challan ? 
122

(2) If the answer to Question No.1 is in the affirmative, whether the
Explanation to Section 3 has to be and can be  modified by shifting
the starting point of “pendency” of a criminal proceeding  to the
anterior stage of arrest, and whether such a change in the law would
amount  to  an  unreasonable  restriction  on  freedom  of  speech
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution ?
           So far as the first Question is concerned, as already stated, as at
present, if a publication which is made before the filing of a charge sheet or
challan,  interferes  or  tends  to  interfere  with  the  course  of  justice  in
connection with a criminal proceeding, the rights of a person who has been
arrested and in respect of whom the prejudicial publication is made, are not
protected by the law of Contempt  of Court.  But, if such publications are
prejudicial to the suspect or accused, will they not offend the principle of
due process rights of a suspect or an accused as applicable in criminal cases
and as declared by the Supreme Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India :
AIR 1978 SC 597 ?
Article 21 guarantees that  “No person shall be deprived of his life or
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law”.  As is
well known, overruling the earlier view in A.K.Gopalan v. State of Madras :
AIR 1950 SC 27, the Supreme Court held in Maneka Gandhi’s case that the
“procedure  established  by  law”  must  be  a  law  which  is  fair,  just  and
123

equitable  and  which  is  not  arbitrary  or  violative   of  Article  14  of  the
Constitution of India.
If indeed a publication is one which admittedly interferes or tends to
interfere  or  obstructs  or  tends  to  obstruct  the  “course  of  justice”  in  a
criminal proceeding, in respect of a person under arrest (see Section 3[1]),
but the law gives it immunity under sec 3(2) because the publication was
made before the filing of the charge sheet/challan, is such a procedure fair,
just and equitable ?   
In  several  countries,  U.K,  Australia,  New  Zealand  etc,  any
publication made in the print or electronic media, after a person’s arrest,
stating that the person arrested has had previous convictions, or that he has
confessed to the crime during investigation or that he is indeed guilty and
the  publication  of  his  photograph  etc,  are  treated  as  prejudicial  and  as
violative of due process required for a suspect who has to face a criminal
trial. It is accepted that such publications can prejudice the minds of the
Jurors or even the Judges (where Jury is not necessary).  The impact on
Judges has been elaborately discussed in Chapter III of this Report. The
Supreme Court of India has indeed accepted, in more than one case, that
Judges may be ‘subconsciously’ prejudiced against the suspect/accused. We
have indeed referred to some opinions to the contrary expressed by Courts
124

in USA where the freedom of speech and expression is wider than in our
country.  In USA the restrictions are narrow, they must only satisfy the test
of ‘clear and present danger’.  
In India restrictions can be broader and can be imposed, if they are
“reasonable”.  Restrictions intended to protect the administration of justice
from interference  can be  included  in  the Contempt Law of our country
under Art 19(2), if they are ‘reasonable’  It is even accepted in our country
that actual prejudice of Judges is not necessary for proving contempt. It is
sufficient  if  there  is  a  substantial  risk  of  prejudice.   The  principle  that
“Justice must not only be done but must be seen to be done” applies from
the point of view of public perception as to the Judges being subconsciously
prejudiced as has been accepted in UK and Australia.
In view of the above, such a publication made in respect of a person
who is arrested but in respect of whom a charge sheet or challan has not yet
been filed in a Court, in our view, prejudices or may be assumed by the
public to have prejudiced the Judge, and in that case a procedure, such as
the one  permitted by Section 3(2) read with Explanation of the Contempt of
Courts  Act,1971, does not  prescribe a procedure  which  is fair, just  and
equitable,  and is arbitrary and will offend Article 14 of the Constitution of
India.   
125

Contempt law which protects the ‘administration of justice’ and the
‘course of justice’ does not accept undue interference with the due process
of justice and the due process includes non-interference with the rights of a
suspect/accused for an impartial trial.  Thus, Contempt of Court law protects
the  person  who  is  arrested  and  is  likely  to  face  a  criminal  trial.   No
publication  can  be  made  by  way  of  referring  to  previous  convictions,
character or confessions etc. which may cause prejudice to such persons in
the trial of an imminent criminal case. Such a procedure, therefore, would
interfere or tend to interfere or obstruct or tend to obstruct the course of
justice. 
Once is arrest is made and a persons is liable to be produced in Court
within 24 hours, if, at that stage, a publication is made about his character,
past record of convictions or alleged confessions, it may subconsciously
affect the Magistrate who may have to decide whether to grant or refuse to
grant bail, or as to what conditions  have to be imposed or whether the
person should be remanded to police custody or it should be a judicial
remand.  Further, if after a publication, a bail order goes against the arrested
126

person, public may perceive that the publication must have subconsciously
affected the Magistrate’s mind.
The Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 can therefore be validly amended
to say that such prejudicial publication made even after arrest and before
filing of charge sheet/challan will also amount to undue interference with
administration  of  justice  and  hence  would  be  contempt  and  such  a
restriction  is  ‘reasonable’  and  proportionate  to  the  object,  protection  of
rights of the arrested person and the administration of justice. 
So far as Question 2 is concerned, if the contempt law in Section 3 is
to be amended, as proposed above, so as to treat publications of the manner
referred to above  made even after arrest and but before filing of charge
sheet or challan,  as liable to contempt by redefining the Explanation (B) to
deem that a criminal case is “pending” from the stage of arrest, then will
such  a  law  unreasonably  restrict  the  right  to  freedom  of  speech  and
expression  guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) and will  it fall outside the
reasonable limits permissible under Article 19(2).
If a restriction on the freedom of speech and expression is intended
by the legislature to protect the administration of justice or the course of
justice which requires to be meted out to a subject under arrest, and if but
for the immunity granted for such publication, it would admittedly interfere
or tend to interfere with the course of justice, then from the point of view of
127

the person under arrest, in our opinion, such a restriction cannot be said  to
be unreasonable within Article 19(2).  Such a restriction on freedom of
speech and expression under Article 19(2) cannot be said to be violative of
Article 19(1)(a). It is reasonable because, in fact, it is absolutely necessary
as per fair due process after Maneka Gandhi, for the purpose of protecting
the administration of justice which includes protection of the rights of a
person under arrest who is entitled to a procedure which is fair, equitable
and just under Article 21 and  which  is  consistent  with Article  14. The
restriction is reasonable if intended to prevent prejudice on the part of the
Judge, or intended to prevent any impression of prejudice in the minds of
the public as to prejudice in the mind of Judges.  This is a straight answer. 
Art 19(2) raises a question of ‘proportionality’ of a restriction that
may be imposed bylaw such as the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
The provisions of the Contempt of Court Act, 1971, if they treat as
contempt, publications made after the filing of a first information report,
then in view of Surendra Mohanty vs. State of Orissa (1961)(quoted in A.K.
Gopalan vs.  Noordeem 1969(2) SCC 7341 such a provision would be an
unreasonable restriction on freedom of publications.  But, if the proposal is
that  that  the  prejudicial  publications  made  after  the  date  of  arrest  is
contempt,  that,  according  to  A.K.  Gopalan vs.  Noordeen is  not  an
unreasonable restriction on the freedom of publication.
128

Secondly,  it  is  now  well  settled  that   the  right  to  freedom  and
expression under Article 19(1)  is not absolute.   The Constitution itself
permits in Article 19(2) restrictions to be imposed on that right if they are
reasonable. Article 19(2) says:
             “Nothing in sub-clause (a) of Clause (1) shall affect the operation of
any existing law, or  prevent  the State from making any law, in so far as
such  law  imposes  reasonable  restrictions on  the  exercise  of  the  right
conferred  by  the  said  sub-clause  in  the  interests  of  or  in  relation  to
Contempt of Court …”
The Indian Supreme Court has repeatedly held that this freedom is
not absolute.  Even in USA, it has been so accepted.  The difference only is
that  in  USA,  the  principle  is  of  ‘clear  and  present’  danger  while  our
Constitution permits ‘reasonable’ restrictions.
         A restriction on the right to due process which requires that no such
prejudicial publication can be made, after arrest of a person, which would
interfere or tend to interfere or obstruct or tend to obstruct the course of
justice, must be treated as reasonable, for it is not a permanent or absolute
restriction.
129

New Zealand: freedom of expression and liberty have to be balanced in such
a way that there is no prejudice to the suspect or accused:
We  next  come  to  the  case  in  Gisborne  Herald  Ltd. v.  Solicitor
General: 1995(3) NZLR 563 (CA).  Now, the New Zealand Bill of Rights,
1990 referred to in Article 14 to Freedom of expression: “Everyone has the
right to freedom of expression, includes the freedom to seek, receive and
impact information and opinion of any kind or any form.”  Article 8 refers
to right to life not to be deprived of life except on such grounds as are
established  by law and  are consistent  with the  principle of fundamental
justice;  Article  25(a)  which  deals  with  minimum  standards  of  criminal
procedure refer in clause (a) to the right to a fair and public hearing by an
independent and impartial court; clause (c) to be presumed innocent until
proved guilty according to law.  Article 5 speaks of ‘justified limitations’
and says that the rights and freedom in the Bill of Rights may be subject
only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic society.
The Court of Appeal in the above case of Gisborne Herald refused to
follow the law in USA which was based on the principle of ‘clear and
present  danger’  to  the  administration  of  justice  (Bridges v.  California :
(1941) 314 US 252. It refers to the law in Canada in Dagenais v. Canadian
130

Broadcasting Corp. : 1994 (3) SCR 835 that a publication ban should only
be ordered if ‘necessary in order to prevent a real and substantial risk to the
fairness of the trial, because reasonably available alternative measures will
not prevent the risk’ and if the court is of the opinion that ‘the salutary
effects of the publication ban outweigh the deleterious effect to the freedom
of those affected by the ban’.  The Canadian Supreme Court relied on the
Canadian  Charter  Article  2(b)  which  deals  with  freedom of  expression,
Article 11 with fair trial, 11(d) which deals with presumption of innocence
till  proven  guilty  according  to  law  in  a  fair  and  public  hearing  by  an
independent  and  impartial  tribunal;  Article  1  of  that  Charter  permits
limitation  on  Rights  and  Freedoms  only  to  such  reasonable  limitations
prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
society.
After  refusing  to  follow  the  law  in  USA  and  Canada,  the  New
Zealand  Court  of  Appeal  stated  in  Gisborne  Herald  Ltd. v.  Solicitor
General: 1995 (3) NZLR 563 (CA):
“We  are  not  presently  persuaded  that  the  alternative  measure
suggested by Lamer CJ in Dagenais should be treated as an adequate
protection  in  this  country  against  the  intrusion  of  potentially
prejudicial material into the public domain.  Resort to any of those
131

measures has not been common in New Zealand.  Change of venue
application  are  infrequent  and  usually  follow  sensationalized
localised  publicity  of  a  particular  crime.  Venue  changes  are
inconvenient  for  witnesses  and  many  of  those  others  directly
involved.  They are expensive. Further, we have always taken the
view  that  there  is  a  particular  interest  in  trying  cases  in  the
community where the alleged crime occurred.  Next, challenges for
cause are rare.  And for the reasons indicated in the contemporaneous
judgment of this court in  R v.  Sanders 1995 (3) NZLR 545, cross-
examination  of prospective jurors  about their views and beliefs  is
generally undesirable.  Sequestration  of jurors  for the duration of
trials has not been a practice in New Zealand.  Clearly it would add to
the pressure on jurors and affect their ordinary lives.  Adjournment of
trials  as  a  means  of  reducing  potential  prejudices  occasioned  by
pretrial publicity runs up against the right to be lived without undue
delay.”
The Court of Appeal stated:
“So far as possible,  both values should be accommodated.  But, in
some cases, publications for which free expression rights are claimed
may affect the right to a fair trial.  In those cases, the impact of any
132

intrusion,  its  proportionality  to  any  benefits  achieved  under  free
expression values and any measures reasonably available to prevent
or  minimise  the  risks  occasioned  by  the  intrusion  and  so
simultaneously ensuring protection of both free expression and fair
trial rights, should all be assessed.”
It  is,  however,  commented  (see  http:www.crownlaw.govt.nz/
uploads/contempt. pdf) that there appears to be slight shift in the Court of
Appeal in Gisborne in respect of balancing both rights.  In the court below
which heard the case against Gisborne New Herald and other papers in
Solicitor General v. Wellington Newspapers Ltd., 1995 (1) NZLR 45, stated
(at p.48):
“In the event of conflict between the concept of freedom of speech
and the requirements of a fair trial, all other things being equal, the
latter should prevail.”
and in that case it was also said:
“In pretrial publicity situations, the loss of freedom involved is not
absolute.  It is merely a delay.  The loss is an immediacy; that is
133

precious to any journalist, but is as nothing compared to the need for
fair trial.”
In the appeal, in Gisborne Herald Ltd. v. Solicitor General, there appears to
have been a shift that both rights be balanced. The Court of Appeal also
stated in Gisborne:
“The common law of contempt is based on public policy.  It requires
the balancing of public interest factors.  Freedom of the press as a
vehicle  for  comment  on  public  issues  is  basic  to  any  democratic
system. The assurance of a fair trial by an impartial court is essential
for the preservation of an effective system of justice.  Both values
have been affirmed by the Bill of Rights.  The public interest in the
functioning of the courts invokes both these values.  It calls for free
expression of information and opinions as to the performance of these
public responsibilities.  It also calls for determination of disputes by
courts which are free from bias and which make their decisions safely
on the evidence judiciously brought before them.   Full recognition of
both these indispensable elements can present difficult problems for
the courts to resolve.  The issue is how best those values can be
accommodated under the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, 1990.”
134

Finally, the Court of Appeal stated –
“The present rule is that where on the conventional analysis,
freedom of expression and fair trial cannot both be fully assured, it is
appropriate in our free and democratic society to temporarily curtail
freedom of media express so as to guarantee a fair trial.”
In other words, while the trial Judge said fair trial rights override
media rights, the Court of Appeal said both must be balanced and the Court
may impose a temporary ban. 
Australia
Glennon & Hinch cases: freedom of speech and liberty have to be balanced.
But  a  conviction  for  contempt  due  to  likelihood  of  interference  with
administration of justice need not result in setting aside the conviction of an
accused:  Is it correct?
Glennon was a Roman Catholic priest who, in 1978 was convicted of
indecently assaulting a girl under 16.  Seven years later, he appeared as a
135

Crown witness in an assault case against his nephew and another person
who had allegedly assaulted him (i.e. Glennon).  Counsel for the youths
cross-examined  Glennon about  the 1978 conviction  and accused him of
indecently assaulting the two youths.  Extensive media coverage was given
to those allegations.
Glennon was subsequently charged with other sexual offences and he
appeared before the Magistrate’s Court on 12th November, 1985.   In three
separate broadcasts, one Mr. Hinch, speaking on a popular Melbourne radio
station,  alleged  severe  criminal  conduct  and  sexual  impropriety  on
Glennon’s part.  Hitch specifically spoke about Glennon’s prior conviction.
Hinch was convicted for contempt and the same was affirmed in the High
Court in  Hinch v.  Attorney General (Victoria) (1987 164 CLR 15).  The
High Court observed:
“Clearly, the three broadcasts on a popular Melbourne station, in a
context where specific reference was made to the pending criminal
proceedings against Glennon in a Melbourne Court, constituted one
of the most severe cases of contempt of court involving the public
pre-judgment of the guilt of a person awaiting trial to have come
before the courts of this country.”
136

Dean J stated (at p.58) that:
“The right to a fair and unprejudiced trial is an essential safeguard of
the liberty of the individual under the law. The ability of a society to
provide a fair and unprejudiced trial is an indispensable basis of any
acceptable justification of the restraints and penalties of the criminal
law.  Indeed, it is a touchstone of the existence of the rule of law.”
The High Court of Australia held that although the trial might not
take place until some two years after the first broadcast by Mr. Hinch, the
trial  courts  were  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  there  was  ‘a
substantive  risk  of  serious  interference with  the  fairness  of  trial’.   In
sensational cases, jurors were prone to remember the publication in spite of
lapse of time.  The broadcasts  of Hinch were not saved  by the ‘public
interest’ defence.
But when Glennon was later convicted and he raised a question that
his trial was vitiated on account of unfair publicity about his past character
and conviction.  He relied on the judgment punishing Mr. Hinch for his
publication.   But the High Court of Australia  rejected  his  plea in  R.V.
Glennon: (1992) 173 CLR 592 and restored the conviction of Glennon for
sexual  offences  against  young  people.   The  Court  made  a  distinction
137

between preventing prejudicial publicity rather than minimising its impact
at trial.  It stated that different tests were applicable in contempt proceedings
and on the one hand to criminal convictions.  Contempt proceedings are
concerned with potential prejudice, which must be assessed as at the time of
publication.  Actual prejudice is not an element of contempt charge.  By
contrast, before a conviction is set aside, a court of appeal is concerned with
the extent of actual prejudice and, in particular, whether a miscarriage has
occurred.  There  was  no  inconsistency  in  upholding  the  convictions  of
Glennon and punishing Hinch for contempt.  Community’s expectations, it
was  observed, must  be  fulfilled.   It stated  that  in  such  a  situation,  the
quashing of convictions may indeed open ‘flood-gates’.
But the Judgment in Glennon has been criticised.
Allam Ardik, in the Faculty of Griffith University (2000), Alternative
Law Journal, page 1, says that the appellate judge restored the conviction on
account of ‘fear of public outrage’.
Prof. Michael Chesterman (1999) NSW Unit of Tech, (Sydney Law
Review p.5 refers to statistics to say that 11 cases out of 20 cases since 1980
in Australia, where there was ‘convergence’ in the sense that the trial was
138

aborted and the contemnor convicted.  Out of the remaining 9 ‘divergent’
cases, seven were either where the jury did not encounter publicity or the
trial  Judge  made  no  such  finding  as  to  whether  the  jury  encountered
publicity.  Only in  three cases, the jury trial was aborted  but  contempt
proceeding failed on the ground of superior public interest.  The NSW Law
Commission has recommended in 2003 for amendment of the Evidence Act,
1995 and Crimes Act, 1900 to allow courts to pass ‘suppression’ orders in
civil and criminal cases.
We shall next refer to the Reports of the Law Commission on this
question of balancing both fundamental rights.  
New South Wales (Australia) : balancing of expression and due process
in criminal trials :
In Australia,  the New South Wales Law Commission had prepared a
comprehensive  Discussion  Paper,  Paper  No.3  (2000)  on  ‘Contempt  by
Publication’  and  a  Final  Report  100  (2003)  (See
www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/tra.nsf/pages/dp43 toc and Lawlink NSW).  In the
Discussion Paper, in Ch 1 (para1.20), it is stated:
“Competing Public Interests:
1.20. Because  it  imposes  restraints  on  the  publication  of
information, the sub judice rule may be seen to limit
139

both  access  to  information  about  matters  before  the
courts and freedom of discussion in our society.  The
Courts  justify these limitations  on the basis  that the
public interest in protecting the proper administration
of  justice,  particularly  in  criminal  cases,  should
generally  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  access  to
information and freedom of speech. Critics of the sub
judice  rule  have  sometimes  questioned  the  balance
which is struck between the competing public interests.
The Commission examines these criticisms in Chapter
2”.
               In Chapter 2 of the Discussion Paper (NSW) (2000) there is a full
discussion of the subject and it is stated as follows:-
“Freedom of Speech v. Due Process of Law
2.4 :  There is no doubt that freedom of expression is one of the
hall-marks of a democratic society, and has been recognized as
such for centuries.  (Numerous great political and intellectual
figures, Burke, Paine, Jefferson and Mill, to name a few – have
been  associated  with  this  principle.)   Freedom  of  public
discussion of matters of legitimate public concern is, in itself,
an ideal of our society :  Hinch v.  Attorney General : (1987)
140

164 CLR 15(57) Deane J).  Justice Mahoney, in Ballina Shire
v. Ringcanol : (1994) 33 NSWLR 680 (720) spoke of the ends
which are achieved by the capacity to speak without fear and
reprisal and the importance of these ends in a free society :
“ideas might be developed freely, culture may be refined, and
the ignorance or abuse of power may be controlled”.
2.5 :  However, freedom of speech cannot be absolute. In legal,
political and philosophical contexts, it is always regarded as
liable to be overridden by important countervailing interests,
including state security, public order, the safety of individual
citizens and protection of reputation.
2.6 : One such countervailing interest is due process of law.
Freedom  of  speech  ought  not  to  take  precedence  over  the
proper administration of justice, particularly in criminal trials
where an individual’s liberty and/or reputation are at stake, and
where the public have an interest  in securing the conviction of
persons  guilty of serious  crime.  Indeed, the  belief  that the
public interest in a fair trial  will always  outweigh the public
interest in freedom of expression, generally goes unchallenged.
Therefore, a discussion of how to reconcile these competing
public  interests  proceeds  on  the basis  of acceptance  of this
141

notion.  The question to resolve, then, is whether justice can be
done, as well as seen to be done, in the absence of sub-judice
liability.  If the answer is no, then,  sub judice rule is essential
to  achieving  the  proper  balance  between  the  competing
interests,  the  question  must  then  be  asked  whether  the
operation  of the sub  judice rule  restricts  freedom of speech
more than necessary to ensure a fair trial”.
The Commission then refers (in para 2.7) exclusively to the case law
relating to the ‘Legal Protection of Expression’ –  Theophanous v.  Herald
Weekly  Times  Ltd :   (1994)  182  CLR  104,  Lange v.  Australian
Broadcasting Corpn : (1997) 189 CLR 520 in which it was stated that while
freedom of expression was basic, it was not absolute.  In Attorney General
v.  Time  Inc  Magazine  Co  Pte  Ltd :  (NSW  Appeal  40,331/94  dated
15.9.1994)  the  NSW Court  of  Appeal  observed  that  the  Common  Law
principles have been established as a result of a balancing of competing
interests, namely, the public interest in freedom of expression and the public
interest in the administration of justice.  The NSW Court also stated that
freedom of expression is not unconditional.  “Expression can, for legally
relevant  purposes,  be  free  even  though  it  is  subject  to  other  legitimate
interests” (ibid, Gleeson, CJ).
142

 The Commission referred (see paras 2.13 to 2.15) to Article 19(2) of
the  International  Covenant  of  Civil  and  Political  Rights  which  permits
restriction on freedom of speech and expression for various purposes and
stated:
“Furthermore,  Article  19  of  the  ICCPR  is  made  subject  to
Article 19(1) which guarantees the right to individuals to a ‘fair
hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal”.   
 The Commission referred (see paras 2.16 to 2.19),  to the ‘Principle
of Open Justice’ which again is not absolute and  it stated (see para 2.18)
that  “media  can  effectively  perform  this  ‘watch  dog’  role,  promoting
discussion of courts and the justice system, ‘without publishing the most
obviously prejudicial material specifically relevant to a case’.
 The Commission dealt with (see paras 2.20 to 2.22) the  Rules of
Evidence, about the presumption of innocence until proven guilty beyond
reasonable doubt as a basic tenet of criminal procedure.  Rules of evidence
exclude  opinion  evidence,  allegations  as  to  the  general  character  or
credibility  of  an  accused,  confessions  which  are  not  established  as
voluntary, prior conviction or prior conduct.  Such inadmissible evidence
cannot be introduced through the back door.
The Commission referred (see paras 2.23 to 2.26)  to the principle
that ‘Justice must be seen to be done’.  Due process of the law encompasses
143

not  only  the  right  to  a  fair  trial,  but  also  the  preservation  of  public
confidence in the administration of justice.  ‘Justice should not only be done
but must be seen to be done’ R v.  Sussex Justices;  Ex Parte Mc Carthy :
(1924) 1 KB 256 (259).  In this way, public confidence in the administration
of  justice  is  maintained.   If the  media publishes  prejudicial  material  or
wages a campaign, not only it may affect  criminal adjudication but if it
does not,  public may see and the accused may believe that justice is not
done.  Such material can also influence witnesses.
It referred (see para 2.27) to ‘time limits’ and stated that a publication
will  constitute  a  contempt  under  the  sub  judice  rule,  if  it   relates  to
proceedings  which  are  current  or  pending.   For  example,  material
concerning a particular crime, which is published before anyone has been
arrested or charged with the crime, will not constitute a contempt, even if it
later turns out to be prejudicial to the trial of the accused. 
The Commission referred (see para 2.30) to several points raised by
critics of prohibition of publication after arrest or after charge is filed on the
ground that there is no empirical evidence of influence on Jurors or that
some publications fade away in public memory when there are delays in the
trial; that people mistrust what is published in the media etc.  (In some
countries like US, potential jurors are initially examined in large number to
elicit if they admit they have already been influenced by the media publicity
144

and  if  they  admit,  they  are  excluded.)   There  can  be  conscious  or
unconscious  influence  based  on  appearance,  race,  religion,  sect,cultural
attributes, or by publicity as to prior convictions, alleged confessions etc.
The Commission stated (see para 2.35): 
“However, what the sub judice rule seeks to do is to filter out
the most damaging of prejudicial effects so that views formed
prior to the trial or from extrinsic  sources during the trial, are
not held strongly that they cannot be displaced by the evidence
which is presented and tested in the courtrooms, as well as by
judicial directions and instructions on the law and submissions
by counsel on that evidence.  It seeks to suppress only that
material which, in accordance with the present Common Law
test, has a real and definite tendency, as a matter of practical
reality, to prejudice legal process  or on a reformulated  test,
creates a substantial risk that the fairness of the  proceedings
would be prejudiced.  Furthermore, suppression  is for a limited
time only and liability for contempt is only sheeted home where
any of the grounds of exoneration (discussed below) are not
available.”
Under the head of defences, are the following:
145

that  the  person  who  published  did  so  bona  fide  without
knowing or believing it is prejudicial or after becoming aware,
took  steps  to  prevent  publication  or  that  they  had  taken
reasonable care. There can be matters of public interest which
require publication.  Public safety could also be a reason. 
The Commission gave  specific examples of media publicity (see para
2.45)  which can cause prejudice :
(i) a photograph of the accused where identity is likely to be an issue,
as in criminal cases;
(ii) suggestions that accused had previous convictions, or has been
charged for committing an offence and/or previously acquitted, or
has been involved in other criminal activity;
(iii) suggestions  that  the  accused  has  confessed  to  committing  the
crime in question;
(iv) suggestions that the accused is guilty or involved in the crime for
which he or she is charged or that the Jury should convict or acquit
the accused; and 
(v) comments which engender sympathy or antipathy for the accused
and/or which  disparage the prosecution or which make favourable
146

or unfavourable references to the character or credibility of the
accused or a witness.
              Each  of these is discussed in detail (see paras 2.46 to 2.54) though
the Commission refers (see para 2.52) to the Common Law assumptions that
(while Jury may be influenced), Judicial Officers are not. (A view which has
not been accepted in India, as detailed in Chapter III of our Report and also
not accepted by the House of Lords also as stated elsewhere.)
Final Report of NSW Law Reforms Commission (2003) :
In the Final Report of the NSW Law Reforms Commission, it was
stated in (Chapter 2 para 2.5) (Freedom of Speech vs. Due Process of Law)
that  “measures   which  are  necessary  for  due  process  of  the  law  take
precedence  over freedom of speech”.  It referred to  Brennan  J  in  R v.
Glennon: (1992)  173 CLR 592 and stated that while the two rights have to
be  balanced,  the  integrity  of  the  administration  of  criminal  justice  is
fundamental. 
Other Law Commission Reports referred to by the NSW Law Commission.
The NSW Law Commission also  referred to the Report of the New
Zealand  Law  Commission  (Preliminary  Paper  37  on  Juries  in  Criminal
Trials, Part II [Vol 1, p.289] ) that:
“When  a  conflict  arises  between  fair  trial  and  freedom  of
speech, the  former prevailed because the compromise of fair
147

trial for a particular accused will cause them permanent harm
…. whereas  the  inhibition  of  media  freedom ends  with  the
conclusion of legal proceedings”.
and to Michael Kirby J’s observations in John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
v.  Doe : (1995) (37 NSWLRC 81) that it would be unthinkable to allow
destroying  the  essential  power  and  duty  to  protect  fair  trial  of  persons
accused of crimes.
In  Chapter  4  the  NSW  Law  Commission  dealt  with  prejudice  in
criminal proceedings and in Chapter 7 with time limits and ‘imminence’ 
In relation to criminal proceedings, it recommended (see para 7.12)
that “sub judice period commences from the time the process of law has
been set in motion for  bringing an accused to trial.  It stated that issue of
warrant need not be the starting point because arrest may be delayed and
that it is sufficient to say ‘arrest of the accused’ rather than ‘arrest without a
warrant’.  Recommendation 13 was as follows:
“13.   Legislation  should  provide  that,  for  purposes  of  sub
judice rule, criminal proceedings should become pending and
the restrictions on publicity designed to prevent influence on
juries,  witnesses  or  parties  should  apply,  as  from  the
occurrence of any of these  initial stages of the proceedings:
(a) the arrest of the accused  ;
148

(b) the laying of the charge;
(c) the issue of a court attendance notice and its filing in the
registry of the relevant court; or 
(d) the filing of an ex officio indictment.
 Schedule 1 (clause 4) of the NSW Bill, 2003  incorporates this provision.
Australian Law Commission: On balancing the rights :
In  Australia, the Australian Law Reform Commission  (See ALRC
Report No. 35 at page 247) looked at whether reform of the law governing
contempt  by  publication  was  desirable  and  if  so,  in  what  respects.   It
concluded that –
“the  right  of citizens  to  a fair  trial  in  criminal  proceedings
before a Jury would be significantly jeopardized if there were
no restrictions whatsoever of freedom of publication relating to
the trial”.
While it attached considerable importance to the principle of Open Justice,
which is promoted by reporting of what goes on in Australian Courts, it
concluded that –
149

“prohibition  currently  imposed  by  contempt  law  on
publications relating to current or forthcoming trials should not
….. be completely dismantled”.
It  recommended,  however,  that  prohibitions  should  be  ‘confined  to  the
minimum necessary to eliminate substantial risk of prejudice’.
That  would  mean  that  to  the  extent,  the  freedom  of  speech  and
expression must be subordinated to due process in protecting liberty.
Canadian Law Reform Commission: on balancing the rights:
In Canada,  the Canadian Law  Reforms Commission (Report No. 17
at p.9) referred  to   section  1 of the  Canadian  Charter of Rights  which
guarantees  rights  subject  only  to  reasonable  restrictions  as  can  be
demonstrably  justified in a free and democratic society; to section 2 which
refers to freedom of speech and expression  and to section 11(a) which
speaks of the presumption of innocence until proven guilty according to law
in a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal. After
referring to the duty of the State to see that ‘the administration of justice is
impartial and fair’, the Commission argued that the State could not tolerate
an individual attempting to influence unduly the outcome of a trial before a
jury.  The purpose of the sub judice rule is to preserve the impartiality of the
judicial system by protecting it from undue influence which might affect its
150

operation,  or  at  least  might  appear  to  do  so.   While  there  must  be
competition between different rights, there is need to retain the sub judice
rule. 
Irish Law Reform Commission: on balancing the righs :
In Ireland, the Law Reforms Commission (Report 47, 1994 para 6.4)
stated that press, radio and television had a powerful effect on the people
and if it is not subjected to reasonable safeguards, there could be  potentially
serious effects for the proper administration of justice and may result in long
imprisonment of innocent people.   In contrast, the public interest in the free
flow  of  information  is  by  no  means  wholly  interrupted  by  a  careful
observance  of  the  sub  judice  rule,  since,  at  worst,  the  inhibition  of
unrestricted  comment and publication  of allegedly relevant  facts  is of a
temporary nature only.   It rejected the argument that the sub judice rule
offends against the guarantee of freedom of expression (Art 40.6.1).  Juries
could  be  affected  by  prejudicial  publications  affecting  fairness  in
adjudication and other alternatives would not be sufficient. 
Thus all these Law Reforms Commissions in NSW, Australia, Canada
and Ireland supported the sub judice rule and observed that for that purpose
freedom of speech could be restricted.
United Kingdom & the Sunday Times Case :
151

The  competing  rights  of  freedom  of  expression  and  fair
administration of justice came up for consideration in Attorney General v.
Times Newspapers  : 1973(3)All ER 54 (HL).  The result was in favour of
the  administration  of  justice  and  against  the  newspapers.  The  further
petition before the European Court of Human Rights resulted in an opinion
in  Sunday  Times v.  United  Kingdom (1979)  (2)  EHRR  245  that  the
injunction granted by the Court in U.K. against publication was in absolute
terms and without time limit and was very wide and violated the European
Convention and that the contempt law in UK (i.e. before 1981) was vague
and difficult to comply with.  The facts were as follows:
Sunday Times published a series of articles to  bring pressure on the
Distillers Ltd  to settle several pre-trial civil cases which were filed by or on
behalf of those affected by thalidomide drug administered during pregnancy
to women.  The Attorney General commenced proceedings for injunction
restraining the newspaper from publishing one in the series which was about
to be published.  Injunction was granted.  But, the Court of Appeal vacated
the injunction granted by the Divisional Court.  The House of Lords allowed
the appeal and restored the injunction. It was held that when the civil cases
were pending, it was contempt of court to publish articles pressurizing the
Distillers to settle the matters as that would affect the administration of
justice. Some of the Law Lords held that it was likely to prejudice the mind
152

of witnesses, jury or magistrates.  Some stated that it can be assumed that it
would not affect a professional Judge.  Injunction was restored. 
On petition by Sunday Times, the European Court in Sunday Times v.
U.K 1979(2) EHRR 245 dealt with the matter on the basis of Article 10 of
the European Convention (freedom of speech and expression) and posed a
preliminary question “Was the interference prescribed by law ?” as required
by Article 10(2).  It came to the conclusion that the interference was by law
since  ‘law’,  under  that  Article  covered  not  only  statute  law  but  also
‘unwritten law’ and the publishers had sufficient notice of the existence of
such a law. 
The next question  the Court posed was “Did the interference have
aims that are legitimate under Article 10, para 2 ?”.  Under Article 10(2),
restrictions  were  permissible  if  they  were  “necessary  in  a  democratic
society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public
safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, for the protection of the reputation of others, for preventing the
disclosure of information received in confidence, or  for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of judiciary”.  The majority in the European Court
held that ‘authority’ of the judiciary did cover its adjudicative functions as
well as its powers to record settlements.  Here, it  went by the Phillimore
153

Report.  The contempt of court law provided the guidance.  The interference
was legitimate with Article 10(2).
The  next  question  the  Court  posed  was  whether  interference  was
‘necessary in  a  democratic  society’ for  maintaining  the  authority of the
judiciary ? This question was more factual because the point was whether
public  interest  required  publication  of  the  evil  effects  of  thalidomide.
‘Necessary’  in Article 10(2) was not synonymous with ‘indispensable’.
‘Necessary’, the Court said, was not as flexible as the words ‘admissible’,
‘ordinary’, ‘useful’, ‘reasonable’ or ‘desirable’.  It implied a ‘pressing social
need’ or one which was ‘proportionate  to the legitimate aim pursued’.  The
general injunction granted by the Court did not meet this standard as it was
in very wide terms, further, there was not much pressure on the Distillers
Ltd for settlement since the issue was also debated in Parliament. But the
House of Lords’ view that ‘trial by newspaper’ was not permissible was a
concern  in  itself  ‘relevant’  to  the  maintenance  of  the  ‘authority  of  the
judiciary’.  The European Court accepted that :
“If the issues arising in litigation are ventilated in such a way
as to lead the public to form its own conclusion thereon in
advance, it may lose its respect for and confidence in courts’ 
and that 
154

“Again,  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  the  public’s  becoming
accustomed to the regular spectacle of pseudo-trials in the news
media  in  the  long  run  have  nefarious  consequences  for  the
acceptance of the Courts as the proper forum for the settlement
of legal disputes”.
But, the European Court held on facts, that the proposed article by Sunday
Times was “couched in moderate terms and did not present just one side of
the evidence or claim that there was only one possible result at which a
Court could arrive”.  It said “There appears to be no neat set of answers …”
to the effects of Thalidomide.  Therefore, the effect of the article on readers
was likely to be ‘varied’ and hence not adverse to the ‘authority of the
judiciary’.  As the settlement was in progress over a long period, there was
not much prospect of a trial of the  (civil case) coming through.  But it
agreed:
“Preventing interference with negotiations towards settlement
of a pending suit is a no less legitimate aim under Article 10(2)
than preventing interference  with a procedure situation in the
strictly forensic sense”.
But, here the negotiations were prolonged and at the time of publication,
they did not reach a final stage of trial.
155

The Court then emphasized the role of the press and of the Courts but
said it was not a matter of balancing competing interests but going back to
Article 10(2) to find out if the interference was necessary having regard to
the facts and circumstances prevailing in the specific case before it.  The
thalidomide disaster was a matter of public concern and under Article 10,
public had a right to be informed about the drug.  Having regard to all the
circumstances, the interference complained of did not correspond to a social
need  sufficiently  pressing  to  outweigh public  interest  in  freedom  of
expression within the meaning of the Convention.  The restraint was not
‘proportionate’ to the legitimate aim pursued and was  not necessary in a
democratic society for maintaining the authority of the judiciary.
The  Court  stated that  the law  must be certain  and  that  in U.K it
remained uncertain  if the question of balancing rights was left to be decided
in individual cases. 
In our view, the decision of the European Court has no application to
publications  which  may prejudice  the  rights  of  a  person  who  has  been
arrested and where such arrest indicates that a trial could more likely follow
by the filing of a charge sheet.  Sunday Times related to a civil case, it
concerned Article 10(2) of the European Convention which uses the words
156

‘necessary’.  The Court itself admitted that ‘necessary’ was more narrow
than the word ‘reasonable’, a word used in Article 19(2) of our Constitution.
One other important point to be noted here is that while it is open for
U.K citizens to approach the European Court for relief on the ground of
violation of the European Convention, the judgment of the European Court
does not amount to overruling the opinion of the House of Lords.  In fact, in
Sunday Times case itself, the European Court pointed out:
“Whilst  emphasizing  that  it  is  not  its  (European  Court’s)
function to pronounce itself on an interpretation of English law
adopted in the House of Lords”, 
 Borrie and Lowe state clearly (p 102, 3rd Ed, 1999) that “although the
Convention is not directly applicable to U.K domestic law and the decisions
of the European Court are not binding precedents”, nevertheless it was to be
presumed and it was necessary that U.K is reminded of its international
obligations assumed under the Convention. “Even in other Common Law
jurisdictions outside Europe, the European Court’s decision is not totally
irrelevant although it may not be regarded as persuasive as the House of
Lords decisions”. (See  Commercial Bank of Australian  Ltd v.  Preston :
1981(2) NSWLR 554).
157

But, after Sunday Times’ case, the UK law was no longer vague in
view of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1981,which prescribed the date of
arrest as the starting point.
Our Conclusion
 It is, therefore, permissible to amend the Explanation in Section 3 of
the 1971 Act  in such a way that  prejudicial publications made even after
arrest are brought within the fold of contempt law.  It is sufficient, if upon
arrest, the person comes within the protection that the Constitution and the
laws give him, that he must be produced in a Court within 24 hours. 
Here, we have considered cases of bailable offences, where the police
have to and may themselves grant bail within 24 hours of arrest, without
producing the person in Court.  But even so there can be cases where a
person is not able to satisfy the conditions imposed by the police and then
he may have to be produced in court within 24 hours.  As stated earlier,
according to the judgment in Hall, decided by the Scotland Court in 1978
referred to above, the test is whether a person has come within the fold of
protection of the Court and not whether, if the offence is bailable, he is able
to satisfy the conditions and get released within 24 hours by the police.  The
moment an arrest is made, the person comes within the protection of Court
158

and that is sufficient to state that Court proceedings are imminent, for the
person has to be produced in Court within 24 hours.
159

Chapter VIII
Postponement of Publications by Court: Whether ‘substantial
Risk of prejudice as in UK inappropriate?
The  issue  of  orders  by  the  Courts,  -  postponing  publications  to
prevent prejudice to a suspect in an impending or pending criminal case is
of great importance.   The punishment of a person who makes publication
amounting to undue interference of course of justice under sec 3 of the
Contempt of Court Act, 1971 is not always sufficient nor does it in any way
help  the  suspect  or  accused.   Question  is  whether  such  prejudicial
publications may be directed to be postponed by a general or specific order.
Prior restraint and subsequent punishment are distinct
There  is a well  recognized  distinction  between prior  restraint  and
subsequent punishment.  In Constitutional Law (4th Ed)(1991) by John E.
Nowah & Ronald D. Rotunda, while referring to the position in USA it is
stated: (p 970)
160

“While  it  is  no  longer  true  that  the  first  amendment  means  only
freedom from prior restraint, prior restraint is still considered to be
more serious than subsequent punishment”.
Mr. A. Bickel states that a ‘criminal statute ‘chills’ while prior restraint
‘freezes’ (see the Morality of Dissent, p 61 1975).  In our view, if it is ‘prior
restraint’ but only ‘postponement’ of publication, there is no ‘freezing’ at
all.
Stringent conditions have to be imposed if postponement of publications by
Court is to be permitted:
While  subsequent  punishment  may  deter  some  speakers,  prior
restraint  limits  public  debate  and  knowledge  more  severely  and  prior
restraint must be subjected o stringent conditions, whether I is permanent or
temporary.
Under English law, sec 4(2) requires proof  or ‘substantial risk of
prejudice’ has to be proved if a postponement order has to be passed by
Court.  We have o examine what kind of restrictions can be imposed under
our law to postpone publications which are likely to prejudice trial.
161

   In fact, we have seen in the last Chapter the peculiar case of Glennon
in Australia, - to which we have already referred to in Chapter IV, where the
person who made the prejudicial publication was punished for contempt on
the ground of likelihood of prejudice to the accused but later on, the Court
refused to quash the accused’s conviction when a plea was raised by the
accused relying on the judgment in the contempt case, that the trial was
vitiated.    The Court required proof of actual prejudice for quashing the trial
and said that likelihood of prejudice which is relevant for contempt, was not
relevant for quashing a conviction.  This judgment has, as already stated,
been severely criticized.   
It is, therefore, necessary to see if there can be prevention of prejudice
rather than take serious measures after prejudice has occurred.   Of course,
this has to be limited to extreme cases because it amounts to ‘prior restraint’
on publications which it is accepted as being a serious encroachment on the
freedom of speech.   
In the United States where the only exception is ‘grave and present’
danger, prior restraint procedures are very narrow.    We have pointed out
162

that there is considerable difference between the American law which does
not contain any provision like Art. 19(2) of the Constitution of India which
permits ‘reasonable’ restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression
for certain exceptional purposes and contempt of Court is constitutionally
recognized as one which the exceptions.    
The Sunday Times case discussion in Chapter VII was also a case of a
restraint order.  But, we have pointed out that that case is distinguishable
because the Court’s order of prior restraint related to the publication of
prejudicial matter affecting settlement in a batch of civil cases.  Several civil
actions were filed against a company which sold thalidomide to pregnant
women who filed cases against the company on account of the probable
after-effects of the drug on their children to be borne.  The publications
criticized  the  drug  and  the  company  when  settlement  proceedings  were
pending.   We  pointed  out  that  that  case  did  not  relate  to  publications
affecting suspect or accused in a pending or imminent criminal law.
Yet another point we had noted was that the European Court while
deciding Sunday Times case held that in order to grant an injunction it was
incumbent on the party affected to prove ‘necessity’ because Art. 1 of the
163

European  Convention  requires  that  the  restriction to  be imposed  on the
freedom of speech was ‘necessary’ in a democratic society.   The European
Court specifically pointed out that the Convention did not use the word
‘reasonable’ but used the word ‘necessary’.   Our Constitution uses the
words  ‘reasonable  restriction’  and  permits  a  law  to  be  made  imposing
‘reasonable restrictions’.  Further, the European Court commented on the
‘absolute nature of the injunction’ granted by the UK Courts and said that
while such a permanent ban on publication was not necessary, an order
postponing the publication for some time was permissible even under the
Convention.   
Therefore, US precedents and Sunday Times case are not precedents
in our country.
In the Indian context, where an injunction was granted and vacated in
Reliance Petrochemicals case, we have pointed out in Chapter III that the
injunction in that case related to a civil case and that that case is also not
relevant so far as restraints on publications to prevent prejudice in criminal
cases, particularly, after arrest.
164

While  there  are  these  differences  between  the  American  and
Strasbourg jurisprudence and Reliance case on the one hand and the Indian
constitutional  provisions,  it  is  still  incumbent  for  us  to  decide  whether
serious interference with the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed
by our Constitution in Art. 19(1) can be prevented by an injunction order of
a temporary nature.  We have also to decide what conditions have to be
imposed.  
The provision for postponement orders in  sec. 4(2) of the (UK) Contempt
of Courts Act, 1981: Substantial risk of serious prejudice:
The provisions of sec. 4(2) of the UK Act, 1981 were brought in after
the Sunday Times case was decided in 1979 by the European Court.  The
subsection was drafted in the light of the comment by the European Court
that UK law of contempt was vague.   It reads:
“sec. 4(2): In any proceedings, the Court may, if it appears to be
necessary for  avoiding  a  substantial  risk  of  prejudice  to  the
administration  of  justice in  those  proceedings,  or  in  any  other
proceedings  pending or  imminent, order that the publication of any
165

report of the proceedings or any part of the proceedings, be postponed
for such period as the Court thinks necessary for that purpose”
The section applies to prejudice in civil and criminal proceedings.
The important words in this provision are the words ‘necessary’ and
‘substantial risk of prejudice’.   The other words ‘pending or imminent’
refer to proceedings ‘imminent’ as enumerated in the Schedule 1 to that Act,
which includes the ‘date of arrest’.
In this  connection,  we  may point  out  that  there  is  an  exhaustive
discussion of what words should be used while enabling Courts to pass
‘suppression’ orders.   The New South Wales Law Reform Commission, in
its Discussion Paper 43 (2000) on ‘Contempt by Publication’ devotes a full
chapter for ‘Suppression Orders’ (Chapter X).   In the Final Report of 2003,
the subject is again discussed in Chapter X, ‘Suppression Orders’.  We shall
report to these Reports.
The Discussion Paper of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(2000):
166

In the Discussion Paper, the following aspects are discussed – (i) the
concept  of  open  justice,  (ii)  the  qualifications  to  the  principle  of  open
justice,  including  hearings  in  camera,  concealment  of  information  from
those present in Court, power to forbid publication of proceedings heard in
open Court, (iii) existing powers to suppress publication of proceedings in
New South Wales including common law powers, statutory powers to issue
suppression  orders,  legislative  provisions  with  a  prescription  of  non-
publication,  legislative  provisions  with  a  broad  discretion  to  impose
suppression orders, (iv) Suppression Orders in New South Wales under the
headings: issues and options, including the question of conferring general
power on Courts to direct non-publication necessary for administration of
justice, background (prejudice to a fair trial), specific statutory provisions in
Australia, fair trial as an element of proper administration of justice, law
reform  options,  the  Commission’s  tentative  view,  a  broad  power  and
‘substantial risk’, power to suppress names as well as evidence, power to
apply  to  both  civil  and  criminal  proceedings,  legislative  provisions  for
standing and appeals.   
The proposal 21 refers to the ‘substantive risk of prejudice’ principle
with  a  further  provision  enabling  the  media  to  apply  to  the  Court  for
167

variation or revocation of such an order, after hearing the applicant who
obtained the suppression orders.
Final Report of the New South Wales Law Commission (2003):
In  the  final  Report,  the  NSW  Law  Commission  considered  the
following aspects (i) statutory suppression orders including why they are
needed, who is subject to a suppression order, knowledge of the existence of
a  suppression  order,  existing  statutory  regulation  of  publication,  (ii)
recommendations under the sub-titles, standing, interim suspension orders, a
strict  liability  offence,  material  to  which  suppression  orders  apply  and
finally gave its Recommendations as follows:
“A new provision should be introduced into the Evidence Act, 1995
(NSW) which provides that any Court in any proceedings, has the
power  to  suppress  the  publication  of  reports  of  any  part  of  the
proceedings  (including  documentary  material),  where  this  is
necessary  for  the  administration  of  justice,  either  generally  or  in
relation to specific proceedings (including proceedings in which the
order is made).   The power should apply in both civil and criminal
proceedings  and  should  extend  to  suppression  of  publication  of
evidence and oral submissions, as well as the material that would lead
168

to the identification of parties and witnesses involved in proceedings
before the Court.   The new section should not replace the common
law, and should operate alongside existing statutory provisions that
restrict  publication  unless  a successful  application  has  been  made
rendering  such  a  provision  inapplicable  in  the  circumstances.
However,  sec.  119  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Act,  1986  (NSW),
together with any other provisions contained in other statutes which
give  Courts  discretion  if  grounds  are  affirmatively  made  out  to
impose suppression orders, should be repealed. 
A section should be introduced into the Crimes Act, 1900 (NSW)
making breach of an order a criminal offence.   The offence created
by this section should be one of strict liability.
The Evidence Act, 1995 (NSW) should also expressly provide that a
person with a sufficient interest in the matter should be eligible to
apply  to  the  Court  for  the  making,  variation  or  revocation  of  a
suppression order.   The application for a suppression order, together
with the media and anyone else regarded by the court as having a
sufficient  interest  may  be  heard  on  the  application.    The  same
categories of persons should also be able to appeal in relation to a
suppression order.  Such a person, if heard previously on the original
169

application, should be entitled to be heard on the appeal.   Any other
person with a sufficient interest may seek leave to be heard.
An appeal against a decision should be heard by a single Judge of the
Supreme Court, except where a suppression order was made in the
Supreme Court, in which case, an appeal should be to the Court of
Appeal.
The Court should also be empowered to make an interim suppression
order, having a maximum duration of seven days, before proceeding
to a final determination.   The Court should have the power to grant
subsequent interim suppression orders.”
The Commission prepared a draft Bill to enable ‘suppression orders’
to be passed by Court.  We shall refer to it in detail later on.
Other Law Reform Commissions:
We  shall  also  briefly  refer  to  the  views  of  other  Law  Reform
Commissions on “suppression” orders.
The Australian Law Reform Commission in its Report on Contempt
and Prejudice to Jury (Report No.35, 1987) accepted the risk that reports of
legal proceedings may contain material that could prejudice a jury trial.   It
170

recommended that a Court should have power to postpone publication of a
report of any part of proceedings if it is satisfied that the publication could
give  rise  to  a  substantial  risk  that  the  fair  trial of  an  accused  for  an
indictable offence might be prejudiced because of the influence which the
publication may have on jurors (para 324).   In para 327 it recommended
ban on media reports of committal proceedings.
The Law Reform Commission of Victoria (Australia) was of the same
opinion  as  the  Law  Reform  Commission  of  Australia  (Law  Reform
Commission  of  Victoria,  Comments  on  the  Australian  Law  Reform
Commission Report on contempt No.35 (unpublished, 1987).
The Commonwealth Government (Australia) also recommended the
implementation of its 1992 Paper (Australia, Attorney General’s Dept, The
Law of Contempt: Commonwealth Position Paper (1992)) and prepared a
Bill on that basis for the consideration of a Standing Committee of Attorney
General.     The  Bill  of 1993  was  called  the Crimes (Protection  of the
Administration of Justice) Amendment Bill, 1993 (cth).
171

In Canada, it is not permissible to pass a suppression order on the
basis of speculative possibility of prejudice to a fair trial but the publication
must be of such as would create ‘real and substantial risk’ of prejudice to a
fair trial (Dagenais v. Canadian Broadcasting Corpn: (1994) 120 DLR (4th)
12.
The  Irish  Law  Reforms  Commission  has  recommended  stricter
provisions of a ban on reporting of preliminary proceedings of indictable
offences, such as committal proceedings.   (Irish Law Reform Commission,
Contempt of Court, Report No.47, 1994, para 6.37to 6.42 and Consultation
Paper (1991) 343-350).   In fact, that was the position under sec. 17 of the
(Ireland) Criminal Procedure Act, 1967 (which of course did not apply to
bail proceedings) and the Commission felt that that provision has never
been questioned in Ireland.   Such a procedure would ensure that media did
not report matters which a criminal court could treat as ‘inadmissible’ later.
There are several statutes such as the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973,  the  Terrorist  and  Disruptive  Act,  1985  (1987),  the  Prevention  of
Terrorism Act, 2002, and the Unlawful Activists (Preventive) Act, 1967as
172

amended  in  2004.   These  Acts  contain  a  number  of  exceptions  to  the
principles or open justice.
Indian statutes have created some exception to open justice:
In  our  198th Report  on  ‘Witness  Identity  Protection  and  Witness
Protection  Programmes’  (2006)  and  in  the  Consultation  Paper  (August
2004)  which  preceded  it,  there  was  an  exhaustive  discussion  of  these
statutes which are exceptions to the principle of open justice which is also
part  of  our  law.   We have  referred  to  the  statutes  dealing  with  sexual
offences  and  terrorists  where  witness  identity  protection  or  in  camera
proceedings are held as valid exceptions to the principle of open justice.
We have pointed  out that right from the  time when  Scott v.  Scott was
decided  in  1913 AC 417  (463),  ‘open  justice’ has  been  the  law in our
country.   We have also referred to the decisions which stated that that
principle of open justice has exceptions where the exception can be justified
by yet another ‘overriding’ principle.    The  needs  of a fair  trial in  the
administration of justice is one such.  We have also referred elaborately in
the said Reports that the right to freedom of speech is also not absolute in
173

our  country.   We do  not  propose  to  refer  to  all  that  literature  and  to
comparative law to which we have referred in those Reports.
Suffice  it  to  say  that  just  as  there  is  need  to  protect  fairness  in
criminal  proceedings  by  bringing  in  provisions  for  ‘witness  identity
protection’, there is also need to protect the rights of the accused for a fair
criminal trial.
Draft Bill attached to the Report (2003) of NSW Law Reform Commission:
The  New South  Wales Bill, 2003 appended  to  their  Final  Report
(2003) is more elaborate than the UK Act, 1981.  We shall refer to the
provisions in that Bill.
Under sec. 3 of the Bill ‘criminal proceeding’ is defined as follows:
“criminal proceeding: means a proceeding in a court relating to the
trial or sentencing of a person for an offence and includes 
(a) a proceeding for the committal of a person for trial, and
(b) a proceeding for the sentencing of a person following conviction,
and
(c) a proceeding relating to bail (including a proceeding during the
trial or sentencing of a person), and
174

(d) a proceeding relating to an order under Part 15A (Apprehended
violence) of the Crimes Act, 1900, and
(e)      a proceeding preliminary or ancillary to:  
(i) a prosecution for an offence, or
(ii) a proceeding for committal of a person for trial, or
(iii) a proceeding relating to bail  , or
(iv) a  proceeding  relating  to  an  order  under  Part  15A
(Apprehended violence) of the Crimes Act, 1900, and
(f) a proceeding  by way of an  appeal  with  respect  to the trial  or
sentencing of a person.”
Clause (e) of sec. 4 obviously includes the stage when a person has
been ‘arrested’.
Sec. 7 to 10 of the Bill is important and deal with the ‘substantial
risk’.
Sec. 7 deals with ‘Contempt because of risk of influence on  jurors
and  potential jurors’ and applies to civil as well as criminal proceedings.
Sec. 8 deals with ‘Contempt because of risk of influence on witnesses and
potential witnesses’ and applies to civil and criminal proceedings; sec. 9
deals with ‘Contempt because of pressure on parties or prospective parties
to civil proceedings’; sec. 10 deals with ‘Contempt because of pressure on
175

parties or prospective parties to criminal proceedings’.  The clauses of these
sections are all similar with minor differences.  Some sections have extra
clauses.  We shall refer to sections 7, 8 and sec. 10 which are more relevant
for us: 
Sec.  7: ‘Contempt  because  of  risk  of  influence  on  jurors  and  potential
jurors’
(1) A person is guilty of subjudice contempt proceeding against a
person if:
(a) the person publishes matter or causes matter to be published, and
(b) a  criminal  or  civil  proceeding  is  active at  the  time  of  the
publication of the matter, and
(c) the proceeding is one that will be, may be or is being tried before a
jury, and
(d) the publication of that matter creates a substantial risk, according
to the circumstances at the time of publication, that a juror in the
proceeding  or  a  person  who  could  become  a  juror  in  the
proceeding (a potential juror) will become aware of the matter,
and
(e) there is a  substantial risk, according to the circumstances at the
time of publication, that the juror or potential juror will recall the
matter at the time of acting as a juror in the proceeding, and
176

(f) because of the risk that the juror or potential juror will recall the
matter at that time, there is a  substantial risk, according to the
circumstances at the time of publication, that the  fairness of the
proceeding will be  prejudiced through influence being executed
on juror or potential jurors by the published matter.
(2) A person can be found guilty as referred to in subsection (1)
whether or not the person intended to prejudice the fairness of the
proceeding.
(3) Part 1 of Schedule 1 applies for determining the times at which
a proceeding is active for the purposes of this section.
(4) This section extends to the publication of matter outside New
South Wales.
Sec. 8: Contempt  because  of  risk  of  influence  on  witnesses  and
potential witnesses:
(1) A person is guilty in a subjudice contempt proceeding against
the person if
(a) the person publishes matter or causes matter to be published, and
(b) a  criminal or  civil proceeding  is  active at  the  time  of  the
publication of the matter, and
(c) the publication of that matter creates a substantial risk, according
to the circumstances at the time of publication, that a  witness in
177

the  proceeding  or  a  person  who  could  be  a  witness in  the
proceeding (a potential witness) will become aware of the matter,
and
(d) there is a  substantial risk, according to the circumstances at the
time of publication, that a witness will  recall the contents of the
matter  at  any  stage  of  the  proceeding or  of  any  official
investigation in relation to the proceeding, and
(e) because of the risk that the witness will  recall the matter at that
time, that the fairness of the proceeding will be prejudiced through
influence being executed on witnesses or potential witnesses by
the published matter.
(2) A person can be found guilty as referred to in subsection (1)
whether or not the person intended to prejudice the fairness of the
proceeding.
(3) Part 2 of Schedule 1 applies for determining the times at which
a proceeding is to be treated as active within the meaning of this
section.
(4) This section extends to the publication of matter outside New
South Wales.
Sec. 9: Contempt because of pressure on parties or prospective parties
to civil proceedings:
178

(1) A person is guilty of subjudice contempt proceeding against the
person if:
(a) the person publishes matter or causes matter to be published and
(b) the matter contains unfair comment or material misrepresentation
of fact that incites hatred towards severe contempt for, or severe
ridicule of a person  in  his,  her  or  its  character as  a party or
prospective party to a civil proceeding and
(c) because of the publication of the matter, there is substantial risk,
according to the circumstances at the time of publication, that a
person  of  reasonable  fortitude in  the  position  of  a  party or  a
prospective  party  to  the  proceeding  would  make  a  different
decision in  relation  to  the  instituting,  maintaining,  defending,
continuing to defend or seeking to settle the proceeding then he,
she or it would otherwise make.
(2) A  person  can  be  found  guilty  as  referred  to  subsection  (1)
whether or not the person intended to give rise to a risk such as
described in subsection (1)(c).
(3) This section does not apply to or in respect of a publication of
matter concerning a party or prospective party to a civil proceeding
after the conclusion of any appeal in the civil proceeding and the
expiry  of  any  period  permitted  for  appeal  or  further  appeal
(whichever is later).
179

(4) This section extends to the publication of matter outside New
South Wales.
(5) In this section, prospective party, in relation  to a proceeding,
means
(a) any person who, there are reasonable grounds for believing,
could be or become a party in the proceeding, and
(b) any person who is or may be in a position to institute the
proceeding, whether or not actually minded to do so.
Sec.10: Contempt because of pressure on parties or prospective parties
to criminal proceeding:
(1) a person is guilty in a subjudice contempt proceeding against
the person if:
(a) the person publishes matter or causes matter to be published.
(b) The matter contains unfair comment or material misrepresentation
of fact that incites hatred towards, serious contempt for, or severe
ridicule  of  a  person  in  his,  her  or  its  character as  a  party  or
prospective party to a criminal proceeding, and
(c) because of the publication of that matter, there is a substantial risk,
according to the circumstances at the time of publication, that a
person  of  reasonable  fortitude in  the  position  of  a  party  or
prospective party to the proceeding will make a different decision
180

in relation to  instituting,  maintaining,  defending,  pleading guilty
in or accepting a plea of guilty in the proceedings than he, she or it
would otherwise make.
(2) A person can be found guilty as referred to in subsection (1)
whether or not the person intended to give rise to a risk of the kind
described in subsection 1(c).
(3) This  section  does  not  apply to  or  in  respect  of  matter
concerning a party or prospective party to a criminal proceeding after
the conclusion of any appeal proceeding instituted in the criminal
proceeding  and  the  expiry  of  any  period  permitted  for  appeal  or
further appeal (whichever is the later).
(4) This section extends to the publication of matter outside New
South Wales.
(5) In this section, ……………………………….”
Part III of the Bill refers to factors in making a finding of criminal
subjudice  contempt  and  sec.  11  states  pre-existing  publicity  does  not
prevent finding of contempt.   Sec. 12 states  that ‘Evidence  relating to
discharge  of  jury  following  publication  is  admissible  in  contempt
proceedings’.
181

Part  IV  of  the  Bill  refers  to  ‘Defences  in  subjudice  contempt
proceedings: Sec. 13 bears the title “Defence if conduct is innocent or if no
relevant  knowledge  or  control”,  sec.  14  bears  the  title  ‘Defence  if  no
editorial control over the content of publication’.
Part 5 refers to exclusion of liability in subjudice proceeding.  Sec. 15
refers to ‘exclusion of liability when publication relating to a matter of
public interest’ but the exclusion is not available if the benefit does not
outweigh the harm caused to the administration of justice by risk of the
influence on jurors, potential jurors, witnesses, potential witnesses or parties
or potential parties.  Sec. 16 refers to exclusion of liability when publication
is necessary to protect public safety.
Part 6 refers to ‘suppression orders’ if there is actual or threatened
criminal contempt.
“Sec. 17:  Restraint of actual or threatened contempt of Court:
(1) Any person having a sufficient interest may bring a proceeding in
the Supreme Court for an order to restrain a contempt of Court by
publication of matter (whether within or outside the State) that has
a tendency to prejudice the fairness of another proceeding in a
court of the State.
182

(2) An application must not be made under this section unless the
Attorney General and the parties to the other proceeding (if any)
have been notified of the application.
(3) The Director of Public Prosecution does not have to comply with
subsection (2).
(4) A proceeding under this section may be brought by a person on his
or her own behalf or on behalf of himself or herself and on behalf
of  other  persons  (with  their  consent),  or  a  body  corporate  or
unincorporated  (with  the  consent  of  its  Committee  or  other
controlling or governing body), having like or common interests in
that proceeding.”
Part 7 refers to ‘costs of trial discontinued because of contemptuous
publication’.   Sec. 18 deals with this aspect.
Sec. 19 states that the Attorney General may apply for an order under
sec. 18 for the benefit of the accused, or the State or any person or
persons of a class.
Sec. 20 deals with calculation of costs.   Sec. 21 with nature of costs.
Sec. 22 with certification of costs; sec. 23 with nature of order; sec.
24  with  enforcement  of  order;  sec.  25  with  recovery;  sec.  26
‘procedure’.
Part 8 refers to criminal contempt generally:
183

Sec. 27 states that any person may commence proceeding for criminal
contempt; sec. 28 states that mere prejudging issues in proceeding is
not enough to constitution contempt.
Schedule 1:  Part 1 (sec. 7, 8) states when a criminal proceeding is
active.  It says:
“1(1) A criminal proceeding is active for purposes of section 7:
(a)      from the earliest of the following:  
(i) the arrest of a person in New South Wales or in any other  
State or Territory,
(ii) the laying of a charge,
(iii) the issue of a Court attendance notice and filing in the
registry of the relevant Court,
(iv) the filing of an ex officio indictment,
(v) the making of an order in a country other than Australian
that a person be extradited to New South Wales for the
trial of an offence.
(b) until
(i) the verdict of a jury in the proceedings, or
184

(ii) the making of any order, or any other event, having the
effect that the offence or offences charged will not be
tried before a jury, or at all.
(2) If a retrial before a jury is ordered, a criminal proceeding is
active from the time the order for retrial is made.
Part 2 of Schedule 1 deals with meaning of the word ‘active’ for
purposes of risk of influence on witnesses and potential witnesses.
Sec. 4 states:
(1)      A criminal proceeding is active for the purposes of sec. 8  
(a) from the earliest of the following:
(i) the arrest of a person in New south Wales or in any other  
State or Territory,
(ii) the laying of a charge,
(iii) the issue of a Court attendance notice and its filing in the
registry of the relevant Court,
(iv) the filing of an ex officio indictment,
(v) the making of an order in a country other than Australian
that a person be extradited to New South Wales for the
trial of an offence.
(b) until the later of the following:
185

(i) the conclusion of any appeal proceedings;
(ii) the expiry of any period permitted for appeal or further
appeal.
(2) If a retrial is ordered in a criminal proceeding, the criminal
proceeding is active again from the time the order for a retrial is
made, until
(a) the conclusion of any appeal proceedings, or 
(b) the expiry of any period permitted for appeal or further appeal
whichever is late.
Appendix by the Report refers to a Bill on suppression order and
prevention of examination of records.
We have referred to the various provisions of the UK Act, 1981 and
the Bill attached to the N.S.W. Law Reforms Report (2003) which deal with
suppression orders and the ‘substantial risk of prejudice’.
Considerations for proposals for postponement orders: ‘substantial risk of
prejudice’:
If we propose a provision in the proposed Bill for amendment of the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, it is not merely sufficient to amend sec 3 and
its Explanation as stated earlier, but it is necessary to introduce a provision
enabling courts to pass ‘postponement’ order as in sec 4(2) of the UK Act,
186

1981,  that  sub  section  uses  the  words  ‘substantial  risk  of  prejudice’.
Question is whether we should use similar words in the proposed provision.
Interpretation of the words ‘Substantial risk’ of prejudice to administration
of justice by Courts in UK creates problems:
Section  4(2)  of the  U.K. Act states  that  a restraint  order may be
passed  by  a  Court  if  there  is  ‘substantial  risk’  of  prejudice  to  the
administration of justice.  These words have come up for interpretation in a
number of cases in U.K.  It will be seen that the Draft Bill (2003) of New
South Wales (Australia) also uses the word ‘substantial risk’ in Sections 7,8
& 9 follows the UK provision.
It is necessary to refer to the views expressed by Courts and other
commentators 
(A) as to the meaning of the words ‘substantial risk of prejudice’ and 
(B) as to why these words are defective. 
(A)Meaning of ‘substantial risk of prejudice’ in Section 4(2) :
In Attorney General v. Newsgroup Newspapers : 1986 (2) AllER 833
Sir John Donaldson MR stated (p 841) as follows:
       “There has to be substantial risk that the course of justice in the
proceedings  in  question  will  be  seriously  impeded  or prejudiced.
This  is  a  double  test.   First,  there  has  to  be  some  risk  that  the
proceedings This is a double test.  First, there has to be some risk
187

that the proceedings in question will be affected at all.  Second there
has to be a prospect that if affected, the effect will be serious.  The
two limbs of the test can overlap, but they can be quite separate.  I
accept the submission of counsel for the defendant that substantial as
a qualification of risk does not have the meaning of ‘weighty’ but
rather means ‘not insubstantial’or ‘not minimal’.  The ‘risk’ part of
the test will usually be of importance in the context of the width of
publication.”
          Again in Ex parte the Telegraph Group and Others 2001(1) WLR
1983 (CA) (Longmore, LJ, Douglas Brown & Eady JJ), after referring to
Section  4(2),  the  Court  of  Appeal  stated  that  in  order  to  decide  if  the
suppression  order is  ‘necessary’ in the context  of Arts 6 and 10 of the
European Convention, a three pronged test must be satisfied:-
 “the first question was whether reporting would give rise to a
non insubstantial risk  of prejudice  to the administration of
justice in the relevant proceedings and if not, that would be the
end of the matter; that, if such a risk was perceived to exist,
then the  second question is whether a Sec 4(2) order would
eliminate the risk, and if not there could be no necessity to
impose  such a ban and again that would  be the end  of the
matter; that, nevertheless, even if an order would achieve the
188

objective, the Court should still consider whether the risk could
satisfactorily be overcome by some less restrictive means, since
otherwise it could not be said to be ‘necessary’to take the more
drastic approach; and that  thirdly even if there was indeed no
other way of eliminating the perceived risk of prejudice, it still
did not follow necessarily that an order had to be made and the
Court  might  still  have  to  ask  whether   the  degree  of  risk
contemplated should be regarded as tolerable in the sense of
being  the  lesser  of  two  evils;  and  that  at  that  stage,  value
judgment might have to be made as to the priority between the
competing  interests  represented  by articles  6  and  10  of  the
Convention”.
In that case, an order of postponement of reporting the case until after the
conclusion of another trial arising out of the same closely related facts was
passed and upheld by the Court of Appeal.  The order was made during trial
of a charge of murder against a police officer, Christopher Sherwood.  The
same Judge was to preside over another trial of 3 more senior police officers
criminally charged  in  respect  of  the  same  incident  with  ‘misconduct  in
public office’, who were all under suspension. 
189

         The Court of Appeal agreed that all the three tests were satisfied.  It
rejected a plea that a Jury may not be prejudiced if properly directed by the
Judge or on account of delay that may take place before the other trial.  It
stated that in high profile cases, the impact is substantial.  It referred to
Kennedy LJ’s observation in Attorney General v. Associated Newspapers :
(31st October,1977, unreported) which were as follows:
“With potential Jurors receiving information in so many different ways,
high profile cases would become impossible to try, if Jurors could not be
relied on  to disregard much of the information to which they may have
been  exposed,  but  that  does  not  mean  that  they  can  be  expected  to
disregard any information, whenever and however it is received, otherwise
there  would  be  no  point  in  withholding  from  them  any  relevant
information however prejudicial in content or presentation, hence the need
for the Law of Contempt which we are required to enforce.”
That was a case where the Evening Standard revealed potentially damaging
information  about  the  past  records  of IRA activists  who were currently
being  tried  inter alia for breaking prison.  It was held that  a one-sided
picture  cannot  be allowed  to  be  presented  by the press.   The  Court  of
Appeal there observed as follows:
“The  Court  needs,  therefore,  to  be  very  careful  about
sanctioning any course that would lead to information about a
190

criminal  trial  being  presented  to  the  public in  a  way  that
actually distorted what was taking place, rather than merely
summarising it. This might be a significant factor for the Court
to  weigh  in  a  case  where  partial  restriction  was  being
contemplated as a realistic option”.
(B)  Defects in the language of Section 4(2) of the U.K. Act
     In the Discussion Paper 43 (2000) on “Contempt by Publication” 
(Ch.10), (para 10.80) of the NSW Law Reform Commission, it was stated:
“The breadth of the U.K. provision has meant that the section has proved
controversial, attracting criticism that it is applied inconsistently, routinely
and unnecessarily”.
(quoting CJ Millers, Contempt of Court (1989), pp 332-338 and A Arlidge
& T. Smith, on ‘Contempt’ (1999) (pp 413-459)).
            In the Final Report, Ch 10, the Commission observed in para 10.18
as follows (as to Section 4(2) ):
“10.18 :   One  of  the  difficulties  with  the  ‘substantial  risk  of
prejudice’ formulation is that while the risk must be great, the prejudice
need not be (N. Lowe and B. Sufrin, The Law of Contempt, 1996, p 286).
Eady and Smith express the opinion that it seems strange that a Court could
impose  an  order  restraining  publication  where  the  prejudice  in
contemplation is less than severe (A. Arlidge and T. Smith on Contempt of
191

Court (1999) (para 7.133).  Even the meaning of ‘substantial risk’ is more
elusive than might at first appear. In one English case, for example, the
Master of Rolls  accepted  counsel’s  interpretation  of ‘substantial’  as  not
meaning ‘weighty’ but rather ‘not substantial’ or ‘not minimal’ ( Att.Gen v.
English 1983(1) A.C 116 (142) (HL) ).  Another problem  encountered in
England,  where  the  formula  ‘substantial  risk  of  serious  prejudice’  is
employed  (i.e.  in  Section  2)  to  determine  liability  under  sub-judice
principle, is that determining the degree of  risk may require a Judge to
assess  the  susceptibility  of  a  particular  Jury  to  influence  from  the
publication, (C. Walker et al (1992) 55 Modern Law Review 647 at 648), as
opposed to making an objective assessment of the prejudice to justice likely
to result from the publication.
     Borrie & Lowe, the Law of Contempt, (1996) (3rd Edn)  (see p 287)
referto the observation of Lindsay J in MSN Pension Trustees Ltd v. Bank
of America National Trust and Savings Association : 1995(2) All ER 355.
Considering  both  Section  2  (strict  liability)  which  uses  the  words
‘substantial  risk’  and  the  words  ‘seriously  impeded  or  prejudiced’  and
Section 4(2) which,  for the purpose of granting postponement order uses
the words ‘substantial risk of prejudice’, Lindsay J stated that ‘substantial’
meant  ‘not  insubstantial’  and  this  would  lower  the  threshold  for  the
operation  of  Section  4(2)  than  the  legislature  intended.   However,  he
192

assumed in favour of the Serious  Fraud Office which was applying for the
postponement  order,  that  substantial  meant  ‘not  insubstantial’  or  ‘not
minimal’.
Therefore, it is for consideration whether we should use the words
‘substantial  risk  of  prejudice’  in  the  proposed  provision  enabling
postponement orders.
Power of Court to order postponement of publication is not inherent but has
to be conferred by statute :
A  question  has  arisen  whether  a  court  has  inherent  power  to  pass
‘postponement order’ as to publication ?  In R v. Clement (1821) 4 B & Ald
218 there are observations that the Court has inherent power but this view
has  recently  been  not  accepted  by  the  Privy  Council  in  Independent
Publishing  Co Ltd v.  Attorney General of Trinidad  & Tobago : (2004)
UKPC  26  (see  http://www.bailie.org)  and  it  was  held  that  there  is  no
inherent power and power to postpone publication must be conferred by
statute. 
Likewise,  the  NSW Law  Reform Commission,  in  its  Discussion
Paper  43  (2000)  (Ch  10)  (see  paras  10.22  to  10.27)  has  held  that  the
authority of Clement as to inherent power to restrain publication is shaken
in Australia in cases  such as John Fairfax Ltd v. Police Tribunal : (NSW)
1986  5 NSWLR 465.  In this connection, it may be noted that  Borrie &
193

Lowe in their ‘Law of Contempt’ (see p. 279) say that the point has become
academic in view of Section 4(2) of the UK Act of 1981.
    In view of the criticism of the words, we do not want to use the words
‘substantial risk of prejudice’ in the new provision whereby power should
be vested in the Court to pass orders for postponement of publication.  
    As to what words have to be used in our statute for the purpose of
postponement order, we shall deal with that in Chapter X.
     
194

CHAPTER IX
What categories of media publications are recognized as prejudicial to
a suspect or accused?
We feel it necessary as a matter of information to the media and to the
public to refer to the categories of publications  in the media which are
generally recognized as prejudicial to a suspect or accused.
There is a full discussion of the subject in Borrie and Lowe, ‘Law of
Contempt’, 3rd Ed (1996)(Ch 5)(pp 132 to 179) as to what publications are
accepted as resulting in prejudice to criminal proceedings.  We shall refer to
the cases quoted there. (Article by Ms Vismai Rao, on Trial by Media, 5th
Year, USLSS, Indraprastha University, 2006).
(1)  Publications  concerning  the  character  of  accused  or  previous
conclusions: 
Pigot CB stated in  R v.  O’Dogherty (1848) 5 Cox C.C 348 (354)
(Ireland) that 
“Observations calculated to excite feelings of hostility towards
any individual who is under a charge … … …  amount to a
contempt of court.”
195

Borrie and Lowe state (p 132):
“Publications which tend to excite ‘feelings of hostility’ against
the accused amount to contempt because they tend to induce
the Court to be biased.  Such ‘hostile feelings’ can be most
easily induced by commenting unfavourably upon the character
of the accused.”  These also can be influenced on the Jury.
“Such  publications  amount  to  gross  contempt  because  they
bring  to  the  notice  of  the  Jury  facts  very  damaging  to  the
accused, which they are not entitled to know, and which have a
tendency  to create bias against the accused.”
 Publication  of  past  criminal  record  is  recognized  as  a  serious
contempt, satisfying the ‘substantial risk of serious prejudice’ test used in
Section 4(2) of the U.K Act of 1981 as well as under Common Law.  The
above  authors  quote  Moffit  P  in  AG(NSW)   v.  Willisee :  (1980)  (2)
NSWLR 143 (150) that there is
“popular and deeply rooted belief that it is more likely that an
accused  person  committed  the  crime  charged  if  he  has  a
criminal record, and less likely if he has no record”.
See  also  Gisborne  Herald  Co.  Ltd. vs.  Solicitor  General 1995(3)
NLLR 563 (569) (CA).
196

The need to prevent prejudice caused by past criminal record is one of the
‘most deeply rooted and zealously guarded principles of the criminal law’
(Per Viscount Sankey in  Maxwell v.  DPP (1935) AC 309(317) and such
evidence will have to be treated as inadmissible.  But still it may affect the
adjudicator subconsciously, as stated in Chapter III of this Report.  
In the famous case R v. Parke : (1903) (2) KB 432, after an accused
was  arrested  and  remanded  on  a  charge  of  forgery,  the  Star published
articles that he had admitted an earlier conviction for forgery and that he
had  been  sentenced  to  imprisonment.   Wills  J  held  that   that  was
“unquestionably calculated to produce the impression that, apart from the
charges  then under enquiry, he was a man of bad and dissolate character”.  
Again in R v. Davis : (1906) 2 KB 32 a woman  was arrested on a
charge of abandoning her child and the publication in a newspaper that she
was convicted of fraud on more than one occasion, was treated as highly
prejudicial.  
In  Solicitor General v.  Henry and News Group Newspapers  Ltd :
1990  COD  307,  a  person  was  arrested  for  robbery  and  an  article  was
published that he had a previous conviction of rape and it was held to be
contempt even under the strict rule in Section 2 of UK Act, 1981 as creating
197

a ‘substantial risk of serious prejudice’ and the newspaper was fined 15,000
Pounds.  
In another case reported in Times (31st March,1981), the Guardian
Newspaper was fined 5,000 Pounds for revealing, during the middle of a
long fraud trial, that the two accused had previously been involved in an
escape from custody. 
Borrie & Lowe refer (pp 135-136) to  A.G of  New South Wales v.
Truth and Sportsman Ltd. : (1957) 75 WN (NSW) 70 where a newspaper
was held to be in contempt for publishing an article describing a person
charged for possessing a pistol without licence, as a ‘notorious criminal’.   
In R v. Regal Press Pty Ltd : (1972) VR 67 (Victoria), the newspaper
was  held  to  be  in  contempt  for  publishing  that  the  accused,  who  was
arrested and  charged for driving under influence of alcohol, was earlier
convicted of murder. The argument of the publisher that the public already
knew about it was rejected on the ground that  public might have forgotten
it and the publication would bring it back to their memory. 
In Solicitor General v. Wellington Newspapers Ltd  : 1995 NZLR 45,
Gisborne Herald and two other newspapers were convicted for contempt for
reporting the previous conviction of John Giles  at the time of his arrest in
Gisborne  on  charges  of  attempted  murder  of  a  police  constable.   The
argument  that  the  prejudicial  statement  was casually made  in  a  general
198

discussion  was rejected in Hinch v. AG (Victoria) : (1987) 164 CLR 15 and
in AG(NSW) v. Willesee : 1980 (2) NSWLR 143. 
In Canada, it was stated in Re Murphy and Southern Press Ltd (1972)
30 DLR (3d) 355 that ‘Except in the most unusual circumstances, the press
should  refrain  from publishing  criminal  records  of  any accused  person,
alleged co-conspirator or witness’.  Report of previous conviction was held
to be contempt in Re AG of Alberta and Interwest Publications Ltd : (1991)
73 DLR (4th) 83. 
R v.  Thomson Newspapers Ltd, ex parte AG 1968(1) AllER 268, a
person awaiting trial under the Race Relations Act, 1965 was, according to
the press publication, stated to be of bad character as he was a brothel
keeper  and  property  racketeer.   The  comment  was  held  to  amount  to
contempt.
In  AG v.  Times Newspapers  Ltd,  (1983)  Times 12th Feb,  several
newspapers  which  published  comments  on  the  merits  of  the  charges
concerning Michael Fagan, who had intruded into the Queen’s bedroom in
the Buckingham Palace, were fined. 
(2)  Publication of Confessions :
Though a confession to police is inadmissible in law still publications
of confessions before trial are treated as highly prejudicial and affecting  the
199

Court’s impartiality and amount to serious contempt.  In R v. Clarke, ex p
Crippen : (1910) 103  LT 636,  Crippen was arrested  in  Canada but  not
formally charged, but a publication appeared in England in Daily Chronicle,
as  cabled  by  its  foreign  correspondent,  that  “Crippen  admitted  in  the
presence  of witnesses  that he had killed his wife but denied the act of
murder”.   The publication was treated as contempt.  Darling J observed that
“Anything more calculated to prejudice the defence could not be imagined”.
In  Fagan’s case  referred  to  above  also,  a  publication  that  Fagan
confessed  to  stealing  wine was  held  to  create  ‘very’ substantial  risk  of
serious prejudice. 
Captain Alfred Dreyus, a Jewish officer in French Army, was charged
in  1894  with  high  treason  for  allegedly  passing  military  secrets  to  the
German Embassy in Paris.  The anti semetic media immensely highlighted
his  untold confessions, unfounded  charges and illusory events.  He was
prosecuted and sentenced to imprisonment on Devil’s Island.  Twelve years
after his imprisonment, the truth was discovered and he was exonerated and
readmitted into the army (Media, The Fourth Pillar by Miss Vismai Rao, V
year, University School of Law & Legal Studies, Indraprastha University).
In New South Wales, a police officer was found guilty of contempt in
AG (NSW) v. Dean (1990) 20 NSWLR 650, when, in the course of police
200

media conference following the arrest of a suspect in a murder inquiry, he
answered a journalist’s question with a statement  which suggested that the
person confessed to the police.  He was held to be in contempt but was let
off without fine. 
(3)  Publications which comment or reflect upon the merits of the case :
This is indeed the extreme form of ‘trial by newspaper’ since the
newspaper  usurps the  function  of  the  Court  without  the  safeguards  of
procedure, right to cross-examine etc.  Such publications prejudge the facts
and influence the Court, witnesses and others.
It is, however, permissible to publish the fact of arrest and the exact
nature of charge as in R v. Payne 1896(1) QB 577 and that is not contempt.
Assertions of guilt or innocence of the person are treated as serious
contempt.   In R v. Bolam, ex p Haigh : (1949) 93 Sol Jo 220, Haigh was
described as a ‘vampire’ and that he had committed other murders and the
publication gave the names of victims. Lord Goddard sent the editor to jail
and fined the proprietors of Daily Mirror calling it “a disgrace to English
journalism”.  In  R v.  Odham’s Press Ltd ex p AG : 1957 (1) QB 73, the
paper described the person who was accused for brothel keeping that he was
‘in the foul business’ of ‘purveying vice and managing street women’. That
201

was held to be contempt.  In AG v. News Group Newspapers Ltd : 1988(2)
AllER 906 it was held that the publication of guilt amounted to contempt.
Assertion of guilt by ‘innuendo’ was also held to be contempt in
Thorpe v. Waugh : (1979) CA Transcript 282, R v. McCann : (1990) 92 Cr
App Rep 239, AG v. English: 1983 (1) AC 116. 
In  Shamim vs.  Zinat:  1971  Crl  L5  1586  (All),  an  article  was
published in a magazine pending an appeal against conviction for murder
expressing opinion on the merits of the case.  The High Court held that it
amounts to contempt of court because it is an interference into the course of
justice.
(4)  Photographs :
Apart from publication of photographs interfering with the procedure
of  identification  of  the  accused,  there  is  also  the  likelihood  of  such
publication giving a colour of guilt with added emphasis.  In AG v. News
Group Newspapers Ltd : (1984) 6 Crl App Rep (S) 418, the Sun Newspaper
published, on  the second day of trial, a photograph  of a man who was
charged with causing serious injuries to his baby and the baby’s mother was
also accused of the offences.  The caption was  “Baby was blinded by Dad”.
This allegation was not part of the Crown’s allegations.  Stephen Brown L.J
said that “the juxtaposition of the photograph undoubtedly carried with it
202

the risk that the accused, who had pleaded not guilty, might be regarded in a
very  unpleasant  light  by those  who  saw  this  particular  photograph  and
headline”.   Sun admitted contempt and was fined 5000 Pounds. 
In New Zealand (see Chapter V of this Report), in Attorney General
v. Tonks : 1934 NZLR 141 (FC), it was held that publication of photographs
of an accused before trial if the identification was likely to be in issue would
amount to contempt.  Blair J observed:
“If a photograph of an accused person is broadcast in a newspaper
immediately after he is arrested, then such of the witnesses who have
not then seen him, may quite unconsciously be led into the belief that
the accused as photographed is the person they saw. The fact that a
witness  claiming  to  identify  the  accused  person,  has  seen  a
photograph  of  him  before  identifying  him,  gives  the  defence  an
excuse for questioning the soundness of the witness’s identification”.
We have also referred (see Chapter IV) to the NSW case from Australia in
Attorney  General  (NSW) v.  Time  Inc  Magazineco  Ltd :  (Unrep.  CA
40331/94 dated 15th September 1994) where the weekly magazine ‘Who’
published the photo of Ivan Milat, accused in a serial murder case, in the
front page after his arrest and Gleeson CJ observed that this would seriously
interfere with identification by witnesses when the person is lined up with
others.    It could be strongly argued for the accused  that
203

“that the identification in the line-up was useless, or atleast of very
limited value.  It would be argued that, because of what is sometimes
described as displacement effect, there was a high risk that at the time
of the line-up, the witness was performing an act of recognition not of
a  person  who  had  been  seen  by  the  witness  on  some  previous
occasion but of the person in the photograph”.
In  R v.  Taylor : (1994) 98 Cr App Rep 361, there was a charge of
murder against two sisters for the murder of the wife of the former lover of
one of them.  Some newspapers obtained a copy of the video made at the
deceased’s  wedding  and  froze  a  frame  from  the  sequence  of  guests
emerging from the church, kissing first the bride and then the groom, so that
it appeared that the ‘peck’  on the cheek given by the accused to the groom,
her  former  lover,  was  a  mouth-to-mouth  kiss.  This  photograph  was
accompanied  by the  headline  ‘Cheats  Kiss’ and ‘Tender Embrace – the
Lovers  share  a  kiss  just  a  few  feet  from  Alison’.   On  account  of  the
prejudicial publication, the Court of Appeal quashed the convictions and did
not order a retrial. 
(5)  Police activities :
204

We have already referred to  AG (NSW) v.  Dean : (1990) NSWLR
650 (under the heading publication of confessions) how a disclosure by
police of an alleged confession after arrest was held to be contempt.
Borrie & Lowe (1996, 3rd Ed p 151) refer to activities of police which
can  also  amount  to  contempt.   They say “It can be perfectly proper  to
publish  references  to  police  activity  surrounding  a  crime,  such  as  the
various searches, questioning of suspects and any arrest that may be made
but it should not be thought that there is an automatic immunity in so doing
… … … … … … … …”
In an Australian case, R v. Pacini, (1956) VLR 544, for example, a
radio station was held to have committed a contempt by broadcasting, at a
time when the accused was awaiting trial, an interview with a detective who
had been concerned with the arrest of the accused, in which it was intimated
that  the  detective’s  investigation  had  been  brought  to  a  successful
conclusion with the accused’s arrest, the implication being that the accused
was guilty.
In  AG (NSW) v.  TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd : (1990) 20 NSWLR
368, in the case of a murder of two women and a child at two distant
locations, the suspect surrendered  to the police, was interviewed, confessed
and was then taken to the scenes of the crimes by the police where he
demonstrated various significant matters to them.  On these visits, the police
205

and  the  suspect  were  accompanied  by  a  journalist  including  television
crews.  At one point, the television crew travelled in the same aircraft with
the suspect and the police, to the scene of the crime. The police held a press
conference  at  which  it  was  announced  that  the  suspect  had  confessed.
These matters were all broadcast on television news.  The NSW Court of
Appeal stated that the tendency of this publication was to create a risk of
prejudice to the accused at the trials (which did not take place ultimately
since the accused committed suicide while in custody) and was not lessened
because of the very strong evidence against the accused.  The Court of
Appeal observed (p 382):
“A notion that the rules relating to contempt of court somehow apply
with less rigour to the case of a person against whom there is a very
strong case  would  reflect a fundamental misunderstanding  of the
nature and purpose of those rules”.
The contempt was not also lessened because of the role of the police
in encouraging the publicity.  The Court of Appeal said (p 381):
“… as a general rule, we regard it grossly offensive to the principles
embodied in this aspect of the law, and to the proper administration of
justice, for police to display for the benefit of the media, persons in
the course of being questioned or led round the scene of a crime”.
206

Borrie and Lowe refer to R v. Carochhia : (1973) 43 DLR (3d) 427
(Quebec  CA)  from  Canada  where  a  police  officer  was  held  guilty  of
contempt   for issuing  a press  release  to charges  that  had  been  brought
against a particular company and stating that more charges were to come
and generally linking the accused company with organized crime. 
The authors say that these cases are ‘a salutary warning’ to the police
both with respect to their press releases and to the access they give to the
media.  In England, there have been occasions in which the police have
overstepped the mark of prudence (though no prosecution has even been
brought), the most notorious example being the ‘euphoric’ press conference
held by the police following the arrest (on other charges) of Peter Sutclifee
who was later charged with being the so called ‘Yorkshire ripper’.  There
was much concern over the treatment of Sutcliffe’s arrest but it was the
press, rather than the police themselves, who bore the brunt of the criticism,
no doubt because of the subsequent behaviour of the press over the case.
The  authors  say  that  “Irrespective  of  the  responsibility  that  lies  on  the
police, the media themselves have a responsibility that reliance on a police
press release will not be a defence to charges of contempt brought against
them, if their publication is held creative of real risk of prejudice” (as in AG
(NSW) v. TCN Channel Nine News Pty Ltd (1990) 20 NSWLR 368). 
207

The authors refer to a Scottish case for highlighting the facts which
the press has to take into account in describing police operations.  In HM
Advocate v. George Outram & Co Ltd : 1980 SLT (Notes) 13 (High Court
of Justiciary), the Glasgow Herald was fined 2000 Pounds for publishing
the headline “Armed Raids Smash Big Drugs Ring in Scotland”, giving a
detailed account of the arrest and police operations.   In holding the article
to be contempt, the newspaper was said to have published alleged evidence
of highly incriminating character tending to suggest that the guilt of the
accused might be presumed. 
It may not be contempt if the publication is intended to warn public at
the instance of the police that a notorious criminal had escaped and public
have to be careful or watch out for him.  (see p 170 of Borrie & Lowe)
(6)  Imputation of innocence :
The authors refer to decisions which show that direct imputations of
the accused’s innocence can be considered as contempt as was done in R v.
Castro  Onslow’s  and  Whelley’s case  (1873)  L.R 9  Q.B  219  where  the
claimant to succession to property was awaiting a trial on charges of perjury
and forgery and a public meeting was held and two M.Ps who were present
alleged that the accused was not guilty but was the victim of a conspiracy.
Both MPs were held guilty of contempt by Cockburn CJ.
208

This  reminds  us  of  the  famous  statement  in  Ambard v.  AG  of
Trinidad  and  Tobago (1936)  A.C. 322  of Lord  Atkin  in  the  context  of
criticism of Judges:
“The  path  of  criticism  is  a  public  way:  the  wrong  headed  are
permitted to err therein; provided that members of the public abstain
from  imputing  improper  motives  to  those  taking  part  in  the
administration  of  justice,  and  are  genuinely  exercising  a  right  of
criticism, and are not acting in malice or attempting to impair the
administration of justice they are immune.  Justice is not a cloistered
virtue; she must be allowed to suffer the scrutiny and respectful, even
though outspoken, comments of ordinary men”.
The border line between fair criticism and contempt may be thin.  The
path of criticism is a public way and the wrong headed are permitted to err
therein but may yet take the risk of contempt.
In Australia in DPP v. Wran : 1986 (7) NSWLR 616 (NSW CA), the
premier of NSW was held to be in contempt for saying, in response to a
journalist’s question, that he believed in the innocence of a High Court
Judge who had been convicted of charges concerning the perversion of the
course  of  justice  when  he  said  that  a  retrial  could  result  in  a different
verdict.  The Premier and the newspaper were held guilty of contempt. 
209

(7) Creating an atmosphere of prejudice:
Borrie and Lowe (ibid, p 154) refer to the following cases.
In R v. Hutchison , ex p McMahon: 1936 (2) All ER 1514, a news
film whose caption implied a charge which was more serious than the actual
charge was held to be contempt.  When a man was arrested and charged
with unlawful possession of a firearm when it was discovered whilst the
king was riding in a procession in London, the news film showed the man’s
arrest under the title ‘Attempt on King’s life’.   It was held to be contempt.
Swift J warned the proprietors that:
“…. if they want to produce sensational films, they must take care in
describing them not to use any language likely to bring about any
derangement in the carriage of justice”
In another case, where the publication described an act of the accused
as ‘murder’, when the issue before the jury was whether the car in question
got burnt due to some reason or whether it was intentionally set fire by the
accused to kill the occupant, it was held likely to mislead the jury.   In fact,
the case of murder related to another person who had died when a car was
burnt.   R v. Daily Herald ex p Rouse (1931) 75 Sol Jo 119.
210

In USA, in Sheppard vs. Maxwell: (1965) 381. US 532, Dr. Sheppard
was tried for murder of his wife.  The coroner inquest was held in a school
with live broadcasting.  Later, in the Courtroom, three to four benches were
assigned for accommodation of media, a press table was erected inside the
bar of the Court, so close to the accused that he could not even consult his
lawyer without being overheard.  The jurors were subjected  to constant
publicity. The Supreme Court of US set aside the conviction appalled by the
prejudice the accused suffered.
In M.P. Lohia vs. State of West Bengal AIR 2005 SC 790, to which
we have earlier referred, the Supreme Court seriously deprecated a one-
sided article in a newspaper in which the allegations made by the parents of
the wife in an alleged dowry death case were published but the record filed
by the accused that his wife` was schizophrenic were not published.  These
publication create a pressurised atmosphere before the Judge.
(8) Criticism of witnesses:
The same authors refer to the following cases (ibid p 155):
Witnesses  may  be  deterred  if  they  become  the  object  of  public
criticism.    In  R v.  Bottomley,  (1908)  Times,  19th Dec.,  one  Horatio
Bottomley, a Member of Parliament, was on trial for conspiracy to defraud.
He was the editor of a newspaper.   The newspaper of the accused described
211

the cross-examination as ‘relentless cross-examination’ and commented on
the prosecution witness.  It was held that the article interfered with a fair
hearing  because  it  held  up the  witnesses  for the  prosecution  to  ‘public
opprobrium’ if the witness was described as “an unhappy man, writhing in
the ….. of their relentless cross-examination”.   Such comments tended to
prejudice the prosecution case and also deter future witnesses.
As a general rule, adverse comment upon a witness should be avoided
since such comment can only add to the general reluctance of witnesses to
appear in Court (R v. Castro Onslow’s and Whalley’s case, (1873) LR 9 QB
219) (R v. Daily Herald ex p Bishop of Norwich, 1932 (2) ICB 402).
Discrediting witnesses is also prejudicial to a trial.  In Labouchere, ex
p Columbus Co. Ltd. (1901) 17 TLR 578, an article was published in Truth
which attacked a certain witness and even discredited the character of the
witness.  Bruce J stated:
“Looking at the whole of the article in question, he could not doubt
that it was calculated to imply that Cowen was not a witness to be
relied upon, that it held him up as a person whose conduct was to be
condemned  and  that  it  might  prejudice  the  mind  of  any  juryman
against Cowen, who happened to read it”
In another case, there was a publication that a witness was being paid
by  a  national  newspaper,  the  amount  being  contingent  upon  the  final
212

outcome of the case.   Contempt prosecution followed: see  AG v.  New
Statesman and Nation Publishing Co.Ltd. : 1980 (1) All ER 644.
(9) Premature publication of evidence:
Borrie and Lowe (ibid p. 156) state that a newspaper conducting its
own private investigation and publishing the results before or during the
trial is perhaps the most blatant example of ‘trial by newspaper’.   Such
publications hider the Court’s determination of facts and might otherwise be
‘prejudicial’.    There  is  no  guarantee  that  the  facts  published  by  the
newspaper are true, there being no opportunity to cross-examine nor to have
the evidence corroborated.    There is no guarantee that the published facts
will be admitted at the trial, if it amounted to hearsay.   In R v. Evening
Standard,  ex  p  DPP (1924)  40  TLR  833,  the  Court  found  that  certain
newspapers ‘had entered deliberately and systematically on a course which
was described as criminal investigation’.   The defence of the newspaper
was that they had a duty to elucidate the facts.   This defence was rejected
by Lord Hewart CJ (p. 835) as follows:
“While the police or the Criminal Investigation Department were to
pursue  their  investigation  in  silence  and  with  all  reticence  and
reserve, being careful to say nothing to prejudice the trial of the case,
whether  from the  point  of view  of  the  prosecution  or  ….  of the
213

defence, it had come to be somehow for some reason the duty of
newspapers to employ independent staff of amateur detectives who
would  bring  to  an  ignorance  of  the  law  of  evidence  a  complete
disregard of the interests whether of the prosecution or the defence….
”
To publish results of such investigations could prejudice a fair trial
and will therefore amount to contempt.   In that case, the proprietors of
Evening  Standard  were  fined  1000  pounds  and  two  other  papers,  300
pounds each.
The authors, however, point out (pp 157-158) that today the position
has changed with ‘investigative’ journalism.   Cases such as Watergate etc.
the Thalidomide case were the work of journalists.
But, in our view, assuming investigation journalism is permissible, if
that is continued after criminal proceedings become ‘active’ and a person
has been arrested, and if by virtue of the private investigation, the person is
described as guilty or innocent, such a publication can prejudice the courts,
the witnesses and the public and can amount to contempt.
(10) Publication of interviews with witnesses:
214

Borne and Lowe state (ibid p. 158) that in principle, it can amount to
contempt to publish the evidence which a witness may later give in Court.
That is not to say that no statement of a witness can be published pending
trial.
Statement of witnesses, which have not suffered cross-examination
case, in our opinion, present a one-sided picture of the matter.
It may be that some ‘bare facts’ be mentioned as stated by the above
authors to satisfy public curiosity, even if charges are pending in Court.  But
in-depth interview with a witness can create problems.  
In this behalf, certain pertinent aspects were referred by the Salmon
Committee (Committee on the Law of Contempt as it affects Tribunals of
Inquiry under the chairmanship of Salmon CJ, 1969 Cmnd Leo 78, para 31).
The Committee said that a witness could be bullied or unfairly led into
giving an account which was contrary to truth or which contained a start.
The witness could, in a television interview, commit himself to a view due
to tension by an inaccurate recollection of facts.   When later they have to
give evidence, they may feel bound to stick to what they have said in the
media interview.  The Phillimore Committee also accepted the above view
215

and were worried about television interview of witness, the authors pointed
out: (see 1974 Cmnd 5794, para 55).   That Committee stated:
“Television interview import added dangers of dramatic impact.  For
example, the ‘grilling’ on television of a person involved in a case
can seem to take the form of a cross-examination in Court.  It could
obviously create risk of affecting or distorting the evidence he might
give at the trial.   Such an interview could be regarded as ‘trial by
television’.”
The  Committee,  no  doubt,  agreed  that  interviews  make  a  useful
contribution to public information.
The authors say that the absence of prosecution for contempt may
elucidate that such interviews have not been treated as contempt.  But, the
authors, say there are dangers as in  AG(NSW) v. Mirror Newspapers Ltd.
(1980) (1) NSWLR 374 (CA).   There was a coroner’s inquiry into the death
of seven people during a fire accident  at an amusement centre.    One
witness, who had already given evidence, was widely reported as saying, in
effect, that an attendant had allowed two children to go on a ‘ghost train’
into the fire.    The Daily Telegraph, believing that the attendant would not
be giving evidence, published a detailed account by him in which he sought
to defend himself from the previous witnesses’ allegations.   Part of that
216

article stated that the publication in Daily Telegraph may sound that he (the
attendant) had sent the two kids to death.   But, he said, it was not so.   He
even had to wrestle with one young lad who was determined to follow his
mates into the fire and that he had to tear him from the car.    The Court of
Appeal held that the publication interfered with the course of justice and
was  contempt  and  fined  the  proprietors  in  a  sum of  10,000  Australian
dollars.
The  authors  say that  the  conducting  of interview, with a view  to
publication of ‘background’ material after the trial is generally regarded as
legitimate practice, but would amount to contempt if it could be shown to
have  been  of  a  ‘bullying’ kind  such  as  to  deter  witnesses  from  giving
evidence.
Payments to witnesses in current legal proceedings for their stories is
contrary to clause 8 of the (UK) Press Complaints Commission Code of
Practice.    (The  authors  provide  a detailed  discussion  on  ‘Payments  to
Witnesses’ pp. 408 to 410).   But the authors say (p. 409) that “such an
arrangement  could  amount  to  contempt  since  it  seems  to  provide  an
inducement to the witness to ‘tailor’ his evidence so as to ensure the more
financially lucrative result”
In the  trial of Jeremy Thorpe,  there were allegations  (the  authors
pointed out) there were allegations that the Sunday Telegraph agreed to pay
217

a fee to  Peter Bessel, a leading  witness,  for his  revelations  as a future
witness for a fee being reportedly contingent on a verdict of guilty.  This
was  condemned  by the  Press  Council.   Earlier,  on  a  similar  issue,  the
Attorney General promised to make changes in the law, but no such changes
were made probably because of action by the Press Council.
Borrie  and  Lowe  (p.  409-410)  state  that  “the  practice  of  paying
witness’s fee, the amount of which is contingent upon a particular verdict, is
undesirable as it is likely to create a risk of prejudice.   As we know from
the revelations published by the New Statesman (see AG v. New Statesman
and Nation Publishing Co.Ltd.: 1980 (1) All ER 644), the jurors in the
Thorpe trial were greatly influenced by the agreed payments to Bessell and
in any event, such agreements seem obvious inducements to witnesses to
embellish and tailor their evidence”.
In  the  post-consultation  Report  of  the  Lord  Chancellor’s  office,
(March, 2003), it was felt that legislation was not necessary and the media
agreed  that  a  self-regulation  procedure  could  be  evolved  which  must
incorporate well-settled principles.  By February 2003, the proposals made
by the media were accepted by Government.
218

NSW Law Commission in its Discussion Paper 43 (2000) in para 2.45
has enumerated a long list of publication which may be prejudicial to a
suspect or accused.
(i) a photograph of the accused where identity is likely to be an issue,
as in criminal cases;
(ii) suggestions that accused had previous convictions, or has been
charged for committing an offence and/or previously acquitted, or
has been involved in other criminal activity;
(iii)    suggestions that the accused has confessed to committing the
crime      in question;
(iv) suggestions that the accused is guilty or involved in the crime for
which he or she is charged or that the Jury should convict or acquit
the accused; and 
(v)    comments which engender sympathy or antipathy for the accused
and/or  which   disparage  the  prosecution  or  which  make
favourable  or  unfavourable  references  to  the  character  or
credibility of the accused or a witness.
India:
219

There  are  also  a  large  number  of  decisions  of the  Indian  Courts
falling under these very headings.  We do not want to add to the bulk of this
Report by referring to them.
In our country, lack of knowledge of the law of contempt currently
shows that there is extensive coverage of interviews with witnesses.  This is
highly objectionable even under current law, if made after the charge sheet
is filed.
This Chapter is, in fact, intended to educate the media and the public
that  what  is  going  on  at  present  in  the  media  may  indeed  be  highly
objectionable.  Merely because it is tolerated by the Courts, it may not cease
to be contempt.  
220

CHAPTER X
Recommendations for amending the provisions of the 
Contempt of Court Act, 1971
In this Chapter we shall refer to our recommendations for amendment
of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 on the basis of what we have discussed
in the earlier Chapters.
(1)  It is initially necessary to define “publication” as including publication
in print and electronic media, radio broadcast and cable television and the
world-wide web by insertion of an Explanation in clause(c) of Section 2 of
the principal Act, to enlarge the meaning of the word ‘publication’ as stated
above.  This proposal is contained in Section 3 of the Bill.
2 (a)    We have pointed out in the earlier Chapters that it is necessary to
create  a just  balance  between  the  freedom of  speech  and  expression
guaranteed in Article 19(1)(a) and the due process of  criminal justice
required for a fair criminal trial, as part of the administration of justice.  
Though Article 19(2) does not refer to the imposition of
reasonable restrictions for the purposes of administration of justice, the
reference in Article 19(2) that restrictions can be imposed for purpose of
the Contempt of Courts Act clearly indicates that the Contempt of Courts
221

Act, 1971 (sections 2, 3) take care of the protection of the administration
of justice and duecourse of justice.
222

Our  recommendation  must  naturally  be  intended  to  bring  the
provisions of Section 3, particularly, the Explanation to Section 3,
into  conformity  with  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
A.K.Gopalan v. Noordeen :1969(2) SCC 734  wherein, after referring
to freedom of speech and expression,  the Supreme Court held that
publications  made  after  the  arrest of a person  could be criminal
contempt if such publications prejudice any trial later in a criminal
court.   As  the  Explanation  now  stands,  ‘pendency  of  a  criminal
proceeding’ is defined in clause (B) as starting from the filing of a
charge  sheet  or  challan  or  issuance  of  summons  or  warrant  by  a
criminal  court.   The  Supreme  Court  in  the  above  case  held  that
publication made even after arrest and before filing of charge sheet
could also be prejudicial.  If so, that guarantee must be implied in the
‘due process’ under Article 21 as explained in Maneka Gandhi’s case
and to that extent, it is permissible to regulate publications by media
made after arrest even if such arrest has been made before the filing
of the charge sheet or challan. 
223

We  have  seen  that  in  U.K  and  several  countries,  a  criminal
proceeding  is treated as “active” if an arrest  is made.  This is to
accommodate the principle decided by the Scotland Court in Hall (see
Chapter  VI)  that  a  person  arrested  comes  immediately  within  the
protection of a Court for he has to be produced before a Court within
24  hours  of  the  arrest.   Taking  “arrest”  as  starting  point,  any
restriction on prejudicial publications will be reasonable if they have
to satisfy the due process requirement under Article 21 which, after
Maneka Gandhi’s case AIR 1978 SC 597, as that judgment requires
that the procedure protecting liberty must be fair, just and reasonable
and not arbitrary or violative of Article 14.
Therefore, in our view, the word ‘pending’ used in Section 3(1),(2)
and Explanation clauses (a) and (b) at different places must be substituted
by the word ‘active’ because the word ‘pending’ gives an impression that a
criminal case must be actually pending.  The word ‘active’ used in the U.K
Act,1981  and  in  the  Bill  annexed  to  the  Report  of  the  NSW  Law
Commission, 2003 in our opinion, is more apt and under the above Act and
Bill, a criminal proceeding is defined as being ‘active’ from the date of
arrest. 
224

We, therefore, recommend that the word ‘pending’ in Section 3(1),
(2) and Explanation, used at different places  must be substituted by the
word ‘active’.
(b) Further, the revised definition of the word ‘active’ must be applicable
not only for purposes of Section 3 but for the purposes of the entire Act.  In
fact, the word ‘pending’ has not been used in any other section of the Act
except sec 3. Some of the new provisions which we propose, use the word
‘active’  and hence the definition of the word ‘active’ must be applicable to
“all provisions of the Act” and not merely to sec 3. 
           These changes are proposed in Section 4 of the Bill.
3). So far as breach of  sec 3, as proposed, when even a prejudicial
publication is made after arrest or after a charge sheet is filed, or summons
or warrant is issued, at present, if there is criminal contempt of subordinate
courts, those courts have no power to punish for contempt but can only
make a reference to the High Court under sec 15(2).  This provision is good
except  that  in  the  special  case  of  contempt  by  publication  offending
provisions of sec 3(2) and Explanation (or rather even the existing section 3
(2) and Explanation), the procedure is cumbersome and time consuming.
Much damage by publication can result if the contempt power has to be
225

exercised by the High Court for purposes of sec 3(2) violations through a
reference to the High Court.
We are of that view, that a separate section has to be inserted (section
10A) for the purpose of enabling the Court to punish for criminal contempt
by publication under sub clause (ii) and (iii) of sec 2(c), so that action can
be taken directly in the High Court in the manner stated under sec 15(1)
either suo motu or as the application of any person – such as accused or
suspect or others affected by the prejudicial publication.  We are referring to
clause (1) of sec 2 here, and restricting the sub clauses (ii) and (iii) and
clause © which deal with publications.  We are not here concerned with
clause (i) of sec 2© for which sec 15(2) procedure by reference or motion
by Advocate General will continue to apply.
Further once we refer to clause (ii) and (iii) of sec 2©, it will take in
all criminal contempt as to publication falling under those sub clauses (ii)
and (iii) which are not protected by the various sections of the Act.  In
addition we provide that consent of the Advocate General as specified in sec
15(1). 
226

(4)  The next question is to provide something akin to Section 4(2) of the
U.K Act or Sections 7,8, 9 of the Bill attached to the NSW Report (2003).
We shall first refer to these provisions.
   (a)  Section 4(2) of UK Act, 1981, permits the Court to pass orders
postponing publication of reports of criminal cases which are active, if
such publication would create a “substantial risk of prejudice” to such a
proceeding or any imminent proceeding.  Section 4(2) is applicable to
civil  as  well  as  criminal  proceedings  which  are  ‘active’.   Our
recommendations here are confined only to publications affecting active
criminal proceedings. 
(b) We are not happy with the provision postponing ‘reporting’ of
court proceedings which are active as contained in Section 4(2) of the
U.K Act.  We are, in fact, concerned with publications which prejudice a
fair trial.
(c) Sections 7,8,9 of the NSW Bill deem  publications as amounting
to contempt if they create substantial risk of prejudice.  They do not
relate to postponement orders.  The Bill is in Annexure A to that Report
of the NSW Law Commission (2003).  But, Appendix B to that Bill
contains another draft Bill giving powers to court to regulate access to
court  records  or  reports  and  contains  a  provision  for  passing
227

‘suppression orders’ but the sections as proposed there do not refer to
substantial risk of prejudice by publications.
(d)  In our view, firstly, the  section  to be proposed  by us must  vest
powers in Court  to pass postponement orders as to prejudicial publication
of any matter relating to an active criminal proceeding and not merely to
reporting about the case as in Section 4(2) of the U.K Act. 
(e)  Further, in view of the interpretation of the words ‘substantial risk of
prejudice’ by English Courts as where ‘there is no substantial risk’ or ‘no
remote  risk’  and  the  absence  of  any  adjective  governing  the  word
‘prejudice’, we are of the view that instead of the words ‘substantial risk of
prejudice’ in Section 4(2) of the U.K Act, in the proposed section giving
powers  to  the  Court  to  pass  ‘postponement’  orders,  we  should  use  the
words:
     “real risk of serious prejudice”
so that the emphasis is not only on the word ‘risk’ but also on the word
‘prejudice’.
(f)  A  question  may be  asked  as  to  why we are  not  using  these  words
(significant  risk  of  serious  prejudice)  in  Section  3  which  deals  with
‘interference’ or ‘tending to interfere’ with the administration of justice in
sec 2 or the words ‘course of justice’ in Section 3.  
228

The  reason  is  that  the  words  used  in  sec  2©  and  3  define  what
publication  may  be  ‘criminal  contempt’  but  the  question  of  restricting
freedom of speech by passing an order of ‘prior restraint’ as in sec 4(2) of
the UK Act, 1981 requires more stringent conditions.  That is why, for
purposes of passing postponement orders as to publication, it is necessary to
use the words  “significant  risk  of serious  prejudice”.   Prior  restraint  as
pointed  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Reliance  Petrochemicals is  a  serious
encroachment on the right of the press for publication under Art 19(1)(a)
and cannot be interfered with merely because the publication interferes or
tends to interfere with the course of justice as stated in sec 2(c) or sec 3.
Prior restraint requires more stringent conditions.
(g) The next question is as to which Court should pass postponement
orders.  In our view, such powers cannot be vested in the subordinate courts
where the criminal proceedings are ‘active’. This is because under the 1971
Act, the subordinate courts  have no power to take action for contempt.
Under Section 15(2), they can only make a ‘reference’  to the High Court.
Further, the balancing of the rights of freedom of speech and the due
process right of the suspect/accused as explained in Maneka Gandh’s case
229

can be done more appropriately by the High Court which is a Constitutional
Court.
  The High Court for the purpose of passing postponement orders will
be a Bench of not less than two Judges. 
(h)   Postponement of publication does not mean result in an absolute
prohibition.  Initially, an order of postponement must be temporary, and can
be passedex parte and but must be made for a week enabling the media to
come forward for variation or cancellation.   Of course, the initial order of
restraint must be published in the Media, so that the media will have an
opportunity to know about the passing  of the  order and have the order
varied/cancelled. 
(i)  There is, however, danger of the postponement order lapsing at the
end of one week, if no application is filed for variation or modification by
the media and no variation/cancellation is granted in a week.  Hence, it is
necessary  to  provide  for  its  automatic  extension  by  law,  in  case  no
application is filed within one week or where the order is not varied or
cancelled within one week.  Of course, after such automatic extension also,
the media can apply for variation or cancellation. 
(j)  We, therefore, recommend insertion of Section 14A as stated in sec 6 of
the Bill annexed.
230

(4)   We  also  propose  Section  14B  under  which  any  breach  of  a
postponement order i.e. where  the media makes a publication in breach of
the postponement order, it will amount to contempt of court for which the
High Court may take action according to law for criminal contempt. (This is
also contained in Section 6 of the Bill):
We are using the word ‘according to law’ for the High Court may take
action under the Contempt of Court Act r under Art 215 of the Constitution
   (5)  We have proposed Section 14A and 14B as above for the purpose of
passing postponement orders in respect of publications, and breach of such
an order.  But, as stated in our discussion under sec above, a more important
need is the punishment for criminal contempt of a subordinate court where
criminal proceedings are active as stated in subsection (2) of section 3. 
 (6)  As far as applicability of the amending Act is concerned, it shall apply
to publications amounting to criminal contempt in respect of active criminal
proceedings  within  subsection  (2)  of  section  3,  made  after  the
commencement of the amending Act.  This is contained in sec 7 of the Bill.
A Draft Bill on these lines is herewith annexed.
(7) Media persons to be trained in certain aspect of law:
231

The  freedom  of  the  media  not  being  absolute,  media  persons
connected with the print and electronic media have to be equipped with
sufficient inputs as to the width of the right under Art 19(1)(a) and about
what  is  not  permitted  to  be  published  under  Art  19(2).   Aspects  of
constitutional law, human rights, protection of life and liberty, law relating
to defamation and Contempt of Court are important from the media point of
view.  
It  is  necessary  that  the  syllabus  in  Journalism  should  cover  the
various  aspects  of  law  referred  to  above.   It  is  also  necessary to  have
Diploma and Degree Course in Journalism and the Law.
We recommend accordingly.
(Justice M. Jagannadha Rao)
       Chairman
(R.L. Meena)
Vice-Chairman
(Dr. D.P. Sharma)
232

Member-Secretary        
233

ANNEXURE I
Contempt of Court (Amendment) Bill, 2006
An Act to amend the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (70 of
1971).
BE it enacted by Parliament in the fifty-seventh year of the Republic
of India, as follows:
Short title and commencement
1.(1) This  Act  may  be  called  THE  CONTEMPT  OF  COURTS
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 2006.
(2) It shall  come  into  force  on  such  date  as  may be  notified  by the
Government of India in the Official Gazette.
Definitions
2. In this Act, the words ‘Principal Act’ shall mean the Contempt of
Courts Act, 1971.
Amendment to section 2
234

3. In section 2 of the Principal Act, an Explanation shall be inserted
below clause (c) of section 2:
“Explanation: publication  includes  publication  in  print,  radio
broadcast,  electronic  media,  cable  television  network,  world  wide
web.”
Amendment to section 3 of the Principal Act
4.(a) In section 3, subsection (1) of the Principal Act, for the words 
“any civil or criminal proceeding pending at the time of publication,
if at that time he had no reasonable grounds for believing that the
proceeding was pending”
the following words shall be substituted, namely,
“any civil or criminal proceeding active at the time of publication, if
at  that  time  he  had  no  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  the
proceeding was active”
(b) In section 3, subsection (2) of the Principal Act, for the words
“any civil or criminal proceeding which is not pending”
the following words shall be substituted, namely,
235

“any civil or criminal proceeding which is not active”
(c) In  the  Explanation  below  subsection  (3)  for  the  words  “For  the
purposes of this section”, the words “for the purposes of this Act”
shall be substituted.
(d) In the Explanation, in clause (a),
(i) for the words, “is said  to be pending”  occurring before the
bracket and the word (A), the words “is said to be active”, shall
be substituted.
(ii) for the words, “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898” occurring
in clause B, the words “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973”
shall be substituted.
(iii) for  clause  (B)(i),  the  following  clause  (B)(i)  shall  be
substituted, namely,
“(i) where it relates to the commission of an offence, when a
person is arrested or when the chargesheet or challan is filed or
when the Court issues summons or warrant, as the case may be,
against the accused, whichever is earlier, and”.
(iv) for the words, “shall be deemed to continue to be pending”
occurring after the subclause (B)(ii) and the words “in the case
of a civil or criminal proceeding”, the words “shall be deemed
to continue to be active”, shall be substituted.
(e) In the Explanation, in clause (b), 
236

for the words,  “deemed to be pending”  occurring  after the words
“which has been heard and finally decided shall not be”, the words
“deemed to be active”, shall be substituted.
Insertion of section 10A
5. The following section shall be inserted after section 10, namely,
“Cognizance  of  criminal  contempt  of  subordinate  court  by
publication.
10A. Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  subsection  (2)  of
section 15, in respect of criminal contempt of courts subordinate to
the High Court arising out of publications falling within sub-clauses
(ii) and (iii) of clause (c) of section 2, the High Court may take action
on its own motion or on a motion made by the persons referred to in
subsection (1) of section 15.
Provided that it shall not be necessary to obtain the consent of the
Advocate  General  or  of  the  Law  Officer  notified  by  the  Central
Government in the  Official  Gazette as  stated  in subsection  (1)  of
section 15.”
6. Insertion of sections 14A and 14B
The  following  sections  shall  be  inserted  after  section  14  of  the
Principal Act, namely -
Orders  of  High  Court  for  postponement  of  prejudicial
publications by the media
237

14A(1)In any criminal proceedings which are active, the High Court may
issue a general direction ex parte, whenever it appears to it to be
necessary, that any matter the publication of which may cause real
risk of serious prejudice to the cause of such proceeding or to the
administration of justice in those proceedings or in any other criminal
proceedings or any part of such proceeding, active or imminent, shall
not be published by the media or any person for an initial period of
seven days from the date of its order or that such matter shall be
published  subject  to  conditions  and  the  High  Court  may  direct
publication of such an order.
(2) An order under subsection (1) may be passed by the High Court upon
an application by 
(a) the Advocate General or by a law officer referred to clause (c) of
subsection (1) of section 15, or 
(b) by a person who has been arrested or who being an accused in
such criminal proceeding, a chargesheet or challan has been filed
or summons or warrant has been issued by the Court against him,
or 
(c) by any person who is interested in the avoidance of the risk and
prejudice referred to subsection (1).
(3) An order of postponement of publication, with or without conditions,
passed under subsection (1), may be varied or cancelled by the High
Court at the instance of the representatives of the media or by any
other person interested in such variation or cancellation, by the filing
238

of an application  therefor in the  High  Court within  the period  of
seven  days  referred  to  in  subsection  (1)  or  after  the  period  of
extension of such order as provided in subsection (4).
(4) If no application is filed for such variation or cancellation within the
period of seven days as stated in subsection (2) or if filed, has not
been modified within the said period of seven days, the order passed
under subsection (1) shall stand extended beyond seven days unless
varied or cancelled in an application filed within the seven days or
filed after the seven days aforesaid.
Explanation:  For the purposes of this section and section 14B, the
High Court shall mean a Bench of the High Court of not less than two
Judges.
Action for criminal  contempt for violation  of an order passed
under section 14A
14B. Where  any  person  violates  any  order  of  postponement  of
publication or the conditions laid down in orders passed under section
14A, the High Court may initiate proceedings for criminal contempt
in the High Court, in accordance with law and pass such order as to
punishment as it may deem fit.
Applicability of the Act
“7. The provisions of the Principal Act as amended by this Act
shall  apply  to  publications  by  any  person  in  connection  with  a
239

criminal proceeding which is active as stated in subsection  (2) of
section 3 of the principal Act or to criminal proceedings which are
active or imminent as stated in section 14A of the principal Act.”
240