LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
201ST REPORT 
ON
EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE TO VICTIMS OF
ACCIDENTS AND DURING EMERGENCY MEDICAL
CONDITION AND WOMEN UNDER LABOUR
( Draft Model Law Annexed )
AUGUST 2006

JUSTICE M. JAGANNADHA RAO LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
CHAIRMAN SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI-110001
TEL: 23384475
FAX: 23073864, 23388870
E-MAIL: ch.lc@sb.nic.in
RESIDENCE: 1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI-110011
TEL: 23019465
F.No.6(3)125/2006-LC(LS)  31st August, 2006
Dear Shri Bhardwaj Ji,
Sub: 201st Report on “Medical Treatment after Accidents and During
Emergency Medical Condition and Women in Labour”.
The  Supreme  Court  of  India  as  long  back  as  1989  observed  in
Parmanand Katara v. Union of India AIR 1989 SC 2039 that when accidents
occur and the victims are taken to hospitals or to a medical practitioner, they
are not taken care of for giving emergency medical treatment on the ground
that the case is a medico-legal case and the injured person should go to a
Government  Hospital.    The  Supreme  Court  emphasized  the  need  for
making  it  obligatory  for  hospitals  and  medical  practitioners  to  provide
emergency medical care.   This is not the only reason for not attending on
injured persons or persons in a medical emergency, for sometimes such
persons are turned out on the ground that they are not in a position to make
payment immediately or that they have no insurance or that they are not
members  of any scheme which  entitles  them to  medical  reimbursement.
The Supreme Court reiterated its views in  Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor
Samithi v. State of West Bengal, 1996 (4) SCC 37 and National Consumer
Redressal Commission has also decided in like manner in  Pravat Kumar
Mukerjee v.  Ruby General Hospital (25.4.2005).   The Law Commission
has, therefore, taken up the subject suo motu in view of the observations of
the Supreme Court in Parmanand Katara.
2

Indifference  towards  victims of accidents  and  those  in emergency
medical conditions and even women under labour who are about to deliver
is not peculiar to India but is prevalent in other countries also.   In the
United  States,  there  is  a  statute  called  EMTALA  (Emergency  Medical
Treatment and Labour Act) which was enacted by introducing it in 1986
into the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1985 (COBRA).
This Act is also known as the Patient Anti-Dumping Act.  It imposed a
mandatory  duty  on  hospitals  to  give  medical  treatment  to  patients  in
emergency medical condition and women under labour, failing which the
defaulter  can  be  punished  under  the  criminal  law.    Under  that  law,  a
hospital must screen and stabilize such persons and then provide emergency
medical treatment.   After screening, if the hospital has no facilities, it must
transfer the person to another hospital having necessary facilities.   In this
Report, we have adopted several provisions of EMTALA and made suitable
changes to suit our conditions.
We have provided that no hospital or medical practitioner shall refuse
to  provide  emergency  medical  care  to  victims  of  accidents  or  those  in
emergency medical condition on the ground that it is a medico-legal case or
that the person is not able to pay immediately or that he has no medical
insurance  or  other  reimbursement  facilities.    If  they  refuse  without
justifiable reason, that will be an offence.   
Hospitals  and  medical  practitioners  have  to  initially  screen  the
persons to decide if the persons require emergency medical treatment.   If
they do not require such treatment, the further provisions of the Act will not
apply.   If it is  determined that the persons  require emergency medical
treatment, first they have to be stabilized and thereafter, they must be given
treatment.    If the hospital or medical practitioner does not have facilities
for screening,  stabilization  or emergency medical  treatment,  the persons
have to be transferred to another hospital or to a medical practitioner having
facilities.    As  to  what  safeguards  have  to  be  taken  while  making  the
transfer, as to calling for the services of an ambulance or other vehicle, as to
how the persons should be taken care of during transit, all these matters are
provided in detail in the Bill annexed to the Report.   The hospitals and
medical  practitioners  have  to  maintain  registers  as  to  screening,
stabilization, treatment or transfer.
3

We have also provided that the States must publish a scheme for
reimbursement of expenditure incurred by hospitals, medical practitioners
or  for  ambulances  and  the  States  must  allocate  separate  funds  for  this
purpose.    The duty of the States in this behalf can be traced to Art. 21 as
well as to Directive Principles of State Policy enunciated in the Constitution
of India.
We have prepared the Report annexing a Model Bill to be enacted by
the States as we are aware that the subject of ‘hospitals’ falls within Entry of
State List, Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and, therefore, it will be for
the State Legislatures to enact law.   The Model Bill, if passed by the States,
will also apply to medical practitioners incidentally.   
A law to compel hospitals  and  medical  practitioners  to attend  on
victims  of  accidents  those  in  emergency  medical  condition  and  women
under labour is one of urgent necessity.
We are sure that upon implementation of the Report and the Bill by
the  States,  the  huge  gap  in  the  law  in  this  behalf  will  be  legislatively
plugged.
Yours sincerely,
(M. Jagannadha Rao)
Shri H.R. Bhardwaj
Union Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi.
4

INDEX TO CONTENTS
Chapter Title Page
I Introductory  3 –
11
II Current state of emergency medical
care and laws in India 12 – 27
III Emergency Medical Care procedures
in Hospitals in other jurisdictions 28 – 52
IV Ambulance Services in other 53 – 76
Jurisdictions
V Recommendations for Monitoring
Medical Care by Hospitals and
Medical Practitioners 77 – 97
Annexure - Model Law 98 – 111
5

Chapter I
Introductory
The  Law  Commission  of  India  has  taken  up  the  subject  of
‘Emergency Medical Care to Victims of Accidents’ and other Emergencies’
in  the  light  of  the  observations  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  in
Paramanand Katara vs. Union of India: AIR 1989 SC 2039 and in Paschim
Banga Khel Mazdoor Samiti vs.  State of West Bengal: 1996(4) SCC 37
regarding the refusal of hospitals to grant emergency relief to patients who
are injured in accidents and are in emergency medical condition.  There are
also certain judgments of the National Consumer Redressal Forum in this
behalf.  
The Commission is aware of the ground reality that in spite of the
observations  of the Supreme Court  and certain  provisions  of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, it is a fact of life that there is no proper pre-hospital
medical care and that private hospitals and medical practitioners who are
nearest to the place of accident refuse to admit victims even for emergency
medical care, on the plea that the cases are medico-legal cases and they
direct the victims to go to government hospitals, howsoever far they may be.
Some private hospitals refuse purely on monetary grounds, if the victim is
either poor or is not immediately in possession of funds.
The  medical  literature  on  the  subject  states  that  the  ‘GOLDEN
HOUR’ is the first hour immediately after the accident in which ‘emergency
6

medical care’ is necessary and most victims die if no such care is available
or is not given soon after the accident.  The purpose of emergency medical
care is to ‘stabilize’ the patient and this, unfortunately, is not done.  
In the public interest case filed in the Supreme Court on the need for
emergency care of victims of accident, the Supreme Court of India stated in
Parmand Katra v. Union of India : AIR 1989 SC 2039 as follows:
“Every injured  citizen  brought  for medical treatment should
instantaneously be given medical aid to preserve life and thereafter
the procedural criminal law should be allowed to operate in order to
avoid negligent death.  There is no legal impediment for a medical
professional  when  he  is  called  upon  or  requested  to  attend  to  an
injured  person  needing  his  medical  assistance  immediately.   The
effort to save the person should be the top priority not only of the
medical professional but even of the police or any other citizen who
happens to be connected with the matter or who happens to notice
such an incident or a situation.”
“Preservation of human life is of paramount importance. That
is so on account of the fact that once life is lost, the status quo ante
cannot be restored as resurrection is beyond the capacity of man. The
patient whether he be an innocent person or be a criminal liable to
punishment under the laws of the society, it is the obligation of those
who are incharge of the health of the community to preserve life so
that the innocent may be protected and the guilty may be punished.
Social laws do not contemplate death by negligence to tantamount to
legal punishment.  A doctor at the Government hospital positioned to
7

meet the State obligation is, therefore, duty bound to extend medical
assistance for preserving life.  Every doctor whether at a Government
hospital or otherwise has the professional obligation to extend his
services with due expertise for protecting life.  No law or State action
can  intervene  to  avoid/delay  the  discharge  of  the  paramount
obligation  cast  upon  members  of  the  medical  profession.  The
obligation  being total, absolute and paramount, laws  of procedure
whether  in  statutes  or  otherwise  which  would  interfere  with  the
discharge of this obligation cannot be sustained and must, therefore,
give way. Every doctor should be reminded of his total obligation and
be assured of the position that he does not contravene the law of the
land  by  proceeding  to  treat  the  injured  victim  on  his  appearance
before  him  either  by  himself  or  being  carried  by  others.   Zonal
regulations and classifications cannot also operate as fetters in the
process of discharge of the obligation and irrespective of the fact
whether  under  instructions  or  rules,  the  victim  has  to  be  sent
elsewhere  or  how  the  police  shall  be  contacted,  the  guideline
indicated  in  the  1985  decision  of  the  Committee  on  Forensic
Medicine (set up by the Ministry of Home Affairs of the Government
of India) is to become operative.”
8

“It is expected of the members of the legal profession which is
the other honourable profession to honour the persons in the
medical  profession  and  see that  they are not  called  to give
evidence so long as it is not necessary.  It is also expected that
where  the facts  are so  clear it  is expected that  unnecessary
harassment of the members of the medical profession either by
way  of  requests  for  adjournment  or  by  cross  examination
should be avoided so that the apprehension that the men in the
medical profession have which prevents them from discharging
their  duty  to  a  suffering  person  who  needs  their  assistance
utmost is removed and a citizen needing the assistance of a
man in the medical profession receives it.”
In Paramanand Katara v. Union of India 1989 SC 2039, the Supreme
Court observed that,
“every  injured  citizen  brought  for  medical  treatment  should
instantaneously be given medical aid to preserve life and thereafter
the procedural criminal law should be allowed to operate in order to
avoid negligent death” ……
“It is further submitted that it is for the Government of India to
take  necessary  and  immediate  steps  to  amend  various
provisions  of  law  which  come  in  the  way  of  government
doctors as well as other doctors in private hospitals or public
hospitals to attend to the injured/serious persons immediately
9

without waiting for the police report as completion of police
formality.   They should be free from fear that they would be
unnecessarily  harassed  or  prosecuted  for  doing  their  duty
without first complying with the police formalities.  It is further
submitted that a doctor should not feel himself handicapped in
extending immediate help in such cases fearing that he would
be harassed by the police or dragged to court in such a case.  It
is submitted that Evidence Act should also be so amended as to
provide that the doctor’s diary maintained in regular course by
him in respect of the accident cases would be accepted by the
courts in evidence without insisting the doctors being present
to  prove  the  same  or  subject  himself  to  cross-
examination/harassment for long period of time.”
In  Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity v.  State of West Bengal,
1996 (4) SCC 37, the Supreme Court further held (para 9) that,
“in this context Shri Dhavan has invited our attention to the recent
developments that have taken in this field in the United States.  There
it  was  found  that  private  hospitals  were  turning  away  uninsured,
indigent persons in need or urgent medical care and these patients
were  often  transferred  to,  or dumped  on  public  hospitals  and  the
resulting  delay  or  denial  of  treatment  had  sometimes  disastrous
consequences.  To meet this situation the US Congress has enacted
the  Consolidated  Omnibus  Budget  Reconciliation  Act  of  1986
(COBRA) to prevent this practice of dumping of patients by private
hospitals.   By the said Act all hospitals that receive medicare benefits
10

and maintain  emergency rooms are required to  perform two tasks
before they may transfer or discharge any individual:
(i) the hospital must perform a medical screening examination of
all prospective patients, regardless of their ability to pay;
(ii) if  the  hospital  determines  that  a  patient  suffers  from  an
emergency condition the law requires the hospital to stabilize
that condition and the hospital cannot transfer or discharge an
unstabilise  patient  unless  the  transfer  or  discharge  is
appropriate as defined by the statute.
Provision  is  made  for  imposing  penalties  against  hospitals  or
physicians  that  negligently  violate  COBRA.     In  addition,  the
individual  who  suffers  personal  harm  as  a  direct  result  of  a
participating hospital’s violation can bring a civil suit for damages
against that hospital.”
The Supreme Court further held (para 9) that,
“the Constitution envisages the establishment of a welfare State at the
federal level as well as at the State level.   In a welfare State the
primary duty of the government is to serve the welfare of the people.
Providing adequate medical facilities for the people is an essential
part of the obligations undertaken by the government in a welfare
State.    The  government  discharges  the  obligation  by  running
hospitals and health centers which provide medical care to the person
11

seeking to avail of those facilities.   Art. 21 imposes an obligation on
the State to safeguard the right to life of every person.”
The  Supreme  Court  referred  to  the  Union  of  India  through  an
affidavit) in  Paramanand Kumar Katara v.  Union of India, AIR 1989 SC
2039 (para 6) as follows, namely, that:
“there are no provisions in the Indian Penal code, Criminal Procedure
Code, Motor Vehicles Act, etc., which prevent doctors from promptly
attending on seriously injured persons and accident cases before the
arrival  of  police  and  thus  taking  into  cognizance  of  such  cases,
preparation of FIR and other formalities by the police.   However, the
deponent most humbly submits that the respondent shall always abide
by the directions and guidelines given by the Hon’ble Court in the
present case.”
Though the life and liberty of a person is very much protected under
Part III of the Constitution (under Art. 21), and though there is a Supreme
Court  direction  that  in  all  accident  cases  irrespective  of  the  police
complaint, it is the fundamental duty on the part of the hospitals (where the
injured were taken) to attend on the patients, unfortunately nothing is done
in the matter.   As a result, many people have been dying without any care
or attention.
Doctors  point  out  that  at least  50 per  cent  of the fatality can  be
averted if the victims are admitted to a hospital within the first one hour.
12

For an accident victim, it is important that he is provided basic first aid
which enables him to survive till he reaches the hospital.
With  increasing  vehicle  population,  there  is  an  ever-increasing
number of accidents on our roads.  Though our vehicles travel much more
slowly compared to global standards, our accident rate per 1000 vehicles is
among the highest in the word.  
The National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission in  Pravat
Kumar  Mukherjee vs.  Ruby  General  Hospital  &  Others (25.4.2005)
declared that a hospital is duty bound to accept accident victims and patients
who are  in critical  condition  and that  it cannot  refuse  treatment on the
ground  that  the  victim is  not  in  a position  to  pay the  fee  or  meet  the
expenses  or on the  ground  that there  is no  close relation  of the  victim
available who can give consent for medical treatment.  Sumanta Mukherjee,
a 20 year old student was injured when a Calcutta Tramway Corporation
bus hit his motorcycle.  The victim was taken to the nearest hospital, the
Ruby General Hospital.  The victim was conscious when he reached the
hospital and showed the doctors his medi-claim policy insuring him for Rs.
65,000/-.  He assured the hospital that all the bills would be cleared and
requested that treatment be given.  The doctors started emergency treatment
but soon demanded Rs.15,000/- from the persons who brought Mukherjee
in.  Those persons immediately pooled Rs.2,000/- and informed that they
had contacted  the parents of the victim and the parents were willing to pay
the balance.  However, since the amount of Rs.15,000/- was not arranged,
the hospitals discontinued treatment.  The victim died.
13

The National Consumer Commission while imposing damages in a
sum of Rs.10 lakhs on the Hospital observed  that doctors at the hospitals
cannot first demand fees before agreeing to treat the patient and they cannot
also insist on consent of relatives of the victim before starting emergency
treatment.  The National Commission relied on Paramanand Katara decided
by the Supreme Court, referred to above.  It held that the preservation of
human life is of paramount importance.  That is also in consonance with the
Code of Medical Ethics.  Recovery of fees can wait, but treatment cannot be
denied.
The  Supreme  Court  in  Indian  Medical  Association vs.
V.S.Shanta:1995(6) SCC. 651 observed that a hospital has generally two
categories  of patients, those who pay and those who are treated free, the
free patients acquire the status of consumers because it is deemed that the
treatment to free patients is deemed to be met by the paying patients.
In  view  of  the  above  judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court  and  the
National  Consumer  Redressal  Forum  and  the  fact  that  there  is  no
appropriate legislation on the subject, the Law Commission of India has
taken up the subject  suo motu.  It proposes to give recommendations and
also a draft Model Bill for the purpose of emergency treatment of victims.
The Bill will cover medical treatment to victims of all types of emergencies
requiring immediate medical help, including motor, fire and other accidents,
which take place during earthquakes, floods, etc. It can also be in respect of
a woman under labour.
14

Chapter II
Current state of emergency medical care and laws in India
Accidents  where  victims  require  emergency  medical  care  are  not
confined  to  motor  accidents.   Emergencies  may  arise  due  to  motor
accidents, fire, floods, cyclone, earthquakes etc. or even sudden collapse of
victims or emergent deliveries in pregnancy.
Among these, road accidents, however, contribute the largest number
of deaths or injuries.  These accidents are increasing at an alarming rate of
3% annually.  About 10.1% of all deaths in India are due to accidents and
injuries.   A vehicular accident is reported every 3 minutes and a death,
every 10 minutes on our records.  During 1998, nearly, 80,000 lives were
lost and 330,000 people were injured.  Of these, 78% were persons in the
age group of 20-44 years.  A trauma-related death occurs in India every 1.9
minutes.  The majority of road accident victims are pedestrians, two wheeler
riders and bicyclists, passengers by motor vehicles, as cited in the paper
(2006) submitted by Ms. Shradd Deshmukh, ILS, Law College, Pune on
‘Emergency Medical Aid to Victims’, to the Law Commission.
The World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention released by the
WHO on World Health Day (7th April, 2004) stated that around 12 lakh
people die each year on account of accidents globally.
In the year 2004, the National Human Rights Commission constituted
an Expert Group to study the existing system for emergency medical care in
15

India to suggest appropriate methods of emergency medical care, which
should be developed by different States/Union-Territories and their essential
components.  The Group submitted a Report on 7th April 2004.  It reviewed
the existing scenario and the Centralised Accident and Trauma Services
(ATS) and stated  that nearly 4 lakh persons loose their lives annually due to
injuries, nearly 75 lakh persons are hospitalized and three and half lakh
persons who receive minor injuries get emergency care at various places in
India.  However, present Emergency Medical Support (EMS) in the country
is functioning sub-optimally and requires upgradation.  The Report revealed
the  lacunae,  which  exist  in  the  present  EMS  and  made  a  number  of
recommendations for implementation in the short term and in the long-run.
These recommendations were sent to the Health Services and the States and
UTs.  (Medical Relief to Road Accident Victims submitted by Devanshi
Nijhara, ILS Law College Pune, to the Law Commission).  Text of full
Report of NHRC titled “Emergency Medical Services in India – Present
Status and Recommendations for Improvement” is published in ‘Journal of
the National Human Rights Commission’ vol.3, 2004.
Government of India has accorded permission for the establishment
of  100  Emergency  Accident  Relief  Centres  in  all  the  National
Highways/State Highways at a distance of 50 km each to give timely first
aid  to  accident  victims  and  to  arrange  for  further  medical  treatment  in
hospitals.  This is a unique programme implemented by the Government
jointly with private hospitals, sponsors etc.  Out of the 100 centres targeted,
77 are now functioning.  Among the centres now functioning, 41 are fully
financed by private hospitals and institutions while the remaining 36 are
partly sponsored  by the  Government  and  provide  a  monthly  support  of
16

Rs.40,000/-  or  the  actual  expenditure  incurred  by  these  sponsors  (not
exceeding Rs. 40,000/- .  During the year 2004, with timely medical aid,
these centres  are said  to have  saved  19,595 lives,  treated  6,400  serious
injured  cases  and  13,195  persons  with  minor  injuries.   (ibid,  Devanshi
Nijhara’s Paper).
The Indian Emergency Journal (Aug., 2005) in its Editorial says:
“The fact is that 80,000 people are killed in accidents every year ….
At least 30 to 45 minutes elapse between the time of a crash and
arrival at hospital.  12 percent of institutions in the trauma-care-sector
have no access  to  ambulance.   Only 50 per cent  of the available
ambulance services possess the acute-care facilities needed to keep an
accident victim alive during transportation…  And only 4 per cent of
personal staffing these services (have certified formal training).
National  Toll  Free  Number  108  and  Ambulances  &  Identifying
Hospitals: (Hindu dated 4th July 2006, p.12)
“Ambulances  with  state  of  art  equipment  would,  it  is  stated,  be
deployed by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) for every 50
km on completed stretches of highways entrusted to them.
A national toll-free telephone number 108, will be earmarked (it has
already been done in Andhra Pradesh) to which information on accidents
can  be  passed  on,  immediately  by  passengers  or  passersby.   This  was
decided  at  a meeting  to draw a road  map to develop  an integrated  and
17

comprehensive system of trauma care by the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
The Department of Economic Affairs of the Union Finance Ministry
and the Department of Road Transport and Highways will jointly devise an
insurance-funded  payment for  the  treatment  of  victims  of  hit  and  run
accidents.
Under  the  scheme,  the  Health  and  Family  Welfare  Ministry  will
identify distinct Government Hospitals near the National Highways, for a
time-bound  upgradation  of  trauma  care  facilities.   They  would  also
standardize the configuration of ambulances with the latest equipment and
draw up qualification for the staff to be deployed on them.  This is to ensure
that  staff  would  be  able  to  stabilize  the  condition  of  victims  prior  to
hospitalization.
The meeting was attended by senior officers of the Department of
Road  Transport  and  Highways,  National  Highways  Authority  of  India,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Economic Affairs,
(Insurance Division) and Ministry of Telecommunication.
The  other  decisions  include  gradual  extension  of  deployment  of
ambulances  to  national  highways  under  construction,  provision  of
ambulances to States, NGOs.”
Tamil Nadu State : Road Safety Council, Road Safety Fund & Identification
of hospitals on Highways
18

In Tamil Nadu, Government has established under section 215 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and appointed a Road Safety Commissioner who
has various duties including accident relief.
A Road Safety Fund has been created during the year 2000 to fund
Road  Safety  Activation.   Allocations  will  be  made  to  the  fund  from
compounding  fees  and  spot  fines  collected  by  Transport  and  Police
Departments. The fund will be administered by a committee chaired by the
Home Secretary.
The  Highway  Patrol  force  is  proposed  to  be  re-organised  by
integrating  it  with  traffic  accident  posts  and  linking  with  Emergency
Accident  Relief Centres  (EARC).  80 stretches  have been  identified  for
Highway Patrol with 160 teams by the Police Department and a concurrent
team to co-ordinate with the Highway Patrol Team.
The  Tamil  Nadu  Government  has  identified  Emergency   Relief
Centres (ARCs) on mega highways in Tamil Nadu and has proposed such
centres for every 50 Kms on the National Highways in the State.  These
Centres can be contacted by dialing the  toll free number 1033 from any
landline phone near accident spot.  A fully equipped  ambulance  with a
trained paramedic is always on standby to respond to such calls.  Victims
are transported to the nearest hospitals free of charge.
A  large  number  of  hospitals,  about  75  have  been  identified  (see
http://www.tn.gov.in/sta/roads.htm) and 7 more are proposed.
19

The Basic feature of the scheme is to establish 100 emergency ARCs
on  National  Highways/State  highways  throughout  Tamil  Nadu.   These
centers are operated by leading hospitals in the area.  It is an example of
public-private partnership model. The starting infrastructure like cubicle,
ambulance, etc., is provided by the sponsoring agency/hospital. The local
Regional Transport offices help in getting telephone and water/Electricity
connections. Some Centres are fully sponsored where the full maintenance
cost  including  salary,  fuel,  medicine  etc.  are  borne  by  the  sponsoring
hospitals.
Some  Centres  are  sponsored  where  the  staff  is  provided  by  the
hospitals and maintenance expenditure is given by the State Government.
To establish any new Centre, preference is given to full sponsorship.  In
case there is no sponsor ready to take the full expenditure, Government will
provide  the  maintenance  expenditure.   As  on  27.1.2004,  there  are  75
Centres functioning and 25 more Centres are proposed.  It is stated that as
on 1.9.2004, 16,326 lives have been saved.
Andhra Pradesh : Satyam EMRI : Toll Free No.108 and Ambulances:
Satyam group who are leaders in computer technology have set up the
Emergency Management Research Institute (EMRI), a non-profit society,
for round-the clock emergency response service.
The  Andhra  Pradesh  Government  in  conjunction  with  Ministry of
Communication, Government of India, has allocated the free toll telephone
number 108 (on the model of 911 in USA). 108 will be uniform across the
country.  The Hyderabad EMRI Institute’s primary objective is to aid the
20

needy in emergencies like Medical, Fire, Accident, etc. by providing timely
attention and support.
The Project was structured to be carried out in phases, to facilitate a
planned rollout of emergency services across the State of Andhra Pradesh.
To  start  with,  the  cities  of  Hyderabad,  Secunderabad,  Vishakhapatnam,
Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Warangal have these ambulances.  This scheme
is stated to be the first of its kind in India.
In the second phase, the scheme will cover most of the towns in
Andhra Pradesh.
Technical challenges include:
System Integration of disparate system of multiple vendors.
Integrating EMRI applications with NORTEL.
It  was  decided  to  go  ahead  with  closed  Applications  Call  system  and
Contraclosed Dispatching System, to be implemented in the first phase and
co-ordinating it into a Distributor Call –Taking and Distributor Dispatching
System in latter phases, covering the entire State.
The  system  integrator,  which  is  a  company  known  as  GTL,  has
studied the business challenges and delivered the following solutions:
(1) All calls  for emergency (Hyderabad  and other … locations)
will land in Communication Server 1000 M at Hyderabad Call
Centre through BSNL Network.
21

(2) Communication Server 1000 M and Symposium Call Centre
Server will route the call to the respective available Agent/Call
taker at Hyderabad.
(3) The Call Despatcher, located at Hyderabad shall dispatch the
calls for respective regions using PSTN/Wireless Network.
(4) The agent will be able to transfer or conference a live-call with
a call despatcher.
The Emergency Response Vehicles are fitted with GPS system for
mapping and tracking.  EMRI had signed a memorandum of understanding
with  the  Andhra  Pradesh  Government  for  a  public-private  partnership
initiative.
A Journal called, India Emergency Journal, (a quarterly) was also
released.
There  is  a  proposal  to  set  up  an  Indian  Emergency  Management
Authority  (IEMA)  at  the  national  level  to  enable  State  Governments  to
operate emergency response centers for promoting and enhancing public
safety by providing legal, financial and administrative policy framework.
It is stated that the call centre on Medchal Road (Byrraju Foundation)
is receiving on an average 2,200 calls per day from various parts of the twin
cities.  During the first 45 days, they received more than 1,00,600 calls and
they saved 375 lives. Two-thirds of calles were accident related.
Presently, 40 responders work in three shifts at the call centres.
22

30 Ambulances and an equal number of responders (on two-wheelers)
are stationed at vantage points throughout the city.
The  EMRI  Ambulances  are  equipped  with  automated  external
defillibrator with multi-para monitors, oxygen manifold system and ‘Bord
Avion’ ventilators.
They are equipped with extricate tools, fire extinguishers and rescue
blankets to help the victim.
Current Legal Framework:
So far as current legal framework is concerned, in spite of the fact
that rash and negligent driving of a motor vehicle falls within the scope of
sec. 304-A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 where imprisonment may go
upto 2 years accidents due to negligent driving of motor vehicles have not
stopped.  Of course if it amounts to culpable homicide or murder under
section 299 read with section 300, the punishment under sections 302 or
304 may extend to life imprisonment or 10 years.
Initially, in 1978, a Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha and was
passed on 23.2.1978 which referred to amendment of section 304-A.  It not
only  recommended  increase  in  punishment  from  2  years  to  5  years,  it
proposed a new section 304B for drivers who runaway without informing
police  within  a  reasonable  time,  that  the  punishment  must  be  7  years
imprisonment.
23

This Bill was not passed by the then Lok Sabha on account of its
dissolution.
Later, the Bill was referred to the Law Commission and in the 156th
Report the above amendments were reiterated.  So far as section 304B is
concerned,  because  another  section  with  that  number  had  already  been
inserted, the Commission recommended a change in the number as section
304B.
The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 contains a whole chapter on “Accident
Compensation” which includes a provision for no fault liability, currently
fixed at Rs.50,000/- if death is caused or Rs.25,000/- if it causes injury.
This is intended to help tide over immediate financial problems.  There is,
of course, provision for compensation for negligently killing or injuring any
person.   There  is  vast  legal  literature  as  to  the  manner  of  computing
compensation.  Under an ‘Act-policy’ provision contained in the said Act,
Insurance Companies which issue policies have to cover certain mandatory
risks.   Lok  Adalats  and  Motor  Accident  Claim  Tribunals,  all  over  the
country provide remedies for payment of compensation for death or injury.
In the 178th Report of the Law Commission (2001), a lacuna in the
law pointed by the High Courts  in several judgments was sought  to be
remedied.  But  Parliament  has  not  yet  implemented  the  same
recommendation.  We propose to reiterate that amendment.  The problem is
that if a person who is injured and has claimed compensation dies as a
consequence of the injury, while the claim is pending before the Claims
Tribunal, the proceedings abate and the deceased’s estate represented by his
24

legal representatives get nothing.  The benefit of the abatement goes to the
tort-feasor.  This is happening in a number of cases.  The Law Commission
has, therefore, recommended an amendment which allows the proceedings
to be continued by the legal heirs of the injured person who has died during
the pendency of the litigation.
So far as ‘emergency medical aid’ is concerned, we have referred to
the judgment of the Supreme Court in  Parmanend Katara and other cases
decided by the National Consumer Redressal Forum.  Apart from these,
there are some special provisions introduced into the Motor Vehicle Act,
1988.
Section 134 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 imposes a duty on the
driver of the vehicle and of the doctor and hospital who are approached.
Section 187 creates an offence if sec 134 is not complied with.   Section 134
reads as follows:
“Section  134:  Duty of Driver in  case  of accident and injury to a
person:
When any person is injured or any property of a third party is
damaged  as  a  result  of  an  accident  in  which  a  motor  vehicle  is
involved, the driver of the vehicle or other person in charge of the
vehicle – 
(a) unless it is not practicable to do so on account of mob fury or
any other reason beyond his control, to take all reasonable steps
to secure medical attention for the injured person, by conveying
him to the nearest medical practitioner or hospital, and it shall
25

be  duty of every registered medical practitioner or the doctor
on duty in the hospital immediately to attend to the injured
person and render medical aid or treatment without waiting for
any  procedural  formalities, unless  the  injured  person  or  his
guardian, in case he is a minor, desires otherwise;
(b) give on demand by a police officer, any information required
by  him  or,  if  no  police  officer  is  present,  report  the
circumstances of the occurrence, including the circumstances,
if  any,  for  not  taking  reasonable  steps  to  secure  medical
attention  as  required  under  clause  (a)  at  the  nearest  police
station as soon as possible, and in any case within twenty-four
hours of the occurrence ;
(c) give the following information in writing to the insurer, who
has issued the certificates of insurance, about the occurrence of
the accident, namely:- 
(i) Insurance policy number and period of its validity;
(ii) Date, time and place of accident;
(iii) Particulars  of  the  persons  injured  or  killed  in  the
accident;
(iv) Name of the driver and the particulars of driving licence.
Explanation:  For the purposes of this section, the expression “driver”
includes the owner of the vehicle.”
Under section 187 of the said Act, whoever fails to comply with the
provisions of the various clauses of section 134, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with which
may extent to Rs.500/- or with both.  If it is a second time such an offence is
26

committed by a person, the punishment by imprisonment may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend up Rs. 1000/- or with both.
But, in a large number of cases, which are known as he ‘hit and run’
cases, the driver who runs away under cover of darkness or when he speeds
up and runs away or when there is nobody in the vicinity to note down the
number  of the  vehicle,  or where   the injured  person  not  being  in a fit
condition to note the number, the unfortunate position is that the driver or
the vehicle number is not traceable.  In such situations, the above provisions
of sec 134 or 187 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 are not helpful.  The
serious apathy of the runaway tort teaser cannot be easily remedied.
Further, the above provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act do not cover
accidents due to other transport vehicles, like carts, cycle rickshaw, etc.  Nor
does it cover victims of fire, flood, etc.
In addition, passers by who witness the accident fear harassment by
police and are not willing to take the victim to a hospital or report to the
police.  They do not want to be called to the police station or to the Court
for their statements or evidence to be recorded.
Pre-hospital Care: Equipped Ambulances and transport
The British Medical Journal noted in one of its reviews on ‘trauma’
issues that society seems to accept a lower standard of safety for road users
than for other modes of transport.  In India, the problem is more acute due to
shortage  of trained surgeons  to handle accident  trauma, poor diagnostic
27

infrastructure in government hospitals and because of grossly insufficient
ambulance  services  in  rural  and  semi-urban  areas.   Trained  personnel
staffing professional ambulance services will make a world of difference.
The British Journal states that for accident victims, the  golden hour is a
continuous process beginning with the care that is given in the ambulance
en route to hospital; this protection is vital for survival rates.
Dr. P.V. Jayashankaran and Dr. P.C. Raja Ravi Verma, in an article in
the  ‘Hindu’  magazine  section  (dated  Oct.  16,  2005)  have,  after  giving
statistics about accidents globally, and in India and Tamil Nadu state are as
follows:
“…. the chances of survival are bleak as we truly lack an awareness
of the most important service, the pre-hospital care’.
‘….. any tragic accident can be construed to be a success or failure
within the first 10 minutes of medical attention as this is the time
when the most important decisions are to be taken.  It is here that the
concept of the  Golden Hour comes into play.  The concept can be
better understood if one were to learn the primary (Trimodal) causes
of death in major accidents.  In fact, the London blasts highlighted the
case of an explosion  in a double-decker bus that went off near a
conference  hall  hosting  a  meeting  of  medical  practitioners.  The
prompt medical care made available by the various specialists is a
case in point.’
28

About the pre-hospital facilities available in UK, the authors say that
in  the  United  Kingdom  the  support  systems  are  quite  effective.   The
National  Health  Services  has  well-equipped  ambulances  with  top  class
personnel  (para-medicals)  to  manage  accident  victims  throughout  the
country under a single umbrella.  These ambulances rush to the spot and
effectively avert any tragedy within the  early minutes by way of proper
assessment  of the injuries  and  they quickly  transport the  victims to  the
nearest hospitals.  By the time the victim reaches the hospital, he or she is
almost saved and in becomes easy for starting definitive treatment.
In India, according to the above authors, the situation is different.
Whenever an accident occurs, the focus on saving the life of the victims
gets  diluted  due  to  the  fear  of subsequent  legal  procedures  and  due  to
paucity of people with an awareness of the importance of pre-hospital care.
What  is  required  is  a  well  maintained,  state-of-the-art  ambulance  with
oxygen, intravenous infusions, life-saving drugs, splints, defibrillators and
ventilators.  Well trained para-medical staff must be available at all times in
the ambulance.
The government has formed a number of Emergency Accident Relief
Centres (ARCD) through which the ambulances are sent to the scene of
accident but there is dearth of qualified para-medical personnel who can
assess or assist a victim.  32 Centralised Accident Trauma Services (CATS)
ambulances, says a Delhi Report (Express Newsline, Aug. 25, 2005) were
imported from Japan in the year 2000 at a cost of Rs.17.50 lakhs each and of
them,  only  18  are  functional.   Compared  to  the  early  Omni-vans  and
Gypsies that were used as ambulances, the CATS Ambulances are more
29

spacious  and  have  medical  facilities  fitted  inside  the  ambulances.   The
advanced equipment in big vans, says a paramedical, were previously not
available in the Omni Vans or Gypsies.  In case there is a serious road
accident, if the ambulance is not well equipped and if paramedical personnel
are not available in the ambulance, the transport facility does not qualify for
being recognized as a pre-hospital care facility.
His Excellency the President of India Shri A.P.J. Abdul Kalam in his
inaugurated address at the Annual General Meeting of the Indian Red Cross
Society and St. John Ambulance, New Delhi on October 17, 2004 strongly
pleaded  for  an  integrated  and  institutionalized  approach  for  emergency
response.  He suggested a scheme, in which whenever an accident occurs, a
message  could  be  sent  to  the  nearest  ambulance  team  and  immediate
medical help is arranged for.  He also recommended for formulating a legal
mechanism for providing such emergency support in critical situations.  He
disapproved the tendency among people to avoid coming to the succour of
accident  victims,  fearing  medico-legal  issues.  He  said  that  hospitals
demanding the presence of the police and the completion of formalities
before they could start treating the patients are undesirable (see an article
Challenges  of  Emergency  Management  in  India  by  Anil  K.  Sampada,
published in Indian Emergency Journal, vol.1).
As  of  now  in  India,  there  is  no  proper  legal  framework  to  (1)
encourage  citizens  to  report  and  come out  to  give help  to the accident
victims without fear of harassment, (ii) to mandate all doctors and hospitals
to attend accident victims and provide all medical facilities for stabilizing
patients in emergency, (iii) establish trained paramedics for pre hospital care
30

during transport (iv) to aid and implement trauma care system regardless of
jurisdictional boundaries.  
In the light of the number of accidents in the country, the indifference
of those who witness an accident in offering prompt assistance on account
of  the  likelihood  of  facing  to  comply  with  legal  formalities,  lack  of
ambulances with well equipped medical facilities or para-medical staff, it is
clear that the situation needs to be remedied by corrective action.  We are
proposing draft legislation as a step in this direction.
It is first necessary to certain laws relating to emergency medical care
in other jurisdictions.
31

CHAPTER III
Emergency Medical Care procedures in Hospitals other Jurisdictions:
In the chapter-II, we had occasion to refer briefly to the facilities
available  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  also  to  the  Centralized  Accident
Trauma Services (CATS) introduced in a small measure in certain places in
India.   But,  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to  the  emergency  accident-care
procedures in other jurisdictions in some more detail.
U.S.A.:
Protection to those who render emergency care of injured:
In the State of Virginia, the Code of Virginia (as amended in 2000)
contains sec. 8.01.225 which exempts a person from civil liability when he
renders emergency care or assistance.  The section provides that any person
who,  in  good  faith,  renders  emergency  care  or  assistance  without
compensation,  to  any  person  who  is  ill  or  injured  at  the  scene  of  the
accident, fire or life threatening emergency, or  en route therefrom to any
hospital, medical clinic or doctor’s office, shall not be liable for any civil
damages for acts or omissions resulting from the rendering of such care or
assistance.  Similarly, if any person provides assistance upon request of any
police  agency,  fire  department,  rescue  or  emergency  squad,  or  any
governmental agency in the event of an accident or other emergency, he
shall not be liable for any civil damages resulting from any act, omission on
his part in the course of rendering such assistance in good faith.
32

In New York, a similar provision exists in Art 30 of the Public Health
Law Emergency Medical Services. Section 300A provides that any person
who voluntarily and  without expectation  of any monetary compensation
renders first aid or treatment at the scene of an accident or other emergency,
outside a hospital or to a person who is unconscious, ill or injured, shall not
be liable for damages for injuries alleged to have been sustained by such
person or for damages for the death of such person alleged to have occurred
by  reason  on  an  action,  omission  in  the  rendering  of  such  emergency
treatment.
EMTALA (USA): (Anti-dumping law): Duties of hospitals:
The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act, 1986 (EMTALA)
is a federal law enacted by Congress as part of the Consolidated Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act, 1985 (COBRA) (42 USC sec 1395 dd), referred
to by the Supreme Court in Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samiti case 1996
(4) SCC 37.
The above Act is also known as the “anti-dumping” law, as it was
designed to prevent hospitals from refusing to treat patients or transferring
them to charity or public hospitals because the victims are unable to pay or
had  Medic-aid  coverage.  EMTALA  requires  hospitals  with emergency
departments to provide emergency medical care to everyone who needs it,
regardless of ability to pay or insurance status.  Under the law, the patients
with  similar  medical  conditions  must  be  treated  consistently.  The  law
applies  to hospitals that accept Medicare reimbursement and to all their
patients, not just those covered by Medicare.
33

The Guide for Interfacility Patient Transfer published by the National
Highway Traffic Safety Authority, USA (April, 2006) (NHSTA) gives a lot
of  details  about  the  Act  and  various  other  particulars.  (see
www.nhtsa.dot.gov.gov/partal/site/nhtoc/menuitem).
Under EMTALA (extracted in this chapter), the hospitals have these
basic obligations:-
(1) The  hospitals  must  provide  all  patients  with  a  medical
screening  examination  to  determine  whether  an  emergency
medical condition exists without regard for ability to pay for
services.
(2) Where an emergency medical condition exists, they must either
provide treatment until the patient is  stabilized, or if they do
not  have  the  capabilities,  transfer the  patient  to  another
hospital.
(3) Hospitals  with  specialized  capabilities  are  obliged  to  accept
transfers if they have the capabilities to treat them.  Medical
care cannot be delayed by questions about methods of payment
or insurance coverage.
Of  course,  under  (1)  if  an  appropriate  medical  screening examination
identifies  that  no  emergency  medical  condition  exists,  the  EMTALA
obligation ceases to exist.  Under (2), no EMTALA obligation exists if an
identified medical condition is  stabilized. Additionally, latest  regulations
now recognize that a patient with an emergency medical condition may be
discharged  with  a  plan  to  have  subsequent  treatment  provided  as  an
outpatient if such a plan is consistent with medical routine and does not
jeopardize the patient’s health.
34

The  NHTSA  Guide  further  states  that  EMTALA  governs  how
patients may be transferred from one hospital to another.  Under the law, a
patient is considered stable for transfer if the treating physician determines
that  no  material  deterioration  will  occur  during  the  movement  between
facilities and that the receiving facility has the capability to manage the
patients’ medical condition.  EMTALA does not control the transfer of a
stable patient; however, patients  with incompletely stabilized emergency
medical condition may still be transferred under EMTALA if one of the two
following conditions exists:
(a) the patient (or someone acting on the patients’ behalf) provides
a  written  request  for  transfer despite  being  informed  of the
hospitals’ EMTALA obligations to provide treatment; or
(b) a physician certifies that medical benefits reasonably expected
from transfer outweigh the risk to the individual.
Once a doctor has decided to transfer the individual, (points out the
Guide), the following steps must be taken:
(i) the  transferring  hospital  must  provide  all  medical
treatment within its capacity, which minimizes the risk to
the individual’s health.
(ii) the receiving facility must accept the transfer and must
have space available and qualified personnel to treat the
individual.
(iii) the transferring hospital must send copies of all medical
records related to the emergency medical condition.  If
the  physician  on  call  refuses  or  fails  to  assist  in  the
35

patient’s case, the physician’s name and address must be
documented  on  the  medical  records  provided  to  the
receiving facility.
(iv) Qualified  personnel,  with  the  appropriate  medical
equipment, must accompany the patient during transfer.
The transferring physician, by law, has the responsibility
of selecting the most appropriate means of transport to
include qualified personnel and transport equipment.
Under EMTALA, the patient care during transport is the responsibility of
the transferring physician/hospital until the patient arrives at the receiving
facility. The transferring physician is also responsible for the orders as to
transfer and for the treatment orders to be followed during the transport.
This may conflict with (US) State statutes, which in some instances, allow
only  authorized  medical  physicians  to  give  orders  to  EMS  personnel.
EMTALA does not refer to the transport service and its medical directive,
leaving ultimate medical responsibility and its transition during transport
open for interpretation.
Certificate  of  necessity  for  transfer  is  a  requirement  for
reimbursement by the Centres for Medicare and Medic-aid Services (CMS).
The CMS definition of ‘medical necessity’ is as follows:
‘Medical necessity is established when the patient’s condition is such
that use of any other method of transportation is contra-indicated.  In
any  case,  in  which  some  means  of  transportation  other  than  an
ambulance  could  be  utilized  without  endangering  the  individual’s
health, whether or not such other transportation is actually available,
no payment may be made for ambulance service.’
36

Regulations:
The  Centres  for  Medicare  and  Medic-aid  Services  has  issued
Regulations pertaining to the enforcement of this law.  Regulations go into
much greater details than the statute.  Proposed rules published in 1988 can
be found in the federal Register (June 16, 1988) (53 FR 22513).  In the
EMTALA, obligations are tied to hospitals’ participation in Medicare.  In
fact, a hospital could relieve itself of EMTALA obligations by dropping out
of the Medicare program; although this certainly would not be financially
beneficial  to  the  hospital  (Guide  for inter-facility patient  transfer,  April
2006, NHTSA, Appendix D, E).
EMTALA STATUTE: (Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act)
EXAMINATION AND TREATMENT FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL
CONDITIONS AND WOMEN IN LABOR
(42 U.S.C. § 1395dd)
“Sec. 1867. (a) MEDICAL SCREENING REQUIREMENT – In the case of
a  hospital  that  has  a  hospital  emergency  department,  if  any  individual
(whether or not eligible for benefits under this title) comes to the emergency
department and a request is made on the individual’s behalf for examination
or  treatment  for  a  medical  condition,  the  hospital  must  provide  for  an
appropriate  medical  screening  examination  within  the  capability  of  the
hospital’s  emergency  department,  including  ancillary  services  routinely
available  to  the  emergency  department,  to  determine  whether  or  not  an
emergency  medical  condition  (within  the  meaning  of  subsection  (e)(1))
37

exists.
(b)  NECESSARY  STABILIZING  TREATMENT  FOR  EMERGENCY
MEDICAL CONDITIONS AND LABOR
1) IN GENERAL – If any individual (whether or not eligible for benefits
under this title) comes to a hospital and the hospital determines that the
individual has an emergency medical condition, the hospital must provide
either – 
(A) within the staff and facilities available at the hospital, for such further
medical examination and such treatment as may be required to stabilize the
medical condition, or
(B) for transfer of the individual to another medical facility in accordance
with subsection (c).
(2) REFUSAL TO CONSENT TO TREATMENT – A hospital is deemed to
meet the requirement of paragraph (1)(A) with respect to an individual if the
hospital offers the individual the further medical examination and treatment
described in that paragraph and informs the individual (or a person acting
on the individual’s behalf) of the risks and benefits to the individual of such
examination and treatment, but the individual (or a person acting on the
individual’s behalf) refuses to consent to the examination and treatment.
The hospital stall take all reasonable steps to secure the individual’s (or
person’s)  written  informed  consent  to  refuse  such  examination  and
treatment.
38

(3) REFUSAL TO CONSENT TO TRANSFER – A hospital is deemed to
meet the requirement of paragraph (1) with respect to an individual if the
hospital  offers  to  transfer  the  individual  to  another  medical  facility  in
accordance  with  subsection  (c) and  informs  the  individual  (or  a  person
acting on the individual’s behalf) of the risks and benefits to the individual
of such transfer, but the individual (or person acting on the individual’s
behalf)  refuses  to  consent  to  the  transfer.  The  hospital  shall  take  all
reasonable steps to secure the individual’s (or person’s) written informed
consent to refuse such transfer.
(c) RESTRICTING TRANSFERS UNTIL INDIVIDUAL STABILIZED – 
(1)  RULE  –  If  an  individual  at  a  hospital  has  an  emergency  medical
condition which has not stabilized (within the meaning of subsection (e)(3)
(B)), the hospital may not transfer the individual unless – 
(A)(i)  the  individual  (or  a  legally  responsible  person  acting  on  the
individual’s behalf) after being informed of the hospital’s obligations under
this section and of the risk of transfer, in writing requests transfer to another
medical facility,
(ii) a physician (within the meaning of section 1861 (r)(1)) has signed a
certification  that  based  upon  the  information  available  at  the  time  of
transfer, the medical benefits reasonably expected from the provision of
appropriate  medical  treatment  at  another  medical  facility  outweigh  the
39

increased risks to the individual and, in the case of labor, to the unborn
child from effecting the transfer, or
(iii) if a physician is not physically present in the emergency department at
the time an individual is transferred, a qualified medical person (as defined
by the Secretary in regulations) has signed a certification described in clause
(ii) after a physician (as defined in section 1861 (r)(1)), in consultation with
the  person,  has  made  the  determination  described  in  such  clause,  and
subsequently countersigns the certification; and
(B) the transfer is an appropriate transfer (within the meaning of paragraph
(2)) to that facility.
A certification described in clause (ii) or (iii) of subparagraph (A) shall
include a summary of the risks and benefits upon which the certification is
based.
(2) APPROPRIATE TRANSFER – An appropriate transfer to a medical
facility is a transfer –
(A) in which the transferring hospital provides the medical treatment within
its capacity which minimizes the risks to the individual’s health and, in the
case of a woman in labor, the health of the unborn child;
(B) in which the receiving facility -
40

(i) has  available  space  and  qualified  personnel  for the  treatment  of the
individual, and
(ii) has agreed to accept transfer of the individual and to provide appropriate
medical treatment;
(C) in which the transferring  hospital  sends  to the  receiving  facility all
medical records (or copies thereof), related to the emergency condition for
which the individual has presented, available at the time of the transfer,
including records related to the individual’s emergency medical condition,
observations  of  signs  or  symptoms,  preliminary  diagnosis,  treatment
provided,  results  of  any  tests  and  the  informed  written  consent  or
certification (or copy thereof) provided  under paragraph  (1)(A), and the
name and address of any on-call physician (described in subsection (d)(1)
(C) who was refused or failed to appear within a reasonable time to provide
necessary stabilizing treatment;
(D)  in  which  the  transfer  is  effected  through  qualified  personnel  and
transportation equipment, as required including the use of necessary and
medically appropriate life support measures during the transfer; and
(E)  which  meets  such  other  requirements  as  the  Secretary  may  find
necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals transferred.
(d) ENFORCEMENT –
41

(1) CIVIL MONETARY PENALTIES –
(A) A participating hospital that negligently violates a requirement of this
section is subject to a civil money penalty of not more than $50,000 (or not
more than $25,000 in the case of a hospital with less than 100 beds) for each
such violation. The provisions of section 1128A (other than subsections (a)
and (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty under this subparagraph in the
same  manner  as  such  provisions  apply  with  respect  to  a  penalty  or
proceeding under section 1128A(a).
(B) Subject to subparagraph (C), any physician who is responsible for the
examination,  treatment,  or  transfer  of  an  individual  in  a  participating
hospital, including a physician on-call for the care of such an individual,
and  who  negligently violates  a requirement  of  this  section,  including  a
physician who –
(i) signs a certification under subsection (c)(1)(A) that the medical benefits
reasonably to be expected from a transfer to another facility outweigh the
risks associated with the transfer, if the physician knew or should have
known that the benefits did not outweigh the risks, or
(ii) misrepresents an individual’s condition or other information, including a
hospital’s obligations under this section, is subject to a civil money penalty
of not more than $50,000 for each such violation and, if the violation is
gross and flagrant or is repeated, to exclusion from participation in this title
and State health care programs. The provisions of section 1128A (other than
the first and second sentences of subsection (a) and subsection (b)) shall
42

apply to a civil money penalty and exclusion under this subparagraph in the
same manner as such provisions apply with respect to a penalty, exclusion,
or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
(C)  If,  after  an  initial  examination,  a  physician  determines  that  the
individual requires the services of a physician listed by the hospital on its
list of on-call physicians (required to be maintained under section 1866(a)
(1)(I)) and notifies the on-call physician and the on-call physician fails or
refuses to appear within a reasonable  period of time, and the physician
orders the transfer of the individual because the physician determines that
without  the  services  of  the  on-call  physician  the  benefits  of  transfer
outweigh the risks of transfer, the physician authorizing the transfer shall
not be subject to a penalty under subparagraph (B). However, the previous
sentence shall not apply to the hospital or to the on-call physician who
failed or refused to appear.
(2) CIVIL ENFORCEMENT – 
(A) PERSONAL HARM – Any individual who suffers personal harm as a
direct result of a participating hospital’s violation of a requirement of this
section may, in a civil action against the participating hospital, obtain those
damages available for personal injury under the law of the State in which
the hospital is located, and such equitable relief as is appropriate.
(B) FINANCIAL LOSS TO OTHER MEDICAL FACILITY – Any medical
facility  that  suffers  a  financial  loss  as  a direct  result  of a  participating
hospital’s violation of a requirement of this section may, in a civil action
43

against  the  participating  hospital,  obtain  those  damages  available  for
financial loss, under the law of the State in which the hospital is located,
and such equitable relief as is appropriate.
(C) LIMITATIONS ON ACTIONS – No action may be brought under this
paragraph more than two years after the date of the violation with respect to
which the action is brought.
(3)  CONSULTATION WITH PEER REVIEW  ORGANIZATIONS  –  In
considering allegations of violations of the requirements of this section in
imposing  sanctions  under  paragraph  (1),  the  Secretary  shall  request  the
appropriate utilization and quality control peer review organization (with a
contract under part B of title XI) to assess whether the individual involved
had an emergency medical condition which had not been stabilized, and
provide a report on its findings. Except in the case in which a delay would
jeopardize the health or safety of individuals, the Secretary shall request
such a review before effecting a sanction under paragraph (1) and shall
provide a period of at least 60 days for such review.
(e) DEFINITIONS – In this section:
(1) The term “emergency medical condition” means – 
(A) a medical condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient
severity (including severe pain) such that the absence of immediate medical
attention could reasonably be expected to result in –
44

(i)  placing  the  health  of  the  individual  (or,  with  respect  to  a  pregnant
woman, the health of the woman or her unborn child) in serious jeopardy,
(ii) serious impairment of bodily functions, or
(iii) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part; or
(B) with respect to a pregnant woman who is having contractions –
(i) that there is inadequate time to effect a safe transfer to another hospital
before delivery, or
(ii) that transfer may pose a threat to the health or safety of the woman or
the unborn child.
(2) The term “participating hospital” means hospital that has entered into a
provider agreement under section 1866.
(3)(A) The term “stabilize” means, with respect to an emergency medical
condition described in paragraph (1)(A), to provide such medical treatment
of the condition as may be necessary to assure, within reasonable medical
probability, that no material deterioration of the condition is likely to result
from or occur during the transfer of the individual from a facility, or, with
respect to an emergency medical condition described in paragraph (1)(B), to
deliver (including the placenta).
45

(B) The  term  “stabilized”  means  with  respect  to  an emergency medical
condition described in paragraph (1)(A), that no material deterioration of the
condition is likely, within reasonable medical probability, to result from or
occur during the transfer of the individual from a facility, or, with respect to
an emergency medical  condition  described  in paragraph  (1)(B), that the
woman has delivered (including the placenta).
(4) The term “transfer” means the movement (including the discharge) of an
individual  outside  a  hospital’s  facilities  at  the  direction  of  any  person
employed  by (or  affiliated  or  associated  directly or  indirectly  with)  the
hospital, but does not include such a movement of an individual who (A)
has been declared dead, or (B) leaves the facility without the permission of
any such person.
(5) The term “hospital” includes a rural primary care hospital (as defined in
section 1861(mm)(1)).
(f) PREEMPTION – The provisions of this section do not preempt any State
or local law requirement, except to the extent that the requirement directly
conflicts with the requirement of this section.
(g) NONDISCRIMINATION – A participating hospital that has specialized
capabilities or facilities (such as burn units, shock-trauma units, neonatal
intensive care units, or (with respect to rural areas) regional referral centers
as identified by the Secretary in regulation) shall not refuse to accept an
appropriate  transfer  of  an  individual  who  requires  such  specialized
46

capabilities  or  facilities  if  the  hospital  has  the  capacity  to  treat  the
individual.
(h) NO DELAY IN EXAMINATION OR TREATMENT – A participating
hospital  may  not  delay  provision  of  an  appropriate  medical  screening
examination required under subsection (a) or further medical examination
and treatment required under subsection (b) in order to inquire about the
individual’s method of payment or insurance status.
(i) WHISTLE BLOWER PROTECTIONS – A participating hospital may
not  penalize  or  take  adverse  action  against  a  qualified  medical  person
described in subsection (c)(1)(A)(iii) or a physician because the person or
physician  refuses  to  authorize  the  transfer  of  an  individual  with  an
emergency medical condition that has not been stabilized or against any
hospital  employee  because  the  employee  reports  a  violation  of  a
requirement of this section.”
EMTALA REGULATIONS
“Regulation  489.24:  Special  responsibilities  of  Medicare  hospitals  in
emergency cases
 (a): “General:  In  the  case  of  a  hospital  that  has  an  emergency
department,  if  any  individual  (whether  or  not  eligible  for
Medicare benefits and regardless of ability to pay) comes by
him  or  herself  or  with  another  person  to  the  emergency
department and a request is made on the individual’s behalf for
examination or treatment of a medical condition by qualified
medical personnel (as determined by the hospital in its rules
47

and regulations), the hospital  must provide for an appropriate
medical  screening examination  within  the  capability  of  the
hospital’s emergency department, including ancillary services
routinely available to the emergency department, to determine
whether or not an emergency medical condition exists.  The
examinations  must  be conducted  by individuals  determining
qualified by hospital by law or rules or regulations and who
meet the requirements of sec. 482.55 concerning emergency
services personnel and direction.”
(b) We shall refer to some definitions in the Regulation
(A)‘Comes to the emergency department’ means, with respect
to an individual requesting examination or treatment, that
the individual is on hospital property. For purposes of this
section, ‘property’ means the entire main hospital campus,
including the parking lot, sidewalk and drive way, as well as
any  facility  or  organization  that  is  located  off  the  main
hospital campus but has been determined to be a department
of the hospital.  ‘Property’ also includes ambulances, owner
and operated by the hospital even if the ambulance is not on
hospital grounds.  An individual in a non-hospital owned
ambulance on hospital property is considered to have come
to the hospital’s emergency department even if a member of
the ambulance staff contacts the hospital on telephone or
telemetry communications and informs the hospital that they
want  to  transport  the  individual  to  the  hospital  for
48

examination and treatment.  In these situations, the hospital
may deny access if it is ‘discretionary status’, that is, it does
not have staff or facilities to accept any additional patients.
If,  however,  the  ambulance  disregards  the  hospital’s
instructions and transports the individual on to the hospital
property, the individual is considered to have come to the
emergency department.
(B)The regulations define ‘Capacity’ of a hospital as being its
ability  to  accommodate  the  individual  requesting
examination  or  treatment  of  the  transferred  individual.
Capacity  encompasses  such  things  as  number  and
availability  of  quality  staff,  beds  and  equipment  on  the
hospital’s  past  practices  of  accommodating  additional
patient in excess of its occupancy limits.
(C) ‘Emergency  Medical  Condition’  means  (1)  a  medical
condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient
severity  (including  severe  pain,  psychiatric  disturbances
and/or symptoms of substance abuse) such that the absence
of  immediate  medical  attention  could  reasonably  be
expected to result in –
(a) placing the health of the individual (or, with respect toa
pregnant woman, the health of the women or her unborn
child) in serious jeopardy;
(b) serious impairment to bodily functions; or
(c) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part; or
(2)  With  respect  to  a  pregnant  woman  who  is  having
contradictions –
49

(a) that there is inadequate time to effect a safe transfer to
another hospital before delivery or
(b) that transfer may pose a threat to the health or safety
of the woman or the unborn child.
(D) ‘Stabilized’  means  with  respect  to  an  ‘emergency
medical condition’ as defined in this section means:
(i) that no material deterioration is likely, within reasonable
medical probability, to result from or occurs during the
transfer of the individual from a facility or with respect
to an ‘emergency medical condition’.
(ii)that the woman has delivered the child and the placenta.
(E)‘To stabilize’ means, with respect to an ‘emergency medical
condition:
(i) to provide such medical treatment of the condition
necessary  to  assure,  within  reasonable  medical
probability,  that  no  material  deterioration  of  the
condition is likely to result from or occurs during the
transfer of the individual from a facility; or
(ii) with respect to an ‘emergency medical condition’, the
woman has delivered the child and the placement.
Regulation  489.24  (Special  responsibility  of  Medicare  hospitals  in
emergency cases):
Section (c) “Necessary  stabilized  treatment  for  emerging  medical
conditions:
(1) If  any  individual  (whether  or  not  eligible  for  Medicare
benefits) comes to a hospital and the hospital determines
50

that the individual has an emergency medical condition, the
hospital must provide either –
(i) Within the capabilities of the staff and facilities
available  at  the  hospital,  for  further  medical
examination and treatment as required to stabilize
the medical condition; or
(ii) for transfer of the individual to another medical
facility in accordance with para (d) (below) of this
section.”
(2) Refusal (by victim) to consent to treatment  :  This provision
states that after the hospital with an emergency department
informs the patient or person acting on his behalf, of the
risks and benefits to the individual of the examination and
treatment, but the individual (or person acting on his behalf)
refuses consent  to  the  examination  and  treatment,  the
medical record of the hospital must record the refusal and
take all reasonable steps to secure the individual’s written
informed consent (or that of the person acting on his or her
behalf). The written document must indicate that the person
has  been  informed  of  the  risks  and  benefits  of  the
examination or treatment.
“(3) Delay in examination or treatment (not permissible):
A particular hospital (i.e. that has entered into a Medicare
provider agreement under section 18.66 of the Act) may not
delay  providing  an  appropriate  medical  screening
examination or further medical examination and treatment
51

required in order to inquire about the individual’s method of
payment or insurance status.
(4)This clause deals with refusal by the victim or the person
acting on his behalf, for transfer to another medical facility
having  required  facilities.  Written  refusal  must  be
obtained.”
Section (d) Restricting transfer until the individual is stabilized:
(1) If an individual at a hospital has an emergency medical
condition that has not been stabilized, the hospital may
not transfer the individual unless –
(i) the  transfer  is  an  appropriate  transfer  as  stated  in
section (d)(2), and
(ii) (A) the individual (or a legally responsible person
acting  on  his  behalf) requests  the  transfer, after
being informed of the hospital’s obligation under
this section and of the risk of transfer. The request
must be in writing and indicate the reasons for the
request as well as indicate that he or she is aware
of the risks and benefits of the transfer.
(B) a physician has signed a certificate that, based
upon the information available at the time of transfer,
the  medical  benefits  reasonably  expected  from  the
provision of appropriate medical treatment at another
medical facility outweigh the increased risks to the
individual or, in the case of a woman in labour, to the
woman or the unborn child, from being transferred.
52

The certification must contain a summary of the risk
and benefits upon which it is based; or
(C)  if a physician is not physically present in the
emergency department  at  the  time  an  individual  is
transferred, a qualified medical person (as determined
by the hospital in its bye laws and regulations) has
signed a certificate described in clause B above after
a physician in consultation with the qualified medical
person, agrees with the certification and subsequently
countersigns  the  certificate.   The  certificate  must
contain  a  summary of  the  risks  and  benefits  upon
which it is based.
(2) A transfer to another medical facility will be appropriate
only in those cases in which –
(i) the  transferring  hospital  provides  medical
treatment  within  its  capacity  that  minimizes  the
risk to the individual’s health and, in the case of a
woman in labour, the health of the unborn child;
(ii) The receiving facility –
(A) has  available  space  and  qualified
personnel  for  the  treatment  of  the
individual; and
(B) has  agreed  to  accept  transfer  of  the
individual  and  to  provide  appropriate
medical treatment;
53

(iii) the  transferring  hospital  sends  to  the  receiving
facility,  all  medical  records  (or  copies  thereof)
related  to  the  emergency  condition  which  the
individual has presented that are available at the
time  of  transfer)  including  available  history,
records  related  to  the  individual’s  emergency
medical  condition,  observations  of  signs  or
symptoms,  preliminary  diagnosis,  results  of
diagnostic  studies  or  telephone  reports  of  the
studies,  treatment  provided,  results  of  any  tests
and the informed written consent or certification
(or copy thereof) required under this section, and
the name and address of any on-call physician who
has refused or failed to appear within reasonable
time  to  provide  necessary  stabilizing  treatment.
Other records (e.g. test results not yet available or
historical  records  not  readily available  from the
hospital’s files) must be sent as soon as practicable
after transfer, and
(iv) the transfer is effected through qualified personnel
and  transportation  equipment  as  required,
including  the  use  of  necessary  and  medically
appropriate  life  support  measures  during  the
transfer.
(3) a participatory hospital may not initize do take adverse
action against a physician or a qualified medical person
described in para d(1)(ii)(C) above because the physician
54

or qualified person refuses to authorize the transfer of an
individual with an emergency medical condition that has
not  been  stabilized,  or  against  any  hospital  employee
because  the  employee  reports  a  violation  of  a
requirement of this section.
Sub- Recipient hospital’s responsibilities:
section (e):
A particular hospital that has specialized capabilities or
facilities (including, but not limited to, facilities such as burn
units,  shock-trauma  units,  neonatal  intensive  care  units,  or
(with regard to rural areas) regional referral centres) may not
refuse to accept from a referring hospital within the boundaries
of the United States an appropriate transfer of an individual
who requires such specialized capabilities or facilities if the
receiving hospital has the capacity to treat the individual.
Section (f): Termination of provider agreement:  If a hospital fails to meet
the requirement of section (a) to (e), the HCFA may terminate
the ‘provider agreement’ in accordance with section 489.53.
….
Section (h): Off Campus Departments:  If an individual comes to a facility
or organization that is located off the main hospital campus but
has been determined to be a department of the hospital and a
request is made on the individual’s behalf for examination or
treatment  of  a  potential  emergency  medical  condition  as
55

otherwise described in section (a), the hospital is obligator, in
accordance with the rules, to provide the individual with an
appropriate medical screening examination and any necessary
stabilizing treatment or an appropriate transfer.
(1) Capability of the hospital:  
The  capability  of  the  hospital  includes  that  of  the
hospital as a whole, not just the capability of the off-campus
department.  Except for cases described in para (i)(3)(ii), the
obligation of a hospital under this section must be discharged
within the hospital as a whole.   However, the hospital is not
required to locate additional personnel or staff to off-campus
departments to be on standby for possible emergencies.
(2) Protocols for off-campus departments
….
(3) Movement  or  appropriate  transfer  from  off-campus
departments
.. .. .. .. ..”
EMTALA Sign requirement at Hospitals:
The following NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC is required to be displayed
in all public entrances, registration areas, emergency department, waiting
areas  of  Hospitals,  as  required  by  the  HCFA  (Health  Care  Financing
Administration) of U.S.:-
“IT’S THE LAW
IF  YOU  HAVE  A  MEDICAL  EMERGENCY,  OR,  ARE  IN
LABOUR  YOU HAVE  THE  RIGHT TO  RECEIVE,  (within  the
capabilities of this hospital’s staff and facilities)
56

AN  APPROPRIATE  MEDICAL  SCREENING  EXAMINATION
NECESSARY  STABILIZING TREATMENT  (including  treatment
for  an  unborn  child)  and,  if  necessary,  AN  APPROPRIATE
TRANSFER to another FACILITY EVEN IF YOU CANNOT PAY
OR DO NOT HAVE MEDICAL INSURANCE or 
EVEN  IF  YOU  ARE  NOT  ENTITLED  TO  MEDICARE  OR
MEDICAID.  THIS HOSPITAL DOES/DOES NOT PARTICIPATE
IN THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.”
The above sign must be visible from a distance of 20’ away or from
patient’s likely viewing point and posted in a manner likely to be seen.
These  provisions  of  EMTALA and  the  Regulations  made  for  the
purpose of enforcing EMTALA can be a model for considering appropriate
reconsideration for a law in our country.
57

CHAPTER IV
Ambulance Services in other Jurisdiction
In order to give an idea of regulation of ambulance services, we shall
refer to the rules in force in USA, for example in the State of Minnesota (we
are not covering these aspects relating to ambulances in the Bill attached to
this Report).
USA – Ambulance Services:
The State of Minnesota in USA in city statutes of 2004 deals with
Ambulance Services.  In section 144 E(1) to144 E(52) there are several
provisions which can be a model for legislation in India.  We do not propose
to refer to all the provisions except the crucial ones.
So far as definitions are concerned, we shall refer to a few of them
which are important:
001(1b) defines ‘Advanced life support’ as means ‘rendering basic
life  support  and  rendering  intravenous  therapy,  drug  therapy,
intubation, and defibrillation’. 
001(2)  defines ‘Ambulance’  as means  ‘any  vehicle  designed  or
intended for and actually used in providing ambulance service to ill or
injured persons or expectant mothers.’
001(3) ‘Ambulance  service’ means  transportation  and  treatment
which is rendered or offered to be rendered preliminary to or during
58

transportation  to, from, or between  health care facilities  for ill  or
injured  persons  or   expectant  mothers.   The  term  includes  all
transportation involving the use of a stretcher, unless the person to be
transported  is  not  likely  to  require  medical  treatment  during  the
course of transport. 
001.3a: Ambulance service personnel means individuals who are
authorized  by a licensed  ambulance  service to provide emergency
care for the ambulance service and are: 
(1) Emergency  Medical  Technicians,  Emergency  Medical
Technician-Intemediate,  or  Emergency  Medical  Technician-
Paramedic; 
    (2) Registered nurses who are qualified …
    (3) Registered physician assistants … 
    001.4a: Basic airway management means:  
    (i) resuscitation  by  mouth-to-mouth,  mouth-to-mask,  bag  valve
mask, or oxygen powered ventilators; or
59

     (ii) insertion of an oro-pharyngeal, nasal pharyngeal, esophageal
obturator  airway,  esophageal  tracheal  airway,  or  esophageal
gastric tube airway. 
001.4b: Basic life support means rendering basic-level emergency
care,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  basic  airway  management,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, controlling shock and bleeding, and
splinting fractures …
001.5b: Defibrillator means an automatic, semiautomatic, or manual
device  that  delivers  an  electric  shock  at  a  preset  voltage  to  the
myocardium through the chest wall and that is used to restore the
normal cardiac rhythm and rate when the heart has stopped beating or
is fibrillating. 
001.5c: Emergency medical technician means EMT.  
001.5d: Emergency medical technician-intermediate (EMT-I) …
001.5e: Emergency medical technician-paramedic EMT-P) … 
001.6: First Responder means an individual who is registered by the
board to perform, at a minimum, basic emergency skills before the
arrival  of  a  licensed  ambulance  service,  and  is  a  member  of  an
organized service …
60

001.7: License means authority granted by the board for the operation
of an ambulance service in the state of Minnesota.  
001.9a:  Part-time advance life support means rendering basic life
support and advanced life support for less than 24 hours of every day.
001.9b: Physician means …
001.9c: Physician assistant means …
001.9d: Pre-hospital care data means information collected by ambulance
service personnel about the circumstances related to an emergency response
and patient care activities provided by the ambulance service personnel in a
pre-hospital setting. 
001.12: Registered nurse means …
001.14: Training program coordinator …
001.15: Volunteer ambulance assistant …
144E.01: Emergency Medical Services Regulatory Board …
02 to 05: Staff, Member, etc.
144E.01.6: Duties of Board.  
(a) The Emergency Medical Services Regulatory Board shall: 
61

    (1) administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and other duties
as assigned to the board; 
    (2) advise applicants for state or federal emergency medical services
funds, review and comment on such applications, and approve the use of
such funds unless otherwise required by federal law; 
    (3) make recommendations to the legislature on improving the access,
delivery,  and  effectiveness  of  the  state's  emergency  medical  services
delivery system; and 
    (4)  establish  procedures  for  investigating,  hearing,  and  resolving
complaints against emergency medical services providers.  
    (b) The  Emergency  Medical  Services  Board  may  prepare  an  initial
work plan, which may be updated biennially.  The work plan may include
provisions to: 
    (1) prepare an emergency medical services assessment which ddresses
issues affecting the statewide delivery system; 
    (2) establish  a  statewide  public  information  and  education  system
regarding emergency medical services; 
    (3) create,  in  conjunction  with  the  Department  of  Public  Safety,  a
statewide injury and trauma prevention program; and 
62

    (4) designate  an  annual  emergency  medical  services  personnel
recognition day. 
144E.05 General authority. 
144.E.05-1: Receiving Grants or gifts.
144.E.05-2: Contracts.
144E.06: Primary service areas:
    The board shall adopt rules defining primary service areas under which
the  board  shall  designate  each  licensed  ambulance  service  as  serving  a
primary service area or areas. 
144E.10: Ambulance service licensing.
144E.101 Ambulance service requirements. 
144E.101-1: Personnel: 
(a) No publicly  or privately  owned  ambulance  service  shall  be
operated in the state unless its ambulance service personnel are
certified, appropriate to the type of ambulance service being
provided, according to section  144E.28 or meet the staffing
criteria specific to the type of ambulance service. 
63

(b) An ambulance service shall have a medical director as provided
under section 144E.265. 
144E/101-2: Patient care:  When a patient is being transported, at least one
of the ambulance service personnel must be in the patient compartment.  If
advanced life support procedures are required, an EMT-P, a registered nurse
qualified under section 144E.001, subdivision 3a, clause (2), item (i), or a
physician assistant qualified under section 144E.001, subdivision 3a, clause
(3), item (i), shall be in the patient compartment. 
144E.101-3: Continual service:  An ambulance service shall offer service
24 hours per day every day of the year, unless otherwise authorized under
subdivisions 8 and 9. 
    Sub-divn. 4: Denial of service prohibited:  An ambulance service shall
not be denied pre-hospital care to a person needing emergency ambulance
service because of inability to pay or because of the source of payment for
services if the need develops within the licensee's  primary service area or
when responding to a mutual aid call.  Transport for the patient may be
limited to the closest appropriate emergency medical facility.
    Sub-divn. 5: Types of service.  The board shall regulate the following
types of ambulance service: 
    (i) basic life support; 
64

    (ii) advanced life support; 
    (iii) part-time advanced life support; and 
    (iv) specialized life support. 
    Sub-divn. 6: Basic life support:
(a) Except  as  provided  in  paragraph  (e),  a  basic  life  support
ambulance shall be staffed by at least two ambulance service
personnel, at least one of which must be an EMT, who provide
a level of care so as to ensure that: 
(1) life-threatening situations and potentially serious injuries
are recognized; 
(2) patients are protected from additional hazards; 
(3) basic treatment to reduce the seriousness of emergency
situations is administered; and 
(4) patients are transported to an appropriate medical facility
for treatment. 
(b)  A  basic  life  support  service  shall  provide  basic  airway
management.  
65

(c) By January 1, 2001, a basic life support service shall provide
automatic  defibrillation,  as  provided  in  section   144E.103,
subdivision 1, paragraph (b).  
(d)  A  basic  life  support  service  licensee's  medical  director  may
authorize the ambulance service personnel to carry and to use
medical antishock trousers and to perform intravenous infusion
if the ambulance service personnel have been properly trained. 
(e) Variation of facilities by Driver of an ambulance of service: …
    Sub-divn. 7: Advanced life support:
(a) An advanced life support ambulance shall be staffed by at least: 
    (1) one EMT and one EMT-P;
(2)  one  EMT  and  one  registered  nurse  who  is  an  EMT, is
currently practicing nursing, and has passed a paramedic
practical  skills  test  approved  by  the  Board  and
administered by a training program; or 
(3) one EMT and one physician assistant who is an EMT, is
currently  practicing  as  a  physician  assistant,  and  has
passed a paramedic practical skills test approved by the
board and administered by a training program. 
66

 (b)  An  advanced  life  support  service  shall  provide  basic  life
support,  as  specified  under  subdivision  6,  paragraph  (a),
advanced  airway  management,  manual  defibrillation,  and
administration of intravenous fluids and pharmaceuticals. 
(c) In addition to providing advanced life support, an advanced life
support  service  may  staff  additional  ambulances  to  provide
basic life support according to subdivision 6.  When routinely
staffed and equipped as a basic life support service according
to  sub-division  6 and  section  144E.103, sub-division  1, the
vehicle shall not be marked as advanced life support.  
(d)  An  ambulance  service  providing  advanced  life  support  shall
have a written agreement with its medical director to ensure
medical control for patient care 24 hours a day, seven days a
week.   The  terms  of  the  agreement  shall  include  a  written
policy on the administration of medical control for the service.
The policy shall address the following issues:  
 (i)  two-way  communication  for  physician  direction  of
ambulance service personnel; 
(ii) patient triage, treatment, and transport; 
(i) use of standing orders; and
67

(ii) the means by which medical control will be provided
24 hours a day. 
The agreement shall be signed by the licensee's medical director
and the licensee or the licensee's designee and maintained in the
files of the licensee. 
    (e) When an ambulance service provides advanced life support, the
authority  of  an  EMT-P,  Minnesota  registered  nurse-EMT,  or
Minnesota registered physician assistant-EMT to determine the
delivery of patient care prevails over the authority of an EMT. 
    Sub-divn. 8: Part-time advanced life support:
(a) A part-time advanced life support service shall meet the staffing
requirements under subdivision 7, paragraph (a); provide service
as required under subdivision 7, paragraph (b), for less than 24
hours every day; and meet the equipment requirements specified
in section 144E.103.
(b) A part-time advanced life support service shall have a written
agreement with its medical director to ensure medical control for
patient  care during the time the service offers  advanced  life
support.   The  terms of the  agreement  shall  include  a written
policy on the administration of medical control for the service
and address the issues specified in sub-division 7, para (d). 
68

Sub-divn.  9:  Specialized  life  support: A  specialized  ground  life
support service providing advanced life support shall be staffed by at
least  one  EMT  and  one  EMT-P,  registered  nurse,  or  physician
assistant.  A specialized life support service shall provide basic or
advanced  life  support  as  designated  by  the  board,  and  shall  be
restricted by the board to:
(1) operation less than 24 hours of every day;
(2) designated segments of the population;
(3) certain types of medical conditions; or 
(4) air ambulance service that includes fixed-wing or rotor-wing. 
    Sub-divn. 10: Driver:  A driver of an ambulance must possess a current
driver's license issued by any state and must have attended an emergency
vehicle driving course approved by the licensee.  The emergency vehicle
driving course must include actual driving experience. 
    Sub-divn. 11: Personnel roster and files:
(a) An ambulance service shall maintain: 
(1) at least two ambulance service personnel on a written on-
call schedule;
69

(2) a current roster of its ambulance service personnel,including
the  name,  address,  and  qualifications  of  its  ambulance
service personnel; and 
(3) files documenting personnel qualifications. 
(b) A licensee shall maintain in its files the name and address of its
medical director and a written statement signed by the medical
director indicating acceptance of the responsibilities specified in
section 144E.265, subdivision 2. 
    Sub-divn. 12: Mutual aid agreement:  A licensee shall have a written
agreement with at least one neighboring  licensed  ambulance service for
coverage during times when the licensee's ambulances are not available for
service in its primary service area.  The agreement must specify the duties
and responsibilities  of the agreeing parties.  A copy of each mutual aid
agreement shall be maintained in the files of the licensee. 
    Sub-divn. 13: Service outside primary service area:  A licensee may
provide its services outside of its primary service area only if requested by a
transferring physician or ambulance service licensed to provide service in
the primary service area when it can reasonably be expected that: 
70

(1)  the  response  is  required  by the  immediate  medical  need  of  an
individual; and 
(2) the ambulance service licensed to provide service in the primary
service area is unavailable for appropriate response.
144E.103 Equipment: 
    Sub-divn 1. General requirements.
(a) Every  ambulance  in  service  for  patient  care  shall  carry,  at  a
minimum: 
    (1) oxygen; 
(2) airway maintenance equipment in various sizes to accommodate
all age groups; 
(3) splinting equipment in various  sizes  to accommodate all age
groups; 
(4) dressings, bandages, and bandaging equipment; 
(5) an emergency obstetric kit; 
71

(6)  equipment  to  determine  vital  signs  in  various  sizes  to
accommodate all age groups; 
(7) a stretcher; 
(8) a defibrillator; and 
(9) a fire extinguisher. 
(b) A basic life support service has until January 1, 2001, to equip
each ambulance in service for patient care with a defibrillator. 
Sub-divn. 2: Advanced life support requirements:  In addition to the
requirements  in  subdivision  1,  an  ambulance  used  in  providing
advanced  life  support  must  carry  drugs  and  drug  administration
equipment and supplies as approved by the licensee's medical director. 
Sub-divn. 3: Storage:  All equipment carried in an ambulance must be
securely stored. 
Sub-divn. 4: Safety restraints:  An ambulance must be equipped with
safety straps for the stretcher and seat belts in the patient compartment
for the patient and ambulance personnel. 
144E.11: Ambulance service application procedure: … 
72

144E.121 Air ambulance service requirements. 
    Sub-division 1:  Aviation compliance
Sub-division 2:  Personnel
Sub-division 3:  Equipment
144E.123:  Pre-hospital care data:
Sub-division 1:  Collection and maintenance
Sub-division 2:  Copy to receiving hospital
Sub-division 3:  Review
Sub-division 4:  Penalty: Failure to report all information required by
the  board  under  this  section  shall  constitute  grounds  for  license
revocation.
144E.125: Operational procedures:
    A  licensee  shall  establish  and  implement  written  procedures  for
responding to ambulance service complaints, maintaining ambulances and
equipment, procuring  and  storing  drugs,  and  controlling  infection.   The
licensee shall maintain the procedures in its files. 
144E.127: Inter-hospital transfer: 
73

    When transporting a patient from one licensed hospital to another, a
licensee may substitute for one of the required ambulance service personnel,
a physician, a registered nurse, or physician's assistant who has been trained
to  use  the  equipment  in  the  ambulance  and  is  knowledgeable  of  the
licensee's ambulance service protocols. 
144E.13: Temporary license
144E.14: Transfer of license or ownership
144E.15: Relocation of base of operations
144E.16 Rules; local standards: 
    Sub-division 1: Repealed, 1999 c 245 art 9 s 66.
    Sub-division 2: Repealed, 1999 c 245 art 9 s 66.
    Sub-division 3: Repealed, 1999 c 245 art 9 s 66. 
Sub-division 4: Rules:  The board may adopt rules needed to regulate
ambulance services in the following areas: 
    (1) applications for licensure; 
    (2) personnel qualifications and staffing standards; 
    (3) quality of life support treatment; 
74

    (4) restricted treatments and procedures; 
    (5) equipment standards; 
    (6) ambulance standards; 
    (7) communication standards, equipment performance and 
maintenance, and radio frequency assignments; 
    (8) advertising; 
    (9) scheduled ambulance services; 
    (10) ambulance services in time of disaster; 
(11) basic, intermediate, advanced, and refresher emergency care course
programs; 
    (12) continuing education requirements; 
    (13) trip reports; 
    (14) license fees, vehicle fees, and expiration dates; and 
75

    (15) waivers and variances. 
    Sub-division 5: Local government's powers:
(a) Local units of government may, with the approval of the board,
establish  standards  for  ambulance  services  which  impose
additional  requirements  upon  such  services.   Local  units  of
government intending to impose additional requirements shall
consider  whether  any  benefit  accruing  to  the  public  health
would  outweigh  the  costs  associated  with  the  additional
requirements. 
The regulations presented by the local unit of government shall not
conflict with rules made by the Board.
144E.18: Inspections:
    The board may inspect ambulance services as frequently as deemed
necessary to determine whether an ambulance service is in compliance with
sections 144E.001 to 144E.33 and rules adopted under those sections.  The
board may review at any time documentation required to be on file with a
licensee. 
144E.19: Disciplinary action:
    Sub-division 1:  Suspension; revocation; nonrenewal:
76

 The board may suspend, revoke, refuse to renew, or place conditions
on the license of a licensee upon finding that the licensee has violated a
provision of this chapter or rules adopted under this chapter or has
ceased to provide the service for which the licensee is licensed. 
Sub-division 2: Notice; contested case.
Sub-division 3: Temporary suspension.
144E.265: Medical director:
    Sub-division 1:  Requirements.
Sub-division 2:  Responsibilities:
Responsibilities  of  the  medical  director  shall  include,  but  are  not
limited to: 
(1) approving standards for training and orientation of personnel
that impact patient care;
(2) approving  standards  for  purchasing  equipment  and  supplies
that impact patient care; 
(3) establishing standing orders for prehospital care; 
(4) approving  written  triage,  treatment,  and  transportation
guidelines for adult and pediatric patients; 
77

(5) participating in the development and operation of continuous
quality improvement programs including, but not  limited to,
case review and resolution of patient complaints; 
(6) establishing procedures for the administration of drugs; and 
(7) maintaining the quality of care according to the standards and
procedures established under clauses (1) to (6). 
    Sub-division 3:  Annual assessment; ambulance service.  
By medical director. 
144E.27: First responder registration. 
Subdivision 1.    Training programs, Registration, Renewal, Denial,
suspension, revocation, Temporary suspension.
144E.275: Medical  response  unit  registration:   Registration,
qualifications, Expiration, Renewal.
144E.28: Certification of EMT, EMT-I, and EMT-P. 
78

Requirements,  Expiration  Dates,  Reciprocity,  Forms  of
disciplinary  action,  Denial,  suspension,  revocation,  Temporary
suspension, Renewal, Reinstatement.
144E.283: EMT instructor qualifications.
144E.285: Training programs. 
    Approval required.
EMT-P requirements, Expiration, Disciplinary action, Temporary
suspension, Audit.
144E.286: Examiner qualifications for emergency medical technician
testing.
144E.287: Diversion program. 
144E.29: Fees. 
    (a) The board shall charge the following fees: 
(1) initial  application  for  and  renewal  of  an  ambulance  service
license, $150; 
79

(2) each ambulance operated by a licensee, $96.  The licensee shall
pay an additional $96 fee for the full licensing period or $4 per
month for any fraction of the period for each ambulance added
to the ambulance service during the licensing period; 
(3) initial application for and renewal of approval for a training
program, $100; and 
(4) duplicate of an original license, certification, or approval, $25.  
(b) With the exception of paragraph (a), clause (4), all fees are for a
two-year period.  All fees are non-refundable. 
(c) Fees collected by the board shall be deposited as non-dedicated
receipts in the general fund. 
144E.30: Cooperation; Board powers:
Sub-division 3:  Cooperation during investigation.
Sub-division 4:  Injunctive relief.
Sub-division 5:  Subpoena power.
144E.305:  Reporting misconduct:
80

    Sub-division 1:  Voluntary reporting.
Sub-divn. 2:  Mandatory reporting.
Sub-divn. 3: Immunity: Immunity for good faith reporting from civil
actions on reporting Individual, Licensee, health care facility, business
or organization.
144E.31: Correction order and fines by Board.
144E.35: Reimbursement to nonprofit ambulance services. 
    Sub-division 1: Repayment for volunteer training.
Sub-division 2:  Procedure.
144E.37: Comprehensive advanced life support. 
Comprehensive advanced life support educational program to train
rural medical personnel, including physicians, physician assistants, nurses
for emergencies – by Board. 
144E.50 Emergency medical services fund. 
    Sub-division 1: name of fund.
81

Sub-division 2: Establishment and purpose.
In order to develop, maintain, and improve regional emergency medical
services systems, the Emergency Medical Services Regulatory Board
shall establish an emergency medical services system fund.  
The fund shall be used for the general purposes of –
(1) promoting systematic, cost-effective delivery of emergency
medical care throughout the state;
(2) identifying common local,  regional, and state emergency
medical  system  needs  and  providing  assistance  in
addressing those needs; 
(3) providing  discretionary  grants  for  emergency  medical
service projects with potential regionwide significance;
(4) providing  for public  education  about  emergency medical
care; 
(5) promoting  the  exchange  of  emergency  medical  care
information; 
(6) ensuring the ongoing coordination of regional emergency
medical services systems; and
82

(7) establishing  and maintaining  training  standards  to ensure
consistent  quality  of  emergency  medical  services
throughout the state.  
 Sub-divn. 3:  Definition – Board. 
Sub-divn.  4:  Use  and  restrictions. Designated  regional medical
services  system  funds.to  support  local  and  regional  emergency
medical  services  as  determined  within  the  region,  with  particular
emphasis given to supporting and improving emergency trauma and
cardiac care and training.  No part of a region's share of the fund may
be used to directly subsidize any ambulance service operations or
rescue  service  operations  or  to  purchase  any  vehicles  or  parts  of
vehicles for an ambulance service or a rescue service. 
Sub-divn. 5: Distribution:  Money from the fund shall be distributed
according to this sub-division.
(1) Ninety-five percent of the fund shall be distributed annually on a
contract for  services  basis  with  each  of  the  eight  regional
emergency medical services systems designated by the board.
(2) The systems shall be governed by a body consisting of appointed
representatives from each of the counties in that region and shall
also  include  representatives  from  emergency  medical  services
organizations.  
83

(3) The board shall contract with a regional entity only if the contract
proposal  satisfactorily  addresses  proposed  emergency  medical
services activities in the following areas:  (i) personnel training;
(ii)  transportation  coordination;  (iii)  public  safety  agency
cooperation;  (iv)  communications  systems  maintenance  and
development;  (v)  public  involvement;  (vi)  health  care  facilities
involvement; and (vii) system management. 
(4) If  each  of  the  regional  emergency  medical  services  systems
submits a satisfactory contract proposal, then this part of the fund
shall be distributed evenly among the regions. 
(5) If one or more of the regions does not contract for the full amount
of its even share or if its proposal is unsatisfactory, then the board
may reallocate the unused funds to the remaining regions on a pro
rata basis.  
(6) 5% of the fund shall be used by the board to support region-wide
reporting systems and to provide other regional administration and
technical assistance. 
Sub-divn.  6: Audit  of  regional  emergency  medical  services
board.
   144E.52: Funding for the emergency medical services regions. 
84

The Emergency Medical Services Regulatory Board shall distribute
funds appropriated from the general fund equally among the emergency
medical service regions.  Each regional board may use this money to
reimburse eligible emergency medical services personnel for continuing
education costs related to emergency care that are personally incurred
and are not reimbursed from other sources.  Eligible emergency medical
services personnel include, but are not limited to, dispatchers, emergency
room physicians, emergency room nurses, first responders, emergency
medical technicians, and paramedics. 
There are some of the important statutes/Rules in force elsewhere
which can form the basis for a similar system in India so as to fulfil the
needs  of  our  society,  referred  to  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  in
Parmanand Katara  and other cases.
In  the  next  chapter,  (Chapter-IV),  we  propose  to  give  our
recommendations  for  a law to be made in India, so  far as  requiring
hospitals and medical practitioners to compulsorily provide emergency
medical care without rising objections.
So far as ambulances are concerned, except to the extent transfer
from one hospital to another, we are not giving any recommendation
though there are separate statutes giving ambulances, in USA, as stated
above.
85

CHAPTER  V
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANDATORY EMERGENCY
MEDICAL CARE BY HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL
PRACTITIONERS 
In the light of the discussion in Chapters I and II, and the principles
applied  for  mandatory  emergency  medical  care  in  hospitals  in  USA  in
particular,  as  described  in  chapter  III,  we  propose  to  give  our
recommendations, keeping in view the observations of the Supreme Court
in Parmanand Katara v. Union of India AIR 1989 SC 2039, Paschim Banga
Khet Mazdoor Samiti v. State of West Bengal: 1996(4) SCC 37 and Indian
Medical Association  v. V.S. Shanta 1995(6) SCC 651 and decision of the
National Consumer Redressal Commission in  Pravat Kumar Mukherjee  v.
Ruby General Hospital (25.4.2005).
We  are  drafting  a  Model  Law  for  the  States  in  view  of  the
observation of the Supreme Court.  It may be noted that ‘hospitals’ fall
under Entry 6 of State List in Schedule VII of the Constitution of India.  The
reference to medical practitioners in this Bill is purely incidental.
Duty of Hospitals and Medical Practitioners:
86

We  have  noticed  the  observations  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
Parmanad Katara v. Union of India : AIR 1989 SC 2039 that hospitals and
medical practitioners have a duty to provide emergency medical care.
In that case, the Court observed that “the effort to save the persons
should be the top priority not only of the medical professionals but even of
the police or any other citizen who happens to be connected with the matter
or who happens to notice such an accident or a situation”.  The Court said,
“it  is  the  obligation of  those  who  are  in  charge  of  the  health  of  the
community to preserve life so that the innocent may be protected and the
guilty may be punished”.  The Court further observed:
“A doctor at the Government hospital positioned to meet the State
obligation is, therefore, duty bound to extend medical assistance for
preserving life.  Every doctor whether at a Government hospital or
otherwise, has the professional obligation to extend his services with
due expertise for protecting life.  No law or State action can intervene
to avoid/ delay the discharge of the  paramount obligation cast upon
members  of  the  medical  profession.   The  obligation  being  total,
absolute and  paramount, laws  of procedure whether in  statutes  or
otherwise which would interfere with the discharge of this obligation
cannot be sustained and must, therefore, give way.”
The Court also observed:
87

“But  on  behalf  of  the  medical  profession  there  is  one  more
apprehension which  sometimes prevents  a medical  professional  in
spite of his desire to help the person, as he apprehends that he will be
a witness and may have to face police interrogation which sometimes
may need going to the police station repeatedly and waiting and also
to be a witness in a Court of law where also he apprehends that he
may have to go on number of days and may have to wait for a long
time  and  may  have  to  face  sometimes  long  unnecessary  cross-
examination which sometimes may even be humiliating for a man in
the medical profession and in our opinion, it is this apprehension
which prevents a medical professional who is not entrusted with the
duty of handling medico-legal cases to do the needful, he always tries
to avoid and even if approached, directs the person concerned to go to
a State hospital and particularly to the person who is in-charge of the
medico-legal cases.”
The Court directed:
“We are of the view that every doctor wherever he be within the
territory  of  India  should  forthwith  be  aware  of  this  position  and,
therefore, we direct that this decision of ours shall be published in all
journals reporting  decisions  of  this  Court  and  adequate  publicity
should  be  given  by  the  national  media as  also  through  the
Doordarshan and All India Radio.”
Similar views were expressed in the other cases referred to above.
88

We are, therefore, of the opinion that it is necessary to impose a
statutory duty on hospitals and medical practitioners to attend on a person
who has met with an accident or who is in an emergency condition who
comes  before them or who is  brought  before them, without  raising  any
objection and without any excuse that it is a medico-legal case and that the
person must be taken to a Government hospital.
Apart  from this  kind  of  objections,  there  are  other  circumstances
which are recognised today as being responsible for refusal to treat persons
mentioned above. One such objection is that the person is not immediately
in a position to meet the expenditure that may be involved in emergency
medical  treatment.   Sometimes,  hospitals  or  doctors  want  immediate
payment. Some others are not prepared to take up cases where the person
does not have insurance or has no facility for medical reimbursement either
from  his  employer  or  under  any  other  medical  reimbursement  scheme.
These and other objections necessitate that a specific statutory provision
must be made imposing a mandatory duty on hospitals and doctors to treat
persons  who  are  injured  in  accidents  or  who  are  in  other  medical
emergencies.  They have to first treat the patient, screen him, stabilize him
and render such emergency medical care as is required or is available in the
hospital or the clinic of the medical practitioner.  We are also proposing a
statutory scheme for reimbursement by the State Governments.
The first few hours are known as ‘golden hours’ for such patients
for if there is no emergency medical care coming soon after the accident or
other emergency medical condition, the life of the person may be lost for
ever or he may remain crippled and ill beyond repair for all time.
89

In the United States of America, as stated in chapter III, lack of
interest on the part of hospitals to attend on victims of accidents, those in an
emergency medical condition and women under labour led to the passing of
a law called EMTALA STATUTE (42 USC 1395 DD) (Emergency Medical
Treatment and Labour Act) by amending the Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA).  That Act made it a mandatory duty
on the part of hospitals to attend on such persons.  The Act contains an
entire scheme of screening, stabilizing and rendering emergency treatment.
It also deals with situations where the hospital is not sufficiently equipped
to  provide  stabilization  or  emergency  treatment  and  in  that  event,  the
hospital has to transfer the person to another hospital.  In certain cases, it
cannot transfer unless the patient is stabilized.  A number of safeguards are
provided in Emtala as to what should be done for transfer of a person to
another hospital. The Emtala also creates offences against those who violate
the duties envisaged by it.
In this Report and the Bill, we have adopted some of the principles
stated in Emtala and we have made suitable changes for our purposes in
India.
(A)  We recommend statutory duties on hospitals and medical practitioners
We, therefore, recommend a section in the proposed law to make it
mandatory  to  direct  medical  assistance  in  accidents  and  emergencies
precluding  the  hospitals  or  doctors  from  raising  any  objection  on  the
following grounds:-
90

(a) that it is a medico-legal case requiring information to be given
to the police authorities, or
(a) that the person is not immediately in a position to make
payment for screening and emergency medical treatment or
that  immediate  payment  should  be  made  as  a  condition
precedent for treatment, or
(b) that the person does not have medical insurance or is not a
member  of  any  medical  scheme  providing  for  medical
reimbursement.
In addition, we propose that “no other unreasonable objection” can be
raised for giving emergency medical treatment.
The draft of the proposed section 3 is as follows: 
“Duty  of  duty  doctors  in  hospitals  and  private  medical
practitioners
3. It  shall  be  the  duty  of  every  hospital  and  every  medical
practitioner to immediately attend on every person involved in an
accident or who is purportedly in an emergency condition, when such
a person has come or has been brought to the hospital or to the private
medical practitioner and screen or transfer such person as stated in
section  4  and  when  the  screening  reveals  the  existence  of  an
emergency medical condition, to stabilize or transfer such person as
91

stated in section 5 and afford them, such medical treatment as may be
urgently called for -
(i) without  raising  any  objection  that  it  is  a medico-legal  case
requiring information to the police authorities,
(ii) whether or not such a person is immediately in a position to
make payment for screening and emergency medical treatment,
and without insisting on payment as a condition precedent.
(iii) whether or not such a person has medical insurance or is a
member of any medical scheme of the person’s employer or to
a scheme which otherwise provides for medical reimbursement,
and
(iv) without raising any other unreasonable objection.”
 (B) ‘Screening’ a person to determine if he is in an’emergency medical
condition.
Definition of ‘emergency medical condition’
The next requirement is to make it mandatory for “screening” the
person to find out whether the person requires emergency medical treatment
in the hospitals, i.e. treatment as an in-patient or whether he could be treated
in  the  out  patient  department  of  the  hospital.   Even  a  private  medical
practitioner can conduct such a screening.  The results of the screening must
be documented by the hospital or doctor in their registers.  Section 4 of the
Bill provides for mandatory screening as follows: 
92

“Screening of the person
4. Whenever such a person referred to in section 3, is brought or comes
to the hospital or medical practitioner, it shall be their duty to provide an
appropriate  medical  screening  examination  within  the  capability  of  the
hospital or the medical practitioner, as the case may be, for the purpose of
determining whether or not an emergency medical condition exists.”
Provided that if such hospital or medical practitioner, as the case may
be, is not having capability for conducting appropriate medical screening
examination, it shall be their duty to arrange for the transfer of the person to
a hospital or to another medical practitioner which or who, in their opinion,
has the necessary capabilities for such medical screening examination.”
Once the mandatory screening is done, it may reveal that the person is
or is not in an emergency medical condition. 
By emergency medical condition, (which we propose to define) we
mean a medical condition manifesting acute symptoms of sufficient severity
(including severe pain) where the absence of emergency medical treatment
could reasonably be expected to result in
(i) death of the person,
(ii) serious jeopardy in the health of the person (or in the case of
a  pregnant  woman,  in  her  health  and  the  health  of  the
unborn child), or
(iii) serious impairment of bodily functions, 
(iv) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part,
93

We propose to add an Explanation as to what is emergency medical
condition of a pregnant woman such as where there is no adequate time to
effect a safe transfer of the person to another hospital before delivery, or the
transfer may pose a threat to the health or safety of the woman or her unborn
child.”
(C) Emergency  Medical  Treatment  to  a  person  who  is  in  emergency
medical condition.
Stabilising a person:
If a person is in an emergency medical condition, as revealed by the
screening,  he  must  be  given  emergency  medical  treatment  including
stabilization and further treatment.
We propose to define ‘emergency medical treatment’ as follows:
“‘Emergency medical treatment’ means the action that is required to
be taken, after screening of a person injured in an accident or who is
in  an  emergency  medical  condition,  as  to  the  stabilization  of  the
person and the rendering of such further treatment as may, in the
opinion of the hospital or medical practitioner be necessary for the
purpose of preventing aggravation of the medical condition of the
person or his death and in the case of a pregnant woman, for the
purpose of safe delivery and safeguarding the life of the woman and
the child.”
“Stabilization  with respect to an emergency condition means –
94

(i) to provide such medical treatment of the condition as may be
necessary to assure, within reasonable medical probability, that
no  material  deterioration  of the condition  is  likely to result
from  or  occur  during  the  transfer  of  the  individual  from  a
facility, or
(ii)to provide, with respect to a pregnant woman who is having
contractions, for the safe delivery of the child (including the
placenta), 
and the word ‘stabilized’ shall be understood accordingly.”
Duty of hospital  and  medical  practitioner  to  stabilize  the  medical
condition is provided in section 5(i)) of the Bill as follows:
“Stabilizing the person and transfer
5. Wherever in respect of a person referred to in section 3, screening, as
stated  in section  (4)  has  been  done  and  it has  been  determined  that  an
emergency medical condition exists which requires to be urgently treated, it
shall be the duty of the hospital or medical practitioner, as the case may be,
subject to the provisions of section 6, either -
(i) to provide, within the staff and facilities available at the hospital
or with the medical practitioner, such further medical examination
and such medical treatment as may be required to stabilize his
medical condition, or
(ii) .. .. .. .. ..”
(D) After stabilization, transfer, where necessary
95

But, where the necessary facilities for stabilization are not available
with a hospital or medical practitioner, it is necessary to arrange for transfer
to another hospital or medical practitioner, who or which, in the opinion of
the transferring hospital or medical practitioner, can stabilize the person and
provide further medical treatment.
This is provided in section 5(ii) of the Bill as follows:
“Stabilizing the person and transfer
5. Wherever in respect of a person referred to in section 3, screening, as
stated  in section  (4)  has  been  done  and  it has  been  determined  that  an
emergency medical condition exists which requires to be urgently treated, it
shall be the duty of the hospital or medical practitioner, as the case may be,
subject to the provisions of section 6, either -
(i) .. .. .. .. .. ..
(ii)where  such facilities  are not available  with the hospital  or the
medical practitioner, or the person request for a transfer arrange
for the transfer of the person to a hospital or to another medical
practitioner  which  or  who  in  their  opinion  has  the  necessary
facilities for such further medical examination, stabilization and
further medical treatment and then the provisions of section 8 shall
apply.”
(E) Refusal for transfer for treatment or transfer
If a person injured in an accident or in serious  medical condition
refuses  to  give  consent  either  for  emergency  medical  treatment  (i.e.
96

including stabilization) or for treatment after stabilization, the hospital or
medical  practitioner  must  get  his  written  informed  consent.   Similarly,
where for lack of facilities in the hospital or with the medical practitioner,
or where the patient requests for transfer, he has to be transferred to another
hospital or medical practitioner, and the person  refuses  for transfer, the
person’s  written  informed  refusal  must  be  obtained  and  if  such  person
refusesto give consent, the duty of the hospital or medical practitioner, as
provided in Section 5, shall cease to exist.  This is provided in proviso to
section 5.  Proviso reads as follows:
“Provided that where such person refuses to give consent for
treatment or transfer, as stated in section 6, thereafter, duty of the
hospital or medical practitioner shall cease to exist.”
This is provided in section 6 of the Draft Bill.
“Refusal by the person to consent for treatment or transfer
6. Where in respect of a person referred to in section 3, it has been
determined  that  he  requires  emergency  medical  treatment  or  has  to  be
transferred as stated in section 5, and where such person is mentally or
physically in a position to refuse in writing,
(i) refuses  to  consent  to  emergency  medical  treatment  after  the
hospital  or  the  medical  practitioner,  as  the  case  may  be,  has
offered to provide further emergency medical treatment, and after
being  informed  of  the  risks  and  benefits  of  such  emergency
medical treatment, the duty doctor in the hospital or the medical
practitioner shall take all reasonable steps to obtain the person’s
97

written informed consent in respect of his refusal to consent for
emergency medical treatment; or
(ii)refuses to consent for transfer to another medical facility after the
hospital  or  the  medical  practitioner,  as  the  case  may  be,  has
offered to transfer him to another medical facility in accordance
with section 8, and after being informed of the risks and benefits
to such person of such transfer, the duty officer in hospital or the
medical practitioner, shall take all reasonable steps to obtain the
person’s  written  informed  consent  in  respect  of  his  refusal  to
consent to such transfer.”
(F) No transfer before stabilization:
As proposed in section 7 of the Bill,  where a person requests for a
transfer,  referred  to  in  section  5(ii),  but  is  in  an  emergency  medical
condition which has not stabilized, he should not be transferred if facilities
for stabilization are available without following the procedure; unless
(a) the person, upon being informed of the obligations of the duty
doctor or of the medical practitioner as stated in section 3 and of
the  risk  of  transfer,  requests  for  transfer  in  writing  without
stabilization, to another medical facility, or
(b) the duty doctor in the hospital or the medical practitioner, as the
case may be, has signed a certificate that, based upon information
available at the time of transfer, the medical benefits reasonably
expected from the provision of appropriate emergency medical
treatment at another hospital or with another medical practitioner
outweigh the increased risks to the person and in the case of a
98

pregnant woman under labour, to the unborn child, of the effects
of transfer, 
and unless the transfer is an ‘appropriate transfer’.
(G) Transfer  must  be  an  appropriate  transfer:  Care  during  transfer,
ambulance & records etc.:
For  transfer,  the  hospital  or medical  practitioner  must  call  for  an
ambulance  and  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  agencies  running  ambulances  to
provide the ambulance without raising any objection that it should be paid
first.  If no ambulance is available, the hospital or medical practitioner has
to seek the help of the police to requisition any vehicle for transport. The
transferring hospital or doctor must provide for medical facilities during the
transport.  Section  8  which  deals  with  these  aspects  under  the  heading
‘appropriate transfer’ reads as follows:
“Appropriate transfer
8. A transfer to another hospital or medical practitioner shall be
treated as an appropriate transfer if
(a) the  transferring  hospital  or  the  medical  practitioner  provides
medical treatment within its or his capacity which minimizes the
risks to the health of the person and in the case of a pregnant
woman  in  labour,  the  health  of  the  unborn  child  during  such
transfer, and
99

(b) the receiving hospital or the medical practitioner has available
space,  qualified  personnel   and  infrastructure  for  providing
emergency medical treatment to the person and thereafter, in so
far  as  the  stabilization  and  further  medical  treatment  are
concerned,  the  duties  cast  under  section  3  shall  apply  to  the
receiving hospital or the receiving medical practitioner.
(c) the  transferring  hospital  or  medical  practitioner  sends  to  the
receiving hospital or receiving medical practitioner
(i) all medical records (or copies thereof), relating to the
screening and the emergency medical condition of the
person, which are available at the time of such transfer,
including  records  relating  to  the  person’s  medical
condition, observation of signs or symptoms, preliminary
diagnosis, treatment provided, results of any tests and the
informed written consent, if any, and
(ii) a certificate of the hospital or medical practitioner that,
based  upon  the  information  available  at  the  time  of
transfer  that  the  medical  benefits  reasonably  expected
from the provision of appropriate medical treatment at
the receiving hospital outweigh the increased risks, on
account of the transfer, to the person and, in case of a
women under labor, to the unborn child.
(d) the  transferring  hospital  or  medical  practitioner  provides
necessary medical  facilities  including  life support systems and
qualified personnel within the capacity of the transferring hospital
or  medical  practitioner,  to  accompany  the  person  during  the
100

period covered by transport to the receiving hospital or receiving
medical practitioner.
(e) the transferring hospital or medical practitioner has informed, by
telephone  or otherwise, the  hospital  or medical  practitioner  to
which or to whom the person is being transferred that a person in
an emergent medical is being transferred and furnish the details of
the person’s condition,
Provided that where any ambulance or other transport vehicle
is  not  available  with  the  transferring  hospital  or  medical
practitioner, it or he shall call for the services of an ambulance or
other  transport  vehicle  and  in case of non-availability thereof,
shall  seek  the  assistance  of  any  police  authorities  having
jurisdiction over the area where the transferring hospital or the
clinic  of  the  medical  officer  is  located,  for  requisitioning  a
transport vehicle,
Provided further that when any ambulance or vehicle is called
for,  by  such  hospital  or  medical  practitioner  or  by  police
authorities as aforesaid, the agency running the ambulance or the
owner  or  person  operating  the  vehicle  shall  not  raise  any
objection to provide the ambulance or other vehicle on any of the
grounds referred to in clauses (i) to (iv) in section 3.”
(H) Maintenance of Records by hospitals and medical practitioners:
It  is  necessary  that  the  hospital  or  medical  practitioner  maintain
records. The details are set out in section 9 of the Draft Bill.
101

“Every  hospital,  medical  practitioner,  --  shall  maintain  a  separate
register containing the following information:
(a) name  and  address  of  the  person  injured,  date  or  place  of
accident  as  reported,  nature  of  injuries  and  other  relevant
details and the person who brought him,
(b) name  and  address  of  the  person  purportedly  in  emergency
medical condition, nature of emergency and nature of medical
condition and the person who brought him,
(c) details  of the screening  tests  done and the determination  of
emergency condition,
(d) whether the person is in a position to give informed consent for
emergency  medical  treatment  including  stabilization  or  for
transfer or if he refused them,
(e) whether emergency medical treatment was not given for want
of facilities, if so, which facilities,
(f) nature of tests done, results thereof, surgery conducted, who
attended, time, date and hours of treatment,
(g) details of transfer to another hospital or medical practitioner
(h) details of fee paid to consultants or laboratories,
(i) details of expenditure incurred,
(j) other particulars to show that the hospital or doctor complied
with its or his duties under the Act.
(k) Such other particulars as may be prescribed.”
(I) Scheme  for  reimbursement  to  hospitals  and  medical  practitioners,
ambulance for transfer etc. to be framed by State Governments: States
to allocate Funds:
102

The State Government must frame a scheme for reimbursement to
hospitals, medical practitioners, ambulances and those who provide vehicles
for  transport.  The  State  must  notify  an  authority  which  will  deal  with
reimbursement. The State must set apart substantial money for purpose of
reimbursement.   The  scheme  must  provide  for  the  procedure  for
reimbursement. The scheme must be published in State Gazette.  These are
provided in the Draft Bill in section 10, which reads as follows:
“Scheme of State Government for reimbursement of expenses
10(1) The State Government shall frame a scheme, within one month from
the  date  of  commencement  of  this  Act,  for  the  purpose  of
reimbursement of the expenses incurred in the course of performance
of the duties referred to in sections 3 to 9, by a hospital or medical
practitioner or an agency which has provided ambulance facilities or
other person who has provided a vehicle for transfer as mentioned in
clause  (e) of section 8.
(2) Such a scheme shall, inter-alia, refer to –
(a) the authority which will be in-charge of reimbursement
of expenses,
(b) the  conditions  which  have  to  be  satisfied  before
reimbursement of expenses can be granted,
(c) the  manner  in  which  applications  may  be  made  for
reimbursement and what supporting documents have to
be  submitted  or  to  whom  the  reimbursement  can  be
made,
103

(d) the manner in which the material produced by the person
seeking reimbursement has to be scrutinized or verified,
(e) the procedure for giving a hearing to the applicant in
respect of the reimbursement claimed,
(f) the time frame for reimbursement,
(g) the mode of repayment, and
(h) other details which may result in an effective scheme of
reimbursement of expenses incurred.
(1) The  State  Government  shall  allocate  necessary  funds  for  the
purpose  of  reimbursement  of  the  expenses  incurred  by  those
referred to in sub-section (1),
(2) The  scheme  framed  under  sub-section  (1)  and  subsequent
changes, if any, made thereto from time to time, shall be published
in the Gazette of the State Government.
(J) Penalties  for  breach  of  duties  by  hospitals,  medical  practitioners,
ambulances for transfer etc.:
There must be penalties against hospitals, medical practitioners or
those who run ambulances or those whose vehicles are requisitioned by
police for transport.
There must be provision for imprisonment or fine for those who fail
in their duties – including those in-charge of management or responsible for
giving emergency medical aid in a hospital.
There must be provision for cancellation of licenses to hospitals.
104

There must also be provision for disciplinary action against medical
practitioners.
This shall be in addition to penalties prescribed under any other law
in force.
These are all provided in section 11.
“Penalties
11. (1) Any person managing or responsible for the management of the
hospital or a medical practitioner or agency running an ambulance or
owner or operator of a vehicle which or who refuses to perform all or
any of the duties referred to in sections 3 to 9, without justifiable
reason, shall be liable for punishment by way of imprisonment for a
period  which  may extend  upto six  months  or for fine  which may
extend upto rupees ten thousand or for both.
(2) Any  hospital  refusing  to  perform  the  duties  referred  to  in
sections 3 to 9 without justifiable reason, may be proceeded against
for suspension or cancellation of any of its licenses under which it is
running the hospital, in addition to the penalty referred to in sub-
section (1) that may be imposed on the persons owning or managing
the hospital.
(1) Any  medical  practitioner  attached  to  a  hospital  or  any  other
medical practitioner who refuses to perform the duties referred to
in sections 3 to 9, without justifiable reason may, in addition to the
penalty  provided  in  sub-section  (1),  be  subjected  to  such
disciplinary action  as  may be determined by the  State  Medical
Council.
105

(2)   These provisions will be in addition to the penalties prescribed
under any other law in force.”
(L) Rules to be framed by State Government:
We have provided that the State Government may make rules for
implementation  of  the  provisions  of  the  Act  and  that  the  rules  will  be
published in the State Gazette.  This is provided in section 12.
“Rule making powers
12. (1) The  State  Governments  may  make  rules  for  the  purpose  of
enforcement of the provisions of this Act and publish the same in
the State Gazette.
       (2) The rules referred to in sub-section (1) shall be laid before the
legislature  within  a  period  of  one  month  from  the  date  of
publication  of  the  rules  in  the  State  Gazette  as  stated  in  sub-
section (1).”
106

The Draft of the Bill is annexed with this Report.  We recommend
accordingly.
( Justice M. Jagannadha Rao )
Chairman
( R.L. Meena )
Vice Chairman
Dated:  31.08.2006        ( Dr. D.P. Sharma )
Member-Secretary
107

ANNEXURE
MODEL LAW
ON
MEDICAL TREATMENT AFTER ACCIDENTS AND
DURING EMERGENCY MEDICAL CONDITION AND WOMEN IN
LABOUR, BILL
A  Bill  to  mandate  emergency medical  treatment  by hospitals  and
medical practitioners to victims of accidents and those in other emergency
medical condition including women in labour without raising any objection
or objections that the cases are medico-legal cases or any other objection
and  without  demanding  any payment as  a  condition  precedent  for such
treatment  and  to  provide  for  scheme  for  reimbursement  of  emergency
medical treatment and for other matters incidental thereto:
Chapter I
Preliminary
Short title and commencement
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Treatment After Accidents
and During Emergency Medical Condition Act, 2006.
(2) It shall extend to the territories of the State of …..
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint.
108

Definitions
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) ‘accident’ means any accident giving rise to severe bodily pain or
serious  injury to human beings  who are in emergency medical
condition;
(a) ‘emergency  medical  condition’  means  a  medical  condition
manifesting  acute  symptoms  of  sufficient  severity  (including
severe pain) where the absence of emergency medical treatment
could reasonably be expected to result in
(i) death of the person, or
(ii) serious jeopardy in the health of the person (or in the case of
a  pregnant  woman,  in  her  health  and  the  health  of  the
unborn child), or
(iii) serious impairment of bodily functions, or
(iv) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.
Explanation:  In  the  case  of  a  pregnant  woman  who  is  having
contractions, an ‘emergency medical condition’ shall be deemed to
exist where
(i)   there is no adequate time to effect a safe transfer of the
person to another hospital before delivery, or
(ii)  the transfer may pose a threat to the health or safety of the
woman or her unborn child.
109

(b) ‘emergency medical treatment’ means the action that is required to
be taken, after screening of a person injured in an accident or who
is in an emergency medical condition, as to the stabilization of the
person and the rendering of such further treatment as may, in the
opinion of the hospital or medical practitioner be necessary for the
purpose of preventing aggravation of the medical condition of the
person or his death and in the case of a pregnant woman, for the
purpose of a safe delivery and safeguarding the life of the woman
and the child.
(c)  ‘medical practitioner’ means a medical practitioner who possesses
any recognized medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of
section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956)
and who is  enrolled  in  a State  Medical  Register as  defined  in
clause  (k)  of  that  section  and  includes  a  private  medical
practitioner;
(d) ‘hospital’ includes a nursing home, clinic medical center, medical
institution having hospital emergency department or facilities for
emergency medical treatment;
(e) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by Rules made under this Act;
(f) ‘stabilize’ means, with respect to an emergency medical condition
(i) to provide such medical treatment of the condition as may
be  necessary  to  assure,  within  reasonable  medical
probability, that no material deterioration of the condition is
likely to  result  from  or  occur  during  the  transfer  of  the
individual from a facility, or
110

(ii) to provide, with respect to a pregnant woman who is having
contractions, for the safe delivery of the child (including the
placenta), 
and the word ‘stabilized’ shall be understood accordingly.
(g) ‘transfer’  means  the  movement  (including  the  discharge)  of an
individual  outside a hospital’s  facilities  at the direction  of any
designated medical practitioner employed by a hospital but does
not include an individual who has been declared dead or leaves the
facility without the permission of the doctor attending on him.
Explanation:  ‘designated  medical  practitioner’  means  any
practitioner employed by the hospital for directing transfer outside
a hospital’s facility and includes any other medical practitioner
temporarily discharging the functions of such designated medical
practitioner.
Duty of duty doctors in hospitals and private medical practitioners
3. It  shall  be  the  duty  of  every  hospital  and  every  private  medical
practitioner to immediately attend on every person involved in an accident
or who is purportedly in an emergency condition, when such a person has
come  or  has  been  brought  to  the  hospital  or  to  the  private  medical
practitioner and screen or transfer such person as stated in section 4 and
when  the  screening  reveals  the  existence  of  an  emergency  medical
condition, to stabilize or transfer such person as stated in section 5 and
afford them, such medical treatment as may be urgently called for, -
111

(i) without  raising  any  objection  that  it  is  a  medico-legal  case
requiring information to the police authorities,
(ii) whether or not such a person is immediately in a position to make
payment for the screening and emergency medical treatment, and
without insisting on payment as a condition precedent.
(iii) whether or not such a person has medical insurance or is a member
of any medical scheme of the person’s employer or to a scheme
which otherwise provides for medical reimbursement, and
(iv) without raising any other unreasonable objection.
Screening of the person
4. Whenever such a person referred to in section 3, comes or is brought
to the hospital or medical practitioner, it shall be their duty to provide an
appropriate  medical  screening  examination  within  the  capability  of  the
hospital or the medical practitioner, as the case may be, for the purpose of
determining whether or not an emergency medical condition exists.
Provided that if such hospital or medical practitioner, as the case may
be, is not having capability for conducting appropriate medical screening
examination, it shall be their duty to arrange for the transfer of the person to
a hospital or to another medical practitioner which or who in their opinion
has the necessary capabilities for such medical screening examination.
Stabilizing the person and transfer
112

5. Wherever in respect of a person referred to in section 3, screening,
as stated in section 4 has been done and it has been determined that an
emergency medical condition exists which requires to be urgently treated, it
shall be the duty of the hospital or medical practitioner, as the case may be,
either -
(h) to provide, within the staff and facilities available at the hospital
or with the medical practitioner, such further medical examination
and such medical treatment as may be required to stabilize his
medical condition, or
(ii) where  such facilities  are not available  with the hospital  or the
medical practitioner, or the person requests for a transfer, arrange
for the transfer of the person to a hospital or to another medical
practitioner  which  or  who  in  their  opinion  has  the  necessary
facilities for such further medical examination, stabilization and
further medical treatment and then the provisions of section 8 shall
apply.
Provided that where such person refuses to give consent for
treatment or transfer, as stated in section 6, thereafter, duty of the
hospital or medical practitioner shall cease to exist.
Refusal by the person to consent for treatment or transfer
6. Where in respect of a person referred to in section 3, it has been
determined  that  he  requires  emergency  medical  treatment  or  has  to  be
transferred as stated in section 5, and where such person is mentally or
physically in a position to refuse in writing,
113

(i) refuses  to  consent  to  emergency  medical  treatment  after  the
hospital  or  the  medical  practitioner,  as  the  case  may  be,  has
offered to provide further emergency medical treatment, and after
being  informed  of  the  risks  and  benefits  of  such  emergency
medical treatment, the duty doctor in the hospital or the medical
practitioner shall take all reasonable steps to obtain the person’s
written informed consent in respect of his refusal to consent for
emergency medical treatment; or
(ii) refuses to consent for transfer to another medical facility after the
hospital  or  the  medical  practitioner,  as  the  case  may  be,  has
offered to transfer him to another medical facility in accordance
with section 8, and after being informed of the risks and benefits
to such person of such transfer, the duty doctor in hospital or the
medical practitioner, shall take all reasonable steps to obtain the
person’s  written  informed  consent  in  respect  of  his  refusal  to
consent to such transfer.
Restricting transfer till person is stabilized
7. Where a person referred to in section 3, requests for transfer but is in
an emergency medical condition which has not stabilized, the hospital or the
medical practitioner, as the case may be, shall not transfer the person if
facilities for stabilization are available, unless
(i) the person, upon being informed of the obligations of the duty
doctor or of the medical practitioner as stated in section 3 and of
114

the  risk  of  transfer,  requests  for  transfer  in  writing  without
stabilization, to another medical facility, or
(ii) the duty doctor in the hospital or the medical practitioner, as the
case may be, has signed a certificate that, based upon information
available at the time of transfer, the medical benefits reasonably
expected from the provision of appropriate emergency medical
treatment hospital or with another medical practitioner outweigh
the increased risks to the person and in the case of a pregnant
woman  under  labour,  to  the  unborn  child,  of  the  effects  of
transfer, and
(2) the transfer is an appropriate transfer as stated in subsection (8).
Appropriate transfer
8. A transfer to another hospital or medical practitioner shall be treated
as an appropriate transfer if
(a) the  transferring  hospital  or  the  medical  practitioner  provides
medical treatment within its or his capacity which minimizes the
risks to the health of the person and in the case of a pregnant
woman  in  labour,  the  health  of  the  unborn  child  during  such
transfer, and
(b) the receiving  hospital  or the  medical  practitioner  has  available
space,  qualified  personnel   and  infrastructure  for  providing
emergency medical treatment to the person and thereafter, in so far
as the stabilization and further medical treatment are concerned,
115

the duties cast under section 3 shall apply to the receiving hospital
or the receiving medical practitioner.
(c) the  transferring  hospital  or  medical  practitioner  sends  to  the
receiving hospital or receiving medical practitioner
(i) all  medical  records  (or  copies  thereof),  relating  to  the
screening  and  the  emergency  medical  condition  of  the
person,  which  are available  at  the time of such  transfer,
including records relating to the person’s medical condition,
observation  of signs  or symptoms, preliminary diagnosis,
treatment provided, results of any tests  and the informed
written consent, if any, and
(ii)a  certificate  of  the  hospital  or  medical  practitioner  that,
based upon the information available at the time of transfer
that  the  medical  benefits  reasonably  expected  from  the
provision of appropriate medical treatment at the receiving
hospital  outweigh  the  increased  risks,  on  account  of  the
transfer, to the person and, in case of a women under labor,
to the unborn child.
(d) the  transferring  hospital  or  medical  practitioner  provides
necessary medical  facilities  including  life support systems and
qualified personnel within the capacity of the transferring hospital
or  medical  practitioner,  to  accompany  the  person  during  the
period covered by transport to the receiving hospital or receiving
medical practitioner.
(e) the transferring hospital or medical practitioner has informed, by
telephone  or otherwise, the  hospital  or medical  practitioner  to
which or to whom the person is being transferred that a person is
116

an emergent medical is being transferred and furnish the details of
the person’s condition,
Provided that where any ambulance or other transport
vehicle is not available with the transferring hospital or medical
practitioner, it or he shall call for the services of an ambulance or
other  transport  vehicle  and  in case of non-availability thereof,
shall  seek  the  assistance  of  any  police  authorities  having
jurisdiction over the area where the transferring hospital or the
clinic  of  the  medical  officer  is  located  for  requisitioning  a
transport vehicle,
Provided further that when any ambulance or vehicle is
called for by such hospital or medical practitioner or by police
authorities as aforesaid, the agency running the ambulance or the
owner  or  person  operating  the  vehicle,  shall  not  raise  any
objection to provide the ambulance or other transport vehicle on
any of the grounds referred to in clauses (i) to (iv) in section 3.
Maintenance of records
9. Every  hospital,  medical  practitioner,  --  shall  maintain  a  separate
register containing the following information:
(a) name and address of the person injured, date or place of accident
as reported, nature of injuries and other relevant details, and the
person who brought him,
(b) name and address of the person purportedly in emergency medical
condition, nature of emergency and nature of medical condition,
and the person who brought him,
117

(c) details  of  the  screening  tests  done  and  the  determination  of
emergency condition,
(d) whether the person is in a position to give informed consent for
emergency medical treatment including stabilization or for transfer
or if he refused them,
(e) whether emergency medical treatment was not given for want of
facilities, if so, which facilities,
(f) nature  of  tests  done,  results  thereof,  surgery  conducted,  who
attended, time, date and hours of treatment,
(g) details of transfer to another hospital or medical practitioner
(h) details of fee paid to consultants or laboratories,
(i) details of expenditure incurred,
(j) other particulars to show that the hospital or doctor complied with
its or his duties under the Act.
(k) Such other particulars as may be prescribed.
Scheme of State Government for reimbursement of expenses 
10.   (1) The State Government shall frame a scheme, within one month
from the date of commencement of this Act, for the purpose of
reimbursement  of  the  expenses  incurred  in  the  course  of
performance of the duties referred to in sections 3 to 9, by a
hospital  or  medical  practitioner  or  an  agency  which  has
provided ambulance facilities or other person who has provided
a vehicle for transfer as mentioned in clause  (e) of section 8.
118

(2) Such a scheme shall, inter-alia, refer to –
(a) the authority which will be in-charge of reimbursement
of expenses,
(b) the  conditions  which  have  to  be  satisfied  before
reimbursement of expenses can be granted,
(c) the  manner  in  which  applications  may  be  made  for
reimbursement and what supporting documents have to
be  submitted  or  to  whom  the  reimbursement  can  be
made,
(d) the manner in which the material produced by the person
seeking reimbursement has to be scrutinized or verified,
(e) the procedure for giving a hearing to the applicant in respect
of the reimbursement claimed,
(f) the time frame for reimbursement,
(g) the mode of repayment, and
(h) other details  which may result in an effective scheme of
reimbursement of expenses incurred.
(3) The State Government shall allocate necessary funds for the
purpose of reimbursement of the expenses incurred by those
referred to in sub-section (1),
(4) The  scheme  framed  under  sub-section  (1)  and  subsequent
changes,  if  any,  made  thereto  from  time  to  time,  shall  be
published in the Gazette of the State Government.
119

Penalties
11. (1) Any person managing or responsible for the management of the
hospital or a medical practitioner or agency running an ambulance or
owner or operator of a vehicle which or who refuses to perform all or
any of the duties referred to in sections 3 to 9, without justifiable
reason, shall be liable for punishment by way of imprisonment for a
period  which  may extend  upto six  months  or for fine  which may
extend upto rupees ten thousand or for both.
(2) Any  hospital  refusing  to  perform  the  duties  referred  to  in
sections 3 to 9 without justifiable reason, may be proceeded against
for suspension or cancellation of any of its licenses under which it is
running the hospital, in addition to the penalty referred to in sub-
section (1) that may be imposed on the persons owning or managing
the hospital.
(3) Any  medical  practitioner  attached  to  a  hospital  or  any  other
medical practitioner who refuses to perform the duties referred to
in sections 3 to 9, without justifiable reason may, in addition to the
penalty  provided  in  sub-section  (1),  be  subjected  to  such
disciplinary action  as  may be determined by the  State  Medical
Council.
(4)   These provisions will be in addition to the penalties prescribed
under any other law in force.
Rule making powers
12. (1) The  State  Governments  may  make  rules  for  the  purpose  of
enforcement of the provisions of this Act and publish the same in
the State Gazette.
120

       (2) The rules referred to in sub-section (1) shall be laid before the
legislature  within  a  period  of  one  month  from  the  date  of
publication  of  the  rules  in  the  State  Gazette  as  stated  in  sub-
section (1).
121