GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
TWO HUNDERED AND THIRD REPORT
ON
SECTION 438 OF THE CODE OF 
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
AS AMENDED BY THE CODE OF
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
ACT, 2005
(ANTICIPATORY BAIL)
DECEMBER 2007

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan     ILI Building (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                         New Delhi-110 001
                                 Tel. : 91-11-
23384475
                                  Fax.: 91-23383564
D.O. No.6(3)128/2006-LC(LS)               December  26, 2007
     Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Sub:203  rd   Report of the Law Commission on   ‘Anticipatory   
  Bail’
I have great pleasure in forwarding the 203rd Report
of the Law Commission on ‘Section 438 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973’ as amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2005, dealing with ‘anticipatory bail’.
The enforcement of the amended Section has been
kept  in  abeyance  by  the  Government  in  view  of  lawyers’
objections thereto. Before taking a final decision in the matter,
the  Government  decided  to  seek  the  expert  opinion  of  this
Commission  on  the  amended  Section.  Hence,  the  present
reference.
The Ministry of Home Affairs, in their D.O. letter
No. 12/53/2006-Judl.Cell, dated September 19, 2006, sought the
opinion of the Law Commission of India on the amended version
of Section 438 Cr.P.C. The Section has been amended to the
effect that:
(i) the  power  to  grant  anticipatory bail  should  be
exercised by the Court of Session or the High
Court  after  taking  into  consideration  certain
factors;
(ii) upon  consideration  of  these  factors,  the  Court
will  either  reject  the  application  or  issue  an
2

interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail in
the first instance;
(iii) where the Court has rejected the application or
has not passed any interim order, it will be open
to  the  officer-in-charge  of  a  Police  Station  to
arrest the applicant, without warrant, on the basis
of the accusation apprehended in the application
for the grant of anticipatory bail;
(iv) where the Court makes an  interim order for the
grant  of  interim  bail,  it  will  forthwith  give  a
notice being not less than seven days’ notice to
the Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of
the  Police  with  a  view  to  give  them  an
opportunity of being heard when the application
is finally heard;
(v) the presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory
bail will be obligatory at the time of final hearing
of  the  application  if  the  Court  considers  such
presence necessary in the interest of justice on an
application  made  by the  Public  Prosecutor  for
such presence.
The principal objection against the new provisions
has been the personal presence of the applicant at the time of
final hearing of the application. The main apprehension has been
that the applicant could be arrested in the event of rejection of his
application and the applicant would thus be deprived of his right
to move the higher court for necessary relief.
In this 203rd Report, the Law Commission has made
an in-depth study of the scope and ambit of the existing as well
as the amended Section with reference to the case law on the
subject  before  making  its  recommendations.  A  draft  text  for
revising the Section is also given in the concluding Chapter of
the Report.
3

As regards the Proviso to sub-section (1) of Section
438, as amended, permitting arrest of the applicant by the police
without warrant on the basis of the accusations apprehended in
the  application  for  grant  of  anticipatory  bail,  the  Law
Commission has been of the view that the proviso is more of
explanatory nature and clarifies that there shall no bar against
such arrest by the police in the circumstances mentioned therein
if there are otherwise reasonable grounds to make such arrest.
The Commission noted that the correct law was laid down by the
Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  on  this  aspect  in  the  case  of  M.C.
Abraham and another Vs State of Maharashtra and others, (2003)
2  SCC  649.   Accordingly,  the  power  of  arrest  is  not  to  be
exercised  in  a  mechanical  manner  but  with  caution  and
circumspection.  The  mere  fact  that  the  bail  applications  are
rejected  is  no  ground  for  directing  the  applicants’  immediate
arrest.  There may be cases where an application may be rejected
and yet the applicant is not put up for trial as, after investigation,
no material is found against him. In this case, the apex court held
that  the  High  Court  proceeded  on  the  assumption  that  since
petitions for anticipatory bails were rejected, there was no option
for the State but to arrest those persons. This assumption, the
Supreme  Court  said,  was  erroneous.   Accordingly,  the
Commission has concluded that it is not necessary to have the
Proviso  inserted  in  Section  438(1)  and  recommended  its
omission.
As regards sub–section (1B) relating to the presence
of the applicant at the time of final hearing, the Law Commission
has gone in depth in the nitty gritty of restraint and custody to
which the applicant may be subjected to in terms of the Court’s
order under sub-section (1B). The Law Commission has come to
the conclusion that when the applicant appears in the Court in
compliance of the Court’s order and is subjected to the Court’s
directions, he may be viewed as in Court’s custody and this may
render the relief of anticipatory bail infructuous. Accordingly, the
Law  Commission  has  recommended  omission  of  sub-section
(1B) of Section 438 Cr.P.C.
4

During the course of its examination of the subject,
the Law Commission noted plethora of case-law as to in what
order  the  Court  of  Session  and  the  High  Court  should  be
approached under Section 438 as well as the grant, or as the case
may be, denial of anticipatory bail after an application for the
same relief has been considered and disposed of by one of the
two alternative judicial forums. It is noted that concurrent powers
under the Section are vested in the two courts in their original
jurisdiction. This might be for the reason that orders for grant or
refusal of bail are interlocutory orders against which no revision
lie. But this position was obtained when the law does not provide
for interim and final orders on anticipatory bail applications and
such  applications  are  ordinarily  filed  in  pending  cases.  Now,
when even registration of FIR is not considered necessary for
serving  an  anticipatory  bail  application  and  final  orders  are
required to be passed after hearing the applicants and the State
authorities, the scenario has materially altered. Accordingly, the
Law Commission has recommended insertion of a provision in
the Section 438 on the lines of sub-section (3) of Section 397
providing for an option to choose either the Court of Session or
the High Court in which concurrent powers of revision are vested
and  once  that  option  is  exercised,  the  recourse  to  the  other
alternative forum is barred for the same relief. However, all other
existing remedy against such a final order will continue to be
available except to the extent as aforesaid. In addition, the benefit
of  revision  under  Section  397  are  recommended  and  for  this
purpose, also with a view to place the matter beyond pale of any
controversy, an Explanation is recommended to be inserted to
clarify that 
a  final  order  on  an  anticipatory  bail  application  will  not  be
construed as an interlocutory order for the purposes of the Code.
The  Law Commission  has  thus  recommended  revision  of  the
amended Section 438 as follows:
(i) The  proviso  to  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  438
shall be omitted.
5

(ii)  Sub-section (1B) shall be omitted.
(iii) A new sub-section on the lines of Section 397 (3)
should be inserted.
(iv) An Explanation should be inserted clarifying that
a final order on an application seeking direction
under the Section shall not be construed as an
interlocutory order for the purposes of the Code.
The Report contains the text of Section 438 so revised in
its final chapter.
We,  therefore,  request  you  to  kindly  issue
instructions for transmission of this 203rd Report to the Ministry
of Home Affairs.
With respectful Regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister of Law & Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
    New Delhi-110 001  
Encl: as above 
6

            LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SECTION 438 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE, 1973 AS AMENDED BY THE CODE
OF
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT,
2005
(ANTICIPATORY BAIL)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
        1. Introduction 1
2. Pre-Amended Law 5
3. Legislative Changes 12
4. Amended Law 19
5. Lawyers’ Objections to Amended Section 22
6.Analysis of the Amended Law and Conclusions  25
6.1 Nature and Extent of Amendments 25
6.2 Note on Proviso to Sub-Section (1) 
of the Amended Section 31
6.3 Note on Section 438 (1B) 40
6.4  Note on Concurrent Jurisdiction 64
7. Recommendations 86
7

CHAPTER–1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 This  Report  deals  with  Section  438  of  the  Code  of  Criminal
Procedure,  1973  as  amended  by  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2005. This Section provides for a direction from the
Court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  viz.  the  High  Court  or  the  Court  of
Session, for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest in the event of his
arrest. This is popularly known as ‘Anticipatory Bail’, that is to say, bail in
anticipation of arrest. The amended Section has not yet been brought into
force.
1.2 It is expedient to state briefly the genesis of this Report so that its
scope can be properly understood and appreciated in its right perspective. 
1.3 Vide its D.O. letter No. 12/53/2006-Judl.Cell, dated September 19,
2006, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, made the
present reference, the relevant extracts of which read as follows:-
“The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005 has a
provision vide clause 38 to amend Section 438 Cr.P.C. to the effect
that (i) the power to grant anticipatory bail should be exercised by
the Court of Session or High Court after taking into consideration
certain circumstances; (ii) if the Court does not reject the application
for the grant of anticipatory bail, and makes an interim order of bail,
8

it  should,  forthwith  give  notice  to  the  Public  Prosecutor  and
Superintendent  of  Police  and  the  question  of  bail  would  be  re-
examined in the light of the respective contentions of the parties;
and (iii) the presence of the person seeking anticipatory bail in the
Court  should  be  made  mandatory  at  the  time  of  hearing  of  the
application  for  the  grant  of  anticipatory  bail  subject  to  certain
exceptions. 
The Bill, after being passed by Parliament, the lawyers’ fraternity
from various parts of the country especially from the State of Tamil
Nadu protested against some of the provisions of the Act including
the  proposed  amendment  to  Section  438  Cr.P.C.  relating  to
anticipatory bail. 
The principal objection against the new provision is that a person
seeking advanced bail has to be present in Court when the petition is
taken  up.  The  main  apprehension  is  that  the  suspect  could  be
arrested  as  soon  as  Sessions  Court  rejects  his  anticipatory  bail
application, if he is present in the Court. The lawyers’ fraternity
feels that such provision would deny the accused the right to move
higher courts for relief/appeal. Grant of anticipatory bail is a power
concurrently vested in both the Sessions Court and the High Court.
The Lawyers fear that the suspects may be arrested even before they
could exhaust their option of moving the High Court. 
In view of the strong protest against this provision by the Lawyers
fraternity, giving effect to this provision was kept in abeyance and it
9

was decided to seek expert opinion of the Law Commission of India
on the amended version of Section 438 Cr.P.C.”
1.4 Accordingly, the Law Commission was requested to examine the
amended version of Section 438 Cr.P.C. and to suggest a revised version
which might have the required provision to enable the accused to get due
opportunity  to  approach  higher  courts  with  his  plea  before  being
apprehended by police.
1.5 On  a  query  by  this  Commission,  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs
clarified, vide their Office Memorandum No. 12/53/2006-Judl.Cell, dated
August 8, 2007 as follows: 
“The amendment made to Section 438 Cr.P.C. was on the basis of
the  suggestions  made  by  the  Inspectors  General  of  Police
Conference, 1981. At the behest of the Committee of Secretaries, a
Group of Officers consisting of Director, CBI, Director, BPR&D,
Chief  Secretary,  Delhi,  Additional  Secretary,  MHA  and  Joint
Secretary in  the  Department  of Legal  Affairs  was  constituted  to
examine the suggestions made by the aforesaid Inspectors General
of  Police  Conference.  The  Group  of  Officers  agreed  with  the
suggestion to amend Section 438 Cr.P.C. as suggested by Inspectors
General of Police Conference and accordingly this was included in
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 which was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 9th May, 1994.
The proposal which was considered and passed in Parliament went
through consideration and checking at various levels including the
10

Law Ministry, Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
etc.
After consideration and passing of the Bill in Parliament during the
budget session of 2005, the lawyers’ fraternity from many parts of
the  country  particularly  from  the  State  of  Tamil  Nadu  strongly
protested against some of the provisions including amendment made
to Section 438 Cr.P.C. Therefore, a proposal was made to give effect
to those provisions of the Act which have not been objected to by a
large section. As regards those provisions which did not find favour
with the lawyers’ fraternity, it was proposed that they might be re-
examined by an expert group or the Law Commission of India. The
Cabinet Note wherein this proposal was made had been approved by
the Cabinet in its meeting held on 4th March, 2006. Subsequently, a
reference was made to the Law Commission of India requesting the
Law Commission to examine the possibility of revising the amended
Section 438 Cr.P.C. with sufficient safeguards so as to neutralize the
apprehension expressed by the lawyers’ fraternity”.
1.6 Accordingly, the Law Commission was requested to examine the
amended version of Section 438 Cr.P.C. and to explore the possibility of
suggesting  a  modified  version  to  make  the  provision  workable  with
sufficient safeguards to protect the rights and liberty of the citizen.
11

CHAPTER–2
PRE-AMENDED LAW
2.1 Chapter XXXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 contains
provisions  as  to  Bail  and  Bonds.  Section  438  provides  for  Court’s
direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest. Such a bail is
popularly referred to as anticipatory bail as it is granted in anticipation of
arrest. This is a new provision in the present Code. The earlier Code i.e.
the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898,  did  not  contain  any  specific
provision  corresponding  to  the  present  Section  438.  In the  absence  of
specific provision under the Old Code, there was a difference of opinion
among the High Courts of different States on the question as to whether
Courts had the inherent power to pass an order of bail in anticipation of
arrest, the preponderance of view being that it did not have such power.
(See Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others Vs State of Punjab (1980) 2
SCC 565). 
2.2 The new provision in Section 438 (has been inserted in the Code on
the recommendation of the Law Commission in its 41st Report. In this
Report,  the  Law  Commission  made  the  following  observations  on
‘anticipatory bail’ viz. 
“39.9.  Anticipatory Bail:- The suggestion for directing the release
of  a  person  on  bail  prior  to  his  arrest  (commonly  known  as
“anticipatory bail”) was carefully considered by us. Though there is
a conflict of judicial opinion about the power of a Court to grant
12

anticipatory bail, the majority view is that there is no such power
under the existing provisions of the Code. The necessity for granting
anticipatory  bail  arises  mainly  because  sometimes  influential
persons try to implicate their rivals in false causes for the purpose of
disgracing them or for other purposes by getting them detained in
jail for some days. In recent times, with the accentuation of political
rivalry, this  tendency is showing  signs  of steady increase. Apart
from false cases, where there are reasonable grounds for holding that
a person accused of an offence is not likely to abscond, or otherwise
misuse  his  liberty while  on  bail,  there  seems  no  justification  to
require him first to submit to custody, remain in prison for some
days and then apply for bail.
We recommend the acceptance of this suggestion. We are further of
the view that this special power should be conferred only on High
Court and the Court of Session, and that the order should take effect
at the time of arrest or thereafter. 
………….
We considered carefully the question of laying down in the statute
certain  conditions  under  which  alone  anticipatory  bail  could  be
granted. But we found that it may not be practicable to exhaustively
enumerate those conditions; and moreover, the laying down of such
conditions may be construed as pre-judging (partially at any rate) the
whole case. Hence we would leave it to the discretion of the court
and prefer not to fetter such discretion in the statutory provision
itself. Superior Courts will, undoubtedly, exercise their discretion
properly,  and  not  make  any  observations  in  the  order  granting
13

anticipatory bail which will have a tendency to prejudice the fair
trial of the accused.” (pp. 320-321).
2.3 Based  on  the  41st Report  of  the  Law  Commission,  Government
introduced the Criminal Procedure Code Bill, 1970. In the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the Bill of the Code of Criminal Procedure in
respect of Clause 447 which was incorporated in the Code as Section 438,
it was stated as follows:-
“As recommended by the Commission, a new provision is being
made enabling the superior Courts to grant anticipatory bail, i.e., a
direction to release a person on bail issued even before the person is
arrested.  With  a  view  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  the  person
hampering the investigation, special provision is being made that the
Court granting anticipatory bail may impose such conditions as it
thinks fit. These conditions may be that a person shall make himself
available to the Investigating Officer as and when required and shall
not do anything to hamper investigation.”
2.4 From  the  Statement  of  Objects  and  Reasons  for  introduction  of
Section 438 of the Code, it is apparent that the framers of the Code on the
basis of recommendation of the Law Commission purported to evolve a
device by which a citizen is not forced to face disgrace at the instance of
influential persons who try to implicate their rivals in false cases; but the
Law Commission, at the same time, had also issued a note of caution that
such power should not be exercised in a routine manner. [see Durga Prasad
Vs State of Bihar, 1987 Cri. L.J.1200].
14

2.5 The Bill was referred to the Joint Committee of both the Houses. In
the  meantime,  Government  decided  to  seek  the  opinion  of  the  Law
Commission on few points, the reasons for which were stated as follows:-
“Ás there are divergent opinions on certain points which are being
considered by the Joint Committee in respect of the said Bill, the
Government  would  like  to  have  the  considered  opinion  of  the
present  Law  Commission  on  certain  specific  points  hereinafter
mentioned. As the consideration of the Bill, clause by clause, has
already been taken by the Joint Committee of Parliament,  it
would not be necessary to refer the whole Bill for the opinion of the
Law Commission afresh. But the Government would very much like
to have the considered opinion of the Commission on a few specific
points which has arisen for consideration.”
2.6 These  points,  inter  alia,  included  …  (vi)  Provision  for  grant  of
anticipatory bail”.
2.7 The Commission submitted 48th Reports on these points. As regards
anticipatory bail, the Report stated as follows:-
“The Bill introduces a provision for the grant of anticipatory bail.
This is substantially in accordance with the recommendation made
by the previous Commission. We agree that this would be a useful
addition though we must add that it is in very exceptional cases that
such a power should be exercised.
15

We are further of the view that in order to ensure that the provision
is not put to abuse at the instance of unscrupulous petitioners, the
final order should be made only after notice to Public Prosecutor.
The initial order should only be an interim one. Further, the relevant
Sections should make it clear that the direction can be issued only
for reasons to be recorded and if the Court is satisfied that such a
direction is necessary in the interest of justice.
It will also be convenient to provide that notice of the interim order
as well as of the final orders will be given to the Superintendent of
Police forthwith,” [48th Report of Law Commission of India, July
1970, P.10 (para 31)].
2.8 It appears that the aforesaid recommendations did not find favour
with the Government as can be gathered from the text of Section 438 as
ultimately enacted in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2.9 The  Joint  Committee  of  the  Parliament  made  the  following
observations in respect of Clause 436, which was the original clause 447
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Bill, 1970:-
“The Committee is of the opinion that certain specific conditions for
the grant of anticipatory bail should be laid down in the clause itself
for being complied with before the anticipatory bail is granted. This
clause has been amended accordingly”.
16

2.10 Clause 436 was then enacted as Section 438 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, which reads as follows:-
“438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.
(1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be
arrested on  an  accusation  of  having  committed  a  non-
bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the
Court of Session for a direction under this Section; and
that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the event of
such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes  a
direction  under  sub-section  (1),  it  may  include  such
conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the
particular case, as it may think fit, including –
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself 
available for interrogation by a police officer as and when  
required;
(ii)   a condition that the person shall not, directly or 
indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to any 
person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to 
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to 
any police officer;
17

(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India 
without the previous permission of the Court;
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-
section (3) of Section 437, as if the bail were granted under 
that Section.
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an 
officer-in-charge of a police station on such accusation,
and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while 
in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be 
released on bail; and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of 
such offence decides that a warrant should issue in the first 
instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant
in conformity with the direction of the Court under sub-
section (1).
18

CHAPTER–3
LEGISLATIVE CHANGES
3.1 With  a  view  to  removing  certain  difficulties  experienced  in  its
working,  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973  underwent  several
amendments in 1974, 1978, 1980, 1983, 1988, 1990, 1991 and 1993 for
specific purposes.
3.2 In  May,  1994  the  Government  of  India  introduced  the  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure  (Amendment)  Bill,  1994  in  the  Rajya  Sabha
incorporating many amendments in the Code including those proposed to
be made in Section 438.
3.3 Earlier,  the  IGP’s  Conference,  1981,  inter  alia,  suggested  that
Section 438 be amended so as to take away the powers to grant
anticipatory bail from the Court of Session and vest the same only in
the High Courts. In May 1983, the Home Ministry constituted  a
Group of Officers, which considered the question of deletion of the
provision of anticipatory bail and felt that since, after deletion of the
provision, the High Court will be competent to grant bail under the
inherent powers, the provision need not be deleted. As sometimes,
the Courts take a very liberal view in granting anticipatory bail to
criminals, it was considered that such powers should be taken away
from the Court of Session and vest only in the High Court even
though it will make difficult for the poor persons to avail of the
provisions of anticipatory bail. At times, an accused person secures
19

anticipatory  bail  even  without  making  an  appearance  before  the
Court. It was, therefore, proposed to amend Section 438 Cr.P.C. to
the effect that:-
(i) the power to grant anticipatory bail should be taken away
from the Court of Session and should vest only in the High
Court;
(ii) if the Court does not reject the application for the grant of
anticipatory bail, and makes an interim order of bail, it
should, forthwith give notice to the public prosecutor or
Government Advocate. The question of bail would then be
re-examined in the light of the respective contentions of
the parties; and
(iii) the presence of the person seeking anticipatory bail in the
Court should be made mandatory at the time of hearing of
the  application  for  the  grant  of  anticipatory  bail  and
provision made for certain exceptions so as to cover cases
where a person is sick or cannot appear in Court due to
certain unavoidable circumstances.
3.4 A Parliamentary Bill being No. 56 of 1988 was introduced in the
Lok Sabha on 13th May, 1988, clause 49 whereof sought to amend Section
438 by inter alia, omitting the words “or the Court of Session” both from
sub-section (1) and (2) of that Section, but the same had not been carried
out.
20

3.5 In  May,  1994  the  Government  of  India  introduced  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 in the Rajya Sabha while the
Bill  was  before  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Home  Affairs,  the
Government  of  India  made  a  reference  to  the  Law  Commission  to
undertake comprehensive revision of the Code of Criminal Procedure and
suggest reforms in the law. Accordingly, the Law Commission submitted
its  154th Report  on  the  subject.  It  may be  expedient  to  reproduce  the
relevant extracts of this Report hereinbelow insofar as the same relate to
anticipatory bail.
“Since the introduction of the provision of anticipatory bail under
Section 438, its scope has been under judicial scrutiny. The leading
case on the subject is Gurubaksh Singh Sibbia Vs State of Punjab
(1980) 2SCC 565. The Supreme Court, reversing the Full Bench
decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in this case (Shri
Gurubaksh Singh Sibbia and others Vs State of Punjab, AIR 1978
P&H 1), which had given a restricted interpretation of the scope of
Section  438,  held  that  in  the  context  of  Article  21  of  the
Constitution, any statutory provision (Section 438) concerned with
personal liberty could not be whittled down by reading restrictions
and limitations into it. The Court observed:-
“Since denial of bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty, the
Court should lean against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions
on the scope of Section 438, especially when no such restrictions
have been imposed by the legislature in the terms of that Section”
(p. 586).
21

The Court also held that the conditions subject to which the bail can
be granted under 437(1) should not be read into Section 438. While
allowing unfettered jurisdiction to the High Court and the Court of
Session, the Supreme Court fondly hoped that a convention may
develop whereby the High Court and the Court of Session would
exercise their discretionary powers in their wisdom. The Court laid
down the following clarifications on certain points which had given
rise to misgivings:-
(i) The person applying for anticipatory bail should have
reason to believe that he will be arrested. Mere ‘fear’ of
arrest cannot amount to ‘reasonable belief’.
(ii) The High Court and the Court of Session must apply
their mind with care and circumspection and determine
whether the case for anticipatory bail is made out or
not.
(iii) Filing  of  FIR  is  not  a  condition  precedent  to  the
exercise of power under Section 438.
(iv) Anticipatory bail can be granted even after the filing of
FIR.
(v) Section 438 cannot be applied after arrest.
(vi) No blanket order of anticipatory bail can be passed by
any Court (pp. 589-590).
The working of Section 438 has been criticized in that it hampers
effective investigation of serious crimes, the accused misuse their
22

freedom to criminally intimidate and even assault the witnesses and
tamper with valuable evidence and that whereas the rich, influential
and powerful accused resort to it and the poor do not, owing to their
indigent circumstances thus giving rise to the feeling that some are
“more equal than others” in the legal process.
In view of the above circumstances, some State governments have
made local amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure. Uttar
Pradesh Legislature has repealed 438 by the Amending Act of 1976.
West Bengal Legislature enacted amendments in 1990 incorporating
certain limitations on the power to grant anticipatory bail.  Those
are: (i) mere filing of application in the High Court or Court  of
Session for grant of anticipatory bail does not debar the police from
apprehending  the  offenders;  (ii)  the  High  Court  or  the  Court  of
Session be required to dispose of an application for anticipatory bail
within thirty days  from the date  of such  application  and  (iii) in
offences  punishable  with  death,  imprisonment  for  life  or
imprisonment for a term not less than 7 years, no final order shall be
made without giving the state a minimum of seven days’ notice to
present its case.
 
The Code of Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill in clause 43 seeks
to amend Section 438, echoing the recommendations of the Law
Commission  in  its  48th Report  and  also  on  some  other  grounds
referred to above, in the following manner:-
23

“In  Section  438  of  the  principal  Act  for  sub-section  (1),  the
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:
(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested
on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may
apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under
this Section that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on
bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter alia,
the following factors, namely: 
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to
whether he has previously undergone imprisonment on
conviction  by  a  Court  in  respect  of  any  cognizable
offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of
injuring or humiliating the applicant by having him so
arrested.
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order
for the grant of anticipatory bail:
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the
Court of Session, has not passed any interim order under this
sub-section  or  has  rejected  the  application  for  grant  of
anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer-in-charge of a
24

police station to arrest, without warrant the applicant, if there
are reasonable grounds for such arrest.
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-
Section (1), it shall forthwith cause a notice being not less
than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order
to be served on the Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent
of  Police,  with  a  view  to  give  the  Public  Prosecutor  a
reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application
shall be finally heard by the Court.
(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail
shall  be  obligatory  at  the  time  of  final  hearing  of  the
application and passing of final order by the Court, if on
an application made to it by the Public Prosecutor, the Court
considers such presence necessary in the interest of justice.”
In the various workshops diverse views were expressed regarding the
retention or deletion of the provision of anticipatory bail. One view is
that it is being misused by affluent and influential sections of accused
in society and hence be deleted from the Code. The other view is that it
is a salutary provision to safeguard the personal liberty and therefore be
retained. Misuse of the same in some instances by itself cannot be a
ground for its deletion. However, some restraints may be imposed in
order to minimize such misuse. We are, however, of the opinion that the
provision  contained  under  Section  438  regarding  anticipatory  bail
should remain in the Code but subject to the amendments suggested in
25

clause 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
which lays down adequate safeguards”. (Pages 27-29)
26

CHAPTER–4
AMENDED LAW
4.1 The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act 2005 came into
force on 23rd June, 2006 except certain Sections thereof, including Section
38.  Section  38  relates  to  amendment  of  Section  438  of  the  Code.
Accordingly for existing sub-section (1), new sub-sections (1), (1A) and
(1B) are substituted. As stated above, the amended Section has not yet
come into force.
4.2“Section  438  as  substituted  by  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2005 is reproduced hereinbelow:
“438 (1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be  
arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, 
he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a 
direction under this Section that in the event of such arrest, he shall be
released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration,
inter alia, the following factors, namely: 
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to
whether  he  has  previously  undergone  imprisonment  on
conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
27

(iv) where  the accusation has  been  made with the object of
injuring  or  humiliating  the  applicant  by having  him so
arrested
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order
for the grant of anticipatory bail:
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the
Court of Session, has not passed any interim order under this
sub-section  or  has  rejected  the  application  for  grant  of
anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer-in-charge of a
police  station  to  arrest,  without  warrant,  the  applicant  on  the
basis of the accusation apprehended in such application.
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section
(1), it shall forthwith cause a notice being not less than seven
days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on
the Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a
view to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of
being heard when the application shall be finally heard by the
Court.
(1B)   The  presence  of the  applicant  seeking  anticipatory bail
shall be obligatory  at  the  time  of  final  hearing  of  the
application  and  passing of final  order  by the  Court, if  on  an
application  made  to  it  by  the  Public  Prosecutor,  the  Court
considers such presence necessary in the interest of justice.
28

(2)  When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction
under sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in such directions
in  the  light  of  the  facts  of  the  particular  case,  as  it  may think  fit,
including –
      (i) a condition that the person shall make himself available
for  interrogation  by  a  police  officer  as  and  when
required; 
      (ii) a  condition  that  the  person  shall  not,  directly  or
indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to
any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or
to any police officer;
     (iii)    a condition that the person shall not leave India without
the previous permission of the Court;
     (iv)  such other condition as may be imposed under sub-
section (3) of Section 437, as if the bail were granted
under that Section.
(3)  If  such  person  is  thereafter  arrested  without  warrant  by  an
officer-in  charge  of  a  police  station  on  such  accusation,  and  is
prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the
custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and
if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a
warrant should issue in the first instance against that person, he shall
issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court
under sub-section (1).
29

                          CHAPTER–5
   LAWYERS’ OBJECTIONS TO AMENDED SECTION
5.1 The Madras Bar Association appointed a Committee, headed by a
former State Public Prosecutor, to study the various amendments to the
Code of Criminal Procedure made by the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2005. The Committee gave its report to the effect that
40 out of 44 amendments were welcome ones. The other four, including
the one made in Section 438 were opposed being against public interest
and  would,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Committee,  interfere  with  the
independence of the judiciary and the rights of the accused seriously. The
other three set of amendments related to Sections 25A, 324 and 378(1)(a).
The Bar Association, therefore, appealed to the Government not to enforce
these  amendments.  The  relevant  extracts  of  the  Committee’s
recommendations in respect of Section 438 are as follows:-
“The proviso (2) to sub-section (1) of Section 438 has to be
deleted. The apprehension of the accused is manifold and in
some cases there may not even be a real possibility of arrest
though the accused may apprehend an arrest. To permit the
police  officer-in-charge  to  arrest  without  warrant,  the
applicant, on the basis of the accusation apprehended in such
an application would defeat the very purpose of Section 438.
Similarly, sub-section would only make the hearing of the bail
application more cumbersome and the presence of the accused
30

as  envisaged  in  sub-section  (1B)  at  the  time  of  the  final
hearing of the application would enable the police officer to
arrest the accused in the event of the rejection of the bail
application.  The  whole  object  of  introducing  Section  438
Cr.P.C.  in  1973  Cr.P.C.  will  be  defeated  if  the  present
amendment is  given  effect to. It is  pertinent  that  both  the
Court  of  Session  as  well  as  the  High  Court  have  the
concurrent powers in entertaining the bail application. In the
event of the applicant choosing to move the Court of
Session, he has a right to move the High Court in the event of
his  anticipatory  bail  application  being  dismissed.  In  such
circumstances,  if  the  accused  is  present  in  the  Court  of
Session at the time of hearing of anticipatory bail application
and  if  he  were  to  be  arrested  without  giving  him  an
opportunity to move the High Court for anticipatory bail, the
very object of this provision would be defeated.”
5.2The Advocates’ Association, High Court, Chennai, too opposed
the amended Section 438. It has submitted as follows:-
“The proposed amendment being brought in Section 438 of 
Code of Criminal Procedure will take away the rights of an alleged
accused who may not have involved in any offence without  there
being any chance to get anticipatory bail without subjecting  himself
before the Court where the anticipatory application is pending. In the
event of not granting any anticipatory bail by the Court, such person
can straightaway be arrested.  This  amendment  provides  an
31

unexpected opportunity and embarrassment to the Advocates to bring
the alleged accused before the  Court  hearing  anticipatory  bail
applications on an application made to the Court by the public prosecutor 
and such advocates indirectly  help  the  police  to  arrest  such
accused without there being  any  investigation  made  in  the  alleged
offence. This amendment will take away the rights and liberty of an
individual to put forth his plea before a Court without getting arrested.”
32

CHAPTER–6
ANALYSIS OF THE AMENDED LAW AND CONCLUSIONS
6.1 Nature and Extent of Amendments
6.1.1 sub-section (1) of Section 438 has been extensively amended
by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005. New
sub-sections (1), (1A) and (1B) substitute the existing sub-section
(1) of Section 438. Accordingly, the following major changes have
been made in the Section, namely:
1. Certain factors which the Court will consider, among
others, while dealing with application for anticipatory
bail, are mentioned in sub-section (1).
2. Upon  consideration  of  these  factors,  the  Court  will
either reject the application or issue an interim order for
the grant of anticipatory bail in the first instance.
3. Where the Court has either rejected the application or
has  not  passed  any  interim  order  for  grant  of
anticipatory bail, it will be open to the officer-in-charge
of  a  police  station  to  arrest  without  warrant  the
applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended in
such application [Proviso to sub-section (1)].
4. Where the Court grants an interim order, it will give
notice  being  not  less  than  seven  days  notice  to  the
Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police with
33

a  view  to  give  the  Public  Prosecutor  a  reasonable
opportunity  of  being  heard  when  the  application  is
finally heard by the Court [sub-section (1A)].
5. The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail
will be obligatory at the time of final hearing of the
application and passing of a final order by the Court if
on an application made to it by the Public Prosecutor,
the  Court  considers  such  presence  necessary  in  the
interest of justice. [sub-section (1B)].
6.1.2 The Court would grant or refuse anticipatory bail after taking
into consideration inter alia the following factors, namely:
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to
whether he has previously undergone imprisonment on
conviction  by  a  Court  in  respect  of  any  cognizable
offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of
injuring or humiliating the applicant by having him so
arrested.
6.1.3 The changes  mentioned at Sl. No.1 to 4 are already being
followed in practice by Courts while dealing with applications for
grant of anticipatory bail, without these being formally incorporated
in the Section. The change mentioned at Sl. No. 5 is the only new
34

addition. The objections to the amendments are primarily directed
against the changes mentioned at Sl. Nos. 3 and 5 above.
6.1.4 Thus, it may be seen that in Rattan Kumar Vs State of Assam
(1979) Cri. L.J. NOC 143 (Gauhati), ad interim anticipatory bail was
granted  ex  parte.  Subsequently  on  hearing  both  the  parties,  the
earlier  order  granting  bail  was  reversed.  It  was  held  that  the
subsequent order was not order of cancellation but refusal to grant
bail.
6.1.5 Although the existing Section 438 does not stipulate hearing
of the State authorities while considering grant of anticipatory bail,
it  is  inherent  in  the  provision  that  the  State  authorities  being
necessary  parties  to  such  an  application  should  be  afforded  an
opportunity of being heard in the matter. In State of Assam and
another Vs R.K. Krishan Kumar and others, AIR 1998 SC 144, the
learned Single Judge of Bombay High Court issued direction under
Section 438 to release the respondents, if arrested, on bail without
even  affording  an opportunity to the  appellants, i.e. the  State  of
Assam and its Director General of Police in spite of they being made
parties in each of the applications for anticipatory bail. In view of
the conceded position that appellants were not heard by the High
Court, the Supreme Court  set aside the impugned orders on that
ground  alone.  Without  going  into  the  question  whether  Bombay
High Court had jurisdiction to entertain the applications filed by
respondents  in respect  of the  offences  perpetrated in Assam, the
Supreme Court further directed that a Division Bench of Guwahati
35

High  Court  should  dispose  of  the  applications  which  stood
transferred  to  it,  after  hearing  the  appellants.  The  Court  further
directed  that  “status  quo  as  on  today  will  be  maintained  by the
appellants vis-à-vis the respondents herein till 7.11.1997 which is
necessary  to  enable  the  Division  Bench  of  the  High  Court  of
Guwahati to pass appropriate orders on the applications filed by the
respondents” The appeals were disposed of accordingly.
6.1.6 In Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others Vs State of Punjab
(1980)  2  SCC  565,  the  Supreme  Court  made  the  following
observation, viz.:
“There  was  some  discussion  before  us  on  certain  minor
modalities regarding the passing of bail orders under Section
438(1).  Can  an  order  of  bail  be  passed  under  the  Section
without notice to the Public Prosecutor? It can be. But notice
should  issue  to  the  Public  Prosecutor  or  the  Government
Advocate  forthwith  and  the  question  of bail  should  be re-
examined  in  the  light  of  the  respective  contentions  of the
parties.  The  ad  interim  order  too  must  conform  to  the
requirements of the Section and suitable condition should be
imposed on the applicant even at that stage.” (at page 591)
6.1.7 In  a  very  recent  case,  the  Supreme  Court  set  aside  the
impugned order made by the High Court  without  service on the
appellant, converting the application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to
one  under  Section  438  and  granted  interim  protection.  While
36

deprecating  the  practice  of  converting  applications  filed  under
Section 482 to one for bail in terms of Section 438 or 439 Cr.P.C.
Dr. Arijit Pasayat, J. observed in Savitri Goenka Vs Kusum Lata
Damant and others, 2007 (12) SCALE 799: “Though many points
were urged in respect of the appeal, we find that the impugned order
of the High Court cannot be maintained on one ground. Though it
had  issued  notice  to  the  appellant,  the  matter  was  disposed  of
without hearing the appellant.”  
6.1.8  Thus,  it  may be  seen  that  Courts,  as  a  matter  of  practice,
ordinarily pass interim order in the first instance and the same is
then confirmed or recalled and cancelled after hearing the Public
Prosecutor though there has been no specific provision in Section
438 to that effect. Similarly, the factors for consideration in dealing
with anticipatory bail applications as are now mentioned in the new
Section are only illustrative in nature and the same, along with other
relevant  factors  are  indeed  being  taken  into  consideration  while
making final orders on such applications inspite of the fact that these
have not been expressly incorporated in the pre-amended Section. In
State  of  Rajasthan  Vs  Bal  Chand,  AIR  1977  SC  2447,  Justice
Krishna Iyer observed: “The basic rule may perhaps be tersely put as
bail, not jail, except where there are circumstances suggestive of
fleeing from justice or thwarting the course of justice or creating
other troubles  in the shape  of repeating  offences  or intimidating
witnesses and the like by the petitioner who seeks enlargement on
bail  from  Court.”  In  Jagannath  Vs  State  of  Maharashtra,  1981
Cri.L.J. 1808 (Bom.), the Court listed certain factors which have to
37

be kept in view while granting any bail either post-arrest or pre-
arrest, namely, (i) nature and seriousness of the  accusations, (ii) the
nature of the prosecution evidence, (iii) the severity of the likely
punishment  in  case  the  prosecution  succeeds,  (iv)  status  of  the
accused,  (v)  likelihood  of  repeating  similar  offences,  and  (vi)
likelihood of tampering of prosecution evidence etc.
6.1.9 It can therefore be said that the amended Section merely seeks
to formalize certain aspects that are otherwise being followed in
practice without having been formally included in the Section. It
needs  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  legislation  is  a sphere  which  is
seldom perfectly complete. There may be conditions and practices
which  escape  formal translation into statutory laws but yet, they
continue to influence the conduct of the organs of the State and their
subjects. Such conditions and/or practices may have been initiated in
the first instance in individual cases based on sound reasons, logic
and rationale. Based on their intrinsic value and inherent appeal, no
sooner  than  later,  they  develop  into  customary  practices  before
crystallizing  into  binding  precedents.  When  the  impact  point  is
reached, these conditions and/or practices will emerge as explicit
law through passage of legislation. This is what we say, inchoate
law or, the law in the making. In the present case, such inchoate law
on  anticipatory bail has  thus  been  imbibed into the formal legal
order by statutory incorporation thereof into the Code except to the
extent of conditions mentioned at No. 3 and 5 above which are not
in sync with the extant judicial practices and procedures. These two
aspects are dealt in detail hereinafter.
38

6.2  Note on Proviso to Sub-Section (1) of the Amended Section:
6.2.1 As far as the proviso permitting the arrest where either the
Court  has  not  passed  any  interim  order  or  has  rejected  the
application  for  grant  of  anticipatory  bail,  merely  based  on  the
averments in the anticipatory bail application is concerned, the said
power granted by the proviso can cause incalculable harm for the
following reasons:-
(i) A person approaches the Court for anticipatory bail mainly for
the reason that with some malafide motive the complainant is 
seeking to implicate him falsely in a criminal case. 
Predominantly, this is a reason why a person seeks 
anticipatory bail. No doubt, certain real offenders also make false
allegations of malafide and under that garb seek to obtain 
anticipatory bail. 
(ii) In order to get at the latter category of people, the former are 
also exposed to the humiliation of arrest. It is here that the  
proviso to Section 438 fails to arrive at the right balance.
(iii) Permitting arrest merely because interim bail is denied, in a 
matter where notice has been issued to the police would 
virtually render the anticipatory application infructuous. Traditional
view was that once an anticipatory bail is filed, till it is disposed off,
the person should not be arrested. In fact, some  Police  Standing
Orders had also prescribed that this procedure should be followed.
39

(iv) This proviso should be read down and it should mean that
only where the anticipatory bail application is rejected, either
ex-parte or after notice and if a police officer, under Section
157(1)  Cr.P.C.,  considers  arrest  necessary,  then  and  then
alone should arrest be done. Merely because anticipatory bail
application  is  rejected,  an  innocent  person  should  not  be
arrested for the reason that he set out certain averments as the
basis for apprehending arrest. 
(v) Permitting arrest of an applicant seeking anticipatory bail in
case the Court has not passed any interim order providing
protection against his arrest would render the pending bail
application  infructuous  even  without  going  into  its  merits.
Such arrest may have the effect of over-reaching the Court
and the judicial process. 
(vi) Unless the above interpretation is put the ambiguity in the
proviso will cause hardship. The Supreme Court has held that
an anticipatory bail application can be moved in certain cases
even before an FIR is registered. (Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
and others Vs State of Punjab (1980) 2 SCC 565). In a case
where an FIR is not registered or even an FIR is refused to be
registered (of which the applicant himself may not be aware),
merely because the anticipatory bail application is moved, and
interim  order  is  not  passed  or  where  anticipatory  bail  is
rejected as a matter of course based on the averments, arrest
should not be made.
40

6.2.2 There  seems  to  be  much  substance  in  the  aforesaid
submissions especially when we bear in mind the proper nature and
scope of the power to arrest and the manner in which it is ought to
be exercised in law. It will be relevant to refer to certain very useful
and  succinct  observations  made  by  the  Supreme  Court  on  this
subject  in  the  case  of  M.C.  Abraham  and  another  Vs  State  of
Maharashtra and others (2003) 2 SCC 649.
6.2.3 In this  case, a complaint  was filed  by the  Provident  Fund
Commissioner against the Directors of Maharashtra Antibiotics and
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (referred to as MAPL) alleging offences under
Sections  406 and 409/34 IPC. MAPL was a joint venture of the
Government of India and the State of Maharashtra and had been
declared a sick industry by the Board of Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction. Some of the accused persons moved the High Court
for  grant  of  anticipatory bail  under  Section  438  of the  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure.   Those  petitions  were  rejected  by the  High
Court  by  its  order  dated  7-9-2001.   The  orders  rejecting  those
petitions were not appealed against.
6.2.4 On 10.1.2002,  the  High  Court  passed  the  impugned  order
observing  that  it  was  shocking  that  the  writ  petitioners  have  to
approach the High Court seeking directions against the State to act
on  the  complaint  lodged  by  the  Provident  Fund  Commissioner
against  the  Directors  of  MAPL.  Despite  the  fact  that  their
applications for grant of anticipatory bail had been rejected by the
High Court by a reasoned order, they had not been arrested. The
41

High Court, therefore, felt that in the circumstances, the only course
open to the respondent State was to cause their arrest and prosecute
them. The High Court thereafter passed the following order:-
“We, therefore, direct the respondent State to cause arrest of
those accused and produce them before the Court on or before
14.1.2002.  On their failure to do so we will be constrained to
summon  the  Commissioners  of  Police,  Nagpur,  Pune  and
Mumbai to appear before this Court in person and explain that
as to why they are not able to cause arrest of these persons.
Merely because the accused are government servants/officials
they  do  not  enjoy  any  immunity  from  arrest  if  they  have
committed an offence. It is expected of the State to be diligent
in prosecuting such offenders without discrimination.
The order be communicated to the Principal Secretary, Home
Department,  Government  of  Maharashtra  and  also  to  the
Commissioners of Police of three cities who will be solely
responsible for  failure  to  comply  with  the  orders  of  this
Court.  Learned APP is directed to communicate the orders
by fax, wireless message in addition to other mode of service
and  even  inform  them  on  telephone  SO  16.1.2002.
Authenticated copy be furnished to APP”.
6.2.5 On 16.1.2002, the Court passed another order wherein it was
observed:  “Our  anxiety  is  to  see  that  the  State  expeditiously
42

concludes the investigation in the case and file a charge sheet. We
may again remind the State of the order passed by this Court while
rejecting the pre-arrest bail application on 7.9.2001 and should not
show any laxity in the investigation.”
6.2.6 Earlier on 11.1.2002, the Court had dismissed an application
filed  by  Respondents  for  modification  of  Court’s  Order,  dated
7.9.2001. All these three orders were challenged in appeals by the
appellants in the Supreme Court. 
6.2.7 Allowing the appeals, the Hon’ble Supreme Court made the
following observations:
“In  the  first  place,  arrest  of  an  accused  is  a  part  of  the
investigation and is within the discretion of the investigating
officer.  Section  41  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure
provides for arrest by a police officer without an order from a
Magistrate  and  without  a  warrant.  The  Section  gives
discretion to the police officer who may, without an order
from  a  Magistrate  and  even  without  a  warrant,  arrest  any
person in the situations enumerated in that Section. It is open
to him, in the course of investigation, to arrest any person who
has been concerned with any cognizable offence or against
whom  reasonable  complaint  has  been  made  or  credible
information  has  been  received,  or  a  reasonable  suspicion
exists of his having been so concerned. Obviously, he is not
expected to act in a mechanical manner and in all cases to
43

arrest  the  accused  as  soon  as  the  report  is  lodged.  In
appropriate cases, after some investigation, the investigating
officer may make up his mind as to whether it is necessary to
arrest the accused person.  At that stage the court has no role
to play. Since the power is discretionary, a police officer is
not always bound to arrest an accused even if the allegation
against  him  is  of  having  committed  a  cognizable  offence.
Since an arrest is in the nature of an encroachment  on  the
liberty of the subject and does affect the reputation and status
of the citizen, the power has to be cautiously exercised. It
depends inter alia upon the nature of the offence alleged and
the type of persons who are accused of having committed the
cognizable offence.  Obviously, the power has to be exercised
with caution and circumspection.
… … … 
The  mere  fact  that  the  bail  applications  of  some  of  the
appellants had been rejected is no ground for directing their
immediate arrest. In the very nature of things, a person may
move the court on mere apprehension that he may be arrested.
The court may or may not grant anticipatory bail depending
upon the facts and circumstances of the case and the material
placed before the court. There may, however, be cases where
the application for grant of anticipatory bail may be rejected
and ultimately, after investigation, the said person may not be
put up for trial as no material is disclosed against him in the
course  of investigation.  The  High  Court  proceeded  on  the
assumption that since petitions for anticipatory bail had been
44

rejected, there was no option open for the State but to arrest
those persons. This assumption, to our mind, is erroneous. A
person whose petition for grant of anticipatory bail has been
rejected  may  or  may  not  be  arrested  by  the  investigating
officer depending  upon  the  facts  and  circumstances  of the
case, nature of the offence, the background of the accused, the
facts  disclosed  in  the  course  of  investigation  and  other
relevant considerations.”
6.2.8 Reference  may  also  be  made  to  the  observations  of  the
Supreme Court in S.N. Sharma Vs Bipen Kumar Tiwari and others
(1970) 1 SCC 653 wherein the Court observed: 
“It appears to us that, though the Code of Criminal Procedure
gives to the police unfettered power to investigate all cases
where  they  suspect  that  a  cognizable  offence  has  been
committed,  in  appropriate  cases  an  aggrieved  person  can
always  seek a remedy by invoking  the power of the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution under which, if
the  High  Court  could  be  convinced  that  the  power  of
investigation has been exercised by a police officer malafide,
the  High  Court  can  always  issue  a  writ  of  mandamus
restraining the police officer from misusing his legal powers”
[pp. 657-658 (Para 11).
     
6.2.9 It may thus be seen that the arrest of a person should not
necessarily  be  resorted  to  merely  because  his  application  for
45

anticipatory bail has been rejected by the Court. There has to be
sufficient  grounds  to  arrest  such  a  person.  The  power  of  arrest
should  not  be  exercised  mechanically.   Instead,  it  should  be
exercised cautiously and with circumspection, having regard to the
facts and circumstances of each case, especially the nature of the
offence  alleged  to  have  been  committed  and  antecedents  of  the
accused  person  and  other  relevant  material.  If  upon  such  a
consideration,  the  arrest  of  the  accused  person  is  considered
necessary, only then it would be made and not otherwise. This may
be viewed as inherent in the power of arrest. Necessity of arrest in a
case may be construed as an essential attribute of the valid exercise
of the power to arrest. Absence of such necessity will vitiate the
exercise of the power to arrest and render the arrest so made as
arbitrary and bad in law. 
6.2.10 The proviso is more of clarificatory nature. It is not by way of
an exception to sub-section (1) of the Section. It only seeks to clarify
whether  there  is  any embargo  on  the  Police  power  to arrest  the
applicant/petitioner  on  whose  anticipatory  application  either  no
interim order has been passed or whose application  for direction
under sub-section (1) has been rejected. The proviso declares that
there will not be any embargo and it will be open to the Police to
arrest  such  a  person  if  such  an  arrest  is  otherwise  considered
necessary in a given case. The proviso, however, does not say that
the  Police  must  necessarily  arrest  the  person  in  the  situation
envisaged therein. Undoubtedly, the proviso does not enjoin upon
the Police Officer to mandatorily arrest the person whose application
46

for anticipatory bail has been rejected. It only provides that in the
exigencies mentioned therein, there will not be a bar to the arrest of
the person if the Police otherwise considers his arrest necessary and
there are sufficient grounds to do so. The well settled legal position
is that in the absence of any protective judicial order, there will not
be any fetter on the exercise of power of arrest by the police in
accordance with the provisions of the Code. Since the law on this
aspect of the matter is already very clear, it is not necessary to insert
this proviso in the Section. We are of the considered view that the
general power of arrest of the police need not in fact be asserted in
the context of anticipatory bail as is done in the said Proviso in as
much as it may unwittingly give an impression, howsoever wrong it
might be, that police could  arrest if the applicant  is not  granted
anticipatory  bail.  One  must  further  note  that  the  contingencies
contemplated in the proviso are not only confined to rejection of
anticipatory bail application but also extend to the cases of pendency
of anticipatory bail applications though no interim order has been
made  thereon.  Arrest  in  such  a  case  will  render  the  pending
anticipatory bail application infructuous as no direction for release
on  bail  in  the  event  of arrest  can  be  issued  after  the arrest  has
already been made.  Arrest in such a case will have the effect of
overreaching the Court  even during the pendency of anticipatory
bail  application.  Permitting  arrest  of  the  applicant  during  the
pendency of his anticipatory bail application will defeat the very
purpose of Section 438. We expect the police to be bit more discreet
in effecting arrest in such cases.  As a matter of principle arrest in
such cases should not be made unless it is absolutely necessary to do
47

so in the interest of justice. Even while doing so, proper decorum
and  respect  ought  to  be  shown  to  the  judicial  institution  before
which  anticipatory  bail  application  may be pending.  Arrest  of  a
person whose application for anticipatory bail is rejected, will also
deprive him of his right to move the higher Court for relief against
his arrest. We, therefore, recommend that the Proviso to sub-section
(1) of Section  438  should be omitted as there is  no warrant for
reiterating the general power of arrest of the police as is otherwise
obtained under the existing law. 
6.3 Note on Section 438 (1B):
6.3.1 As far as Section 438(1B) is concerned, the Section provides:
(a) the presence of the person;
(b) seeking anticipatory bail
(c) shall be obligatory;
(d) at  the  time  of  final  hearing  of  the  application  and
posting for final order by the court;
(e) if on application made to it by the Public Prosecutor;
(f) the  court  considers  such  presence  necessary  in  the
interest of justice.
6.3.2 It may thus be seen that the presence of the petitioners is not
necessary  in  all  the  cases  of  final  hearing  of  anticipatory  bail
applications. It is only in such cases where an application has been
filed by the Public Prosecutor for the presence of the petitioner and
the court considers the presence of such person necessary in the
48

interest of justice. Such a conclusion can be reached by the court
after hearing both the parties. The petitioner would thus have an
opportunity  to  present  his  side  of  the  case  while  opposing  the
application  filed  by  the  Public  Prosecutor.  Where  no  such
application has been filed by the Public Prosecutor, it may not be
necessary for the applicant to be present at the final hearing of his
application for anticipatory bail.
6.3.3. Under  the  existing  provision,  it  is  not  necessary  for  the
applicant to be personally present in the court while applying for
anticipatory bail. There is no obligation cast on a person against
whom  a  crime  has  been  registered  by  the  police  for  having
committed a non-bailable offence to appear before the Court to get
himself released on bail in anticipation of his arrest. If there is no
such duty cast on him to surrender and move for bail, it does not
stand to reason that he should be deprived of the right to move for
anticipatory bail as soon as a crime is registered against him. The
right to move for anticipatory bail is available to a petitioner till he
is  actually  arrested  on  the  basis  of  the  accusation  (See
Chandramohan Vs State of Kerala, 1977 K.L.T. 791).
6.3.4 Once the arrest is made, the provisions relating to anticipatory
bail cease to apply. Even an appeal against the grant of anticipatory
bail becomes infructuous. In State of Assam and another Vs Dr.
Brojen Goga and others, AIR 1998 SC 143, the State challenged the
order  of  a  Single  Judge  of  the  Bombay  High  Court  granting
anticipatory bail to the respondent No.1. Inspite of the said order,
49

the  Assam  Police  arrested  respondent  No.1  and  took  him  into
custody. When the petition was taken up for hearing, the Supreme
Court declined to deal with the respective contentions of the parties
as the appeal became infructuous upon the arrest of the respondent
No. 1. The Court observed that it was for the respondent No. 1 to
move the Court of appropriate forum if he wanted to take up the
issue of violation of the direction in the impugned order. 
6.3.5 In Hajialisher  Vs  The  State  of  Rajasthan,  (1976)  Cri.  L.J.
1658  (Raj.), it  was  held  that  surrender  of  accused  could  not  be
insisted upon in case of an application for anticipatory bail. In this
case, the petitioner came straight to the High Court under Section
438 Cr. P.C. without approaching the Court of Session. The High
Court expressed the view that ordinarily the lower Court should be
first moved though in exceptional cases or special circumstances,
the High Court might entertain and decide an application for bail
under Section 438. The learned Counsel of the petitioner then hinted
that the Session Court might insist upon surrendering the accused
before giving consideration to the application under Section 438. In
response to this, the learned Single Judge observed: “I do not see
any ground for such apprehension. Law is crystal clear on the point
that under Section 438 Cr.P.C. whenever any person has reason to
believe  that  he  may  be  arrested  on  an  accusation  of  having
committed  a  non-bailable  offence, he  may apply for  anticipatory
bail. If the surrender of the accused were insisted upon, then the
very purpose of Section 438 Cr.P.C. for grant of anticipatory bail
would be defeated. It need hardly be pointed out that Section 438
50

was  provided  to  meet  those  cases  where  for  political  or  other
extraneous  considerations,  false  and  unfounded  criminal  charges
may be brought against innocent persons and they may be harassed
and  humiliated.  Keeping  in  view  the  intention  of  the  legislature
implicit  in  the  Section,  I am of  the view  that  if  the  application
properly  falls  under  Section  438,  Cr.P.C.,  the  surrender  of  the
accused cannot be insisted upon.”
6.3.6 The lawyers’ objections to new sub-section (1B) are two-fold
– firstly that personal appearance of the applicant in the Court at the
time of final hearing of his application would enable the police to
arrest him in the event of rejection of his application by the Court,
and secondly, in such an event, the applicant would be deprived of
his statutory right to move the High Court under Section 438 Cr.P.C.
otherwise available to him under this Section as concurrent powers
have been vested thereunder in the Court of Session as well as the
High Court. There is some substance in what the lawyers say. The
position  available  under  new  sub-section  (1B)  is  certainly  less
advantageous  than  what  is  presently  obtained  under  the  existing
Section 438. However, it is more a matter of legislative policy as to
what the law should be. The right to move the Court of Session or
the High Court one after another has been so given under the statute
and the same can be taken away or suitably modified by amending
the statute. Even under the existing provision, if a person chooses to
move, the High Court first, he will not have an effective right to
have the same relief at the hands of the Court of Session as grant of
such relief by a lower court is most likely to be viewed as an act of
51

judicial impropriety when the same relief has been refused by the
Higher Court on the same facts and material. Theoretically, a person
can move either the Court of Session or the High Court at his option
and not necessarily in any given order. To this aspect, we may deal
in greater detail a little later. But suffice it to say, the new sub-
section (1B) is not  open to any objection  on account  of lack of
legislative competence. As regards the value opinion as to whether
the law should be as provided in new sub-section (1B), is a different
matter. 
6.3.7 But  there  could  be  another  serious  objection  to  new  sub-
section  (1B) which  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  anticipatory bail
itself. As stated earlier, anticipatory bail is in anticipation of arrest.
Once arrested, the benefit of anticipatory bail is not amenable to be
availed of.
6.3.8 Section 438 known as anticipatory bail is, in fact, a pre-arrest
bail. The legislature has given authority or has conferred right upon
a  citizen  of  this  country  that  if  he  apprehends  his  arrest  in
connection with some non-bailable offence, then, he can move an
application to the Court of Session or the High Court for grant of
pre-arrest bail and the Court may grant a protective order in favour
of such person. While granting such order, the Court may impose
certain conditions enumerated under Section 438(2), Cr.P.C. Section
439, Cr.P.C. deals with the powers of Session Court and High Court
in cases where the accused has already been taken into custody. Any
order  passed  under  Section  439,  Cr.P.C.  would  be  a  post-arrest
52

order, it directs a competent Court to release the accused on his
furnishing  personal  bond  and/or  surety  bond  or  on  complying
certain conditions.
6.3.9 Application  under  Section  439  Cr.P.C.  in  view  of  the
language  employed  under  Section  439,  Cr.P.C.,  would  be
maintainable only when the accused is in the custody.
6.3.10 In  Naresh  Kumar  Yadav  Vs  Ravindra Kumar and  others,
2007 (12) SCALE 531, Dr. Ajit Pasayat J. very aptly amplified the
distinction between anticipatory bail under Section 438 and regular
bail under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as
follows:
“The facility which Section 438 of the Code gives is generally
referred to as ‘anticipatory bail’. This expression which was
used by the Law Commission in its 41st Report is neither used
in the section nor in its marginal note. But the expression
‘anticipatory bail’ is a convenient mode of indication that it is
possible to apply for bail in anticipation of arrest. Any order
of bail can be effective only from the time of arrest of the
accused. Wharton’s Law Lexicon explains ‘bail’ as ‘to set at
liberty  a  person  arrested  or  imprisoned,  on  security  being
taken for his appearance.’ Thus bail is basically release from
restraint,  more  particularly  the  custody  of  Police.  The
distinction  between an ordinary order  of bail and an order
under Section 438 of the Code is that whereas the former is
53

granted after arrest, and therefore means release from custody
of the Police, the latter is granted in anticipation of arrest and
is therefore effective at the very moment of arrest. (See: Gur
Baksh Singh v. State of Punjab 1980 (2) SCC 565).  Section
46 (1) of the Code, which deals with how arrests are to be
made, provides that in making an arrest the Police Officer or
other person making the same “shall actually touch or confine
the  body  of  the  person  to  be  arrested,  unless  there  be  a
submission  to  the  custody  by  word  or  action”.  The  order
under  Section  438  of  the  Code  is  intended  to  confer
conditional immunity from the touch as envisaged by Section
46  (1)  of  the  Code  or  any  confinement.  This  Court  in
Balachand Jain v. State of Madhya Pradesh (AIR 1977 SC
366)  has  described  the  expression  ‘anticipatory  bail’  as
misnomer. It is well-known that bail is ordinary manifestation
of arrest, that the Court thinks first to make an order is that in
the  event  of  arrest  a  person  shall  be  released  on  bail.
Manifestly there is no question of release on bail unless the
accused is arrested, and therefore, it is only on an arrest being
effected the order becomes operative. The power exercisable
under Section 438 is somewhat extraordinary in character and
it is only in exceptional cases where it appears that the person
may  be  falsely  implicated  or  where  there  are  reasonable
grounds for holding that a person accused of an offence is not
likely to  otherwise  misuse  his  liberty then  power  is  to  be
exercised under Section 438. The power being of important
nature it is entrusted only to the higher echelons of judicial
54

forums, i.e. the Court of Session or the High Court. It is the
power exercisable  in  case  of  an  anticipatory accusation  of
non-bailable  offence.  The  object  which  is  sought  to  be
achieved by Section 438 of the Code is that the moment a
person is arrested, if he has already obtained an order from the
Court  of  Session  or  High  Court,  he  shall  be  released
immediately on bail without being sent to jail.
Sections 438 and 439 operate in different fields. It is clear
from a  bare  reading  of  the  provisions  that  for  making  an
application in terms of Section 439 of the Code a person has
to  be  in  custody.  Section  438  of  the  Code  deals  with
“Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest”.
6.3.11 Section 438, Cr.P.C. clearly says that when any person has
reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having
committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court
or Court of Session for a direction under this Section, and that in the
event  of  such  arrest,  he  shall  be  released  on  bail.  Section  438,
Cr.P.C. provides a protective order in favour of the accused who is
apprehending his arrest; while Section 439, Cr.P.C. applies to the
accused who is in custody. The word ‘custody’ for the purposes of
Section 439 has been interpreted by the Supreme Court and by the
High  Court.  [Akhilesh  Jindani  (Jain)  And  another  Vs  State  of
Chhattisgarh, 2002 Cri. L.J. 1660 (Chhattisgarh)].
55

6.3.12  While  interpreting  the  expression  “in custody” within  the
meaning of Section 439 Cr. P.C., Krishna Ier J speaking for the
Bench in Niranjan Singh and another Vs Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote
(1980) 2 SCC 559 observed that:
“When is a person in custody, within the meaning of Section 
439 Cr.P.C.? When he is in duress either because he is held 
by the investigating agency or other police or allied authority 
or is under the control of the court having been remanded by 
judicial order, or having offered himself to the Court’s 
jurisdiction and submitted to its orders by physical presence. No
lexical dexterity nor precedential profusion is needed to come  to
the realistic conclusion that he who is under the control  of  the
court or is in the physical hold of an officer with coercive power is
in custody for the purpose of Section 439. This word is of elastic
semantics but its core meaning is that the law has taken
control of the person. The equivocatory quibbling and hide-and-
seek niceties sometimes heard in court that  the  police  have
taken a man into informal custody but not arrested  him,  have
detained him for interrogation but not taken him  into  formal
custody and other like terminological  dubieties  are  unfair
evasions of the straightforwardness of the law. We need not dilate
on this shady facet here because we are  satisfied  that  the
accused did physically submit before the Session  Judge  and  the
jurisdiction to grant bail thus arose.
56

Custody, in the context of Section 439, (we are not, be it  
noted, dealing with anticipatory bail under Section 438) is  
physical control or at least physical presence of the accused in
court coupled with submission to the jurisdiction and orders
of the Court.
He can be in custody not merely when the police arrests him,
produces  him  before  a  Magistrate  and  gets  a  remand  to
judicial or other custody.  He can be stated to be in judicial
custody when he surrenders before the court and submits to its
directions. In the present case, the police officers applied for
bail  before  a  Magistrate  who  refused  bail  and  still  the
accused, without surrendering before the Magistrate, obtained
an order for stay to move the Session Court. This direction of
the Magistrate was wholly irregular and may be, enabled the
accused persons to circumvent the principle of Section 439
Cr. P.C. We might have taken a serious view of such a course,
indifferent  to  mandatory  provisions,  by  the  subordinate
magistracy but for the fact that in the present case the accused
made up for it by surrender before the Sessions Court. Thus,
the Session Court acquired jurisdiction to consider the bail
application.  It  could  have  refused  bail  and  remanded  the
accused  to  custody,  but  in  the  circumstances  and  for  the
reasons mentioned by it, exercised its jurisdiction in favour of
grant of bail. The High Court added to the conditions subject
to which bail was to be granted and mentioned that accused
57

had submitted to the custody of the court. We, therefore, do
not proceed to upset the order on this ground.”
6.3.13  In  Directorate  of  Enforcement  Vs  Deepak  Mahajan  and
another (1994) 3SCC 440, the Supreme Court made the following
observations:
“The word ‘arrest’ is derived from the French word ‘Arreter’
meaning  “to  stop  or  stay”  and  signifies  a  restraint  of  the
person. Lexicologically, the meaning of the word ‘arrest’ is
given  in  various  dictionaries  depending  upon  the
circumstances in which the said expression is used. One of us,
(S. Ratnavel Pandia,, J. as he then was being the Judge of the
High Court of Madras) in Roshan Beevi and others Vs Joint
Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu and others 1984 (Cri.
L.J. 134: (1984) 15 ELT 289: 1983 MLW (Cri) 289 (Mad) )
had an occasion to go into the gamut of the meaning of the
word  ‘arrest’  with  reference  to  various  textbooks  and
dictionaries, the New Encyclopaedia Britannica, Halsbury’s
Laws,  A  History  of  Law   by  L.B.  Curzon,  Black’s  Law
Dictionary  and  Words  and  Phrases.  On  the  basis  of  the
meaning given in  those  text-books  and  lexicons,  it  has
been held that:
“[T]he word ‘arrest’ when used in its ordinary and natural
sense, means the apprehension or restraint or the deprivation
of one’s personal liberty. The question whether the person is
58

under arrest or not, depends not on the legality of the arrest,
but on whether he has been deprived of his personal liberty to
go  where he pleases.  When used  in the legal sense in the
procedure connected with criminal offences, an arrest consists
in the taking into custody of another person under authority
empowered by law, for the purpose of holding or detaining
him  to  answer  a  criminal  charge  or  of  preventing  the
commission of a criminal offence. The essential elements to
constitute an arrest in the above sense are that there must be
intent to arrest under the authority, accompanied by a seizure
or detention of the person in the manner known to law, which
is so understood by the person arrested.”
There are various sections in Chapter V of the Code titled
“Arrest  of  persons”  of  which  Sections  41,  42,  43  and  44
empower  different  authorities  and  even  private  persons  to
arrest a person in given situation.
Thus  the  Code  gives  power  of arrest  not  only to  a police
officer and a Magistrate but also under certain circumstances
or  given  situations  to  private  persons.  Further,  when  an
accused  person  appears  before  a  Magistrate  or  surrenders
voluntarily, the Magistrate is empowered to take  that
accused person into custody and deal with him according to
law. Needless to emphasize that the arrest of a person is a
condition  precedent  for  taking  him  into  judicial  custody
thereof. To put it differently, the taking of the person into
59

judicial  custody  is  followed  after  the  arrest  of  the  person
concerned by the Magistrate on appearance or surrender. It
will be appropriate, at this stage, to note that in every arrest,
there is custody but not vice versa and that  both  the
words  ‘custody’  and  ‘arrest’  are  not  synonymous  terms.
Though ‘custody’ may amount to an arrest in certain 
circumstances but not under all circums-tances.  If these two
terms are interpreted as synonymous, it is nothing but an
ultra legalist interpretation which if under all circumstances
accepted  and  adopted,  would  lead  to  a  startling  anomaly
resulting in serious consequences, vide Roshan Beevi.” 
6.3.14 In State of Assam Vs Mobarak Ali and others, 1982 Cri. LJ
1816,  a  Division  Bench  held  that  when  an  accused  voluntarily
surrendered before the Court and the Court granted him bail, then
grant of bail would be under Section 437 and within the jurisdiction
of the Magistrate. Such an action could not be said to be one under
Section  438.   While  interpreting  Section  437  of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, Lahari J, speaking for the Bench, made
the following observations:
“The Section assigns the authority competent to grant bail,
namely, a Court other than the High Court and the Court of
Session. It specifies the nature of the offence, i.e. non-bailable
offences. The section also prescribes the circumstances when
bail may be granted, namely, (1) when the accused has been
arrested or detained without warrant by an officer-in-charge
60

of  a  police  station.  In  such  circumstances  production  or
appearance in Court is non-essential; (2) when the accused
appears, or, (3) he is brought before a Court, other than the
High Court or Court of Session, he may be enlarged on bail
by  “the  Court”.  Therefore,  the  conditions  precedent  to
entertain  application  for  bail  is  whether  the  person  is  an
accused or suspected of the commission of any offence. If the
learned Magistrate finds that he is accused of an offence or is
suspected  of  commission  of  a  non-bailable  offence,  the
second  condition  comes  into  play,  namely,  whether  he  is
under  arrest  or  detention  without  warrant  by  an  office-in-
charge of the police station. If he is arrested or detained, the
detention must be by an officer-in-charge of the police station
and without any warrant. Apart from this an accused may be
brought before the Court by any police officer or authority
competent  to  arrest  an  accused  or  any  person  legally
competent  to  arrest  him.   Therefore,  in  the  first  case  the
physical production of the accused before the Court  is
not  at  all  necessary  whereas  in  the  case  of  bringing  the
accused before the Court requires production of his “corpus”.
This  production  of  the  accused  before  a  Court  does  not
depend on the own volition of the accused.   It is an act of the
third  party.  In between, there is another class or type of
persons who may be enlarged on bail under Section 437, that
is, person who is accused of or suspected of a commission of
a non-bailable offence appears voluntarily before the Court,
what he should do on “appearance” is to make an application
61

before the Court asking for bail. The grant of bail or refusal
thereof is absolutely within the discretion of the Court.  His
appearance in Court capacitates the Court to grant bail with
condition  or without  condition.  No sooner  does  he  appear
before the Court, the accused or the suspect surrenders to the
custody of the Court. The act of appearance or surrender to
the custody enables the accused to ask for bail.  Such accused
may be enlarged on bail by the order of the Court or the Court
may straightway send the accused to jail if it does not grant
bail. As such, whenever an accused appears voluntarily before
the Court and surrenders to the Court he remains throughout
in the custody of the Court until he is enlarged on bail.  The
question  of  granting  bail  to  such  an  accused  cannot  arise
unless he is not in custody of the Court.  When an accused
“appears” and asks for bail, he must surrender to the 
Court and remain in custody of the Court. No such accused or
suspect can ask for bail under Section 437, if he appears but
does not submit to the custody of the Court. The meaning of
the term “custody” is “physical control” or at least physical
presence of the accused in Court coupled with submission to
the jurisdiction and order of the Court, as explained by the
Supreme Court in Niranjan Singh Vs Prabhakar, AIR 1980 SC
785  :  (1980  Cri.  L.J.  426).  Their  Lordships  have  clearly
stated: “he can be stated to be in judicial custody when he
surrenders  before  the  Court  and  submits  to  its  direction”.
Therefore,  the  term  “appears”  in  Section  437  means  and
includes voluntary appearance before  the  Court  without
62

intervention of any agency and the act of surrender before the
Court coupled  with submission to its  directions. These  are
implicit in Section 437 of “the Code”.
As Such, we hold that when an accused appears and remains in  
the physical control of the Court or he is physically present
and  submits  to  the  jurisdiction  and  orders  of  the  Court,  the
Magistrate is empowered to grant bail to such an accused or suspect,
if he is so entitled to.  In the instant case, the accused appeared and
surrendered to the jurisdiction of the Court, prayed for enlargement
on bail. The Magistrate was competent to grant bail. However, the
learned Judge is of the view that exercise of such power collides
with the exclusive power of the High Court or the Court of Session
conferred on them under Section 438 of “the Code”. The ambit and
scope of Section 438 are quite distinct and separate. A direction for
grant of bail to a person apprehending arrest can be made in favour
of a person who apprehends arrest. No application under Section
438 can be made by a person detained or arrested by the police.  The
applicant need not appear in Court nor should be brought in Court.
He cannot be granted bail by the Court forthwith.  He can only
get a direction from the Court that in the event of his arrest he may
be enlarged on bail by the police. Therefore, the distinctive features
are that in Section 438 – (i) the applicant need not be an accused
person, (ii) he need not be brought  before  a  court  nor  his
personal appearance in Court is a condition precedent; he may apply
without personally appearing before the Court; (iii) the applicant
need not surrender to the physical control of the Court nor need
63

he submit to the custody of the Court; (iv) the application must be
for anticipatory bail in the event of his arrest.  Therefore,  on
arrest  no  application  under  Section  438  is  maintainable;  (v)  the
Court cannot direct that he should be released on bail forthwith. It
can only make a direction that in the event of his arrest  he
should be released on bail. The authority to  grant  bail  is  the
officer-in-charge of police station, if the applicant is wanted to be
arrested  without  warrant,  on  such  accusation.  This  extraordinary
power to make direction for grant of bail cannot be exercised by the
Magistrate directly or indirectly. It can only be exercised  by the
High Court or the Court of Session.
In  the  instance  case,  the  accused  did  not  ask  for  grant  of  bail
apprehending  arrest.  The accused  persons  surrendered  before the
Court and prayed for bail. Therefore, Section 438 had no application
in the present case. Under these circumstances, we hold that the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate did not exercise the powers and
functions  under  Section  438  of  “the Code”.  The  exercise  of  the
powers and functions were limited within the scope of Section 437
of “the Code”.
Accordingly, we answer the question that the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate acted under Section 437 of the Code and did not exercise
any power and function under Section 438. The order is revisable
by the learned Session Judge.”
64

6.3.15 As stated earlier, the Code of Criminal Procedure did not
contain any specific provisions corresponding to the present Section
438. Under the old Code, there was a sharp difference of opinion
amongst  the  various  High  Courts  on  the  question  as  to  whether
courts had the inherent power to pass an order of bail in anticipation
of arrest, the preponderance of view being that it did not have such
power. It will be expedient to refer to the reasons underlying this
view.  For this purpose, the following observations made by Madhya
Pradesh  High  Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh Vs
Narayan Prasad Jaiswal, AIR 1963 Madhya Pradesh 276 will be of
relevance:
“The dictionary meaning of the word ‘bail’ is to set free or liberate a
person on security being given for his  appearance. In Wharton’s
Law Lexicon (14th Edn.) the word “bail” has been defined thus -  
“to set at liberty a person arrested or imprisoned, on security 
being taken for his appearance on a day and at a place
certain, which security is called bail, because the party arrested
or imprisoned is delivered into the hands of those who bind  
themselves or become bail for his due appearance when 
required, in order that he may be safely protected from prison, to
which they have, if they fear his escape, etc. the legal power to
deliver him.”
65

In Tomlin’s Law Dictionary, it has been stated that the word ‘bail’ is
used in our Common Law for the freeing or setting at liberty of one
arrested or imprisoned upon any action, either civil or criminal, on
surety taken  for  his  appearance  at  a  day  and  place  certain.  The
reason why it is called ‘bail’, is because by this means the party
restrained is delivered into the hands of those that binds themselves
for his forthcoming, in order to a safe keeping or protection from
prison”.  The  word  has  been  similarly  defined  in  Earl  Jowitt’s
‘Dictionary of English Law’ (1959 Edn.). It has also been similarly
defined in Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary and other legal dictionaries.
‘Bail’  thus  means  release  of a person  from legal  custody.  This
meaning of the word has been adhered to in the Code. A reference to
Sections 57, 59, 62, 63, 64, 169, 170, 496 and 497 giving to the
police the power to release on bail and Sections 76, 86, 91, 186, 217,
426, 427, 432, 438, 496 and 497 dealing with the power of the Court
to grant bail and to the forms prescribed for bailable warrants and
for bail-bonds which are to be executed when bail is given makes it
very clear that where a person is granted bail he is released from
restraint. If, therefore, the grant of bail to a person presupposes that
he is in the custody of the Police or of the Court, or, if not already in
such custody is required to surrender to such custody, then it is
unreal to talk of any person, who is under no such restraint, being
granted bail.”
6.3.16 The contention that anticipatory bail was permissible because
of use of the word ‘appears’ in Sections 496 and 497, did not find
favour with Court. The Court was of the view that mere voluntary
66

appearance, without anything more could not give rise to the Court
the power of releasing the person on bail. The reason is that a person
who is free and is not required to surrender to any custody under any
order of arrest issued against him is under no custody from which he
could be released.
6.3.17 Single Judge of the High Court of Kerala too observed in
Varkey Paily Madthikudiyil Pulinthanam Vs State of Kerala, AIR
1967, Kerala 189 that bail means release of a person from legal
custody and the grant of bail to a person pre-supposes that he is in
the custody of the police or of the Court.
6.3.18 In B. Narayanappa and others Vs State of Karnataka, 1982
Cri.L.J.1334,  it  was  held  that  when  the  accused  appeared  and
submitted  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court,  he  was  under  judicial
custody  and  the  Magistrate  could  not  have  rejected  his  bail
application under Section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 on the ground that the applicants were neither arrested by the
police nor they had been summoned by the Court nor they appeared
in response to any process of the Court.  The Court observed:
“There is nothing in the Section either to exclude voluntary
appearance or to suggest that the appearance of the accused
must be in obedience to a process issued by the Court. No
doubt the other expressions used in the section as “is brought
before Court” have reference to prior arrest and bringing of
such person before Court by the police either in pursuance of
67

a process issued by the Court or otherwise on account of the
inability of such person arrested to give bail immediately on
being  arrested and detained  by an officer in charge of the
police station. The word ‘appearance’ as used in the section to
me,  it  appears,  is  wide  enough  to  include  the  voluntary
appearance.” 
6.3.19 Referring to the decision of the Supreme Court in Niranjan
Singh and another Vs Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote, AIR 1980 SC
785, the High Court of Karnataka further observed:
“In the present case also the accused having appeared before
the Court had submitted to the jurisdiction of the Court and
asked for bail. As enunciated  in  the  above  decision,  if  the
surrender  and  the  physical  presence  of  the  accused  with
submission  to  the  jurisdiction  and  orders  of  the  Court  is
judicial  custody,  then  the  accused-petitioner  herein  having
appeared before the Court and asked of bail, they were under
restraint  and  they  had  submitted  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Court. The Magistrate was not right in saying that he is not
in a position to understand the meaning of the word ‘appears’
within the meaning of the expression “custody’ as used in
Section 439 as discussed in the said  decision  with  the
meaning  of  Section  436  Cr.P.C.  When  the  mere  physical
presence before the Court with a request to grant bail amounts
to custody, it is more than appearance.” 
68

6.3.20Section 88 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides for
power to take bond for appearance. Accordingly, when any person
for whose appearance or arrest the officer presiding in any court is
empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such court,
such officer may require such person to execute a bond, with or
without sureties, for his appearance in such court, or other court to
which the case may be referred for trial. The presence of the person
must  be  on  his  own  volition  as  a  free  agent  and  not  under
compulsion  of  any  court’s  order.  This  section  was  held  to  be
inapplicable when the accused was present along with his counsel in
response to the court’s summons in the case of K. Pandarinathan Vs
V. Raju and another, 1998 Cri. L.J. 1128.  
6.3.21 Section 88 corresponds to Section 91 of the old Code. While
dealing with Section 91 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
the Supreme Court made the following observations in the case of
Madhu Limaye and another Vs Ved Murti and others (AIR 1971 SC
2481), viz. “In fact Section 91 applies to a person who is present in
court and is free because it speaks of his being bound over to appear
on another day before the court.  That shows that the person must be
a free agent whether to appear or not.  If the person is already under
arrest  and  in  custody,  as  were  the  petitioners,  their  appearance
depended not on their own volition but on the volition of the person
who had their custody….. It is not necessary to take a bond from a
person who is already in detention and is not released.  The danger
arises when the man is free and not when he is in custody. It is to
prevent his acting that the bond is taken or he is kept in custody till
69

he gives the bond. Section 344 deals with ordinary adjournment of a
case  and allows  a person  to  be  admitted to  bail  or the  court  to
remand him if he is in custody”.
6.3.22 It will be expedient to recapitulate the essential ingredients of
the new sub-section (1B) even at the cost of repetition. Firstly, the
presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory shall be obligatory in
terms  of  sub-section  (1B);  Secondly,  such  presence  will  be  so
obligatory at the time of final hearing of his application and passing
of  final  order  by  the  court;  Thirdly,  such  presence  is  rendered
obligatory  on  an  application  made  to  the  court  by  the  Public
Prosecutor praying for such presence in the interest of justice;  And
lastly, such presence will be insisted upon as obligatory if the court
considers, on the application made to it by the Public Prosecutor,
that  such  presence  is  necessary in  the  interest  of  justice.  In  the
aforesaid circumstances, there is obvious restraint on the freedom
and liberty of the applicant and obligatory presence envisaged by the
sub-section subject the applicant to the dictate of the court.  Such
obligatory  presence  is  apparently  not  compatible  with  the
applicant’s right to court’s direction for anticipatory bail as he is
already placed under restraint and he is most likely to be transferred
from court’s custody to the police/judicial custody in the event of
rejection of his anticipatory bail application. Such an eventuality
would  not  have  been  in  the  legislative  contemplation  while
providing for anticipatory bail. We are therefore inclined to take the
view  that  sub-section  (1B)  renders  the  right  to  anticipatory  bail
nugatory and infructuous.
70

6.3.23  From the aforesaid, it may be  seen that in  case a person
happens to be present in the Court on his own volition, the Court
may take  action  under  Section  88  of the  Code  to  bind  him for
appearance on a future date. However, if a person surrender himself
in  the Court  and subject himself to  Court directions,  Section 88
would be inapplicable in such a case and the proper course would be
to either remand him to judicial custody or admit him to bail. Where
a  person  seeks  anticipatory  bail,  the  Court  may  not  direct  his
personal appearance. It will, however, be open to the Court to either
reject his application or grant him anticipatory bail. Where a person
appears before the Court in compliance with any Court’s order and
surrenders himself to the Court’s directions or control, he may be
granted  regular  bail  since  he  is  already  under  restraint.  The
provisions relating to the anticipatory bail may not be attracted in
such a case. In view of the  aforesaid, the insertion of new sub-
section (1B) in Section 438 is apparently not in consonance with the
nature and scheme of anticipatory bail. The obligatory nature of the
presence  as  envisaged  in  this  new  sub-section  renders  the
application  for  anticipatory  bail  infructuous  as  the  applicant  has
already been placed under restraint and is in the custody of Court. 
6.3.24 We are conscious of the fact that this aspect of the matter
seems to have unwittingly escaped this Commission’s attention at
the time of submitting 154th Report. We are also aware of the fact
that  the  similar  provision  has  been  inserted  in  the  Code  in  its
application to the State of Maharashtra by State amendment made in
71

1993. It has not been brought to our notice if the obligatory presence
of the applicant in compliance with the Court’s order has received
judicial consideration in any case. We have noted the case of State
of Maharshtra and another Vs Mohd. Sajid Husain Mohd. S. Husain
etc. 207(12) SCALE 63 under Section 438 Cr.P.C. as amended by
the State of Maharshtra by Act No. 24 of 1973. But the case was
dealt with reference to the four factors mentioned in sub-section (1)
of Section 438 that were relevant for considering the application for
grant of anticipatory bail. The question of obligatory presence of the
applicant did not crop up for Court’s consideration. Nevertheless,
we are of the view that obligatory presence of the applicant seeking
anticipatory bail in compliance with Court’s order to that effect will
be antithesis to his right to anticipatory bail. We are, therefore, of
the considered view that sub-section (1B) should be omitted from
this section.
6.4 Note on Concurrent Jurisdiction:
6.4.1 One of the objections raised against the amended section has
been that if the applicant seeking anticipatory bail is required to be
compulsorily present in the Court in terms of new sub-section (1B),
he is most likely to be arrested from the Court precincts in the event
of rejection of his bail. Such an arrest of the applicant will deprive
him of his right otherwise available to him to move the alternative
forum provided in Section 438 of the Code. Concurrent jurisdiction
of the Court of Session and the High Court under Section 438 has
generated much litigation. The Code has not prescribed any specific
72

order in which the two alternative forums are to be approached. It is
left to the option of the applicant to move either the Court of Session
or the High Court for anticipatory bail one after another or in reverse
order. There is conflict of opinion amongst various High Courts as
to whether the Court of Session should originally be approached in
the first instance or the High Court can be straightaway approached
for grant of anticipatory bail without first taking recourse to the
Court of Session. It may be noted that both Court of Session and the
High  Court  exercised  original  jurisdiction  under  Section  438.
However, when the High Court is moved after the anticipatory bail
application has been dismissed by the Court of Session, the petition
for anticipatory bail in the High Court is required to be accompanied
with  a  copy  the  Session  Court’s  order  from  which  reason  for
dismissal of anticipatory bail application can be gathered. In such a
case, the High Court essentially exercises revisionary powers over
the order of the Court of first instance. i.e. Session Court though
purporting to be exercising original jurisdiction under Section 438.
On the other hand, it has been held in some cases that where the
applicant moved High Court for anticipatory bail which was rejected
then the Court of Session should not grant anticipatory bail to the
applicant on the same facts and material as otherwise it would be an
act of judicial impropriety. There are also cases where similar view
has been taken in reverse order in respect of rejection of application
for anticipatory bail by Court of Session. Accordingly, it has been
held  in some cases  that if an application  for  anticipatory bail is
rejected by the Court  of Session, then similar application  on the
same fact would not lie in the High Court unless there is some new
73

material or facts. There are cases also where contrary view has been
taken whereby no such fetter is admitted on the powers of the High
Court.
6.4.2 It will be useful to refer to some of these cases for better
appreciation.
6.4.3 In Onkar Nath Agrawal and others Vs State 1976 Cri. L.J.
1142, the Full Bench of Allahabad High Court held that Section 438
“clearly  contemplates  two  forums  for  moving  an  application  for
anticipatory bail, namely the Court of Session and the High Court.
Both the jurisdictions are concurrent and it is left for the person to
choose either of the two… The provision read as a whole does not
prima facie create any bar that he must apply to the Court of Session
first before coming to the High Court to seek his redress. Thus, a
bail application under Section 438 may be moved in the High Court
without the applicant taking recourse to the Court of Session.” 
6.4.4 In Y. Chendrasekhara Rao Vs Y.V. Kamala Kumari, 1993 Cri.
L.J. 3508, the Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court held
that an application for anticipatory bail was maintainable in the High
Court without the party approaching the Court of Session in the first
instance. The Court did not find any justification for the registry to
return the papers  on the ground that the applications  in the first
instance were not maintainable in the High Court under Section 438.
The Court observed: “The provision clearly implies that not only
concurrent power is conferred on the High Court and the Court of
74

Session but choice is given to the affected person to move either of
the two fora … if the party who intends to move an application
under Section 438 feels that moving the Court of Session is more
convenient, he may do so. But if he thinks that approaching the High
Court is more convenient and less time-consuming, he shall not be
precluded from doing so. Situations may conceivably arise when a
person may find it more efficacious  to approach the High Court
under Section 438. A resident of Srikakulam or Visakhapatnam, if
apprehends  arrest  when  he  is  in  Hyderabad,  may  find  it  more
convenient  to  move  the  High  Court  under  Section  438  for
anticipatory bail without any loss of time instead  of moving  the
Court of Session of his native district. It is not possible to visualize
comprehensively  what  precise  reasons  impel  persons  to  invoke
jurisdiction of the High Court, in the first instance, under Section
438.  …  When  the  procedure  incorporated  under  Section  438  in
unequivocal language confers power both on the High Court and the
Court of Session to grant anticipatory bail, denial of the right to
move  the  High  Court,  in  the  first  instance,  clearly  amounts  to
violation of the guaranteed fundamental right under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India”. 
6.4.5 In Devidas Raghu Naik Vs State, 1989 Cri. L.J. 252, a Single
Judge of Bombay High Court held “that in view of the concurrent
jurisdiction given to the High Court and Session Court, the fact that
the Session Court has refused a bail under Section 439 does not
operate as a bar for the High Court entertaining a similar application
under  Section  439  on  the  same facts  and  for  the  same  offence.
75

However, if the choice was made by the party to move first the High
court and the High Court has dismissed the application, then the
decorum and the hierarchy of the Courts require that if the Session
Court  is  moved  with a similar application  on  the facts,  the  said
application be dismissed.”
6.4.6 In Jagannath Vs State of Maharashtra, 1981 Cri. L.J. 1808, the
Bombay High Court held that “the Session Court and the High Court
have the concurrent jurisdiction in the matter of grant of anticipatory
bail.” Referring to Section 397(3) of the new Code providing that if
one Court was moved in its revisional jurisdiction, the other Court
shall not entertain similar application, the Court stated that “nothing
prevented Parliament from putting a similar bar in the provisions
relating to bail – either pre-arrest or post-arrest – and this indicates
that what was intended was exercise of concurrent jurisdiction by
Court of Session and High Court in the matter of grant of bail.”
6.4.7 In Amiya Kumar Vs State of West Bengal, 1979 Cri. L.J. 288,
a Division Bench of Calcutta High Court held that “Section 438 has
given  a  choice  of  selecting  the  forum for  filing  the petition  for
anticipatory bail – to choose either the High Court or the Court of
Session  though  both  the  Courts  have  been  made forums  for the
approach of the applicant. This section gives right to the party with
restricted choice. …Two Courts are empowered to grant bail under
Section 438, namely, the High Court and the Court of Session, but
the petitioner may choose one of the two Courts and apply to the
court of his choice. We cannot hold that if the petitioner approaches
76

the Court of Session  for the relief under Section  438 and if his
prayer is rejected, he will be again entitled to approach the High
Court for the same relief on the same ground under that Section.” 
6.4.8 However, a three member’s Bench of the same High Court did
not agree with this view in Diptendu Nayak and others Vs The State
of West Bengal, 1989(1) Crimes 435 (Calcutta) wherein it was held
that the bail application under Section 438 Cr.P.C. might be moved
to the High Court after the applicant had not succeeded before the
Court of Session.
6.4.9 Similar views were expressed by Delhi High Court in Arun
Madan Vs State, 1993(1) Crimes 599: 1993 Cri. L.J. 1493 wherein it
was held that “a person after unsuccessfully moving the Court of
Session  for  anticipatory  bail  under  Section  438  of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure can again approach the High Court for the same
purpose under the same section.”  
6.4.10  In Mohan Lal and others etc. Vs Prem Chand and others,
AIR 1980 Himachal Pradesh 36, the Full Bench of the High Court
held that “a person can apply for anticipatory bail to the High Court
direct without first invoking the jurisdiction of the Session Judge.”
6.4.11 In K.C. Iyya Vs State of Karnataka, 1985 Cri. L.J. 214, it was
ruled that: “Since both the Courts, the Court of Session and the High
Court have concurrent powers in the matter of grant of anticipatory
bail  under  Section  438  of  the  Criminal  P.C.,  a  person  seeking
77

anticipatory bail under Section 438 should approach the Court of
Session in the first instance as this would serve the ends of justice,
public interest, and also the administration of justice. There may be
cases  with  special  reasons  or  involving  special  circumstances
necessitating the person concerned to approach the High Court at the
first instance. If the reasons assigned by him to approach the High
Court at the first instance are found genuine, such an application
may be considered by the High Court.”
6.4.12 In Smt. Manisha Neema Vs State of Madhya Pradesh, 2003
(2)  Crimes  402,  the  High  Court  expressed  the  opinion  that  the
applicant  should  have  filed  the  application  at  the  first  instance
before the Court of Session and thereafter, if it was rejected, he
could have approached the High Court. In reaching this conclusion,
the  Madhya  Pradesh  High  Court  relied  on  one  of  its  earlier
judgments in the case of Dainy alias Raju Vs State of MP, 1989 JLJ
232 wherein Hon’ble Justice R.C. Lahoti (later on the Judge of the
Supreme Court and Hon’ble Chief Justice of India) has held that
though  under  Sections  438  and  439  of  the  Cr.P.C.  there  is
concurrent  jurisdiction,  but  the  application  should  be  filed  first
before the Court of Sessions and on failure before that Court, the
application should be filed before the High Court accompanied with
the first order of Sessions Court and also mentioning all the relevant
facts.  His  Lordship,  in  paras  19,  20  and  21  has  given  detailed
reasons for holding so. For convenience, the same are reproduced
below:-
78

“19.  The  jurisdiction  of  High  Court  and  Court  of  Session
under Section 439, Cr.P.C. being concurrent, as a matter of
practice,  the  bail  applicants  are  required  ordinarily  to
approach the Court of Sessions in the first instance and if
relief is denied they approach the High Court u/s 439, Cr.P.C.
itself, not as a superior Court sitting in appellate or revisional
jurisdiction  over  the  order  of  the  Court  of  Sessions,  but
because  the  superior  Court  can  still  exercise  its  own
jurisdiction independently, unaffected by the result of exercise
by the Court of Session because the latter is an inferior Court
though vested with concurrent jurisdiction. The application
seeking  bail  before  the  High  Court  is  accompanied  by  an
order of the Court of Session rejecting a similar prayer. The
idea is to provide the superior Court with an advantage of
apprising  itself  with  the  grounds  as  considerations  which
prevailed with the Court of Session in taking the view which
it did. It has come to my notice in several cases that the first
order of the Court of Session rejecting a prayer for bail is a
detailed order and when another application is repeated before
the same Court, the subsequent order rejects the application
simply by stating that earlier application having been rejected
on merits, the Court did not see any reason to take a different
view of the matter. The latter order is not a detailed one. This
subsequent order is filed before the High Court to fulfil the
formality  but  the  inevitable  consequence  is  that  the  High
Court is deprived of the opportunity of apprising itself with
the  reasons  which  formed  foundation  for  rejection  of  the
79

prayer by the Sessions Court. The possibility cannot be ruled
out that such a course is adopted purposely because the bail-
applicant does not feel comfortable before the High Court in
the  presence  of  a  detailed  order  of  the  Court  of  Session
rejecting the prayer for bail.
20. To sum up the disciplines of the system are:
(i) In view  of  the  decision  of  the  Apex  Court  in
Shahzad  Hssan  Khan  (supra),  a  subsequent
application for bail in the same jurisdiction, must
be placed before the same Judge (so long as he is
available) before whom had come up the earlier
application, with whatever result;
(ii) a subsequent application for bail must mention
all  the  earlier  or  pending  attempt  to  that  and
made before the High Court as well as the Court
of Sessions along with their fate;
(iii) while moving an application for bail before the
High Court, the application ought ordinarily to be
accompanied by the order of the Court of Session
rejecting the first prayer for bail and containing
reasons, unless dispensed with;
80

(iv) a  bail  petition  is  expected  to  incorporate  a
statement  as  to  all  facts  and  circumstances
considered relevant by the applicant in support of
his prayer so that whatever is put forth before the
Court does not vanish in thin air, but is retained
in  the  record,  though  there  is  no  format
prescribed for bail applications; if any statement
is likely to be controverted by the opposite party,
the party would do well to support its statement
by an affidavit or documents, as advised.
21. A question may be posed whether these requirements falling
within the domain of format or procedural requirements only, laying
down  rules  of discipline  only can be treated so imperative as to
override  the  substantive  law  of  bails,  negativing  the  right  or
privilege for failure of compliance therewith. The requirements have
a laudiable purpose, principle and policy behind. They have been
projected by judicial wisdom founded on judicial experience. The
rightful result must be achieved by rightful means. That is the rule of
law. If bifocul interests of justice to the individual involved and the
society affected (as spoken of in Babusingh and others, supra), are to
be secured, if fallacies as to bail jurisdiction are to be removed: if
fairness in dispensation of criminal justice has to be retained, nay
brightened,  if  abuse  of  process  of  law  is  to  be  avoided,  and  if
unwanted practice/tactics are to be curbed: these rules of discipline
have to be treated as imperative. A failure to observe them may be
destructive of the very purpose sought to be achieved.”
81

6.4.13In Chhajju Ram Godara and others Vs State of Haryana, 1978
Cr. L.J. 608 (Punjab & Haryana), it was held that “Section 438 of
the Cr. P.C. gives concurrent powers of granting anticipatory bail
both  to  the  High  Court  and  the  Court  of  Session.  As  in  other
analogous provision in the Code, it is normally to be presumed that
the Court of Session would be first approached for the grant thereof
unless an adequate case for not approaching the said court has been
made out.”  
6.4.14 In Hajialisher Vs State of Rajasthan, 1976 Cri. L.J. 1658, the
High Court observed that although the High Court has concurrent
jurisdiction with the Session Court to grant bail under either of the
aforesaid two Sections, viz. Sections 438 and 439, it is desirable that
the ordinary practice should be that the lower court should be first
moved  in  the  matter,  though  in  exceptional  cases  or  special
circumstances,  the  High  Court  may  entertain  and  decide  an
application for bail either under Section 438 or Section 439, Cr. P.C.
This is specially important because any expression of opinion by the
superior court is likely to prejudice, if not frequently, in cases few
and far between, the trial in the lower court. On proof of special
circumstances  the  High  Court  would  certainly  entertain  an
application under Section 439 and decide it on merits. But, for that
reason, an accused person cannot claim as a matter or right to get
such an application decided in the first instance by the High Court.”
82

6.4.15 In Dharampal Vs State of Punjab, 2002 Cri. L.J. 1621, grant
of  anticipatory  bail  by  the  Session  Judge  Ropar  was  adversely
commented upon in view of the fact that he himself had refused
anticipatory bail twice earlier and the High Court too had refused
anticipatory bail and the Supreme Court had also refused to interfere
with order refusing anticipatory bail. The High Court observed that
“in these circumstances, Session Judge, Ropar has not done well and
has shown gross judicial indiscipline and impropriety while granting
anticipatory bail in disregard of the orders of the High Court and
those of the Supreme Court and his own orders.”
6.4.16 In Gandhi Vs State of Andhra Pradesh, 1991(3) Crimes 796
(AP), it was held that a second bail application for anticipatory bail
was not barred under Section 438 Cr.P.C. However, if the second
bail application did not reveal any changed circumstances since the
rejection of the first application filed by the petitioner, it would be
liable to be dismissed.
6.4.17 In Rameshchandra Kashiram Vora Vs State of Gujarat, 1988
Cr. L.J. 210, it was observed that “it would be a sound exercise of
judicial discretion not to entertain each and every application for
anticipatory  bail  directly  by-passing  the  Court  of  Session.
Ordinarily, the Session Court is nearer to the accused and easily
accessible and remedy of anticipatory bail is same and under same
section and there is no reason to believe that Session Court will not
act according to law and pass appropriate orders. In a given case, if
any accused is grieved, his further remedy to approach the High
83

Court is not barred and he may prefer a substantive application for
anticipatory bail under Section 438 or revision application  under
Section 397 of the Cr. P.C. to the High Court and the High Court
would have the benefit of the reasons given by the Session Court. It
would be only in exceptional cases or special circumstances that the
High Court  may entertain  such an  application  directly and  these
exceptional  and special circumstances  must really be exceptional
and should have valid and cogent reasons for by-passing the Session
Court  and  approaching  the  High  Court…When  the  accused  has
simple  and  equally  efficacious  remedy  available  in  the  Session
Court, special and weighty reasons would be required to make out a
special  and  exceptional  case  for  persuading  the  High  Court  to
entertain such application directly.”
6.4.18    In  State  of  Maharashtra  and  another  Vs  Mohd.  Sajid
Hussain etc., 2007(12) SCALE 63, the respondents filed application
for anticipatory bail before the Session Judge, which was dismissed.
The respondents moved the High Court and their application for
anticipatory  bail  was  allowed  while  allowing  the  appeal  filed
thereagainst by the State, the apex Court observed that “it is now
well-settled principle of law that while granting anticipatory bail, the
Court must record the reasons therefor”. The Supreme Court noted
that the High Court had refused to grant regular bail to the accused
against whom charge-sheet had been submitted. The learned Session
Judge also did not grant bail to some of the accused persons. The
apex Court then observed that “if on the same materials, prayer for
regular bail has been rejected, we fail to see any reason as to why
84

and on what basis the respondents could be enlarged on bail.” The
Supreme Court therefore concluded that the High Court ought not to
have granted anticipatory bail to the respondents and accordingly set
it aside.
6.4.19 There are a lot many more cases on the above aspects. Suffice
it to say that the section has generated much litigation that could
have been avoided. There are certain other provisions in the Code
which have vested concurrent jurisdiction in the High Court and the
Court of Session. For example, both the High Court and the Court of
Session have concurrent jurisdiction of revision under Section 397.
However, under Section 397 if a person approaches either of these
Court, he cannot again agitate that matter by way of revision in the
other  Court.  Whereas  there  seems  to  be  justifiable  reason  for
conferring concurrent jurisdiction on the High Court and the Court
of Session, yet the person seeking anticipatory bail should have been
given an option on the lines of Section 397(3). Accordingly, if he
approaches either of these two Courts, he should not be allowed
again to seek the same relief by way of a substantive application
under Section 438 in the other Court. It may be noted as observed by
Karnataka High Court in K.C. Iyya and etc. Vs State of Karnataka,
1985 Cri. L.J. 214 that in the matter of bail, either anticipatory as
regular, the voice of the Court of Session is not final but is subject to
revisional  or  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  and  the
Supreme Court. Also in these matters of bail, either anticipatory or
regular, the Court of Session is given as wide a power of discretion
as  vests  in  the  High  Court.  In  this  connection,  the  following
85

observations of Chandrachud, C.J. in  Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc.
Vs The State of Punjab, AIR 1980 SC 1632 may be noted.
“There is no risk involved in entrusting wide discretion to the 
Court of Session and the High Court in granting anticipatory 
bail because firstly, these are higher Courts manned by 
experienced persons; secondly, their orders are not final but are
open to appellate or revision scrutiny.”
6.4.20 t may be noted in this regard that Inspectors General of Police
Conference, 1981, inter alia suggested  that Section 438 be
amended so as to take away the powers to grant anticipatory
bail  from  the  Session  Court  and  vest  it  only  in  the  High
Courts.  A  Group  of  officers,  constituted  pursuant  to  the
decision taken at the meeting of Secretaries held on 2nd July,
1982,  too  concurred  with  it  when  it  observed  that  “as
sometimes, the Courts take a very liberal view in granting
anticipatory  bail  to  criminals,  it  was  considered  that  such
powers should be taken from the Court of Session and vest
only in the High Court even though it will make difficult for
the poor persons to avail of the provisions of anticipatory bail.
A Parliamentary Bill being No. 56 of 1988 was introduced in
the Lok Sabha on 13th may, 1988, clause 49 of which related
to amendment of Section 438, providing, inter alia, omission
of the words or the Court of Session” from sub-section (1) and
(2)  of  that  section.  However,  these  proposed  amendments
were ultimately not carried out and both the High Court and
86

the Court of Session continued to have concurrent jurisdiction
under Section 438 in the matter of anticipatory bail and in our
opinion, rightly so. There are certainly distinct advantages of
vesting concurrent jurisdiction in the two judicial forums and
giving  an  option  to  an  applicant  to  choose  one  of  two,
depending  upon  his  convenience  or  otherwise.  These
advantages  have  been  referred  to  in  some  of  the  decided
cases.  (See  Shivasubramanyam  Vs  State  of  Karnataka  and
another, 2002 Cri.L.J. 1998; Y. Chendrasekhara Rao Vs Y.V.
Kamala Kumari, 1993 Cri.L.J. 3508 (A.P.); Rameshchandra
Kashiram Vora Vs State of Gujarat, 1988 Cri.L.J.210 (Guj.).
However, it is not readily discernible as to why same relief or
facility has been made available to same persons at the hand
of two different judicial forums one after another in exercise
of  their  respective  original  jurisdiction  when  efficacious
remedy is otherwise available against the order of the Court
which may have been chosen by an applicant for relief in the
first instance. One fails to understand as to why a provision on
the lines of Section 397(3) has not been made in Section 438
whereby once the applicant has availed his option to choose
one of the two alternative forums, his recourse to the other
forum is foreclosed, if he fails to get the desired relief from
the forum he has earlier chosen. Thus, if a person moves the
Court of Session for anticipatory bail and fails to get it, then
why he should again be allowed to file another substantive
application  to  anticipatory  bail  to  High  Court  instead  of
revision, or, as the case may be, appeal against the order of
87

rejection of the application by the Session Court. Again, if the
person has moved the High court in the first instance, does it
not look apparently anomalous for the same person to move
the lower Court, namely, the Court of Session for the same
relief on the same facts that has been denied to him by the
High Court? Theoretically, it is permissible. But, as a matter
of propriety and policy, should that person not be made to
move the higher judicial forum instead of a lower one in such
cases. It is inherent in the scheme of things that when two
alternative forums are provided in law for seeking directions
for anticipatory bail, one lower and another higher, then the
lower  should  be  first  resorted  to  as  a  matter  of  principle
except  in  exceptional  cases  in  which  event  the  applicant
should be deprived of his option to move the lower forum
afresh on the same facts and material. Any different approach
may lead to anomalous results where the relief sought at the
hands of the High Court having been denied, can again be
sought from the lower court without there being any change in
the circumstances in which the relief has been denied by the
High Court. Theoretically, it may be feasible but in practice it
will  not  be.  Such  a  scenario  might  not  have  been  in  the
contemplation of the framers of the law. If that be so, then we
fail to understand as to what distinct advantage is intended to
be conferred on persons seeking anticipatory bail by allowing
them to move the two alternative forums one after another in
their original jurisdiction for the same relief on the same facts.
One  reason  for  this  could  be  that  an  order  rejecting  an
88

application bail is interlocutory [See Zubair Ahmad Bhat Vs
State  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir,  1990  Cri.L.J.  103  (J&K),
Joginder Singh Vs State of Himachal Pradesh, ILR (1975) HP
181. A different view was, however, expressed in Mohan Lal
and other Vs Prem Chand and others, AIR 1980 HP 36 (FB)]
wherein  it  was  held  that  Sessions  Judge’s  order  refusing
anticipatory bail was not an interlocutory order. The power of
revision conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 397 is not
exercisable  in  relation  to  any  interlocutory  order  in  any
appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding. (See Section 397(2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973). The conflicting
views of High Courts in various cases in this regard have led
to  varied  judicial  practices  whereby  recourse  is  sometime
taken to the powers of revision of the High Courts against
orders of Courts of Session declining anticipatory bails and in
other cases inherent powers of the High Courts are invoked in
such matters. The High Courts exercise their inherent powers
to redress the grievance of the aggrieved person or to prevent
the use of the process of the Court and to secure the ends of
justice or to prevent miscarriage of justice or illegal exercise
of jurisdiction  under Section  482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or under Article 227 in exceptional cases.
[See Shyam M. Sachdev Vs State and another, 1991 Cri.L.J.
300 (Delhi)]; Ram Prakash Vs State of H.P. 1979 Cri.L.J. 750
(HP);  Bhola  and  others  Vs  State  1979  Cri.L.J.  718
(Allahabad); Kamal Krishna De Vs State 1977 Cri.L.J. 1492
(Calcutta)]. The Supreme Court in a number of cases has laid
89

down the scope and ambit of the powers of the courts under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. Every High Court has inherent power to
act ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice, for the
administration of which alone if exists, or to prevent abuse of
the process of the court. Inherent power under Section 482
Cr.P.C. can be exercised: (i) to give effect to an order under
the Code; (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court; and
(iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. Inherent powers
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. though wide have to be exercised
sparingly, carefully and  with  great  caution  and  only when
such exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down in
this  section  itself.  Authority  of  the  court  exists  for  the
advancement of justice. If any abuse of the process leading to
injustice is brought to the notice of the court, then the Court
would  be  justified  in  preventing  injustice  by  invoking
inherent  powers  in  absence  of  specific  provisions  in  the
Statute…The  powers  possessed  by  the  High  Court  under
Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude
of the power requires great caution in its exercise. (See Inder
Mohan  Goswami and  another  Vs State  of  Uttaranchal  and
others,  207(12)  SCALE  15  at  25).  Section  482  is  not
controlled by Section 397(2) or 397(3). The inherent powers
of the High Court are not subjected to the bar contained in
Section 397 as the powers of the High Court under these two
Sections  are  distinct,  different  and  mutually  exclusive  and
ought not to be equated. Nothing in the Code nor even the bar
under Section 397 affect the amplitude of the High Court’s
90

inherent power if glaring injustice stares the Court in the face
[See Govind Das Biyani and others Vs Badrinarayan Rathi
(1995) 4 Crimes 755 (M.P.); Smt. Chander Mohini Khuller Vs
State of West Bengal and another, 1995(4) Crimes 289 (Cal.);
Rajeev Bhatia Vs Abdulla Mohmed Gani and another, 1992
Cri.L.J.  2092  (Bom.);  Binod  Sitha  Vs  Suna  Devi  1986(1)
Crimes  208  (Ori);  Raj  Kapoor  and  others  Vs  State  (Delhi
Administration)and others, AIR 1980 SC 258); Malam Singh
Vs State of Rajasthan, 1977 Cri.L.J. 730 (Raj.)]. Thus, where
an application for anticipatory bail has been rejected by the
Court of Session and no revision lies against it for the order of
rejection being an interlocutory order, then the remedy of the
applicant will be to invoke the inherent powers of the High
Court under Section 482 or the constitutional powers under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India, in a case a provision
is inserted in Section 438 on the lines of Section 397(3). It
may  be  seen  that  there  is  lack  of  uniformity  in  judicial
practices in these matters that needs to be remedied. One way
of doing this is to extend the benefit of revision by suitably
amending the law. It may be noted that the amended provision
envisages passing of ad interim order on an application for
anticipatory bail application in the first instance, followed by
a final order after hearing the Public Prosecutor. Besides, such
an application need not necessarily be filed in any pending
case as registration of a FIR is not considered necessary. To
add to it, the applicant may not be ultimately put up for trial if
the  investigation  of  the  case  does  not  reveal  any  material
91

against the applicant. In such a scenario, the final order on the
application may not be in the nature of interlocutory as the
case may stand disposed of finally. Besides, the use of legal
fiction is not unknown to Law and it is quite often applied to
meet a given exigency or to secure certain ends. It is thus
legally  feasible  to  expressly  provide  in  the  Law that  final
orders  on  an  anticipatory  bail  application  may  not  be
construed as interlocutory for the purposes of the Code. And,
we recommend accordingly.
6.4.21 Accordingly, the position that will so emerge will proceed on
the following lines, viz.,
(i)  Both  the  High  Court  and  the  Court  of  Session  will  have
concurrent jurisdiction to deal with application for directions under
Section 438 and it will be open to a person to move either of these
two Courts at his option; 
(ii) Once that option is exercised and that person decides to move
one of these Courts, then the person will not have any further option
to move the other Court; 
(iii) Where the person chooses to move the Court of Session in the
first instance, a revision will lie in the High Court against the order
of Court of Session on the application for issue of directions under
Section 438; 
(iv)  Where the person chooses to straightaway move the High Court
in the first instance, subject to Court’s satisfaction of the special or
exceptional  circumstances  justifying  such  move,  the  person  will
92

stand deprived of the aforesaid remedy of revision. In such a case
the person if aggrieved of the High Court’s order on his application
for  direction  under  Section  438  may  have  to  invoke  the
extraordinary  constitutional  powers  of  the  Supreme  Court  by
seeking special leave to appeal in the Supreme Court.
6.4.22   We  are,  therefore,  of  considered  view  that  Section  438
should  be amended  so  as  to contain  a provision  on the lines  of
Section 397(3). All other remedies that are presently provided in the
Code  or  otherwise  against  the  final  order  on  an  application  for
anticipatory bail, will, however, continue to be available. This will
also take away much of the sting of lawyers’ objections against the
amendments, particularly those contained in sub-section (1B), that
the applicants have been so denied the right to move the other forum
against the rejection of his application as he could be arrested being
present in the Court, though we have recommended omission of that
sub-section, albeit, on different grounds.
6.4.23  We  would  summarize  our  recommendations  in  the
succeeding chapter, and also attempt a draft of the revised text of
Section  438  as  amended  on  the  basis  of recommendations  made
hereinabove.
93

CHAPTER-7
RECOMMENDATIONS
7.1       We recommend that:
(i)   The proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 438 shall
be omitted.
(ii)      Sub-section (1B) shall be omitted.
     (iii)   A new sub-section on the lines of Section 397(3)      
      should be inserted.
     (iv)   An Explanation should be inserted clarifying that a   
     final order on an application seeking direction under
     the section shall not be construed as an interlocutory
     order for the purposes of the Code.
7.2 The text of Section 438 so revised will be as follows:
“438. Direction  for  grant  of  bail  to  person   apprehending
arrest  
(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be 
arrested on accusation of having committed a non-
bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the 
Court of Session for a direction under this section that in
the event of such arrest he shall be released on bail; 
and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter 
alia, the following factors, namely:-
94

(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact
as  to  whether  he  has  previously  undergone
imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect
of any cognizable offence;
(iii) the  possibility  of  the  applicant  to  flee  from
justice; and
(iv) where  the  accusation  has  been  made  with  the
object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by
having him so arrested,
either  reject  the  application  forthwith  or  issue  an
interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail.
2. Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section
(1), it  shall  forthwith  cause  a  notice  being  not  less  than
seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be
served on the Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of
Police,  with  a  view  to  give  the  Public  Prosecutor  a
reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application
shall be finally heard by the Court.
Explanation: The final order made on an application for
direction under sub–section (1) shall not be construed
as an interlocutory order for the purposes of this Code.
3. When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a
direction  under  sub-section  (1),  it  may  include  such
95

conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the
particular case, as it may think fit, including:
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available
for interrogation by a police officer as and when required;
(ii)  a  condition  that  the  person  shall  not,  directly  or
indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to any
person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade
him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police
officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without
the previous permission of the Court;
(iv)  such  other  condition  as  may be  imposed  under  sub-
section (3) of Section 437, as if the bail were granted under
that section.
4. If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an
officer  in  charge  of  a  police  station  on  such  accusation,  and  is
prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the
custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail, and
if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a
warrant should issue in the first instance against that person, he shall
issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court
under sub-section (1).
96

5. If an application under this section has been made by any
person either to the High Court or the Court of Session, no further
application by the same person shall be entertained by the other of
them.
 We recommend accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
                    Chairman
(Prof. (Dr.) Tahir Mahmood) (Dr.D.P. Sharma)
                Member          Member-
Secretary
97