                                          
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Proposal to Amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956
as amended by Act 39 of 2005 
Report No. 204
FEBRUARY 2008

THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 204)
Proposal to Amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956
as amended by Act 39 of 2005 
Presented to the Union Minister for Law and Justice, Ministry of Law
and  Justice,  Government  of  India  by  Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,
Chairman, Law Commission of India, on 5th day of February, 2008. 
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three years
from 1st September, 2006 by Order No. A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA),
dated the 16th October, 2006 of Government of India, Ministry of Law
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the Member-Secretary,
one full-time member and six part-time members.
Chairman
The Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman
Member Secretary
Dr. D.P. Sharma
Full-time Member
Prof. (Dr.) Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. K.N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Dr. Mrs. Devinder Kumari Raheja
Prof. Mrs. Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
The Chief Executive of the Law Commission is
Dr. D.P. Sharma, Member-Secretary
3

The Law Commission is located at ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Research Staff
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Addl. Government Counsel
Shri J.T. Sulaxan Rao : Addl. Government Counsel
Shri Sarwan Kumar : Deputy Government Counsel
Shri A.K. Upadhyay : Asst. Government Counsel
Dr. V.K. Singh : Asst. Government Counsel
Shri C. Radha Krishna : Asst. Government Counsel
Administration Staff
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S.K. Basu : Section Officer
Shri N.S. Nagar : Library Consultant
4

The text of this Report is available on the internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©       Government Copyright 2008
Law Commission of India
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
New Delhi-110 001
India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  Government  Logos)  may  be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is
reproduced  accurately  and  not  used  in  a  misleading  context.  The
material must be acknowledged as Government copyright and the title
of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating this Report should be addressed to the Member-
Secretary,  Law  Commission  of  India,  2nd Floor,  ILI  Building,
Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi-110001, India.  Fax: 91-11-23388870 or
E-Mail at: dr.dpsharma@nic.in 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan           ILI Building (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                                  Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                             New Delhi-110 001
                                              Tel. : 91-11-23384475
                                                Fax.: 91-23383564
D.O.No. 6(3)138/2007-LC(LS)      February  5, 2008
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Sub: Proposal to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956
as amended by Act 39 of 2005
I am forwarding herewith 204th Report of the Commission on Hindu Succession
Act, as amended by Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (39 of 2005).
The aforesaid Amending Act was passed to give effect to the recommendations
made by the Commission in its 174th Report on Property Rights: Proposed Reforms under
the Hindu Law.  This subject was taken up by the Commission suo motu in view of the
pervasive  discrimination  prevalent  against  women  in  relation  to  laws  governing  the
inheritance/succession of property amongst the members of a joint Hindu family.
While  going  through  the  Amending  Act,  the  Commission  noticed  certain
legislative inadvertences which need rectification.  In pursuance of its terms of reference,
which, inter alia, enjoin upon the Commission to make recommendations for the removal
of anomalies, ambiguities and inequities in the law, the Commission undertook this study
suo motu with a view to remove anomalies that have afflicted the Amended Act.
We  hope  that  the  recommendations  in  this  Report  will  further  the  objects
underlying the constitution of the Commission.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
                                                                                                                     Sd/-     
                      (Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Hon’ble Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001
Encl: as above
Residence: No.1,Janpath, New Delhi-110011. Tel.:91-11-23019465.23793488.23792745
E-mail:ch.lc@sb.nic.in
6

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
PROPOSAL TO AMEND
THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956
AS AMENDED BY ACT 39 OF 2005
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Background 8
2. The Present Study 10
3. Over-Lapping in Class-I and Class-II 
Heirs, Need for Reconciliation 13
4. Father – Need for Relocation 16
5. Father’s Widow           18
6. Revision of Class-I Heirs           19
7. Summary of Recommendations           22
7

1. BACKGROUND
Inspite of the constitutional mandate for gender equality, gender bias
and discrimination continue to be prevalent in the Indian society in one
form or another. Though there are distinct signs of gradual reduction of
inequalities on the basis of sex, yet these could not be eliminated altogether.
There is no denying of the fact that the fight against gender inequalities has
to be pursued with sustained rigours on a long term basis until the ultimate
goal of gender equality is attained.  Towards this end, the Commission suo
motu took the study of reforms in respect of property rights of women under
the Hindu Law in its 174th Report as discrimination against women has been
glaringly  discernible  in  this  area.  In  order  to  give  effect  to  the
recommendations made by the Commission in the aforesaid 174th Report,
the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (30 of 1956) was amended by the Hindu
Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (39 of 2005).  The statement of Objects
and Reasons of the Amendment Act 39 of 2005 read as follows:
“The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 has amended and codified the law 
relating to intestate succession among Hindus. The Act brought about
changes  in the law of succession  among Hindus and gave rights  
which  were till  then  unknown in  relation  to women’s property.  
However, it does not interfere with the special rights of those who are
members of Hindu Mitakshara coparcenary except to provide rules  
for devolution of the interest of a deceased male in certain cases. The 
Act lays down a uniform and comprehensive system of inheritance  
and applies, inter alia, to persons governed by the Mitakshara and  
Dayabhaga schools and also to those governed previously by the  
8

Murumakkattayam, Aliyasantana and Nambudri laws. The Act 
applies to every person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms  
or developments including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of 
the Brahmo, Pararthana or Arya Samaj; or to any person who is  
Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion; or to any other person who is not a
Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion. In the case of a 
testamentary disposition, this Act does not apply and the interest of the
deceased is governed by the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
2. Section 6 of the Act deals with devolution of interest of a male 
Hindu in coparcenary property and recognizes the rule of devotion by
survivorship among the members of the coparcenary.  The retention
of the Mitakshara coparcenary property without including the females in
it means that the females cannot inherit in ancestral property as their 
male  counter-parts  do.  The  law  by  excluding  the  daughter  from  
participating in the coparcenary ownership not only contributes to her
discrimination on the ground of gender but also has led to oppression 
and negation of her fundamental  right of equality guaranteed by the 
Constitution, having regard to the need to render social justice to  
women,  the States of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and 
Maharashtra have made necessary changes in the law giving equal  
right to daughters in Hindu Mitakshara coparcenary property.  The  
Kerala Legislature has enacted the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System 
(Abolition) Act, 1975.
3. It is proposed to remove the discrimination as contained in  
section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 by giving equal rights to 
9

daughters in the Hindu Mitakshara coprarcenary property as the sons 
have.  Section 23 of the Act disentitles a female heir to ask for 
partition in respect of a dwelling house wholly occupied by a joint 
family until the male heirs choose to divide their respective shares 
therein.  It is also proposed to omit the said section so as to remove the
disability on female heirs contained in that section.
4. The above proposals are based on the recommendations of the 
Law  Commission  of  India  as  contained  in  its  174th Report  on  
“Property  Rights  of  Women:  Proposed  Reform  under  the  Hindu
Law”.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”
2. THE PRESENT STUDY
Section 8 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (in short HSA) contains
general rules of succession in case of males.  Accordingly, the property of a
male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the provisions of this
Chapter1:-
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in class I of
the Schedule;
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the heirs,
being the relatives specified in class II of the Schedule;
1 Chapter II on Intestate Succession, containing Sections 5 to 29.
10

(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon
the agnates of the deceased; and
(d) lastly,  if  there  is  no  agnate,  then  upon  the  cognates  of  the
deceased.    
The heirs in class I and class II in the Schedule to HSA, as amended
by the Act 39 of 2005, are as follows:
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 8)
Heirs in Class I and Class II
Class I
Son;  daughter;  widow;  mother;  son  of  pre-deceased  son;
daughter  of  a  pre-deceased  son;  son  of  a  pre-deceased  daughter;
daughter of a pre-deceased daughter; widow of a pre-deceased son;
son of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-
deceased son of a pre-deceased son; widow of a pre-deceased son of a
pre-deceased son [son of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased
daughter;  daughter  of  a  pre-deceased  daughter  of  a  pre-deceased
daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased daughter;
daughter of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased son]2.
Class II
I. Father.
II. (1) Son’s daughter’s son, (2) son’s daughter’s daughter,
(3) brother, (4) sister.
2 Added by Act 39 of 2005, Sec. 7 (w.e.f. 9.9.2005)
11

III. (1) Daughter’s son’s son, (2) daughter’s son’s daughter,
(3) daughter’s daughter’s son, (4) daughter’s daughter’s
daughter.
IV. (1) Brother’s son, (2) sister’s son, (3) brother’s daughter,
(4) sister’s daughter.
V. Father’s father; father’s mother
VI. Father’s widow; brother’s widow.
VII. Father’s brother; father’s sister.
VIII. Mother’s father; mother’s mother.
IX. Mother’s brother; mother’s sister.
Explanation:- In this Schedule, references to a brother or sister
do not include references to a brother or sister by uterine blood.
A  bare  perusal  of  the  aforesaid  two  classes  reveals  certain
anomalies  that  seem to  have  inadvertently  crept  in.  For  example,
daughter’s daughter’s son and son’s daughter’s daughter find mention
in both the classes. Further, whereas mother is included in class I,
father’s widow is included in class II. There is apparent ambiguity
that  needs  clarification.  The  reading  of  class  I  ex-facie  is  quite
complex and cumbersome. The terms of reference with which the
Commission has been set up, inter alia, enjoins upon it to revise the
Central Acts of General Importance so as to simplify them and to
remove anomalies, ambiguities and inequities. In view of this, the
Commission considered it appropriate to take up further revision of
the amended HSA with a view to simplify the two classes and remove
the anomalies resulting from legislative inadvertences.
12

3. OVER-LAPPING  IN  CLASS-I  AND  CLASS-II  HEIRS,
NEED FOR RECONCILIATION
As per 2005 amendment in the aforesaid Act following relations viz:-
1. Son of a predeceased  daughter of a predeceased daughter (i.e.
daughter’s daughter’s son);
2. Daughter of a predeceased daughter of a predeceased daughter
(i.e. daughter’s daughter’s daughter).
3. Daughter of a predeceased son of a predeceased daughter (i.e.
daughter’s son’s daughter);
4. Daughter of a predeceased daughter of a predeceased son (i.e.
son’s daughter’s daughter)
are  added  in  the list  of  legal  heirs  under Class-I of the  schedule
provided under the said Act.  The above four now added in Class I are
already in Class II prior to the amendment and though they have been
elevated  to  Class  I,  they  have  not  been  deleted  from  Class  II.
However, the said relations were required to be omitted from their
entries present prior to 2005 viz. under 2nd and 3rd Entry under Class-
II heirs which are still present under the aforesaid provisions only in
different words as:-
Class-II, Entry II (2) son’s daughter’s daughter  (Check  S.No.4  
above u/cl-I)
Class-II, Entry III (2) daughter’s son’s daughter  (Check  S.No.3  
u/cl-I)
13

(3) daughter’s  daughter’s  son  (Check  S.No.1
u/cl-I)
(4) daughter’s  daughter’s  daughter  (Check
S.No.2 above u/cl-I)
Though both the above entries in Class-II prima-facie seem to
be different due to the use of the word “pre-deceased” in Class-I for
the same, actually meaning wise, both relations are same and will
only  come into  picture  if  their  legal  ascendants  died  prior  to  the
opening of succession i.e. before the death of the Hindu Male dying
intestate, with respect of whom all the above relations are derived.
Hence, in our opinion, a definite correction is required in Class-II of
the schedule and the relations provided under the same, which are
already covered in Class-I, must be deleted.
As already stated, the four of the descendants included as Class
I heirs are listed as Class II heirs as well. The confusion caused by
this  repetition  requires  correction.  The  repetition  is  perceptibly
obvious  and  requires  elimination  to  restore  clarity  and  to  avoid
unnecessary litigation.
Two of the male descendants  in the daughter’s line are not
listed as Class I heirs while their female counterparts are so listed.
There is no basis or justification for this omission.
14

The omission is not based on principle, but creates a reverse
discrimination  against  the  male  descendants  and  this  has  to  be
rectified.
Thus “son of predeceased son of a predeceased daughter” as
well as “son of a predeceased daughter of a predeceased son” of the
intestate are not added under Class-I by the said amendment of 2005.
The  said  relations  are  also  derived  through  daughter  and  grand-
daughter of the intestate. On the basis of the same logic used for
remaining insertions made in Class-I u/2005’s amendment, the said
relations too should have been included in class I heirs.  Daughter of
a predeceased daughter of a predeceased son who is item number 2 of
Entry 2 in Class II has been elevated as a Class I heir under the
amendment.  However, son’s daughter’s son i.e. son of a predeceased
daughter of a predeceased son is retained in Class II though both of
them are in the same degree of relationship to the intestate.
Daughter’s son’s daughter who was formerly in Class-II has
been  elevated  in  Class-I  as  daughter  of  a  predeceased  son  of  a
predeceased daughter. While daughter’s son’s son namely Entry 3 in
item 2 is retained in Class II though both of them are in the same
degree of relationship to the intestate, and, therefore, in our opinion
above said 2 relations, which are mentioned as “daughter’s son’s son”
and “son’s daughter’s son”, under Class II – 2nd and 3rd items (Entry)
respectively, be omitted from there and be added in Class-I.
15

In our opinion, the mistake we have noticed while scanning
through the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 is definitely
the result  of a legislative  inadvertence.  We therefore  suggest  that
son’s daughter’s son as well as daughter’s son’s son may be added in
Class-I, deleting them from Class-II, based on the same logic used for
remaining insertions in Class I under the 2005 amended provisions.
We therefore request the Law Department to take appropriate steps to
rectify the defect pointed out by us as above.
4. FATHER – NEED FOR RELOCATION
The other point that may be considered is that –
 Because of this amendment the persons in Class-II Entry II and III
are pushed up and take place with Class-I heirs.  By this, these 3rd
generation persons remotely connected with the deceased person take
preference over a very close relative, namely
“Father” the only heir in Class II Entry 1 and
“Brother” in Class II Entry II Item 3 and “Sister” in Class II 
Entry II Item 4.
“Father”, who is certainly a very close relative rather than any
one  coming  in  the  Class  II  Entry  2  and  3  list,  assumes  more
importance  in  view  of  the  recent  enactment  of  the  Parliament  to
provide  maintenance  to  parents  in  “The  Senior  Citizens
(Maintenance, Protection and Welfare) Act, 2007” wherein it is now
made mandatory that every person should maintain his parents and
16

failure  will  result  in  punishment.  While  so,  it  is  but  natural  and
logical to expect that a father should be given the right of inheritance
of the property of his son like a mother.  As  such  pushing
“Father” beyond a III generation “Daughter’s daughter’s daughter”
etc., has no meaning. Why a preference to the more close relatives
should be given-up, in place of 3rd generation relatives who in our
society may not have any contact with the person dying intestate – is
not known.
Further, we have to see one more point that is almost all (Class
I heirs) sons, daughters and grand children have the duty to maintain
the parents or grand parents as per the 2007 Act.  There is no duty
cast  upon  the great grand children  to  look after their  great grand
parents, whereas they have been given equal right to share as Class I
heirs.  This is certainly an anomaly.  This can be rectified only by
including the “Father” in Class-I.
As suggested earlier, we have to consider that the desirability
of elevating the father as a Class I heir with the mother was that he
may not  be  the  lesser  heir  than  a  daughter’s  daughter  in  the  list
particularly  when  we  are  now  thinking  of  enforcing,  by  law,  of
obligation of the children to maintain their parents.
17

5. FATHER’S WIDOW
Entry VI in Class II heirs specifies Father’s widow along with
brother’s widow and is placed below grand father and grand mother
of the deceased male coparcener dying intestate. It may be noted that
the term father’s widow’ include ‘mother’ in its ambit. But ‘mother’
has already been included in Class-I heirs. Thus, father’s widow in
Class-II, Entry-VI, will logically refers to step-mother only and not
real mother. However, the related Entry does not expressly say so. It
may be relevant to note Rule 1 and Rule 2 in Section 10 of HSA in
this regard. According to Rule 1, the intestate’s widow, or if there are
more widows than one, all the widows together shall take one share.
The Indian Law provides for monogamy and prohibits bigamy and
polygamy  as  a  general  rule.  The  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955  too
prescribes  that  neither  party  has  a  spouse  living  at  the  time  of
marriage as a condition for Hindu marriage. Thus, there is remote
possibility  for  some  one  to  have  more  than  one  widows.  The
provisions  of HSA seem to be more by way of abundant caution.
Rule-2 in Section 10 provides that the surviving sons, daughters and
mother of the intestate shall each take one share. Thus, it may be seen
that if mother of the intestate takes her share as Class-I heir, then
nothing will remain for the step mother, if any, to succeed.
The expression ‘father’s widow’ therefore needs to be clarified
as referring to step mother (s) and not real mother, i.e. father’s widow
other than real mother. But this entry may be upgraded to the level of
18

Entry 2 and father’s widow other than real mother be placed after
‘brother and sister’ in Entry 2 under class II in the Schedule.
6. REVISION OF CLASS-I HEIRS
Class I heirs in the Schedule contain a large list of successors,
going down upto three degree of descent of the deceased intestate,
that  is,  upto  his  great  grand  children.  The  list  presents  quite  a
complex reading and is not amenable to easy understanding. We feel
that this needs to be simplified, particularly in view of the general
principles  of  succession  contained  in  Sections  9  and  10  of  HSA.
According to the order of succession, among the heirs specified in the
Schedule those in class I shall take simultaneously in succession and
to the exclusion of all other heirs. It will now be appropriate to refer
to the rules for distribution of property among heirs in Class I of the
Schedule as contained in Section 10 of HSA. Section 10 of HSA
reads as under:
“10. Distribution of property among heirs in class I of the  
Schedule.- The property of an intestate shall be divided among 
the heirs in class I of the Schedule in accordance with the  
following rules:
Rule 1.- The intestate’s widow, or if there are more 
widows  than  one,  all  the  widows
together, shall take one share.
19

Rule 2.- The surviving sons and daughters and the  
mother of the intestate shall each take
one 
share.
Rule 3.- The heirs in the branch of each pre-deceased
son or each pre-deceased daughter of the  
intestate shall take between them one
share.
Rule 4.- The distribution of the share referred to in 
Rule 3 –
(i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-
deceased  son  shall  be  so  made  that  his
widow  (or  widows  together)  and  the
surviving  sons  and  daughters  gets  equal
portions; and the branch  of his predeceased
sons gets the same portion;
(ii) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-
deceased daughter shall be so made that the
surviving  sons  and  daughters  get  equal
portions.”
From  the  aforesaid,  it  follows  that  the  surviving  sons  and
daughters of the intestate take one share each. If any son or daughter
dies before the intestate, then his, or her children, as the case may be,
will take between them one share that would have gone to the pre-
deceased son or daughter, as the case may be, had he or she been
alive at the time of intestate’s death. In other words, if any of such
20

child pre-deceased the intestate leaving his or her children alive at the
time of intestate’s death, the children of such child as aforesaid will
take between them the share which the said child would have taken if
living at the intestate’s death. This rule is also embodied in Section
16 in respect of order of succession among heirs of a female Hindu.
This is percolated down the line of succession and is inherent in the
scheme of Section 10 read with Class I heirs in the Schedule.
Besides, the widow of a pre-deceased son will also take one
share.
Accordingly,  the  law  in  these  provisions  can  be  suitably
revised with a view to simplify it further as follows. The following
Rule shall be inserted in Section 10.
Rule 2.  The mother and father, if both survive at the intestate’s death,
shall take between them together, one share. 
Mother shall be deleted from existing Rule 2. 
The existing Rules 2 and 3, 4 shall be renumbered as Rule 3, 4
and 5 respectively. The words “and so on in succession” shall be
added at the end of renumbered Rule 4. 
The Class I heirs in the Schedule may be revised as under.
Class-I
21

1. Son, daughter, widow, mother and father.
2. Where any  son  or daughter  pre-deceased  the  intestate,  then
children of such pre-deceased son or daughter, as the case may
be, and widow of a pre-deceased son, if any.
3. And so on in succession among the heirs of the descending
branch of successors pre-deceasing the intestate.
7. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The following entries should be deleted from class II (as these
have been elevated to class I)  in the Schedule.
Entry (II) (2) son’s daughter’s daughter
Entry (III) (2) daughter’s son’s daughter
Entry (III) (3) daughter’s daughter’s son
Entry (III( (4) daughter’s daughter’s daughter
2. The following entries should be deleted from class II and be
added to class I heirs in the Schedule.
Entry (II) (1) son’s daughter’s son
Entry (III) (2) daughter’s son’s son.
3. ‘Father’ should be deleted from Entry I under class II and be
inserted in class I after ‘mother’.
22

4. Father’s widow be deleted from Entry VI and included in Entry
II after ‘sister’ as father’s widow other than real mother.
5. (1) The following Rule shall be inserted in Section 10, after
Rule 1,
Rule 2 – The surviving parents at the intestate’s death shall
together take between them one share.
 (2) The following Rules 2, 3 and 4 shall be renumbered as
Rules 3, 4 and 5 respectively.
(3) Mother  shall  be  deleted  from  existing  Rule  2  and
renumbered Rule 3.
(4) The words “so on in succession” shall be added at the
end of renumbered Rule 4.
6. Amendments recommended at Serial No. 1 to 3 above except to
the extent to which these relate to the deletions in Class-II will not be
necessary, if the alternative recommendation of revising class I heirs
in the Schedule as follows is accepted.
Class I
1. Son, daughter, widow, parents (or mother and father).
2. In case any son or daughter dies before the intestate’s death,
then children of any such pre-deceased son or daughter, as the
case may be, and widow of the pre-deceased son, if any.
23

3.  And so in succession, among the heirs of the  descending  
branches of successors being grand children and great grand  
children and widow of any grandson or great grandson, and so 
on, as the case may be, in the case of their pre-deceasing the 
intestate.
                                               (Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
                                                             Chairman
(Prof. (Dr.) Tahir Mahmood)          (Dr. D.P. Sharma)
                Member                                                            Member-Secretary
24