GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
PROPOSAL TO AMEND THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD
MARRIAGE ACT, 2006 AND OTHER ALLIED LAWS
Report No. 205
FEBRUARY 2008
1

THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 205)
PROPOSAL TO AMEND THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD
MARRIAGE ACT, 2006 AND OTHER ALLIED LAWS
Presented to the Union Minister for Law and Justice, Ministry of Law
and  Justice,  Government  of  India  by  Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,
Chairman, Law Commission of India, on 5th day of February, 2008. 
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three years
from 1st September, 2006 by Order No. A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA),
dated the 16th October, 2006 of Government of India, Ministry of Law
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the Member-Secretary,
one full-time member and six part-time members.
Chairman
The Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman
Member Secretary
Dr. D.P. Sharma
Full-time Member
Prof. (Dr.) Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. K.N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Dr. Mrs. Devinder Kumari Raheja
Prof. Mrs. Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
The Chief Executive of the Law Commission is
Dr. D.P. Sharma, Member-Secretary
The Law Commission is located at ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwandas Road,
3

New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Research Staff
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Addl. Government Counsel
Shri J.T. Sulaxan Rao : Addl. Government Counsel
Shri Sarwan Kumar : Deputy Government Counsel
Shri A.K. Upadhyay : Asst. Government Counsel
Dr. V.K. Singh : Asst. Government Counsel
Shri C. Radha Kriahna : Asst. Government Counsel
Administration Staff
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S.K. Basu : Section Officer
Shri N.S. Nagar : Library Consultant
4

The text of this Report is available on the internet at:
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
© Government Copyright 2008
Law Commission of India
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
New Delhi-110 001
India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  Government  Logos)  may  be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced  accurately  and  not  used  in  a  misleading  context.  The
material must be acknowledged as Government copyright and the title
of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating this Report should be addressed to the Member-
Secretary,  Law  Commission  of  India,  2nd Floor,  ILI  Building,
Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi-110001, India.  Fax: 91-11-23388870 or
E-Mail at: dr.dpsharma@nic.in 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          ILI Building (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                            Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                        New Delhi-110 001
                                            Tel. : 91-11-23384475
                                            Fax.: 91-23383564
DO No. 6(3)/117/2006-LC(LS)                February 5, 2008  
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Sub: Proposal to Amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act,
2006 & other allied Laws
I am forwarding herewith the 205th Report of the Law Commission on
“Child Marriage”. 
The Supreme Court in Writ Petition (Crl) No. 81/2006 had requested
the assistance of the Law Commission on certain legal issues relating to
Child Marriage, and the different ages at which a person is defined as a
child in different laws.  During the pendency of the Writ Petition,
however, the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 was enacted giving
certain important rights to victims of child marriage and children born
from these marriages.  The Commission took these changes into account
and further examined whether the new Act addressed all the concerns
relating to child abuse, health and  human rights, which are an
inevitable consequence of  child marriage.   Thereafter, the Commission
forwarded its suggestions to the Supreme Court in December, 2007.  
The present report is divided into six chapters.   After the
introduction, the 2nd chapter deals with the salient features of the
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.  Chapter – 3 outlines the data
available on the incidence of Child Marriage throughout the country and
the possible causes for this.  The chapter deals, in some detail, about
recent studies on the consequences of Child Marriage.  It notes that
Child Marriage stunts the growth and development, particularly of the
girl child who is the more vulnerable partner.  The report takes into
account the fact that child marriage may often result in early pregnancy
and that complications during child birth and both maternal and infant
mortality (both of the mother & child) are common during child birth for
young pregnant girls.  It further notes that child marriage results in
child labour at home and young girls have very little decision making
powers.  Child marriage makes girls more vulnerable to domestic violence
and sexual abuse.  It also deprives the girl child of her right to
obtain education  and live a life of freedom & dignity.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Residence: No.1,Janpath, New Delhi-110011. Tel.:91-11-23019465.23793488.23792745
                                                    E-mail:ch.lc@sb.nic.in
6

The report looks at the laws relating to child marriage from
various countries and the International Covenants that mandate the
eradication of child marriage like CEDAW (The Convention  On The
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) and Convenants
like the CRC (Convention on the Rights Of The Child), which makes it
obligatory for states to protect children from all form for violence and
abuse and neglect.
After noting the changes to the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929
with reference to the age of marriage and age of consent for sexual
inter-  course
and judgments which have upheld child marriage through the years the
report recommends that child marriage below 18 for both girls and boys
should be prohibited and that marriages below the age of 16 be made void
while those between 16 and 18 be made voidable.   However, to ensure
that young women and children are not left destitute the report
recommends that  provisions relating to  maintenance and custody should
apply  to  both  void  and  voidable  marriages.   The  report  further
recommends that the age for sexual consent should be 16 for all young
girls, regardless of marriage.  Finally, it recommends that registration
of marriage be made compulsory. 
The present report thus aims to suggest a  law which will
eradicate the evil of child marriages.
I acknowledge the extensive contribution made by Ms Kirti Singh
Part time member and Ms Pawan Sharma, Additional Government Counsel in
preparation of the final Report. 
With kind regards, 
Yours Sincerely,
(Justice AR Lakshmanan)
 
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 001.
7

                             LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
PROPOSAL TO AMEND
THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE ACT, 2006
AND OTHER ALLIED LAWS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Serial No. Title                
Page
1. Chapter I Introduction 3 -  5
2. Chapter II Main Features of the Prohibition
Of Child Marriage Act, 2006 6 -  8
3. Chapter III The Scope, Causes and 
Consequences of Child Marriage 9 – 18
4. Chapter IV Human Rights and the Prohibition
Of Child Marriage Act, 2006 –
Criticism in Chapter -4           19-26
5. Chapter V The Child Marriage Restraint 
Act, 1929; Legislative History, 
Judgments, and various  Reco-
mmendations for Amendments on
Child Marriage and Age of Child 27-36
          
6. Chapter VI Conclusion and Recommendations 37-40
7. Bibliography  41-44
8

CHAPTER I
Introduction
The Supreme Court of India, in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 81 of
2006, has requested the Law Commission to assist it with certain issues
relating to child marriage. The Supreme Court in its order dated 27.3.2006
has also noted that different laws specify different ages while defining a
child and there are various contradictions between these legislations.       
The  Writ  Petition,  which  has  been  filed  by  the  Delhi  State
Commission for Women and the National Commission for Women, points
out that while the word, “child” is defined as any person below the age of 18
in the Indian Majority Act and The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection)
Act,  2000,  it  was  18  for  girls  and  21  for  boys  in  the  Child  Marriage
Restraint  Act,  1929  (hereafter  CMRA).  The  Hindu  Marriage  Act  also
prescribes the same minimum ages for a marriage. The Writ Petition further
states that though the Indian Penal Code contains no definition of the word
“child”, the age of consent for the girl for sexual intercourse is 16 under
Section 375 IPC while in married couples the age of consent is presumed to
be 15. According to the Petitioner the Shariat allows marriage at the age of
15. 
The Petition further lists as a grievance the following:-
a) Section 5 and 11 of the HMA do not authorize the court to declare
a marriage void on the ground that either of the parties is underage. 
b) The exception to section 375 of the Indian Penal Code exempts a
husband from the charge of rape if his wife is not under 15 years of
9

age.  The  Petition  sees  this  as  a  direct  contradiction  to  the  Child
Marriage Restraint Act of 1929, under which no child marriage is
allowed. However the Petition notices that child marriages are not
invalid under the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.
 
The Petition therefore recommends that there should be a uniform definition
of child in all legislations for the sake of uniformity and for the sake of
protecting children against child abuse. It argues that the legal minimum age
for marriage is 18 under a number of ratified international agreements and
the laws of many countries. It argues that all marriages under the age of 18
should be void. 
It further prays that the Union of India should be directed to amend
the laws relating to age of marriage and minimum age of giving sexual
consent so that both are in conformity with each other. The petition prays
for deletion of the explanation under Section 375 IPC under which marital
rape is not considered rape unless the wife is under 15 years of age. 
Amongst the reasons given for declaring marriages under the age of
18 void is the reason that child marriage is usually forced marriage and   no
full  and  informed  consent  can  be  given  by  a  person  under  18.   Child
marriage is also stated to be akin to child abuse and for many girls is the
beginning  of  frequent  and  unprotected  sexual  activity  which  can  have
serious  health  consequences  like  anemia,  maternal  mortality,  infant
mortality, and result in certain diseases like HIV/AIDS. The Petition points
out that young girls are more prone to domestic violence and have limited
social networks.  The rights of young girls like the right to education and the
right to an all-round development are violated by child marriage.     
10

It is pertinent to point out that after the Writ Petition was filed the
Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 has been revamped and the Prohibition
of Child Marriage Act, 2006 has been enacted. It is a well known fact that
child marriage has a specific gender dimension and the adverse effects of
child marriage have a greater impact on a girl child. We need to examine
whether the new Act addresses all the concerns  relating  to child abuse,
health,  and  human  rights  which  are  inevitable  consequences  of  child
marriage. 
11

CHAPTER II 
Main Features of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006
The new Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 (hereafter PCMA)
brings about far reaching changes in the law as under:-
• Section  3  of  this  Act  states  that  “child  marriages  shall  be
voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child
at the time of the marriage.” It allows for a petition to be filed
to  declare  the  marriage  void  within  2  years  of  the  child
attaining majority. However, since a girl is supposed to attain
majority at the age of 18 and a boy at the age of 21, the girl can
file a petition till she becomes 20 years of age and a boy till he
becomes 23 years of age. 
• The Act also allows for maintenance and residence for the girl
till  her  remarriage  from  the  male  contracting  party  or  his
parents. 
• It further allows  for appropriate orders  for custody for any
child born from the marriage. 
• All the punishments for contracting a child marriage have been
enhanced. The punishment for a male over 18 years of age has
been enhanced to rigorous imprisonment of up to 2 years or
with a fine upto 1 lakh rupees or both. 
• A similar punishment is prescribed for anyone who performs,
conducts, directs or abets any child marriage.  
12

• The  same  punishment  is  also  prescribed  for  anyone  who
solemnizes a child marriage including by promoting such a
marriage, permitting it to be solemnized or negligently failing
to prevent the marriage. No woman can however be punished
with  imprisonment.  The  Act  also  makes  all  offences
cognizable and non-bailable.  
• The  Act  further  allows  for  injunctions  to  prohibit  child
marriages including ex parte interim injunctions. It states that
any  child  marriage  solemnized  in  contravention  of  an
injunction order will be void. 
The  Act  lays  emphasis  on  the  prohibition  of  child  marriages  by
providing for the appointment of Child Marriage Prohibition Officers by the
State  Governments  and  gives  powers  to  these  Officers  to  prevent  and
prosecute solemnization of child marriages and to create awareness on the
issue. However without the required financial allocations these Officers will
probably not get appointed. The Act gives the District Magistrate powers to
stop  and  prevent  solemnization  of  mass  child  marriages  by  employing
appropriate measures and minimum police force apart from giving him all
the powers of the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer.                     
In view of the provisions of PCMA we have to examine whether any
further amendments to the law of child marriage are necessary. The present
law while making child marriage voidable under a gender neutral provision
has also given a male child the right to get out of a forced marriage.  The
law, however, does not make a marriage invalid whether it is performed
when the child is an infant or later at puberty or adolescence. Under the
13

criminal law, however, Section 375 IPC makes it a crime to have a sexual
relationship with a child under 15 years of age. A contradiction therefore
remains between the PCMA and Section 375 IPC. It is relevant to mention
that prior to the new Act a Parliamentary Standing Committee had examined
the government Bill on the Prevention of Child Marriage and suggested that
child marriages solemnized after the introduction of the new Act should be
made void ab initio. The Standing Committee had pointed out that research
had shown that a girl child “has to suffer irreparable losses due to biological
factors and inability to sustain pressure of marriage at an early age.”1 In the
next chapter we therefore examine the scope, causes and consequences of
child marriages.          
1 Rajya Sabha Thirteenth Report on the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004, New Delhi, November
2005, Para 10.4
14

CHAPTER III:
The Scope, Causes and Consequences of Child Marriages
Child  marriages  continue  to  be  a  fairly  widespread  social  evil  in
India. In a study carried out between the years 1998 to 1999 on women aged
15-19 it was found that 33.8% were currently married or in a union.2 In
2000 the UN Population Division recorded that 9.5% of boys and 35.7 % of
girls aged between  15-19 were married. 3This showed that child marriage
was  far  more  prevalent  amongst  girls  and  this  highlighted  the  gender
dimension of the problem. The National  Family Health Survey of 2005-
2006 (NFHS-3) carried out in twenty-nine states  confirmed that 45% of
women currently aged 20-24 years were married before the age of eighteen
years.  The percentage was much higher in rural areas (58.5%) than in urban
areas (27.9%) and exceeded 50% in eight states. 4 The percentage of women
aged 20-24, married by the time they are 18, stood at 61.2% in Jharkhand
followed by 60.3 % in Bihar, 57.1% in Rajasthan, 54.7% in AP, and 53% in
MP, UP and West Bengal. The NFHS-3 findings further revealed that 16%
of   women aged 15-19 were already mothers or pregnant at the time of the
survey. It was also found that more than half of Indian women were married
before the legal minimum age of 18 compared to  16% of men aged 20-49
2 The Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) figures retrieved from UNICEF based website,
<www.childinfo.org/areas/childmarriage/>, visited on November 2007
3 UN Population Division (2000). World Marriage Patterns, Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, Washington, 
<www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldmarriage/worldmarriage.htm>, visited on November 2007
4 National  Family Health Survey of 2005-2006 (NFHS-3),
<http://www.nfhsindia.org/> (The NFHS-3 facts and figures mentioned hereafter have all been retrieved
from this website) , visited on October 2007
15

who were married by age 18. Though NFHS-3 did not compile data on girls
who were married  below the age of 15, the 2001  Census of India5 had
revealed that 300,000 girls under 15 had given birth to at least one child.
Further in a survey conducted by the Government of Rajasthan in 1993 it
was found that 56% girls had been forced into marriage before the age of 15
and  of  these  7%  were  married  before  they  were  10.6 A  second  survey
conducted in 1998 in the State of MP found that 14 % girls were married
between the ages of 10 and 14. 7In states like Rajasthan, mass marriages of
very young children take place on occasions like the Akha Teej.     
The NFHS-3 findings show a slight rise in the median age of marriage
for women aged 20-49 from 16.78 in NFHS-2 to 17.2. However this data
does not reveal how many marriages are taking place even below the age of
15. Furthermore, with about  315 million people in India being in the age
group of  10–24 years (RGI 2001)9, and 44.5 %  of women aged 20-24 still
getting married by  the time they are 18, and 29.3% of men aged 25-29
getting married by the time they are 21,  the improvement seems trivial.  
In 2006 the Hindustan Times reported that 57% of girls in India are
married off before they are 18 as per the International Centre for Research
on Women.10 
52001 Census of India,
<www.censusindia.gov.in/>, visited on November 2007
6 UNICEF website on Married Adolescents. Cited in UNFPA. 2004. Child Marriage Advocacy Programme:
Fact Sheet on Child Marriage and Early Union
7  Ibid.
8National  Family Health Survey of 1998-99 (NFHS-2),
 <www.nfhsindia.org/data/india/indfctsm.pdf>, visited on November 2007
9 Census-2001Registrar General of India(RGI) figure as taken from K.G. Santhya and Shireen J. Jejeebhoy
paper: Young People’s sexual and reproductive Health in India: Policies, programmes and realities,
Population Council regional working papers No.19, New Delhi, 2007
10 The Hindustan Times daily on 29.8.2006
16

The phenomenon of child marriage can be attributed to a variety of
reasons. The chief amongst these reasons is poverty and culture, tradition
and  values  based  on  patriarchal  norms.  These  norms  do  not  take  into
account that “(i)n actuality, child marriage is a violation of human rights,
compromising  the  development  of  girls  and  often  resulting  in  early
pregnancy and social isolation, with little education and poor vocational
training reinforcing the gendered nature of poverty.
   Young married girls are a unique, though often invisible, group.
Required to perform heavy amounts of domestic work, under pressure to
demonstrate fertility, and responsible for raising children while still children
themselves,  married  girls  and  child  mothers  face  constrained  decision-
making and reduced life choices. Boys are also affected by child marriage
but the issue impacts girls in far larger numbers and with more intensity…
Where a girl lives with a man and takes on the role of caregiver for him, the
assumption is often that she has become an adult woman, even if she has not
yet reached the age of 18.” 11
The marriage of a minor girl often takes place because of the poverty
and indebtedness of her family. Dowry becomes an additional reason, which
weighs  even more heavily on poorer families.  The general demand for
younger brides also creates an incentive for these families to marry the girl
child as early as possible to avoid high dowry payments for older girls. 
The  girl  in  our  patriarchal  set  up  is  believed  to  be  parki  thepan
(somebody’s property) and a burden. These beliefs lead parents to marry the
girl  child.  In  doing  so,  they  are  of  course  relieving  themselves  of  the
11 Taken from UNICEF based website,
<www.childinfo.org/areas/childmarriage/>, visited on November 2007
17

‘burden’ of looking after the child. The girls are considered to be a liability
as they are not seen as individuals who can contribute productively to the
family. Unfortunately, the patriarchal mindset is so strong that the girl has
no say in decision  making. Texts like Manu Smirti which state that the
father or the brother, who has not married his daughter or the sister who has
attained  puberty  will  go  to  hell  are  sometimes  quoted  to  justify  child
marriage.  Child marriages are also an easy way out for parents who want
their daughters to obey and accept their choice of a husband for them.
There is also a belief that child marriage is a protection for the girls
against unwanted masculine attention or promiscuity. In a society which
puts a high premium on the patriarchal values of virginity and chastity of
girls, girls are married off as soon as possible. 
Furthermore securing the girl economically and socially for the future
has been put forth as a reason for early marriage. 12
The institution of marriage in communities or societies can be used to
serve or strengthen economic and social ties between different families and
even communities.  Also a young girl may be offered to a family in order to
improve the financial and social standing of the girl’s family.13  
Other reasons that have been listed for the high prevalence of child
marriages in India are lack of education and knowledge, shortcomings in the
law, and the lack of  will and action on part of the administration. 14
As stated above, child marriage is a grave violation of the rights of
the child depriving her of opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy
manner to obtain education and to lead a life of freedom and dignity.  It
12 Chatterji, Jyotsna,  Child Marriage, paper presented at India Social Forum, November 2006, New Delhi  
13 International Center for Research on Women (ICRW)  Policy Advisory on Child Marriage,
<www.icrw.org/docs/childmarriage0803.pdf >, visited on November 2007  
14 Chatterji, Jyotsna,  supra note 12.  
18

deprives the young girl of capabilities, opportunities and decision-making
powers and stands in the way of her social and personal development. 
Young  brides  face  the  risk  of  sexual  and  reproductive  ill  health
because  of  their  exposure  to  early  sexual  activity  and  pregnancy.  The
NFHS-2 had recorded that only 4% of married girls practiced gauna. It had
further been recorded that the period between marriage and gauna had been
reduced to about one year in most cases.  The NFHS-3 figures show that the
practice has been further restricted to 0.7% married girls.  Complications
and mortality are common during childbirth for young pregnant girls. Girls
who come from poor backgrounds and who are often married at an early age
have little or no access to health care services. Risks associated with young
pregnancy and childbearing include “an increased risk of premature labour,
complications during delivery, low birth-weight, and a higher chance that
the newborn will not survive.”15  Young mothers under age 15 are five times
more  likely  to  die  than  women  in  their  twenties  due  to  complications
including  haemorrhage,  sepsis,  preeclampsia/  eclampsia  and  obstructed
labour.  16  Maternal mortality amongst adolescent girls is estimated to be
two to five times higher than adult women. 17 Maternal mortality amongst
girls aged 15-19 years is about three times higher.18 Young women also
suffer from a high risk of maternal morbidity. It has been found that for
“every woman who dies in childbirth, thirty more suffer injuries, infections
15 Black, Maggie, Early Marriage, Child Spouses, UNICEF, Innocenti Research Centre, Digest no.7
(2001), p.10
16 Mensch, Barbara S., Judith Bruce and Margaret S. Greene, The Uncharted Passage: Girls’ Adolescence
in the Developing World, The Population Council (1998), New York.
17  Sethuraman, Kavita and Nata Duvvury, The Nexus  of Gender Discrimination with Malnutrition: An
Introduction, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol XLII No44 November 3-9, 2007, p.49
18 Barua, A., Heman Apte, Pradeep Kumar, Care and Support of Unmarried Adolescent Girls in Rajasthan,
Economic and Political Weekly, Vol XLII No44 November 3-9, 2007, p.54
19

and  disabilities,  which  usually  go  untreated  and  some  of  which  are
lifelong”.19 Research further indicates that the babies of mothers below the
age of 18 tend to have higher rates of child morbidity and mortality. “Infants
of mothers aged younger than 18 years have a 60 per cent greater chance of
dying in the first year of life than those of mothers aged 19 years or older
[UNICEF 2007].”20 Babies are born premature or underweight  or young
mothers simply lack parenting skills and decision-making powers.21
Secondly,  young  girls  face  the  risk  of  infection  with  sexually
transmitted diseases including HIV. Young brides who run away from early
marriages may end up as sex workers or eventually resort to use sex work as
a way of earning additional income. 
Young  brides  also  run  the  risk  of  catching  diseases  from  their
respective spouses, as older husbands often engage in sexual relations with
other  women  outside  the  marriage.  Young  married  girls  do  not  have
bargaining power in the marriage and therefore cannot negotiate safe sex
and are deemed vulnerable.   It has also been found that young girls are
physiologically more prone to contracting HIV/AIDS, as her vagina is not
well lined with protective cells and her cervix may be more easily eroded.
An  analysis  of  the  HIV  epidemic  shows  that  “the  prevalence  of  HIV
infection is highest in women aged 15–24 and peaks in men between five to
ten years later.”22
19 Black, Maggie, supra note 15, p.11
20 Barua, A., supra note 18, p.54
21 Otoo-Oyortey, Naana and Sonita Pobi, Early Marriage and Poverty: Exploring links for policy and
programme development, The Forum on Marriage and the Rights of Women and Girls, London, 2003, p.19
22 Barua, A., supra note 18, p.26 
20

 Women  experience domestic violence from their spouses and their
relatives for a variety of reasons. These reasons include dowry and the wife
not behaving according to norms set by the husband and his family which
are often patriarchal in nature.  A study has shown that India has the highest
rate of “domestic violence among women married by 18 with a rate of 67
per cent,  compared  to 45 per cent  of women who had  not  experienced
violence.”23 Since an age gap between men and their wives generally exists
and quite often men are much older, the power dynamics between them can
be extremely unequal. The girl becomes socially isolated and does not have
any decision-making powers and consistently faces harassment from her
husband  and  in-laws.  NFHS-3  indicates  that  decision-making  power  is
extremely limited for married women in general as only 52.5% of currently
married  women participate  in  household  decisions.  Furthermore because
young  brides  enter  the  marriage  at  an  early  age,  they  do  not  develop
personal and social skills that will enable them to fend for themselves. They
become totally dependent on their spouses and are not likely to leave a
violent marriage. 
Women also undergo sexual violence in marriage and young girls are
particularly vulnerable. In a study carried out in Calcutta in 1997 where half
the women interviewed were married at or below the age of 15, with the
youngest being married at 7 years old, findings revealed that this age group
had “one of the highest rates of vulnerability to sexual violence in marriage,
second  only  to  those  whose  dowry  had  not  been  paid.”24  The  women
23 U.N Children’s Fund (UNICEF). Early Marriage: A Harmful Traditional Practice, UNICEF: Florence
(2005), p.22
24 Somerset, Carron, Early Marriage: Whose Right to Choose? Forum on Marriage and the Rights of Women
and Children, London (2000), p.21 
21

interviewed  said  they  had  sexual  intercourse  before  menstruation  had
started, that sex was early and very painful, and “many still continued to be
forced into sexual activity by their husbands.” 25Additionally the young girls
“had made their husbands aware of their unwillingness to have sex or of
pain during sex, but in 80 per cent of these cases the rapes continued.”26
As husbands are often much older than their brides, girl brides are
likely to be widowed at an early age.  A child bride who is widowed can
suffer  discrimination  including  loss  of  status  and  they  are  often  denied
property rights, and other rights. Child widows have little or no education or
other skills to be able to take care of themselves. At a 1994 Conference in
Bangalore, India, participants told of being married at five and six years old,
widowed a few years later, and rejected by their in-laws and their own
families.  These  widows  are,  quite  simply,  left  with  no  resources  and
nowhere to go. 27
Young  girls  who  are  married  early  usually  stop  going  to  school.
Giving  an education to a girl is perceived  by both  the girl’s and boy’s
families  unnecessary  for  becoming  a  good  wife  or  a  mother,  if  not  a
deterrent. Those who have a choice are eventually forced to drop out of
school  because  they  are  forced  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  doing
domestic chores and starting a family etc. Early marriage is often linked to
low levels of schooling for girls. NFHS-3 figures show that 71.6% of Indian
women currently aged 20-24 years, who had been married before the age of
25 Otoo-Oyortey, Naana, supra note 21, p.21
26 Ouattara, M., P. Sen, and M. Thomson, Forced Marriage, Forced Sex: The Perils of Childhood for Girls,
(1998) p.31, <http://www.nepalsathi.ws/birendra/writings/bhutanrefugees/bt_1998ouattara.pdf> , visited on
November 2007
27 Black, Maggie, supra note 15, p.9
22

eighteen years, did not have any education at all. Furthermore, by not going
to school, young brides are denied the opportunity to make friendships with
peers or acquire critical life skills.   
It has been said that “(e)ducated women are more likely to have a say
in decision-making regarding the size of their families and the spacing of
their children. They are also likely to be more informed and knowledgeable
about contraception and the health care needs of their children.”28 Since
married girls leave their homes and often villages, towns, cities etc. they
“tend to lose the close friendships they had formed in their parental homes,
and often become quiet and subdued. This means that even where girls have
developed social networks they are unable to access them.”29
The loss of adolescence, the forced sexual relations, and the denial of
freedom  and  personal  development  attendant  on  early  marriage  have
profound psychosocial and emotional consequences. Researchers on child
marriage in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh state that young married girls
suffered more than boys due to the abovementioned consequences of child
marriage.30
28 Otoo-Oyortey, Naana, supra note 21, p.13
29 Ibid., p.21
 
30 Black, Maggie, supra note 15, p.9
23

                                             CHAPTER IV
Human Rights and the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006
Child marriage is thus child abuse and a violation of the human rights
of the child. It has an extremely deleterious effect on the health and well
being  of the  child.  It is  a denial  of  childhood  and  adolescence;  it  is  a
curtailment of personal freedom and opportunity to develop to a full sense
of selfhood as well as a denial of psycho-social and emotional well being
and it is a denial of reproductive health and educational opportunities. The
girl child is the most affected and suffers irreparable damage to her physical,
mental, psychological and emotional development.31
It is important therefore, to examine whether the new law on child
marriage (PCMA) takes into account and seeks to redress the disastrous
effects of child marriage in a holistic manner. By making a provision for
child marriage protection officers and giving powers to Magistrates to stop
mass child marriages and by making child marriages both cognizable and
non-bailable the new law certainly seeks to prevent child marriages from
taking place and sets a machinery in place to do so. Further, by providing
that ex-parte interim injunction orders can be given by a Magistrate to stop
child marriages the new law is a definite improvement over the old law
which stipulated that no interim injunction orders could be passed without
notice. The enhancement of punishment in Sections 9, 10 and 11 for the
guardian and others who promote or permit or fail to stop a child marriage,
for a groom above 18 and for those who perform, conduct or direct any
31 Chatterji, Jyotsna, supra note 12.  
24

child  marriage,  up  to  two  years  from  the  earlier  three  months  and  the
increase  in  fine  up  to  rupees  one  hundred  thousand  are  also  welcome
changes.
However, three important criticisms of the new Act have been made
by Women’s and Human Rights Groups and other concerned individuals.
One  of  the  main  criticisms  of  the  new  Act  has  been  that  it  does  not
invalidate a marriage even below  a certain age. Thus a child of 10,11,12 or
13 years of age can be married and subjected to sexual and other forms of
abuse which  normally have lasting  and  irreversible  mental  and  physical
consequences. Merely giving a girl child an option to end the marriage after
the age of 15 years may not be sufficient. Also, though under the criminal
law  sexual  intercourse  with  a  wife  under  15  years  is  punishable,  the
marriage is still held to be valid under the new Act. It has been proposed by
some that the age of consent under the rape laws should be the same as the
minimum age of marriage and all marriages below this age should be held
void. Some others have proposed that in special circumstances a marriage
may be allowed between over 16 years (hereinafter called the relaxed age of
marriage) and the age for consent to sexual intercourse and the relaxed age
of marriage should be the same and marriages below the age of 16 should be
void. 
The  new  Act  like  the  old  CMRA  continues  to  stipulate  different
minimum ages for a girl and a boy to get married. This provision has been
criticized by some as being discriminatory, biased and based on patriarchal
notions of marriage.32 Another criticism that has been raised vis-à-vis the
new Act is the fact that though a boy can opt out of the marriage till the age
32 Sagade, Jaya Child Marriage in India, Oxford University Press, 2005 
25

of 23 years, a girl can only do so till the age of 20 years (2 years after
reaching the age of majority).
If  we  examine  the  laws  in  different  countries,  we  see  that  most
countries ban child marriages and punish rape within and outside marriage.
However,  child  marriage  continues  to  be  prevalent  in  most  of  the
developing world. In some countries, though the legal age for marriage is 18
years a person  may be allowed to marry before that  age in exceptional
circumstances. Otherwise the marriage is void. For instance, in Australia a
person can apply to a judge or magistrate for an order allowing him/her to
marry if he/she has reached the age of 16 years. 33 However, by 1991 every
state in Australia had abolished the marital rape exception. 
In New Zealand, a person under 20 years of age but over 16 years old
can only marry with parental consent. The age of sexual consent for women
is also 16 years. 34 There is no exception for marital rape in the Crimes Act,
1961  of  New  Zealand.35 The  marital  rape  exemption  was  abolished  in
1985.36 
In the UK, a marriage below the age of 16 years is void.37 The Marital
rape exemption was abolished in its entirety in 1991.
33 The Australia Marriage Act, 1961 with amendments up to act No. 46 of 2006, Part II, 11,
<www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/ActCompilation1.nsf/0/62C9133A12096F07CA25719C00335
E03/$file/MarriageAct1961_WD02.pdf>, visited on December 2007  
  
34 Marriage Act 1955,
<www.legislation.govt.nz/libraries/contents/om_isapi.dll?clientID=578134860&infobase=pal_statutes.nfo&
jump=a1955-092&softpage=DOC> , visited on December 2007
35 Crimes Act 1961, Section 128, Clause 4,
<www.legislation.govt.nz/libraries/contents/om_isapi.dll?clientID=578134913&infobase=pal_statutes.nfo&
jump=a1961-043%2fs.128&softpage=DOC#JUMPDEST_a1961-043/s.128>, visited on December 2007
36 Mishra, Saurabh & Sarvesh Singh, Marital Rape — Myth, Reality and Need for Criminalization, (2003)
Practical Lawyer WebJour 12, <www.ebc-india.com/lawyer/articles/645.htm>, visited on December 2007
37 Marriage Act 1949, Halsburuy’s Laws of England, 4th Edn. Reissue, Vol.29(3) p.41 
26

In Egypt, the age of majority for all legal purposes except marriage is
21 years.  The marriageable age is 18 for males and 16 for females.38 But
again the age of consent is different from marriageable age.   The age for
giving consent is 18 years39 and the penal code says that intercourse with a
girl below 18 years is rape.40   
In the U.S., different States have different laws. The legal age for
marriage  under  most  of  these  laws  is  however  18  for  both  males  and
females. 41 However, in States like California a person can marry below that
age with the permission of parents.42 The marital rape exception has been
abolished in 50 States of the US.43
In Pakistan under the Muslim Family Law Ordinance, the girl must
have attained the age of 16 years and the boy must have attained the age of
18 years and both need to consent before the marriage can take place. 44 In
Indonesia the age of majority as well as marriageable age is 16 for girls and
38 CEDAW Egypt Country Report (30 March 2000), pp.14-5
39  UNICEF Website, <http://www.unicef.org/knowyourrights/know_oldenough.html> , visited on
November 2007
40 CEDAW Egypt, supra note 38, p.16
41 Cornell University Law School, Legal Information Institute(LII),
<www.law.cornell.edu/topics/Table_Marriage.htm>, visited on December 2007 
42 California Family Code, Section 301,
<www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/displaycode?section=fam&group=00001-01000&file=300-310>, visited on
November 2007
43 Narayan, Chitra, When the spouse turns abusive, the Hindu (Metro Plus Chennai), Jun 03, 2006
44 Article 16, CEDAW  Pakistan Country Report (2005), p.122
27

19 for boys.45 The age for giving a valid consent to a sexual act is also set at
16 years for a girl. Any marriage below the legal age is void.46
The Domestic Violence law in Indonesia also punishes a person in the
household who forces sex on another person in the same household with a
maximum sentence of 15 years.47
The detailing of laws from different countries therefore shows that
barring  a  few  countries,  most  countries  have  18  as  a  minimum age  of
marriage for both boys and girls. Some countries allow marriage below the
age of 18 but above the age of 16. The age of consent to sexual intercourse
is      the same as the minimum or relaxed age of marriage.
International  Conventions  also  support  the  proposition  that  child
marriage  should  be  eradicated.  Various  international  bodies  such  as  the
UNICEF and the United National Population Fund have suggested that 18
should be considered the minimum age of marriage. 
 The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW), which India has ratified, specifically addresses
age of marriage. Article 16(2) provides that "the betrothal and the marriage
of a child shall have no legal effect, and all necessary action, including
legislation, shall be taken to specify a minimum age for marriage and to
make the registration of marriages in an official registry compulsory". The
Committee that oversees the Women's Convention, has, however, issued its
interpretation of article 16(2) in the form of General Recommendation No.
45Article 16, CEDAW Indonesia Country Report (27 July 2005), p.57
46 Ibid., p.58
47 Amnesty International, Indonesia: Exploitation and abuse: the plight of women domestic workers
(Report), AI Index: ASA 21/001/2007, February 2007, p.12.
28

21.  entitled  "Equality  in  marriage  and  family  relations.”48 This
recommendation has also suggested that the age of marriage for both men
and women should be 18. The recommendation quotes with approval the
Vienna  Declaration  and  Programme  of  Action  adopted  by  the  World
Conference on Human Rights, 1993, that States are urged to repeal existing
laws  and  regulations  and  to  remove  customs  and  practices  which
discriminate against and cause harm to the girl child. It further states, “when
men  and  women  marry,  they  assume  important  responsibilities.
Consequently, marriage should not be permitted before they have attained
full  maturity  and  capacity  to  act.  According  to  the  World  Health
Organization, when minors, particularly girls, marry and have children, their
health can be adversely affected and their education is impeded. As a result
their  economic  autonomy  is  restricted.  This  not  only  affects  women
personally but also limits the development of their skills and independence
and  reduces  access  to  employment, thereby detrimentally  affecting  their
families and communities.”
 Further the Committee on the Status of Women under CEDAW has
criticized the fact that certain countries have different ages of marriage for
boys and girls as follows: 
“Some  countries  provide  for  different  ages  for  marriage  for  men  and
women. As such provisions assume incorrectly that women have a different
rate of intellectual development from men, or that their stage of physical and
intellectual development at marriage is immaterial, these provisions should
be abolished. In other countries, the betrothal of girls or undertakings by
48 Though India has made a reservation regarding Article 16(2) the reservation only deals with registration
of marriage and not minimum of age of marriage. See CEDAW, General Recommendation 21, UN GAOR,
1994, Doc. No. A/47/38.
29

family members on their behalf is permitted. Such measures contravene not
only the Convention, but also a woman's right freely to choose her partner.”
Various International Conventions have emphasized the important principle
that marriage should be on the basis of equality and with the full and free
consent of the parties. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1948;
provides that men and women are entitled to equal rights in marriage and
marriage breakdown, and that both potential spouses should freely and fully
consent  to  the  marriage  vide  Article  16(2).49 Accordingly,  the  1956
Supplementary  Convention  on  the  Abolition  of  Slavery  and  Practices
Similar to Slavery considers forced marriage akin to slavery [Article 1(c)].
The 1964 Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage
and Registration of Marriages stipulates that a marriage requires the consent
of both parties [Article 1]; calls upon parties to eliminate the marriage of
girls under the age of puberty and requires that states stipulate a minimum
age of marriage. The ICCPR[Article 23]50 and the ICESCR[Article 10]51
again reiterate that marriage shall be entered into with the free and full
consent of both parties. 
The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) to which
India is a signatory, makes it obligatory for states to protect the child from
all  forms  of  mental  or  physical  violence,  injury  or  abuse,  neglect,
49 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1948 available on the United Nations website,
<www.un.org/Overview/rights.html>, visited on December 2007
50 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights available on the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights website, <www2.ohchr.org/english/law/cescr.htm>, visited
on December 2007
51 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights available on the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights website, <www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm>, visited on December
2007
30

maltreatment and exploitation, including sexual exploitation. This inevitably
happens in the case of a girl child when she is married while still a child.
31

CHAPTER V
The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929: Legislative History,
Judgments, and various Recommendations for Amendments   on Child  
Marriage and Age of Child     
The Child Marriage Restraint Act was the result of sustained pressure
by social reform groups and individuals who felt deeply about the adverse
consequences  of  child  marriage.  The  minimum  age  of  marriage  was
upwardly revised on several occasions due to social pressure and increased
from 10 years to 16 years. In 1940 the age of consent  for married and
unmarried girls was 15 though the minimum age of marriage became 16. 
The rise in age of marriage under CMRA and the age of consent for
sexual intercourse under the Penal Code have mostly gone side by side as
can be seen from the table below: 
Table 
Year Age of
consent
under s.375,
5th clause,
IPC
Age
mentioned
in the
Marital
Rape
Exception
to s.375,
IPC
Minimum
age of
marriage
under the
Child
Marriage
Restraint
Act, 1929
32

1860 10 years 10 years --
1891 (Act
10 of 1891)
after the
amendment
of I.P.C.)
12 years 12 years --
1925 (after
the
amendment
of I.P.C.)
14 years 13 years --
1929 (after
the passing
of the Child
Marriage
Act)
14 years 13 years 14 years
1940 (after
the
amendment
of the Penal
Code and
the Child
Marriage
Act)
16 years 15 years 15 years
1978 16 years 15 years 18 years
The CMRA law, however, remained ineffective for a variety of reasons. In a
study by UNICEF in 2001 it was found that the number of prosecutions did
not exceed 89 in any one year.52 According to the National Crime Bureau
Records 2005, 122 incidences were reported in the country under the Child
Marriage Restraint Act in 2005, compared to the 93 cases that were reported
in 2004.  53 These statistics are obviously not an accurate reflection of the
52 Black, Maggie, supra note 15, p.9
53 National Crime Records Bureau, Crime in India 2005
33

number of cases of child marriage which are occurring in the country. Most
cases of child marriage are not being reported and/or being ignored by the
police and government authorities. Even from the reported 122 cases, only
45 resulted in conviction. 54
With regard to the question of validity of marriages performed in
violation  of  the  age  requirement  prescribed  by  the  Child  Marriage
(Restraint) Act, the judiciary has taken a well settled stand. Starting from
the earliest case that came up in 1885 to a recent judgment of 2006, the
pronouncements  of  various  High  Courts  and  the  Supreme  Court  have
approved the validity of such marriages. A recent judgment of the Delhi
High Court reiterated that marriages solemnized in contravention of age
prescribed under Section 5(iii) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1965 are neither
void nor voidable.55 The court held that the judgment was based on public
policy  and  the  Legislature  was  conscious  of  the  fact  that  if  marriages,
performed in contravention of the age restriction, are made void or voidable,
it could lead to serious consequences and exploitation of women. The view
that child marriages were valid was upheld in many other judgements like
Durga Bai v. Kedarmal Sharma56, Shankerappa v. Sushilabai57,  Smt. Lila
Gupta v. Laxmi Narain and others58, Rabindra Prasad v. Sita Dass59, William
Rebello v. Angelo Vaz60, Neetu Singh v. State & others61 and Ravi Kumar v.
The State & Anr. 62. 
   <http://ncrb.nic.in> , visited on November 2007
 
54 Ibid.
55 Manish Singh v. State Govt. of NCT. And Ors., 2006(1) HLR 30356 Durga Bai v. Kedarmal Sharma, 1980(Vol. VI) HLR 16657 Shankerappa v.Sushilabai, AIR 1984 Kar 11258 Smt. Lila Gupta v. Laxmi Narain and others, 1978 SCC (3) 25859 Rabindra Prasad v. Sita Dass, AIR 1986 Pat 12860 William Rebello v. Angelo Vaz, AIR 1996 Bom 20461 Neetu Singh v. State & others, 1999(1) Vol. 39 HLR 46662 Ravi Kumar  v. The State & Anr., MANU/DE/1497/2005
34

Under the old CMRA there were very few convictions. It has been said that
“the courts have been reluctant to find adults guilty under the Act. It has
been held, for instance, that a guest escorting the bride and reminding others
to raise a customary chorus cannot be punished under the Act.63 Negotiation
and preparation for the marriage is also not punishable.64 Section 5 of the
Act,  which  makes  the  person  who  conducts,  directs,  or  performs  the
marriage liable, has been very narrowly construed by the court. It has also
been held by the courts that for a person to be punished under the Act it
must be proved that the marriage has been duly performed in accordance
with all the religious rites applicable to the form of marriage.65 This kind of
reasoning allows an accused party to raise the plea that the marriage has not
been  performed  according  to  applicable  ceremonies.  Though  there  have
been  some  positive  judgments  under  the  Act  saying  that  deterrent
punishment  should  be  awarded,  courts  have  given  extremely  light
punishments and let off the accused with small fines.66”67 
Under the old CMRA a police officer had no powers to arrest without
a warrant or an order of the Magistrate. The Act also prohibited complaints
after the first  year of marriage and therefore made prosecution  of child
marriages extremely difficult.68 However, while most of these issues have
been dealt with and the present PCMA holds all those who are participating
63 Emperor v. Fulabhi Bhulabhai Joshi and others, AIR1940 Bombay 36364 Sheikh Haidar Sheikh Rahimmo Attar Musalman v. Syed Issa Syed Rahiman Musalman and others, AIR
1938 Nagpur 23565 Khushalchand Janki Prasad v. Shankar Pandey Gaya Prasad, AIR 1963 Madhya Pradesh 126  66  Mt. Jalsi Kuar & others v. Emperor, AIR1933 Patna 471 and Kondepudi Sriramamurthi v. State of
Andhra Pradesh and another, AIR 1960 Andhra Pradesh 302
67  Singh, Kirti and Diviya Kapur, Law, Violence and the Girl Child, Heath and Human  Rights and, An
International Journal, Vol 5. No.2 , 2001, p.18
    
68 CEDAW, General Recommendation 21, UN GAOR, 1994, Doc. No. A/47/38
35

in and abetting a child marriage guilty and provides harsher    punishment,
judicial attitudes will also have to change and see the issue of child marriage
from the point of view of the girl child. Further it has been found that there
is a complete lack of awareness of the law relating to child marriage. It is
therefore, extremely important for the government to publicize the contents
of the present Act and create awareness about the ills of child marriage.
Consequent changes will also have to be made in The Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 to have equivalent punishment under Section 18 of the Act.69 
Under the Special Marriage Act however, Section 4(c) provides that
at the time of marriage the male must have completed the age of 21 years
and the female the age of 18 years.  A marriage solemnized in contravention
of this clause is treated as void and can be so declared under section 24 of
the Act.  Thus no provision makes a minor’s marriage possible under this
Act and  a child  marriage  is treated  as void  and  is  subject  to the penal
provisions of CMRA.
Marriages in the State of Goa are governed by the family laws of Goa,
Daman & Diu. Under the family law in Goa there is a chapter dealing with
Civil  Marriage  and  its  Solemnization.70 Article  3  provides  that  all
Portuguese shall solemnize the marriage before the respective officer of
civil registration under the conditions and in the manner established in Civil
Law, and only such a marriage is valid.  Article 4 (3) provides that males
below the age of 18 years and females below the age of 16 years shall not
contract.   According  to  Article  5,  consent  of  parents  is  necessary  for
marriage. 71
69 Presently Section 18 of the Hindu Marriage Act stipulates a lesser punishment of upto 15 days
imprisonment or fine upto Rs. 1,000/-. 
70 See William Rebello v. Jose Angelo Vaz, AIR 1996 Bom 204
71 Ibid.
36

Renunciates of Pondicherry are governed by the French Civil Code,
Chapter I, Article 144 of the French Civil Code provides that a man cannot
contract a marriage before he has completed 18 years and a woman till she
has completed 15 years of age.
The above study makes it clear that under Indian laws, the minimum
age  for  marriage  is  prescribed  as  21  years  for  males  and  18  years  for
females. In spite of these legal provisions, child marriage is still widely
practiced and a marriage solemnized in contravention of these provisions is
not  void even under the new PCMA, 1929, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
and also under the Muslim Law.  
If the wife is below 15, then the husband can be charged for the
offence of rape.  However, here also the law makes a distinction between a
wife below 12 and a wife over 12.  Under Section 376 when the wife is
below 12, the penalty is severe, i.e. imprisonment of either description for a
term, which shall not be less than seven years but which may be for life or
for a term which may extend to 10 years and fine.  If, however, the wife is
not under 12, i.e. she is above 12 but below 15, the punishment is milder i.e.
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years or fine or both.
The  84th Report  of  the  Law  Commission  had  recommended  an
increase  in  the  minimum  age  of  consent  and  the  minimum  age  in  the
Exception Clause.  The Commission had recommended as follows:
“2.20.  The question to be considered is whether the age should be
increased to 18 years. The minimum age of marriage now laid down
by law (after 1978) is 18 years in the case of females and the relevant
clause  of  section  375  should  reflect  this  changed  attitude.  Since
37

marriage with a girl below 18 years is prohibited (though it is not
void as a matter of personal law), sexual intercourse with a girl below
18 years should also be prohibited.”
The  laws  relating  to  rape  were  again  considered  by  the  Law
Commission in its 172nd Report on “Review of Rape Laws” (2000).  The
Law Commission before submitting its Report circulated a draft of proposed
changes.   The  National  Commission  for  Women  submitted  its
recommendations on the Draft.  In respect of provision relating to sexual
intercourse with one’s own wife, the NCW suggested that “marital sexual
intercourse by a man with his own wife without consent should also be
considered as sexual assault.”72 Certain Women’s Groups including the All
India Democratic Women’s Association and Sakshi had also recommended
that marital rape be recognized as rape. Though the Law Commission did
not agree with this suggestion it recommended that the age of consent for
both unmarried and married women should be 16 years, below which sexual
intercourse should be considered rape and punished accordingly. 
The National Commission for Women in its report in 1995-96 had
recommended  that  child  marriages  be  declared  void.  It  had  further
recommended that there should be compulsory registration of marriages and
emphasized  on  free  and  compulsory  education  till  the  age  of  14.  The
Commission felt that all these steps could play an important part in checking
child marriages.      
The  Central  Government  after  consulting  the  State  Governments
introduced  the  Prevention  of  Child  Marriage  Bill,  2004  and  this  was
referred to the department related Parliamentary Standing  Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice for examination and report.
72 See The National Commission for Women Recommendations available on its website:
<http://ncw.nic.in/>  (visited on November 2007)  
38

The Committee has proposed a common marriageable age for both the sexes
i.e., 18 years so as to avoid any serious consequences to the individual and
the society as a whole. The Committee has further recommended that child
marriage should be void ab initio and not voidable at the option of either
contracting party keeping in view the inhibitions that parties have against
court  proceedings.  The  Committee  has  further  recommended  initiating
social measures such as creation of rehabilitation fund for providing shelter,
food, education, health and security for the victims of child marriages and
also  recommended  active  support  and  coordination  of  officials  of
Panchayat, Tehsil, District and State levels, NGOs ,and social groups and
agencies.
Another  recommendation  made  by  the  Committee  was  that  the
punishment  laid  down  in  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act  for  conducting  child
marriages should be raised significantly in order to bring it at par with the
`penal provisions proposed in the new legislation.
The  Committee  has  also  recommended  compulsory  registration  of
marriages  and  called  for  active  involvement  of  NGOs  and  other  civil
agencies to prevent the occurrence of child marriages. It has suggested that
a proper system for prevention of child marriages should be set up to deal
with the issue in a holistic manner.
It  has  also  been  recommended  that  one  way  of  curbing  the
phenomenon of child marriages would  be to register all marriages. The
Supreme Court in the case of Smt. Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar73 observed
that  compulsory  registration  of  marriages  would  be  a  step  in  the  right
direction as child marriage was still prevalent in many parts of the country.
The Court directed that steps for registration of marriage should be taken by
73 Smt. Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar, 2007(12) Scale 578
39

the State Governments who had not yet passed Acts for this purpose. The
States were further asked to invite objections from the public and make
registration  of  marriages  compulsory  for  all  citizens  regardless  of
community 74 within three months of its order dated 19.12.2007. 
The third issue raised by the petitioner is to make a uniform definition of
‘child’ in all legislations in conformity with the Convention on the Rights of
the  Child.   Since  different  legislations  have  come  into  existence  with
different and specific purposes, a uniform definition of a child may not be
possible. For instance, the age of consent for sexual intercourse would be
lower  than  18  because  consensual  sex  above  the  age  of  16  is  fairly
widespread  and  routine.   Similarly  the  object  behind  the Child  Labour
(Prohibition  & Regulation)  Act, 1986  is  to ban child  labour completely
below  the  age  of  14  and  regulate  it  above  that  age  and  therefore  the
definition of a child is in tune with these objectives.      
Every law provides its own definition of the term ‘child’.   Some refer
to a child as a person who has not completed the age of 18 years and in
some statutes a child is defined as a person below 16 years and in other
statutes it is 14 years.   Some of such statutes are as under:
1. As per the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, a child is a person
who if a male has not completed 21 years of age, and if a female, has not
completed 18 years of age.
2. The Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1986 defines  child as  a
person who has not completed the age of 16 years and a minor means a
74 The Supreme Court noted that A.P., Bihar, Chattisgarh, Goa, M.P., Karnataka, Maghalaya, Mizoram,
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura have already enacted laws for Registration of Marriages.  
40

person who has completed the age of 16 years but has not completed the
age of 18 years.
3. A person is deemed to have the majority on completion of 18 years
under the Indian Majority Act, 1875.
4. A child  is  a person  below 18  years of age under  the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
It is urged in the petition that there should be a uniform definition of
‘child’ in all statutes relating to child welfare and their rights. However at
the present time it is not feasible to have a uniform definition of child as  the
different legislations serve different objectives and purposes. Each act
should be examined on its own to deter whether the definition of the child is
Justified. As far as the PCMA is concerned however, we feel that there is no
rationale basis for having different ages for marriage between boys and girls
as discussed in detail earlier.         
41

CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
An  increasing  number  of  studies  have  highlighted  the  extremely
harmful and traumatic effects of child marriage. Child marriage below a
certain age is blatant child abuse. The Indian Penal Code considers any
sexual intercourse with a minor wife below 15 years of age rape. The case
of Phulmonee75 which galvanized public opinion against child marriage in
the last century ,and for raising the age of consent, was a case in which a
girl aged 11 years died of hemorrhage from a rupture of vagina caused by
her husband who had forced sex on her. However, even the present law on
child marriage does not address a situation like Phulmonee’s. There is no
provision in the law to stop a child bride from living with her husband and
from being sexually abused apart from other forms of abuse.  The Child
Marriage  Act,  in  fact  lays  the  foundation  for  such  an  abuse  by  not
invalidating any child marriage. Research has further shown how the child
bride is more liable to suffer from pregnancy related problems and how high
both maternal and infant mortality is in the case of child marriages. Apart
from this child marriage deprives all girl children of their basic fundamental
human rights to develop in a natural, healthy environment. It deprives girls
of their right to education and to physical and mental and psychological
development. It isolates girls from their environment and infringes on their
fundamental right to liberty, speech, movement. To ignore the well-known
75 Queens Empress v. Huree Mohan Mythee XVIII Indian Law Reporter (Calcutta) 49 (1891); Sagade, Jaya
supra note 32, p.40. 
42

adverse effects of child marriage vis-à-vis the girl child would be to ignore
the manner in which the child bride experiences life and would amount to a
denial of the fact that girls are human beings and have certain fundamental
rights including the right to life. The adverse health consequences and the
violence  faced  by  the  girl  child  below  a  certain  age  are  factors  which
outweigh certain ‘social’ considerations in not invalidating the marriage.     
We further feel that there is no rationale for stipulating different ages
for consent to sexual intercourse for a minor bride and for other minor girls.
The rationale behind the minimum age of consent is that the girl is not
mature enough to know the consequences of sexual intercourse and this
rationale would be the same for a minor bride and other minor girls. We
therefore, recommend the following. 
i) That child marriage below a certain age, ie. 16 years of age be
made void. However, all the Sections relating to maintenance in
Section 4 of the PCMA 2006 regarding maintenance to the female
party to the marriage till her remarriage and the provisions relating
to child custody and legitimacy of the children in Section 5 and 6
of the PCMA 2006 be made applicable to cases of void marriages
also.
 
ii) All marriages between 16 and 18 should be made voidable at the
option of either party. The sections relating to maintenance, child
custody,  and  legitimacy  in  Sections  4,  5  and  6  should  be
applicable to voidable marriages as they are at present.  
43

Consequently Section 3(1) and 3(3) of the PCMA 2006 should be
amended to incorporate the changes outlined in paras (i) and (ii)
above and will read as under:-
“3(1)  (i)   Any  marriage  of  a  child  below  16  years  of  age
solemnized after the commencement of this Act will be null and
void and may, on a petition be presented by either party thereto
against the other party be so declared by a decree of nullity. 
(ii) Every marriage of a child between the ages of 16 and 18,
whether solemnized before or after the commencement of this Act,
shall be voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a
child at the time of the marriage.”
Section 3(3) should be amended to read as under:-
“(3) The petition under Section 3(1)(ii) may be filed at any time
till  the  person  contracting  a child  marriage  attains  20  years of
age.”   
      
iii) That the exception to the rape Section 375 of the Indian Penal
Code be deleted. This would ensure that the age of consent for
sexual intercourse for all girls, whether married or not, is 16.  The
172nd Report of the Law Commission had recommended increasing
the age of consent for all girls to 16.   
iv) Registration  of  marriages  within  a stipulated  period,  of  all  the
communities, viz. Hindu, Muslim, Christians, etc. should be made
mandatory by the Government.
44

  
v) The age of marriage for both boys and girls should be 18 years as
there is no scientific reason why this should be different.     
Consequently the present Section 2(a) of the PCMA should be
deleted and replaced by the following Section 2(a):-
“(a) ‘child’ means a person who has not completed 18 years of
age.”
vi) Other acts like the Hindu Marriage Act should also be amended to
ensure that the provisions in the said acts are the same as and do
not contradict the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006. 
      
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Dr. D. P. Sharma)
Member-Secretary
Bibliography
45

 Amnesty International, Indonesia: Exploitation and abuse: the plight of women
domestic workers (Report), AI Index: ASA 21/001/2007, February 2007
 Australia Marriage Act, 1961 with amendments up to act No. 46 of 2006
 Chatterji, Jyotsna,  Child Marriage, paper presented at India Social Forum, November
2006, New Delhi  
 Crimes Act 1961 of New Zealand available at  <www.legislation.govt.nz>
 Barua, A., Heman Apte, Pradeep Kumar, Care and Support of Unmarried Adolescent
Girls in Rajasthan, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol XLII No44 November 3-9,
2007
 Black, Maggie, Early Marriage, Child Spouses, UNICEF, Innocenti Research Centre,
Digest no.7 (2001)
 California Family Code available at <www.leginfo.ca.gov/>
 CEDAW  Egypt Country Report (30 March 2000)
 CEDAW, General Recommendation 21, UN GAOR, 1994, Doc. No. A/47/38.
 CEDAW Indonesia Country Report (27 July 2005)
 CEDAW  Pakistan Country Report (2005)
 Census of India available at  <www.censusindia.gov.in/>
 Cornell University Law School, Legal Information Institute(LII),
<www.law.cornell.edu>
 International Center for Research on Women (ICRW)  Child Marriage, Laws & Civil
Society Action, (2006) Washington, DC
 International Center for Research on Women (ICRW),  Policy Advisory on Child
Marriage ,available at  <www.icrw.org/docs/childmarriage0803.pdf >
 International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) Too Young To Wed: Education
& Action Towards Ending Child Marriage, (2005) Washington, DC    
46

 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights available on the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights website,
<www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm>
 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights available on the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights website,
<www2.ohchr.org/english/law/cescr.htm>
 Marriage Act 1949, Halsburuy’s Laws of England, 4th Edn.Reissue, Vol.29(3)
 Marriage Act 1955, of New Zealand available at <www.legislation.govt.nz>
 Mathur, S., M. Greene and A. Malhotra , Too Young to Wed: The Lives, Rights and
Health of Young Married Girls. ICRW: Washington D.C. (2003).
 Mensch, Barbara S., Judith Bruce and Margaret S. Greene, The Uncharted Passage:
Girls’ Adolescence in the Developing World, The Population Council (1998), New
York.
 Mishra, Saurabh & Sarvesh Singh, Marital Rape — Myth, Reality and Need for
Criminalization, (2003) Practical Lawyer WebJour 12, <www.ebc-
india.com/lawyer/articles/645.htm>
 Narayan, Chitra, When the spouse turns abusive, the Hindu (Metro Plus Chennai), Jun
03, 2006
 National Commission for Women Website <http://ncw.nic.in/>
 National Crime Records Bureau Website   <http://ncrb.nic.in>
 National  Family Health Survey Website  <http://www.nfhsindia.org/>
 National  Family Health Survey of 1998-99 (NFHS-2),
 National  Family Health Survey of 2005-2006 (NFHS-3) 
 Otoo-Oyortey, Naana and Sonita Pobi, Early Marriage and Poverty: Exploring links
for policy and programme development, The Forum on Marriage and the Rights of
Women and Girls, London, 2003
 Ouattara, M., P. Sen, and M. Thomson, Forced Marriage, Forced Sex: The Perils of
Childhood for Girls, (1998)  
 Rajya Sabha Thirteenth Report on the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004, New
Delhi, (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 29th November, 2005, Laid on the table of the
47

Lok Sabha on 29th November, 2005), New Delhi, November 2005/ Agrahayana, 1927
(Saka)
 Ram, F., R.K. Sinha, S.K. Mohanty et al. 2006. Marriage and Motherhood: An
Exploratory Study of the Social and Reproductive Health Status of Married Young
women in Gujarat and West Bengal, India. New Delhi: Population Council.
 Sagade, Jaya, Child Marriage in India, Oxford University Press, 2005
 Santhya, K.G. and Shireen J. Jejeebhoy paper: Young People’s sexual and
reproductive Health in India: Policies, programmes and realities, Population Council
regional working papers No.19, New Delhi, 2007
 Sethuraman, Kavita and Nata Duvvury, The Nexus  of Gender Discrimination with
Malnutrition: An Introduction, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol XLII No44
November 3-9, 2007
 Singh, Kirti and Diviya Kapur, Law, Violence and the Girl Child, Heath and Human
Rights and, An International Journal, Vol 5. No.2 , 2001
 Somerset, Carron, Early Marriage: Whose Right to Choose? Forum on Marriage and
the Rights of Women and Children, London (2000)
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1948 available on the United Nations
website,  <www.un.org/Overview/rights.html>
 U.N Children’s Fund (UNICEF). Early Marriage: A Harmful Traditional Practice,
UNICEF: Florence (2005)
 UNFPA, Child Marriage Advocacy Programme: Fact Sheet on Child Marriage and
Early Union (2004)
 UNICEF based website: <www.childinfo.org/areas/childmarriage/>  
 United Nations Children’s Fund, The State of the World’s Children 2007:Women and
Children, The Double Dividend of Gender Equality, UNICEF, New York, 2006
 UN Population Division. World Marriage Patterns, Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, Washington (2000)  
L  ist of Cases:  
 
 Durga Bai v. Kedarmal Sharma, 1980(Vol. VI) HLR 166
 Emperor v. Fulabhi Bhulabhai Joshi and others, AIR1940 Bombay 363
48

 Kondepudi Sriramamurthi v. State of Andhra Pradesh and another, AIR 1960 Andhra
Pradesh 302
 Khushalchand Janki Prasad v. Shankar Pandey Gaya Prasad, AIR 1963 Madhya
Pradesh 126  
 Manish Singh v. State Govt. of NCT. And Ors., 2006(1) HLR 303
 Mt. Jalsi Kuar & others v. Emperor, AIR1933 Patna 471
 Neetu Singh v. State & others, 1999(1) Vol. 39 HLR 466
 Queens Empress v. Huree Mohan Mythee XVIII Indian Law Reporter (Calcutta) 49
(1891); 
 Rabindra Prasad v. Sita Dass, AIR 1986 Pat 128
 Ravi Kumar  v. The State & Anr., MANU/DE/1497/2005
 Shankerappa v.Sushilabai, AIR 1984 Kar 112
 Sheikh Haidar Sheikh Rahimmo Attar Musalman v. Syed Issa Syed Rahiman
Musalman and others, AIR 1938 Nagpur 235
 Smt. Lila Gupta v. Laxmi Narain and others, 1978 SCC (3) 258
 Smt. Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar, 2007(12) Scale 578
 William Rebello v. Angelo Vaz, AIR 1996 Bom 204
49