GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION
OF 
INDIA
Proposal for enactment of new Coroners Act applicable to
the whole of India.
Report No.206
JUNE  2008

THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 206)
Proposal for enactment of new Coroners Act applicable to
the whole of India.
Presented  to  the  Union  Minister  for  Law  and  Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by Dr.
Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of
India, on the 10th day of June, 2008.
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of
three  years  from  1st September,  2006  by  Order  No.
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III(LA),  dated  the  16th October,
2006  of  Government  of  India,  Ministry  of  Law  and
Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and six part-
time Members.
Chairman
The Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. D.P. Sharma
Full-time Member
Prof.  Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. K.N. Chandrasekharan Pillai
Dr. Mrs. Devinder Kumari Raheja
Prof. Mrs. Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
The Law Commission is located at ILI Building, 
3

2nd Floor, Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi-110 001.
Law Commission Staff
Dr. D.P. Sharma, Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm Agrawal, Additional Secretary
Research Staff
Ms. Pawan Sharma     : Addl. Law Officer
Shri J.T. Sulaxan Rao  : Addl. Law Officer
Shri Sarwan Kumar     : Deputy Law Officer
Shri A.K. Upadhyay     : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V.K. Singh               : Assistant Law Officer
Shri C. Radha Krishna : Assistant Law Officer
Administration Staff
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S.K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
Information
Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
© Government Copyright 2008
Law Commission of India
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
New Delhi-110 001
India
The text in this document (excluding Government Logos)
may  be  reproduced  free  of  charge  in  any  format  or
medium providing that it is reproduced accurately and
not used in a misleading context.  The material must be
acknowledged as Government copyright and the title of
the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed
to the Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India, 2nd
Floor,  ILI  Building,  Bhagwandas  Road,  New  Delhi-
110001,  India.   Fax:  91-11-23388870  or  E-Mail  at:
dr.dpsharma@nic.in
Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan  ILI Building (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                      Bhagwandas Road, 
5

Chairman, Law Commission of India                                    New Delhi-110 001
                                    Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                     Fax: 91-23383564
DO No.6 (3)/137/2007-LC(LS)   10th June, 2008
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Sub: Proposal for enactment of new Coroners Act
applicable to the whole of India.
I am forwarding herewith the 206th Report of the
Law Commission of India on “Proposal for enactment of
new Coroners Act applicable to the whole of India”.
The  Delhi  High  Court  in  Writ  Petition  (C)
No.6179/2007 between Social Jurist, a Civil Rights Group
Vs.  Union  of  India  had  recommended  to  the  Law
Commission of India to examine whether a legislation like
the Coroners Act, 1988 prevalent in the United Kingdom
is needed in this country and whether a suitable proposal
for this purpose could be made to the Parliament in this
regard.
In  view  of  this,  the  Commission  undertook  this
study.   It  examined  the  Coroners  Act, 1988  (UK), the
existing Coroners Act, 1871 which was a Central Act but 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Residence: No.1,Janpath, New Delhi-110011. Tel.:91-11-23019465.23793488.23792745
                                                    E-mail:ch.lc@sb.nic.in
6

it has very narrow territorial limits in India, namely, the
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts of
Calcutta and Bombay, along with the relevant provisions 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian
Penal  Code,  1860.   The  Commission  is  aware  of  the
enormously  expanded  scope  of  Article  21  of  the
Constitution, viz., the right to know the correct cause of
death  of  any  person,  especially  when  the  death  is
unnatural  or  there  are  surrounding  suspicious
circumstances.
The  Commission  is  of  the  view  that  there  is  a
necessity of an independent authority to enquire into the
true and real cause of death of a person, even if such
person dies outside the territorial limits of the country.
Accordingly,  a  draft  Bill  has  been  appended  and
annexed to this Report as Annex.
The Commission places on record the able assistance
rendered by Dr. R.G. Padia, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, in preparing this Report.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001.
7

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
PROPOSAL FOR ENACTMENT OF NEW CORONERS
ACT APPLICABLE TO THE WHOLE OF INDIA
CONTENTS
Serial No.   Title             Page Nos.
1. Introduction   9 - 14
2. Annex                                        15-34
The Coroners Bill, 2008
8

Introduction
Serious  concern  has  been  expressed  at  various
quarters  on  account  of  recent  abnormal  spurt  in  the
unnatural deaths, especially at places like hospitals, police
firings and police encounters, railways and other vehicles,
and even in the household by way of dowry deaths, raising
suspicions  of  adoption  of  illegal  means  with  a  strong
possibility of the complicity of the officials of the State. It
has also been found that in criminal cases, the divergent
post-mortem reports and the statements of witnesses have
led to an alarming rate of acquittal in criminal cases. 
Moreover, scope of Article 21 has been enormously
expanded by the Apex Court, so as to include the right to
know or right to have the correct information and this will
also include the right to know the correct cause of death of
any person. 
9

It  is  also  clear  that  public  interest  will  be  greatly
subserved  and  the  moral  fabric  of  our  democratic
government  would  be  considerably  strengthened,  if  the
correct and true cause of the death of any person is known,
especially  when  the  death  is  unnatural  or  there  are
surrounding suspicious circumstances. 
At present, in the entire country, the existing Coroners
Act, 1871 applies only in respect of very limited territorial
jurisdiction, namely, the ordinary original civil jurisdiction
of the High Courts of Calcutta and Bombay and thus the
entire territorial boundaries of even these two States have
not been covered under the said Act. 
Suggestions have also been made from many quarters,
including  by  way of  judicial decisions  that such  an  Act
should be framed for the entire country. In Writ Petition No.
( C ) 6179/2007 between Social jurist, a Civil Rights Group
& Anr. Vs Union of India & Ors. , a Division Bench of
Delhi  High  Court  by  its  order  dated  12.10.2007  has
recommended to the Law Commission to examine whether
a  Legislation  like  the  Coroners  Act,  1988  prevalent  in
10

United Kingdom is needed in this country and whether a
suitable proposal for this purpose should be made to the
Parliament in this regard. However, the observations of the
Hon’ble Delhi High Court in the aforesaid case in paragraph
25 that “ there is admittedly no comparable legislation in
India nor has our attention been drawn to any by learned
counsel for the parties” do not appear to be correct and it is
clear that the learned counsel for either of the parties did not
draw the attention of the Hon’ble Delhi High Court to the
existing Coroners Act, 1871, which was a Central Act and it
was already operating in India, although within very narrow
territorial limits. 
The  cause  for  recommending  a  legislation  like
Coroners Act in the country had arisen before the Delhi
High Court on account of the fact that a child of a tender
age of five months had died in England, but in spite of  the
various valiant efforts taken by the parents of the child in
England, the exact cause of death of the child could not be
ascertained in England in spite of the two reports submitted
in England – one based on post-mortem examination and
another by Department of Forensic Medicine & Science,
University  of  Glasgow,  England.  The  parents  were  not
11

satisfied with the said report, but they could not prove the
medical negligence of the doctors in the United Kingdom,
because, according to them, the true cause of death could
not be found out and after a lapse of long seven years, the
parents had brought the body of the unfortunate child in
India  in  the  year  2007  and  after  making  several
correspondence with the governmental authorities, a Public
Interest  Litigation  was  filed  in  the  Delhi  High  Court.
However, the Delhi High Court after analyzing the existing
provisions  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  and  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure came to the conclusion that if the death
had occurred in England, unless there was any request made
by the Government in England or by any authority in that
country, a post-mortem examination of the dead body of the
unfortunate  child  could  not  be  conducted  de  hors  an
investigation into criminal offence under Section 174 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. It has been further held by the
Delhi  High  Court  that  in  cases  involving  offences
committed  outside  India  by  Non-Indian  citizens,  such
jurisdiction  is  limited  to  and  dependent  on  whether  the
country of the authority competent in the country where the
offence is committed has requested the Central Government
to have the matter investigated under 166B of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. If there is no such request, a police
12

officer in India cannot  register a case  or investigate the
commission  of  any  offence  that  has  taken  place  outside
India. 
With a view to have uniformity of the law applicable
throughout  India,  it  may  be  considered  that  the  extant
Coroners Act, 1871 should be repealed in order that the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, viz., sections
174  to  176  govern  the  field  in  the  aforesaid   territorial
jurisdictions of Calcutta and Bombay also, besides the rest
of  India.   Further,  enactment  of  a  new  Coroners  Act
applicable to the whole of India, in addition to the said
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, is felt to be
the need of the hour.
In view of the aforesaid, it has been decided to suggest
to the Government of India that a necessary independent
authority may be constituted to inquire into the true and real
cause  of  death  of  a  person,  even  if  such  a  person  dies
outside the territorial limits of the country. In order to attain
this  objective,  we  recommend  a  model  Bill  to  the
Government of India in the form given in the Annex.
13

(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood)  (Dr. D.P. Sharma)
    Member Member-
Secretary
Dated:  June 10, 2008
ANNEX
THE CORONERS BILL, 2008
14

CHAPTER I
Preliminary
1. This Act may be called the Coroners Act, 2008.
2. It extends to the whole of India.
CHAPTER II
Appointment of Coroners
3. (1) Within the local limits of each district of a State
and also for every Union Territory, there shall be a Coroner.
Provided that one Coroner may be appointed for more
than one district by the concerned State  Government.
4. Every  such  officer  shall  be  appointed  and  may  be
suspended or removed by the State Government.
5. Every Coroner shall be deemed a public servant within
the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.
15

6. There shall be a separate cadre of Coroners in each
State.    The  Coroners  shall  be  appointed  by  the  State
Government in accordance with the Rules laying down their
qualifications, method of recruitment, terms and conditions
of  their  service  including  their  salaries  and  allowances
payable by the concerned State and every such coroner will
be a whole time employee of the State concerned.    Services
of the Coroners would be available during all times of a day
throughout. 
CHAPTER III
Duties and Powers of Coroners
7. (1) When the Coroner is informed that the dead body
of a person is lying within his jurisdiction and there is
reasonable cause to suspect that such person has died under
any of the circumstances mentioned in section 11 or has died
a sudden death of which the cause is unknown, the Coroner
may proceed to hold a preliminary inquiry on the body.
Provided  that  if  a  Coroner  is  undertaking  a  journey
outside his district and finds a dead body on the road or at
16

any  other  place  lying  unattended,  and  in  his  opinion
immediate and urgent action is necessary to be taken, he will
also have extra-territorial jurisdiction  to take cognizance of
that dead body.
(2) For the purpose of an inquiry under subsection
(1), [the Coroner may], as son as practicable, after receipt of
the information proceed to view and examine the body.  Such
view and examination shall be held in the presence of the
police officer to whose jurisdiction the case belongs and, if
possible, in the presence of the relations or friends, if any, of
the deceased and the Coroner may reduce to writing such
observations as the appearances of the body requires.   When
the inquiry is concluded if the Coroner is satisfied as to the
cause of death and if a post mortem examination is in his
opinion not necessary, the Coroner may authorize the body to
be disposed of.
8. Where the Coroner has reason to believe that death has
occurred within his jurisdiction in any of the circumstances
mentioned  in  section  11  or  12  and  that  owing  to  the
destruction  of  the  body  by  fire  or  otherwise,  or  disposal
thereof in contravention of any law for the time being in
force, or to the fact that the body is lying in a place from
17

which  it  cannot  be  recovered,  an  inquest  cannot  be  held
except by virtue of the provisions of this section, he may
report  the  facts  to  the  State  Government  and  the  State
Government may, if it considers desirable so to do, direct an
inquest to be held touching the death.    When such direction
is given, an inquest shall be held accordingly by the Coroner
and  the  provisions  of  this  Act  shall  apply  with  such
modifications  as may be  necessary in consequence of the
inquest being held otherwise than on or after view of the
body.
9. “Exhumation of body for examination
23.- (1) A Coroner may order the exhumation of
the  body  of  a  person  buried  within  his  district
where it appears to him that it is necessary for the
body to be examined –
(a) for the  purpose  of  his  holding  an  inquest
into that person’s death or discharging any
other function of his in relation to the body
or the death; or
(b) for the purposes of any criminal proceedings
which  have  been  instituted  or  are
18

contemplated in respect of the death of that
person or of some other person who came by
his death in circumstances connected with
the  death  of  the  person  whose  body  is
needed for examination.
(2) The power of a Coroner under this section
shall be exercisable by warrant under his hand.
(3) No body shall be ordered by a Coroner to be
exhumed except under this Section.”
10. A  Coroner  will  have  jurisdiction  over  a  dead  body
found within his territorial jurisdiction whether the death has
occurred in any part of the country or even abroad.   The
cause of action will not depend on the cause of the death
which might be arisen at some other territorial jurisdiction
like bullet injury or administration of poison in some other
territory and the presence of the body will by itself determine
the cause of action by a Coroner.
11. (1) If it appears to the Coroner either before or in the
course of an inquiry under section 7 that there is reason to
suspect –
19

(a) that the deceased came by his death by homicide,
suicide or infanticide; or
(b) that  the  death  was  caused  by  an  accident,  or
poison or machinery; or
(c) that the death was caused by an occurrence arising
out of the use of a vehicle in a street, public road
or in a private place; or 
(d) that the death occurred in a prison in which the
deceased was a prisoner or that it occurred whilst
the deceased was in the custody of the police; or 
(e) that the death occurred –
in a leper asylum appointed under the Lepers Act,
1898;
(f) in  an  asylum or  mental  hospital  established  or
licensed under the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912;
(g) in a Borstal School established under the Bombay
Borstal Schools Act, 1929;
(h) in  a  Receiving  Centre  or  Certified  Institution
provided  and  maintained  under  the  Bombay
Beggars Act, 1945;
(i) in  any  certified  school,  Remand  Home  or  fit
person institution or approved place, established,
maintained,  declared  or recognized, as the  case
may be, under the Bombay Children Act, 1948;
20

in  which  the  deceased  was  received,  detained,
committed to, confined or kept, as the case may
be, under the orders of any authority competent to
pass such orders under the said Acts; or
(j) that  the  death  occurred  in  circumstances  the
continuance  or  possible  recurrence  of  which  is
prejudicial to the health or safety of the public or
any section of the public:
and in any other case, if it appears to the Coroner
either before or in the course of the preliminary
inquiry that there is reason for holding an inquest,
he shall proceed to hold such inquest, whether or
not  the  cause  of  death  arose  within  his
jurisdiction;
(k) that  the  death  is  caused  in  a  hospital/nursing
home,  whether  run  by  Government,  a  trust  –
public or private, or a purely private hospital or
nursing home; 
(l) death has occurred on the railways or tramways or
airways or other vehicles, whether mechanically
propelled or driven by hand;
(m) death has occurred in a police firing;
(n) death has occurred in a police encounter;
21

(o) death has occurred in public parks or at places of
public resort;
(p) dowry deaths within the households where there is
a complaint regarding the demand of dowry by
any person;
Provided that a Coroner will have no jurisdiction
in  case  of  death  of  a  person  who  is  under
detention or arrest of the defence forces under the
command of an official of the defence forces.”
(2) Such  inquest  shall  ordinarily  be  held  in  the
Coroner’s Court house.
(3) The Coroner may hold one inquest on the bodies
of several persons provided that they all are believed to have
come by their deaths, in or in consequence of one and the
same incident.
(4) Every  such  inquest  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a
judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 of the
Indian Penal Code and for the purpose of any such inquest
the Coroner shall have and may exercise all the powers of a
Criminal Court under section  340  and  section  345  of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
22

12. (1) Where a person dies –
(a) in a prison situate within the local limits of
the  Coroner’s  jurisdiction,  the
Superintendent of the prison,
(b) while in the custody of the police, the police
officer in charge of the station concerned,
(c) in any of the places referred to in clause (e)
to (j) of  subsection  (1) of  section  11, the
Superintendent  where  there  is  a
Superintendent appointed for such place and
elsewhere, the person in charge of the place,
(d) in respect of the cases covered under clauses
(k) to (p) of  section  11 by  the  concerned
authority or the individual, shall report the
death to the Coroner and await his orders
before the body is disposed of.
(2) Any Superintendent of prison, or any such police
officer or any Superintendent or person in charge of the place
referred to in clause (e) to (j) of subsection (1) of section 11,
concerned authority or the individual under clauses (k) to (p),
who fails to comply with the requirements in subsection (1)
23

shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
13. (1) Any person who, with the intention of preventing
the holding of an inquest on a dead body which the Coroner
is  bound  to  hold  under  section  11,  buries,  cremates  or
otherwise  disposes  of  it,  and  any  person  who  with  such
intention abets such burial, cremation or disposal of a dead
body shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
(2) Such  punishment  shall  be  in  addition  to  the
punishment  to  which  such  person  may  be  liable  for  any
offence of which he may be found guilty in respect of the
death of the deceased or under section  201 of the Indian
Penal Code.
14. A Coroner may order a body to be disinterred within a
reasonable time after the death of the deceased person, either
for the purpose of taking an original inquisition where none
has been taken, or a further inquisition is, in the opinion of
the Coroner, necessary or desirable in the interests of justice.
24

15. The Coroner will conduct the inquest himself by calling
such number of credible witnesses as he deems fit, but not
less than three in number.
16. At or before the first sitting of an inquest on a body the
Coroner shall view the body.
Provided that when a preliminary inquiry on the body
has  been  held  under  section  7,  or  if  from  the  medical
evidence  or  from  a  medical  certificate,  the  Coroner  is
satisfied that no advantage will result from such viewing, the
Coroner may dispense with a view of the body at the inquest.
17. The  Coroner  shall  then  make  proclamation  for  the
attendance of witnesses, or, where the inquiry is conducted in
secret,  shall  call  in  separately  such  person  who  knows
anything concerning the death.
18. (1) It shall be the duty of all persons acquainted with
the circumstances attending the death to appear before the
inquest as witnesses  –  The  Coroner shall inquire  of such
circumstances and the cause of death, and if before or during
the inquiry he is informed that any person, whether within or
without the local limits of his jurisdiction, can given evidence
25

or  produce  any  document  material  thereto,  may  issue  a
summon  requiring  him  to  attend  and  give  evidence  or
produce such document on the inquest.
(2) When any person so summoned fails to appear
and the summons has been proved to be duly served on him
in time to admit of his appearing in accordance therewith and
no reasonable excuse is offered for such failure, the Coroner
may, after recording his reasons in writing, issue a warrant
for his arrest.   Such warrant shall be executed as if it were
issued under section 87 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.
(3) Any person disobeying a summons issued under
subsection (1) shall be deemed to have committed an offence
under section 174, section 175 or section 176 of the Indian
Penal Code, as the case may be.
(4) For the purpose of causing prisoners to be brought
up to give evidence the Coroner shall be deemed a Criminal
Court within the meaning of Part IX of the Prisoner’s Act,
1900.
26

19. (1) If before proceeding to view a body under section
7 or at the view or at any stage of an inquest by jury, it
appears to the Coroner that a post mortem examination of the
body is necessary to ascertain the cause of death, he may
direct such examination to beheld by the civil surgeon or by a
duly  qualified  registered  medical  practitioner  invited  to
attend  as  a  witness.     The  Coroner  may  also  direct  an
analysis of any of the organs or parts of the body or of their
contents.   Every medical witness other than the Chemical
Examiner to Government and the Coroner’s Surgeon shall be
entitled  so  such  reasonable  remuneration  as  the  Coroner
thinks fit.    For the purpose of such post mortem examination
the Coroner may order the removal of the body to any place
within  his  jurisdiction  which  may  be  provided  for  that
purpose.
(2) Any document purporting to be a report under the
hand  of  any  Chemical  Examiner  or  Assistant  Chemical
Examiner  to  Government  upon  any  matter  or  thing  duly
submitted to him for examination, or analysis and report in
the course of any proceeding under this Act, may be used as
evidence in any inquest under this Act and in any subsequent
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
27

20. Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  Act,  the
Coroner may at any stage of the proceedings under this Act
for the purposes of preservation of safe custody, order the
removal  of  the  body  to  any  place  within  his  jurisdiction
which may have been provided for that purpose.
21. (1) All evidence given under this Act shall, except in
the  case  provided  in  subsection  (2),  be  on  oath  and  the
Coroner shall be bound to receive evidence on behalf of the
person who is alleged to have caused or to be concerned in
causing the death of the deceased person.
(2) If such person himself wishes to make a statement
it shall be the duty of the Coroner to warn him that he is not
bound to make any statement; but if such person persists, the
Coroner shall, without administering him any oath, record his
statement  in  full  after  duly  warning  him  that  any
incriminating statement which he may make may be used in
evidence in any subsequent inquiry, trial or other proceeding
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3) For the purpose of section 26 of Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, a Coroner shall be deemed to be a Magistrate.
28

(4) Witnesses  unacquainted  with  the  English
language  shall  be  examined  through  the  medium  of  an
interpreter, who shall be sworn to interpret truly as well the
oath as the question put to, and the answers given by each
witness.
22. The Coroner may adjourn the inquest from time to time,
and from place to place.
23. (1) If on an inquest touching a death, the Coroner is
informed  that  criminal  proceedings,  have  been  instituted
against  some person  before  a  Magistrate in  respect  of  an
offence touching the death of the deceased, he may adjourn
the inquest and submit his proceedings to the Magistrate.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression
“the criminal proceedings” means the proceedings before a
Magistrate and before any court to which the accused person
is committed for trial or before which an appeal from the
conviction of that person is heard, and criminal proceedings
shall not be deemed to be concluded until no further appeal
can be made in the course thereof.
29

24. When  all  the  witnesses  have  been  examined,  the
Coroner  shall  sum  up  the  evidence,  the  Coroner  shall
thereafter will submit his report with the necessary details
and reasons to the Commissioner of Police.   The report will
be regarded as a material evidence in any Court or any other
criminal proceedings.
25. The Coroner may also, where the report justifies him in
taking the belief that the death of the deceased person was
occasioned by an act which amounts to an offence under any
law  in  force  in  India  he  may  issue  his  warrant  for  the
apprehension of the person who is found to have caused the
death of the deceased person, and send him forthwith to a
Magistrate empowered to commit him for trial.
26. When the proceedings are closed, or before, if it be
necessary to adjourn the inquest, the Coroner shall give his
warrant for the [disposal] of the body on which the inquest
has been taken.
27. No inquest shall be quashed for any technical defect.
30

In any case of technical defect, a Judge of the High
court may, if he thinks fit, order the inquest to be amended,
and the same shall forthwith be amended accordingly.
Provided that any person who is not satisfied with the
report  of  the  Coroner  may  approach  the  High  Court  by
moving an application for appointment of another Coroner
and for the submission of his report, and if the High Court is
satisfied, it may direct accordingly.   The High Court may
also direct an inquest by a Coroner of a different district
within its own jurisdiction.
28. It shall no longer be the duty of the Coroner to inquire
whether any person dying by his own act was or was not felo
de se, to inquire of treasure trove or wrecks to seize any
fugitive’s goods, to execute process or to exercise as Coroner
has no jurisdiction conferred by this Act.
CHAPTER IV
Rights and Liabilities of Coroners
31

29. All disbursements duly made by a Coroner for fees to
medical witnesses and the like, shall be repaid to him by the
State Government.
30. Every Coroner may from time to time, with the previous
sanction of the State Government, appoint, by writing under
his hand, a proper person to act for him as his deputy in the
holding of inquests.
All inquests  taken  and  other acts  done  by  any  such
deputy, under or by virtue of any such appointment, shall be
deemed to be the acts of the Coroner appointing him:
Provided that no such deputy shall act for any such
Coroner except  during  the illness  of  the said Coroner, or
during his absence for any lawful and reasonable cause.
Every such appointment may at any time be cancelled
and revoked by the Coroner by whom it was made.
31. Coroners and Deputy Coroners shall be privileged from
arrest while engaged in the discharge of their official duty.
32

32. Any Coroner or Deputy Coroner failing to comply with
the  provisions  of  this  Act,  or  otherwise  misconducting
himself in the execution of his office, shall be liable to such
fine or simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding three
months as the Chief Justice of the High Court, upon summary
examination and proof of the failure or misconduct, thinks fit
to impose.
33. The Chief Justice of the High Court may act suo motu
or on the complaint of any person.    However, no criminal
proceedings would be initiated against any Coroner by any
person or authority by reason of his failure to perform any
part of his duty or for any misconduct.
34. The State Government shall have the power to make
Rules in order to implement the provisions of the Act.
33

34