GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Proposal to amend Section 15 of the Hindu Succession
Act, 1956 in case a female dies intestate leaving her self
acquired property with no heirs.
Report No. 207
JUNE 2008

THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 207)
Proposal to amend Section 15 of the Hindu Succession
Act, 1956 in case a female dies intestate leaving her self
acquired property with no heirs.
Presented to the Union Minister for Law and Justice, Ministry of
Law  and  Justice,  Government  of  India  by  Dr.  Justice  AR.
Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of India, on 10th  day
of June, 2008. 
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three
years from 1st September, 2006 by Order  No. A.45012/1/2006-
Admn.III (LA), dated the 16th October, 2006 of Government of
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the Member-
Secretary, one full-time Member and six part-time Members.
Chairman
The Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman
Member Secretary
Dr. D.P. Sharma
Full-time Member
Prof. (Dr.) Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. K.N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Dr. Mrs. Devinder Kumari Raheja
Prof. Mrs. Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
3

The Law Commission is located at ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
The Chief Executive of the Law Commission is:
Dr. D.P. Sharma, Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm  Agrawal, Additional Secretary
Research Staff
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J.T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri Sarwan Kumar : Deputy Law Officer
Shri A.K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V.K. Singh : Assistant Law Officer
Shri C. Radha Krishna : Assistant Law Officer
Administration Staff
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S.K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library
Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©       Government Copyright 2008
Law Commission of India
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
New Delhi-110 001
India
The text in this document (excluding Government Logos) may
be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing
that it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The material  must  be  acknowledged  as Government
copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating this Report should be addressed to the
Member-  Secretary,  Law  Commission  of  India,  2nd Floor,  ILI
Building, Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi-110001, India.  Fax: 91-
11-23388870 or E-Mail at: dr.dpsharma@nic.in 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          ILI Building (IInd
Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                            Bhagwandas
Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                    New Delhi-110 001
                                         Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                            Fax: 91-23383564
June 10, 2008
Dear Shri Bhardwaj ji,
I am forwarding herewith 207th Report of the Commission
on proposal to amend section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act
in  case  a  female  dies  intestate  leaving  her  self-acquired
property  with  no  heirs.  This  subject  was  taken  up  for
consideration by the Commission suo motu in view of vast
changes in the social scene in the past few years. Over the
years,  women  have  taken  a  stride  in  all  spheres.  The
consequence is that women are owning property earned by
their own skill. These situations do not seem to have been in
the contemplation of Legislators when the Act was enacted.
Another aspect which the Commission feel is very important
in the present scenario is that when amendments are made to
the effect that women have been entitled to inherit property
from her  parental  side  as  well  as  from  husband’s  side,  it
would be quite justified if equal right is given to her parental
heirs along with her husband heirs to inherit her property if
such a situation arise. It is in this context, the Commission
proposed  an  amendment  to  section  15  of  the  Hindu
Succession Act as indicated in the Report.
The  Terms of Reference  of the Commission, inter alia
empower  it  to  examine  the  existing  laws  with  a  view  to
promoting  gender  equality  and  suggesting  amendments
thereto as well as to revise the Central Acts of general 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6

Residence: No.1,Janpath, New Delhi-110011. Tel.:91-11-23019465.23793488.23792745
                                                    E-mail:ch.lc@sb.nic.in
importance so as to simplify them and to remove anomalies,
ambiguities and inequities. Therefore,  the aforesaid  subject
was taken up by the Commission suo motu in relation to laws
governing  inheritence  and  succession  of  property.  Social
justice demands that the women should be treated equally
both in the economic and social sphere. The Commission feels
that the proposed amendment is needed as per the points
stated in the Report. The recommendations contained in the
Report are aimed at suggesting changes in section 15 of the
Hindu  Succession  Act  so  that  equal  right  is  given  to  the
parental  heirs  along  with  husband’s  heirs  to  inherit  the
property. We hope that the recommendations in this Report
will go a long way in attaining the objectives set out above.
With warm regards,
Yours sincerely,
(AR. Lakshmanan)
Shri H.R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001
7

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
REPORT ON PROPOSAL TO AMEND SECTION 15 OF
THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956 IN CASE A FEMALE
DIES  INTESTATE  LEAVING  HER  SELF  ACQUIRED
PROPERTY WITH NO HEIRS.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION  9
2. SCHEME OF SUCCESSION IN THE CASE OF A 
HINDU FEMALE 10
3. RELEVANCE OF SOURCE OF ACQUISITION 12
4. SELF-ACQUIRED PROPERTY – A GREY AREA 16
5. THE CASE FOR CHANGE 18
6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 23
7. PROPOSED AMENDMENT 24
8

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
REPORT ON PROPOSAL TO AMEND SECTION 15 OF
THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT  , 1956 IN CASE A  
FEMALE DIES INTESTATE LEAVING HER SELF
ACQUIRED PROPERTY WITH NO HEIRS.
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 is a part of the Hindu
Code  which includes  the Hindu Marriage  Act, 1955 Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 and the Hindu Minority
and  Guardianship  Act,  1956.  These  Acts  brought
revolutionary  changes  in  the  law  relating  to  Hindus.   It
codified the law relating to marriage, succession, adoption etc.
 
1.2 The Hindu Succession Act made a revolutionary change
in the law relating to succession especially for female Hindus.
For the first time, a Hindu female could become an absolute
owner  of  property.  She  could  inherit  equally  with  a  male
counter-part  and  a  widow  was  also  given  importance
regarding succession of her husband’s property as also to her
father’s property. The Hindu Succession Act was amended in
2005 to provide that the daughter of a coparcener in a joint
9

Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara Law, shall, by birth
become a coparcener in her own right in the same manner as
the son, having the same rights and liabilities in respect of the
said property as that of a son (see Section 6 of the Act).  
2. SCHEME OF SUCCESSION IN THE CASE OF A HINDU
FEMALE
2.1  Section  15  of  the  Hindu  Succession  Act  propounds  a
definite and uniform scheme of succession to the property of a
female Hindu who dies intestate.  There are also rules set out
in Section 16 of the Hindu Succession Act which have to be
read along with Section 15 of the Act. 
2.2 Section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act is as under :
“15. General rules of succession in the case of female
Hindus 
– (1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall
devolve according to the rules set out in Section 16, -
(a)  firstly, upon the sons and the daughters (including
the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter)
and the husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and the father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and 
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1) :
10

(a)  any property inherited by a female Hindu from her
father or mother shall devolve, in the absence of
any son or daughter of the deceased (including the
children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not
upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1) in
the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of
the father; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her
husband or from her father-in-law shall devolve, in
the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased
(including the children of any pre-deceased son or
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in
sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but
upon the heirs of the husband.”
2.3 Section 16 of the Hindu Succession Act provides for the order
of succession and the manner of distribution among heirs of a
female Hindu. The Section reads as follows:
“16. Order of succession and manner of distribution
among  heirs  of  a  female  Hindu.-- The  order  of
succession  among the heirs referred to in section 15,
shall be and the distribution of the intestate's property
among  those  heirs  shall  take  place  according  to  the
following rules, namely:
Rule 1.--Among the heirs specified in sub-section (1) of
section 15, those in one entry shall be preferred to those
in any succeeding entry and those including in the same
entry shall take simultaneously.
11

Rule 2.--If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre-
deceased the intestate leaving his or her own children
alive at the time of the intestate's death, the children of
such son or daughter shall take between them the share
which such son or daughter would have taken if living at
the intestate's death.
Rule 3.--The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs
referred to in Clauses (b), (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) and sub-
section (2) of section 15 shall be in the same order and according to
the same rules as would have applied if the property had been the
father's or the mother's or the husband's, as the case may be, and such
person  had  died  intestate  in  respect  thereof  immediately after  the
intestate's death.”
3. RELEVANCE OF SOURCE OF ACQUISITION
3.1 The  group  of  heirs  of  the  female  Hindu  dying
intestate is described in 5 categories as ‘a’ to ‘e’ of Section 15
(1), which is illustrated as under:
3.1.1 In a case where she dies intestate leaving property,
her property will firstly devolve upon her sons and daughters
so also the husband. The children of any pre-deceased son or
daughter are also included in the first category of heirs of a
female Hindu.
12

3.1.2 In case she does not have any heir as referred to
above, i.e. sons, daughter and husband including children of
any pre-deceased sons or daughters (as per clause ‘a’) living at
the time of her death, then the next heirs will be the heirs of
the husband. 
3.1.3  Thirdly, if there are no heirs of the husband, the
property would devolve upon the mother and father;
3.1.4 Fourthly,  if  the  mother  and father  are  not  alive,
then the property would devolve upon the heirs of the father
which mean brother, sister etc.;
3.1.5 The last and the fifth category is the heirs of the
mother  upon  whom  the  property  of the  female  Hindu  will
devolve  if  in  the  absence  of  any  heirs  falling  in  the  four
preceding categories.
 
3.2 This  is  the  general  rule  of  Succession  but  the
Section also provides for two exceptions which are stated in
sub-section (2). Accordingly, if a female dies without leaving
any issue then the property inherited by her from her father or
mother will not devolve according to the rules laid down in the
five entries as stated earlier but upon the heirs of father.  And
secondly, in respect of the property inherited by her from her
13

husband or father-in-law, the same will devolve not according
to the general rule but upon the heirs of the husband.
3.3 The  Hindu  Succession  Bill,  1954  as  originally
introduced  in the Rajya Sabha did not contain any clause
corresponding to sub-section (2) of Section 15. It came to be
incorporated on the recommendations of the Joint Committee
of the two Houses of Parliament. The reason given by the Joint
Committee is found in Clause 17 of the Bill, which reads as
follows:-
“While revising the order of succession among the heirs
to a Hindu female, the Joint Committee have provided,
properties inherited by her from her father reverts to the
family of the father in the absence of issue and similarly
property  inherited  from  her  husband  or  father-in-law
reverts to the heirs of the husband in the absence of
issue.  In the opinion of the Joint Committee such a
provision  would  prevent  properties  passing  into  the
hands of persons to whom justice would demand they
should not pass.”
3.4 The intent of the Legislature is clear that the property, if
originally  belonged  to  the  parents  of  the  deceased  female,
should go to the legal heirs of the father.  So also under clause
(b) of sub-section (2) of Section 15, the property inherited by a
14

female Hindu from her husband or her father-in-law, shall
also under similar circumstances, devolve upon the heirs of
the husband.  It is the source from which the property was
inherited  by  the  female,  which  is  more  important  for  the
purpose of devolution of her property. The fact that a female
Hindu originally had a limited right and later, acquired the full
right, would not, in any way, alter the rules of succession
given in sub-section (2) of Section 15.  (See Bhagat Ram (D) by
L.Rs, Appellants vs. Teja Singh (D) by L.Rs, Respondents – AIR
2002 SC 1 at p.3)
3.5 The 174th Report of the Law Commission of India had
also  examined  the  subject  of  “Property  Rights  of  Women:
Proposed Reforms under the Hindu Law” and after eliciting
views from the public had noted that the rules of devolution of
the property of a female who dies intestate reflects patriarchal
assumptions.  The  174th Report  had  explained  the  position
thus:-
“Again the patrilineal assumptions of a dominant male
ideology  are  clearly  reflected  in  the  laws  governing  a
Hindu female who dies intestate. The law in her case is
markedly  different from those governing Hindu males.
The  property  is  to  devolve  first  to  her  children  and
husband; secondly, to her husband’s heirs; thirdly to her
father’s  heirs,  and  lastly  to  her  mother’s  heirs.  The
15

provision of section 15(2) of HAS is indicative again of a
tilt towards the male as it provides that any property she
inherited from her father or mother should devolve, in
the absence of any children, to her father’s heirs and
similarly, any property she inherited from her husband
or father-in-law, to her husband’s heirs. These provisions
depict that property continues to be inherited through
the  male  line  from  which it came  either  back  to her
father’s family or to her husband’s family (Page 32 para
2.5 of the Report).
3.6 The  basis of inheritance  of a female Hindu’s  property
who dies intestate would thus be the SOURCE from which
such female Hindu came into possession of the property and
the manner of inheritance which would decide the manner of
devolution.
4.  SELF-ACQUIRED PROPERTY – A GREY AREA
4.1 The term ‘property’ though not specified in this Section
means property of the deceased heritable under the Act. It
includes both movable and immovable property owned and
acquired by her by inheritance or by devise or at a partition or
by  gift  or  by  her  skill  or  exertion  or  by  purchase  or
prescription.  The Section does not differentiate between the
property  inherited  and  self  acquired  property  of  a  Hindu
female it only prescribes that if a property is inherited from
16

husband or father-in-law, it would go to her husband’s heirs
and if the property is inherited from her father or mother, in
that case, the property would not go to her husband’s but to
the heirs of the father and mother.
4.2 This Section, has not clearly enumerated and considered
about succession of a female Hindu property where it is  self-
acquired.  Or  to  put  it  this  way,  the  Legislators  did  not
contemplate  that  Hindu  females  would  be   in  later  years
would be having self-acquired property  and in certain cases
where her heirs in the first category fail, the property would
devolve totally upon her husband’s heirs who may be very
remotely related as the compared to her own father’s heirs.
4.3 This is very aptly illustrated by the following illustration:-
A  married  Hindu  female  dies  intestate  leaving  the
property which is her self-acquired property.  She has no
issue and was a widow at the time of her death.  As per
the present position of law, her property would devolve in
the second category i.e. to her husband’s heirs.  Thus, in
a case where the mother of her husband is alive, her
whole property would devolve on her mother-in-law. If
the mother-in-law is also not alive, it would devolve as
per the rules laid down in case of a male Hindu dying
intestate i.e. if the father of her deceased husband is
alive, the next to inherit will be her father-in-law and if
17

in the third category if the father-in-law is also not alive,
then  her  property  would  devolve  on  the  brother  and
sister of the deceased husband.
4.4 Thus, in case of the self-acquired property of a Hindu
married female dying intestate, her property devolves on her
husband’s  heirs.   Her  paternal and maternal  heirs do not
inherit but the distant relations of her husband would inherit
as her husband’s heirs.
5. THE CASE FOR CHANGE
5.1 The Hindu Succession Act was enacted in 1956 when in
the structure of a Hindu society, women hardly went out to
work.
5.2 There has been a vast change in the social scene in the
past few years and women have taken a stride in all spheres.
The consequence is that women are owing property earned by
their  own  skill.  These  situations  were  not  foreseen  by  the
Legislators.
5.3 If that is so, what is the impact of these socio-economic
changes? Do they warrant any change in the law of succession
in relation to the property of a female Hindu dying intestate?
What is the fall out of gradual disintegration of joint Hindu
family and emergence of nuclear family as a unit in society
18

over the years in the context of law of succession governing
the issue at hand? One of the fundamental tenets underlying
the law of succession has been the proximity of relation in
which a successor stands to the person who originally held
the property that may be the subject matter of inheritance in a
given  case.  The  fact that women  have  been  given  right to
inherit from her parental side, also assumes relevance in the
present  context.  These  developments  and  changes  lead  to
competing arguments and approaches that may be taken in
redefining the law of succession in case of a female Hindu
dying  intestate.  Thus,  three  alternative  options  emerge  for
consideration, namely:
1. Self-acquired  property  of  a  female  Hindu  dying
intestate should devolve first upon her heirs from
the natal family.
2. Self-acquired  property  of  a  female  Hindu  dying
intestate should devolve equally upon the heirs of
her husband and the heirs from her natal family.
3. Self-acquired  property  of  a  female  Hindu  dying
intestate should devolve first upon the heirs of her
husband.
5.4 The  third  option  may  be  taken  first  as  this  can  be
disposed  of  summarily.  The  option  essentially  means
continuation of status-quo. We have already seen earlier that
19

socio-economic changes warrant corresponding changes in the
law on the subject as well.
5.5 We may now take up the first option.  The protagonists of
this approach contend that the general order of succession
reflects gender bias.  It will be relevant to refer to the following
passage in this regard:
“Succession for male and female intestates:  Under the
Hindu  Succession  Act  the  provisions  for  two  entirely
different schemes of succession on grounds of the sex of
the intestate create a distinction between the male and
female intestates. There is a further divergence in case of
female intestates linked with the source of the property
that is the subject matter of inheritance. Thus, where a
woman  inherits  property  from  her  parents,  and  dies
issueless, this property on her death does not go to her
own heirs but goes to the heirs of her father.  Similarly,
where she  inherits the  property  from her  husband or
from her father-in-law, on her death this property goes to
her husband’s heirs from whom or whose father she had
inherited the property.  The subdivision of the schemes
of succession in case of female intestate is outdated and
irrational. The heirs are not described as brother, sister,
her brother-in-law etc., but as heirs of her parents and
heirs of her husband.  She is perceived as having no
20

identity of her own. The legislature while framing this
scheme  was  very  much  influenced  by  the  whole
Mitakshara law, its concept of stridhana and inheritance
by a female in a double capacity. This reversion of the
once-inherited-property  back  to  her  father’s  or  her
husband’s heirs shows a desperateness on the part of
the legislature to treat her only as a temporary occupier.”
(See  Pradhan  Saxena  –  Succession  Laws  &  Gender
Justice in Redefining Family Law in India – Edited by
Archana Parasar, Amit Dhanda, Routledge, New Delhi,
2008).
5.6 The supporters of this approach contend that the joint
family system in our country has slowly been eroded and an
increasing number of nuclear and semi-nuclear families have
replaced the traditional Mitakshara Hindu joint family system.
Women  are also becoming  more  economically  independent.
With  the  growth  of  the  nuclear  family  a  married  woman
dependency on her natal family and continued closeness to it
is  much  greater  today  even  if  it  was  not  so  earlier.  Most
married women would prefer that their parents should be the
more preferred heirs to inherit her property if her children etc.
and husband are not alive. She would also prefer that her
sister and brother have a better right to inherit her property
than her brother-in-law and sister-in-law. Accordingly, it is
urged that Section 15(1) should be modified to ensure that the
21

general  order  of  succession  does  not  place  a  woman’s
husband’s heirs above those who belong to her natal family
like her father and mother and thereafter  her brother and
sister. It is contended that when a man dies intestate, his
wife’s relatives do not even figure in the order of succession
despite  the  manner  in  which  he  may  have  acquired  the
property. In view of this, parity is sought in the case of female
by applying the same rules as applicable to male’s property.
Accordingly, it is suggested that it would be better to amend
Section 15(1) to specify the general rules of devolution, which
will apply not only to self-acquired property by a women but
also to other property acquired through her family, gifts, etc.
The only proviso which would then be needed would be to
property that a woman acquires from her husband’s family.
5.7 The second option in this regards is that the whereas
property of a female Hindu dying intestate devolves upon the
heirs  depending  up-on  the  source  from  which  the  said
property was acquired by her, the self-acquired property of
such female be simultaneously inherited by her heirs both
from the husband family as well as the natal family in equal
share. The fact remains that in spite of her closeness to, and
dependence  on,  her  natal  family,  her  relations  with  her
husband’s family are not separated and uprooted in entirety.
She continues to be a member of her husband’s family, getting
support from it in all walks of life. One cannot afford to ignore
22

the ground realities in this regard. The social ethos and the
mores  of  our  patriarchal  system  demand  that  the  existing
system  should  not  be  totally  reversed  as  claimed  by  the
protagonists of the first option. Lest, there may be social and
family tensions which may not be in the overall interest of the
family as a whole and, as such, ought to be avoided. In any
case, it is open to the female Hindu to bequeath her property
the way she likes by executing a will.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.1 In the present scenario when amendments are made to
the effect that women have been entitled to inherit property
from her parental side as well as from husband’s side, it will
be quite justified if equal right is given to her parental
heirs  along  with  her  husband’s  heirs  to  inherit  her
property. 
6.2 It is, therefore, proposed that in order to bring about a
balance, Section 15 should be  amended so that in case a
female Hindu dies intestate leaving her self-acquired property
with no heirs, as mentioned in clause ‘a’ of Section 15, the
property should devolve on her husband’s heirs and also on
the heirs of her paternal side.
23

6.3 If this amendment is brought about, the effect will be as
under:
A married Hindu female dies intestate leaving  self-
acquired  property  at  the  time  of  her  death,  the  only
surviving  relatives  are  her  mother  in  law(L)  and  her
mother (M).
Pre Amendment Post Amendment
As  per  the  present  law,  her
property  would  devolve
entirely on ‘L’  and ‘M’ will not
get  anything  from  her
property.  
By proposed amendment, her
mother-in-law  and  mother
should equally inherit to her
self acquired property.
A married Hindu female dies intestate leaving  self-
acquired property and she has no heirs as per clause ‘a’ of
the  Schedule,  the  only  surviving  relatives  are  her
husband’s brother and sister (BL&SL) and her own brother
and sister (B&S).
24

As  per  the  present  law, her
property  would  normally
devolve  upon  ‘BL’  and  ‘SL’.
‘B’  and  ‘S’  do  not  inherit
anything  from  her  in  this
property.
By the proposed amendment,
her  own  brother  and  sister
should  equally inherit along-
with  her  brother-in-law  and
sister-in-law. 
7. PROPOSED AMENDMENT
7.1 In Section 15 of Hindu Succession Act, 1956, 15 (2) (c)
be added.
“(c) if  a  female  Hindu  leaves  any  self  acquired
property, in the absence of husband and any son
or  daughter  of  the  deceased  (including  the
children of any pre-deceased son or daughter),
the said property would devolve not upon heirs
as  mentioned  in  sub  Section  (1)  in  the
chronology,  but  the  heirs  in  category  (b)+(c)
would  inherit  simultaneously.   If  she  has  no
heirs in category (c), then heirs in category (b) +
(d) would inherit simultaneously.”
7.2 Thus,  Section  15  along  with  the  proposed
amendment will be as under :
15. General rules of succession in the case of female
Hindus – 
25

(1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall
     devolve according to the rule set out in Section 16, -
(a)  firstly, upon the sons and the daughters (including
the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter)
and also the husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and the father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and 
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1) :
(a)  any property inherited by a female Hindu from her
father or mother shall devolve, in the absence of
any son or daughter of the deceased (including the
children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) and
not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section
(1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs
of the father; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her
husband or from her father-in-law shall devolve, in
the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased
(including the children of any pre-deceased son or
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in
sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but
upon the heirs of the husband; and 
(c)   if a female Hindu leaves any self acquired property,
in the absence of husband and any son or daughter
of the deceased (including the children of any pre-
deceased son or daughter), the said property would
26

devolve not upon heirs as mentioned in sub Section
(1) in the chronology, but the heirs in category (b)+
(c) would inherit simultaneously and if she has no
heirs in category (c), then heirs in category (b)+(d)
would inherit simultaneously and so on.
7.3 It is recommended accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr.  Tahir Mahmood)           (Dr. D.P. Sharma)
         Member     Member-Secretary
27