 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Proposal  for  amendment  of  Explanation  to
Section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956  to
include oral partition and family arrangement in
the definition of “partition”.
Report No. 208
JULY 2008

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 208)
Proposal for amendment of Explanation to Section 6 of the
Hindu  Succession  Act,  1956  to  include  oral  partition  and
family arrangement in the definition of “partition”.
Presented to Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj, Union Minister for Law and
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by
Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of
India, on the 30th day of July, 2008. 
The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three
years from 1st September, 2006 by Order No. A.45012/1/2006-
Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the  16th October,  2006,  issued  by  the
2

Government  of  India,  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice,
Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the Member-
Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  and  seven  part-time
Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
3

Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar       : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma    : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri Sarwan Kumar : Deputy Legal Adviser
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Shri C. Radha Krishna : Assistant Govt. Advocate
Administrative Staff
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The text in this document (excluding the Government Logo)
may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium
provided that it is reproduced accurately and not used in a
misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as the
Government of India copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed to
the  Member-Secretary  and  sent  either  by  post  to  the  Law
Commission of India, 2nd Floor, ILI Building, Bhagwan Das
Road, New Delhi-110001, India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in  
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan      ILI Building  (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                                Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                           New Delhi-110 001
                                         Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                          Fax: 91-11-23383564
DO No. 6(3)136/2008-LC(LS)                         30 July, 2008
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Sub: Proposal  to  suitably  amend  the Explanation  to  section  6  to
include oral partition and family arrangement in the definition
of “partition”.
I am forwarding herewith the 208th Report of the Law Commission of India
on the above subject.
Section  6 of the  Hindu  Succession  Act, 1956  deals  with  devolution  of
interest in coparcenary property.  The Act was amended by Act 39 of 2005 and a
new section 6 was substituted.  Sub-section (5) of section 6 and the Explanation
thereto read thus:
“(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has
been effected before the 20th day of December, 2004.
Explanation.-  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  “partition”  means  any
partition made by execution of  a deed of partition duly registered under
the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) or partition effected by a decree of
a court.”
The Explanation defines “partition” as any partition made by execution of a
deed of partition duly registered under the Registration Act, 1908 or partition
effected by a decree of court. This definition of “partition” does not include oral
partition and family arrangement.
Since  the  amended  Act  has  failed  to  include  oral  partition  and  family
arrangement within the definition of “partition”, which are common and legally
accepted modes of division of property under the Hindu Law, the Commission
undertook this subject suo motu.
6

The Supreme Court of India in its judgment dated 21.01.1976 in Kale and
Ors. v. Deputy Director of Consolidation and Ors., 1976 (3) SCC 119 held that a
document which is in the nature of a memorandum of an early family arrangement
and which is filed before the court for its information for mutation of names is not
compulsorily  registrable  and  therefore  can  be  used  in  evidence  of  the  family
arrangement  and is final and binding  on the parties.  The above view  of the
Supreme Court has also been clearly enunciated and adroitly adumbrated in a long
course of decisions of the Supreme Court and also those of Privy Council and
High Courts.  The courts have taken a liberal and broad view of the validity of a
family  settlement  and  have  always  tried  to  uphold  it  and  maintain  it.   The
Commission  is  of  the  view  that  the  proposal  for  suitable  amendment  in  the
Explanation to section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act is absolutely necessary in
public interest.
The  Commission  places  on  record  the  able  assistance  rendered  by  Ms.
Hema Sampath, Senior Advocate, Chennai, in preparing this Report.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
(AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001
7

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
PROPOSAL FOR AMENDMENT OF EXPLANATION TO SECTION
6 OF THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956 TO INCLUDE ORAL
PARTITION AND FAMILY ARRANGEMENT IN THE DEFINITION
OF “PARTITION”.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION 9 
2. JUDICIAL VIEW 14
3. RECOMMENDATION 19
1. INTRODUCTION
8

1.1 The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (30 of 1956) is a part of the Hindu Code
which also  includes  the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance  Act, 1956  and  the  Hindu  Minority and Guardianship  Act, 1956.
These Acts brought about revolutionary changes in the law relating to Hindus.  It
codified the law relating to marriage, succession, adoption, etc.
1.2 The Hindu Succession Act made a revolutionary change in the law relating
to succession, especially for female Hindus.  For the first time, a Hindu female
could become an absolute owner of property.  She could inherit equally with a
male counterpart and a widow was also given importance regarding succession of
her husband’s property as also of her father’s property.  The Hindu Succession Act
was amended in 2005 by the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (Act 39
of 2005) to provide that the daughter of a coparcener in a joint Hindu family
governed by the Mitakshara Law shall by birth become a coparcener in her own
right in the same manner as the son, having the same rights and liabilities  in
respect of the said property as that of a son.
1.3 Section 6 of Hindu Succession  Act deals  with devolution of interest  in
coparcenary property. Section 6, before its substitution by Act 39 of 2005, read as
under:
9

 6. Devolution of interest in coparcenary property. – “When a male
Hindu dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his
death an interest in a Mitakshara coparcenary property, his interest in the
property shall devolve by survivorship upon the surviving members of the
coparcenary and not in accordance with this Act:
Provided that, if the deceased had left him surviving a female relative
specified in Class I of the Schedule or a male relative specified in that class
who claims through such female relative, the interest of the deceased in the
Mitakshara coparcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate
succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship.
Explanation 1.-……..
Explanation 2.-………”
1.4 New Section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act is as under:     
6. Devolution of interest in coparcenary property. –  “(1) On
and from the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act,
2005, in a Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, the daughter
of a coparcener shall,- 
(a) by birth become a coparcener in her own right in the same
manner as the son; 
(b) have the same rights in the coparcenary property as she would
have had if she had been a son; 
10

(c) be  subject  to  the  same  liabilities  in  respect  of  the  said
coparcenary property as that of a son, 
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed
to include a reference to a daughter of a coparcener: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect or
invalidate  any  disposition  or  alienation  including  any  partition  or
testamentary disposition of property which had taken place before the 20th
day of December, 2004. 
(2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of
sub-section  (1)  shall  be  held  by  her  with  the  incidents  of  coparcenary
ownership and shall be regarded, notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act or any other law for the time being in force, as property capable of
being disposed of by her by testamentary disposition. 
(3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Act, 2005, his interest in the property of a Joint Hindu family
governed by the Mitakshara law, shall devolve by testamentary or intestate
succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship, and
the  coparcenary property shall be  deemed to have  been divided  as  if a
partition had taken place and,-
(a)     the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son; 
(b) the share of the pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter,
as they would  have  got had  they been  alive at the  time of
partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child of such pre-
deceased son or of such pre-deceased daughter; and 
11

(c) the share of the pre-deceased child of a pre-deceased son or of
a pre-deceased daughter, as such child would have got had he
or she been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to
the child of such pre-deceased child of the pre-deceased son or
a pre-deceased daughter, as the case may be. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest of a
Hindu  Mitakshara coparcener  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  share  in  the
property that would have been allotted to him if a partition of the property
had taken place immediately before his death, irrespective of whether he
was entitled to claim partition or not. 
(4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act,
2005, no court shall recognise any right to proceed against a son, grandson
or  great-grandson  for  the  recovery  of  any  debt  due  from  his  father,
grandfather  or  great-grandfather  solely  on  the  ground  of  the  pious
obligation under the Hindu law, of such son, grandson or great-grandson to
discharge any such debt: 
Provided  that  in  the  case  of  any  debt  contracted  before  the
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005, nothing
contained in this sub-section shall affect- 
(a) the right of any creditor to proceed against the son, grandson or
great-grandson, as the case may be; or 
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of, any such
debt,  and  any  such  right  or  alienation  shall  be  enforceable
under the rule of pious obligation in the same manner and to
the same extent as it would have been enforceable as if the
12

Hindu  Succession  (Amendment)  Act,  2005  had  not  been
enacted. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of clause (a), the expression "son",
"grandson"  or  "great-grandson"  shall  be  deemed  to  refer  to  the  son,
grandson or great-grandson, as the case may be, who was born or adopted
prior to the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act,
2005. 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has
been effected before the 20th day of December, 2004. 
Explanation.-  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  "partition"  means  any
partition made by execution of a deed of partition duly registered under the
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) or partition effected by a decree of a
court.” 
1.5 A daughter of a coparcener became equal to a son and got equal rights in
the coparcenary property as a son.
1.6 The proviso to Section 6(1) protects any disposition or alienation including
any partition or testamentary disposition of property which had taken place before
20th December, 2004.
1.7 The Explanation appended after sub-section (5) defines “partition” as any
partition  made  by execution  of  a  deed  of  partition  duly  registered  under  the
Registration Act, 1908 or partition effected by a decree of court.
13

1.8 The Act has failed to include oral partition and family arrangement within
the definition of “partition”, which are common and legally accepted modes of
division of property under the Hindu Law.
2. JUDICIAL VIEW
2.1 The Supreme Court of India in its judgment dated 21.01.1976 in  Kale and
Ors. v. Deputy Director of Consolidation and Ors., 1976 (3) SCC 119, while
dealing with a memorandum of family arrangement through family settlement,
held that the family arrangements are governed by a special equity peculiar to
themselves and that the family arrangement may have been oral in which case no
registration is necessary and that the registration would be necessary only if the
terms of the family arrangement are reduced into writing.
2.2 The Supreme Court has observed: -
“By virtue of a family settlement or arrangement members of a family
descending from a common ancestor or a near relation seek to sink their
differences  and  disputes,  settle  and  resolve  their  conflicting  claims  or
disputed titles once for all in order to buy peace of mind and bring about
complete harmony and goodwill in the family. The family arrangements are
governed by a special equity peculiar to themselves, and will be enforced if
honestly made, although they have not been meant as a compromise, but
have  proceeded  from  an  error  of  all  parties,  originating  in  mistake  or
ignorance of fact as to what their rights actually are, or of the points on
which their rights actually depend.
14

“The object of the arrangement is to protect the family from long
drawn litigation or perpetual strifes which mar the unity and solidarity of
the family and create hatred and bad blood between the various members of
the family.  It promotes social justice through wider distribution of wealth.
Family therefore has to be construed widely.  It is not confined only to
people having legal title to the property.
“Courts lean in favour of family arrangements.  Technical or trivial
grounds are overlooked.  Rule of estoppel is pressed into service to prevent
unsettling of a settled dispute.
“Family arrangement may be even oral in which case no registration
is necessary. Registration would be necessary only if the terms of the family
arrangement are reduced into writing.  Here also, a distinction should be
made between the document containing the terms and recitals of a family
arrangement made under the document and a mere memorandum prepared
after the family arrangement had already been made either for the purpose
of the record or for information of the court for making necessary mutation.
In such a case the memorandum itself does not create or extinguish any
rights  in  immovable  properties  and  therefore  does  not  fall  within  the
mischief of Section  17(2) of the  Registration  Act and is,  therefore, not
compulsorily registrable.
“So a document which was no more than a memorandum of what had
been agreed to did not require registration.
15

“Hence a document which is in the nature of a memorandum of an
earlier  family  arrangement  and  which  is  filed  before  the  court  for  its
information  for  mutation  of  names  is  not  compulsorily  registrable  and
therefore can be used in evidence of the family arrangement and is final and
is binding on the parties.
“Even if a family arrangement which required registration was not
registered it would operate as a complete estoppel against the parties who
have taken advantage of the family arrangement.
“Before dealing with the respective contentions put forward by the
parties, we would like to discuss in general the effect and value of family
arrangements  entered into  between the parties  with a view to  resolving
disputes  once  for  all.  By  virtue  of  a  family  settlement  or  arrangement
members of a family descending from a common ancestor or a near relation
seek  to  sink  their  differences  and  disputes,  settle  and  resolve  their
conflicting claims or disputed titles once for all in order to buy peace of
mind and bring about complete harmony and goodwill in the family. The
family arrangements are governed by a special equity peculiar to themselves
and would be enforced if honestly made. In this connection, Kerr in his
valuable treatise  Kerr on Fraud at p. 364 makes the following pertinent
observations regarding the nature of the family arrangement which may be
extracted thus:
The principles which apply to the case of ordinary compromise between strangers
do not equally apply to the case of compromises in the nature of family arrangements.
Family arrangements are governed by a special equity peculiar to themselves, and will be
enforced if honestly made, although they have not been meant as a compromise, but have
16

proceeded from an error of all parties, originating in mistake or ignorance of fact as to
what their rights actually are, or of the points on which their rights actually depend.
“The law in England on this point is almost the same. In Halsbury's
Laws of England, Vol. 17, Third Edition, at pp. 215-216, the following apt
observations  regarding  the  essentials  of  the  family  settlement  and  the
principles governing the existence of the same are made: 
A family arrangement is an agreement between members of the same family,
intended  to  be  generally  and  reasonably  for  the  benefit  of  the  family  either  by
compromising doubtful or disputed rights or by preserving the family property or the
peace and security of the family by avoiding litigation or by saving its honour.
The agreement may be implied from a long course of dealing, but it is more usual
to  embody  or  to  effectuate  the  agreement  in  a  deed  to  which  the  term  "family
arrangement" is applied.
Family arrangements  are governed  by principles  which  are not applicable to
dealings between strangers. The court, when deciding the rights of parties under family
arrangements or claims to upset such arrangements, considers what in the broadest view
of the matter is most for the interest of families, and has regard to considerations which,
in dealing with transactions between persons not members of the same family, would not
be taken into account. Matters which would be fatal to the validity of similar transactions
between strangers are not objections to the binding effect of family arrangements.” 
2.3 The principles indicated above have been clearly enunciated and adroitly
adumbrated in a long course of decisions of the Apex Court as also those of the
Privy Council and High Courts in the following cases: 
17

Khunni Lal v. Gobind Krishna  Narain, ILR 33 All 356;
Mt. Hiran Bibi v. Mt. Sohan Bibi, AIR 1914 PC 44;
Sahu Madho Das v. Mukand Ram, AIR 1955 SC 481;
Ram Charan Das v. Girja Nandini Devi, AIR 1966 SC 323;
Tek Bahadur Bhujil v. Debi Singh Bhujil, AIR 1966 SC 292;
Maturi Pullaiah v. Maturi Narasimham,  AIR 1966 SC 1836;
Krishna Beharilal v. Gulabchand,  1971 (1) SCC 837;
S. Shanmugam Pillai v. K. Shanmugam Pillai, 1973 (2) SCC 312.
2.4 Thus, it would appear from a review of the decisions (supra), that the courts
have taken a very liberal and broad view of the validity of the family settlement
and have always tried to uphold it and maintain it.   The central idea in the
approach made by the courts is that if by consent of parties, the matter has been
settled, it should not be allowed to be reopened by the parties to the agreement on
frivolous or untenable grounds.
3. RECOMMENDATION
3.1 Oral  partition  or  family  arrangement  is  an  extremely  valuable  power
whereby the peace, happiness and welfare of a family are secured and litigation is
avoided. It is specifically helpful in the case of illiterate members of a family or
who have no means to bear expenditure of legal process/advice etc.
18

3.2 By the 2005 amendment in the Hindu Succession Act, oral partition and
family arrangement which had been effected prior to the enactment would be set at
naught.    Hence,  the  Commission  proposes  a  suitable  amendment  in  the
Explanation  to  section  6  of  the  Hindu  Succession  Act,  1956  to  include  oral
partition and family arrangement in the definition of “partition”.
3.3 We recommend accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
                        (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal)
  Member-Secretary
Dated: July 30, 2008.
19

20