 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Proposal for omission of Section 213 from the Indian
Succession Act, 1925.
Report No. 209
JULY 2008

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 209)
Proposal for omission of Section 213 from the Indian
Succession Act, 1925.
Presented to Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj, Union Minister
for Law and Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice,
Government  of  India  by  Dr.  Justice  AR.
Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of India,
on  the 30th day of July, 2008. 
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of
three  years  from  1st September,  2006  by  Order  No.
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the  16th October,
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven part-
time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
3

2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar            : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri Sarwan Kumar : Deputy Legal Adviser
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Shri C. Radha Krishna : Assistant Govt. Advocate
Administrative Staff
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the  Government
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or
medium provided that it is reproduced accurately and not
used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material  must  be
acknowledged as the Government of India copyright and
the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed
to the Member-Secretary and sent either by post to the
Law  Commission  of  India,  2nd Floor,  ILI  Building,
Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India or by email
to lci-dla@nic.in 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan         ILI Building  (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                                    Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                             New Delhi-110 001
                                            Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                            Fax: 91-11-23383564
DO No. 6(3)140/2008-LC(LS)     30 July, 2008
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Sub: Proposal for omission of Section 213 from the
Indian Succession Act, 1925.
I have great pleasure in submitting herewith the 209th Report of
the Law Commission of India on the above subject. 
The Indian Succession (Amendment) Act, 2002 (26 of 2002)
amended sections 32 (devolution of such property) and 213 (right as
executor or legatee when established) of the Indian Succession Act,
1925.  Explanation  to  section  32 was omitted  relieving  thereby a
Christian  widow  of  the  bar  to  succeed  distributive  share  of  her
husband’s estate even if there was a valid contract made to that effect
before her marriage.  The words “or Indian Christians” after the word
“Muhammadans” in sub-section (2) of section 213 were inserted. The
opening portion of the said sub-section (2) now reads thus:
“(2) This section shall not apply in the case of wills made by
Muhammadans or Indian Christians and shall only apply – 
……..”
The result is that the provision of sub-section (1) of section 213
which  necessitates  grant  of  probate  of  the  will  or  letters  of
administration with the will or with a copy of an authenticated copy
of the will annexed, by a Court of competent jurisdiction in order to
establish the right as executor or legatee is now not applicable to the
wills made not only by Muhammadans but also by Indian Christians.
But this provision continues to apply -
6

(i) in the case of wills made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh
or Jaina where such wills  are of the classes specified in
clauses (a) and (b) of section 57, i.e., wills and codicils
made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina on or after
the  1st day  of  September,  1870,  within  the  territories
which at the said date were subject to the Lieutenant-
Governor  of  Bengal  or  within  the  local  limits  of  the
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts of
Judicature at Madras and Bombay and all such wills and
codicils made outside those territories and limits so far as
they relate to immovable property situate within those
territories or limits; and
(ii) in the case of wills made by any Parsi dying after the
commencement of the Indian Succession (Amendment)
Act, 1962, where such wills are made within the local
limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the
High Courts at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and where
such wills are made outside those limits, insofar as they
relate to immovable property situate within those limits.
The exemption in respect of the wills made by Muslims under
the parent Act was due to the Muslim Personal Law.  The stipulation
imposed under the unamended section 213 of the Act in respect of
wills made by any Indian Christian, Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
was the legacy of the colonial rule, which was extended to Parsis in
1962.  The discrimination against the wills executed by the Indian
Christians has now been removed by the 2002 Amendment on an All-
India basis.
There is discrimination in respect of wills made by Hindus,
Buddhists, Sikhs, Jainas or Parsis, where such wills are made within
the territories of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High
Courts of Judicature at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and where such
wills  are  made  outside  those  territories  insofar  as  they  relate  to
immovable properties  situate within those territories.  There is no
rationale  in   insisting  upon  the  obtaining  of  probate  or  letters  of
7

administration   in   respect  of  wills  executed  by Hindus, Buddhists,
Sikhs,  Jainas  and  Parsis  in respect  of the property situate  outside
those limits. Since there is no uniformity in the application of section
213 insofar as it relates to the Muslims and Christians on the one
hand and Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jainas and Parsis on the other, the
Commission has resolved to recommend for the repeal of section 213
altogether  from  the  statute  and  remove  the
disuniformity/discrimination  and  attain  uniformity. There  does  not
appear to be any earthy reason to ignore the claim to equality of the
major section of the people of India, the Hindus etc. Article 15 of the
Constitution  of  India  states  that  the  State  shall  not  discriminate
against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place
of birth or any of them.
The Commission places on record the able assistance rendered
by Mr. Justice S.A. Kader, former Judge, High Court of Madras and
Senior  Advocate,  Supreme  Court  of  India,  now  at  Chennai,  in
preparing this Report.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
(AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001
8

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Proposal for omission of Section 213 from the Indian
Succession Act, 1925.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION 10
2. DISUNIFORMITY 20
3. RECOMMENDATION 28
9

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 An article entitled “The Indian Succession (Amendment) Act
26 of 2002 – Why this discrimination against Hindus, Buddhists,
Sikhs, Jainas and Parsis?”, authored by Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.A.
Kader, former Judge of the Madras High Court, was published at
page 35 of the Journal Section of The Law Weekly, Madras in 2003
(Vol.2). The entire article is reproduced hereunder:
‘The Indian Succession (Amendment) Act 2002 which
received the assent of the President on the 27th May 2002 and
published in the Gazette of India on 22.11.2002 has amended
section 32 and section 213(2) of the parent Act which ran as
follows:
“32. Devolution of such property.- The property of an
intestate  devolves  upon  the wife or husband, or upon
those who are the kindred of the deceased, in the order
and according to the rules hereinafter contained in the
Chapter.
Explanation.- A widow is not entitled to the provision
hereby made for her if, by a valid contract made before
her  marriage,  she  has  been  excluded  from  her
distributive share of her husband’s estate.”
10

[This section does not apply to Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs,
Jainas and Parsis.   It applies to only Indian Christians.]
Section 213:
“213. Right as executor or legatee when established. -
(1) No right as executor or legatee can be established in
any  Court  of  Justice,  unless  a  Court  of  competent
jurisdiction in India has granted probate of the will under
which  the  right  is  claimed,  or  has  granted  letters  of
administration  with  the  will  or  with  a  copy  of  an
authenticated copy of the will annexed.
(2) This Section shall not apply in the case of wills
made by Muhammadans, and shall only apply-
(i) in the case of wills made by any Hindu, Buddhist,
Sikh  or  Jaina  where  such  wills  are  of  classes
specified in clauses (a) and (b) of section 57, and
(ii) in the case of wills made by any Parsi dying after
the  commencement  of  the  Indian  Succession
(Amendment) Act, 1962 (16 of 1962), where such
wills  are  made  within  the  local  limits  of  the
ordinary  original  civil  jurisdiction  of  the  High
Courts  at  Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Bombay,  and
where such wills are made outside those limits, in
11

so far as they relate to immovable property situate
within those limits.”
2. The  Statement  of  Objects  and  Reasons  for  the
Amendment Act 26 of 2002 are as follows:-
“The Indian  Succession Act  1925  was aimed  at
consolidating the Indian law relating to testamentary and
intestate succession.  Section 32 of this Act recognizes
the Christian widow as one of the heirs to succeed the
property  of  her  deceased  husband  dying  intestate.
However, the Explanation to the said section provides
that the widow would not be entitled to succeed such
distributive share if there is a valid contract made before
her  marriage  to  that  effect.   The  Kerala  Women’s
Commission and some Non-Governmental Organizations
have pointed out that this provision of the Act excluding
a  Christian  widow  from her  distributive  share  on  the
basis  of  the  contract  is  discriminatory  and  they  have
suggested  that  she  should  be  entitled  to  succeed  her
distributive  share  notwithstanding  any  contract  to  the
contrary.
Section 213  of this  Act requires  that no person
claiming  a right  as  executor  or  legatee  of  a  will  can
establish such right in any court of justice under the will
unless  he  has  been  granted  a  probate  or  Letters  of
12

Administration  with  the  will  or  a  copy  of  the
authenticated copy of the will annexed, by a court  of
competent jurisdiction.   No such probate or Letters of
Administration  is  required  for  a  Mohammedan  to
establish  rights  under  the  will  nor  there  is  any
requirement in the case of other communities on an All
India basis.   The Law Commission of India, the Kerala
Women’s  Commission,  Members  of  Parliament
belonging  to  Christian  community  and  various  other
individuals  and  organizations  have  pointed  out  and
represented  to  the  Government  that  this  provision  is
discriminatory and should not apply to Christians alone.
The matter has been examined by the Government
and it has been decided to-
(a) delete the Explanation to Section 32; and
(b) make  Section  213  inapplicable  to  Indian
Christians by amending the Indian Succession Act,
1925.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”
3.  Section  2 of the  Indian  Succession  (Amendment)  Act
2002 deletes the Explanation to section 32 of the parent Act
thereby relieving the Christian widow of the bar to succeed
distributive share of her husband’s estate even if there was a
13

valid contract  made to that  effect  before  marriage.   This  is
indeed a welcome amendment which has done away with the
discrimination against Christian widows. 
4.  Section 3 of the Amendment Act 2002 has inserted the
words “or Indian Christians” after the word “Muhammadans”
in Section 213(2) of the Principal Act, which now reads thus:-
“This Section shall not apply in the case of Wills
made by Muhammadans or Indian Christians and shall
only apply – 
………
ii. ………..”
5. The  result  is  the  provisions  of  Section  213(1)  which
necessitates  the  grant  of  probate  of  the  Will  or  Letters  of
Administration  with  the  Will  or  with  a  copy  of  the
authenticated copy of the Will annexed by a court of competent
jurisdiction in order to establish the right as executor or legatee
is  not  now  applicable  to  the  Wills  made  not  only  by
Mohammedans  but  also  by  Indian  Christians.    But  the
aforesaid provision continues to apply-
I.  In the case of Wills made by any Hindu, Buddhist,
Sikh  or  Jaina  where  such  Wills  are  of  the  classes
specified in clauses (a) and (b) of Section 57, i.e., Wills
and Codicils made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
14

on  or after  the  1st day of  September 1870  within  the
Territories  which  at the  said date  were subject  to the
Lieutenant Governor of Bengal or within the local limits
of  the  ordinary  original  civil  jurisdiction  of the  High
Courts of Judicature at Madras and Bombay and all such
Wills and Codicils  made outside those Territories  and
limits  so  far  as  relates  to  immovable  property  situate
within those Territories or limits;
II.  In the case of Wills made by any Parsi dying after the
commencement of the Indian Succession (Amendment)
Act, 1962, where such Wills are made within the local
limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the
High Courts at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and where
such Wills are made outside those limits, insofar as they
relate to immovable property situate within those limits.
6. The  exemption  in  respect  of  Wills  made  by Muslims
under the parent Act was due to the Muslim Personal Law.
The stipulation imposed in section 213(1) of the Act in respect
of Wills made by any Indian Christian, Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh
or  Jaina  was  the  legacy  of  Colonial  Rule  which  has  been
extended to Parsis in 1962.    The discrimination against the
Wills executed by the Indian Christians has now been removed
by the present Amendment on an All India basis.   In Kerala,
this discrimination against Indian Christians has already been
done away with by the Kerala Act 1 of 1997 with effect from
15

14.3.1997.   The discrimination in respect of Wills made by
Hindus,  Buddhists,  Sikhs,  Jainas  or  Parsis  continues  in  a
limited form, i.e., where the Will is made within the Territories
of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts of
Judicature at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and where such
Wills are made outside those Territories so far as they relate to
immovable  property  situate  within  those  Territories.    This
discrimination is liable to be struck down under Article 15 of
the Constitution which prohibits discrimination on grounds of
religion, race, caste or place of birth.   Will the Parliament look
into  this  anomaly  and  repeal  Section  213(1)  and  (2)
altogether?’
1.2 On the above article, a note was published by the Law Weekly,
Madras, 2003 (2) page 57 (JS), which is also reproduced hereunder:-
‘The litigant public in our land, why for the matter of
that, even our legal fraternity is greatly obliged to Mr. S.A.
Kader, former Judge of our High Court for his piece, “The
Indian Succession  (Amendment)  Act 26 of 2002  – Why this
discrimination against Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jainas and
Parsis?” which we have carried at pages 35 J.S. to 37 J.S. (in
Part 4 of this Volume) in our Journal Section.
We had ourselves noticed that the 2002 November part
of AIR carried the text of the Amending Act, Act 26 of 2002 at
page 120 of journal part.
16

We were wondering what to make of this amendment
made 77 years after the enactment of Indian Succession Act,
1925, assented to by the then Governor General in Council on
30th September  1925,  itself  a  Consolidating  Act  whose
forerunner was the Act of 1865.
Our inability to get down to business which we can only
attribute to our lacking in facilities has been exposed by the
young gentleman that Mr. Kader who is only 76 years young is
by his commitment to legal research.  That he quoted from
Thomas Gray in his  retirement speech  from his  seat on the
Bench of our Court on 4.11.1988 may be only one incident.
Parliament had passed the Bill placed before it in the
year 2001 itself and the Rashtrapathy gave his assent to the
same on 27.5.2002, but the  Law or Legislative department of
the  Union  Cabinet  could  get  the  enactment  printed  in  the
Official Gazette of India only on 22.11.2002.
Mr.  Kader  has  been  able  to  locate  the  Statement  of
Objects and Reasons for the Amending Bill/Act.   The selective
approach made by Parliament to go to the help of only those
who open their mouths and make a full throated noise is clearly
brought out on a mere look at the Objects and Reasons for this
measure.
17

Mr. Kader’s conclusion that the provisions of the Indian
Succession  Act,  1925,  as  now  remain,  are  clearly
discriminatory and require to be struck down by the High Court
(s) is the only obvious one.
.. .. .. .. ..
On 22.2.2001, a Bench of the Supreme Court of India
(Rajendra Babu and Lahoti, JJ.) delivered judgment in W.P.(C)
No.137 of 1997 and connected cases.   The same is reported in
AIR 2001 SC 1151 and 2001-4-SCC-325.
The claim made by the petitioners in the said case, in the
main, was that just as Muslims and Parsis have been exempted
from the operation of section 213, Indian (?) Christians of this
country should also enjoy the same exception and that it should
be so declared.
Though the prayer came to be rejected by the Bench, it is
found that the Indian Parliament lost no time in conceding the
request  and  obliging  a  significant  section  of  our  country’s
citizens, namely, Christians.
What is sauce for the goose is (or at least, must be!)
sauce for the gander too.
There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  earthy  reason  why
Parliament  or the  concerned  Ministry  of the  Union  Cabinet
18

came to ignore the claim to equality of the major section of the
people of India, the Hindus and enable them to be freed from
the shackles.
.. .. .. ..
If in regard only to properties in Chennai, Mumbai or
Kolkata  or in  the  event  of the  testator  having  executed  the
testament while within these cities, is a probate made requisite
by this provision leaving aside the entire country does not this
provision appear an anachronism?
More so, when a distinct and not a small percentage of
the population will be affected by this Rule.
Here we can also take note of Section 3 of the Act of
1925 and Section 332 of its predecessor Act 10 of 1865 has
made  provision  for  the  State  Government  to  exempt  by
notification, the operation of, among others, Sections 212, 213,
and 215 to 369, the members of any race etc. to whom the State
Government  considers  it  impossible  or inexpedient  to  apply
such  provision.  One  can  even  apply  the  maxim  ‘cessante
ratione legis cessat ipsa lex.’ (-Broom)  Can’t we!
We leave it to the Mega Association of lawyers in our
State, the Madras High Court Advocates Association and its
office bearers to take up the issue with the T.N. Government to
19

make a notification under Section 3 of Act 39 of 1925 and
relieve a large section of our people.’
2. DISUNIFORMITY
2.1 A perusal of the above article and the note published by the
Law  Weekly,  Madras  would  clearly  demonstrate  and  reveal  the
discrimination against Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jainas and Parsis in
the matter of obtaining probate of a will or letters of administration
with respect to the wills executed by Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jainas
and  Parsis  within  the  local  limits  of  the  ordinary  original  civil
jurisdiction of the High Courts at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and
where such wills are made outside those limits, in so far as they relate
to immovable properties situate within those limits, that the learned
author pleaded for the removal.
2.2 Hardship is experienced by litigants  in obtaining probate or
letters  of  administration  paying  high  duty.    While  obtaining  of
probate or letters of administration is not insisted upon in respect of
wills  executed  by  Muslims  and  Christians  anywhere  in  India  in
respect of properties situated anywhere in India and wills executed by
Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jainas and Parsis outside the local limits of
the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts at Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay in respect of properties situated outside those
limits, there is no rationale in insisting upon obtaining of probate or
letters  of  administration  in  respect  of  wills  executed  by  Hindus,
20

Buddhists,  Sikhs,  Jainas  and  Parsis  within  the  local  limits  of  the
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts at Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay, and where such wills are made outside those
limits  insofar  as  they relate  to  immovable  property situate  within
those limits.
2.3 Article 15 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“Art.  15. (1)  The  State  shall  not  discriminate  against  any
citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of
birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability,
liability, restriction or condition with regard to-
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of
public entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of
public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State
funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
(3) Nothing  in  this  article  shall  prevent  the  State  from
making any special provision for women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall
prevent the State from making any special provision for the
advancement  of  any  socially  and  educationally  backward
21

classes  of  citizens  or  for  the  Scheduled  Castes  and  the
Scheduled Tribes.
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1)
of article 19 shall prevent the State from making any special
provision,  by law, for the  advancement  of  any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes  or  the  Scheduled  Tribes  in  so  far  as  such  special
provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including  private  educational  institutions,  whether  aided  or
unaided  by  the  State,  other  than  the  minority  educational
institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30.”
2.4 The  above  Article  prohibits  discrimination  on  grounds  of
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
2.5 The  constitutional  validity  of  section  118  of  the  Indian
Succession Act was challenged before the High Court of Kerala in
Preman v. Union of India, AIR 1999 Kerala 93.   It was argued that
the said provision was anomalous and anachronistic being violative
of  Articles  14,  15,  25  and  26  of  the  Constitution  of  India  and,
therefore,  the  said  section  was  liable  to  be  struck  down  as
unconstitutional.    The  case  was  decided  by  the  Division  Bench
headed by Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan (as he then was).
The High Court held:
22

“In the instant case, Section 118 of the Act regarding
religious  bequests  of  all  testators,  viz.  of  Hindus,
Muhammadans, Parsis, Jaina, etc., are not subjected to this
procedure and the bequests by Christians alone is singled out.
Therefore, we hold that Section 118 of the Indian Succession
Act  regarding  religious  and  charitable  bequests  is
discriminatory  and  violative  of  Articles  14  and  15  of  the
Constitution of India and it is necessary that all testators who
are  similarly  situated  should  be  subjected  to  the  same
procedure.  As the law stands today, a Christian cannot make a
bequest for religious or charitable purposes without satisfying
the conditions and procedures prescribed by Section 118 of the
Act.   Such a burden, procedural burden and substantive law
burden  is  not  falling  upon  Hindu,  Muhammadan,  Jaina  or
Parsi testators. … 
we declare that Secton 118 of the Indian Succession Act:
(a) discriminates against a Christian vis-à-vis non-Christian;
(b)  discriminates  against  testamentary  disposition  by  a
Christian  vis-à-vis  non-testamentary  disposition;  (c)
discriminates against religious and charitable use of property
vis-à-vis all other uses including not so desirable purposes; (d)
discriminates against a Christian who has a nephew, niece or
nearest relative vis-à-vis a Christian who has no relative at
all; and (e) discriminates against a Christian who dies within
12 months of execution of the will, of which he has no control.
We, therefore, declare  that Section  118  of the Indian
Succession Act is anomalous and anachronistic being violative
23

of  Articles  14,  15,  25  and  26  of  the  Constitution  of  India.
Section 118 of the Indian Succession Act is, therefore, struck
down as unconstitutional.”
2.6 This matter was taken to the Supreme Court through a writ
petition and heard by its Bench comprising Hon’ble Chief Justice of
India V.N. Khare, Hon’ble Justice S.B. Sinha and Hon’ble Dr. Justice
AR. Lakshmanan in John Vallamattom v. Union of India, AIR 2003
SC  2902.    The Supreme Court  allowed  the  writ  petition  for  the
elaborate reasons recorded in the judgments and also declared Section
118 of the Indian Succession Act as unconstitutional being violative
of Articles 14, 15, 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India.
2.7 Hon’ble  Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan  delivered  a  separate
judgment agreeing with the other two Judges.   In his concurring
judgment,  he  has  elaborately  dealt  with  discriminatory  treatment
meted  out  to  the  members  of  the  Christian  community under  the
Indian Succession Act, 1925 by which they are practically prevented
from bequeathing property for religious and charitable purposes.   In
conclusion, he observed:
“The Indian Succession Act though is claimed to be a
universal law of testamentary disposition, but in effect, crucial
sections  apply  only  to  Christians.  There  is  no  acceptable
answer from the other side as to why S. 118 of the Act is made
applicable to Christians alone and not to others. …
24

The  Indian  Succession  Act  came  into  effect  on  30th
September, 1925. As per S. 4, Part II of the Act shall not apply
if the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or
Jaina. Section 20 of Part III of the Act is not applicable to any
marriage contracted before the first day of January, 1866; and
is not applicable and is deemed never to have applied to any
marriage, one or both of the parties to which professed at the
time of marriage the Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or
Jain religion. As per S. 23 of Part IV of the Act, that part shall
not apply to any Will made or intestacy occurring before the
first  day  of  January,  1866  or  to  intestate  or  testamentary
succession  to  the  property  of  any  Hindu,  Muhammadan,
Buddhist, Sikh, Jain or Parsi. Likewise, as per S. 29 of Part V
of  the  Act,  that  shall  not  apply  to  any  intestacy  occurring
before the first day of January, 1866 or to the property of any
Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina. By Act 51 of
1991, Parsis were also excluded from the application of S. 118
of the Act. Thus, it is seen that the procedure prescribed has
been made applicable to Christians alone. There is also no
acceptable answer from the respondent as to why it regulates
only religious and charitable bequests and that too, bequests
of Christians alone.  The whole case, in my view, is based upon
undue, harsh and special burden on Christian testators alone.
A substantive restriction is imposed based on uncertain events
over which the testator has no control. I, therefore, have no
hesitation to hold that S. 118  of the Act regarding religious
and charitable bequests of all testators who are similar should
25

be subjected to the same procedure. As the law stands today, a
Christian cannot make a bequest for religious or charitable
purposes  without  satisfying  the  conditions  and  procedures
prescribed by S. 118 of the Act. Such a burden, procedural
burden and substantive law burden is not falling upon Hindu,
Muhammadan, Jain or Parsi testators. …
The very same question was raised before the Kerala
High Court. …
It is pertinent to notice that the judgment of the Kerala
High  Court  was  not  appealed  against  by  the  respondent
herein, namely, the Union of India. Even after the judgment of
the Kerala High Court dated 16.10.1998, the Parliament did
not remove the discrimination. Under such circumstances, this
Court, in  my opinion,  in  exercise  of  its  jurisdiction  and  to
remedy violation of fundamental rights, are bound to declare
the impugned provision as invalid and being violative of Arts.
14,  15,  25  and  26  of  the  Constitution.  For  the  foregoing
reasons, I am respectfully in agreement with My Lord Hon'ble
the  Chief  Justice  of  India  that  S.  118  of  the  Act  is
unconstitutional  and  is  liable  to  be  struck  down  as
unconstitutional. …
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.”
26

2.8 Sub-section (2) of section 213 of the Indian Succession Act
was  amended  by  the  Indian  Succession  (Amendment)  Act,  2002
introducing  the  words  “or  Indian  Christians”  after  the  word
“Muhammadans”. The result is that the provision of sub-section (1)
of  section  213  which  necessitates  grant  of  probate  of the  will  or
letters  of  administration  with  the  will  or  with  a  copy  of  an
authenticated  copy of  the  will  annexed,  by a Court  of  competent
jurisdiction in order to establish the right as executor or legatee is
now not applicable to the wills made not only by Muhammadans but
also by Indian Christians.   But this provision continues to apply-
(1) in the case of wills made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh
or Jaina where such wills are of the classes specified in
clauses  (a)  and  (b)  of  section  57,  that  is,  wills  and
codicils made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina on
or  after  the  1st day  of  September,  1870,  within  the
territories  which  on  the said  date  were subject  to  the
Lieutenant Governor of Bengal or within the local limits
of  the  ordinary  original  civil  jurisdiction  of the  High
Courts of Madras and Bombay and all such wills and
codicils made outside those territories and limits so far as
they relate to immovable property situate within those
territories or limits; and
(2) in  the  case  of  wills  made  by  Parsis  dying  after  the
commencement of the Indian Succession (Amendment)
Act, 1962, where such wills are made within the local
27

limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the
High Courts of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and where
such wills are made outside those limits, insofar as they
relate to immovable property situate within those limits.
3. RECOMMENDATION
3.1 It is thus seen that there is discrimination and no uniformity in
respect of wills made by Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jainas or Parsis,
where the will is made within the territories of the ordinary original
civil jurisdiction of the High Courts of Judicature at Calcutta, Madras
and Bombay and where such wills are made outside those territories,
insofar as they relate to immovable properties situate within those
territories. Therefore, section 213 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925
is liable to be struck down as being violative of Article 15 of the
Constitution  of  India.  Hence,  the  Commission  proposes  repeal  of
section 213 altogether from the statute.
3.2 We recommend accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
                      (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal)
  Member-Secretary
Dated: July 30, 2008.
28