4

+90 Ie

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

TWENTY-FIRST REPORT

(MARINE INSURANCE)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA :MINISTRY OF LAW


0.0. No. F.1(3)/60-L.C,
CHAIRMAN,

LAW COMMISSION.

New Dethi-3, the 1st September, 1961.

Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,

Minister of Law,
Néw Delhi.

' My par Muuister,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the twenty-
first Report of the Law Commission on the Law of Marine
Insurance.

5th May, ro6r. The Report has been revised in accordance
with the decisions taken at that meeting.

3. The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services
rendered by Shri P, M. Bakshi, Deputy Draftsman, in’ connec-
tion with the Preparation of the draft and the Report.

Yours sincerely,
T. L. VENKATARAMA ATYAR.


>
we

REPORT ON MARINE INSURANCE
CONTENTS
PARAGRAPH SUBJECT-MATTER
I No Indian Statute on marine insurance पु
2 Need for legistation

3 Desirability of following the (English) Marine In-
surance Act, 1906 : : : पु :

4 Departure from English law .
5 Definition of “ship” included

6 Insurable value of ships driven by power other than
steam : : : : : पु . :

7 Deviation for saving Property

8-9  Abandonment—Effect of subsequent acts of the in-
surer or change of circumstances . पु .

10 Sale of injured ship without repair—amount to be
paid by insurer . . न . : .

१3५ Other points

12 Appendices .

APPENDICES
APPENDIS I.—Proposals as shown in the form of a draft Bill .
APPENDIX IT.—Notes on Clauses . . .
APPENDIX III.—Showing the provision in the (English) Marine
Tasurance Act, 1906, and the corresponding pro-
vision, if any, in Appendix I . पु .

APPENDIX IV.—Suggestions in respect of other Acts

Pace

13
42

125

130


fry

REPORT ON MARINE INSURANCE

1. There is no enactment of the Indian Legislature on No Indian
the law relating to marine insurance.) The Indian Stamp statute on
Act, 1899, prescribes the duties payable on insurance हट सर in-
policies. The Transfer of Property Act, 1882, contains 7
provisions relating to the formalities to be observed in the
assignment of marine policies. The Insurance Act, 1938,
regulates generally the carrying on of the business of
insurance (including marine insurance) by associations in-
corporated and unincorporated and by individuals, and does
not deal with the contract of insurance between the insurer
and the assured. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (Cen-
tral Act 44 of 1958), deals with the law relating to shipping
such as registration of vessels, qualifications of Masters, the
tights and obligations of the crew, the construction of ships
and their equipments and the like, but not with marine
insurance. The last mentioned Act does, however, contain
Provisions on such topics as sea-worthiness, collision and
salvage, which arise for consideration in the law of marine
insurance, Thus there is no statute which deals directly
with the subject of marine insurance contracts and the
rights of the parties thereto. In the absence of such a
statute, the courts were guided on the few occasions on
which questions relating to marine insurance arose for devi-
sion, by the correspon Sing provisions of the (English)
Marine Insurance Act, 1906, and by the principles laid down
in the decisions of English Courts in dealing with such
contracts.

perty Act relating to the assignment of policy of Marine
insurance was introduced. In the statement of Objects
and Reasons appended to that Bill? eceur the following
observations: —

“It is recognised that while legi: हक tion on the above
lines would clarify the Law of ment, and sub-
rogation of marine insurance policies, the whole law

marine insurance will not be put on a satisfactory
basis, unless comprehensive legislation on the lines of
the Marine Insurance Act, 1906, is enacted for British
India. Such a project, however, must necessarily await
termination of the war.”

0 पक detaile of stati touching on Ue GM [77 details of statistics touching on the subject, see A; dix IT,
SMotes.on Clauses), topic discussed at the beginning under शक Pay

“For details see Appendix I, Notes on Clauses under clauses 57-53.


४७०४७)

‘Need for
रु

Desirability
of fo allowing
the ee Ee

Act, 1906,

2

As a first step in the codification of the entire law relat-
ing to shipping, our Parliament has enacted the Indian
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. In 1959, a Bill on marine
insurance! was introduced in the Rajya Sabha by a Private
Member? In due course, the Bill was circulated for the
opinion of the State Governments, High Courts, and other
bodies and persons interested. After the receipt of their
comments, the Government of India referred to the Law
Commission the questions as to whether there was need for
legislation on this subject, and if there was, the lines on
which it should be undertaken. That is how this matter

has come before this Commission.

2. That there is need for this legislation was recognised,
as already stated,® in the statement of Objects and Reasons
appended to the Bill for amendment of the provisions of
the Transfer of Property Act. That statement was made
in 1944, and since then the need for such a legislation has
become greater. There has been, in recent years, a marked
increase in the mercantile marine owned by this country.
We have moreover entered on an era of industrial expan-
sion, and-to carry on our export and import trade effec-
tively, it is necessary that we should own our own vessels.
There is even now an appreciable volume of business in
the taking up of marine insurance policy on ships,. cargo
and freight, and that is bound to increase in the not distant
future, Under the circumstances, a law on marine insur-
ance would facilitate the expansion of business in exports
and imports, and in the settlement of disputes arising in
the course thereof. Such a legislation would also be in
furtherance of the policy underlying the enactment of the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. We are therefore of opi-
nion that there is ample need for enactment of a statute
on marine insurance.

3. We are also of opinion that the statute should, in
eneral, follow the (English) Marine Insurance Act, 1906.
The jaw as embodied therein represents the experience of a
leading maritime nation, extending over nearly three cen-
turies. Marine insurance policy as embodied in the Lloyd's
was settled in its present form in 1779, but many of its pro-
visions go back to a much earlier date. Lloyd's policy has
been criticised as “an absurd and incoherent instrument”,*
“a very strange instrument”,® and its language as “crabbed
and obscure”.® But it is based on usage and has been in
vogue in the commercial world for too long a period, now

"The Indian Marine Insurance Bill 1959 (Bill No. x of 1959)—Raiya
Sabha,

‘Shri M. P. Bhargava.

‘Para. 1, supra,

Per Buller, J., in Brough v. Whitmore (1791) 4 T.R. at p. 210.

‘Per Mansfield, C.J., in Lo Cheminant v, Pearson (1812) 4 Taunt. 380.

‘Chalmers’ Marine Insurance Act, 1906, sth edn, 9. 3.


3

to be lightly disturbed. There are numerous decisions of
courts, some of them by the House of Lords, construing its
provisions, and the rules of interpretation applicable to
them may now be taken to be fairly well-settled, and they
are embodied in the Schedule to the English Act.

We are aware of the criticisms levelled against the

English Act, that it embodies only some of the legal prin-

ciples governing marine insurance, that its language is cryp-

tic, wide and indefinite, with the result that to understand

its true import one has to refer to the law as it stood at the

time of the enactment, as expressed in the decided cases.*

7 But then it has to be remembered that the statute has stood

the test of time, having worked satisfactorily for more than

half a century, and that it has been adopted in the Com-

monwealth countries such as Australia and Canada, so

much so it can well be said to have assumed the status of

a law of nations. As the topic is one which is inter-

national in character, both convenience and expediency

require that our law should, as far as possible, be in
conformity with it. :

In fact, business in maritime insurance in this country
follows closely the English pattern. Our marine insurance
policies are drawn upon the model of Lloyd's policy.
Many of our policies are re-insured in England, and these
‘re-insurance policies are governed by the English law.
Moreover, when our goods are exported, they are insured,
and when those goods are transferred, the relative insur-
ance policies have to be assigned for protecting the rights
of the transferee and it will facilitate business if there is
uniformity of law. We have therefore decided to follow, in
general, the pattern of the (English) Marine Insurance Act,

4, There are, however, certain provisions in the English Departure
Act which, in our view, require modification, when regard from English
is had to the opinions expressed in English decisions subse- law.

? quent to the Act of 1906, or to the conditions in this ccuntry.

5. The English Act contains no definition of “ship”. Definition of
Rule 15 in Schedule I of that Act provides that certain ship in-
things forming fittings and equipments of the ship are also cluded.
included therein. But the Act is silent as to what vessels
should be included in the definition of “ship”. The question
has accordingly been raised whether sailing vessels propell-
ed by oars should be included in it. Even in England the
view has been expressed by Arnould? that “ship” probably
includes all builds of vessels. Referring next to the defini-
tion of “ship” in Indian statutes, s. 3(55) of the General

*Rishards v. Forestal Land Co., (1942/3) All, England Reports
76—1942 A.C. 50 (House of Lords). 42/3) ne &

Arnould, rine Insurance 1954) Vol. 1, page 199, Articles r8q-185,


4

Clauses Act! provides that a “ship” includes vessels not
exclusively Piepelled by oars. Section 48 of the Indian
Penal Code defines vessel as “anything made for the convey-
ance by water of human beings or property”. This would
include vessels propelled by oars. Section 3(45) of the
Indian Merchant Shipping Act (44 of 1958) enacts that a
ship does not inelude sailing vessels. But this definition is
only for the purpose of that Act, and is itself based cn the
view that but for the specific provision contained in this
Act, the word “ship” would include sailing vessels. There
has been a considerable body of opinion from South India,
where such vessels are largely in use, for their inclusion
in the definition of “ship”. We have accordingly decided to
include? a definition of “ship” as including sailing vessels
propelled by oars.

Insurable 6. Section 16 of the English Act provides that insurable

fae of value in the case of steam ships includes also the machinery,

by power etc, if owned by the assured. This does not cover the case

other than of a ship driven by power other than steam. A provision

steam. relating to such a ship is also necessary, and we have
accordingly provided’ that in the case of a ship driven
by power other than steam, the insurable value includes
o the machinery and the fuel and engine stores if owned
by the assured, .

Deviation 7. Another topic on which we have departed from the

fers bien English law has reference to “deviation”. Where a ship

Property. deviates from the voyage contemplated by the policy, the
insurer is discharged from liability under the policy from
the time of deviation (section 46, English Act). But the law
recognises certain lawful excuses for such deviation, one of
which under the English law is that it is for the purpose of
saving human life [section 49(1) (e), English Act]. When
the deviation is for saving property and not human life, it
is not excused, and the insurer is discharged. That is the
Jaw also in America.’

It should be noted that the position is different when the
question arises between the cargo-owner and the ship-
owner under a contract of affreightment. According to the
(English) Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1924, Schedule,
Article IV, para. 4, a deviation in saving or attempting . to
save life or property at sea or any reasonable deviation is

IThe definition in the General Clause Act follows section 742, English)
Merchant Shipping Act. For cases on the definition in the latter Act, see
Temperley, Merchant Shipping Acts, sth Edn. p. 441443.

*See Appendix I, clause 2-“ ship ”.
3568 Appendix I, clause 14,

‘Gf, also the First Schedule, rule 15 of the English Act and the departure
Proposed therefrom,

"Vide 45 Cormis Juris Secundum, Insurance,” p. 570, para, 653,
hand column.


ys

5

excused. And the Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act,
1925, Schedule, Article IV, para. 4, has also enacted the law
in the same terms. The question is whether two different
rules should apply as regards lawfulness of deviation, one
as between the iisurer and the assured, and the other as
between the cargo-owner and the ship-owner. The rule en-
acted in the (English) Marine Insurance Act 1906, is based
on common law! and that has been departed from as regards
contracts of affreightment in 1924. We think that there is
ho good ground for applying two different rules between
marine insurance contracts and contracts of affreightment,
and we have therefore adopted the law? as enacted in the
Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, as more equitable, and
accordingly substituted a Provision excusing deviation for
the purpose of saving or attempting to save life or Property
at sea. We, however, consider that “other reasonable devi-
ation” (allowed in the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act), is too
wide in its terms ta be adopted for purposes of insurance,

8. The law as to the rights of the assured when there is
constructive total Joss as enacted in the English Act of 1906
requires, in our opinion, to be clarified, Under that law,
when there is a constructive total loss, the assured may
abandon the subject-matter and treat the loss as if it were
an actual total loss,

Two questions arise with reference to this provision. The
first question is, is it open to the insurer thereafter to salve
the subject-matter, and claim that the assured could recover
only on the footing of a partial loss? It is settled law that
he cannot! That is because the election of the assured to

transferring the title to the insurer.* The English Act is
silent on this question, obviously because the law was not
in doubt. We have considered it desirable that it should be
made explicit.

9. The other question arising on this topic is as regards
“ademption” in case of total loss. When the subject-matter
of insurance is seized by a third person and the assured is
deprived of possession thereof, he can elect to treat it as
constructive total loss. That might happen, for example,

किक ¥. Stamp 850) | Gb.D wi Che ¥. Siam (2880) 5 G.B.D. 295 C.A. on appeal from 4 CBD,
BGA. ‘See also Halsbury, 3rd Bada. Vol. #2, 7. 79, Pees ea OED

*See Appendix I clause 50,
iWide Blairmore Sailing Ships Go. v. Macredia (2898) A.C. 59 फू 607 5
लिए Lavrs of Englands rd edn, Vol at . 756, Para. mould
(195 ‘ol, 2, Article 11282 7. 156, Pare. 302, and id
‘Vide Chalmers’ Marine Insurance Act, 1906, sth Edn, p. 92.

Abandon-

ment—effect
of subsequent
acts of the in~

surer or
change of
sircum-
stances.


6

thereof to the assured, can that be pleaded as a defence to
the action on the policy by the latter? According to the
common law of England, that is a valid defence, and the
right of the assured is only to recover for partial loss. But
that is not the law in Scotland or the Continent or the
United States. The English Act of 1906 is silent on this
question, and there has been a difference of opinion as to
whether under the Act, the common law of England as to
ademption has been changed! We think that the position
should be made clear, and in agreement with the law of
Scotland, of the Continent and of the United States, we have
provided? that the right of the insured to recover for total
Joss should not be affected by events subsequent thereto.

Sale of 10. Another question on which the English Act is silent
insured, Sh is ag to the measure of indemnity when a ship damaged by
ein out Herils insured against is sold without repair. Section 69 of

Guount to the English Act which prescribes the measure of indemnity
‘be paid by in case of partial loss does not deal with this matter. The
angurer. reason for this might be that the law on the subject was
still considered unsettled at the time. The question arose

. for decision in Pitman v. Universal Marine Insurance Co.*-*

There a ship which was valued by the owners at 4000 con-

sols ran aground. After effecting some repairs the owner

sold it for 3897 consols and then sued to recover 781 consols

from the insurers on the basis of the estimated cost of

repairs, without selling the ship. The defendants contended

that they were liable to pay only the difference between the

sound value of the ship and the amount actually realised in

resale, and whatever was spent by the assured for the

repairs, and on this basis paid 245 consols into court. Lind-

ley, J., as he then was, held that the plaintiff was not entitl-

ed to anything more, as the contract of insurance was one of
indemnity, and that no damages beyond what the plaintiffs

had in fact suffered could be awarded.on a hypothetical

basis of repairs which were not in fact made. The plaintiffs

then’ appealed, and the Court of Appeal affirmed the

judgment of Lindley, J., by a majority consisting of Jessel,

MLR., and Cotton, LJ. Brett, LJ. dissented, observing

that damages should be calculated on the basis of the esti-

mated cost of repair, less the usual deductions, and that the

principle adopted by Lindley, J. was a dangerous innova-

tion, There has been some difference of opinion as to

whether the value of the ship should, for the purpose of

this rule, be calculated as on the date of the commencement

of the risk or as at the time of the casualty. But apart from

iPide Halsbury’s Laws of England, Vol. 22, p. 159, para. 308, and the
casts cited in foot note 8. See also Amould, (1954) Vol. 2, pages 1000-1001
Articles 1096 ef seg.

3See Appendix I, clause 62(2).

+(1882) 9 Q.BD. 192.

“The matter haa been discussed in detail in Appendix IT in Notes on
clause 70.

‘Vide Chalmers’ Marine Insurance Act, 1906, 5th Edn., p. 108,


प्‌

कह

y

7

that, the rule laid down by Lindley, J., and affirmed by the
majority of the Court of Appeal appears to be equitable and
in accordance with the character of the insurance contract
as one of indemnity, and we have accordingly adopted it
and provided! that when a ship which has been damaged is
sold in that condition, the assured is entitled to be indemni-
fied for the reasonable cost of repairing the damage but not
exceeding the depreciation in value as ascertained by the
be

11. These are some of the more important points on Other points.

which we have departed from the provisions of the English
law. There are a few other points and they have been dealt
with in the notes on clauses. We have also made some modi-
fications of a formal character as regards the arrangement
of the topics and clauses.

12. In order to give a concrete shape to our proposals, we Appendices.

have in Appendix I put them in the form of a draft Bill.
Appendix II contains the notes on clauses, explaining with
reference to each clause in Appendix I any point that may
need elucidation.
Appendix III contains a comparative table showing the
provision in the English Act, and the corresponding provi-
sion, if any, in Appendix I.

A ofippendix IV contains our suggestions in respect of other
cts.

1. T. L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR,

(Chairman).
2, 9, SATYANARAYANA RAO. 1
3. L. 8. MISRA. I
4. ७. RB. RAJAGOPAUL. Members.

5. S. CHAUDHURI.
6. N. A. PALKHIVALA.

D. BASU,
Joint Secretary.
New DEH;
The 29th July, 1961. ‘

tAppendix I, clause 70.



INDEX TO APPENDIX I

Ciause SuBjsCT-MATTER

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1 Short title, and commencement,
Definitions.

CHAPTER II
‘MARINE INSURANCE

Contract of Marine Insurance

3. Marine insurance defined.
4. Mixed sea and land risks. ‘
5. Lawful marine adventure.

Insurable Interest

Insurable interest defined.

Tnterests which may, in particular, be insured.
Quantum of interest in certain cases.
Avoidance of wagering contracts.

I When interest must attach.

व... Right of mortgagee, consignee, etc., to insure on behalf of other
persons interested.

12. Reinsurance.

. Insurable value

8७४७9

13... Measure of insurable value.
CHAPTER IIT
DISCLOSURES AND REPRESENTATIONS
14. Marine insurance to be a contract of utmost good faith,
15. Disclosure by assured.
16. Disclosure by agent effecting insurance.

I}. Representations pending negotiation of contract.
18. | When contract is deemed to be concluded.



CLAUSE Supyect-MaTrER
CHAPTER IV
Tue Pouicy
19. Cantract must be embodied in a policy,
zo, What policy must specify.
21, Signature of insurer.
22, Voyage and time policy.
23. Designation of subject-matter.
24. Valued policy.
25. Unvalued policy.
26. Floating policy by ship or ships.
27. Form of, and construction of terms in, policy,
28. Premium to be arranged.
29. Double insurance.
CHAPTER V
THe PREMIUM
30. When premium payable.
31. Policy effected through broker,
32. Effect of receipt on policy.
CHAPTER VI
‘WARRANTIES
33. Nature of warranty.
34. Express warranty.
35. Warranty must be complied with,
36. When breach of warranty excused.
37. Warranty of neutrality,
38. No implied warranty of nationality.
39. Warrant of good safety.
40. Warranty of seaworthiness of ship.
जा No implied warranty that goods are sea-wortiy.
42 Warranty of legality.


CLAUSE

10:

SUBJECT-MATTER

43.

45.

47.

49.
50.
$1.

53«
54.
55.
56.

CHAPTER VII
Tre VoyacE

Implied condition as to commencement of risk.
Alteration of port of departure.

Sailing for different destination.

Change of voyage.

Deviation.

Several ports of discharge.

Delay in voyage.

Excuses for deviation or delay.

Effect of transhipment, etc.

CHAPTER VIII
ASSIGNMENT OF POLICY

Transfer of policy of marine insurance.

Assured having no interest cannot assign.

Assignment of rights under policy of marine insurance,
Assignment of interest.

Overriding effect of Chapter.

CHAPTER 1X
Loss AND ABANDONMENT

Included and excluded losses.
Partial and total loss.

Actual total loss.

Missing ship.

Constructive total loss defined.
Effect of constructive total loss.
Notice of abandonment.

Réfect of abandonment.


Hn
ee
CLausE ‘SupjHct-MATTER

CHAPTER X

PARTIAL LOSSES (INCLUDING SALVAGE AND CENTRAL AVERAGE
AND PARTICULAR CHARGES)

65, Particular average loss,
66. Salvage charges.
67. General average 1085.
CHAPTER XI
Measure OF INDEMNITY
68. Extent of liability of the insurer for loss,
69. Total loss.
70. Partial loss of ship.
जा. Partial loss of freight.
Fz. Partial loss of goods, merchandise, etc.
73. Apportionment of valuation.
‘74. General average contributions and salvage charges.
75. Liabilities to third parties,
76. General provisions as to measure of indemnity,
77. ‘Particular average warranties,
7B. Successive losses.
79. Suing and labouring clause.
CHAPTER XII
RIGHTs OF INSURER ON PAYMENT

80. Right of subrogation.
81. Right of contribution.
82. Effect of under-insurance.

CHAPTER XIII
RETURN OF PREMIUM

83. Enforcement of return.

84. Return by agreement.
85. Return for failure of consideration.

296 MofL—2.


12

CLAUSB Supyect-MATTER

CHAPTER XIV
MutuaL INSURANCE
86, Modification of Act in case of mutual insurance.
CHAPTER XV
MISCELLANEOUS
87. Ratification by assured.
88. Implied obligations varied by agreement or usage.
89. Reasonable time, etc, a question of fact.
90. Slip as evidence.
gt. Savings.

THE SCHEDULE.—
ForM oF Pouicy.


APPENDIX I
PROPOSALS aS SHOWN IN THE FORM oF a pRAFT Bit,
{This is a tentative draft only)
THE MARINE INSURANCE BILL, 1961
A
BILL
to codify the law relating to marine insurance.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the.............. Year of
the Republic of India as follows: —
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Marine Insurance Act, Short title
1. and com-
mencement,

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central cy.
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, sd,
appoint. ing!

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(०) “contract of marine insurance” means a con-
tract of marine insurance as defined by section 2;

(b) “freight” includes the profit derivable by acy. s. 90,
ship-owner from the employment of his ship to carry his English Act.
own goods or other. movables, as well as freight pay-
able by a third party, but does not include passage
money;

(c) “insurable property” means any ship, goods or Of. s. 3(2)
cther movables which are exposed to maritime perils; (90 part,
aa
éd) “marine adventure” includes any adventure
where,—

(i) any insurable property is exposed to mari-Cf. s. 3(2)
time perils, (०) pert,
8. 31 11261

(४) the earnings or acquisition of any freight, findtih” Ker.
passage money, commission, profit or other ecu:
hiary benefit, or the security for any advances, Ss
or disbursements, is endangered by the exposure of
insurable property to maritime perils,

13


Gn 3. 3(2)s
ition
English Act.

oS F. Se 905
ish Act.

+ 8. 905,
Polis! Act.

डिक Aer

Marine in-
surance
defined,

g 8. 1,
glish Act.
Mixed sea
and land
risks.

Gf. ४. 25
English Act.

Lawful
marine ad-

vent a
Cf.a. 3)
English Act.

4

(iii) any liability to a third party may be in-
curred by the owner of, or other person interested
in or responsible for, insurable property by reason
of maritime perils;

(e) “maritime perils” means the perils consequent
on, or incidental to, the navigation of the sea. that is to
say, perils of the seas, fire, war perils, pirates, rovers,
thieves, captures, seizures, restraints and detainments
of princes and peoples, jettisons, barratry and any other
perils which are either of the like kind or may be
designated by the policy;

(f) “movables” means any movable tangible pro-
perty, other than the ship, and includes money, valuable
securities and other documents; .

(g) “policy” means a marine policy;
(h) “ship” includes a sailing vessel; and

(i) “suit” includes counter-claim and set-off.

CHAPTER II

Marine INSURANCE

Contract of marine insurance

3 A contract of marine insurance is an agreement where-
by the insurer undertakes to indemnify the assured, in the
manner and to the extent thereby agreed, against marine
losses, that is to say, the losses incidental to marine
adventure.

4, (1) A contract of marine insurance may, by its express
terms, or by usage of trade, be extended so as to protect
the assured against losses on inland waters or on any land
risk which may be incidental to any sea voyage.

(2) Where a ship in course of building, or the launch sf
a ship, or any adventure analogous to a marine adventure,
is covered by a policy in the form of a marine policy, the
provisions of this Act, in so far as applicable, shall apply
thereto; but, except as provided by this section, nothing in
this Act shall alter or affect any rule of law applicable to
any contract of insurance other than a contract of marine
insurance as defined by this Act.

5. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every lawful
marine adventure may be the subject of a contract of marine
insurance.


i

Insurable interest

6. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person Insurable
has an insurable interest who is interested in a marine ine,
adventure.

(2) In particular, a person is. interested in a marine & 3. 5s,
adventure where he stands in legal ............ relation to the
adventure, or to any insurable property at risk therein, in
consequence of which he may benefit by the safety or due
arrival of insurable property, or may be prejudiced by its
loss, or by damage thereto, or by the detention thereof, or
may incur liability in respect thereof.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a bene-
ficiary under a trust shall be deemed to stand in legal
relation to the trust-property at risk in a marine adventure.

7. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions Tnteresta

wi rays

contained in section 6,— in patticul

be insured,

(7) a defeasible interest is insurable, as also a con- Gf. 8.
tingent interest, and, in particular, where the buyer of Enelis!
goods has insured them, he has an insurable interest,
notwithstanding that he might, at his election, have
rejected the goods, or have treated them as at the
seller’s risk by reason of the latter’s delay in making
delivery or otherwise;

(2) a partial interest of any nature is insurable; छः 8. 8,
glish

ance has an insurable interest in his risk;

(4) the lender of money on bottomry or respon: GF. 8, TO,
lish Act.

dentia has an insurable interest in respect of the loan;

__ (5) the master or any member 6f the crew of a ge 8. Ils
ship has an insurable interest in respect of his wages;

(6) in the case of advance freight, the person Gf. #12,
advancing the freight has an insurable interest, in so Englis!
far as such freight is not repayable in case of loss;

7s
sh Act.

Act.

(3) the insurer under a contract of marine insur-Cf.-s. 9),

Tish’Acte
ish Act.

inglish Act.

ih Act.

(7) the assured has an insurable interest in the Bali Ket

charges of any insurance which he may effect.

8. (1) Where the subject-matter insured is mortgaged,

cum
the mortgagor has an insurable interest in the full value Piansurable

thereof, and the mortgagee has an insurable interest in res- certain cases.

pect of uny sum due or to become due under the mortgage. Cf. s. 1401)

aa 4
ngs Rt,


वि . 16 seem armen

_ (2) The owner of insurable Property has an insurable
interest in respect of the full value thereof, notwithstanding
that some third person may have agreed, or be liable, to
indemnify him in case of loss.

Avoidance 9. (1) Every contract of marine insurance by way of
CONTENT, मम wagering is void.

Cf. 3. 4,
English Act, (2) A contract of marine insurance is deemed to be a
नल wagering contract—

(a) where the assured has not an insurable interest
as defined by this Act, and the contract is entered into
with no expectation of acquiring such an interest; or

(b) where the policy is made “interest or no inter-
est”, or “without further proof of interest than the
policy itself’, or “without benefit of salvage to the
insurer”, or subject to any other like term:

Provided that, where there is no Possibility of salvage,
a policy may be effected without benefit of salvage io the
insurer.

When in- 10. (1) The assured must be interested in the subject-
terest must matter insured at the time of the loss, though he need not
attach. be interested when the insurance is effected:

g. 8. 6,
lish Act. Provided that, where the subject-matter is insured “lest
or not lost”, the assured may recover although he may not
have acquired his interest until after the loss, unless at the
time of effecting the contract of insurance the assured was
aware of the loss and the insurer was not.

(2) Where the assured has no interest at the time of the
loss, he cannot acquire interest by any act or election after
he is aware of the loss,

Right of 11. A mortgagee, consignee or any other person having
mortgaget, an interest in the subject-matter insured may insure on
Sees: behalf and for the benefit of other persons interested as
gure on be- well as for his own benefit.

half of other

persons
interested.

128 . 8. 1.

stan Rest

Reinsurance. 42, The insurer under a contract of marine insurance
Cf. s. 907). may reinsure in respect of his insurable interest in his risk,

Pts) ae but, unless the policy otherwise provides, the original assur-
lish Act. ed has no right or interest in respect of such re-insurance.


7

Insurable value

18. Subject to any ress provision or valuation in the Measure ot
policy, the insurable val lue of the subject-matter insured inturable
oust be ascertained as follows: — 36.

f 8: 16s

(2) In insurance on ship, the insurable value is the English Act.
value, at the commencement of the risk, of the ship, in-
cluding her out-fit, provisions and stores for the officers
and crew, money advanced for seamen’s wages, and
other disbursements (if any) incurred to make the ship
fit for the voyage or adventure contemplated by the
policy, plus the charges of insurance upon the whole.

The insurable value, in the case of a steamship,
includes also the machinery, boilers, and coals and
engine stores, if owned by the assured; in the case of a
ship driven by power other than steam, includes also
the machinery, and fuels and engine stores, if owned
by the assured: and in the case of a ship engaged in a
special trade, includes also the ordinary fittings requi-
site for that trade.

(2) In insurance on freight, whether paid in
advance or otherwise, the insurable value is the gross
amount of the freight at the risk of the assured, plus
the charges of insurance.

(3) In insurance on goods or merchandise, the in-
surable value is the prime cost of the property insured,
plus the expenses of and incidental to shipping and the
charges of insurance upon the whole.

(4) In insurance on any other subject-matter, the
insurable value is the amount at the risk of the assured
when the policy attaches, plus the charges of insurance.

CHAPTER III
DISCLOSURES AND REPRESENTATIONS

14; A contract of marine insurance is a contract based Marine in-
upon the utmost good faith, and, if the utmost good faith be uence to

not observed by either party, the contract may be avoided Df 8 contract

by the other party. good faith.
Cf.
Satin Ber,

15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Disclosure
assured must disclose to the insurer, before the contract is oy assured
concluded, every material circumstance which is known to cy, 4, 18,
the assured, and the assured is deemed to know every cir- English Act.
ccumstance which, in the ordinary course of business, ought
to be known to him. If the assured fails to make such
disclosure the insurer may avoid the contract.

(2) Every circumstance is material which would infiu
ence the judgment of a prudent insurer in fixing the pre-
mium, or determining whether he will take the risk.


18

(3) In the absence of in airy, the following circum-
stances need not be disclose |, namely; —
(७) any circumstance which diminishes the risk;
(b) any circumstance which is known or presumed
to be known to the insurer. The insurer is presumed
to know matters of common notoriety or knowledge,

and matters which an insurer in the ordinary course of
his business, as such, ought to know;

(0) any circumstance as to which information is
waived by the insurer;

(व) any circumstances which it is superfluous to dis-
close by reason of any express or implied warranty.

(4) Whether any particular circumstance, which is not
disclosed, be material or not is, in each case, a question of
‘act. °

(5) The term “circumstance” includes any communica-
tion made to, or information received by, the assured,

Disclosure 16. Subject to the Provisions of section 15 as te cireum-

by agent stances which need not be disclosed, where an insurance is

effecting 1” effected for the assured by an agent, the agent must dis-
2.19, close ta the insurer—

lish Act, __ (a) every material circumstance which is known to

(b) every material circumstance which the assured
is bound to disclose, unless it comes to his knowledge
too late to communicate it to the agent.

Representa- 17. (1) Every material representation made by the

ons pepding assured or his agent to the insurer during the negotiations
a tion of for the contrac! , and before the contract is concluded, must
Sonam be true, If it be untrue the insurer may avoid the contract.

ayy (2) A representation is material which would influence
Act, the judgment of a prudent insurer in fixing the Premium,
or determining whether he will take the risk.

(3) A representation may be either a representation as
to a matter of fact, or a representation as to a matter of
expectation or belief,

(4) A representation as to
be substantially correct, that is to say, if the difference be-

_.@5) A representation as to a matter of expectation or
belief is true if it be made in good faith.


we

19

46) Whether a particular Tepresentation be material or
Not 13, ineach case, a question of fact,

18. A contract of marine insurance is deemed to be con- When con-
eluded when the proposal of the assured is accepted by the dooney to
imsurer, whether the policy be then issued or not; and for §

CHAPTER IV
THE Pouicy

19. A contract of marine insurance shall not be admitted Contract
in evidence unless it is embodied ina marine policy in must be
accordance with this Act, The policy may be executed and embodied
issued either at the time when the contract is concluded, or Gh. a Polley.

afterwards, English Act,
20. A marine policy must specify— What policy
must specify,
(1) the name of the assured, or of some person who Cf. s. 23,
effects the insurance on his behalf; English Act.
(2) the subject-matter insured and the risk insured
against;

(3) the voyage, or period of time, or both, as the
case may be, covered by the insurance;

(4) the sum or sums insured;
(5) the name or names of the insurer or insurers,

21. (1) A marine policy must be signed by or on behalf Signature of
the insurer.) insurer,

(2) Where a policy is subscribed by or on behalf of two Foglia Ker,
or more insurers, each subscription, unless the contrary be
expressed, constitutes a distinct contract with the assured.

22. (1) Where the contract is to insure the subject- Voyage and
matter “at and from”, or from one Place to another or time policy.

(2) Atime Policy which is made for any time exceeding
twelve months is invalid?

७ ENO Diovive relating to “seal” of w comOWIGS प 7777 77त__-- Proviso relating to “ seal” of 8 corporation appears to be neces;
hy 6) which will suffice
"The lish Act contains the words “ Subject to the Provisions
section Severe the Finance Act, 1901”, The 7907 Act deals with oat
Bastion Sane हि re is Provis 1 1 itatute
stamp }. Hence 3% no point in mentioni Indian Stamp
Act in the clause, He the 8


‘Designation
of subject-
raster.

8. 26,
Se ‘Act.

Valued
icy.

Unyalued
policy.

SH 8. 28,
h Act.

20

23. (1) The subject-matter insured must be designated
in a marine policy with reasonable certainty.

(2) The nature and extent of the interest of the assured
in the subject-matter insured need not be specified in the
policy.

(3) Where the policy designates the subject-matter in-
sured in general terms, it shall be construed to apply to the
interest intended by the assured to be covered,

(4) In the application of this section regard shall be had
to any usage regulating the designation of the subject-
matter insured.

24. (1) A policy may be either valued or unvalued.

(2) A valued policy isa policy which specifies the
agreed value of the subject-matter insured.

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and in the
absence of fraud, the value fixed by the policy is, as between
the insurer and the assured, conclusive of the insurable
value of the subject intended to be insured, whether the
loss be total or partial.

(4) Unless the policy otherwise provides, the value fixed
by the policy is not conclusive for the purpose of determin-
ing whether there has been a constructive total logs.

25, An unvalued policy is a poliey which does not specify
the value of the subject-matter insured, but, subject to the
limit of the sum insured, leaves the insurable value to be
subsequently ascertained, in the manner hereinbefore ex-
plained.

26. (1) A floating policy is a policy which describes the
imsurance in general terms, and leaves the name or names of
the ship or ships and other particulars to be defined by
subsequent declaration.

(2) The subsequent declaration or declarations may be
made by endorsement on the policy, or in other customary
manner,

(3) Unless the policy otherwise provides, the declara-
tions must be made in the order of despatch or shipment.
They must, in the case of goods, comprise all consignments
within the terms of the policy, and the value of the goods or
other property must be honestly stated; but an omission or
erroneous declaration may be rectified even after loss or
arrival, provided the omission or declaration was made in

th. हि

good fi


al

(4) Unless the policy otherwise provides, where a dec-
Jaration of value is not made until after notice of loss or
arrival, the policy must be treated as an unvalued policy as
regards the subject-matter of that declaration.

27. (1) A policy may be in the form in the Schedule. Form of and
of terms in,

: Policy.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and unless the gs. 8.

context of the policy otherwise requires, the terms and ex- si Ree
pressions mentioned in the Schedule shall be construed as

aving the scope and meaning assigned to them in the

Schedule.

28. (1) Where an insurance is effected at a premium to Premium to
be arranged, and no arrangement is made, a reasonable pre- be arranged.
2 8. 37५
mium is payable. 12480 eee.
(2) Where an insurance is effected on the terms that an
additional premium is to be arranged, in a given event, and
that event happens but no arrangement is made, then a
reasonable additional premium is payable.

29. (1) Where two or more policies are effected by or on Donble
behalf of the assured on the same adventure and interest or insurance.
any part thereof, and the sums insured exceed the indem- 85025
nity allowed by this Act, the assured is said to be over. Act.
insured by double-insurance. .

(2) Where the assured is over-insured by double-insur-
ance,— ~ .

(a) the assured, unless the Policy otherwise pro-
vides, may claim payment from the insurers in such
order as he may think fit, provided that he is not en-
titled to receive any sum in excess of the indemnity
allowed by this Act;

(b) where the policy under which the assured
claims is a valued policy, the assured must Bive credit,
as against the valuation, for any sum received by him
under any other policy, without regard to the actual
value of the subject-matter insured;

(c) where the policy under which the assured
claims is an unvalued licy, he must give credit, as
against the full insurab xe value, for any sum received
by him under any other policy;

{d) where the assured receives any sum in excess
of the indemnity allowed by this Act, he is deemed to
hold such sum. in trust for the insurers, according to
their right of contribution among themselves,


23

CHAPTER V
Tae Premium

_ 30. Unless otherwise agreed, the duty of the assured or
his agent to pay the premium, and the duty of the insurer
to issue the policy to the assured or his agent, are concurrent
conditions, and the insurer is not bound to issue the policy

+ until payment or tender of the premium.

31, (1) Unless otherwise agreed, where a marine policy
is effected on behalf of the assured by a broker, the broker
is directly responsible to the insurer for the premium, and
the insurer is directly responsible to the assured for the

. amount which may be payable in respect of losses, or in
respect of returnable premium.

(2} Unless otherwise है eed, the broker has, as: against
the assured, a lien upon the policy for the amount of the
premium and his charges in respect of effecting the policy;
and, where he has dealt with the person who employs him
as a principal, he has also a lien on the policy in respect of
any balance on any insurance account which may be due to
him from such person, unless he had, when the debi was in-
curred, reason to believe that such person was only an agent.

32. Where a marine policy effected on behalf of the
assured by a broker acknowledges the receipt of the pre-
mium, such acknowledgment is, in the absence of fraud,
conclusive as between the insurer and the assured, but not
as between the insurer and the broker.

CHAPTER VI
‘WARRANTIES

33, (1) A warranty, in sections 34 to 42, means a promis-
sory warranty, that is to say, a warranty by which the
assured undertakes that some particular thing shall or shall
not be done, or that some condition shall be fulfilled, or

Act. whereby he affirms or negatives the existence of a particular

s

state of affairs.
(2) A warranty may be express or implied.

34, (1) An express warranty may be in any form of
words from which the intention to warrant is to be inferred.

(2) An express warranty must be included in, or written
upon the policy, or must be contained in some document in-
corporated by reference into the policy.

(3) An express warranty does not exclude an implied
warranty, unless it be inconsistent therewith.


35. A warranty, as defined in section 33, is a condition Warranty
which must be exactly complied with, whether it be must be
material to the risk or not. If it be not so complied with, complied
then, subject to any express provision in the policy, the in- g.
surer is discharged from liability as from the date of the 2206 722
breach of warranty, but without prejudice to any liability
incurred by him before that date.

36. (1) Non-compliance with a warranty is excused When
when, by reason of a change of circumstances, the warranty bresch of
ceases to be applicable to the circumstnces of the contract, Qoned?
or when comp! Fence with the warranty is rendered unlawful 8. 34,
by any subsequent law. 83 "Act.

(2) Where a warranty is broken, the assured cannot
avail himself of the defence that the breach has been reme-
died, and the warranty complied with, before loss.

(3) A breach of warranty may be waived by the insurer.

37. (1) Where insurable property, whether ship or Warranty of
goods, is expressly warranted neutral, there is an implied neutrality.
condition that the property shall have a neutral character g. 8. 365
at the commencement of the risk. and that, so far as the English Act.
assured can control the matter, its neutral character shall
be preserved during the risk.

(2) Where a ship is expressly warranted “neutral”,
there is also an implied condition that, so far as the assured
can control the matter, she shall be properly documented,
that is to say, that she shall carry the necessary Papers to
establish her neutrality, and that she shall not falsify or
suppress, her papers, or use simulated papers, If any loss
occurs through breach of this condition, the insurer ray
avoid the contract.

38. There is no implied warranty as to the nationality of No implied
a ship, or that her nationality shall not be changed during nationally. of
nat

the risk, .
Of. 8. 375

Peels Act,

39, Where the subject-matter insured is warranted Warranty of
“well” or “in good safety” on a particular day, it is sufficient good safety.

if it be safe at any time during that day. Cf. s. 38,
i safe ai (| time ig that day. डिक,

40. (1) In a voyage policy there is an implied warranty Warranty of
that at the commencement of the voyage the ship shall be seavrorthiness
seaworthy for the purpose of the particular adventure in- Gt su, 5
sured. Englis Ket,

(2) Where the policy attaches while the ship is in port,
there is also an implied warranty that she shall, at the com-
mencement of the risk, be reasonably fit to encounter the
ordinary perils of the port.

(3) Where the policy relates to a voyage which is per-
formed in different stages, during which the ship requires


‘No implied

‘warranty
that goods
are sca-
worthy.
9 8. 4%
17% Ker.

‘Warranty
of legality.

कं ‘hea

Implied
condition

28 to com--
mencement
of risk.

Ch, 8. 42,
English Act,

Alteration.
of port of
departure.

Cf. 8. 43,
Englistt Act.

Sailing for
different

wrt Ket.

different kinds of or furtlier preparation or equipment,
there is an implied warranty that at the commencement of
each stage the ship is seaworthy in respect of such prepara-
tion.or equipment for the purposes of that stage.

(4) A ship is deemed to be seaworthy when she is
reasonably fit in all respects to encounter the ordinary perils
of the seas of the adventure insured.

(5) In a time policy there is no implied warranty that a
ship shall be seaworthy at any stage of the adventure, but
where, with the privity of the assured, the ship is sent to sea
in an unseaworthy state, the insurer is not liable for any
loss attributable to unseaworthiness.

41. (1) Ina policy on goods or other movable there is no
implied warranty that the goods or movables are seaworthy.

(2) In a voyage policy on goods or other movable there
is an implied warranty that at the commencement of the
voyage the ship is not only seaworthy as a ship, but also that
she is reasonably fit to carry the goods or other movable to
the destination contemplated by the policy.

42, There is an implied warranty that the adventure
insured is a lawful one, and that, so far as the assured can
control the matter, the adventure shall be carried out in a
lawful manner.

CHAPTER VII
THE Voyace

43. (1) Where the subject-matter is insured by a voyage
policy “at and from” or “from” a particular place, it is not
necessary that the ship should be at that place when the con-
tract is concluded, but there is an implied condition that the
adventure shall] be commenced within a reasonable time,
and that if the adventure be not so commenced the insurer
may avoid the contract.

(2) The implied condition may be negatived by showing
that the delay was caused by circumstances known to the
insurer before the contract was concluded, or by showing
that he waived the condition.

44, Where the place of departure is specified by the
policy, and the ship, instead of sailing from that place, sails
from any other place, the risk does not attach.

45. Where the destination is specified in the policy, and
the ship, instead of sailing for that destination, sails for any
other destination, the risk does not attach,


28

46.. (1). Where after the commencement of the risk, the Change of
destination of the ship is voluntarily changed from the desti- "०४०४६:
nation contemplated by the policy, there is said to be a gf ti tt kt
change of voyage. el *

(2) Unless the policy otherwise provides, where there is
a change of voyage, the insurer is discharged from liability
as from the time of change, that is to say, as from the time
when the determination to change it is manifested; and it is
immaterial that the ship may not in fact have left the course
of voyage contemplated by the policy when the loss occurs.

4%. (1) Where a ship, without lawful excusé, deviates Deviation.
from the voyage contemplated by the policy, the insurer Cf. 5. 46,
is discharged from liability as from the time of deviation, English
and it is immaterial that the ship may have regained her Act-
route before any loss occurs.

(2) There is a deviation from the voyage contemplated
by the policy—

(a) where the course of the voyage is specifically
designated by the policy, and the course is departed
from; or है

(b) where the course of the voyage is not specifi-
cally designated by the policy, but the usual and cus-
tomary course is departed from.

(3) The intention to deviate is immaterial; there must
be a deviation in fact to discharge the insurer from his
liability under the contract,

48. (7) Where several ports of discharge are specified Several
by the policy, the ship may proceed to all or any of them, ports of
but, in the absence of any usage or sufficient cause to the “scharge.
contrary, she must proceed to them, or such of them as she tid?
goes to, in the order designated by the policy. If she does Act
not, there is a deviation. .

(2) Where the policy is to “ports of discharge”, within
a given area, which are not named, the ship must, in the
absence of any usage or sufficient cause to the contrary,
proceed to them, or such of them as she goes to, in their
geographical order, If she does not, there is a deviation.

49. In the case of a voyage policy, the adventure insured Delay in
must be prosecuted throughout its course with reasonable voyage.
despatch, and if without lawful excuse it is not so prose- Cf. 5. 485
cuted, the ‘insurer is discharged from liability as from the Enslish Act.
time when the delay becomes unreasonable.

50. (7) Deviation or delay in prosecuting the voyage Excuses for
contemplated by the policy is excused— deviation or

lay.
(०) where authorised by any special term in the oy. 2 49;
policy; or . - English


(b) where caused by circumstances beyond the con-
trol of the master and his employer; or

_,,€) where reasonably necessary in order to comply
with an express or implied warranty; or

(d) where reasonably necessary for the safety of
the ship or subject-matter insured; or

(७) for the purpose of saving or attempting to save
life or property at sea; or

(f) where reasonably necessary for the purpose of
obtaining medical or surgical aid for any person on
board the ship; or

(g) where caused by the barratrous conduct of the
master or crew, if barratry be one of the perils insured
against. .

(2) When the cause excusing the deviation or delay
ceases to operate, the ship must resume her course, and
prosecute her voyage, with reasonable despatch.

Effect of 53. Where, by a peril insured against, the voyage is
tranship- interrupted at an intermediate port or place, under such
ment, etc. circumstances as, apart from any special stipulation in the
gf. 8. 59 contract of affreightment, to justify the master in landing
glish Act. and re-shipping the goods or other movables, or in tranship-
ping them and sending them on to their destination the
liability of the insurer continues, notwithstanding the land-

ing or transhipment.

CHAPTER VIII
ASSIGNMENT

‘Transfer of 52. (1) A policy of marine insurance may be transferred
policy of by assignment unless it contains terms expressly prohibiting

assignment, and may be assigned either before or after
surance.

Cf. 8. 5०0). loss.
8. |»

Bnblish ace

and 8. 130-A

‘Transfer of

Property Act. (2) A policy of marine insurance may be assigned by

endorsement thereon or in any other customary manner.

Assured 58. Where the assured has parted with or lost his interest
having no = in the subject-matter insured and has not, before or at the
interest time of so doing, expressly or impliedly agreed to assign
Seen, the policy, any subsequent assignment of the policy is in-
sign. है
¢3 कई ग्ू operative: .
lis ct
ands.130-A Provided that nothing in this section affecis the assign-

हनन है ment of a policy after loss,


27

$4. Whete a policy of marine insurance has been assign- ao
ed so as to pass the beneficial interest therein, the assignee under
of the policy is entitled to sue thereon in his own name; policy of
and the defendant is entitled to make any defence arising marine in-
out of the contract which he would have been: entitled to surance.
make if the suit had been brought in the name of the person gf कक
by or on behalf of whom the policy was effected. res and &

135-A(1).

i i r Transfer of
55. (1) Where the assured assigns or otherwise Parts prope ty Acts

with his interest in the subject-matter insured, he does no F

thereby transfer to the assignee his rights under the con- Assignment

tract of insurance, unless there be an express or impiied Ch 5. 15.8%

agreement with the assignee to that effect. English Act.
(2} The provisions of this section do not affect a trans-

mission of interest by operation of law.

56. Nothing in clause (e) of section 6 of the Transfer of Oyerriding

Property Act, 1882, shall affect the provisions of this section. eect of
Ch. 8. 130+
A’ ‘Transfer
CHAPTER IX of Property
4 of 1882.

Loss AND ABANDONMENT

57. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and unless Inctuded
the policy otherwise provides, the insurer is liable for any and sx-
loss proximately caused by a peril insured against, put, sub- cluded
ject .as aforesaid, he is not liable for any loss which is not cf. he 55.
proximately caused by a peril insured against. glish

(2) In particular — Act.

(a) the insured is not liable for any loss attributable
to the wilful misconduct of the assured, but, unless the
policy otherwise provides, he is liable for any loss proxi-
mately caused by a peril insured against, even though
the loss would not have happened but for the miscon-
duct or negligence of the master or crew;
(b) unless the policy otherwise provides, the in-
surer on ship or goods is not liable for any loss proxi-
mately caused by delay, although the delay be caused
by a peril insured against;
(९) unles the policy otherwise provides, the insurer
is not liable for ordinary wear and tear, ordinary leak-
age and ‘breakage, inherent vice: or nature of the sub-
ject-matter insured, or for any loss proximately caused
by rats or vermin, or for any injury to machinery not
proximately caused by maritime perils.
58. (1) A 1053 1789 be-either total or partial. Any 1095 partial and
gther. than a total loss, as hereinafter defined, is a partial total loss.

Gf. 8, 56.
English Act.

(2) A total loss-may be either an actual total loss, or 8
constructive total loss. -

296 M of Law—3.


28

(3) Unless a different intention appears from the terms
of the policy, an insurance against total loss includes &
constructive, as well as an actual, total 1055.

(4) Where the assured brings a suit for a total loss and
the evidence proves only a partial loss, he may, unless the
policy otherwise provides, recover for a partial loss.

(5) Where goods reach their destination in specie, but
by reason of obliteration cf marks or otherwise they are
incapable of identification. the loss, if any, is partial and
not total

Actual total 59. (1) Where the subject-matter insured is destroyed,

gt. or so damaged as to cease to be a thing of the kind insur-

‘alish Act. ed, or where the assured is irretrievably deprived thereof.
there is an actual total loss.

(2) In the case of an actual total loss. no notice of aban-
donment need be given.

o ४ 60. Where the ship concerned in the adventure is miss-
1 Xo, ing, and after the lapse of a reasonable time no news of
her has been received, an actual total loss may be presumed.

Constructive 61. (1) Subject to any express provision in the policy,

defined. there is a constructive total loss where the subject-matter

८. ४ insured is reasonably abandoned on account of its actual

BohieKee. total loss appearing to be unavoidable, or because it could
not be preserved from actual total loss without an expendi-
ture which would exceed its value when the expenditure
had been incurred.

(2) In particular, there is a constructive total loss—

(4) where the assured is deprived of the possession
of his ship or goods by a peril insured against, and— -

(a) it is unlikely that he can recover the ship
or goods, as the case may be, or

(9) the cost of recovering the ship or goods, as
the case may be, would exceed their value when
recovered, or

(ii) in the case of damage to a ship, where she is so
damaged by a peril insured against that the cost of re-
pairing the damage would exceed the value of the ship
when repaired.

In estimating the cost of repairs, no deduction is to
be made in respect of general average contributions to
those repairs payable by other interests, but account
is to be taken of the expense of future salvage opera-
tions and of any future general average contributions
to which the ship would be liable if repaired; or


(4) in the case of damage to goods, where the cost
of repairing the damage and forwarding the goods to
their destination would exceed their value on arrival.

62. (1) Where there is a constructive total loss, the assur- Bffect of
ed may either treat the loss as a partial loss, or abandon Sonatmuctive
the subject-matter insured to the insurer and treat the loss Of 3.6L,
as if it were an actual total loss, English Act.

(2) Where the assured has elected to treat the loss as if
it were an actual total loss, he shall not be required to treat
it as ० partial loss merely by reason of any act of the insurer
done after the exercise of such election or any event that
might happen subsequent to such exercise.

63. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, where Notice of
the assured elects to abandon the subject-matter insured sbandon-
to the insurer, he must give notice of abandonment. If he on
fails to do so, the loss can only be treated as a partial loss. English Act.

(2) Notice of abandonment may be given in writing, or
by word of mouth, or partly in writing and partly by word
of mouth, and may be given in any terms which indicate
the intention of the assured to abandon his insured interest
in the subject-matter insured unconditionally to the insurer.

(3) Notice of abandonment must be given with reason-
able diligence after the receipt of reliable information of
the loss, but where the information is of doubtful character
the assured is entitled to a reasonable time to make inquiry.

हि (4) Where notice of abandonment is properly given, the
rights of the assured are not prejudiced by the fact that the
insurer refuses to accept the abandonment.

(5) The acceptance of an abandonment may either be
express or implied from the conduct of the insurer. The
mere silence of the insurer after notice is not an acceptance.

(6) Where notice of abandonment is accepted, the aban-
donment is irrevocable. The acceptance of the notice con-
clusively admits liability for the loss and the sufficiency
of the notice.

हि (7) Notice of abandonment is unnecessary where, at the

time when the assured receives information of the loss, there
would be no possibility of benefit to the insurer if notice
were given to him.

___(8) Notice of abandonment may be waived hy the
insurer. है

(9) Where an insurer has re-insured his risk, no notice
of abandonment need be given by him.

64. (1) Where there is a valid abandonment, the i
is entitled to take over the interest of the assured in what. बा
ever may remain of the subject-matter insured, and all ment.
proprietary rights incidental thereto. Cone


“30

(2) Upen:the abandonment of a ship, the insurer there-
of is entitled to any:freight in ‘course of being earned, and
which is earned by: her subsequent to the casualty causing
the loss, less the expenses of earning it incurred after the
casualty; and, where the ship is carrying the owner's gcods.
the insurer is entitled to a reasonable remuneration for the
carriage of them subsequent to the casualty causing the
088.

CHAPTER X

PARTIAL LOSSES (INCLUDING SALVAGE AND GENERAL AVERAGE AND
PARTICULAR CHARGES)

Particular 65. (1) A particular average loss is a partial loss of the
renee subject-matter insured, caused by a peril insured against,
‘a 64s and which is not a general average loss.

lish Act.

(2) Expenses incurred by or on behalf of the assured for
the safety or preservation of the subject-matter insured,
other than general average and salvage charges, are called
particular charges. Particular charges are not included in
particular average.

Salvage 66. (1) Subject to any express provision in the policy,
aa salvage charges incurred in preventing a.loss by perils in-

sh Act. Sured against may be recovered as a loss by those perils.

(2) “Salyage charges” means the ‘charges recoverable
under maritime law by a salvor independently -of contract.
‘They: do not include the expenses of:services in the nature
of salvage rendered by the assured-or his agertts, or .any
person employed for hire by them, for the purpose of avert-
ing a peril insured against. Such expenses; where properly
incurred, may be recovered as particular charges or as 8
general average loss, according to the circumstances under
which they were incurred.

General 67. (1) A general average loss is a loss caused by or
aerage Joss. directly consequential on a general average act. It includes

jish Act. @ general average expenditure as well as a general average
हु sacrifice. -

(2) There is a general average act where any exira-
ordinary sacrifice or expenditure is voluntarily and reason-
ably made or incurred in time of peril for the purpose of
preserving - the property imperilled in the common
adventure.

(3) Where there is a general average loss, the party on
whom it-falls is entitled, subject to the conditions imposed
by maritime law, to a rateable contribution from the. other
parties interested, and such contribution is called a general
average contribution, -


31

(4) Subject to any express provision in the 70169, where
the assured has incurred a general: average expenditure, he
may recover from the insurer in respect of the proportion
of the loss which falls upon him; and, in the’case of a gene-
tal average sacrifice, he may recover from the insurer in
respect of the whole loss without having enforced his right
of contribution from the other parties liable to contribute.

(5) Subject to any express provision in.the policy, where
the assured has paid, or is liable to pay, a general average
contribution in respect of the interest insured, he may
recover therefor from the insurer.

(6) In the absence of express stipulation, the insurer is
not liable for any general average loss or contribution where
the loss was not incurred for the purpose of avoiding, or in
connection with the avoidance of, a peril insured against.

(7) Where ship, freight and cargo, or any two of those
interests, are owned by the same assured, the liability of
the insurer in respect of general average losses or contri-
butions is to be determined as if those interests were owned
by different persons.

CHAPTER XI
MEASURE OF INDEMNITY

68. (1) The sum which the assured can recover in res- Extent of
pect of a loss on a policy by which he is insured, in the Hability of
case of an unvalued policy to the full extent of: the insur- for 1008.
able value, or, in the case of a valued policy to the full Cf. & 6%
extent of the value fixed by the policy, is called the measure English Act.
of indemnity.

(2) Where there is a loss recoverable under the policy,
the insurer, or each insurer if there be more than one, is
liable for such proportion of the measure of indemnity as
the amount of his subscription bears to the value fixed by
the policy in the case of a valued policy, or to the insurable
walue in the case of an unvalued policy.

49..Subject to the provisions of this Act and to any Total loss.
express provision in the policy, where there is a total loss cy. ६, 68,
of the subject-matter insured,— पु English Act.

1 (1) if the policy be a valued policy, the measure of
indemnity is the sum fixed by the policy;
(2) if the policy be an unvalued policy, the measure

of indemnity is the insurable value of the subject-
matter insured.

7, Where a ship is damaged, but is not totally lost, the Partial loss
measure of indemnity, subject to any express provision in of ship.
the policy, is as follows:— . 5. 695
inglish Act,

(1) Where the ship has been repaired, the assured
is entitled to the reasonable cost of the repairs, less the


32

customary deductions, but not exceeding the sum in-
sured, in respect of any one casualty.

(2) Where the ship has been only partially repair-
ed, the assured is entitled to the reasonable cost of suc!
repairs, computed as above, and also to be indemnified
for the reasonable depreciation, if any, arising from
the unrepaired damage, provided. that the aggregate

amount shall not exceed the cost of repairing the whole
damage computed as above.

(3) Where the ship has not been repaired, and has
not been sold in her damaged state during the risk,
the assured is entitled to be indemnified for the reason-
able depreciation arising from the unrepaired damage,
put not exceeding the reasonable cost of repairing such
damage, computed as above.

(4) Where the ship has not been repaired, and has
been sold in her damaged state during the risk, the
assured is entitled to be indemnified for the reasonable
cost of repairing the damage, computed as above, but

not exceeding the depreciation in value as ascertained
by the sale.

71. Subject to any express provision in the policy, where

Partial 1085

of freight. there is a partial loss of freight, the measure. of indemnity is

Gi qo, such proportion of fhe sum fixed by. the policy in the case

lish Act. of a valued policy, or of the insurable value in the case of

an. upvalued policy, as the proportion of freight lost by the
assured bears to the whole freight at the risk of the assur-
ed under the policy.

Partial loss. 72. Where there is a partial loss of goods, merchandise

of goods, or other movables, the measure of indemnity, subject to any

merchandise, express provision in the policy, is as follows: —

Pesan 8. Ret.

measure of indemnity is such proportion of the sum fix-
ed by the policy as the insurable value of the part lost
bears to the jnsurable value of the whole, ascertained
as in the case of an unvalued policy:

(2) Where part of the goods, merchandise or other
movables insured by an unvalued poli cy is totally lost,
the measure of indemnity 48 the insurable value of the
part lost, ascertained as in the case of total loss:

(3) Where the whole or any part of the goods or
merchandise insured has been delivered damaged at its
destination, the measure of indemnity is such propor-
tion of the sum fixed by the policy in the case of a
valued policy, or of the insurable value in the case of
an unvalued policy, as the difference between the gross


we

33

sound and damaged values at the place of arrival bears
to the gross sound value;

(4) “Gross value” means the wholesale price or, if
there be no such price, the estimated value, with, in
either case, freight, landing charges and duty paid
beforehand; provided that, in the case of goods or
merchandise customarily sold in bond, the bonded
price is deemed to be the gross value. “Gross proceeds”
means the actual price obtained at a sale where all
charges on sale are paid by the sellers,

73. (1) Where different species of property are insured Apportion-
under a single valuation, the valuation must be apportioned ment of
over the different species in proportion to their respective valuation,
insurable values, as in the case of an unvalued policy. The g tis Ket
insured value of any part of a species is such proportion of ~"® .
the total insured value of the same as the insurable value of
the part bears to the insurable value of the whole, ascer-
tained in both cases as provided by this Act.

(2) Where a valuation has to be apportioned, and parti-
culars of the prime cost of each separate species, quality or
description of goods cannot be ascertained, the division of
the valuation may be made over the net arrived sound
values of the different species, qualities or description nf
goods.

74. (1) Subject to any express provision in the policy, General
where the assured has paid, or is liable for, any general एटा
average contribution, the measure of indemnity is the full and salvaga
amount of such contribution, if the subject-matter liable tn charges.
contribution is insured for its full contributory value; but, if Cf s. 73,
such subject-matter be not insured for its full contributory English Act.
value, or if only part of it be insured, the indemnity payable
by the insurer must be reduced in proportion to the under-
insurance, and where there has been a particular average
loss which constitutes a deduction from the contributory
value, and for which the insurer is liable, that amount must
be deducted from the insured value in order to ascertain
what the insurer is liable to contribute.

{2) Where the insurer is liable for salvage charges, the
extent of his liability must be determined on the like
principle.

15. Where the assured has effected an insurance in 1 iabilities to
express terms against any liability to a third party, the third parties.
measure of indemnity, subject to any express provision in Cf. s, 74,
the policy, is the amount paid or payable by him to such English Act.
third party in respect of such liability.

76. (1) Where there has been a loss in respect of any General pro-
subject-matter not expressly provided for in the foregoing visions as to
provisions of this Act, the measure of indemnity shall be ingen of
ascertained, as nearly as may be, in accordance with those ‘mnt.
provisions, in so far as applicable to the particular case. Fidel ret


34
(2) Nothing in the provisions of this Act relating to the
measure of indemnity shall affect the rules relating to
double insurance, or prohibit the insurer from disproving in-
terst wholly or in part, or from showing that at the time of
the loss the whole or any part of the subject-matter insured
was not at risk under the policy.

Particular 71. (1) Where the subject-matter insured is warranted
average free from particular average, the assured cannot recover for
warranties. 5 Joss of part, other than a loss incurred by a general aver-
907५ age sacrifice, unless the contract contained in the policy be
t. apportionable; but, if the contract be apportionable, the
assured may recover for a total loss of any apportionable

part.

(2) Where the subject-matter insured is watranted free
from particular average, either wholly or under 8 certain.
percentage, the insurer is nevertheless liable for salvage
charges, and for particular charges and other expenses pro-
perly incurred pursuant to the provisions of the suing and
labouring clause in order to avert a loss insured against.

(3) Unless the policy otherwise provides, where the sub-
ject-matter insured is warranted free from particular aver-
age under a specified percentage, a general average loss can-
not be added to a particular average loss to make up the
specified percentage. eee

(4) For the purpose of ascertaining whether the specified
percentage has been reached, regard shall be had only to the
actual loss suffered by the subject-matter insured. Particular
charges and the expenses of and incidental to ascertaining
and proving the loss must be excluded.

‘Successive 78. (1) Unless the policy otherwise... provides, and
losses. subject to the provisions of 1 this Act, the insurer is liable
eae a. Th for successive losses, even though the tofal amount of such

. losses may exceed the sum insured. 2,

(2) Where, under the same policy,.a partial loss, which
hag not been repaired or otherwise made good, is followed
by a total loss, the assured can only recover in respect, of the

total loss:

Provided that nothing in this section ghal] affect’ the
liability of the insyrer under the suing and labouring clause.
Suing and 79. (1) Where the policy contains a suing and labour-
iabouring ing clause, the engagement thereby entered tet 0 18 deemed:
clause. to be supplementary to the contract of insurance, and the
28५75... assured may recover from the insurer any expenses properly
incurred pursuant to the clause, notwithstanding that the
insurer may have paid for a total loss or that the subject-
matter may have been warranted free from‘particular aver-

waht age, either wholly or under a certain percentage. ~


35

(2) General average losses and contributions and saly-
age charges, as defined by this Act, are not recoverable
under the suing and labouring clause.

(3) Expenses incurred for the purpose of averting or
diminishing any loss not covered by the policy are not re-
scoverable under the suing and labouring clause.

(4) It is the duty of the assured and his agents, in all
cases, to take such measures as may be reasonable for the
purpose of averting or minimising a loss.

CHAPTER XII
RicHTs or INSURER ON PAYMENT

80. (1) Where the insurer pays for a total loss, either of Right of
the whole, or, in the case of goods, of any apportionable *brogetion.
part, of the subject-matter insured, he thereup on becomes C/- igi
entitled to take over the interest of the assui in whatever and 8. 135-A
may remain of the subject-matter so paid for, and he is Transfer of
thereby subrogated to all the rights and remedies of the Property Act.
assured in and in respect of that subject-matter as from the
time of the casualty causing the loss.

(2) Subject to the foregoing provisions, where the in-
surer pays for a partial loss, he acquires no title to the
subject-matter insured. or such part of it as may remain,
but he is thereupon subrogated to all rights and remedies
of the assured in and in respect of the subject-matter in-
sured as from the time of the casualty causing the loss, in so
tar as the assured has been indemnified, according to this
Act, by such payment of the loss.

{3) Nothing in cleuse (९) of section 6 of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882, shall affect the provisions of this section. 4 of 1882.

81. (1) Where the assured is over-insured by double- Right of
insurance, each insurer is bound, as between himself and contribution.
the other insurers, to contribute rateably to the loss in pro- oe 8. 80,
portion to the amount for which he is liable under his con- जिओ Act.
tract.

(2) Hf any insurer pays more than his proportion of the
loss, he is entitled to maintain a suit for contribution against
the other insurers, and is entitled to the like remedies as a
surety who has paid more than his proportion of the debt.

82. Where the assured is insured for an amount less than pgect of
the insurable value, or, in the case of a valued policy, for an under-in-
amount Jess than the policy. valuation, he is deemed to be surance.
his own insurer in respect of the uninsured balance. £ i har

lish Act


36
CHAPTER XIII
Rerurn oF PREMIUM.

Bnforcement 83. Where the Pr emium, or a proportionate part thereof,
of return. is, 09 this Act, lated to be returnable,
9, fi हक (a) if already paid, it may be recovered by the as-
sured from the insurer; and

(b) if unpaid, it may be retained by the assured or
his agent.

Return by 84, Where the policy contains a stipulation for the return

agreement. of the premium, or a proportionate part thereof, on the

Cf. 5. 83, happening of a certain event, and that event happens, the

English Act. premium, or, as the case may be, the proportionate part
thereof, is thereupon returnable to the assured.

Return for 85. (1) Where the consideration for the payment of the
failure of | premium totally fails, and there has been no fraud or illega-
fontidera- lity on the part of the assured or his agents, the premium is
thereupon returnable to the assured.

Petia’ 8. 84,

Stel Act. (2) Where the consideration for the payment of the pre-
mium is apportionable and there is a total failure of any
apportionable part of the consideration, a proportionate part
of the premium is, under the like conditions, thereupon re-
turnable to the assured.

(3) In particular,—

(a) where the policy is void, or is avoided by the
insurer as from the commencement of the risk, the pre-
mium is returnable provided that there has been no
fraud or illegality on the part of the assured; but if the
risk is not apportionable, and has once attached, the
premium is not returnable;

(b) where the subject-matter insured, or part
thereof, has never been imperilled, the premium, or as
the case may be, a proportionate part thereof, is return-
able;

Provided that, where the subject-matter has been
insured “lost or not lost” and has arrived in safety at
the time when the contract is concluded, the premium is
not returnable unless, at such time, the insurer knew of
the safe arrival;

(c) where the assured has no insurable interest
throughout the currency of the risk, the premium is re-
turnable, provided that this rule does not apply to &
policy effected by way of ...... wagering;

(6) where the assured has a defeasible interest.
which is terminated during the currency of the risk, the
premium is not returnable;


37

(e) where the assured has over-insured under an
unvalued policy, a proportionate part of the premium is
returnable;

(f) subject to the foregoing provisions, where the
assured has over-insured by double insurance, a propor-
tionate part of the several premiums is returnable:

Provided that, if the policies are effected at different
times, and any earlier policy has at any time borne the
entire risk, or if a claim has been paid on the policy in
respect of the full sum insured thereby, no premium is
returnable in respect of that policy, and when the
double insurance is effected knowingly by the assured
no premium is returnable.

CHAPTER XIV
Murua Insurance

86. (1) Where two or more persons mutually agree to Modification
insure each other against marine losses, there is said to be of Act in
a mutual insurance. fase of in

(2) The provisions of this Act relating to the premium ‘vzance.
do not apply to mutual insurance; but a guarantee, or such . s. 85,
other arrangement as may be agreed upon, may be substi- English Act.
tuted for the premium.

(3) The provisions of this Act, in so far as they may be
modified by the agreement of the parties, may in the case of
mutual insurance be modified by the terms of the policies
issued by the association, or by the rules and regulations of
the association.

(4) Subject to the exceptions mentioned in this section,
the provisions of this Act apply to a mutual insurance.

CHAPTER XV
MISCELLANEOUS

87. Where a contract of marine insurance is in good faith Ratification
effected by one person on behalf of another, the person on by assured.
whose bel it is effected may ratify the contract en Cf. 8. 26
after he is aware of a loss. ४ y oven Enetish Act

88. (1) Where any right, duty or lisbility would arise Implied.
under a contract of marine insurance by implication of law, obligations
it may be negatived or varied by express agrecment, or by ued by.
usage, if the usage be such as to bind both Parties to the or usage.
contract. Cf. 8. 87,

English Act.

{2) The provisions of this section extend to any right,
duty or liability declared by this Act which may ४४ Jawfally
modified by agreement.


Reasonable
time, etc.,
a question
of fact.
Gf. 8. 88,
English Act

Slip as
evidence.

Savings.

Lloyd's S.G.

88.

89. Where by this Act any reference is made to reason-
able time, reasonable premium or reasonable diligence, the
question what is reasonable is a question of fact.

90. Where there is a duly stamped policy, reference may
be made, as heretofore, to the slip or covering note in any
legal proceeding.

91. The rules of.......law, including the law merchant,
which applied to contracts of marine insurance immediately
before the commencement of this Act, save in 90 far as they
are inconsistent with the express provisions of this Act,
shall continue to apply to contracts of marine insurance.

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 27)
Form or Pouicy

BE IT KNOWN THAT .....- as well in .... own name as for
and in the name and names of all and every other person or
persons to whom the same doth, may, or shall appertain, in
part or in all doth make assurance and cause ........+5 and
them, and every of them, to be insured, lost or not lost, at
and from ..........++ Upon any kind of goods and mer-
chandiges, and also upon the body, tackle, apparel, ordnance,
munition, artillery, boat, and other furniture, of and in the
good ship -or vessel called the .. whereof is
master,! for this present voyage, ...... OF whosoever else
shall go for master in the said ship, or by whatsoever other
name or names the said ship, or the master thereof, is or
shall be named or called; beginning the adventure upon the
said goods and merchandises from the loading thereof
aboard the said ship, ..........-- .. upon the said ship,
BO eee eee and so shall continue and endure, during her
abode there, upon the said ship, &c. And further, until the
said ship, with all her ordnance, tackle, apparel, &c., and
goods: and merchandises whatsoever, shall be arrived at
debe e cess aeneee upon the said ship, &c., until she hath
moored at anchor twent y four hours in good safety; and
upon the goods and merchandises, until the same be _ there
discharged and safely landed. And it shall be lawful for the
said ship, &c., in this voyage, to proceed and sail to and
touch and stay at any ports or places whatsoever. ee
without’ prejudice to this insurance. The said ship
and merchandises, &c., for so much as concerns the assured
by agreenient between the assured and assurers in this
policy, are and shall be valued at ...........-...+ Touching
the adventures and perils which we the assurers are con-
tented to bear and do take upon us in this voyage: they are
of the seas, men of war, fire, enemeis, pirates, rovers, thieves,

‘The words “under God” have been omitted as unnecessary.


39

jéttisons, letters of mart and ¢ountermart, surprisals, tak-
ings at sea, arrests, restraints, and detainments of all kings,
princess, and people, of what nation, condition, or quality
soever, barratry of the master and mariners, and of all other
perils, losses, and misfortunes, that have or shall come to the
hurt, detriment or damage of the said goods and merchan-
dises, and ship &c., or any part thereof.

And in case of any loss or misfortune it shall be lawful Sue and
to the assured, their factors, servants and assigns, to sue, labour
labour, and travel for, in and about the defence, safeguards, (16:
and recovery of the said goods and merchandises, and ship,
Ete., or any part thereof, without prejudice to this insurance;
to the charges whereof we, the assurers, will contribute
each one according to the rate and quantity of his sum
herein assured.

And it is especially declared and agreed that no acts of Waiver
the insurer or insured in recovering, saving, or preserving clause.
the property insured shall. be considered as a waiver, or
acceptance of abandonment.

a * * *

‘And so we, the assurers, are contented, and do hereby
promise and bind ourselves, each one for his own part, our
heirs, executors, and goods to the assured, their executors,
administrators, and assigns, for the true performance of the
premises, confessing ourselves paid the consideration due
unto us for this assurance by the assured, at and after the
rate of ......

In witness whereof we, the assurers, have subscribed
our names and sums assured in ..........--

N.B.—Corn, fish, salt, fruit, flour, and seed are warranted Memoran
free from average, unless general, or the ship be stranded—
sugar, tobacco, hemp, flax, hides and skins are warranted
free from average, under five per cent., and all other goods,
also the ship and freight, are warranted free from average,
under three per cent. unless general, or the ship be
stranded.

RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF POLICY

The following are the rules referred to by this Act for
: the construction of a policy in the above or other like form,
where the context does not otherwise require: — पर

1. Where the subject-matter is insured “Lost or not lost”, Lost or not
and the loss has occurred -before the contract is concluded, lost,
the risk attaches unless, at such time, the assured was aware
of the loss, and the insurer was not.

.. 2. Where the subject-matter is insured “from” a parti- From.
cular place, the risk does not attach until the ship starts on
the voyage insured. :


At and from
Ship.

Freight,

From the
ah

Safely
landed.

Touch and
stay.

Perils of the
teas,

Pirates.

Restraints
of princes.

40

3. (०) Where a ship is insured “at and from” a particular
place, and she is‘at that place in good safety when the con-
tract is concluded, the risk attaches immediately.

(b) If she be not at that place when the contract is con-
cluded, the risk attaches as soon as she arrives there in good
safety, and, unless the policy otherwise provides, it is im-
material that she is cavered by another policy for a specified
time after arrival.

(c) Where chartered freight is insured “at and from” a
particular place, and the ship is at that place in good safety
when the contract is concluded, the risk attaches imme-
diately. If she be not there when the contract is concluded,
the risk attaches as soon as she arrives there in good safety.

(d) Where freight, other than chartered freight, is pay-
able without special conditions and is insured “at and from”
a particular place, the risk attaches pro rata as the goods or
merchandise are shipped:

Provided that if there be cargo in readiness which be-
longs to the shipowner, or which some other person has
contracted with him to ship, the risk attaches as soon as the
ship is ready to receive such cargo.

4. Where goods or other movables are insured “from the
loading the: "the risk does not attach until such goods or
movables are-actually on board, and the insurer is not liable
for them while in transit from the shore to the ship.

5. Where the risk on goods or other movables continues
until they are “safely landed”, they must be landed in the
customary manner and within a reasonable time after
arrival at the port of discharge, and if they are not so landed
the risk ceases.

k 6. In the absence of any further license or usage, the
iberty to touch and stay “at any port or place whatsoever”
does not authorise the ship to depart from the course of her
voyage from the port of departure to the port of destination.

7. The term “perils of the seas” refers only to fortuitous
accidents or casualties of the seas. It does not include the
ordinary action of the winds and waves.

8. The term “pirates” includes passengers who mutiny
and rioters who attack the ship from the shore.

9. The term “thieves” does not cover clandestine theft or
theft committed by any one of the ship’s company, whether
crew or passengers. -

10. The term “arrests, &c., of kings, princes and ple”
refers to political or executive acts, and does not inc! ade a
loss caused by riot ot by ordinary judicial process.


at

11. The term “barratry” includes every wrongful act wil Barratry.
fully committed by the master or crew to the prejudice of
the owner, or, as the case may be, the charterer.

12. The term “all other perils” includes only perils All other
similar in kind to the perils specifically mentioned in the Perils.

policy.

13. The term “average unless general” means a =partial Average
loss of the subject-matter insured other than a general aver- unless
age loss, and does not include “particular charges”. general.

14, Where the ship has stranded, the insurer is liable for Stranded.
the excepted losses, although the loss is not attributable to
the stranding, provided that when the stranding takes place
the risk has attached and, if the policy be on goods, that the
damaged goods are on board.

15. The term “ship” includes the hull, materials and out- ship.
fit, stores and provisions for the officers and crew, and, in the
case of vessels engaged in a special trade, the ordinary fit-
tings requisite for the trade, and also, in the case of a steam-
ship, the machinery, boilers, and coals and engine stores, if
owned by the assured, and also, in the case of a ship driven
by power other than steam, the machinery and fuels ond
engine stores, if owned by the assured.

16. The term “freight” includes the profit derivable by a Freight,
shipowner from the employment of his ship to carry his own
goods or movables, as well as freight payable by a third
party, but does not include passage money.

17. The term “goods” means goods in the nature of mer- Goods.
chandise, and does not include personal effects or provisions
and stores for use on board. हु

In the absence of any usage to the contrary, deck eargo
and living animals must be insured specifically, and not
under the general denomination of goods.

Explanation of abbreviations used in Notes on Clauses :

Chalmers. . . Chalmers, Marine Insurance,
1956 edition
Dover . . . Dover, Handbook to Marine

or Insurance, Fifth edition (1957)
Dover, Handbook.

Keate . . oe Keate, Guide to Marine Insurance
Twelfth Edition (1958).


APPENDIX It
Noves oN CLAUSES
Existing law in India

Some provisions relevant to the law of marine insurance
are at present contained in—

(a) section 2(20), s.7,1 and s.66 of the Indian Stamp:
Act, 1899 and Article 47, sub-divisions A and E, of the
Schedule to the Act;

(b) the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938), which
mainly deals with the working of insurance concerns.
and not with contracts of insurance;

(c) the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958),.
sections 345-352 and sections 402-404;

(व) section 130, Exception and s.130-A and s.135-A,
Transfer of Property Act, 1882;

(९) The Commercial Documents Evidence Act, 1939
(30 of 1939), entry 9 in the Schedule, Part 1.

Existing law in Englend

The existing law in England is contained in—
@ the Marine Insurance Act, 1906 (6 Edw, VIII,
ch. 41);

(४) The Marine Insurance (Gembling Policies) Act,
1909 (9 Edw, VII, ch. 12);

(iii) The Law Reform (Contributory Negligence)
Act, 1945 (8 & 9 Geo. VI, ch. 28);

(iv) The Stamp Act, 1891 (54 & 55 Vict. ch. 39), sec-
tions 92, 93, 94, 95 and 97;

(७) The Finance Act, 1901 (1 Edw. VIL, ch. 7), sec-
tion 11; .

(vi) The Revenue Act, 1903 (3 Edw. VII, ch. 46),
section 8;
(vii) The Finance Act, 1912, section 8;

(viii) The Finance Act, 1920 (10 and 11, Geo. 5,
ch. 18)—section 41, for scales of stamp duties.

1 Construed ‘n Tricombji Damb; ij & Co. vs.Vitfi Kanji, (1922) AIR.
1923.Bom. 142 (question being-whether the document was 8 “ policy ? or
a more letter of cover to issue a policy and Surajmal. va. . Triton Inrance Co.
3925) LLR. 52 Cal. 408 — ALR. 1925 P.C. 83, 84 (The provisions ०
section 7 are mandatory).

42


Clause 1—Legistative competence

The subject-matter of the Bill falls in the Union list (see
entries 25 and 47), No extent clause is considered nec essary, 4
as the nature of the subject-matter is such that it has to do
more with international transactions and extra-territorial
events than with internal ones, Compare the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958.

Clause 2.— "Contract of marine insurance”

This is a formal definition, inserted to make the definition Departure
Clause exhaustive. Eom, ri ct

Clause 2—freight”

Needs no comments, except that the word “other” has Departure
been inserted before “movables” though not found in sec- 1251 te
tion 90, English Act, Compare section 3 (2) (a) of the Eng- *
lish Act, है

Clause 2.—insurable Property”

This has been put in the defination clause, for compre-
hensiveness,

Clause 2.—“marine adventure” ang “marine perils”
Pe

These have been put in the definition clause, to make the
clause exhaustive

(i) The importance of the concept of marine ad- Marine
venture lies in the fact that under section 5(1) of the adventure,
English Act, only a Person who is interested in the

. Who has no interest in the ship may still be able to in-
sure the venture under which the ship is engaged. For
example, a person may be interested financially in lay-
ing an Atlantic cable through a ship, though he has no

such.

damaged, but the adventure ig frustrated by the opera-
tion of the insured perils, This is usually disc it
the text-books under the doctrine of “frustration”,

(iti) The adventure must be lawful. As to the
warranty of legality, see section 41 of the English Act,

_ _ (iv) Section 506 of the (English) Merchant Ship-
ing Act, 1894, Provides that an insurance effected against
the happening, without the Owner’s actual fault or pri-

of those ship-owner’s liabilities in respect of which
a statutory limit of liability is effective, that is to say,
roughly, liability for collisions ete, shall not, by reason


44

of the nature of the risk insured, be invalid, This sec-
tion has been referred to in s.7 of the Indian Stamp Act
also.-#-4,

&) As to “perils of the sea”, see the “Inchmaree
case”.*

Lord Herschell in the Inchmaree Case® attempted
to put forth a number of definitions of the expression
‘perils of the sea”. He thought that the following defi-
nition given by Lord Ellenbrough was right:—

“All cases of marine damage of the like kind
with those specially enumerated, and occasioned by
similar causes”.

The following definition given by Lopes LJ. in
Pandorf v. Hamilton,’ was considered “very good”:—

“In a sea-worthy ship damage to goods by the
action of the sea during transit, not attributable to
the fault of any body, is a damage from a peril of
the sea.”

Lord Herschell himself thought that the following
definition might suffice: —

“All perils, losses and misfortunes of a marine
character or of a character incident to a ship as
8 पु

The case, of course, arose before the Act. The facts
were, that a steamer was insured by a policy in the
ordinary form on the ship and her machinery including
the donkey engine. For the purposes of navigation, the
donkey engine was being used for Pumping water into
the boilers, when, owing to a valve being closed which
ought to have been kept open, water was forced into and
split the air-chamber of the donkey pump. The closing
of the valve was either accidental or due to the negli-
gence of an engineer, and was not due to ordinary wear
and tear. It was held by the House of Lerds, reversing
the decision of the Court of Appeal, that the injury was

3Construed in A Reference (1903) 1.L.R. 30 Cal. 565.
3868 also 5. 352, Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
38८८ note at the end entitled “ Suggestion regarding s. 7 (1) of the Indian

Stamp Act” for a detailed discussion.

The Thames and Mersey Marine Insurance Co. v. Hawtilton, Fraser

and Co., (1887) A.C. 484, particularly Lord Halsbury at p. 490, 491.

‘Thames amd Mersey Marine Insurance Co., प्र, Hamilton, Fraser and Co-

(1887) A.C. 484, 492, 493-

16 Q.B.D. 629, 633.


45

not covered by the policy, because such a loss did not
fall under “perils of the seas”, nor under the general
words “all other perils, losses and misfortunes that have
or shall come to the detriment or damage” (of the sub-
ject-matter of the insurance). A long line of cases was
cited by the House of Lords (Lord Halsbury, Lord
Bramwell, Lord Herschell and Lord Macnaghten) to
show that the general words had to be limited to the
perils etc. similar in nature to those specifically
enumerated.

It was as a result of this decision that the “Inch- Inchmaree
maree Clause” came to be inserted in marine policies for Clause, or
adding certain perils which are not, strictly speaking, Perils Clause.
marine perils. The clause! specially covers loss or dam-
age caused by—

(i) accident in loading, discharging or shifting
cargo or fuel;
(ii) explosions on ship on board or elsewhere;
(४8४) bursting of boilers, breakage of shafts or
latent defect in the machinery or hull;
(iv) contact with aircraft (This was »dded in
D5
(v) negligence of masters, officers, crew or

pilots:

Provided such loss or damage has not resulted from
want of due diligence by the assured, owners or
managers.

Masters, officers, crew or pilots are not to be con-
sidered as part owners within the meaning of this
clause, even if they hold shares in the vessel.

In a recent case? the Madras High Court held, that Meaning ०
where goods are shipped on a particular ship and ere tun misfor-
not delivered at the destination, the insurance company ली +
is liable under the expression “misfortune” used in the Indian Case.
policy even if the cause of the loss is not known. In
that case four drums of English sodium sulphite and
five drums of sodium hydro-sulphite were shipped
from Bombay to Madras. When the ship arrived at
Madras and the clearing agents of the plaintiff (pur-
chasers) went to clear the goods, the goods had not been
landed. The shipping company was informed and
made search to find out if the goods had been ever-
carried to Colombo or Calcutta; but nothing tangible re-
sulted from the search. The plaintiffs claimed for the
value of the goods (about Rs. 2,000) against the shipping
company as well as against the insurers. The defence

*The clause will be found reproduced in Dover, Handbook, page 247
and page 182.

*Home Insurance Company Limited y. Ram Noth, (1955) ALR. 1:
Mad, 602 (Basher Ahmed Sayeed, J.). 1958) 955



46

of the shipping company, namely, that they were
exempted from a certain clause excluding liability, was
nagatived. The defence of the insurers, that the goods
were excluded by the “Free from Particular average”
clause was negatived, because the clause was not rele-
vant to a case of total loss. The further defence of the
insurers, that. they were not liable unless the peril, etc
was of the particular type referred to in the insurance
policy, was negatived in these words: “The term ‘mis-
fortunes’ after having mentioned all the other perils of
the sea, is found in the relevant clause in the insurance
policy. It is difficult to say how the loss of the total
goods on board the ship when once it is proved that
they were put on board could be excluded from the
scope and meaning of the word ‘misfortune’. I do not
think the rule of ejusdem generis will apply in the
present case when almost all the kinds of the perils of
the sea have been exhaustively given in the list and
when in addition to that the word ‘misfortune’ is also
included .............. Merchants insure the goods with
the company to cover any risk in their being safely
landed in the port of destination, and if the goods are
not so landed, when once they were put on board and
if the loss of the goods has arisen, then certainly it is a
loss and a misfortune which is covered by the terms
of the policy”.

In the absence of a statutory provision, the Court
had interpreted the word “misfortune” according to its
ordinary meaning on general principles. But under
English Law the general words come to bear a restrict-
ed connotation—see Rule 12 of the Rules of Construc-
tion in the Schedule to the English Act.1_ The position
under this Bill would be the same as in England.

Clause 2.—“Moveables”
Needs no comments.
Clause 2.—“policy”
Needs no comments.
Clause 2.—“ship”

Departure A definition of “ship’ as including sailing मे vessels has
from the been added in order to cover ships propelled. by oars?

“ship. Clause 2.—“suit”

Departure This follows section 90 of the English Act. The defini-
from Eng- tion of “action” has been replaced by the definition of “suit”;
lish Act— the English Act uses the word “action” in the substan-

we of word tive sections—section 50(2), section 56(4) and section 80. In

गत a discussion on tule 12, sec Dover, page 246.
‘For reasons see the body of the Report. para. 5.


41

India, however, the word “suit” is used and has, therefore,
been defined here. हे

Clause 3

‘This defines a “contract of marine insurance”. The fol-
lowing points may be noted: —

1. This definition stresses three elements, viz,
(४) indemnity, (ii) marine losses, and (iti) insurance “in
the manner and to the extent agreed”.

The rule that insurance 15 a contract of indemnity Indemnity.
can be said to be an unbroken thread which runs
through the Marine Insurance Act from the beginning
to the end. This rule has its Positive as well as nega-
tive aspects. By its positive aspect, what is meant is
that the assured must be enabled to recover the full
loss (within the limits of the Policy). Section 77(1) of
the English Act, under which successive losses can be
recovered, is an illustration of the Positive aspect; be-
cause, under that section, the insurer is liable for suc-
cessive losses even though the total amount of such
losses may exceed the sum insured. Section 84 of the
English Act, enabling the assured to return of the
premium, also provides illustration of the indemnity
aspect; see section 84(3)(b), (c), (d), ete.

The negative aspect of the indemnity is amply
illustrated by section 33 (over-insurance), section 61
(effect of constructive total loss), section 67 (measure of
indemnity), and section 77 (2) (merger of partial loss in
2 subsequent total loss); and section 79 (subrogation)
and section 80 (contribution between co-insurers) em-
phasise the indemnity element beyond any doubt.

2, An elaborate definition of “marine aviation and
transit insurance’ has been given in the (English)
Assurance Companies Act, 19461 It need not be
considered, since. it does not define marine insurance
as a concept, but merely enumerates the various
properties which can be insured. The definition of
marine insurance business” in section 2(13A), (Indian)
Insurance Act, 1988 (4 of 1938) also merely enumerates
the various interests which can be insured.

3. The definition in the (English) Stamp Act,? 1891,
section 92 and the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, section 2(20)
may be compared. The definition of “policy of sea-
insurance” in section 2(20) of the Indian Stamp Act is
wide enough to cover any insurance made upon any
ship or vessel, whether for marine or inland navigation.
The definition adopted in the clause under discussion

49 and 10 Geo, 6 ch. 28, हु
354 and 55 Viet. ०. 39,



Departure
English Act.

Craft Clause
(for crafts,
Ughters,
etc.).

48

(which follows section 1 of the English Act) stresses
the concept of “marine losses” and “marine adventures”;
put, as expressly provided elsewhere, & contract of
matine insurance may by express terms or usage be
extended so as to protect the assured against losses on
inland waters or on any land risk which may be inci-
dental to any sea voyage. Since the primary concept
of marine insurance is concerned with the sea and not
with inland waters, it has been considered desirable not
to refer expressly to inland navigation in the definition.
There is nothing to prevent an insurer from utilizing the
marine insurance policy for inland navigation. In fact,
the form is capable of being used with suitable modifi-
cations for insurance in respect of other modes of
transport. A statute on marine insurance, however,
taust primarily confine itself to marine adventures

4. The word “assured” has been used in the defini-
tion, instead of “insured”. The expressions do not
appear to have different meanings.

5. “Premium” has not been mentioned in the defini-
tion, because of section 85 of the English Act relating
to mutual insurance, whereby a guarantee etc. may be
substituted for premium.

In the opening portion the word “agreement” has
been used instead of “contract” appearing in the Eng-
lish Act. The Indian Contract Act makes a distinction
between the two. It is only an agreement which is
enforceable by law which is a contract. In consonance
with that distinction, “agreement” is preferable

Clause 4
This deals with “mixed sea and land” risks.

The words “by its express terms” enable the contract
to extend to non-marine risks also, what is called,—‘ware-
house to warehouse” coverage, that is to say, the goods are
covered as soon as they leave the warehouse even though
the journey from warehouse to the sea is ori land. ~~

In cargo policies, a craft clause is inserted to bring in
craft risk at the port of shipment. (Customary craft risk
at the port of discharge would, it has been stated? be
covered by the printed form). The Institute form of the
clause is as follows:—

“Including transit by craft, raft, and/or lighter.to and
from the vessels Each craft, raft and/or lighter to be deem-
ed a separate insurance. The assured are not to be pre-
judiced by any agreement exempting lighter-man from
liability”. -

3866 clause 4.

"Dover, Handbook, page 224:



49

The last sentence of the clause is explained? in this
manner. Lighter-men are common carriers. They are,
however, not covered by the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act.
Hence they often insert a clause relieving themselves from
the bulk of the common law liabilities. These clauses
reduce the effect of the principle of subrogation? and
consequently prejudice the rights of the insurers. Marine
underwriters, however, accept the Position as it is, and
undertake not to plead against the insurer that they have
surrendered certain rights which would otherwise have
accrued to the insurers,

Sub-Section (2) covers construction, building, and Anomaly in
jJaunching risks. ‘There is one anomaly, namely, that while Stamp Act.
such insurances are treated as analogous to marine insur-
ances, the policies themselves are stamped with the duty
ap plicable to non-marine insurances. In England, builders’
tisks policies are under the Revenue Act, 1903 (3 Edw. VII,

Ch, 46), section 8, to. be stamped 88 if for a “voyage” and
not deemed to be policies for time, even if made for more
than a year. Other policies on adventures “analogous to
marine adventures” would presumably be liable to stamp
only as non-marine policies.’ In India there is no express
provision, but entry 47 of the First Schedule to the Indian

tamp Act, sub-division A relating to “sea insurance”,
would not in terms apply and a fixed duty under sub-divi-
sion B would be leviable, because such policies would not
be “sea-insurance policies’ as defined in s. 2(20) of the
Indian Stamp Act.

The position is anomalous. It is desirable that at least
4 provision requiring all policies governed by sub-section
(2) to be stamped as voyage policies, be inserted in the
Todian Stamp Act,

Clause 5
Needs no comments.t

Clause 6
(Section .5 of the English Act),

(i) The importance of the concept of insurable interest
lies in this, that under section 4(2)(a) of the English Act,
if the assured has no insurable interest, the contract is
deemed to be a Wagering contract. .

(ii) ‘The amplification in sub-section (2) is said to be
based on the observations of Lawrence J.5 to the effect that

*Cf. Dover, page 298.

“Cf. Dover, page 324.

*See section 79, English Act Clause 80,

‘As to “ marine adventure ?? and “' marine perils *, sce notes to clause 2.
‘Lucena v. Crawfard, (1906) 3 Hos & P.N.R. 269, 302.


eparture
Act,

a

General.

Buyer's

50

“Interest does not necessarily imply a right to the whole or
part of the thing, nor necessarily or exc pat ia that which
may be the subject of privation . To be interested
in the preservation of a thing, so circumstanced
with respect to it as to have benefit from its existence, pre-
judice from its destruction”.

(iti) Shareholders of a shipping company cannot be said
to have an interest, because what section 5(2) requires is,
not merely that a person may benefit by the safe arrival of
the property, but also that he must stand in legal or equit-
able relation to the adventure, etc.’

Mortgagees, charterers and bailees of ships stand in such
relationship. Similarly, trustees and - beneficiaries in
England.

(iv) What is required is an interest in the adventure and
not in the ship. A person interested financially in the lay-
ing of cables in the Atlantic has no interest in the ship, but
has an interest in the adventure,

(०) An agent to whom goods are despatched for sale on
commission can also insure, because loss of the goods would
mean loss ef the commission to him.? Similarly, a person
who is at a risk in the freight has an interest in the freight.

(vi) As to the time when the interest must exist, see
section 6 of the English Act. As to contingent interests,
ete., Ace section 7 and as to partial interest, see section 8 of
the Act.

The English Act contains the words “or equitable”.
These have been omitted, because it would not be accurate
to speak in India of “equitable” relations. An Explanation
has, however, been added to deal specifically with the case
of a beneficiary's interest in trust-property.

Clause 7(1)

This provides that “defeasible” or a “contingent” inter-
est is insurable.

It also gives a good example of a defeasible interest.
While a buyer of goods to whom the goods are shipped
acquires the property as soon as the goods are shipped on
board,* he has still a right to reject goods if they are
not of merchantable quality. His interest is, therefore,
“defeasible”, because it is liable to be defeated during the
currency of the agreement by the option of rejection.

3Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, ard edition, page 275.

*Thames and Mersey Marine Insurance Co. v. Gunford Shipping Co.
(7977) A.C. 529.

१566 section 23 of the Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930 and section 18 (5:
of the (Haglish) Sele of Goods Act, 1893. ° )


51

Nevertheless, his “defeasible’ interest is insurable. The
significance of section 7 of the English Act lies in making
at clear.

Another example is a buyer’s interest which is liable to
be defeated by stoppage in trimsit. See sections 44—46 of
the (English) Sale of Goods Act, 1893 and sections 50—82 of
the Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930.

Where the buyer has a defeasible interest, the seller has Selier’s
a corresponding contingent interest, because, unless the interest.
buyer exercises the option to reject the goods, that is to say,
unless that “contingency” occurs, the seller's interest does
not arise.

It has been stated! that what is called “duty contingency” “ Duty
or “freight contingency” are also relevant to the subject contingency”
of section 7. Such insurances are necessary where, during « por
the course of transit. either the freight or the duty becomes contine
payable so that the value of the subject-matter is likely to gency”,
be enhanced by the amount of such freight or duty. In
such cases, in the event of a total loss the risk is excluded,
80 that if there should be no arrival of ships the duty or
freight payable at destination would not be collected,

Clause 7(2)

A partial interest can be insured. It has been held?
that even an undivided interest in a Parcel of goods is in-
surable. so that the exact extent of the interest need not be
determinable. It has also been held® that a shareholder in
a cable company can effect insurance on an adventure for
laying cable from Ireland to New Foundland. But this deci-
sion has been criticised.4

This deals with re-insurance. General.

At one time, re-insurance was illegal as a wager policy.®

Re-insurance, it is said, need not be described as such on
the face of the policy.

There are two kinds of re-insurance :— Kinds of
(a) where the re-insurer accepts liability to pay

only the amount which is lawfully payable by the ori-
ginal insurer to the assured, and

‘Dover, page 308 and page 185,
‘Inglis v. Stock, (1885) 100 App. Cas. 263, 274.
*Wilson v. Jones, (1867) L.R. 2 Ex. 139.

‘Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, 3 edition, page 277, and Arnould, Marine
Insurance, para. 249.

‘Marine Insurance Act, 1745 (19 Geo. 2 Ch. 37, section 4) referred to in
Shipping Law by Lord Chorley, 3rd edition, page'29s, »


52

(9) where the re-insurer binds himself expressly to
accept any terms between the parties to the original
insurance.

“To Ordinarily, the contract “to pay as may be paid there-
aa may ¢ on”, though apparently not falling under the first category,
paid.’ has been held to be so falling.

. Clause 7(4)

“Bottomry” This relates to insurance by a person who lends money
or on what is called “bottomry” or “respondentia”. Bottomry
is an advance of money, in time of dire necessity, to a mas-
ter of a vessel for the purpose of the adventure and arrang-

- ed after all other means of obtaining funds have failed. The
money is advanced on the security of the ship or of the
ship with the freight or cargo added. Bottomry bonds are
taxable.’ Respondentia is a similar advance, but is secur-
ed on cargo only. Such a loan is repayable even though
the ship is lost, provided the cargo is saved. Such bonds
are also taxable.'

respon-
dentia”,

Bottomry bonds rank in priority in reverse, that is, the
later ones rank before the earlier ones. “Loan? presum-
ably includes interest on the loan, also, under this section.

Query. One query which arises is whether after the execution
of the bond, the owner of the subject-matter loses his in-
surable interest to the extent of the loan. In other words,
whether, after such bond, the owner’s interest is limited
to the difference between the amount of the advance and
the value of the subject-matter. In modern times, because
of the development of communications the occasions for
the bottomry bonds are rare. Hence, the provision need
not be elaborated.

Clause 7(5)

This deals with insurance of wages. Prior to the Act,
sailors were not allowed to insure their wages, for reasons
of public policy. In fact, at one time, they were not entitled
to wages unless the freight was actually earned. This was
intended to secure that they would fully exert their efforts
in time of peril*

Clause 7(6)

This deals with advance freights.

As to the meaning of the word “freight”, see the rules
of construction in the First Schedule to the English Act,
rule 16. Out of the various forms of freight, only advance

- 1466 the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, First Schedule, Entry No. 16.
"See the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, First Schedule, Entry No. 56.
*See Dover, page 371.

45९6 Dover, pages 231-233.



53

freight has been mentioned in this section. Normally,
freight does not become payable until the completion uf the
voyage, and it is until then at the ship-owner’s risk, But
where the advance freight is stipulated for and the
understanding is that the freight will not be refunded if the
voyage fails, the shipper of the goods is the Proper person
to insure. Presumably, it is for this reason that only
advance freight has been dealt with specifically in this
section. The other kinds of freight would be taken care
of by the ship-owner himself and not by the owner of the
cargo. .

Clause 7(7)
The reason for allowing the assured to insure the insur- Insurance of
ance charges themselves is as follows: — Insurance

charges.

Pyemiums of insurance in marine insurance are
high. The ship-owner, while calculating his freight,
usually includes insurance premium as an element in
costing. He expects that his vessel will be utilised
throughout the year, and assumes that the profits of the
ship for the year will cover the cost of insurance. In
other words, he takes it that the ship will earn freight
enough to cover the corresponding proportion of the
annual premium. If this expectation is not realised, he
stands to suffer, and it is that risk which is allowed to
be insured under the section.

By the “disbursement warranty”', the ship-owner Disburse-
is permitted to insure upto the total amount of the wot
actual annual premiums. But the amount is reduced W#"ranty—

monthly by a proportionate amount of the whole. As Uimninishing.
to return of premium, see section 83 of the Act. Retum of
premium,

Where the policy is for a period of twelve months, « Full pre-

the sum insured on account of premium usually repre- mium if
sents the full twelve months’ amount, Where, however, lost”.
the policy is for a shorter period, the insurance of the
ship is often arranged on “full premium if lost” terms.?
Here, if there is a total loss by an insured peril or
otherwise, the balance of the twelve months’ premium
is payable to the insurers. In these circumstances, the
total loss increases the premium liability of the ship-
‘owner, and he has an insurable interest in the full
twelve months’ premium, subject to pro rata diminish-
ing as above.

Non-return of premium—that is, in cases where a“ On arti-
return of premium is negatived by “on arrival” provi- val”.
sions,—is also insurable.* The return clause provides

“Wee Dover, pages 152, x34 198 Keo paws gg Dover, pages 152, 154, 158 Keate, page 102.
"Dover, page 313.
*Gf. Section 83 of the English Act, clause 84.



General,

Mortgagors
Query.

4

for a pro rata. monthly return of each commenced
month if the policy is cancelled by agreement. The re-
turn, is, however, “on arrival’, in the:sense that the
refund of premium is not claimable unless the period
covered by the policy runs off without total loss. In
such cases, the premium is not returnable—~and that
risk of non-return itself can be insured.

Clause 8
This deals with the quantum of interest, in certain cases,

Sub-section (1) which allows insurance both by the
mortgagors and by the mortgagee, it has been said, is
theoretically open to objection. The interests of the two
are distinct and, therefore, contribution on the basis of
double insurance (section 32 of the English Act) may not
apply. Both can recover simultaneously. Further, the
mortgagee (if the vessel is lost) can still realise his debt as
an unsecured debt.

That is, however, only in theory, because in practice it
is the mortgagor who effects insurance both on his own
account and on behalf of the mortgagee, and then charges
the policy in favour of the mortgagee.

Subrogation, Where both the interests are insured by separate olicies,

by arama”
party.

General.

subrogation would apply (section 79 of the English Act).
Presumably, the mortgagor also would have the benefit of
subrogation. As regards sub-section (3), an illustration of
a case where it could apply would be where the ship-owner
has accepted a certain liability. in respect of the cargo, but
the owner of the cargo can nevertheless effect insurance
against the very loss for which he can hold the ship-owner
liable. [Of course, in such cases, ihe pr rinciple of subroga-
tion (section 79 of the English Act) will apply]. What the
section stresses is, that the fact that the owner of the cargo
has a right of action against a third party (shipowner)
does not prevent the cargo-owner from. insuring the cargo.

Clause 9

(i) This section makes wagering agreements void for
the purposes of civil law. Compare section 30 of the
Indian Contract Act. See also the recommendation made
in the report on the Contract Act! to extend section 30 to
collateral agreements. In England, the Marine Insurance
(Gambling Policies) Act, 1909 imposes criminal liabilities
in certain cases, with the result that even collateral transac-
tions would be avoided and the broker effecting such policies
cannot claim commission.

413th Report of the Law Commission (Contract Act), page 28, paragraph


55

For an example of a wager, see the case of Gedge v.
Royal Exchange Assurance.

(ii) The result of this section is that what is called the “ Policy
“policy of interest” clause or “full interest admitted” clause proof of
cannot create any rights.* .

(मा) For a definition of “insurable interest” see section
5 of the English Act.

(iv) The provisions of the Marine insurance (Gamb- English Act
ling Policies) Act, 1909 of England, relating to insurable of 1909-
interest are worded slightly differently. Section 1(1) (a)
speaks of “bona fide interest direct or indirect, either in the
safe arrival of the ship........ or in the safety or preserva-
tion of the subject-matter insured or a bona fide expectation
of acquiring such. interest.”

(v) Section 1(1) (9) of the 1909 Act provides that an “No in-
employee of the ship owner effecting a contract of marine terest”
insurance in the terms “interest or no interest” or “without Policies.
further proof of interest than the policy itself” or “without
benefit of the salvage to the insurers” or similar terms is
deemed to have entered into a gambling contract and is
punishable. Similarly, section 1(5) of the 1909 Act raises a
rebuttable presumption that contracts in such terms enter-
ed into by non-employees are deemed to be gambling con-
tracts unless the contrary is proved.

(It appears that so far no prosecution has been instituted
under th: is Act.)

‘The word “gaming” has been omitted, as the practice in Departure
i from. the
India is to speak of wagering agreements only. English Act.
[Section 4, Proviso, English Act].

The proviso says that if there is no possibility of salvage, Without
a policy may be effected without benefit of salvage. An benefit of
example of such a contract would be an insurance on in. “58°
creased value of cargo. Where cargo is the subject of
increase in value (because of rise in market values during
the transit), the original policy no longer affords sufficient
eaver, and it becomes necessary to take out an increased
value policy. Under such a policy, the insured amount will
increase if the prices rise, that is to say, as soon as the
further insurance to cover the increase in value is taken by
the owner of the goods, the owner of the goods can recover
under the increased value policy the same percentage of
loss as he may recover under the original insurance. The
policy would be without benefit of salvage to the “increased

2092९ 2 0.8. 214 (Arrival of ship at Yokohama was the subject-matter
of the insurance, but assured had no interest in such arrival and hence could
mot recover).

“See discussion below, under s. 4, proviso, English Act.


56

value” underwriter; the increased value underwriters
would not be allowed to participate in the salvage, and the
original insurers, on payment of the amount undertaken by
them, would be entitled to the whole salvage. See the
undermentioned case’, where general average contribu-
tions recovered by the original insurer were held to be
exclusively theirs. The topic is linked up with that of sub-
rogation (see section 79 of the English Act). If there is a
possibility of salvage, such policies would be wagering
policies and void at law though honoured in practice.

Increase 1 These have been already discussed It has been the

wae practice for the insurer and the assured to bargain on the

Pa ie basis that the assured shall not be required to produce proof

Policy prot Of his interest in the subject-matter beyond production of

of interest the policy. These are called P.P.I. (policy proof of interest).

or FLA. Similar are FIA. policies (“Full interest in the assured”)
Underwriters are bound on such policies only in honour;
in the eye of the law, they are wagers. It has been pointed
out®, that in section 4(2) (b) of the English Act, the word
“deemed” raises a conclusive presumption. “Deemed” does
not mean that the contract is prima facie deemed to be a
gambling and wagering contract, or that the inference may
be rebutted by showing that the insurer had, or expected
to acquire, an insurable interest.

Clause 10

Interest at, (४) The eect of section 6{2) is that an expectancy is
the time of insurable. The reason for this relaxation can be found in
less. the exigencies of business. Modern business practice, it is.
stated, necessitates the taking out of insurance long before
the goods become the property of the assured, and hence
section 6(1) is complied with if the assured has an interest
at the time of the loss. This concession saves the time
which would otherwise lapse between the acquisition of
interest and the taking out of the policy, For example,
“tag interest carriers of goods may take out policies “as interest may
mayeppear’. appear”. At the time of the insurance they may be carry-
ing no goods, but the moment the goods are loaded, the
policy comes into play. Similarly, a purchaser of a cargo
of wheat may, under the agreement to sell, undertake the
risk when the wheat is loaded on board. Now, the loading
may take some days. As soon as such parcel of wheat is
loaded, the risk passes to him, but not before. The law,
however, enables him to insure the whole cargo so that he
need not take insurance every time when a parcel is loaded.

"Boag v. Standard Marine Insurance Co. Ltd., (1936) 2 K.B. 121, 127
affirmed in (1937) 2 K.B, 113 = (1937) 1 AER. 774 GA.

3562 above “without benefit of salvage”,

Ly *Cheshire and Ca. y, Vaughan Brothers, (1920) 3 K.B, 240, 254, Scrutton


57

(४) It must, however, be noted that he cannot acquire Interest
an interest after a loss has occurred.t after loss,

(iii) The proviso to section 6(1) makes a eR ecial provi- Lost or
sion whereby interest can be acquired even after the loss, 7ण lost.
provided that the assured had, at the time of effecting the
insurance, no knowledge of the loss. See also rule 1 of the
First Schedule to the English Act, as to “lost or. not lost”.

(iv) One result of the rule that there must be interest
at the time of loss is, that if the ship-owner insures a ship
for a certain period and selés the ship before that period
expires, he cannot recover.

Clause 11
Needs no comments.

Clause 12

Needs no comments. The subject of re-insurance has
been dealt with separately?

Clause 13

This deals with the measure of insurable value. As to General.
valuations, see also sections 27—29 of the English Act.

The words “subject to any express provision or valua-
tion” imply that the rules given in section may be applied
(generally) only in respect of unvalued policies.

Policies of marine insurance are usually “valued”, Valued
because after the destruction of ship proof of value will be policies.
difficult and expensive. Usually, therefore, an agreed
figure is inserted in the contract and the policy is called a
“valued policy”3

In the case of goods or freight, it is not so difficult to Unvalued
prove the value, and both valued and unvalued policies are policies.
common.

In a sense, a “valued policy” is not strictly one of in-

. demnity, because the value of the ship is fixed artificially
and the figures put by the parties may sometimes be above

the market value. Gross over-valuation may be evidence of

bad faith,t but otherwise the valuation is conclusive

between the insurer and the assured, and enables the tctal

less to be speedily settled and partial loss to be easily

adjusted. (The valuation is, of course, conclusive, even

‘Except as provided by section 6 (1), proviso, English Act,=Clause 10
(x) proviso, :

3566 notes to clause 7(3).

"See also notes on section 27 (2) of the English Act,—clause 24(2),

‘Thames and Mersey Marine Insurance Co., v. Gunford Shipping Co.,
(191) A.C. 529.


“Open”

Floati
policies

Departure
from the

English Act.

Duty of
assured,

‘Time of
disclosure.

‘What should
be dis-

between the parties, for the purpose of the insurance only
and not for any other Purpose). Moreover, under section
27(4) of the English Act, the valuation can be re-opened
in the case of a constructive total loss,

Unvalued policies were previously called “open” policies,
because the assured had the opportunity of proving the
value. The expression “unvalued”, policy is, however, the
correct expression (see section 28 of the English Act), and
the expression “open policy” should really be used for what
are called “floating policies.” Large shippers of small
parcels of goods do not find it donvenient to take out a policy
on each shipment, but insure all their shipments during a
certain period. The policy is for a round sum and every
shipment reduces the insurer’s liability. These are called
“floating policies’.

The English Act provides that insurable value in the
case of a steamship includes also the machinery etc. if
owned by the assured. The case of a ship driven by power
other than steam is not covered, Since ships are some-
times propelled by other power also, it is desirable to cover
their gases, and the necessary change has accordingly been
made.?* पु

Clause 14

This provides that a contract of marine insurance is one
of utmost good faith. In fact, all insurance contracts are
contracts of utmost good faith. Bad faith does not render
the contract void, but only voidable. A person about to
make out a policy must therefore—

(४) make no active misrepresentation, and

(ii) disclose every material circumstance as defined in
s. 18(2) of the English Act.

Clause 15

The disclosure must be made before the contract is
made, under s. 18(1); as to the time when the contract is
deemed to be effected, see 5. 21 of the English Act,

+ 9. 18(1) imposes a duty to disclose not only facts actually
known, but also facts which, the section says, किक it to be
known” by the assured. S. 18(3) gives a list eireum-
stances which need. not be disclosed, Thus, if petrol is a
usual cargo from America to France, that fact need not be
disclosed

|. पु also section 29 of the English Act) cleme 26 ana section 29 of the English Act, clause 26, and notes thereto,

‘Cf. The First Schedule, rule 15 of the English Act, and the change
propos therein. ° °

*For 8 detailed discussion see the body of the Report, para. 6.

"Mann, etc. & Co, v. General Marine Underwriters Ltd., (1922) 2 K.B,



Clause 15

It may be mentioned here that the fact that another
insurer had refused to insure the cargo or ship previously
is not a material fact in marine insurance.t Further,
Opinions need not be disclosed. Thus, the original insurer
coming to the conclusion that he has insured a bad risk and
getting it re-insured at a higher premium is not guilty of

aith.’

It has been suggested’ that in s. 18(2), to make it more Suggestion
complete, the words “or in fixing the line which he will to. add
accept” should be added, because it is a well-established reference
principle of underwriting to accept a smaller line on Specu- “line *
lative business than on risks the past experience with which Rejected.
has been relatively favourable. It appears, however, un-
necessary to make any such change. The section is compre-
hensive for all practical purposes.

Lastly, as regards 3, 18(3) (d), relating to circumstances Warranties,
covered by a warranty, it may be noted that if a warranty
is broken, the insurance is nevertheless valid upto the time
of the breach of the warranty, while in case of departure
from good faith it is not so.

Clause 16

This deals with disclosures by an agent effecting insur-
ance. The importance of this clause lies in the fact that
most of the contracts of marine insurance are placed
through brokers. The broker is the agent of the assured and
not of the insurer. If the broker himself is guilty of non-
disclosure or misrepresentation. and the assured is innocent,
the contract is still voidable. (Of course, in such cases, the
assured can sue the broker for negligence).

Clause 17

This deals with representations made pending negotia- Generat,
tion of the contract.

As regards sub-section (2), the comments on another Suggestion.
section‘ of the English Act may also be seen for adding the
words “the line he will accept”.

Representations as to future may cause some difficulty. Representa-
For example, a representation that a ship is to sail on a tions at to
particular date is representation on a matter of fact, and fuure.
if the ship is lost on some other date the insurer may avoid

1Glasgorws Assurance Corporation v. Symondon (i911), 16 Commercia
Cases, 109, 119 = 104 L.T. 254 = 27 T.L.R. 245, quoted in Shipping
Law by Lord Chorley, 3rd edition, page 288.

*Glasgow Assurance Corporation's Case, already cited.
*Dover, page 322.
‘See notes to section 18 of the English Act—clause ts,
296 M of L—5


Slip.

Unenforce-
contracts,

Open slip.

Fleet slips.

Open cover.

the contract. But a representation in the form that “it is
intended that the ship will sail ‘on a certain date’ would not
affect the contract if it is a mere matter of expectation”.

Clause 18

This deals with the time when the contract is deemed
to be concluded.

Virtually, this section defines the meaning of “accept-
ance”, The contract is concluded when the ‘s! ip is signed,
whether the policy be then issued or not.

A slip (according to the English practice) is a piece of
paper on which the broker writes down the name of the
ship, the proposed voyage, the sum assured, etc. The slip
is taken to the underwriting room of Lloyd’s. There he
ap proaches the underwriters and tries to “place” portions
of the sum with them. ‘The first underwriter may under-
write for say, one thousand pounds and the next for ten
thousand pounds and so on. Each underwriter initials the
slip, and writes down the amount to which he will be
liable. Until, however, the policy is issued, the slip hinds
the underwriter only in honour, because of section 95 of
the English Stamp Act, 1891 and section 22 of the (English)
Marine Insurance Act.

Until the policy is issued, the contract is, presumably,
“unenforceable”.

Sometimes a merchant has knowledge in general of
shipments but does not know the precise details. In such
cases, the risk is submitted to the insurer by ‘open slip’.
It is made out to cover the amount adequate 40 mect the
circumstances, and expressed by the words “steamer......
and/or the steamer approved or held covered”, When the
details become known, these will be incorporated in the
“closing instructions”?

“Fleet” slips are those by which the whole of the vessels
of one fleet are covered by means of one slip.

In modern times, instead of insuring individual ship-
ments as isolated transactions, “open covers” are used.
These may be in respect of a limited period or a perma-
nent “open” cover,—‘open” until terminated by cancella-
tion. The open cover would effect insurance on “convey-
ances and parcel post and air and steamer” or in other
suitable terms.

Anderson v, Thornton, (1853) 8 Exch. 425=20 L.T.O.S. 250, cited in
Dover, page 328.

“For “closing instructions”, see below.


61

Tho they serve similar purpose as “floating
policies"* open covers are not the same as floating policies,
jecause—
(i) the open cover is merely an honourable under-
taking to issue policies within its terms and has no
greater significance than that of a slip;?

“A floating policy is an enforceable contract of
marine insurance; an open cover is not”;

(ii) the amount for which cover is made is generally
the maximum amount contemplated by any one sailing,
and that amount is always open during the currency
of the cover irrespective’ of how many “declarations”
are made;

(६४) premiums are paid as policies are issued and
not in one lump sum.

When the broker has completed the risk, he forwards Cover note.

te his client (the assured) a cover note giving the details
of the insurance. Most brokers use printed 10708 with
spaces in which the details are inserted. The cover note
can, therefore, be described as a communication by the
brok er to the assured informing the latter that in accord-
ance with his instructions “cover” against the specified risk
has been effected with a specified insurer, and also inti-
mating that the policy is in preparation and would be
forwarded in due course. .

Where the original instructions of the assured to his Closing
broker were provisional, the broker by his cover note instructioas.
requests the assured to forward closing instructions as
soon 4s possible.

A “closing” slip or “forward” slip is prepared by the Closing slip
broker, who enters therein at length the definite particulars ण Forward
of the insurance and attaching thereto any special clauses S4?-
to be inserted in the policy. It is from this slip that the
marine insurance company prepares the po! Hicy. The
system is not much in vogue now.

Clause 19

This embodies the general principle that a contract of General.
marine insurance must be embodied in a marine policy.

It may be noted that section 93 of the Stamp Act, 1891 Stamp Act.
(English) and section 7 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, are
also relevant on the subject. Both of them provide that

3858 to “floating policies”, see s, 29, English Act—~clause 26.

tKeate, page 18.
"Dover, Analysis of Marine Insurance Clauses 1960 Edn. page 163.


62

@ contract of sea insurance (with a minor exception): shall
not be “valid” unless the same is “expressed” in a policy
of sea insurance. While section 22 of the Marine Insurance
Act speaks of the contract being “inadmissible in evidence”,
the Stamp Act speaks of its not being valid. Thus the
trovisions of the Stamp Act are more stringent.

Suggestion it may also be added here that there are certain provi-

regarding sions in the English Stamp Law, namely, section 11 of the

stamp. Finance Act, 1901, (regar ding policies with a continuation
clause). section 8 of the Revenue Act, 1903 (for builders’
etc. risks) and section 8 of the Finance Act, 1912 (for
mcrease in premium). which are relevant and important
on the subject to stamp in marine insurance. The neces-
sity of making similar provisions in the Indian Stamp Lew
may have to be considered.?

Departure from the English Act

Departure. The significance of the words “subject to” in the English
Act Sap. Act is that the provisions regarding stamping are also to
ject to” the be complied. with It appears, however, unnecessary to
provisions of make this clarification. The result would be the same even

any statutg without those words. Hence they have not been used.

we Ta शा These words refer to detailed provisions in sections 23,

this Act” 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29 in the English Act.

“* May be Execution of policy simultaneously with the conclusion

executed”. of the contract is not frequent, because usually the ecntract
is concluded by the “slip” (see section 21 of the English
Act) while the policy takes some time. The word “may”
is permissive only.

Gentict See, on this subject, discussion in the usual textbooks.4

policy and

slip. Clause 20

This requires that the marine policy must specifv
certain particulars. The name of the ship or the iosscs
covered (precise specifications) are not, required to be
entered.

Stamp Act. It may be noted that section 93(3) of .he (English)
Stamp Act, 1891 and section 7(3} of the Indian Stamp
Act, 1899, provide that no sea policy shall be valid uniess
it specified the particular risk or venture or the time for

1As to the exception, see note at the end entitled, “ Suggestion regarding
section 7 of the Indian Stamp Act” etc,

3866 also notes on section 25, English Act—clause 22. The provisions
are discussed in Dover, Handbook, pp. 133135, and Keate, pp. 99~-ror.

20f. Chalmers, p. 34, footnote -5.

‘See, for example, Dover, Handbook, p. 332.


63

which it is made. the names of the subscribers or under-
‘writers and the amount or amounts insured. Thus, the
provisions of the Stamp Law and the section under dis-
cussion overlap. Section 7(3) of the Indian Stamp Act
should therefore be deleted, after this Bill is passed.

Clause 21

This lays down who should sign a marine policy. Exe- General.
cution by the assured is not necessary.

Sub-section (2) is intended to deal with the cases
where more than one company subscribe to policies on
the same form. In England, the policies of Lloyd and
those issued by the Institute of London Underwriters’
Policy Signing Office (on “Companies Combined Form”)
would be covered by this sub-section. The liability would
ordinarily, under the sub-section, be several and not joint,

It appears, however, that in England for stamp purposes
the whole policy is treated as one contract.t

Clause 22

This deals with the topic of “voyage” and “time” General.
policies. Time policies cover the subject-matter of the
insurance for a period of time. Voyage policies insure the
subject-matter from one place to another or others.

The section requires that a definite period of time Time
should be mentioned. policies.

Under section 7(2) of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, and Stamp Act—,
section 93(2) of the (English) Stamp Act, 1891, a policy of suggested
marine insurance cannot be made for any time exceeding of sec. 7
twelve months. The object behind this stringent Provi- (2).
sion was to ensure a regular revenue from the marine
insurance business. Section 25(2) of the (English) Marine
Insurance Act also makes the same provision in substance,
and says ‘that a time policy for more than twelve months
is invalid. Section 7(2) of the Stamp Act should be
omitted on the passing of this Bill to prevent overlapping
with the clause under discussion.

In actual practice, in England, this restriction regarding Continuation
time was found to cause difficulty, particularly in cases ear Sue
where the vessel had some casualty or encountered heavy regarding
weather. In such cases, it was difficult to arrive at the addition in
actual date of the loss, that is, whether the date fell within Stamp Act.
the time or outside it. To meet such difficulties, a “conti-
nuation clause” was usually attached to a olicy as’ an
honour agreement. Section’ 11 of the (English) Finance
Act, 1901 afforded statutory recognition to the practice of
attaching the continuation clause. That section provides
that a marine insurance policy for a time may contain a

"Dover, page 334.


Combined
onlicies.

64

vontinuation clause and shall not be invalid merely on the
ground that by the continuation clause it becomes avail-
able for a period of more than twelve months, The
slandard form taken by the continuation clause is as
ol -

“Should the vessel at the expiration of this policy
be at sea or in distress at a port of refuge or of ¢
the interest hereby insured shall, provided previous
notice be given to the underwriters, be held covered
ata pro-rata monthly premium to her port of desti-
nation.’

(There are minor provisions in this section regarding
continuation clause, which need not be considered here).

The necessity of making. a similar provision in our
Stamp Law may be considered,? if section 7(2) is retained.

“Voyage” policies expressly describe the voyage
covered, One of several voyages may be covered in such
policies. Questions of deviation from the voyage, change
of voyage and different voyage arise in such policies; but
they need not be considered here*

Very often, voyage policies also contain an element of
time. Section 7(4) of the (Indian) Stamp Aci, 1899, and
section 94 of the (En; glish) Stamp Act, 1891, contain pro-
visions regarding the charging of stamp duties on combined
policies. So long as the voyage policy merely provides
that the insurance continues to attach until the expiry of
24 hours after the ship has arrived in good safety at the
destination, it is still a voyage policy, since this is the
usual form of the clause. Even if the period after arrival
at the destination is extended up to 30 days, the stamp
duty is single. Sometimes a combined voyage and time
policy may cause difficulty. For example in an English
ease? a ship was insured “at and from the port of Pomaron
to New Castle and for 15 days whilst there after arrival”.
The vessel arrived at the destination and discharged the
cargo. But before the 15 days expired, a new cargo was
being loaded for a new outward voyage. Then the ship
was damaged. The contention of the insurers was, that
the 15 days mentioned in the policy were intended only
ns a maximum period for the discharge of the cargo
(meaning, in effect, that the policy was a voyage policy,
and once the voyage was over, the policy ceased). The

3866 Dover, page 133-

386९ also notes to section 22, English Act—clause 19.

*For deviations etc. sce sections 43 to 45 of the English Act,—clauses
#4 to 46,

sGambles y. Ocean Marine Insurance Go. of Bombay, (1876) 1 K.B.
141.


65

Court, however, held that even after the expiry of the first
voyage, the policy continued as a time policy for the
15 days in question, and the insurers were liable for any
Joss or damage occurring during those 15 days, In effect,
therefore, the policy was held not to be a time policy with
reference to a voyage, but a voyage policy initially with
an independent time policy.

Clause 23

This provides that the subject-matter must be designat-
ed with reasonable certainty. The “subject-matter” is not
the same thing as the “interest of the assured”, as is made
clear by sub-section (2). Further, regard must be had to
usage as is made clear by sub-section (4). Thus, “cargo”
would not include live animals and “goods” would not
include passengers’ luggage.

Clause 24

This deals with the topic of valued and unvalued General.
policies.

Valued policies are invariably used on insurance of
ships because, after destruction, it is dificult to prove the
value of the ships. In the case of goods or freight, both
valued and unvalued policies are used.?

Sub-section (3) provides that “subject to the provisions statement of
of the Act” and in the absence of fraud, the value fixed by valuation to
the policies as between the insurer and the assured is be conclu-
con clusive. “Reference may be made to section 27(4), 1०%
section 29(4) and similar provisions which have a bearing
on the subject,

The assured is at liberty to fix his values as he chooses, Arbitrary
if they are acceptable to the underwriter. Once the value valuation.
is fixed, it governs the measure of indemnity Even if
there is a decline in the actual value after the policy is
effected and before the risk arises, the assured can ‘claim
on the basis of the value. Conversely even if there js a
rise in the actual value, the assured cannot claim any
thing more than the value. In this respect, the strict
doctrine of indemnity has been departed from, to meet
practical necessities,

The assured is estopped from saying that the value is Estoppel.
more than that stated in the policy. Thus, in an English
vase,’ where a ship worth £9,000 was valued at £6,000

1866 also notes to section 16, English Act—clause 13.
*See section 67 of the English Act—clause 68,

*North of England Irom Steamsh p Association v, Armstrong (1876) LR. 5
४0.8. 244.


66

and after £ 6,000 had been paid for a total loss, the ship-
owner recovered £ 5,000 from the guilty vessel (which had
caused the collision that led to the loss), it was held that
the ship-owner could claim no part of this £ 5,000 and the
whole sum should go to the insurer! The reason was, that
the owner was by his under-valuation estopped from deny-
ing the real value. : पु

Increased “Increased value policies”, that is to say, policies taken
value out to cover an increase in the market value of the subject-
opening Re matter insured,? sometimes present difficulties, particularly

8९. when the original amount is insured with one insurer and

only the increased value is insured with another insurer.
The difficulties arise when both the insurets claim
“subrogation”?

Very often, in such cases a clause is inserted in the
original policies to the effect that the agreed vaiue of the
subject-matter is to be re-opened if policies are effected on
the increased value. In other words, if the assured places
an additional insurance on the cargo insured, the value of
the cargo shall (in the event of loss or claim) be deemed
to be increased to the total amount insured at the time of
loss or accident. It is unnecessary to consider the effect
of such clauses.*-5

Determin- In determining whether there has been a constructive
aren of cone total loss or not,® section 27(4) of the English Act provides
total loss, | that the value fixed by the policy is not conclusive. As
was observed in an English case,’ the question of total
loss is to be determined just as if there was no policy at
all, It is section 60(1) of the English Act which section
27(4) has in mind. Taking the facts in Irving v. Manning,?
if a ship is valued at £ 17,500 and insured for £ 3,000, and
wf the ship is damaged and repairs are estimated to cost
£ 10,500 but the value of the ship when repaired would
be only £ 9,000, the question is, whether the expenditure
is such as would “exceed its value” within the meaning of
section 60(1) of the English Act if the expenditure is

*Under the doctrine of subrogation,—see section 79 of the English Act—
ist 80.

4See notes under section 4, English Act—clause 9.

*See Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, 3rd edition, page 284, for a full dis~
cussion.

‘For a fuller treatment, see Dover, pages 303 and 338.

5568 also, as to the effect of such clause, observations in Boag v. Standard
Marine Insurance Co., (1937), 1 All. E.R. 714, 719, C.A., per Lord Wright,
MLR.

*For the meaning of ‘ constructive total loss’, see section 60 of the
English Act clsune 61,

"ving v. Manning, (1847), 3 HL.C 287.


vw

67

ineurred. In this case, the expenditure—£ 10,500—would
not exceed its “value"—if the value of £ 17,500 stated in
the policy is taken as the real value. But if the value of
the ship when repaired—_¢: 9,000—is to be taken into
account, the expenditure would’ obviously exceed the value
and the case is one of constructive total loss. The effect
of section 27(4) is that in such case the value stated in’ the
policy—£ 17,500—is not taken as conclusive, and the case
can be regarded as one of constructive total loss.

Where the ship is insured under more than one policy,
some difficulties arise as follows:—

(i) If the values in all the policies tally, it is
obvious that the assured cannot recover more than the
agreed value, because the contract is one of indemnity.

(it) Where the values do not tally, but the total of
the sums assured under each policy does not exceed
the agreed value, there are no serious difficulties
because the case is not one of over-insurance The
only point to be noted in such cases is, that it would
be in the interest of the assured to claim first under
that policy in which a lower value has been agreed.
Tf, for example, a ship is insured for £ 500 and valued
at £ 700 under one policy and insured for £ 600 and
valued at £ 1,200 on another policy, and the insured
chooses to recover first under the © 1,200 policy, and
recovers £ 600, if again he claims from the insurer for
the policy of £ 700, all that he can recover is £ 100
(700 minus 600) on the principle that insurance is
indemnity only. . In other words, the assured is entitled
upto the difference between the amount already
obtained and the value inserted in the policy?

(iii) Where, however, the assured takes out several
policies and their combined value exceeds the value
of the subject-matter insured, it is a clear case of
over-insurance by double-insurance® In such case
(provided the policies are claimed in the correct order),
the assured—can recover upto the higher value, but
no more.

(iv) As regards contribution between the insurers
themselves, section 80 of the English Act will govern
the matter in all such cases,

There can be two values fixed: in the policy—e.g,
one for total loss purposes and other for other purposes,
An example of this is the “Dual Valuation Clause”.
This is not, however, much in vogue now.

‘as to doubie-ingurance, soe scton 3a fhe Engl to double-insurance, see section 32 of the English Act—clause 90.

Bruce v. Yones, (1863) 32 LJ. Bx, 132-1 H.L.C. 769 ; 7 LT. 748,
*See section 32 of the English Act—clause 29 and notes thereto.
‘See Keate, page 103, and ‘Dover, page—x60-161.

Several
policies,

. Dual Valua-

tion, Clause,


* Floating

Policy”.

Some practi-

68

Clause 25

This deals with unvalued policies and leaves the
insurable value to be subsequently ascertained. The words
“in the manner hereinbefore specified” refer obviously to
section 16 of the English Act. If the sum so ascertained
exceeds the sum insured, there is under-insurance. If it
is less than the sum insured, there is over-insurance which
leads to a rateable return of the premium in respect of the
amount of the over-insurance [see section 84(3) (e) of the
English Act]. Even in the case of unvalued policies, the
assured has to give credit for sums received under any
gther policy, as provided by section 32(2)(c) of the English

Ct,

Clause 26

This deals with the topic of floating policy. A floating
policy is sometimes also valled an “open” policy. It is
usually employed by large shippers of small. parcels of
goods. The inconvenience felt in taking out a policy on
each shipment is avoided by this policy, under which all
shipments during a certain period are insured. The policy
is for a round sum, and every shipment reduces the under-
writer’s liability under the policy. Usually, the insured is
supplied with a book of “declaration forms” un which he
can “declare” the shipments as and when they are made.
The declarations are “taken out” in the office of the
insurer after being endorsed on the policy. One more
advantage of a floating policy is, that the merchant is
“automatically covered immediately each shipment becomes
at his risk”, that is, even if an accident (of which he is
unaware) has happened, he is covered, because it is not
necessary that the declaration should precede the 1055.

A disadvantage of the floating policy is the " ccessity of
stamping and the payment of the basic premium at the
outset.

It is a question whether a breach of the duty of the

sal questions. assured to declare the destination simply discharges the

insurer from liability in respect of the shipment in ques-
tion, or whether it avoids the whole policy.

Another question is whether the name of the ship by
which the cargo will be carried must be disclosed. An
opinion has been expressed? that there is no such duty, as
the insurer must be taken to agree to shipment on any
seaworthy ship. The case is different where the owner of
the goods knew, for example, that the ship was to be cast
away.

1Keate, page 19, second para.
‘Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, 3rd edition, page 302.


69

The declaration must be made within the agreed time, Declaration.
The policy, however, attaches immediately on loading,! so -
that if the goods are destroyed by fire before sailing (i.e.
before the time fixed for leclaration) the insurers are
able.

There is a distinction between “open cover” and “flaat- Open cover.
ing policy’, though the two apparently resembles each
other. An open cover is an agreement binding the parties in
honour only. It is not a policy and does not express the
sum or sums insured. It is really an intimation by the
broker to the owner of the goods that an open cover has
been effected. It would appear that the usual practice is

to effect a 12 month open cover and take out floating policies
as required,?.8

Floating policies are often issued one after the other in “To follow
succession. The necessity for this can be illustrated thus:-— a कु
Supposing a floatin, policy for £ 10,000 is issued, and the
“declarations” made thereunder are for goods of the value
of £3,000 and £5,000 respectively, then, by the time a third
shipment of goods of the value of, say, £5,000 is to be made,
the amount covered—i.e. the balance of 2,000 (sum insured
minus value of the two shipments) would be inadequate.
Therefore, as regards the third shipment (of £5,000) £ 2,000
would be covered by the first floating policy and a second
floating policy will be obtained to cover (i) a part of the
third shipment and (ii) also future shipments. This second
policy, thus, “follows and succeeds” the first policy. That
fact is usually mentioned in the second policy.

Clause 27

This is a formal section merely saying that the rules of General.
construction contained in the Schedule will api By and that
a policy “may be” in the form given in the Schedule.

Clause 28

Sub-section (1) provides that where insurance is effected Sub-section
at a premium “to be arranged” and no arrangement is (1)
Made, a reasonable premium is payable. At first sight, it “To be
may appear strange that such an essential factor as the arranged”.
amount of premium is not entered in the policy, The expla-
nation, however, is that very often the assured may desire
to obtain immediate cover but may -not be in a position to
Sive all the particulars to the insurance company. In such
cases, the premium is left to be agreed subsequently. It
may be noted that section 23 of the English Act, which gives
a list of the particulars to be specified in a policy, does not
require that the premium must be noted.

"ion Insurance Society of Ganton v. Will पाक CRGUS द्र af Ganton v. Wills, (1916) 1 A.C. 281, 287,
E "Dover, Handbook page 342,
*See also notes under Section 21, English Act—clause 18.


70°

Eqb-tection Sub-section (2). deals with a case where an additional
“Hel Premiuzn ‘is to be arranged in a certain event and the event
cond, » appens but no arrangement is made. Usually, “held

* covered” provisions are there in many policies. A specimen
of such a clause is—“Held covered in case of any breach of
warranty as to cargo, trade, locality...... date of sailing,
provided notice be given immediately after receipt of advice
and any additional premium required be agreed”,

Another example is the Deviation Clause’ included in
payee policy, the material part of which is often as
follows:—

“Held covered at a premium to be arranged in case
of deviation or change of voyage.”

Clause 29
Generel, This deals with the important topic of double insurance.

Meaning of Where the assured takes out several policies on the same
double subject-matter, the combined value of the several policies
insurance. may or may not exceed the value of the subject-matter. If
it does not exceed the value of the subject-matter, there is
not much difficulty as there is no over-insurance and the
section does not come into play. Where it exceeds the value
of the subject-matter, there is “over-insurance” by double
insurance. In such a case, the section provides that the
assured cannot receive more than the indemnity allowed
by the Act. Thus, if cargo worth £5,000 is insured on two
policies, one for £3,000 and the other for £2,500, not more
than £5,000 is recoverable under both the policies together.
The assured may—
(i) claim first under the higher policy and then
under the lower policy; or
(ii) claim first under the lower policy and then
under the higher policy; or
(iit) claim simultaneously under. both the policies.
In the situation at Nos, (7) and (ii) above, he has to
give credit for what he has received from the first insurance.
In the situation at No. (iii) above, he cannot recover more
than the value of the subject-matter.

Contributi As to contribution, see section 80 of the English Act.
aad sean As to return of premium, see section 84 of the English Act.
of premium,

Double QOver-insurance by dotible insurance requires that the
insurance— policies must have been effected—
essentials of,

(i) on the same adventure;
(ii) against the same risk;

TAs to deviation, see section 46 of the English Act,—clause 47.
3866 also section 27 of the English Act,—clause 24 and notes thereto.


Wh

(ii) in respect of the same interest in the same
subject-matter; and

(iv) for sums exceeding the indemnity allowed by
the law. हु

Therefore, there is no double insurance where different
subject-matters or different interests in the same subject-
matter are recovered by the policies. For example, as
pointed out by Dover,! where the buyer of goods insures
them and so does the seller, their interests are distinct,
because the policy effected by one will not protect the
interest of the other (unless so expressly provided), and
there is no question of double-insurance.

Double insurance is effected advertently where, for pouble-
“example, the assured has some doubt as to the financial insurance—
standing of the first insurer. It can arise inadvertently, for advertent
example, where the consignor of goods insures them on पी
behalf of the consignee but the consignee is already covered हु

by a floating policy.

Clause 30

This deals with the time when premium is payable. The General.
words “unless otherwise agreed” are important, because in
practice policies are usually issued prior to the tender of
the premium.

Clause 31
This deals with policies effected through brokers. General.

According to the general principles of the law of Importance
contracts, the insurer can directly claim his premium from ° broker.
the assured. But, in practice, the broker not only
makes this contract with the insurer but “does so regularly
for various assured who are often not even known to the
underwriter”,? and that is how the usage developed of
making the broker directly responsible for the premium—

a usage which has become law now. This system has the
advantage of—

(i) avoiding cash payments between the insurer
and the broker; and

(ii) enabling the broker to bring pressure to bear
on the assured if he fails to pay the premium?

‘Dover, page 345.
"Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, 3rd edition, page 337.
२566 the lien under section 53 (2) of the English Act,—Clause 31 (21.


72

Jability of It would be seen, that the insurer, the assured and the
ia "* broker—the three persons concerned—have their liabilities
defined as follows in the Act:—

(i) As between the insurer and the assured—

As regards payment of the premium, thougt h
the assured is, speaking in the abstract, liable to the
insurer (section 52), the acknowledgment of the
receipt of the premium contained in the policy
effected through a broker is conclusive as between
the insurer and the assured (Section 54). It has
been stated! that even where the policy does not
acknowledge such payment, by custom every policy
is regarded as a receipt for the premium and the
assured cannot be sued by the insurer for the pre-
mium if the policy is effected through a broker.

As regards liability under the policy, the
insurer is directly responsible to the assured for the
amount payable in respect of losses. As regards
return of premium also, he is directly responsible
to the assured—[section 53 (1) ].*

(i) As between the broker and the assured—

_ In the event of the non-payment of the pre-
mium by the assured, the broker can recover it as
a commercial debt.!

As regards liability under the policy, the
question does not arise. The broker does not bear
the losses.

As regards return of the premium also, he is not
liable.

(iii) As between the insurer and the broker—

__As regards payment of premium, the broker is
शक responsible to the insurer under section

As regards liability under the policy, the ques-
tion does not arise. The insurer is not liable to the
broker,

As regards return of premium also the insurer
is not liable to the broker.

‘Dover, page 377-

4As to return of premium, see sections 83 and 84 read with section 82 of
the English Act,—Clauses 85 and 84 read with clause 83.


73

Clause 32

This deals with the effect of receipt on the policy. Notes General.
to an earlier section may also be seen.

The usual form of acknowledgement is: “Paid the con- Form of
sideration due unto him (the underwriter) for this insur- acknow-
ance by the assured at and after the rate........... * ‘The ledgement.
reason why it is not conclusive between the assured and
the broker is, that it is the broker who has an action against
the assured, and hence an estoppel between the insurer and
the assured cannot operate between the assured and the

roker.:

Clause 33
This deals with the topic of warranties. General.

In marine insurance, it has been said, the so-called Nature of
warranties correspond to “conditions” in the Sale of Goods W#anty
Act. In the Sale of Goods Act, breach of a warranty may i? Tange
give rise to damages and breach of a condition may give 7
rise to a right to avoid the contract. In marine insurance,
the breach of warranties discharges the insurer from liabi-
lity, as provided by section 33(3) of the English Act, from
the date of the breach. To that extent, it is more akin to a
condition.

A representation as to fact may or may not be embodied Representa-
as a warranty. If it is not embodied, the insurer can avoid tion when |
the policy only if the misrepresentation is material. But if warranty.
it is so embodied, and turns out to be false, then whether or
not the fact is material to the risk, the insurer is discharged,
as section 33(3), first sentence, last 9 words, make it clear.

No particular form of words is necessary. The word Words used
“warranty” is not necessary, and a policy expressed to be to indicate
on the “American Ship Mount Vernon” was held to embody “#7f#nty-

a warranty as to nationality of a vessel.*

It is usual to have a clause to the effect that in case of a Held
breach of warranty, the assured shall be held covered (in covered,
spite of the breach} at a premium to be arranged.*

Where the assured fails to comply with the warranty, Time of
the insurer is discharged only from the date of the breach, discharge.
if the warranty is as to a future event. If, however, the
warranty is as to the existence of a particular state of fact,
for instance, where the special equipment of ship is
warranted and the facts differ from the warranty, then the
policy never attaches.®

38६६ notes under section 53 of the English Act,—Clause 31.

‘Lord Chorley, Law of Shipping, 3rd edition, page 338.

*Baring v. Clagett, (1802), cited in Dover, page 348.

4As to premium “to be arranged”, see section 31 of the English Act,—
clause 28 and notes thereto,

"See Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, 3td edition page 309.


Tatention
to break not
sufficient—
difference
between
voyage icy.
time policy.

“ Warrant-
ed”

Implied

warranty not 4 4

excluded.

General.

Cases where
breach of
warrenty
excused.

74

Mere intention to break the warranty is not sufficient,
because intention is revocable. This principle leads to
different results when applied to a voyage policy and when
applied to a time policy. In the case of a time policy, the
mere intention to proceed to a port in violation of a war-
ranty on the subject does not amount to a breach so long
as the ship has not proceeded to that port. In the case of a
voyage policy, however, if from the very beginning the
voyage is different from the voyage insured, the policy
never attaches and no liability arises. This is so even if the
goods are lost at a place which would, at all events, have
been travelled through even on the authorised voyage.

It must be noted, however, that the mere use of the
expression “warranted” does not give rise to a warranty.
Sometimes these words are used merely to exclude a parti-
cular period or a particular place from the operation of the
policy. For example, the use of the word “warranted not
in the Bay of St. Lawrence during the month of April”
merely means that the ship is not insured while it is in the
prohibited area during April

Clause 34

This deals with express warranties. No detailed com-
ments are needed,

The proposition embodied in section 35 (3) of the English
t, that an express warranty does not exclude an implied
warranty (unless inconsistent therewith) is accepted in the
United States of America also?

Clause 35

Needs no comments. The effect of warranties is already
discussed.?

Clause 36

This deals with the cases where breach of a warranty is
excused. The excuse may arise from the following:—

(a) change of circumstances;
(b) subsequent law;
(c) waiver by the insurer;

(d) provision in the policy itself to the effect that
the right to avoid the policy will not be exercised by
the insurer,

786० Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, ard edition page 324.
*See 45 Corpus Juris Secundum, Insurance, page 561, para. 652, right-
column.

‘See notes to clause 33:


B
eo As to @, the uaual exemple is the warranty “warranted
armed” inserted during the war, which becomes obsolete
if peace is declared.
As to (b), it merely embodied the generél principle that
if the performance Of the contract becomes i egal, it need
not be performed.

As to (0), see section 34(3) of the English Act.

As to (d), it is usual to insert a clause in the Disburse-
ment warranty which ordinarily provides that “a breach
of this warranty shall not afford underwriters any defence
to a claim by owners, mortgagees or other parties wha may
have accepted this policy without notice of such breach and -
are not parties or privy thereto.’ ”

ह Clause 37
This deals with the warranty of neutrality. No detailed
comments are needed.
Clause 38

हि This provides that there is no implied warranty of
nationality. ‘There > may, however, be an express warranty
of nationality, whi may be—
(a) positive, for example, when the ship is describ-
ed as of a particular nation;
(b) negative, for example, “Warranted no Ameri-
can war time built vessel”?

Clause 39

This deals with the warranty of “good safety”, and no
detailed comments are needed.

Clause 40

This deals with the Warranty of seaworthiness, The General.
section deals separately with voyage policies and time
policies,

So far'as voyage policies are concerned, sub-section (1) Voyage
to (4) prescribe an implied warranty. The warranty is Policies.
absolute, that is to say, irrespective of any fault of negli-
gence of the assured. हि

‘For an explanation of the Disbursements Warranty, sce Dover, page
152, bottom and succeeding pages. Ste also notes under section 13, English
Act,—clause 7(7).

5Cf. Dover, page 353.

‘For the meaning of “ seaworthiness ”, see Lord Chorley, Shipping
Law, 3rd edition, page 107, and Carver, Carriage by Sea, oth edn, p. 89
अर seq.

296 M of L~6


‘Suggestion
regarding

‘tisk in the
-case of time
policy—
aejected.

6

The warranty can be abrogated, or modified by agree-
ment, as is usually done when the clause “seaworthiness
admitted” is used. The effect of this is that the under-
writer promises to pay in spite of unseaworthiness. Owners
of cargo would particularly benefit by such a clause, because
they have no hand in the management of the ship.’

In a time pol icy, , there is no implied warranty of sea-
worthiness; but if the ship is sent out with the privity of the
assured in'an unseaworthy state the insurer is not liable
for any loss attributable to the unseaworthiness. There is
no total discharge of the insurer. The reason why there is
no implied warranty is,* that the ship may be at sea and
the assured may not know about the seaworthiness of the

ip.
~

It has been suggested that section 39(2) of the English
Act, (which provides that where a policy attaches while the
ship is in port, there is an implied warranty that the ship
is able to encounter the perils of that port) should be em-
bodied also in section 39(5). In other words, when a time
policy attaches while a ship is in port, the ship should
{according to the suggestion) pe fit to encounter the perils
of that port. After careful consideration, the suggestion
has not been accepted. A time policy is a policy for a parti-
cular period, and has no connection with a voyage as such
(unless it is a combined policy). Tts commencing point is
not necessarily’ linked uP with the ship’s starting from a
particular port. For this reason, section 39(2)—port-
worthiness—would not have’ much significance for a time
policy. Secondly, in the few cases in which the commence-
nent of a time policy synchronises with the ship’s being in
a particular port, the parties can provide by an express
warranty for the perils of the port.

In the United States of America, authorities differ as to
whether a warranty of seaworthiness is implied in a time
policy. But the weight of authority is to the effect that if
the vessel is in port at the time of the cormmencement of the
risk, there is an implied warranty that the vessel is sea-
worthy for the risk ‘and will, before sailing, be made sea-
worthy for the voyage? .

Clauses 41 to 48
No detailed comments are needed.*

3866 Halsbury, 3rd edn. Vol. 22, p. 26, para. 37.
"दा, Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, 4th edition, page 317.
345 Corpus ‘Juris Secundum, Insurance, page 563, para. 652, sub-part

_ For & discussion of the various kinds of alterations in a voyage, see notes
under acction 43, English Act,—clause 42.


7

Clause “4
This deals with the subject of alteration of the port of General.

It would be convenient here to classify the various alfer- Various
ations in the voyage, dealt with in the Act. An alteration in kinds of
the voyage may occur by— giterations
Different voyage | «+ change of the narting point— हा
(section 43) 3 or

(i) change of the destination
before commencement of the
risk—{section,44) 5 or
Change of voyage «4 « Git) “change of voyage”, 1.6.
change of the destination |
after commencement of the |
risk—(section 45) 5
Deviation = - . . . + (०) deviation from the voyage-~
पु (section 46)—that is to say,
from the contemp-
lated course of the voyage ;

Delay « - + -+ -+ - (७) delay in the voyage—(séction
48). .

In (4) and (ii), above, the policy never attaches.. In (iii)
above, the policy attaches but the insurer is discharged
when a breach occurs, In (iv) above, the insurer is dis-
charged from the time of, deviation, unless the deviation is
excused under section 49. In (v) above, the insurer is dis-
charged from the time when the delay becomes unreason-
able, unless the delay is excused under section 49.

As to delay in the commencement of the voyage, see an
earlier section?

A clause in a policy covering a change of voyage cannot

operate to protect a different voyage. Sections 43 and 44 of

_ the English Act deal with “different voyage”. The substitu-

tion of a new voyage prevents the risk from attaching and
“held covered” clause would be of no use.

Clause 45

This deals with change of destination before commence- General.
ment of the risk. The distinction between this section and
section 45 is, that while this section contemplates a decision
to alter the destination before the commencement of the
voyage, section 45 seems to contemplate such change after
commencement of the voyage.”

1Section 4a of the English Act,—Clause 4, ,
See" also notes uiider section 43, English Act,—clause 44.


General

When ¢x-
cused.

Essentials
of deviation,

Deviation
distinguished
from change
of voyage,

8
eat Clouse 46

This deals with “chan; ange of voyage”. (As to the claasifi-
cation, of the various ki of changes in voyages, see the
Notes ६० dm earlier section) .1

Tt may be that in very exceptténal..circumstances, 2
change of voyage may be excused. For example, if a British
ship is bound for a port which becomes during the voyage
an enemy ‘port, the continuance of the voyage would be
illegal and a change of voyage is justified? In fact, any
other course would be out of harmony with the warranty of
legality,? vide the word—“lawful manner” there.

It would appear thet a mere intention to abandon the
original destination and substitute a new one would suffice
to bring the section into operation. Thus, if while loading
operations are going on it is decided to change the destine-
tion, the risk ceases to attach even though the loss occurs
while the loading is not completed.

The words “lawful excuse” occur in section 46 but not

_in this section.

The distinction between “change of voyage” under this
Section, and “deviation” under section 46, is explained else-
ere.

Clause 47

This deals with deviation. (As to classification of various
kinds of voyage, see notes under an earlier section),

, Deviation is a departure from the contemplated course
of the voyage. Deviation, in order that it Tay discharge the
insurer from liability, should be without lawful excuse. As
to the excuses for deviation, see section 49 of the En lish
Act, The deviation must be from the “voyage contemplated
by the policy” as explained in section 46(2). Further, there
mist be a deviation in fact and not a mere intention,

In deviation, the ship does proceed to the a, Freed destina-
tion, whereas “change of voyage” implies complete abandon-
ment of the contemplated voyage. It must be noted that in
the formier case, mere intention is immaterial, while in the
Tatter casé it is material as already pointed out.¢

ANlotes. under section 43 of the English Act,—Clanse 44.
1 j {british and Foreign Marine Insurance Co. v. Sanday (Samuel) and Co,
(916) 1 AL. 655. .
"Section 41 of the English Act;—Clause 42.

36५ ni Cuming, Hare, 0879) 1 Bli HL. 87, cited in Dover, page

"See notes under section 46, English Acty—Clause 47.
"See notes under section 45 of the English Act,—Clause 46,


79

There is an Institute clause to the effect Ping the ship will Devistion
be.“held covered ...... in case of deviation or change af “lause.
voyage provided notice be given ...... ‘and an additional
premium required be agreed”?

It would appear that so far as time policies are concerned, Time
the provisions regarding deviation would not ordinarily policies
apply, since the vayage is not specified in the policy. Usual-
ly, however, there are express provisions in the policy re-
garding “trading limits”, departure from which is not
allowed unless permitted by “held covered” clause.

Clause 48
This relates to change in the port of discharge. General,
A change in the port of discharge may arise from— Classification
(i) omission to visita port of discharge; ox ef विश

(ii) visiting an additional port of discharge not of discharge.
mentioned in the policy; or
(iii) change in the order in which the ports of dis-
charge are to be visited.
Aso (i) above, it would seem that there is no deviation
in, such a case? | है

As to (ii) above, it will amount to deviation under sec-
tions 46 and 47 of the English Act, because the voyage con-
templated by the policy did not envisage the additional
port, .

As to (iii) above, the section provides that—

(०) if several ports of discharge are specified by the
olicy, the order designated by the policy must be
‘ollowed;

(b) where ports are not named but are given with-

in a given area, the ship must goto them in their
“geographical” order.

Where ports A, B and Care to be touched and eargo for Over-car-
port B is not discharged at port B, but is taken to port C and riage.
again brought back 0 po ort B and then discharged, the policy
would be void from time of sailing from the interme-
diate port on the outward voyage {unless the Deviation
Clause protects it)? .

Clause 49
This deals with delay in voyage. General.
It is only unreasonable delay that brings the section into u,;
operation; further, the policy is not avoided ab initio but the delay,
insurer is discharged from liability as from the time the
delay becomes unreasonable.

Cited in Dover, page 368.

3866 Dover, pages 369, 370,
“Dover, page 370.



‘When delay
excused.

Sub-section
@

Departure
from the
English Act.

General,

Analysis of
the position.

90

‘Where éntry to.a port is delayed’ because of weather con-
ditions (for ¢: iple, cyclonic storms), the delay would not
be “unreasonable”, See also section 49 of the English Act for
other excuses for delay. हु

: Clause 50
This deals with excuses for deviation and delay.

Clause (a)—excuses deviation etc. authorised by any
special terms in the policy.

Clause (b)—deals with circumstances beyond the con-
trol of the master and the employer. This includes a vessel
being forced out of its course by heavy weather.?

Clause (c)—applies where delay is reasonably necessary
for complying with a warranty. An exemple of this would
be delay occasioned by action taken to make the ship sea-
worthy?

Clause (2) excuses delay for the safety of the ship
(whether the policy is on ship. or on cargo) or for the

‘safety of the subject-matter insured, The result is, that

where cargo A is insured, deviation for the safety of
cargo B would not be protected. Similarly, where the

‘ship is insured, deviation for the safety of any cargo would

not’ be protected.

Clause (e)—deals with deviation etc. for saving human
life ete.

It would be noted that deviation for saving property is
not excused in the English Act.

For reasons already given this rule of the English Act has
been. departed from, so as to cover deviation to save property
at sea!

Clause 51
This deals with the effect of transhipment.

. Transhipment may arise either by operation of a peril
insured against or by other causes. The section is confined
to the former. The latter is not covered unless the policy
otherwise provides. The rule embodied in the section is,
that if the circumstances are such as to justify the losses in
landing and re-shipping the goods or transhipping them, the
insurer continues to be liable, notwithstanding the landing
or transhipment. हु

ADelany v. Stoddart, (1776) 1 ‘Term Rep. 22, cited in Dover, page 372;
and Chalmers, pp. 66-67. १2485 37%

2As to warranty of seaworthiness, see section 39 of the English Act—
Clause 40. .

3866 the body of the Report, para, 7,


81

It has been stated? that in practice, in cargo policies, the
policy provides for other transhipment also, 6) without
additional premium, if customary;— or (ii) with additional
premium if the transhipment is net customary. Further,
“extended cover clause” may cover all transhipments with-
out notice and without additional premium.

* Clause (f) needs no comments.

Clause (g) deals with deviation caused by barratry if
barratry is a peril insured against. The term “barratry” in-
cludes every wrongful act committed by the master or crew
to the prejudice of the owner of charterer.*

‘This provides that when the cause excusing the deviation sub-section
has ceased to operate, the ship must resume her course, etc. (2)
That is to say, it has to take the normal course of the desti-
nation from the point to which it has deviated.

The placing of this section in the English Act is not very Departure
happy. Logically, it comes after deviation— (sections 46 and from, the

‘ English A
49). ‘Hence it has been placed here. @lacing).

Clauses 52 and 53

This deals with the assignment of a marine policy. General
The‘subject-matter of assignment of marine policy has Correspond~

been dealt with to some extent ‘ih the Transfer of Property ing provi-

Act, 1882.''Section 180, Exception, in that Act first provides फर्श Law.

that the general provision regarding formalities of assign- aden °

ment of actionable claims doés not apply to transfer of

marine policies. The next section, section 130A, then pro-

eeeds to lay down certain special rules for assignment of

marine policies; Section 135A deals with assignment of

rights under marine policies. The following comparative

table will show the provisions in the English Act and the

corresponding provisions in the Transfer of Property Act:—

(English) Marine Gndian) Transfer

Thsurance Act. of Property Act.
Section so(x) - eee Section 130A (x)
Section 5० (2) पु पु पु पु Section 135A (3)
Section's0@)- - os . -+« - Section 130A (2)
Section 56. . . + + Section 130A (3)

eae Section 180A (4) which provides that the provi-
sions of section 6(e) of the Transfer of Property Act do not

1Dover, page 400. .
‘Cf. the First Schedule to the English Act, rule 11,


‘State of
‘esignment.

Buyer and
Seller of

ett
eontract.

82

apply to assignment of marine policies. The result is, that
the general rule that a mere right to sue cannot be trans-
ferred, does not apply to marine policies.

By the combined effect of sections 15, 50 and 51 of the

glish Act, the position regarding the stage at which a
policy of marine insurance can be assigned (with reference
to the assignment of the interest) is as follows:—

(४) the mere assignment of the interest of the
owner does not transfer the policy— (section 15);

(i) the owner of the goods may, however, assign
the policy if there is no prohibition against assignment
in the policy— (section 50);

(६४) such assignment may be made—

(a) before or at the time of parting with the
subject-matter (section 51, main paragraph)
whether or not loss has occurred—I[section 50(1)]
or

(b) after the loss has occurred (section 51, pro-
viso) ; -

(c) but not in between his parting with the
subject-matter and the date of the loss-— (section 51
main paragraph).

The principle appears to be, that to make a valid assign-
ment, the assured must still be entitled to the insurance.
When he loses the subject-matter, that is, the insurable
interest, his title to insurance is also gone, and therefore
he cannot subsequently assign it. But it must be noted
that where the goods have been lost, what remains is mere-
% the right of indemnity—which can always be assigned.
‘hus, in an English case’ goods insured under a marine
policy were lost and after the loss the policy was assigned.
it was held that the assignee could maintain an action
against the insurer, The reason for prohibiting assignment
without the subject-matter 18 that the person must be pre-
judiced by the loss before he can recover on the policy.

ut, as Blackburn J. observed: “after the loss has happen-

ed. .the risk ceases at once............the tight to indem-
nity longer depends on the right to property in the
subject-matter.. .but on the right of Property in the

thing.......... lost

In a CLF. contract (cost, insurance and freight), it is
the seller's duty to effect insurance, because the price in-
cludes the items of'cost, insurance, and freight. In a F.0.B,
(free on board) contract, it is for the buyer to insure the
goods. Section 39 of the Indian Sale of Goods Act [corres-
Ponding to section 38 of the (English) Sale of Goods Act]
provides that unless otherwise agreed, where goods are sent

“Llayd v. Fleming (£873) LR. 7 QR. 29, 30. 01.1. ५४, | Fleming (1872) L.R. 7 Q.R. 299, 302—41 1... QB. $3.


by a seller to a buyer by a route involving sea transit in
circumstances in which it is usual to insure, the seller
‘should give notice to the buyer to enable him to insure,
failing which the goods are deemed to be at the seller's risk
during the transit.

The assignee can sue the insurer in his own name, irres- Effect of
Pective of the fact that he was not interested in the subject- assigument,
matter when the damage occurred.

The insurer is entitled to make any defence “arising out Defences
of the contract” which he would have had against the per- available,
son by whom ‘the policy was effected. Thus, an insurer may

avoid the policy on the ground of non-disclosure of a fact

very contract on which the assignee sues. As has been
pointed out,’ if an insurer is liable under two Policies, A
and B, to the same assured, and he pays on policy A under
a mistake of fact, he can claim a refund. If the assured
sues him under policy B, he ¢an set off (against the claim
for the poliey B) the claim for refund under policy A. But
if policy B has been assigned in the meantime, the refund
under policy A cannot thus be set off. The reason is, that
thé claim for refund does not arise out of the Policy sued
upon,

Sections 130A and 1352 (7) of the Transfer of Property Deletion of
Act, 1882, should be deleted, since their substance is being ene पु
incorporated in the clause under discussion, 13

It appears that the need for Passing the Transfer of Transfer of
Property (Amendment) Act, 1944, which inserted the pro- दिल तप
visions regarding marine policies arose in this way. Section ment) Act,
135 of the Transfer of Property Act, as it stood then, ran 1944—
as follows: — History of.

“135. Every assignee, by endorsement or other writ
ing, of a policy of marine insurance or of a policy of
insurance against fire, in whom the property in’ the
subject insured shall ‘be absolutely vested at the date
of the assignment, shall have transferred and vested
in him all rights of suit as if the contract contained in
the policy had been made with himself.” .

The words “property..... _Shall be absolutely vested”
implied that at the time he assignment the assignee
must have become the owner of the goods. It was realised,
however, that while this requirement would be all right for
fire insurance, it was difficult’ to comply with it'in marine
insurance. Frequently, it is difficult to determine whether
at a given time the property in the goods which are the
subject-matter of a contract of sale has en conta OF sale has passed. Loss is ve Loss is very

“Word Ghoeley, Shipping Law, उस cditions Page 307. ~



84

often unknown either to the shipper or to the consignee,
and it is possible that after the policy is assigned it is dis-
covered that ‘goods had been lost and the property had not
yet passed to the consignee. Further, often the assignee
would be a person who has only a limited interest in. the
subject’ insured (e.g. a pledgee). Section 50 of the (Eng-
lish) Marine Insurance Act, which is much wider should,
it was felt, be adopted. To make the matter complete, sec-
tion 51 0६ the English Act was also adopted. (Section 15
of the English Act, however, was regarded as standing-on a
different footing and as not proper for inclusion in the
framework of the Transfer of Property Act).

It had also been pointed out by commercial bodies that
section 79 of the (English) Marine Insurance Act did not (at
that time) find a place in the Transfer of Property Act, with
the result that grave doubts were felt as to whether the
doctrine of subrogation applied in India and whether an
insurer could, aval ing of this doctrine, sue in his own name
without making the assured a party. It was, therefore, felt
that.section 79 ef the Marine Insurance Act should also find
a place in the Transfer of Froperty Act. As a consequen-
tial change, it was decided to exclude section 6(e) of the
Transfer of Property Act from its application to any right
to sue under the proposed provisions. An amendment Bill
on thése lines was therefore, introduced at the instance of
commercial bodies. The Statement of Objects and Reasons
appended to that Bill is given below:—

“The rules and principles governing a marine insurance
policy being materially different from those governing a fire
insurance policy, it is very unsatisfactory to accord the
same treatment in the matter of assignment to both cate-
gories of policies. To take but one instance, a fire insur-
ance policy is not assignable after loss, but the nature of
a marine insurance contract is such as to require that
marine insurance policies should be assignable even efter
loss. In the United Kingdom, assignabilit ity of marine in-
surance policies after loss is placed beyond doubt by section
50 of the Marine Insurance Act. But in the absence of a
similar provision here, it is doubtful if Courts in British
India would hold that they are so assignable. It is propos-
ed, thetefore, te amend the Transfer of Property.Act by—

“(1) omitting from section 135 thereof the reference to
marine insurance policy; and

_. (ii) inserting a new section reproducing the provisions
of section 50 of the Marine Insurance Act”.

“Provincial Governments, High Courts, .and commercial
bodies in the Provinces have been consulted and they are
almost unanimously in favour of legislation on these lines.
As assignabili ty of marine insurance policies is dealt with
in the United Kingdom in sections 50 and 51 of the Marine


85

Insurance Act, it is, a8 suggested by the Calcutta High
Court, also. necessary, for the sake of completeness, to 1e-
Produce the provisions of section 51 of that Act which pre-

lude assignments where the insured has no subsisting inter-
est in the property. insured.

“The need fot thé énactrient of provisions corresponding
to section 79 of the Marine Insurance Act and’ for amending
section 6(९) of the Transfer of Property Act has also been
represented to Government. On consideration of the opi-
nions expressed by the Provincial Governments, High
Courts, and leading commercial bodies Government has now

“Tt is recognised that, while legislation on the above lines
would clarify the law of assignment and subrogation of
marine insurance policies, the whole law of Marine msur-
ance will not be put on a satisfactory basis, unless compre-
hensive legislation-on the lines of the Marine Insurance Act,
1906 is enacted for British India. Such a Project, however,
™must necessarily await the termination of the war”.

Clause 54
See notes on earlier clauses.’

Clause 55

This section deals With assignment of the “interest”, and
Provides that the mere assignment of the Property insured
does not carry with it an assignment of the policy thereon.
As to assignment of the policy, see sections 50 and 51 of the
English Act. The effect of the section is that in the absence
of an agreement to the country, where the interest of the
assured is transferred to another Person, the protection

given by the policy. would end on the determination of the
interest of the assured.

cutor, administrator or receiver of the interest of the assur-
ed is entitled to have the benefit of the policy on behalf of
those who are beneficially entitled to the property insured?

Clause 56
Needs no comments.

Clause 57

losses.

The section enacts two bropositions—one

This deals with the topic of “included” and “excluded” Sera

e, Analysis of

i posi
defining the liability of the ee en mathe Insurer, and the other negative, and the other negative, the section.

+See notes to clauses 52 and 53. a
“Dover, page 316.” “~


86

excluding the liability of the insurer. Its provisions are
“subject to” other provisions. Further, the positive propo-
sition about liability operates “unless the ‘policy otherwise
provides”.

Sub-section (1) states the general proposition, while sub-
section (2) deals particularly with certain kinds of losses.
In sub-section (2), clause (a) again contains both a negative
and a positive proposition, while clauses (b) and (c) contain
-negative propositions only, that is to say, “non-liability”.

Principle of The main principle behind the section is, that if the loss

‘the section, is caused by 8 peril insured against and the peril: is the
proximate cause of the loss, the insurer is liable, put not
otherwise. As to “proximate cause”, it has been said that
“the terminology of causation in English law is by no means
ideal. It would be better for a little plain English.

“Direct cause’ would be better expression than causa
proxima. Logically, the antithesis of proximate cause is

oes

not “real cause”, but “remote cause”.

The object behind the rule is to draw a line of demarca-
tion at some stage. The rule is based on the maxim:
causa proxima non remota spectatur (regard the proximate
and not the remote cause).

Analysis of The connection between a cause and the resulting loss
can be analysed as follows: —
CAUSE
Single cause, Multiple causes
$3
Concurrent Consecutive,
(2) i.e, occurring
in sequence.
Continuous, Interrupted by
| Hebe NOL “new intervening
interrupted. cause".
(3, (4)

Becker Gray & Co. Ltd. v. London Assurance Cor nperations (1918)

AG. 101, 114—117 L.T. 609 per, Lord Justice Summer. The judgment of
Tord Sumner makes some candid observations on “ proximate cause’.



87
Situation No. (1) above—single cause—does not ¢all for

the application of the section. If the loss is caused by a
peril insured against, the insurer is liable.

Situation at (2) above—a number of causes acting toge--
ther—sometimes calls for the application of the section.

Situations at (3) and (4) are the main situations where
the doctrine of proximate cause has always got to be
applied,

It is not always possible to put a cause under situation
No. (2), (3) or (4) exclusively. As has been observed by
Lord Shaw,' “Causes are spoken of as if they were as dis-
tinct from one another 88 beads in a row or links in a chain
but—if this metaphysical topic has to be referred to—it is
not wholly so..............Causation is not a chain but a net,
At each point influences, forces, events—precedent and
simultaneous—meet; and the radiation from each point ex-
tends indefinitely. At the point where these various influ-
ences meet it is for the judgment as upon a matter of fact
to declare which of the causes thus joined at the point of
effect was the proximate and which was the remote cause”.

“To treat proximate cause as if it was the cause which Meaning of
is proximate in time is........... out of the question. ‘The prosimate
cause which is truly proximate is that which is proximate
in efficiency. The efficiency may have been preserved

! although other causes meantime have sprung up which have
not yet destroyed it or truly impaired it, and it may culmi-
nate in a result of which it still remains the real efficient

> cause to which the event can be ascribed.”

The fact in that case were that a ship insured against
perils of the sea was torpedoed by enemy submarine 25
' miles from Havre. (There was a warranty against all con-
Sequences of hostilities). The torpedo struck her well for-
ward, and she began to settle down by the head but with
the aid of tugs she reached Havre and was taken alongside
4 quay in the outer-harbour. A gale sprung up: after 2
days her bulkhead gave way and she sank and became a
। total loss. It was held, that the torpedoing was the proxi-
mate cause of the loss, and the grounding was not a novus
actus interveniens. The underwriters were therefore not

liable because the loss was a consequence of hostilities,

The doctrine of proximate cause merely gives effect to Doctri
intention of the parties. “Cause and effect are the same based on
for underwriters as for. other people. Proximate cause is intention of
not a device to avoid the trouble of discovering the real Parties.”

‘Leyland Shipping Co. v. ‘Norwich Union Fire Insurance Sociesy 8
A.C. 350, 369, per Lord Shaw of Dunfermlane, (1918)



cause or the common sense. Indemnity involves it apart
from decisions.” 5

हे Clause 58
General. This deals with partial and total losses.

Analysis of The following classification of losses will explain the
oases. scheme of the Act— P

LOSSES

soul tse. sae, Partial 8.
व ee Oy particular ave 26 (0.
Gi) General average loss 3. 66.

~~ «= Exchides particular chargea—s. 64(2),
| 1 ules covered by “sue and labour ”—

a be
Actual Constructive
(Ss. 575 58 (Ss. 60-61)
‘and: 72).

‘Amportance The classification of losses into total and partial is
the important tor. this reason, that only a loss which has been
insured can be recovered; and each policy provides how
far a total loss will be recoverable and how far a partial
1 loss will be recoverable. Further, the amount to be re-
covered! would: differ in each case; contrast section 68 on the

one hand with sections 69 to 71 on the other.

Meaning of Total loss as such has not been defined in the Act. Its
a ass species, namely actual loss and constructive loss have, how-
tial” loss. ©Ver, been explained.

So far as partial loss is concerned, section 56(1) provides
that any loss other than a total loss is a partial loss. In
addition to this general provision, section 56(4), section
56(5), etc. deal with partial losses in some aspects thereof.
Where a partial loss is followed by a total loss before the
partial loss is made good, the assured can recover only in
respect of total loss

Clause 59
General. This deals with actual total loss.
Analysis. Actual total loss arises in the following cases—

(i) where the subject-matter is destroyed; or

(ii) where the subject-matter is damaged so as to
cease to be of the kind insured; or .

ABecher Gray & Co. v. London Assurance Corporation (1918) A.C
tox, 113, per Lord. Summer.

3866 also notes under section 64, English Act,—Clause 65.
*Section 77 (2) of the English Act,—Clause 78 (2).


89

(iii) where the assured is irretrievably deprived of
the subject-matter.

An example of the first would be—physical destruction
of the ship or cargo.

An example of the second would be a consignment of
dates which remains sunk for a number of days and is found
to be contaminated by sewage.’ The dates in this case had
a certain value for distilling Purpe oses, but no longer answer-
ed the description of dates. (This was a case of insurance
of freight; the charterer having chartered the ship for a
lump sum, issued bills of lading to shippers. As a result
of the damage, he lost his freight on the cargo in question,
and was therefore entitled to recover the profit which he
-would have made from the transaction.)

As an example of the third may be cited the case where
a ship deserted in a sinking condition is towed into port by
salvors and sold under an order of the Admiralty Court
for less than the salvage charges.”

The distinction between the first two and the third is
that in the third the subject-matter may be in existence,
but the assured does not get it.

. Clause 60

This deals with the case of.a missing ship. What the General.
‘section embodies is-a presumption that where the ship is
missing and after reasonable time* no news is received, an
actual total loss may be presumed.

The section does not raise any presumption as to the Cause of loss-
cause of the total loss. This depends on the balance of pro-
babilities, The question may become important, because
it is only if the ship is lost by a peril insured against that
the ship-owner can recover from the insurer.

As has been pointed out,* the question how the loss was “Free of
‘caused becomes important in war time because of the F.C. capture, and
and 8, clause (free of capture and seizure), usually inserted .
in the policy to exclude risk from “capture, seizure, arrest,
restraint or detainment...... consequences of hostilities or
warlike operations” etc. When the ship is lost, the question
naturally atises whether the ship was not lost by a war tisk
(in war-time, war risks are usually insured by the Govern-
ment), The decision in such case depends on collateral
circumstances, for example, the weather, the amount of
enemy activity, the experience of other vessels, etc.

1Asfar & Com; vy. Blundell, (18: 2 0.8. 198, approved (18:
row ar, & Gs 18% oe (1895) 2 Q.B. 198, app (1896)

*Cosmen v. West, (1887) 13 App. Cas, 160, P.C.

4As to “reasonable time”, see s. 88 of the English Act,—Clause 89.

‘Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, 3rd edition, page 327.



Coxwold
Cases.

General,

Analysis,

First class
of cases,

५ Uncertain”

90
The wide form of the old FC, &'S. clase created un-
expected consequences, Casualties such as stranding were
held to be due to war risks in a case before the House of
Lords! There, the ship was engaged in warlike opera-
tions at.the time of loss, but the loss was actually due to
stranding. The House of Lords held that the stranding was
a corisequence of the operations on which the ship was
engaged, and therefore the ship was lost by a war peril,
stressing the words “consequences of warlike operations”,
The new F.C, & 8. clause provides that the warranty (i.e.
the exclusion from risk of warlike op erations) does not ex-
clude “collision, contact with any fixed or floating object,
stranding, heavy weather or fire unless....,. caused directly

by a hostile act . ore

Clause 61

This defines constructive total loss, The concept of con-
structive total loss is peculiar to marine insurance. For a
discussion of its origin, see the undermentioned case?

Constructive total loss arises where the subject-matter

(i) reasonably abandoned on account of its actual
total loss appearing to be unavoidable; or

(४8) where the abandonment 15 due to the fact that
it could not be preserved from actual total loss without
an expenditure which would exceed its value when the
expenditure has been incurred.

As regards the first class of cases, it must be noted that
recovery of the goods must be “unlikely” and not merely
“uncertain”,** under section 60 (2) (i).

The distinction between “uncertain” and “unlikely” has
been clearly explained in a judgment of Lord Wright*® He
observes:

“There is a real difference in logic between saying
that a future happening is uncertain and saying that it
is unlikely. In the former, the balance is even, No one
can say one way or the other. In the latter, there is
some balance against the event, It is true that there

‘Yorkshire Dale $. S. Co. ४, Minister of War Transport (The Coxvold)
1942 A.C. 691—(1942) 2 AIL ELR. 6,

"Moore v. Evans, (1918) A.C, 185, 194 HLL,

‘See the illustration in Lord Chorley’ ’s Shipping Law, 3rd edition,
331. See also Polurrian S. S. Co. v, » (2915) 1 KIB. 992, ८. Ree

‘The word “unlikely” was substituted at the suggestion of the Lord.
Chancellor's Committee. “See Chalmers, Page 83, foot-note 7.

‘Rickward v, Forestal Land Co, (1941) 3 A.ELR. 62, 81,


91

is nothing in the Act to show what degree of unlikeli-

hood is required. If, on the test of uncertainty, the

seales are at level, any degree of unlikelihood would

seem to shift the balance, however slightly. It is not

yequired that the scale should spring up and kick the
eam.”

The word “unlikely” used in the Act marks a departure
from the common law. Before the Act, the ship-owner was
entitled to recover as for a total loss if it was uncertain that
he could recover the goods (or ship, as the case may be).
This is not so after the Act. The point came into promi-
nence in a case before the Court of Appeal! There, a ship
carrying a cargo of coal and insured against the conse-
quences of war-like operations was captured by a bellige-
rent, deprived of her cargo and detained for about six
weeks, after which the ship was released. The owners of
the steamship claimed from the insurer for a constructive
total loss, on the ground that they had given notice of aban-
donment and that it was at that time “uncertain” that the
ship would be recovered. The insurers admitted that the
ship was detained, but denied that she was captured, and
contended that at no material time was it unlikely that the
plaintiff could recover. It was held by the Court of Appeal
that the Marine Insurance Act had substituted the test of
unlikelihood for the test of uncertainty, and that the assur-
ed had failed to show that there was more likelihoog that
they would not recover than that they would recover. The
claim was, accordingly, dismissed.

As was pointed out by Lord Porter, s. 60 is intended to Relationship
be a complete definition of total loss (because of the words of 8. 60(1)
“as hereinafter defined” appearing in s. 56); but it does not amd s.60(2).
follow that the first sub-section lays down the general rule
and the second Jays down merely the instances already
covered by sub-section (1). Sub-section (2) which gives
particular instances does not merely illustrate; it adds to
the terms of the definition given as a general rule in sub-
section (1).

As to the relationship between section 60(1) and section Section 602)
60(2), it has been pointed out that sub-section (2) gives an is additional.
objective criterion which is more precise than, and substan-
tially different from, the criterion in section 600); and
therefore sub-section (2), as compared with sub-section (1)
is “additional and not merely illustrative’

As to the second class of cases, the well-known case of Second class
Irving v. Manning‘ illustrates its application. In such cases, of cases.

*Pollurrian Steamship Co., Ltd. v. Young, (1915) 1 K.B. 922 GA.
*Robertson v. Nomikos Lid., (1939) 2 All. E.R. 723, 734, HLL.
*Richard v. Forestal Land Co., (1941) 3 AEF. 62, 79,
4(1847) 1 H.L.C. 287, discussed under section 27 of the English Act,—
clause 29,
296 M of L—7


Valuation
Clause.

92

the cost of recovery or reconditioning of the property is
prohibitive, in the sense that the expenditure on the ship
would exceed the post-repair value of the ship. For
example, if a ship is damaged and the repairs are estimated
to cost £10,000 and after repair the value of the ship would
be £9,000 while the actual value of the ship when insured
is, say, £8,000, there is a constructive total loss.

The repaired value is usually estimated by a ship's
surveyor in the case of ships. Sometimes however, a
Valuation Clause? is inserted as follows:—

“In ascertaining whether the vessel is a constructive
total loss, the insured value in the policies on hull and
machinery shall be taken as the repaired value......”

The significance of this clause lies in this, that by a
fiction agreed to by the parties, the insured value is always
taken as the repaired value. To put it in other form, the
assured will never be able to claim a constructive total
loss (where such a clause is inserted) except where the cost
of the repair exceeds the insured value. The clause comes
in handy where the vessel is insured on a higher value than
its actual value. To take a hypothetical case, if a ship is
insured on £10,000 and the damage caused will cost, say,
£7,000 to repair and after repair its value (actual) will be
£6,000 then—

(a) if the Valuation Clause is not there, then the ship
would be a total loss. The insurer would be liable to pay
the full amount of the policy;

(b) if the Valuation Clause is there, then, by the fiction
agreed to by the parties, its value on repair will be taken
as £10,000 (insured value) and not £6,000 (actual post-
repair value).

(in actual practice, when this clause is there, settlement
is made by compromise, so that the ship-owner may not
be compelled to spend more in repairs than the ship would
be actually worth to him when repaired. The reason is,
that after all, the Valuation Clause provides a legal fiction
which may not be in conformity with realities in some
cases) 3-4

2The value fixed by the policy is not conclusive for determining whether
there is a constructive total loss ; see section 27 (4) English Act,—Clause 29
(4).

3This is not the same thing as “‘ Dual Valuation Clause *—discus:eJ
under clause 24.

4$uch compromises would fall under ‘ Compromised total loss”.
“Cf. Dover, page 40r.


93
How the absence of a Valuation Clause may lead to an Anomaly in

anomaly can be illustrated by the following example:— the absence
(Valuation Clause absent in both cases) Clause.
Case A Case B
Insured Value £5,000 £5,000
Cost of repair £4,700 £4,590
Value after repair £4,600 £4,600

In the Case A mentioned above, the insurer will be liable

to pay the full amount of £5,000, (because there will be a
total loss) while in the Case B mentioned above there will
be no total loss as the cost of repair is less than the value
after repair and the insurer will pay only the actual cost of
the repair. Thus, a slight difference in the amount of the
cost of repair affeets considerably the insurer's liability—
a position which is certainly anomalous. (If the Valuation
Clause were there, neither of the cases would be a total loss
and in both cases the insurer will pay only the actual cost
of repairs.)

Sometimes, to avoid disputes, the insurer may compro- Arranged or
mise the total loss. This will be a “compromised total loss”. gp pmised
Sometimes the parties may agree that a total loss has occur- *
red. This would be an “arranged total loss”. The impor-
tance of these two concepts arises in re-insurance, where °
the original insurer, having paid a compromised total loss
or arranged total loss, claims the amount which he has paid
from the re-insurer. Often, re-insurance against total loss
of ship is effected against “constructive and/or compromised
and/or arranged total loss only”, to make the matter clear.
An explanation of the words “compromised” and “arrang-
ed” has been given by Lawrence L.J.! as follows:—

“Compromised_ assumes that a mutual concession
has been made by both parties and that each party has
got something less than he claimed”.

As to “arranged”, His Lordship said:—

“The word arranged to my mind is a wider word
altogether than compromised. In certain cases, and in
my judgment in this case, it is equivalent to agreed”.

In the United States, there is a constructive total loss if American
the damage to a ship or cargo exceeds 50% of the value? "We.
But even in the U.S.A. the rule is subject to any express
agreement to the contrary. The English rule is well estab-
lished, and has been adopted; parties can, where they so
choose, adopt a different rule.

'Gurney v. Grimmer, (1932) 38 Comm. Cases 7 cited in Dover, page
472. See also Lord Chorley, Shipping Law, page 296.

245 Corpus Juris Secundum, Insurance, page 1150, pare, 956, right
hand column. :


94

दीपपध० Section 60(2) (ii), second paragraph, which provides that

Spertions” account is to be taken (in estimating the cost of repairs) of

and“ Fy- the expenses of future salvage operations and future

ture General genera] average contributions to which the ship would be

Average liable if repaired, is to be applied from the date of the

0 casualty, The word “future” would include all post-casualty
salvage operations or general average contributions.
(Contributions or operations prior to the casualty are not
relevant for the purpose of the section).

Clause 62
General. This deals with the effect of constructive total loss
Right to Option to treat the loss as partial has been given to the
1098 88 assured, The question will naturally arise, how, treating
partial. the loss as a partial one would benefit the assured. The

answer is this—

(४) Even a partial loss can be claimed upto 100 per
cent of the insured value," The amount claimable
under a total loss cannot, obviously, also exceed 100 per
cent of the insured value. Thus, the assured is not in a
worse position in all cases by treating it as a partial
Joss only.

(४) As a matter of fact, in a partial loss, the in-
surer may, in addition, be liable for “sue and labour” or
“salvage charges”*. In the case of total loss, however,
the doctrine of “abandonment” transfers to the insurer
the rights of the assured in what remained of the
subject-matter.>

(iti) Further, a partial loss does not terminate the
policy as such, and, therefore, if the policy is a time
policy, the assured continues to enjoy the benefit of the
policy after the partial loss, until the expiry of the
Specified period.

(iv) Lastly, where the subject-matter is greatly
under-insured, claiming for constructive total loss
would not, obviously, benefit the assured, because all
that he would get is the amount insured (which would
be lower than the value of the subject-matter).

Departure Two questions have arisen in connection with abandon-

en the ment. The first is, whether, after the assured has elected

Act—Events to treat a loss as a total loss, can the insurer by his act affect

subsequent prejudicially the right of the assured? The second is, whe-

to election. ther after the assured exercises his election, can events
happening subsequently affect his rights so as to enable
the insurer to insist on the assured taking back the ship
and claiming only for a partial loss?

20n the principle of indemnity.
3868 sections 6s and 78, respectively of the Englivh Act,—Clauses 66
np.

२566 section 63 of the English Act,—Clause 64.


an 95

As regards the first question, the law in England is well-
settled that the insurer cannot require the assured to take
possession of the ship merely on the ground that the suit
has not yet been filed and the ship has been salved in the
meantime. See in this connection the following case’ and.
the discussion in the text books,*

As regards the second question, the rule in England.
would appear to be that the circumstances as they existed
on the date of the action have to be looked at. On this
view, a total loss is said to be “adeemed” if the loss did not
continue to be total at the commencement of the action.
Thus, if a ship is captured and due notice of abandonment
given, still if the property is re-captured the assured can
recover only for a partial loss. See the decision cited below?
and the discussion in the text-book.‘ This rule is peculiar to
England and is not recognised in Scotland, United States,
or the Continental systems.

It is considered that such subsequent events should not
affect the right of the assured. The validity of the election
made by. the assured should be judged with reference to the
state of affairs existing on the date of election; the doctrine
of “ademption” should not be adopted and the view recog-
nised in Scotland, United States, and the Continents should
be followed here also. Necessary provision has been made.

Thus, the clause under discussion— Course,
red.
(i) embodies the English rule on the first point and
(ii) departs from the English law, on the second
point.

[It will be of some interest to note that an attempt was
made to codify the English rule at the time when the Marine
Insurance Act was on the anvil. The following sub-clause
was there in the original Bill:

“Where the assured has given a notice of abandonment
which has not been accepted, the validity of the abandon-
ment must be determined with reference to the state of
affairs at the time of action brought”. .

‘Blatrmore Sailing Ship Co. v. Macredie (1898) A.C. 593, 607.

*Halsbury, 3rd Edn. Vol. 22, page 156, para, 302, and Amauld, Vol, 2,
1954 Edn, Art, 1126.

*Bainbridge v. Neilson, (1808) 10 East 329.

‘Halsbury, 3rd Edn. Vol. 22, page 159, paragraph 308 ; and Arnould
‘Vol. 2, pages 1000--1001, Arts. 1096 & seq; and Keate, p. 93, discussie:
vunder “‘ Waiver Clause".

*Sce also the body of the Report paras. 8 and 9,


Object.

Abandonment.

96
The clause was, however, struck out in consequence of
objections taken to it by Scottish Members.

It will also be interesting to note that some controversy
did prevail.as to whether the Act has altered the English
Common Law rule; but the decision of the Court of Appeal*
laid down that in deciding upon the validity of claims
of this nature the matter must be considered “as they stood
on the date of the commencement of the action”.

This view was approved by Lord Wright in—Rickward
v. Forestal ete. Co.5 observing that “The old rule is, I think,
still the law”,

Clause 63
This deals with notice of abandonment.

The object behind the provisions as to giving notice of
abandonment immediately is “to preclude the assured from
waiting on developments to decide in what form to present
his claim”’* As has been observed,’ the assured “is not
allowed to await events to see how things turn out or to
decide what may best suit his interests”.

Clause 64
This deals with the effect of abandonment.

On abandonment, the interest of the assured in whatever
remains of the subject-matter is transferred to the insurer,
including all proprietary rights incidental thereto. Further,
he is entitled to any freight in the course of being earned
(less certain expenses). Lastly, he is entitled to a reason-
able remuneration for the carriage of the goods subsequent
to the casualty causing the loss.

The distinction between abandonment arid subrogation

‘and subro- can be understood by a reference to the provisions of the

gation.

“Is entitl-
ed.”

section relating to subrogation.*

Where there is valid abandonment, then under the
English Act, the insurer “is entitled” to take over the inte-
rest of the assured. He is, however, not bound to do so.
The question has. arisen in England whether the ship or
other subject-matter insured becomes res-nullius on aban-
donment if the insurer does not take over the property.” It

18९6 Arnould, Vol. 2, page 700, Art. 10972, and Chalmers sth edn.
pages 94-95. :

*Polurrian Steamship Go. Ltd, v. Young, (1915) 1 K.B. 922.

%(1942) A.C, 50, 85.

‘Dover, page 411.

*Richards v. Forestal etc. Co., (1942) A.C. 50, 84, per Lord Wright. °

"See section 79 of the English Act,—Clause 80 and notes thereto.

7See Chalmers, p. 97.


a7

is considered that the insurer should have an option to take
over; he should not be placed under a legal obligation to
do so Hence no departure from the English Act is neces-
sary. The. change Proposed will make the Position clear.

[lt appears that in the United States of America,! jf the
underwriter after the abandonment takes possession of the
vesse] and repairs her and returns her to the insured, it
constitutes an acceptance of abandonment; but it has also.
been held that the underwriter may, without accepting an
abandonment take and repair a vessel and return her to the
insured if the expenses of the repair are not sufficient to
constitute a constructive total loss, But if the expenses
exceed such amount, the insured cannot be required to re-

can recover the cost of additional repairs. The insured may
impose reasonable conditions to be complied with before he
can be required to accept the vessel.

It has been held in the US.A2 that abandonment when Passing of
made relates back to the time of the 1058 and the under- title.
writers become vested as from that date.]

Clause 65
This deals with particular average loss. General,
A particular average loss must be— Analysis,

(i) a partial loss,
(४) caused’ by peril insured against, and
(it) not 2४ gerieral average loss.3

The distinction between a particular average and a gene-
ral average is that—
(a) general average is voluntary, while particular
average is accidental;
(20) general average is undertaken to save property
imperilled in a common adventure. Particular average
is a loss pure and simple.

Damage by sea water when not amounting to total loss,
or damage by fire or collision, are examples of particular
averages.

Charges incurred by the assured for the safety or pre- p,
servation of the subject-matter insured are called particular charges,
charges and are not included in particular average. This
is provided by sub-section @). “Examples of OY tion (2). Examples of particular

745 Corpus Juris Secundum, Insurance, page 115, para, 965, lefi-tana
column.

n45 Corpus Juris Secondum, Insurance, page 116, para. 965, leftchand
colum,—** Relation back.”

*As to gencral average loss, see section 66 of the English Act,—Clausc
475


98

charges would be as stated by Dover,' the cost of pickin
sound cotton from damaged cotton, the cost o! “gkinming™
cocoa, and other re-conditioning charges.? These are parti-
culars in the sense that they are applicable to a particular
interest.

Classification Particular average may be classified as—

(a) damage to ship, for example, by forcible
impact;

(0) loss of freight, for example, by reason of partial
loss of cargo by particular average; and
(c) damage to cargo.

Particular The following chart may be of some help in under-
average and standing the relationship between particular average and
aed con” allied concepts:—

Partial 1088 by

peril insured against
$. 56 (1)

Particular General
average
Sot 5.66
[Does not,
include

Peharees|

particular charges

Sue and Other particular

labour charges, e.g.

8. 78 reconditioning
charges at
destination,

Dover, page 417.

tAs for other provisions as to particular charges, see section 65 (2), 76
and Sch. Trale 14 of the Baglish Act," Sue and labour charges are examples
of “particular charges”. See section 78 of the English Act.--Clause 79.


99 ५ बन

Clause 66
This deals with salvage charges. General,

Even apart from marine insurance, salvage is a concept Salvage.
of importance in maritime law. As provided by section 6 of
the (English) Maritime Conventions Act, 1911 (1 and 2
Geo. 5, c. 57), the master of a vessel shall, so far as he can do
so without serious danger to his own vessel etc. render
assistance to every person, even if such a person be a sub-
ject of a foreign State at war with His Majesty, who is found
at sea in danger of being lost and if he fails to do 33, he shall
be guilty of misdemeanour. When such assistance is given,
the right to reward for the rescue of the maritime property?
has been recognised since the time of Rome. Colliding ves-
sels are also bound to stand by each other under section 422
of the (English) Merchant Shipping Act, 1894. Further,
ships receiving a wireless distress call are bound to render
assistance under section 22 of the (English) Merchant Ship-
ping (Safety Conventions) Act, 1949. For corresp nding
provisions in India, see sections 402 and 348 of the lerchant
Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958) and also section 355 of that
Act regarding signals of distress.

The significance of the section lies in providing that Significance

salvage charges incurred in preventing a loss by perils of the
insured against will be recovered as a loss. This is, of "
course, subject to any contrary provisions in the policy.
The section makes an express reference to “Maritime Law”,
meaning thereby the Common Law rules relating to
salvage, now partly embodied in the statutory provisions
quoted above.? As the measure of liability for salvage
charges, see a separate provision.*

Clause 67
This deals with general average loss. General,

Some amount of confusion results from the fact that the Explanation
expression “general average” is used in several senses, of the various
which though related to each other, are not the same. First, coneebrs of
there is a general average act; next, there is a general aver- Sverage ©
age loss; lastly, there is a general average contribution, The act, (8) loss,
expression “general average” is used to cover all these i) contr
three, which are explained below:— tion.

In the topic of “general average”, a general average act
comes first. In time of peril, for the purpose of preserving

186८ Temperley Merchant Shipping Acts, 5th edn., page 565.
*As to saving of life, see s. 544 (English), Merchant Shipping Act, 1894,
*For a full discussion of the subject of salvage see—

@ Dover, page 671680;

Gi) Kennedy, Law of Civil salvage.
‘Clause 74(2),



‘Loss that

has occurred

to the as-
sured.

“100

property imperilled in common adventure, where extra-
ordinary sacrifice or expenditure is ineurred voluntarily
and reasonably, there arises a general average act. The act
thus denotes such—

(i) sacrifice, or

(ii) expenditure.

When such an act is done, naturally, a loss is caused as a
result thereof. If the loss is caused by or directly conse-
quential on a general average act, the loss is called a general
average loss. .

Where such a loss arises, the question that naturally
comes to mind is, who will pay for it? Section.66(3) of the
English Act provides that the party on whom such loss
falls is entitled to rateable contribution from the other
parties interested; this contribution. is called a general
average contribution,

The chronological order of the various steps can be
shown in the form of a chart as follows: —

CHART (General Average)

General average act @ sacrifice
or

(४) expenditure.
General average loss

General average contribution.
So far, we have been dealing with the assured and his

. rights to contribution from others. Marine insurance, how-

ever, also steps in by providing that if the general average
loss was incurred in connection with a peril insured against,
the.assured can recover from the insurer the loss caused to
him, subject to any express provision in the policy. Now,
here the right to recovery can be dealt with under two
heads:
(i) where the loss has itself occurred to the as-
sured; and.
(it) where the loss has occurred to others and the
assured has contributed as a contributory.
Further, in the first case there is some distinction if the loss
is caused by “expenditure” as distinct from a loss caused by
“sacrifice”.
The following chart will illustrate the topic of recovery
from the insurer:—
CHART— (Recovery for general average from the
insurer)
(a) General average expenditure—Proportion of
the loss which falls upon the assured can be recovered.
from the insurer—s, 66(4), earlier part.


101

(b) General average sacrifice —Whole loss may be
recovered from insurer, without enforcing contribution
from others—s. 66 (4), latter part.

May be recovered from the insurer—s. 66 (5). Contribution
paid or pay-
able by the
assured to
others.

A general average loss is voluntary and is “deliberately How general
designed ta prevent greater losses”! That is how it differs average loss
from other losses, which are caused purely by accident. A difers Bom
loss caused by accident lies where it falls, that is to say, it reasons be-
is borne by the owner whose cargo is lost. But a general hind the
average loss is effected purposely for the benefit of all tule.
persons interested, and hence other interests which have
been saved must contribute to make good the loss. The
doctrine “springs from a rule of law applicable to all who
chance to have interests on board a ship at sea exposed to
some common danger threatening the whole; it is founded
upon justice, public policy and convenience”.?

Since the working out of contribution under general York-
average-—what is called “average adjustment”—may have to fouwerp
be effected between persons belonging to different countries, 7
and may give rise to problems of conflict of laws, ship-
owners have evolved a standard set of rules relating to
general average, known as York-Antwerp Rules. The Rules
are incorporated in charter-parties and bills of lading, and
differ on some points from the provisions in the Marine In-
surance Act. It is not, however, necessary here to discuss
the Rules in detail?

Section 66(2) of the English Act gives a definition of a Ingredients
general average act, and on analysis the definition will be of zeneral
found to yield the following ingredients: — average Act.

(i) Existence of actual danger, expressed by the
words “in time of peril”. Thus, a sacrifice made at a
time when the master of the ship believes that there was
fire on the hold while actually there was no danger,
would not be a general average 8204-06

It has been said that a mistaken belief in the exist- Departure
ence of the danger, if reasonable, may turn the act into from. the
a general average act under the York-Antwerp Rules.®-° ne"

Act—in
York-
‘Lord Chorley, Law of Shipping, 3rd edition, page 173. Antwerp
*Fire v. Middle Dock Co. (1882) 44 L.-T. 426 cited in Dover Hand- Rules—
book to Marine Insuranc, 1957 edition, page 419. Discussed.

4For the text of the rules, see—
6) Dover, page 743 ef seg.
(8) Keate, page 171 e¢ seq.
sWarson (Joseph) & Co. v. Firemen’s Fund Insurance Co. (1922) 2
KB. 35592 LK. 8. 3:
*See Halsbury, 3rd edition, Vol. 22, page 122 and page 125.

‘The relevant cult is Rule A, York-Antwerp Rules, 1950 reproduced in
Chalmers page 214, and Dover, page 750.



Query,

Success of
the adven-

102

The position, however, is by no means clear and conflict-
ing opinions have been expressed. In the U.S.A. a
reasonable apprehension of danger is sufficient. In
view of the doubt existing on the subject even in Eng-
land as to whether the York-Antwerp Rules strike a
departure from the English Act, it is considered unnec-
sary to depart from the language of the section on this
point.

(ii) There must be some extraordinary sacrifice or
expenditure, The sacrifice or expenditure must not fall
“within the compass of the ordinary duties of the ship-
owner”, If, for example, a sailing ship having an auxi-
liary engine loses her sailing power and has to use
steam, thereby increasing the expenses, the increased
expenditure is not extraordinary?

The “sacrifice” may consist of “jettison”, that is,
throwing away of the cargo to lighten the ship, or it
may consist of burning the cargo and spars as additional
fuel for pumping water by the donkey engine where
the coal runs short and the ship has sprung a leak.

(uit) The act must be voluntary. It must not be—

(a) an act of God, for example, a storm which
washes out the cargo but preserves the other pro-
perty;

(6) an act of other person, for example, that of
a mob which takes away the cargo of corn where
the vessel is stranded*

The York-Antwerp Rules, Rule A, speaks cf a sacri-
fice or expenditure which is “Intentionally” made or in-
curred. The question has been raised whether this
means a departure from the statutory expression
iountary * The exp ression “intentionally” is also used
in Rule V of those Rules, though the marginal note to
those rules is, curiously, “voluntary stranding”.

(४०) The act must be reasonable in the circumstances
of the case.

(v) The act must have been done for the purpose of
preserving the property imperilled in the adventure. In
Rule A of the York-Antwerp Rules, the words “for the
common safety for the purpose of preserving from peril
the property involved in a common maritime adven-
ture” are used.

It has been said, that both at Common Law and
under the York-Antwerp Rules, contribution can be de-
manded only if the general average act is successful,

3866 Lord Chorley, Law of Shipping, 4th edition, page 182.
"Wilson v. Bank of Victoria (1867), LR. 2 0.8, 203.
‘Lord Chorley, Law of Shipping, 3rd edition, page 182,


103

that is to say, if the adventure as a whole has been
saved. If no property escapes the dangers from which
the sacrifice was intended to save it, there is no general
average,

It has been suggested that in section 66 (5), (of the Departure
English Act) the word “subject” should be “subject- Bo a oe
matter” or “interest” and in section 66(7), it should be Ene! .
“interest”? The suggestion appears to be reasonable
and has been adopted.

Clause 68

This deals with the extent of liability of the insurer for General,
the loss.

The sum which the assured can recover is restricted—

(०) in the case of a valued policy,’ to the full extent Distinction
icy ow
of the value fixed by the policy; bet in
unvalued
policies,
(b) in the case of an unvalued policy, to the full
extent of the insurable value.

Clause 69

This section, which at first sight appears to be a repetition General,
of section 67 of the English Act, is not actually so. Section 67
deals generally with the measure of indemnity, while sec-
tion 68 deals particularly with that measure in the case cf a
total loss. While section 67 gives the maximum limit for all
cases, section 68 has the effect of enabling the assured to re-
cover that from the insurer in the case of a total loss.

Clause 70
1, This deals with partial loss of ship. General.

2. All partial losses, including general and particular: Application
averages, are recovered. But the section is subject to any of the sec-
other express provision in the policy. tion.

3. The section uses the expression “reasonable cost” and “ Reason-
“reasonable depreciation”, Section 88 of the English Act *¢”.
dealing with “reasonable time”, ete. does not specifically
mention reasonable “cost” and reasonable “depreciation”.

But obviously the question will be decided by the court in
each case.

4. Where it is intended to repair the ship, the insurer has Tender
right to exercise control over the cost of repairs under what clause.
is known as the “Tender clause”.

*Lord Chorley, Law of Shipping, 3rd edition, page 185,
"See Chalmers, page 102, foot-notes 1 and 3,

*See section 27 of the English Act,—Clause 24,

‘The clause is cited in Dover, page 424.


104

recia Sub-sections (2) and (3) speak of “depreciation”. The
following questions, namely,—

(४) whether depreciation should be taken to mean
the estimated cost of repairs, and, if so,

(ii) what is the date with reference to which the
repairs are to be estimated—is it the date of arrival at
destination—are matters which need not be discussed,
because in practice, most cases are settled by compro-
mise,

aGustomey For deductions under “New for old”, see rule XIII of the
geduction— York-Antwerp Rules, 1950.2

old”,

Suggestion 5. It has been suggested that when the damage is only
to substitute partly repaired or not repaired at all. the measure of indem-
on of ren nity of the assured (for the unrepaired damage) should be
Baored, ath of the reas:nable cost of the unrepaired damage, to be

ascertained at the ship’s home port on the last date of the
apiry of the policy. This test differs from the test adopted
in the English Act. The English Act puts it &s the reason-
able depreciation arising from the unrepaired damage (sub-
ject to certain maximum with which we are not ecncerned
in this connection). After giving careful consideration to
the question, it appears that the test adopted in the English
Act is the logical and the correct one. The contract of insur-
ance is one of indemnity only, and the thing for which the
insurer promises to indemnify the assured js the loss caused
by the casualty. Reasonable depreciation reflects this “loss”
aspect correctly.

6. It is true that it is not always easy to evaluate depre-
ciation. But that difficulty applies even to the test sug-
gested; because the process of fixing the hypothetical cast
of repairing damage which has not been actually repaired
cannot yield very accurate and precise results.4

7. In fact, the suggested test can give rise to over-pay-
ment occasionally. For example, if the original value of the
subject-matter insured is Rs. 10,000 and the value at the

home port is Rs. 8,000, but the surveyor estimates the cost of
repair at more than Rs. 2,000, the assured will be over-paid.
(The value at the home port will be a hypothetical figure;
but so also will be the estimate of the cost of repairs.)

Cf. Dover, pp. 423-424,
‘Reproduced in Keate, p. 175, Dover, page 760.
"See Dover, page 423, last para,

‘In practice, claims for such damage are usually compromised ३ see
Dover, page 424, second para.


105

8. For these reasons the suggestion has not been
accepted.t

9. Where a ship is injured by perils insured against but Sale without
is sold without repair, what is the amount which the in- Fepair.
surer has to pay? Section 69 of the English Act does riot
deal with this situation, presumably because the law on the
subject was in an unsettled condition at the time when the
proposal to enact legislation on marine insurance was first
taken up in England?

10. Before the 1906 Act, this point arose directly in a case Decision
before the Court of Appeal.? The rival contentions advanced before the
in that case were:— Pitman’s

case.
(i) the diminution in the value of the ship (depre-
ciation) as shown by the difference between the original
value of the ship and the price realised on sale, should
be the measure of indemnity;

(ii) the estimated cost of repairs is the sole measure
of indemnity, and no regard is to be had to the depreci-
ation in value. It was contended that if the owner
actually repairs the ship, he would certainly get the
reasonable cost of repairs, and the fact that he chooses
to sell it instead of repair it should not make a differ-
ence.

The first test was upheld by a majority of the Court of
Appeal (Jessel M. R. and Cotton L, J. confirming on this
point the judgment of Lindley J.), while the second wes
favoured in the dissenting judgment of Brett LJ.

11. The question as to which of the two tests mentioned Importance
above is to be applied, was of great importance in the case of rule be
cited above,’ as will be seen from the facts. A ship valued *PPlied.
at 3,700 consols was insured in that case, She sailed from
Singapore to Moulmein, and in passing up the river to the
port of Moulmein took the ground and remained aground

or four days until she -was got off and towed up to Moul-
mein, The plaintiffs (the owners) determined to abandon
the vessel and gave notice of abandonment, but the under-
writers declined to accept it. The plaintiffs, thereupon,
having made some slight repairs, sold the ship and_ stores
for 3,897 consols. In the statement of claim, the plaintiffs

‘As to the possible tests of depreciation, sce also Halsbury, Volume XXII,
Page 138, para, 266, foot-note (@), where two tests have been fentioned tr
(0) difference between conventional value and damaged value,

७0 proportion of the actual depreciation to be ascertained and applied
to conventional value.

The point was left open in Irvin v. Hyne, (1949) 2 811 ER, 1089,
361, Chalmers, page 108.

‘Pitman v. The Universal Marine Insurance Co. (1882) 9 Q.BD.
192,


106

had stated the value of the ship at the commencement of the
risk as 4,000 consols. The plaintiffs claimed 781 consols and
odd as a partial average loss, apparently on the basis that
the loss to be made good is to be measured by the amount
which it would have cost to repair the ship (deducting one-
third as the customary allowance for new material). On
this basis, the plaintiffs argued that the cost of repairing the
ship so as to make her as good as she was before she took the
ground, would have been about 5,300 consols, and, there-
fore, the difference hetween that 5,300 and the value of the
ship minus 4,000, that is 1,300, less one-third, was the
measure of indemnity. It was on this basis that the plain-
tiffs claimed 781 and cdd consols. The defenclants, on the
other hand, took the stand that since the plaintiffs had
actually sold the ship, all that they could reccver was the
difference between the “sound” value of the ship—4,000 con-
sols—and the sale price realised, 3,897 consols. The differ-
ence would have come to about 113 consols, and adding to
this certain amounts actually spent by the plaintiffs on
slight repairs, the defendants paid 245 consols into court.
Thus the adoption of the one or the other rule made a con-
siderable difference in the amount to be borne by the in-
surer, .

Judgment of 12. In the court of the first instance, Lindley J., adopted

Lindley J. the first test, viz. rule of depreciation. He held, that the
cases were conclusive to show that events which had hap-
pened and not those which might have happened are to be
regarded. He stressed the indemnity aspect of insurance,
and repelled the contention that there was authority for
the rules suggested by the plaintiffs. Analysing the plain-
tiff’s contention, he said, that it was based upon three
assumptions,—

(i) that the plaintiffs might have repaired if they
had chosen;

(ii) that if they had repaired, the cost of repairs
would be the measure of their loss;

(iid) that it is immaterial to the insurers whether
the repairs were actually effected or not.

As to the first, Lindley J., took it to be well-founded,
because a shipowner could always repair if he chose and
thus refrain from insisting on a total loss. As to the second
assumption, he thought that it was well-founded if the
Tepairs are made bona fide and with reasonable discretion.
But he pointed out that if the repairs are so extensive and
so out of proportion to the value of the ship when repaired,
ag to show want of bona fides or a total disregard of what is-
reasonable, then, it is by no means clear that their cost
could be thrown on the underwriter. As to the third as-
sumption, namely, that the plaintiffs had the right to repair
and to recover the cost, whether the right is exercised or
not, he regarded it as entirely erroneous. “Against what


107

do the underwriters agree to indemnify the assured? Sure- _
ly against such loss as he may in fact sustain by reason of
the perils insured. against”.' “‘“‘Apart from all authority I
shoul id have thought it plain that a loss actually sustained
under the circumstances which did happen, is to be pre-
ferred as a measure of indemnity to a loss which would
have been sustained under circumstances which did not
happen.” He found no authority to the contrary. Accord-
‘ingly, he held that the depreciation in the value of the ship
was the real criterion, and was to be measured by the
difference between the value of the ship when sound and
what she is sold for when damaged. (The detailed calcula-
tion need not be considered at this stage).

13. (a) The plaintiffs appealed, and a majority of the Judgment ot
Court of Appeal affirmed the judgment on the main point, the Court of
namely, which of the two rival tests mentioned above was .
to be adopted. Jessel M. R. observed:? “The contract of
insurance is, as I understand, a contract of indemnity to the
insured against the loss incurred by him through the ship
being injured by the perils of the sea. It follows from this,
that as a general rule in no case can the insured become
richer by reason of these perils, or ‘in other words, that the
insured are not to be entitled to receive from the insurer a
larger sum for a single partial loss than if the ship was
wholly lost.” He furthér observed, that the rights of the
shipowner who actually repaired the vessel to recover the
amount expended in repairs are not the same in all-cases as
those of a shipowner who declines to repair because the
ship is not worth repairing and who, therefore, sells the
ship during the risk.

(6) Cotton L. J., also. took the view that where the ship-
owner elects to take the course of selling the ship, he “as
against himself, fixes his loss”, i.e. he cannot, as against
the underwriters, say that the depreciation of the vessel
exceeds that which is ascertained by the result of the sale.
“To hold that in the present case the insured is entitled to
recover two-thirds of the estimated cost of repairs would
be contrary to what is one of-the principles applicable to
all insurance cases, that the policy is a contract of indem-
nity”® While he took note of the fact that as a general
rule the estimated’ cost of the repairs is the measure of
deterioration, he pointed out, adopting the language of
Maule J. in an earlier case,t “that the insured must recover
- the expenses not eo nomine as expenses but as the measure

1Pitman v.. The Universal Marine Insurance Co., (1882) 9 Q.B.D,
192, 197. हु
*Pitman v. The Universal Marine Insurance’ Co., (1882) 9 Q.B.D. 192,
२१882) 9 Q.B.D, 192, 218.” .
‘Stewart v. Steéle, 5 Scott. N. R. 921, 948.
296 M of L—8


108

of the loss”. Probably, he observed,’ the most accurate way
of stating the measure of what, under such circumstances,
the ship-owner is to recover, 13, that it will be the estimated
cost of repairs less the usual deduction, not exceeding the
depreciation in value of the vessel as ascertained by the
sale,

(c) Brett L. J., however, in a dissenting judgment, held

“that a contract of marine insurance has nothing to do with

depreciation,

gains or losses which are outside the contract. He observed
that it was the cost of repairs against which the owner was
indemnified and not the diminution in the value. He cited
Arnould’s statement? to the effect that if the damage done
to the ship has not been repaired, the only mode of ascer-
taining its amount is by the estimate of surveyors. He
cited certain cases also where the actual sale price was
never considered as relevant. He further pointed out that
the underwriters had for years paid for repairs. A policy
on marine insurance is mainly construed according to long
settled and admitted usage of merchants and underwriters,
and the startling facts of the case in question which were
wholly abnormal, should not, he said, justify any tampering
with a settled rule of adjustment of मी ility. He was,
therefore, of the opinion that the plaintiffs’ claim ought to
be allowed.

14. While the judgment of Lindley J., was thus approved
on the main question as to the test to be applied, the sub-
ordinate question, namely, how depreciation is to be caleu-
lated was not discussed at length by the Court of Appeal.
The formula suggested in this connection by Lindley J. can
be put as follows:? The sound value of the ship in the
port of distress (Moulmein in this case) is to be ascertained.
Her damaged value, i.e. the value for which she was sold,
less the amount spent on repairs before sale, should be
next ascertained. The difference between the sound value’
as so calculated and the damaged value as so calculated,
represents the proportion of loss sustained by the ship-
owner. (To this may be added whatever other sums are
properly chargeable against the underwriters, and the final
proportion of loss thus arrived at). The proportion of loss
so arrived at is to be applied to the ship on its declared
value (or, if the policy is an unvalued one, then on its real
value) at the commencement of the risk. The proportion
of the loss so calculated will be what the insurers have to
pay. In the Court of Appeal Jéssel M. R. stated:

“As to the value, I think, the value to be regarded
is the value of the ship at the port of departure, but in this

11882) 9 Q.B.D. 192, 218, 219.

"Armould, Fifth edition, Vol, 2, page 901. Now see Fourteenth edition,
Vol. 2, page 954.

1882) 9 Q.B.D., 192, 203 ; first 13 Lines.

(1882) 9. Q.B.D. 192, 205,



109

case 11 is not material because, I think, the value at Moul-
mein before the injury wag about the same.” Cotton L. के,
does not appear to have touched this point (beyond stating
that the measure of indemnity should not exceed ‘the depre-
ciation as ascertained by the sale.) मु

15. It would seem that there is no reason why the case Departure
of the ship being scold without repair in damaged state English
should not be covered. The amount to be recovered by Act
assured should not exceed the depreciation as ascertained
by the sale. Subject to this restriction, the reasonable cost
of repairing damage can be allowed.

Necessary departure has been made accordingly from
the English Act.*

The effect of this decision has been thus stated in
Arnould®;

“If the ship after sustaining an average loss is sold
by her owner unrepaired, the measure 0 what he is
entitled to recover against the insurer is the estimated

. Cost of repairs less the usual deduction, not exceeding
the depreciation in value of the vessel as ascertained by
the sale.

[Arnould, of course, observes that it is impossible not
to feel the force of the powerful dissenting judgment in
view of which the law can hardly be stated to be settled.]

Clause 71

This deals with partial loss of freight. The proportion General,
of the freight lost with reference to the whole freight at
the risk of the assured has to be ascertained. That propor-
. tion.of the sum fixed by the policy (if valued) or of the
insurable value (if unvalued) is the measure of indemnity.

Clause 72
This deals with partial loss of Goods, etc. General,

The measure of indemnity is fixed with reference to
“insurable value”. Now, insurable value as defined* is the
Prime cost of the property insured plus the expenditure
etc. Insurable value is thus artificially frozen with refer-
ence to the value before the shipping of the goods. The re-
sult is that, if the market prices of the goods fall, the assur-
ed can nevertheless claim indemnity on the basis of the old
value. Hence, “cargo claims have a tendency to be more

ACS. the © कक the judgment of Conon LJ. आय labo of Cotton L.J., discussed above—para. 10(b),
*See also the body of Report, para, 10.

*Amould, 1954 Edition, Vol, 2, page 954, Article 1034.
“Section 16 (3), English “Act—Clause 13 (3).


Application,
of the
section.

10

frequent in times of commercial depression than when there
is a heavy consumer demand.”*

Clause 73

_ This deals with apportionment of valuation. The sec-
tion obviously is confined to valued policies.

. The necessity for a section like this arises in the follow-
ing cases:-—

Supposing different species of property are insured under
a valued policy; but the value of each species is not men-
tioned separately; then how is the value of each species to
be taken in case of loss? If the policy is taken as unvalued,
then there is no point in having entered a valuation. But,
on the other hand, the valuation is a single one. What the
seetion provides in effect is—the splitting up of the valua-
tion, “apportionment”. The single value is apportioned
over the different species, that is, split up, “as in the case
of an unvalued policy”?

The process is as follows:—-

(४) First find out the insurable value of the species
(see section 16 of the English Act);

(ii) then find out the insurable value of the whole
(s. 16, English Act);

(ii) then find out the proportion between (i) and
(z) above. That proportion of the total insured value
(which is already entered in the policy, the policy be-
ing a valued one) is taken as the insured value of the
species,

This principle applies to species as well as to a part of
a species.

“Netarrived Where it is not possible to ascertain the value of the

value.

General.

spe cies by the test given above (because the various ingre-
ents mentioned in section 16 of the English Act cannot be
ascertained), a division of the valuation is made with refer-
ence to the “net arrived sound value” of the goods and their
various species. “Arrived” values means the value of the
goods when they arrive at the destination.

Clause 74.
‘This deals with measure of liability for—
(@ ‘general avetage contribution; and
(ii) salvage charges. - हु

Dover, page 427. - vee
For unvalued policies, see section 16 of the English Act—Ciause 13.


111.

- The section [sub-section (1)] is intended to indicate the plication
rules governing measure of liability of the insurer for Section,
amounts which the assured has paid or is Hable to pay as
general average contribution. Loss caused directly by the
act of assured himself is not the subject-matter of the
section.

The measure of indemnity is governed by “Contribu- Contributory
tory value”. The contributory value of an interest is its Value.
arrived value less any expenses or charges incurred after
the general average act which would not have been incur-
red had this proved abortive.

If the contributory value is less than the insured value,
the insurer pays in full. Otherwise his liability is rateably
reduced:.

The rules actually adopted in business practice as- to
coritributory values provide that contribution shall be made,
“apon the actual net values of the property at the termina-
tion of the adventure, to which values shall be added the
amount made good as general average for property sacri-
ficed if not already included.” (with certain deductions) *

The following illustration‘ may be useful:—
Cargo insured on valuation of 5000
Particular less amounting to 10%

Illustration.

Deduction from the insured value [vide last 20 words
of sub-section (1)] 500 (ie. 5000 divided by 10).

Basis of insurer's liability thus reduced to 4500
(5000—500).

On the above data—

(i) if the contributory value is less than 4500, the
insurers are liable in full for general average contribu-
tion [section 73 (1), earlier part].

(४) if the contributory value is more than 4500,
the insurer’s liability is रन तक reduced. For
example, if the contributory value is 100, the insurers
pay only three-fourths (4500/8000) of ‘the general
average contribution. [section 73 (1), middle part].

कक pie 43. 430. ~
+For a detailed treatment of contributory values,
29. ; :

see Keate, pages 128-

*See Rule XVII of.the FotkeAntwerp Rules, 1950, reproduced in Keate,

page 177 and in Dover, Page 749. See also the Rules of Practice of the As-
sociation of Aver Adjusters, rules 30, a > Iced i
Reate, page 194 and Dover, ‘page कक 3 ३2, 33 and ३4 reproduced in

“Cf. Dover, pages 430-431.


ane

Salvage.

Criticiem

. regarding
charges.

General.

Examples.

112
Sub-section (2) provides that liability for salvage

charges\—i.e, extent of liability—will be determined on the
like principles.

Two criticisms have been made against this provision

(relating to salvage charges)—

(i) The subject-matter must contribute to salvage
charges on the basis of its saved value and not its
arrived value as in general average.

(ii) Where a portion has been actually sacrificed
in general average and the general average act necessi-
tates salvage, one difficulty arises. The salvors can
collect pro rata on the saved values, while the contri-
bution in general average must be based on arrived
values. The sacrificed portion does not, however,
actually “arrive” but should be charged with its share
of the general average (on equitable principles). But
since it was not saved, the salvors cannot expect it to
meet any proportion of the salvage remuneration. This
difficulty was formerly solved? by introducing (in
statements of general average) a figure called “hypo-
thetical salvage”, representing the value on which the

. sacrificed goods would have contributed to the salvage
if they had not been sacrificed. This ensures equitable
distribution of the burden by placing the sacrificed
goods in no better position than if some other interests
had been sacrificed. (The assured contributing on the
basis of this hypothetical value can of course recover
from the insurer under section 66(5)].

However, in modern times, Rule 44A of the Rules
of Practice of the Association of Average Adjusters®
rovides that “expenses of salvage services rendered
by or accepted under agreement shall in practice be
treated as a general average provided that such ex-
enses were incurred for the common safety........ "
t ‘s therefore, unnecessary to pursue the matter
further. वि

Clause 75
This deals with third party liabilities.

The following examples may be given:—

(2) Ship-owner’s liability arising out of negligent
navigation. .

(ti) Ship-owner’s liability under the contract of
affreightment.

See clause 66.
"Dover, page 432. 7
*Reproduced in, Dover, page 739 and in Keate, page 200.


133

The section does not apply unless there is any express Express
term for insurance ‘against liability to a third party. The ™*
common law rule’ was that a marine insurance policy in an
ordinary form does not cover payments made by the assur-

ed to a third party in consequence of collision for which

the assured ship was to blame.

The Running Down Clause? is usually added to insure Runni
the ship against third-party liability. It is also known as Down Giuse
the Collision Clause. It provides that “if the vessel thereby Clause,
insured shall come into collision with any other vessel and
the assured shall in consequence thereof become liable to
pay and shall pay by way of damages to any other person...
any sum in respect of such collision,...the un derwriters
will pay the assured, such portions of three-fourths of such
sum or sums so paid’as their respective subscriptions thereto
bear to the value of the vessel”, ete,

The Running Down: Clause covers liability only in tort
and not in contract.

The réason why the ship-owners do not accept liability
for the one-fourth is, that®—

“the ship-owner is a member of one of the Mutual
Insurance Clubs which are established to take over the
liability of the ship-owner for this 1/4th....or that the
ship-owners have an insurance fund of their own, estab-
lished for this purpose.”

As has been stated, “Protection” associations cover the
one-fourth collision liability for damage done.*

Clause 76

This deals with the general provisions as to measure of General.
indemnity and is in a sense residuary provision,

Insurances on commissions and on securities sent by Application
registered post insured in marine policy form are covered mab
by this section. sent by

Post.
Clause 77

This deals with “particular average” As to “particular General,
average”, see section 64 of the English Act.

Where the subject-matter insured is warranted “free FPA.

from ‘particular average” (F.P.A), the assured cannot elias a

7 average),

‘De Vaux vy, Salvador, (1836) 4 Ad. & 8, 420,
"Discussed -in, detail in—
1.0) Keate, pages rro—1g2 ;
i) Dover, page 524, et seq.
*Keate, page 111,
4866 Dover, page 494, under “ Protection”


14

recover for loss of a part except in certain cases provided
by this section. Salvage charges (section 65 of the English
Act) and general average expenditure (section 66 of the
English Act) are, however, recoverable, as expressly pro-
vided in this section. , हु

Percentage— For a discussion of “percentage” and mode of ap plication
franchite of the rules relating thereto, see the discussion in the under- .
* mentioned book.’

Clause 78

General. This deals with successive losses.

Importance This section is most important in the case of time policies,
of the sc- because there is greater opportunity there for rep airing the

- damage and for again incurring loss which can be claimed
from the insurer,

Total loss” Jt has been said? that section 77(2) of the English Act
is not exhaustive and that if the vessel is lost during the
period of the policy, whether by @ peril insured against or
otherwise, and by a peril insured against has previously
suffered damage which has been unrepaired and not other-
wise made good, the assured can recover nothing in respect
of the unrepaired damage.

Same policy, In this connection, reference may be made to a case
decided by the House of Lords*-+ where the facts were as
follows: ‘The vessel Eastlands was insured against marine
risks under a time policy. There was no insurance against
war risks, but during the whole period of the policy it was
chartered to the Admiralty who assumed all responsibility
for war risks. The ship was damaged from marine risks;
the damage was repaired in part, but repairs estimated at
“£1,770 were postponed. Before these repairs could be car-
ried out, the vessel was torpedoed by an enemy submarine
‘and became a total loss. The Admiralty paid the agreed

“sound” value’ less £1,770. The ship-owners claimed this
amount ‘from the underwriters. It was held that 88 the
~-amrepaired damage was followed by a total loss, the smaller
loss merged in the larger, and the underwriters were not
liable even though the liability for the total loss did not
fall.upon_them. .The judgment of the Court of App eal
(Bankes, Warrington and Scrutton, L.J.). was reversed, and
that of Bailhache, J. restored.

‘Dover, page 280.
"Dover, page 437-

ABpitish and Foreign Insurance Co., Lid., v. Wilson Shipping Co., Ltd.,
(agar) 1 AC, 188. .

eThe eose hax been discussed in Arnould, Vol. 2, page 951, 952; Article
07a: .


115

Lord Birkenhead! said that two aspects were to be
considered:— _ a .

(1) Where the total loss is caused by a peril insured
against by the pone in question, (2) where the total loss
is not covered by the policy. The first is governed by
section 77(2). The second is not dealt with by the Act, and
it was necessary-to, examine the law estab! ished by the
existing authorities, in view of section 91(2). After examin-
ing the authorities, he observed: —* .

“The true rule is capable of statement in the following
proposition.. Where a vessel insured against perils of the
sea, is dama; ged by one of the risks covered by the policy
and before that damage is repaired she is lost, during the
currency of the Feliey by a risk which is not covered by
the policy, then the insurer is not liable for such damage”.
He said that the rule embodied a principle on which under-
writers and merchants had based their practice for upwards
of a century.

The words “same policy” in the section enact a rule “ Same,
narrower than the decision in Livie v. Jonson’ where a Policy”.
partial loss insured under the policy in suit, was followed

y a total loss during the same voyage but not insured
under that policy. It was held that the partial loss could
not be recovered, As pointed out by Lord Sumner in British
and Foreign Insurance Co. v. Wilson Shipping Co.,* the word
“policy” and “the policy” are, throughout the sections
relating to Measure of Indemnity, used to denote not merely

* (a) a single instrument whether subscribed (i) by one
underwriter, or (ii) by many, but also (b) the entire insur-
ance on the same subject-matter. He said that the words
“under the same policy” rather meant “during the adven-
ture” insured (whether a voyage or a period of time). He,
however, did not regard the point as important, because
section 91(2) of the fn iglish Act “preserves Livie v. Jonson
to its full extent according to the true construction, unless
and until it is overruled.” “The Act”, he said, “...:. only
speaks. of a sequence in time between a partial loss and a
total loss, and of the partial loss not having been repaired”.

Clause 79

This deals with “suing and labouring” charges. “Suing” General.
is perhaps an abbreviation of “pursuing”.

The so-called sue and labour clause in a policy reads as Mcaning of
follows :— the section.

“And in case of any loss or misfortune it shall be lawful
to the assured, their factors, servants and assignees to sue,

4(1921) 1 A.C. 18B, 193.
1921) 1 A.C. 188, 199.
°12 East 648.

4(1921) 1 A.C. 188, 211.


116

in and above the defence, safeguard, and recovery of the
said goods and merchandise and ship etc., or any part there-
of without prejudice to this insurance. To the charges
whereof, we, the insurers, will contribute each one according
to the rate and quantity of the sum herein assured”.

‘Object. The object behind this clause’ is to enable the assured
to recover costs incurred for preservation of the subject-
matter insured, Actually it benefits the insurer because his
liability is reduced if the assured etc. take prompt action
for preservation.”

Relation to Sue and labour charges are a species of particular
charges. charges?
Examples. Examples of charges which fall under this section are—

(i) charges under a salvage agreement, (ii) costs incurred
to recondition damaged goods, (iii) expenses of forwarding
goods by another ship to save freight.

‘The following chart will show the distinction between
the various classes of charges: —

Salvage General Average Sue and Labour
Sue and & 655 S. 66 S. 78
ae, Arising by Maritime Law Arising by Maritime Incurred under an ex-
Salvage’ Taw. press clause.
Gharges and yacurred by others. Maybe incurred by the Incurred by the assured
assured or by others. or his agents.

Avergge
Fapenditure 1, governed by the policy Is govemed by the Is regarded as an inder

policy. pendent agreement.

Measure of indemnity is Measure of indemnity Is payable notwith-
limited by general pro- is limited by general standing that the in-
visions. provisions. surer may have paid

for a total loss.

8. 65 expressly exchides रब S. 78 (2) expressly ex-
from salvage charges es cx- cludes general average
penses rendered by the losses and contribu-
assured or his agents for tion and salvage char-
averting peril insured ges from the Sue and
against. 4 Labour Clause,

Js incurred for preventing Is incurred for preser- Consists of positive
loss and consists. of ving the property im- charges for the defence,
positive expenditure. perilled- in common safe-guard and re-
Madventure and consists covery of the goods,

either of sacrifice or etc.

positive expenditure.
Incurred for the benefit Incurred for the benefit
‘of the whole adventure. of & particular subject
matter.’

iLord Chorley, Shipping Law, 3rd edition, page 319.

"For a full discussion, sce Keate, pages 72-73 and Dover, pages 270-272.
३56९ notes to clause 65. .

4See Keate, page 73 and Dover, page 270.


117

_ Clause 80
This deals with subrogation. General,

Section 79(1) of the English Act corresponds to section Correspond-
3854 (2), Transfer of Property Act, 1882. Section 79(2) cor- ing provi-
responds to section 135A(3) of the Transfer of Property Act. {odie Law.
Section 1356 (2) and (3) should be deleted since their sub- .
stance is being incorporated in the clause under discussion.’

Subrogation has been defined as “the right of the insurer Doctrine
on payment of loss to stand in the shoes of the assured and explained.
to avail himself of his rights and remedies”. The object
behind the rule is to prevent the assured from being in-
demnified for his losses from two or more sources and thus
obtaining profit from the Joss.?

Compare the right of subrogation given to persons inter-Anatogous _
ested in. immovab! ic Property who redeem a mortgage (sec- Provisions.
tion 92 of the Transfer of Pro, erty Act, 1882). That section

Says that the person concerned shall “have, so far as regards
redemption, foreclosure or sale of such property, the same

rights as the mortgagee” ete. Compare section 146 of tne

Indian Contract Act, 1872, under which a surety (by the

Payment of his liability) ig invested with all the Tights

which the creditor had against the principal debtor.

Where the insurer pays for the whole loss, he takes over Distinction
the interest of the assured in what remains and thus is in subi
entitled to the proprietary rights. In the case of partial ton tad
loss, however, title in the subject-matter does not Pass to "
the insurer but he gets all rights and remedies of the
assured in and in respect of the subject-matter insured.

In practice, “letters of subrogation” are executed by Letters of
the assured, laying out the rights of the insurer and hind- subrogation.
ing the assured to Jend-his name to any proceedings which
the insurer might take against third parties liable for the

logs, .

Sometimes a clause “without benefit of salvage to the Without
insurer” is inserted. Under such clause, proprietary rights bones of
of the assured are not transferred to the insurer? 7

Section 61 of the English Act provides that in the case Abanden-
of a constructive total loss the assured may treat the loss ment and
as a partial loss, or, at his option, abandon the subject- .
matter insured to the insurer and treat the loss as if it were
an actual total loss. The following points of difference be-
tween the two can be noted: —*.6

*For a discussion of the circumstances under which section 135A was
nttoduced, see notes under clauses 52-53.

‘Dover, page 441,

*See also notes under section 4, proviso, of the English Act—Clause a
“P.G. Hogg, cited in Dover, page 447. 7

"See also Keate, 9. 98.


Making
1112:
st

“Query.

value policy.

118
(9 In abandonment, the insurer has the property

vested in him including proprietary rights and liens.
In subrogation, he is entitled to the rights of action
arising out of the loss; “Abandonment is the transfer-
ring of ownership in the thing insured from the assured’
to . the - underwriter. Subrogation involves no
‘change of ownership but is a right (which) the under-
awriter has to stand in the shoes of the assured. .......”

(४) In abandonment, the rights follow on a valid
abandonment, while in subrogation they arise on pay-
ment of the loss;-

(iii) Abandonment applies only in cases of total
loss, while subrogation applies both to total and to
partial losses;

(iv) Subrogation entitles the insurer to transfer of
rights and remedies only in respect of the losses, while
abandonment implies complete giving up of the sub-
ject-matter itself, leaving it to the insurers to decide
‘whether they would take it over or not.

The position as to whether an insurer, having paid the
loss can, by virtue of subrogation, claim more than what
he has paid, is not very clear. See the under-mentioned
cases! Lord Wright, M.R., has in a case before the
Court of Appeal’ agreed with the observations of Swinfen
Eady, LJ.,” to the effect that the insurers can, by subroga-
tion, recover upto the amount of the insurance. The point
was, however, not material in either case because in both
cases the sum claimed by the insurers was less than the
amount insured.

When the assured, after taking out one policy, takes out
an ‘inereased value policy’, ‘and the original policy does
not contain a clause expressly or impliedly permitting addi-
tional insurance, then the increased value insurer cannot
claim any share in the salvage (if the original insurer re-

North of England Iron Steamship Insurance Association v. Armstrong,
(870) LR, 5 Q.B.D, 244 (valued policy—ship worth £9,000 but valued and
insured at £6,000—£6,000 paid—owner recovers £5,000 ‘from guilty vessel—
held, ingucers could claim the whole sum as the owner was estopped by his
under-valustion from denying the real value.)

Goole and Hull Steam Towing Co., Ltd. v.. Ocean Marine Insurance Co.
Lid., cited in Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance, 1957 edition, page 446.

*Gase of Glen Line, Lid. cited ia Dover Handbock, page 447. fe.
subrogation will onk y ee the insurer tights upto twenty shi 3 in the
Pound on what he has. paid.” per Lord Atkin.

7 aBoag v. Standard Marine Insisrance Co:, (1937) 1 AN ER. 714) 779
720.

“Thames and Meriey Marine Insurance Go. v. British and Chitian
Steamship Co., (1916) 1 K.B, 30.

éSee notes under s. 4, proviso, English Act,—Clause 9.


“Le

_Xeived any salvage)” This was laid down by the Court of
Appeal.’ In ‘that case, a cargo carried on a certain steamer
was insured under an ordinary policy and also under an
increased value policy. (But the ordinary policy did not
contain any clause for increased valuation or permitting
additional insurance). The steamer was stranded, and both
insurers paid for a total loss and took letters of subrogation
from the owners. The insurers under the ordinary policy
paid a sum of £685. On a general average adjustment be-
ing made, £532 and odd was agreed as the sum arising as
salvage to be received by the owners. This sum was cleim-
ed by the insurers under the ordinary policy, but the insur-
ers under the increased value policy claimed to share
rateably in the salvage. It was held, that the insurers
under the ordinary policy were entitled to the whole sum
of £532 and odd. As was pointed out by Lord Wright
MLR.,? the first insurance was for the whole of the subject-
matter for its full value, and the insurers were entitled to
the full rights of subrogation; and any attempt by the own-
er of the goods to dispose of the. value of those rights would
be futile. If the original policy had contained a clause to
the effect that in the event of any additional insurance be-
ing placed by the insurer the‘value of the cargo would, in
the event of loss or claim, be. deemed to be increased to the
total amount insured at the time of the loss or accident, then
the subsequent insurer would rank in pari passu with the
main policy; but there was no such clause here. (Curiously
enough, in this case, it was the increased value policy that.
contained such a clause—which benefitted no body). it was.
further observed by Romer LJ. and Scott L.J.,* that at
the time when the increased value policy was effected, the
first insurer had already become entitled to a contingent
right to receive any sum which might be recovered as
salvage. Of this right, the insurer could not be deprived
by the assured... Scott LJ., further pointed out, that since
there was no increased valuation clause in the first policy,
.the assured was estopped from alleging that the subject-
matter of the insurance ever had any increased value; and
if the assured was estopped, the subsequent insurer was also
similarly estopped.

Clause 81
* This deals with the right of contribution. General.

Sub-section (1) provides that where the assured is over- Application
insured by double-insurance,’ each insurer is. bound as be- of the sec
tween. himself and other insurers to contribute rateably to ten.

a Boos v. Standard Marine Insurance Co. Lid., (1937) 1 All E.R. 714

(1937) 1 All E.R. 714, 720, 721.

3810 page 722.

‘At page 724. पु

+88 to double-insurance, see seclion 32, English Act.—Cliuse 29


120
the amount for which he is Jiable:- The important word

is “contribute”. The following points emerge: ~
५. (४) the section does not apply unless there is over-
insurance by double-insurance;

(ii) the section applies as between one insurer and
the other insurers. It does not apply as between insur-
er and the assured, for which section 32(2)(d) applies;

(#i) contribution is proportionate to the amount
undertaken by each insurer.

Position of As provided by section 32(2) (a), the assured can claim

assured, payment from the insurer “in such order as he thinks fit”,
so long as the total sum recovered by him does not exceed
the indemnity allowed by the Act.t

Marine and The Marine Insurance Act is obviously confined to rights

sther polic- and duties under marine insurance. In the case of competi-

cies. tion or conflict between a marine policy on the one hand and
a non-marine policy on the other, the Act as such does not
apply; but on general principles, it has been stated,? contri-
bution would be applied. In practice, standard fire policies
contain a clause limiting the insurer’s Hability to the rate-
able contribution of loss based on all subsisting assurances.

Clause 82

General, This deals with under-insurance.

Assured his In the case of under-insurance, the assured is deemed to
own in- be his own insurer regarding the uninsured balance.
पर

Clause 83

General. This deals with enforcement of return of premium, and
- provides that where the premium is wholly or in part “de-
clared to be returnable”® then it may be recovered or re-
tained by the assured. As to the liability for the return of
premium where the policy is effected through a broker,

see section 53(1) of the English Act.

हि Clause 84
General, This deals with the return of premium.
Returns The “Returns Clause” in a policy provides for a pro rata

‘Clause, monthly return for each uncommenced month if the policy
is eancelled by agreement, Further, where the vessel is
“laid-up” in a port for a period of 30 consecutive days, the

+See also notes under section 27 of the English Act—Clause 24.
"Dover, page 449.

*As to cases where premium is returnable, see sections 83 and 84, English
Act,—Clauses 84 and 85,


121

clause allows return of premium on a certain basis. (When
the ship is in port, it is at less risk of loss than when at sea,
and this accounts for the provision for return of premiura).

There may be provision for return of premium, in cargo
insurance, if the journey proceeds via a particular route or
the goods are packed in a particular kind of cases.

Clause 85

This deals with return of premium for failure of con- General,
sideration.

Sub-section (2) provides that where the consideration fr Apportion-
the payment of premium is apportionable, and an apportion- ment of
able part of the consideration totally fails, then a proportion 7™™-
of the premium is returnable. Time policies, it is stated,
would not come under this provision because the period of
time is non-apportionable and if the risk does not continue
for the whole of the period of the policy, no return can he
claimed. -

Sub-section (3) deals with particular cases where re~ Particular
turn for failure of consideration would apply: cases.

1 Para.(a)—deals with the policy being void or being
avoided by the insurer. As to avoiding the policy, see sec-
tion 18(1) (non-disclosure by the assured), section 20/1)
{untrue representation by the assured) etc.

Para. (b)—deals with the cases where the subject-matter
has never been imperilled.

-The proviso deals with “lost or not lost” clause.* If the “ Lost or
insurer knew of the safe arrival of the ship, then, notwith- 7०: lost”.
standing “lost or not lost” clause, he must return the pre~
mium, because so far as he was concerned there was no risk.

Para. (c)—deals with the case where the assured had no
insurable interest. As to insurable interest, see section 5 and
the succeeding sections of the English Act. There is, how-
ever, no return of premium if the policy is effected by way
of gaming or wagering. As to gaming or wagering policies,
see section 4(2) of the English Act. The important words
are “no insurable interest throughout the currency of the
tisk”, so that where, though the assured had no interest in
the beginning, still he acquires it later, and had an expecta-
tion of acquiring it when the policy was effected,’.he can

aim return of premium.

*Dover, page 455.

"Gf. section 6 (1), proviso and First Schedule, Rule 1, of the English Act,
Clause ro and Schedule, Rule 72.

"See section 4(2)(०), English Act.


General.

122

Para. (d)—deals with a.case where an assured had a de-
feasible interest which is terminated during the currency
of the risk; the premium is not returnable in such cage.
to “defeasible” interest, see section 7 (1) of the English Act.

Paras. (९) and (f)—deal with over-insurance. The dis-
tinction between (९) and (f) is, that while (९) deals with
over-insurance simply, (f) deals with over-insurance by
double-insurance, Further, (e) is confined to unvalued poli-
cies, while (f) applies to all policies. Next, (¢) contem-

lates a single policy (contrast the singular word
coremium”™ used there with the plural word “premiums”
used in (f). Under para. (९), where the sum for which
the subject-matter is insured exceeds the insurable value,
there is over-insurance and a proportion of the premium is
returnable if the policy is unvalued. Para. (f) deals with
cases where more than one policy is taken out, resulting in
over-insurance by double-insurance. The topic of such over-
insurance is dealt with in section 32 (as between the insurer
and the assured) and section 80 (contribution as between
co-insurers), Where there is such over-insurance, a propor-
tion of the several premium is returnable, subject to the
proviso given below the section.

है Clause 86
This deals with mutual insurance.
The section allows the following modifications in the case

Modifica-
‘ons allowed. of mutual insurance: — .

‘Utility of
amutual in-
surance.

General.

{a) The provisions of the Act relating to premium
do not apply to mutual insurance, but a guarantee or
other suitable agreed arrangement may be substituted
for the premium.

(89) Any provision of the Act which can be modified
by the agreement of the parties can, in the case of
mutual insurance, be modified by the policies of the
association or rules of the association.

. It has been stated! that the utility of mutual insurance
Hes in—
(a) resérving to the members any underwriting
profits; . हा
(9) extending protection to members not obtain-
able in the ordinary insurance market—for example,
claims against third parties. ue

Clause 87

This deals with ratification of a contract of marine insur-
ance ‘effected in good faith by one person on. behalf of an-
other. The significance of the section lies in the last 8 words

"Dover, page 458.


123

“even after he is aware of a loss”. As to ratification generai-
ly, see sections 196—200 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.

Clause 88

This deals with the variation of the implied obligations Generl.
by agreement or usage.

Clause 89

This deals with “reasonable time”. “reasonable premium” General.
and “reasonable diligence”.

Clause 90

This provides that for interpreting a policy, reference General.
may be made to the “slip” or “covering note”,1 for certain
purposes. Section 21 expressly provides that. for showing
when the proposal was accepted the slip etc. may be
referred to. In the case of mutual mistake also, presum-
ably, the slip can be referred to for ratification?

Clause 91

This saves the provisions of the common law. For an in-
teresting application of this section, see Lord Sumner’s
judgment in British and Foreign Insurance Co. v. Wilson
Shipping Co. १-4,

There are provisions in—

(a) the Indian Stamp Act, 1899;
(b) the Companies 22५5 1956;

(०) the Insurance Act, 1938,

which also have a bearing on marine insurance, but as they
would remain unaffected for the proposed Bill, it is con-
sidered unnecessary to insert any savings for them.

THE SCHEDULE
Rule 15 of the Rules of Construction

The English Act does not cover specifically the case of a Departure
ship driven by power other than steam. To cover such ships, rom the

a change has been made by adding appropriate words.* English

1As to the meaning of these expressions, sce notes under section 21 of the
English Act,—Clause 18,

3Gf. Dover, page 460.
अ1921) 1 A.C, 188, 211.

«The case has been discussed in the notes to section 77 of the English
Act—Clause 78.

*Clause 86 of this Bill deals with associations, and such associations must,
it need not be said, comply with the Companies Act.

*Cf, Section 16 of the English Act and the departure proposed there-
ftom,—Clause 13.

296 M. of L.—9,


Taosurances
- of Certain

tisks not.

invalid,

Suggestion.

124
Suggestion regarding section 7(1) of the Indian Stamp Act,
1899

Section 506, Merchant Shipping Act, 1894 (57 and 58 Vict.
c. 60) runs as follows: —

“506. An insurance effected against the happening, with-
out the owner's actual fault or privity, of any or all of the
events in respect of which the Lability of the owner is
limited under this Part of the Act shall not be invalid by
reason of the nature of the risk”.

Chalmers! explains this as follows: —

“Part VIII limits the liability of the owner of British
ships. The object of this section is to make it clear that
although the liability of a ship-owner is limited, he is still
at liberty to insure”. In other words, the “want of interest”
objection is avoided.?

So far, there is no difficulty. But, curiously, section 7 of
the Indian Stamp Act [following section 93, (English)
Stamp Act, 1891] excepts contracts governed by section 506,
Merchant Shipping Act from its operation. As pointed out
by Chalmers,’ the saving effected by this section (the Eng-
lish section) is curious. The object of the Merchant Ship-

; Ping Act was to make it clear that although the ship-owners’

common law liability was limited by the Act, he was never-
theless entitled to insure against this limited liability—but
the apparent effect of the saving is to dispense with the
necessity of a policy in those cases.

In view of this criticism, which applies equally to section
7, Indian Stamp Act, the mention of section 506, Merchant
Shipping Act in that section should be deleted. Farther,
there is no provision in the (Indian) Merchant Shipping Act,
958 (44 of 1958), corresponding to sectisn 506, English Mer-
chant Shipping Act (though provisions limiting the liability
occur in section 352 of the Indian Act).! Hence the mention
of section 506, Merchant Shipping Act,-has become obsolete
in the Indian Stamp Act.

*Chalmers, page 164, foot-note 1.
*See the following note in sth Edn., page 341—

“This section appears to have been inserted in the Act of 1862 ex
abundante cautela to allay any apprehension there might be chat such insurances
could be impugned on the ground of want of interest or illegality. Tt seems,
however, clear that they arc valid apart from this section. See Hansard
Parl. Deb, Vol. 166, page 2227.”

SChalmers, page 160, foot-note 2.

‘Section 352 of the (Indian) Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 corresponds
to section 503, Merchant Shipping Act, 1894,


APPENDIX III

SHOWING THE PROVISION IN THE (ENGLISH) MARINE INSURANCE
ACT, 1906, AND THE CORRESPONDING PROVISION, IF ANY, IN APPENDIX
I.

Section of the English Act

Clause in Appendix T

T

2

3 09

3 (2) (व) part

३ (2)(०), part and 3 (2)(8) (०)
3 (2), Expl. .

4

5

6

7

8

9 (2), part

9 (2), part and 9 (2)
10

Il

12

13

14 (1) and 14 (3)
14 (2)

15

2 (c)
2 (व)
2 (०)

Io

7@
7)
7)
I2

7 (4)
763)
7 (6)
70)



126

Section of the English Act Clause in Appendix I
16 - . . + . 13
17 : : : . . 14
18 . पु . : : 15
19 पु . . . . 16
20 पु पु : : पु 17
23 . . न + पु 18
22 : : : : पु 19
23 : . : : : 20
24 पु . पु पु : 21
25 . . : पु : 22
26 . . . . + 23
27 : : + : . 24.
28 न पु . न . 25
29 व 26
30” Sees . 27
3 . . . . 28
32 : : : पु . 29
33 (0)(2) . . : . . 33
33 (3) se 35
34 + पु . पु न 36
35 न नल * *. * 34
36 पु . + . . a7
37 . . न पु . 3h
38 . . . . . 39
39 . : पु : : 40

40 पु . पु पु पु बा



127

Section of the English Act Clause in Appendix I
4r : . : पु : 42
42 * . : : . 43
43 se *+» - «* 44
44 पु : . : . 45
45 . पु . : . 46
46 re v7
AT . . . . . 48
48 . . न . . 4g
49 न न : : 5०
50 (1) पु . . . 52 (0)
8०७)... . . eG
50 (3) Se 52 (2)
st se 8
52 : . : पु : 30
53 : . पु पु . 31
54 : : हे . . 32
55 : 57
56 . . . : . 58
57 . . . . . 59
58 . . . + : 60
59 : पु : पु : 51
60 . . eo. . 6r
61 62
62 ‘ . पु . . 63
& . . . . पु 64

66... -. - . 6



128

Section of the English Act

Clause in Appendix T

65

66 . .
67 . .
68 . .
69 . .
qo . .
7 . .
72 न .
73 . .
74 . .
1S . .
76 oo.
7 . .
8 oe
79 soe
80 . .
81 . .
82 . .
83 . .
84 . .
85 . .
86 . .
87 . .
88 मु .
89 . .

go

66
67
68
69
Jo
था
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
8&5
86
87
88
89
90
209) 000) 0)



129
Section of the English Act Clause in Appendix I
gor > . . . - gr
92 (Repeal clause) . . . a
93 . . . . . व, part
94 . . . मु . 1, part
First Schedule. . मु . Schedule

Second Schedule (Enactments re
peal



APPENDIX IV

Suggestions in respect of other Acts

1. Indian Stamp Act, 1899—(a) Policies governed by s.
2(2) of the English Act—building risk, launching risk etc.
policies and policies for adventures analogous to a marine
adventure—should be subject to stamp duty as on sea-
policies for insurance for voyages.

(b) Certain provisions of the Stamp Law of England,
which are of importance in the law of marine insurance,
should be embodied in the Indian Stamp Act?

(०) A provision similar to s.11 of the (English) Finance
Act, 1901, providing that a marine insurance policy for time
shall not be invalid merely on the ground that by the “conti-
nuation clause” it becomes available for a period of more
than twelve months, should be inserted in the Indian Stamp
Act, if s.7(2) of that Act is retained*

(d) Section 7(1) of the Indian Stamp Act should be
amended by deleting the mention of section 506 of the Mer-
chant Shipping Act*

{e) Sections 7(2) and 7(3) of the Indian Stamp Act

should be omitted after the Bill on Marine Insurance is
passed.®

2. The Transfer of Property Act, 1882—(a) Sections
130A and 135A(1) of the Transfer of Property Act shuld
be deleted.®

(b) Sections 135A (2) and (3) of that Act should be
deleted.”

1906 notes to s. 2 of the English Act—Clause 4 (notes on clauses).
3See notes to s, 22 of the English Act—Clause 19 (notes on clauses).
3588 notes to s. 25 of the English Act—Clause 22 (notes cn clauses).

‘See note entitled “ Suggestion regarding section 7 (7) of the Indian
Stamp Act, 1899”, at the end of the notes on clauses.

*See notes to clauses 22 and 20, respectively,
See notes to 8, $0 of the English Act —Clauses 52-53 (notes 01 clauses).
1§¢e notes to section 79 of the English Act—Clause 80 (notes on clauses)»

130
GMGIPND TSWing—296 M. of Law—15-1-62— 2250