GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Humanization and Decriminalization of 
Attempt to Suicide
Report No. 210
OCTOBER 2008

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 210)
Humanization and Decriminalization of 
Attempt to Suicide
Forwarded to Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj, Union Minister  
for Law and Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice,  
Government  of  India  by  Dr.  Justice  AR.  
Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of India,  
on the 17th day of October, 2008. 
2

The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a  
period of three years from 1 st September, 2006 by  
Order No. A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the  
16th October,  2006,  issued  by  the  Government  of  
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of  
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the  
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven  
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar            : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar         : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the  
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of  
charge in any format or medium provided that it is  
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading  
context. The material must be acknowledged as the  
Government of India copyright and the title of the  
document specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be  
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either  
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2 nd Floor,  
ILI  Building,  Bhagwan  Das  Road,  New  
Delhi-110001, India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in  
  
5

DO No.6(3)141/2008-LC(LS)                                     17 October, 2008
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Sub: Humanization and Decriminalization of
        Attempt to Suicide.
I have great pleasure in submitting herewith the 210 th Report of 
the Law Commission of India on the above subject.
In  our  country,  attempt  to  suicide  is  an  offence  punishable  
under section 309 of the Indian Penal Code. Section 309 reads thus:
Attempt  to  commit  suicide.  “Whoever  attempts  to  commit  
suicide  and  does  any  act  towards  the  commission  of  such  
offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both.”
Article 21 of the Constitution of India enjoins that no person  
shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to  
procedure established by law. 
A Division  Bench of the Supreme  Court in  P. Rathinam v.  
Union of India  (AIR 1994 SC 1844) held that the right to live of  
which Article 21 speaks of can be said to bring in its trail the right not  
to live a forced life, and therefore, section 309 violates Article 21.  
This decision was, however, subsequently overruled in Gian Kaur v.  
State of Punjab  (AIR 1996 SC 946) by a Constitution Bench of the  
Supreme Court, holding that Article 21 cannot be construed to include  
within  it  the  ‘right  to  die’  as  a  part  of  the  fundamental  right  
guaranteed therein, and therefore, it cannot be said that section 309 is  
violative of Article 21.
The Law Commission had undertaken revision of the Indian  
Penal Code as part of its function of revising Central Acts of general  
application and importance. In its 42 nd Report submitted in 1971, the  
6

Commission  recommended,  inter  alia,  repeal  of  section  309.  The  
Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1978, as passed by the Rajya  
Sabha,  accordingly  provided  for  omission  of  section  309.  
Unfortunately, before it could be passed by the Lok Sabha, the Lok  
Sabha was dissolved and the Bill lapsed. The Commission submitted  
its 156th Report in 1997 after the pronouncement of the judgement in  
Gian Kaur, recommending retention of section 309.
However, it is felt that attempt to suicide may be regarded more  
as a manifestation of a diseased condition of mind deserving treatment 
and care rather than an offence to be visited with punishment. The  
Supreme Court in  Gian Kaur  focused on constitutionality of section  
309. It did not go into the wisdom of retaining or continuing the same  
in the statute. In view of the views expressed by the World Health  
Organization,  the  International  Association  for  Suicide  Prevention, 
France,  decriminalization  of  attempted  suicide  by  all  countries  in  
Europe  and  North  America,  the  opinion  of  the  Indian  Psychiatric  
Society, and the representations received by the Commission from  
various persons, the Commission has resolved to recommend to the  
Government  to  initiate  steps  for  repeal  of  the  anachronistic  law  
contained in section 309, IPC, which would relieve the distressed of  
his suffering. It needs mention here that only a handful of countries in  
the world, like Pakistan, Bangladesh, Malaysia, Singapore and India  
have persisted with this undesirable law. 
 The criminal law must not act with misplaced overzeal and it is  
only where it can prove to be apt and effective machinery to cure the  
intended evil that it should come into the picture.
With kind regards,
(AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001
7

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
 
HUMANIZATION AND DECRIMINALIZATION OF 
ATTEMPT TO SUICIDE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION                                      9
2. CONSTITUTIONALITY AND                     12
        DESIRABILITY OF                       
SECTION 309, IPC
3. PREVIOUS REPORTS OF THE                20
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
4. OTHER VIEWS                                       31
5. RECOMMENDATION       38
1. INTRODUCTION
8

1.1.1 While approximately one million people die by suicide worldwide 1, 
more than one lakh persons (1,18,112) in the country lost their lives by  
committing suicide during the year 2006. This indicates an increase of 3.7  
per cent over the previous year’s figure (1,13,914). The number of suicides  
in the country during the decade (1996-2006) has recorded an increase of  
33.9 per cent (from 88,241 in 1996 to 1,18,112 in 2006).2 
1.1.2 The overall male: female ratio of suicide victims for the year 2006  
was 64:38; however, the proportion of boys: girls suicide victims (up to 14  
years of age) was 48:52, i.e., almost  equal  number  of young girls have  
committed  suicide  as  their  male  counterparts.  Youths  (15-29  years)  and 
lower  middle-aged  people  (30-44  years)  were  the  prime  groups  taking  
recourse to the path of suicides. Around 35.7 per cent were youths in the age  
group of 15-29 years and 34.5 per cent were middle-aged persons in the age  
group  of  30-44  years  of  the  total  suicide  victims.  Senior  citizens  have  
accounted for 7.7 per cent of the total victims. Social and economic causes  
have  led  most  of the males  to  commit  suicides,  whereas emotional  and  
personal causes have mainly driven females to end their lives.3    
1.2 Suicide  ( felo  de  se )  means  deliberate  termination  of  one’s  own  
physical existence or self-murder, where a man of age of discretion and  
compos  mentis  voluntarily  kills  himself.  It  is  an  act  of  voluntarily  or  
intentionally taking one’s own life. Suicide needs to be distinguished from  
euthanasia or mercy-killing. Suicide by its very nature is an act of self-
1 International Association for Suicide Prevention
2 Accidental Deaths and Suicides in India – 2006, National Crime Records Bureau, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India
3 ibid.
9

killing or self-destruction, an act of terminating one’s own life sans the aid  
or assistance of any other human agency. Euthanasia, on the other hand,  
involves the intervention of other human agency to end the life. Euthanasia  
is nothing but homicide, and unless specifically excepted it is an offence. A 
priori, an attempt at mercy-killing is not an attempt to suicide.
1.3.1 Throughout  history,  suicide  has  been  both  condemned  and  
commended by various societies.  Since the Middle Ages, society has used  
first the canonic and later the criminal law to combat suicide. Following the  
French  Revolution  of  1789  criminal  penalties  for  attempting  to  commit  
suicide were abolished in European countries, England being the last to  
follow suit in 1961.4 
1.3.2 In England, the Suicide Act 1961 abrogated the law laying down that  
attempt to commit suicide is an offence. Although suicide is no longer an  
offence in itself, any person who aids, abets, counsels or procures the suicide 
of another, or an attempt  by  another to commit  suicide, is guilty of an  
offence and liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to 14 years.5
1.4.1 In India, not only abetment of suicide is an offence ( vide section 306, 
IPC), but also attempt to commit suicide is an offence ( vide  section 309,  
IPC). Section 309, IPC reads as under:
4 The New Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 11, Micropaedia, 15th ed. (1987), p. 359
5 Halsbury’s Laws of England, 4th ed. 2000 Reissue, Vol. 11(1), Para 106 
10

Attempt to commit suicide.  “Whoever attempts to commit suicide and  
does  any  act  towards  the  commission  of  such  offence,  shall  be  
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to  
one year or with fine, or with both.”
1.4.2 Thus, in India, attempt to commit suicide is constituted an offence  
punishable under section 309, IPC. Although completed act was not a crime,  
surprisingly, attempt to commit the act was made an offence.
1.5 Suicide is one of the important factors contributing to premature or  
unnatural end of precious human lives. It is a global problem and the World  
Health Organization has in regard to attempted suicide expressed the view  
that punishing with imprisonment a behaviour consequent to either a mental  
disorder or a social  difficulty  gives completely  a wrong message  to the  
population,  and  that  the  WHO  encourages  efforts  for  the  prevention  of  
suicide.
1.6 The  International  Association  for  Suicide  Prevention  has  also  
expressed the view that attempted suicide should be decriminalized and that  
suicidal individuals need to be helped and imprisonment only makes their  
problems worse. The said Association on September 10 every year sponsors  
‘World Suicide Prevention Day’ as a part of its efforts to achieve effective  
suicide prevention.
1.7 In view of the above, the Law Commission suo motu decided to take  
up study of this important issue of suicide prevention. 
11

2. CONSTITUTIONALITY AND DESIRABILTY OF
SECTION 309, IPC
2.1 The constitutionality of section 309 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860  
has been the subject matter of challenge several times before the Supreme  
Court and High Courts.
2.2.1 Article 14 of the Constitution provides for equality before law and  
reads as under:
“The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the  
equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.” 
2.2.2 Article  21  of  the  Constitution  provides  for  protection  of  life  and  
personal liberty and reads as under:
“No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except  
according to procedure established by law.”
2.3 It will be apposite to first note the following observation of the Delhi  
High Court in State v. Sanjay Kumar Bhatia6, a case under section 309, IPC:
“A  young  man  has  allegedly  tried  to  commit  suicide  presumably  
because of over emotionalism. It is ironic that Section 309 I.P.C. still  
continues to be on our Penal Code. The result is that a young boy  
driven to such frustration so as to seek one’s own life would have  
6 1985 CriLJ 931
12

escaped human punishment if he had succeeded but is to be hounded  
by the police, because attempt has failed. Strange paradox that in the  
age  of  votaries  of  Euthanasia,  suicide  should  be  criminally  
punishable. Instead of the society hanging its head in shame that  
there should be such social strains that a young man (the hope of  
tomorrow) should be driven to suicide compounds its inadequacy by  
treating the boy as a criminal. Instead of sending the young boy to  
psychiatric clinic it gleefully sends him to mingle with criminals, as if  
trying its best to see that in future he does fall foul of the punitive  
sections of the Penal Code. The continuance of Section 309 I.P.C. is  
an  anachronism  unworthy  of  a  human  society  like  ours.  Medical  
clinics for such social misfits certainly but police and prisons never.  
The very idea is revolting. This concept seeks to meet the challenge of  
social strains of modern urban and competitive economy by ruthless  
suppression  of  mere  symptoms  –  this  attempt  can  only  result  in  
failure. Need is for humane, civilized and socially oriented outlook  
and penology. Many penal offences are the offshoots of an unjust  
society and socially decadent outlook of love between young people  
being frustrated by false consideration of code, community or social  
pretensions. No wonder so long as society refuses to face this reality  
its  coercive  machinery  will  invoke  the  provision  like  Section  309  
I.P.C.  which  has  no  justification  right  to  continue  remain  on  the  
statute book.”
 2.4.1 In Maruti Shripati Dubal v. State of Maharashtra 7, the Bombay High  
Court  held  that  section  309,  IPC  is  ultra  vires  the  Constitution  being  
7 1987 CriLJ 743
13

violative of Articles 14 and 21 thereof and must be struck down. It was  
pointed  out  that  the  fundamental  rights  have  their  positive  as  well  as  
negative  aspects.  For  example,  the  freedom  of  speech  and  expression  
includes  freedom  not  to  speak  and  to  remain  silent.  The  freedom  of  
association and movement likewise includes the freedom not to join any  
association or to move anywhere. The freedom of business and occupation  
includes freedom not to do business and to close down the existing business.  
If this is so, logically it must follow that right to live as recognized by  
Article 21 of the Constitution will include also a right not to live or not to be  
forced to live. To put it positively, Article 21 would include a right to die, or  
to terminate one’s life. The Court further pointed out that the language of  
section 309, IPC is sweeping in its nature. It does not define suicide. In fact,  
philosophers, moralists and sociologists are not agreed upon what constitutes 
suicide.  What may be considered suicide in one community may not be  
considered so in another community and the different acts, though suicidal,  
may  be  described  differently  in  different  circumstances  and  at  different  
times in the same community. While some suicides are eulogized, others are  
condemned. That is why perhaps wisely no attempt has been made by the  
legislature to define either. The want of a plausible definition itself makes  
the provisions of section 309 arbitrary and violative of Article 14. There are  
different  mental,  physical  and  social  causes  which  may  lead  different  
individuals to attempt to commit suicide for different ends and purposes,  
there  being  nothing  in  common  between  them.  Section  309  makes  no  
distinction  between  them  and  treats  them  alike,  making  the  provisions  
thereof  arbitrary.  Further,  the  Court  observed  that  if the  purpose  of  the  
punishment for attempted suicide is to prevent the prospective suicides by  
deterrence, the same is not achieved by punishing those who have made the  
14

attempts, as no deterrence is going to hold back those who want to die for a  
social or political cause or to leave the world either because of the loss of  
interest in life or for self-deliverance. The provisions of section 309 are  
unreasonable  and  arbitrary  on  this  account  also.  As  is  rightly  said,  
arbitrariness and equality are enemies of each other. The blanket prohibition  
on the right to die on pain of penalty, it was pointed out, is not reasonable.
2.4.2 The High Court also observed that there is nothing unnatural about the 
desire to die and hence the right to die. The means adopted for ending one’s  
life  may  be  unnatural  varying  from starvation  to  strangulation.  But,  the  
desire which leads one to resort to the means is not unnatural. Suicide or an  
attempt to commit suicide is not a feature of a normal life. It is an incident of 
abnormality or of an extraordinary situation or of an uncommon trait of  
personality.  Abnormality  and  uncommonality  are  not  unnatural  merely  
because they are exceptional. 
2.4.3 The High Court further observed that the right to die or to end one’s  
life is not something new or unknown to civilization. Some religions like  
Hindu and Jain have approved of the practice of ending one’s life by one’s  
own  act  in  certain  circumstances  while  condemning  it  in  other  
circumstances. The attitude of Buddhism has been ambiguous though it has  
encouraged suicide under certain circumstances such as in the service of  
religion and country. Neither the old nor the new Testament has condemned  
suicide explicitly. However, Christianity has condemned suicide as a form of 
murder. In contrast, the Quran has declared it a crime worse than homicide.
15

2.4.4 The  High  Court  quoted  the  eminent  French  sociologist,  Emile  
Durkheim’s  threefold classification of suicides made on the basis of the  
disturbance  in  the  relationship  between  society  and  the  individual:  (i)  
Egoistic  suicide  which  results  when  abnormal  individualism  weakens  
society’s control over him; the individual in such cases lacks concern for the  
community with which he is inadequately involved; (ii) Altruistic suicide  
which is due to an excessive sense of duty to community; and (iii) Anomic  
suicide which is due to society’s failure to control and regulate the behaviour 
of individuals. This classification is not regarded as adequate by many, but  
gives us the broad causative factors of suicide. It is estimated that about one-
third  of  the  people  who  kill  themselves  have  been  found  to  have  been  
suffering from mental illness. The Court observed that those who make the  
suicide  attempt  on  account  of  the  mental  disorders  require  psychiatric  
treatment and not confinement in the prison cells where their condition is  
bound to worsen leading to further mental derangement. Those on the other  
hand who make the suicide attempt on account of acute physical ailments,  
incurable diseases, torture or decrepit physical state induced by old age or  
disablement  need  nursing  homes  and  not  prisons  to  prevent  them  from  
making the attempts again.
 
 2.5.1 In P. Rathinam v. Union of India 8, a Division Bench of the Supreme  
Court also held that section 309, IPC violates Article 21, as the right to live  
of which the said Article speaks of can be said to bring in its trail the right  
not  to  live  a  forced  life.  Quoting  from  a  lecture  of  Harvard  University 
Professor of Law and Psychiatry, Alan A Stone, the Supreme Court noted  
that right to die inevitably leads to the right to commit suicide. However, the  
8 AIR 1994 SC 1844
16

Supreme Court disagreed with the view of the Bombay High Court that  
section  309  is  also  violative  of  Article  14.  Dealing  with  the  argument  
relating to the want of a plausible definition of suicide, the Supreme Court  
observed that irrespective of the differences as to what constitutes suicide,  
suicide is capable of a broad definition and that there is no doubt that it is  
intentional taking of one’s life, as stated at page 1521 of Encyclopaedia of  
Crime and Justice, Volume IV, 1983 Edn. As for the reason that section 309  
treats all attempts to commit suicide by the same measure without regard to  
the circumstances in which attempts are made, the Supreme Court held that  
this also cannot make the said section as violative of Article 14, inasmuch as  
the nature, gravity and extent of attempt may be taken care of by tailoring  
the sentence appropriately; in certain cases, even Probation of Offenders Act  
can be pressed into service, whose section 12 enables the court to ensure that  
no stigma or disqualification is attached to such a person.
2.5.2 The Supreme Court observed that suicide, the intentional taking of  
one’s life has probably been a part of human behaviour since prehistory.  
Various social forces, like the economy, religion and socio-economic status  
are responsible for suicides. There are various theories of suicide, to wit,  
sociological, psychological, biochemical and environmental. Suicide knows  
no barrier of race, religion, caste, age or sex. There is secularization of  
suicide. 
2.5.3 The  Supreme  Court  further  observed  that  suicide  is  a  psychiatric  
problem and not a manifestation of criminal instinct. What is needed to take  
care  of suicide-prone  persons  are  soft  words  and  wise  counseling  (of a  
psychiatrist), and not stony dealing by a jailor following harsh treatment  
17

meted out by a heartless prosecutor. It is a matter of extreme doubt whether  
by booking a person who has attempted to commit suicide to trial, suicides  
can be taken care of. 
2.5.4 The Supreme Court expressed the view that section 309 of the Penal  
Code deserves to be effaced from the statute book to humanize our penal  
laws. It is a cruel and irrational provision, as it may result in punishing a  
person again (doubly) who has suffered agony and would be undergoing  
ignominy because of his failure to commit suicide. An act of suicide cannot  
be  said  to  be  against  religion,  morality  or  public  policy,  and  an  act  of 
attempted  suicide  has  no  baneful  effect  on  society.  Further,  suicide  or  
attempt to commit it causes no harm to others, because of which State’s  
interference with the personal liberty of the concerned persons is not called  
for.
2.5.5 The Supreme Court also observed that the view taken by it would  
advance not only the cause of humanization, which is a need of the day, but  
of globalization also, as by effacing section 309, we would be attuning this  
part of our criminal law to the global wavelength.
2.6 In Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab 9, however, a Constitution Bench of  
the Supreme Court overruled the decisions in Maruti Shripati Dubal and P. 
Rathinam, holding that Article 21 cannot be construed to include within it  
the ‘right to die’ as a part of the fundamental right guaranteed therein, and  
therefore, it cannot be said that section 309, IPC is violative of Article 21. It  
was observed that when a man commits suicide he has to undertake certain  
9 AIR 1996 SC 946
18

positive overt acts and the genesis of those acts cannot be traced to, or be  
included within the protection of the ‘right to life’ under Article 21. ‘Right  
to life’ is a natural right embodied in Article 21 but suicide is an unnatural  
termination or extinction of life and, therefore, incompatible and inconsistent 
with the concept of ‘right to life’. The comparison with other rights, such as  
the right to ‘freedom of speech’, etc., is inapposite. To give meaning and  
content to the word ‘life’ in Article 21, it has been construed as life with  
human dignity. Any aspect of life which makes it dignified may be read into  
it but not that which extinguishes it and is, therefore, inconsistent with the  
continued existence of life resulting in effacing the right itself. The ‘right to  
die’, if any, is inherently inconsistent with the ‘right to life’, as is death with  
life.
2.7 It is significant to note that the Supreme Court in Gian Kaur focused 
on  constitutionality  of  section  309,  IPC.  The  Court  did  not  go  into  the 
wisdom of retaining or continuing the said provision in the statute.
2.8 It may not be inapposite to also note C. A. Thomas Master v. Union of  
India10,  wherein  the  accused,  a  retired  teacher  of  80  years,  wanted  to  
voluntarily put an end to his life after having had a successful, contented and  
happy life. He stated that his mission in life had ended and argued that  
voluntary termination of one’s life was not equivalent to committing suicide.  
The Kerala High Court held that no distinction can be made between suicide  
as ordinarily understood and the right to voluntarily put an end to one’s life.  
Voluntary termination of one’s life for whatever reason would amount to  
suicide within the meaning of sections 306 and 309, IPC. No distinction can  
10 2000 CriLJ 3729
19

be made between suicide committed by a person who is either frustrated or  
defeated in life and that by a person like the petitioner. The question as to  
whether suicide was committed impulsively or whether it was committed  
after prolonged deliberation is wholly irrelevant.
 
3. PREVIOUS REPORTS OF THE
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
3.1  The Law Commission had undertaken revision of the Indian Penal  
Code as part of its function of revising Central Acts of general application  
and importance. In its 42 nd Report submitted in June, 1971, the Commission  
recommended,  inter alia,  repeal of section 309. The relevant paras of this  
Report are quoted below:
16.31.  Section  309—suicide  in  the  dharma  shastras.  ‘Section  309 
penalises an attempt to commit suicide.  It may be mentioned that  
suicide was regarded as permissible in some circumstances in ancient  
India.  In the Chapter on “The hermit in the forest”, Manu’s Code  
says,-
“31. Or let him walk, fully determined and going straight  
on, in a north-easterly direction, subsisting on water and  
air, until his body sinks to rest.
32. A Brahmana having got rid of his body by one of  
those  modes  (i.e.  drowning,  precipitating  burning  or  
starving) practised by the great sages, is exalted in the  
world of Brahamana, free from sorrow and fear.”
20

Two  commentators  on  Manu,  Govardhana  and  Kulluka,  say 
that a man may undertake the  mahaprasthana  (great departure) on a  
journey which ends in death, when he is incurably diseased or meets  
with a great misfortune, and that, because it is taught in the Sastras, it  
is not opposed to the Vedic rules which forbid suicide.  To this Max  
Muller adds a note as follows:-
“From the parallel passage of Apas tambha II, 23, 2, it is,  
however,  evident  that  a  voluntary  death  by  starvation  was  
considered  the  befitting  conclusion  of  a  hermit’s  life.   The  
antiquity and general prevalence of the practice may be inferred  
from the fact that the Jaina ascetics, too, consider it particularly  
meritorious.”’
16.32. Should attempt to commit suicide be punishable?  ‘Looking at  
the offence of attempting to commit suicide, it has been observed by  
an English writer:
“It  seems  a  monstrous  procedure  to  inflict  further  
suffering on even a single individual who has already found life  
so unbearable, his chances of happiness so slender, that he has  
been willing to face pain and death in order to cease living.  
That those for whom life is altogether bitter should be subjected  
to  further  bitterness  and  degradation  seems  perverse  
legislation.”
21

Acting  on  the  view  that  such  persons  deserve  the  active  
sympathy of society and not condemnation or punishment, the British  
Parliament  enacted  the  Suicide  Act  in  1961  whereby  attempt  to  
commit suicide ceased to be an offence.’
16.33. Section 309 to be repealed . ‘We included in our Questionnaire  
the question whether attempt to commit suicide should be punishable  
at all.  Opinion was more or less equally divided.  We are, however,  
definitely  of  the  view  that  the  penal  provision  is  harsh  and  
unjustifiable and it should be repealed.’
3.2.1 Clause  126  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  (Amendment)  Bill,  1972,  
introduced in the Council of States on 11.12.1972, provided for the omission  
of section 309. It was stated in the ‘Notes on Clauses’ appended to the Bill  
that the said penal provision is harsh and unjustifiable, and that a person  
making  an  attempt  to  commit  suicide  deserves  sympathy  rather  than  
punishment.
3.2.2 Clause 131 of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1978, as  
passed by the Council of States on 23.11.1978, correspondingly carried the  
above change.
3.2.3 As the House of the People was dissolved in 1979, the Bill, though  
passed by the Council of States, lapsed.
3.3 In 1995, pursuant to the reference made by the Government of India,  
the  Law Commission  undertook  a  comprehensive  revision  of the  Indian  
22

Penal Code, with special reference to the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)  
Bill, 1978, in the light of the changed socio-legal scenario. The 156 th Report 
of the Law Commission, submitted in August, 1997, after the judgment in  
Gian Kaur, recommended retention of section 309, IPC. Chapter VIII of the  
said Report is reproduced below:
‘CHAPTER-VIII
SUICIDE: ABETMENT AND ATTEMPT
Section 306: Abetment of Suicide
Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code penalises abetment of 
suicide.  It reads as:
“306. Abetment of suicide. - If any person commits suicide,  
whoever  abets  the  commission  of  such  suicide,  shall  be  
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not  
exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
8.02. The  constitutionality  of  section  306  was  challenged  in  Smt. 
Gian  Kaur v.  State  of  Punjab.  Upholding  the  constitutionality  of  
section  306,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  section  306  enacted  a  
distinct offence which is capable of existence independent of section  
309. The Court observed:
“Section 306 prescribes punishment for ‘abetment of suicide’  
while  section  309  punishes  ‘attempt  to  commit  suicide’.  
Abetment of attempt to commit suicide is outside the purview  
of section 306 and it is punishable only under section 309 read  
23

with  section  107, IPC.    In  certain  other jurisdictions,  even  
though attempt to commit suicide is not a penal offence yet the  
abettor is made punishable.    The provision there provides for  
the punishment of abetment of suicide as well as abetment of  
attempt to commit suicide.   Thus even where the punishment  
for attempt to commit suicide is not considered desirable, its  
abetment is made a penal offence.   In other words assisted  
suicide  and  assisted  attempt  to  commit  suicide  are  made  
punishable for cogent reasons in the interest of society.   Such a  
provision  is  considered  desirable  to  also  prevent  the  danger 
inherent in the absence of such a penal provision.”
8.03. In England and Wales, the Suicide Act of 1961 has abrogated  
the rule of law whereby it is a crime for a person to commit suicide  
(S.1).  Section 2(1) of the Act imputes criminal liability for complicity  
in another’s suicide.  It reads:
“2(1).-  A  person  who  aids,  abets,  counsels  or  procures  the  
suicide of another, or an attempt by another to commit suicide,  
shall be liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for  
a term not exceeding fourteen years.”
II. Section 309 – ATTEMPT TO COMMIT SUICIDE
8.04. Section 309 of IPC punishes attempt to commit suicide with  
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with  
fine or with both.
24

8.05. The Law Commission in its Forty Second Report had examined  
whether attempt to commit suicide be retained as a penal offence.  
The Commission referred to the Dharma Sastras which legitimized the 
practice of taking one’s life in certain situations and also referred to  
the provisions of Suicide Act, 1961 in Britain which decriminalized  
the offence of attempt to commit suicide.   After examining these  
views, the Commission recommended that section 309 is harsh and  
unjustifiable and it should be repealed.
8.06. In pursuance of the recommendations of the Law Commission,  
clause 131 of the Bill omits section 309 from IPC.
8.07. Subsequently,  there  have  been  significant  judicial  
developments.    The  Delhi High  Court in  State v.  Sanjay  Kumar 
Bhatia speaking through Sachar J, as he then was, for the Division  
Bench observed that the continuance of section 309 is an anachronism  
and it should not be on the statute book.   However, the question of its  
constitutional validity was not considered in that case.
8.08. Soon  thereafter  the  Bombay  High  Court  in  Maruti Shripati 
Dubal v. State of Maharashtra speaking through Sawant J., as he then  
was, examined the constitutional validity of section 309 and held that  
the section  is violative of Article 14 as well  as Article 21 of the  
Constitution.   The Section was held to be discriminatory in nature  
and  also  arbitrary  and  violated  equality  guaranteed  by  Article  14. 
25

Article 21 was interpreted to include the right to die or to take away  
one’s life.   Consequently it was held to be violative of Article 21.
8.09. The  Andhra  Pradesh  High  Court  also  considered  the  
constitutional validity of section 309 in Chenna Jagadeeswar v. State 
of Andhra Pradesh.  Amareshwari J., speaking for the Division Bench, 
rejected the argument that Article 21 includes the right to die.   The  
court also held that the courts have adequate power to ensure that  
“unwarranted harsh treatment or prejudice is not meted out to those  
who need care and attention”.    The court also negatived the violation  
of Article 14.
8.10. The  Supreme  Court  examined  the  constitutional  validity  of  
section  309  in  P.  Rathinam v.  Union  of  India with  reference  to  
Articles 14 and 21.   The Court considered the decisions of the Delhi,  
Bombay  and Andhra Pradesh  High Courts and  disagreed  with the  
view  taken  by  Andhra  Pradesh  High  Court  on  the  question  of  
violation of Article 21.   Agreeing with views of the Bombay High  
Court, the Supreme Court observed:
“On the basis of what has been held and noted above, we state  
that section 309 of the Penal Code deserves to be effaced from  
the statute book to humanize our penal laws.   It is a cruel and  
irrational provision, and it may  result in punishing a person  
again  (doubly)  who  has  suffered  agony  and  would  be  
undergoing ignominy because of his failure to commit suicide.  
Then an act of suicide cannot be said to be against religion,  
26

morality or public policy and an act of attempted suicide has no  
baneful  effect  on  society.    Further,  suicide  or  attempt  to  
commit it causes no harm to others, because of which State’s  
interference with the personal liberty of the persons concerned  
is not called for.
We, therefore, hold that section 309 violates Article 21,  
and so, it is void.   May it be said that the view taken by us  
would advance not only the cause of humanization, which is a  
need of the day, but of globalization also, as by effacing section  
309,  we  would  be  attuning  this part  of  criminal  law  to  the  
global wavelength.”
8.11. But  this  view  of  Supreme  Court  was  overruled  by  a  larger 
Bench in Smt. Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab wherein Verma J., (as he  
then was) speaking for the Court, held that  P. Rathinam’s  case was  
wrongly decided.  The Court observed:
“When  a  man  commits  suicide  he  has  to  undertake  certain  
positive overt acts and the genesis of those acts cannot be traced 
to, or be included within the protection of the ‘right to life’  
under Article 21.   The significant aspect of ‘sanctity of life’ is  
also  not  to  be  overlooked.    Article  21  is  a  provision  
guaranteeing protection of life and personal liberty and by no  
stretch  of imagination  can ‘extinction of life’  be read to be  
included  in  ‘protection  of  life’.     Whatever  may  be  the  
philosophy  of  permitting  a  person  to  extinguish  his  life  by  
27

committing suicide, we find it difficult to construe Article 21 to  
include within it the ‘right to die’ as a part of the fundamental  
right  guaranteed  therein.  Right  to  life  is  a  natural  right  
embodied in Article 21 but suicide is an unnatural termination  
or  extinction  of  life  and,  therefore,  incompatible  and  
inconsistent with the concept of ‘right to life’.   With respect  
and in all humility, we find no similarity in the nature of the  
other rights, such as the right to ‘freedom of speech’ etc. to  
provide a comparable basis to hold that the ‘right to life’ also  
includes the ‘right to die’.   With respect, the comparison is  
inapposite, for the reason indicated in the context of Article 21.  
The decisions relating to other fundamental rights wherein the  
absence  of  compulsion  to  exercise  a  right  was  held  to  be  
included within the exercise of that right, are not available to  
support the view taken in P. Rathinam qua Article 21.
To give meaning and content to the word ‘life’ in Article  
21, it has been construed as life with human dignity.   Any  
aspect of life which makes it dignified may be read into it but  
not  that which  extinguishes it  and is,  therefore,  inconsistent  
with the continued existence of life resulting in effacing the  
right itself.   The ‘right to die’, if any, is inherently inconsistent  
with the ‘right to life’ as is ‘death with life.”
8.12. On the question of violation of Article 14, the Court agreed  
with the view taken by Hansaria J. in P. Rathinam’s case.
28

8.13. Verma J. further observed that the argument “on the desirability  
of retaining such a penal provision of punishing attempted suicide,  
including  the  recommendation  for  its  deletion  by  the  Law  
Commission  are  not  sufficient  to  indicate  that  the  provision  is  
unconstitutional being violative of Article 14.   Even if those facts are  
to  weigh,  the  severity  of  the  provision  is  mitigated  by  the  wide  
discretion in the matter of sentencing since there is no requirement of  
awarding any minimum sentence and the sentence of imprisonment is  
not even compulsory.   There is also no minimum fine prescribed as  
sentence, which alone may be the punishment awarded on conviction  
under section 309, IPC.   This aspect is noticed in  P. Rathinam  for  
holding that Article 14 is not violated.
8.14. The  Supreme  Court’s  decision  in  Smt.  Gian  Kaur has  thus  
categorically affirmed that right to life in Article 21 does not include  
the right to die.  Consequently section 309 which penalises attempt to  
commit suicide is not unconstitutional.
8.15. There  is  a  school  of  thought  which  advocates  the  
decriminalization of the offence of attempt to commit suicide.   They  
plead for a compassionate and sympathetic treatment for those who  
fail in their attempt to put an end to their lives.   They argue that  
deletion  of  section  309  is  not  an  invitation  or  encouragement  to  
attempt to commit suicide.   A person indulges in the act of attempt to  
commit suicide for various reasons some of which at times are beyond  
his control.
29

8.16. On the other hand, certain developments such as rise in narcotic  
drug-trafficking offences, terrorism in different parts of the country,  
the phenomenon of human bombs etc. have led to a rethinking on the  
need to keep attempt to commit suicide an offence.    For instance, a  
terrorist or drug trafficker who fails in his/her attempt to consume the  
cyanide pill and the human  bomb who fails in the attempt  to kill  
himself or herself along with the targets of attack, have to be charged  
under  section  309  and  investigations  be  carried  out  to  prove  the  
offence.   These groups of offenders under section 309 stand under a  
different category than those, who due to psychological and religious  
reasons, attempt to commit suicide.
8.17. Accordingly, we recommend that section 309 should continue  
to be an offence under the Indian Penal Code and clause 131 of the  
Bill be deleted.’
3.4 The Supreme Court upheld that constitutional validity of section 309,  
IPC only by applying the relevant principles to adjudge the constitutional  
validity of the provisions thereof.   It did not go into the desirability of  
having the same in the Indian Penal Code.   
4. OTHER VIEWS
4.1 Shri Justice Jahagirdar has expressed his view in his article entitled  
“Attempt At Suicide – A Crime or A Cry” in the following words:
 
30

“A  man  commits  suicide  for  various  reasons  and  in  diverse  
circumstances. The aim, in all cases, is to get deliverance from the  
several  real  or  imaginary  misfortunes  to  which  that  person  is  
subjected.   If  he  is  successful  in  his  attempt,  it  is  regarded  as  
deliverance; if unsuccessful it is regarded as an offence.  Survival is  
an  offence.   It  is  impossible  to  find  any  rational  justification  for  
inflicting a punishment upon a person who has made an attempt to  
escape punishment which he thinks society is inflicting upon him.  Is  
survival  itself  not  sufficient  punishment?  …  Over  a  long  period,  
fortunately, the attitude  towards suicide  and attempted  suicide  has  
changed  and  most  civilised  countries  have  done  away  with  the  
concept of attempted suicide as an offence.  ‘Suicide’, said Goethe, ‘is  
an  incident  in  human  life  which,  however  much  disputed  and  
discussed, demands sympathy of every man and in every age must be  
dealt with anew’.  That attempted suicide is a matter for treatment and  
not punishment has been recognised by several countries.  After  the  
French Revolution in 1789, attempted suicide was abolished as an  
offence  in  France  and  subsequently  in  all  European  countries.  
England, as usual, was laggard in reforms, but fortunately in 1961 by  
the Suicide Act, the ‘crime’ of attempted suicide was abolished.  In  
USSR and in most of the states in the US, it is not an offence. It was  
accepted  that  suicide  is  the  result  of  psychological  disturbances  
impervious to rational deterrents.  In England a society called The  
Samaritans  provides  psychological  support  to  those  contemplating  
suicide. … Most of the cases are psychiatric. … The presence of  
Section  309  of  the  Penal  Code  is  thus  not  only  irrational  and  
obnoxious but also positively harmful to the members of a society for  
31

whose benefit it is supposed to be on the statute book. As a result of  
this provision existing on the statute book, people needing mental  
treatment  who  are  driven  to  commit  suicide  are  prevented  from  
seeking the same for fear of being punished. … Which is the theory of  
punishment  which  informs  section  309  of  the  IPC?   It  cannot  be  
deterrent  because  a  man  commits  the  act  for  reasons  beyond  his  
control; it cannot be reformative because a sick man is thrown among  
the felons. The punitive theory is wholly irrelevant because the person  
attempting suicide does no wrong to others. In sum, the attempt to  
commit suicide cannot and should not be regarded as an offence. It is  
not committed by a person who wants to hurt anyone; it is not resorted 
to by one with criminal intention. Suicide and attempted suicide are  
difficult to define. An act which cannot be defined precisely cannot be  
punished.  Suicide is attempted by people for reasons beyond their  
control. They need sympathy, care, love and treatment. By branding  
such people as ‘criminals’, treatment is rendered difficult. Punishment  
for attempted suicide is unsupportable by any recognized theory of  
punishment. … What the ‘abolitionists’ of Section 309 are asking for  
is a fair treatment for those unfortunate, hapless people who fail in  
their attempts to commit suicide. The deletion of Section 309 is not an  
invitation or encouragement to attempt to commit suicide. … Do not  
punish the helpless; help the helpless.”  
4.2 The World Health Organization, on knowing the efforts of the NGO,  
the SNEHA, Suicide Prevention Centre, for prevention of suicide, stated to  
them  that  having  suicidal  behaviours  specified  by  law  as  a  punishable  
offence  has  many  negative  effects  at  a  public  health  level.  Moreover,  
32

punishing  with  imprisonment  a  behaviour  consequent  to  either  a  mental 
disorder or a social  difficulty  gives a completely  wrong message  to the  
population.  There  is  now  evidence  from  countries  that  have  repealed  
similarly old legislation, of the overall improvement.
4.3 The President of the International Association for Suicide Prevention,  
France, has, vide his letter of 9 October 2007 addressed to Hon’ble Minister  
of Law and Justice, Government of India, strongly supported withdrawal of  
the status of attempted suicide as a punishable offence. He has stated that  
most  countries in the world who have had laws criminalizing  attempted  
suicide  have  withdrawn  those  laws  in  the  second  half  of  the  twentieth  
century, justifying the withdrawal by the belief that attempting suicide is not  
a crime that should be punished but rather a desperate reaction to a difficult  
life situation by people who usually suffer from a mental disorder. These  
changes have indicated awareness that suicidal individuals need to be helped  
and  imprisonment  only  makes  their  problem  worse.  One  of  the  fears  
expressed when all countries in Europe and North America decriminalized  
attempted  suicide  was  that  suicide  rates  may  increase.  There  are  no  
indications  whatsoever  that  there  was  an  increase  in  suicides  following  
decriminalization, and in many instances it is thought that suicide decreased  
since more suicidal individuals received the help they need. Countries such  
as Singapore, which still imprison some suicide attempters, do not appear to  
have any benefits from those practices. For example, in Singapore suicide  
rates have been increasing in recent years despite their having suicide as a  
punishable  offence.  The International Association  for Suicide Prevention  
wishes India to join the countries of the world, who have decriminalized  
attempted suicide in order to clearly communicate to suicidal individuals  
33

that they should seek help, rather than avoid admitting to their problems for  
fear of imprisonment.   
   
4.4 The SNEHA, Chennai is of the opinion that the continuance of the  
archaic  law  in  India,  like  section  309,  IPC,  is  proving  to  be  
counterproductive to the cause of suicide prevention. In many  countries,  
including the whole of Europe, North America, much of South America and  
Asia, including neighbouring Sri Lanka, attempted suicide is not a criminal  
offence any more. Many who resort to suicide and who manage to survive  
do not seek medical help for fear of being arrested and penalized. Suicide is  
a “cry for help”. People who attempt suicide need extensive and sometimes  
long-term psycho-social support. The panacea for them certainly cannot be  
imprisonment.  They  need  compassion,  emotional  support  and  sometimes 
even  psychiatric  help.  If  the  act  of  attempted  suicide  were  to  be  
decriminalized it will make things more workable and easier for all to extend 
their hand and support in reducing suicide in India. It will encourage those  
who attempted suicide to seek medical and professional help immediately  
without fear or inhibition. Only a handful of countries in the world, like  
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Malaysia, Singapore and India have persisted with  
this  law.  The  apprehension  that  the  repeal  of  the  law  would  cause  an  
increase in suicides is belied by the fact that Sri Lanka repealed the law four  
years ago and the suicide rate is showing a trend in reduction. In the opinion  
of the SNEHA, the persistence of this law leads to following difficulties:
1. Emergency treatment for those who have attempted suicide is  
not readily accessible as they are referred by local hospitals and  
34

doctors to tertiary centres as it is termed as Medico Legal case.  
The time lost in the golden hour will save many lives.
2. Those  who  attempt  suicide  are  already  distressed  and  in  
psychological pain and for them to face the ignominy of police  
interrogation causes increased distress, shame, guilt and further  
suicide attempt.
3. At the time of family turmoil dealing with police procedure  
adds to the woes of the family.
4. It also leads to a gross under-reporting of attempted suicide and  
the magnitude of the problem is not unknown.    Unless one is  
aware  of  the  nature  of  extent  of  the  problem  effective  
intervention is not possible.
5. As  many  attempted  suicides  are  categorized  in  the  guise  of 
accidental poisoning etc. emotional and mental health support is 
not available to those who have attempted as they are unable to  
access the services.
4.5 It  will  be  advantageous  to  quote  the  following  paragraphs  from  
Ratanlal & Dhirajlal’s Law of Crimes (26th Edn., 2007, pages 1825-1827):
“Right to live: General  – Every civilized legal system recognizes  
right to life.  We are having a written Constitution.  There are certain  
basic rights which have been treated as fundamental by the Founding  
35

Fathers of the Constitution.  Article 21 is one of them.  It declares that  
no  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  life  or  personal  liberty  except 
according to procedure established by law.  Section 309 of the Indian  
Penal Code makes an attempt to commit suicide an offence punishable 
with imprisonment up to one year or with fine or with both.  Thus,  
right  to  life  is  also  considered  to  be  a  duty  to  live.   Ordinarily,  
therefore, an individual has no right to end his life.  He has to perform  
his duties towards himself and towards the society at large.
Right to live: Ambit and scope  – It is settled law that life does not  
mean  ‘animal  existence’.   Before  more  than  100  years,  it  was  
recognized by the U.S. Supreme Court in the leading case of Munn v.  
Illinois11.   This   principle is  recognized  by  our  Supreme  Court  in 
Kharak Singh 12, Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration 13 and in various  
other cases.  After Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India 14, various rights  
have been held to be covered by Article 21; such as right to go abroad, 
right to privacy, right against solitary confinement, right to speedy  
trial, right to shelter, right to breathe in unpolluted environment, right  
to medical aid, right to education, etc.  Thus, life does not mean mere  
living,  but  a  glowing  vitality  –  the  feeling  of  wholeness  with  a  
capacity for continuous intellectual and spiritual growth. 
  Right to die?  - As a normal rule, every human being has to live and  
continue to enjoy the fruits of life till nature intervenes to end it.  
11 (1876) 94 US 113
12 AIR 1963 SC 1295
13 AIR 1978 SC 1675
14 AIR 1978 SC 597
36

Death is certain.  It is a fact of life.  Suicide is not a feature of normal  
life.  It is an abnormal situation.  But if a person has right to enjoy his  
life,  he  cannot  also  be  forced  to  live  that  life  to  his  detriment,  
disadvantage or disliking.  If a person is living a miserable life or is  
seriously sick or having incurable disease, it is improper as well as  
immoral to ask him to live a painful life and to suffer agony.  It is an  
insult to humanity.  Right to live means right to live peacefully as  
ordinary  human  being.   One  can  appreciate  the  theory  that  an  
individual may not be permitted to die with a view to avoiding his  
social  obligations.   He  should  perform  all  duties  towards  fellow  
citizens.  At the same time, however, if he is unable to take normal  
care of his body or has lost all the senses and if his real desire is to  
quit the world, he cannot be compelled to continue with torture and  
painful life.  In such cases, it will indeed be cruel not to permit him to  
die. …
Reduction of suffering - Right to live would, however, mean right to  
live with human dignity up to the end of natural life.  Thus, right to  
live would include right to die with dignity at the end of life and it  
should not be equated with right to die an unnatural death curtailing  
natural span of life.  
Hence, a dying man  who is terminally  ill or in a persistent  
vegetative  state  can  be  permitted  to  terminate  it  by  premature  
extinction of his life.  In fact, these are not cases of extinguishing life  
but only of accelerating process of natural death which has already  
commenced.  In such cases, causing of death would result in end of  
his suffering.  
37

But even such change, though desirable, is considered to be the  
function of the legislature which may enact a suitable law providing  
adequate safeguards to prevent any possible abuse.”
5. RECOMMENDATION
5.1 Suicide occurs in all ages. Life is a gift given by God and He alone  
can take it. Its premature termination cannot be approved by any society. But 
when  a  troubled  individual  tries  to  end  his  life,  it  would  be  cruel  and  
irrational to visit him with punishment on his failure to die. It is his deep  
unhappiness which causes him to try to end his life. Attempt to suicide is  
more a manifestation of a diseased condition of mind deserving of treatment  
and care rather than punishment. It would not be just and fair to inflict  
additional legal punishment on a person who has already suffered agony and  
ignominy in his failure to commit suicide. 
5.2 The criminal law must not act with misplaced overzeal and it is only  
where it can prove to be apt and effective machinery to cure the intended  
evil that it should come into the picture.
5.3 Section 309 of the Indian Penal Code provides double punishment for  
a person who has already got fed up with his own life and desires to end it.  
Section  309  is  also  a  stumbling  block  in  prevention  of  suicides  and  
improving the access of medical care to those who have attempted suicide. It  
is unreasonable  to inflict punishment  upon a person who on account of  
family discord, destitution, loss of a dear relation or other cause of a like  
nature overcomes the instinct of self-preservation and decides to take his  
38

own  life.   In  such  a  case,  the  unfortunate  person  deserves  sympathy,  
counselling and appropriate treatment, and certainly not the prison.
5.4 Section 309 needs to be effaced from the statute book because the  
provision  is  inhuman,  irrespective  of  whether  it  is  constitutional  or  
unconstitutional. The repeal of the anachronistic law contained in section  
309  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  would  save  many  lives  and  relieve  the  
distressed of his suffering.
5.5 The Commission is of the view that while assisting or encouraging  
another person to (attempt to) commit suicide must not go unpunished, the  
offence of attempt to commit suicide under section 309 needs to be omitted  
from the Indian Penal Code.
5.6 We recommend accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr.  Tahir Mahmood)                  (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal)
         Member              Member-Secretary
Dated: August      , 2008.
39