GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Laws on Registration of Marriage and Divorce – 
A Proposal for Consolidation and Reform
Report No. 211  
OCTOBER  2008

 LAW  COMMISSION  OF INDIA
         (REPORT  NO. 211)
Laws on Registration of Marriage and Divorce –
   A Proposal for Consolidation and Reform
Forwarded to Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj, Union Minister for  
Law  and  Justice,  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice,  
Government of India by Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan,  
Chairman,  Law  Commission  of  India,  on  17th  day  of  
October, 2008.
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of  
three  years  from  1 st September,  2006  by  Order  No.  
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the  16 th October,  
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law 
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the  
Member-Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  and  seven  
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar            : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar            : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the  Government  
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or  
medium provided that it is reproduced accurately and not 
used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material  must  be  
acknowledged as the Government of India copyright and  
the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed  
to the Member-Secretary and sent either by post to the  
Law  Commission  of  India,  2 nd Floor,  ILI  Building,  
Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India or by email  
to lci-dla@nic.in  
5

DO No. 6(3)133/2007-LC(LS)         17 October, 2008 
                                                                                   
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji, 
 Sub: Laws on Registration of Marriage and Divorce – 
        A Proposal for Consolidation and Reform
                              
I am forwarding herewith the 211th Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
above subject.
The subject has been taken up  suo motu  in the light of the directions of the  
Supreme Court dated 14.2.2006 in Seema v. Ashwani Kumar [2006 (2) SCC 578] that all  
marriages shall be compulsorily registered and that the State Governments shall initiate  
action for rule-making in this regard.  There is a great diversity in respect of laws for  
registration of marriages.
Although  we  have  a  122  year  old  Central  Act,  viz.,  the  Births,  Deaths  and  
Marriages  Registration  Act,  1886  which  states  that  “Births  and  Deaths”  are  to  be  
registered under the Act by the Registrars of Births and Deaths appointed by the State but  
there  is  no provision for registration  of marriages  and hence  the  title  of the Act is  
somewhat misleading.  Under the Act, Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages  
is only to keep proper Indexes of the certified copies of Marriage Registers received by  
him under the provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, Indian Christian Marriage  
Act, 1872 and Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936.
Then we have few other State laws on Marriage Registration in Bombay, Andhra  
Pradesh, West Bengal but nowhere failure to register a marriage which is otherwise  
compulsory, affects the validity of marriage in any way.  The administrative machinery  
for registration of marriages is not regulated everywhere by one and the same law.  In  
different parts of the country it is regulated either by one of the three central laws – the  
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886, the Registration Act, 1908 and  
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 – or by a local law, or a combination of both.  
This creates a lot of confusion with registration officials as well as people wanting or  
required to register their marriages. There was a tremendous diversity of laws relating to  
registration of marriages making it complicated and confusing.
Similarly for registration of divorces, the laws which provide for any kind of  
registration of divorce is that of Muslims and Parsis but provisions of the State laws are  
dormant and hardly in practice and thus leave abundant room for misuse of law and cause  
great hardship to women.
6

In  view  of  the  above,  the  Law  Commission  recommends  enactment  of  a  
“Marriage and Divorce Registration Act” to be made applicable in the whole of India and  
to all citizens irrespective of their religion and personal law and without any exceptions  
or exemptions.
The proposed law should deal only with registration of marriages and divorces  
and not with any substantive aspect now governed by various matrimonial laws – general  
and community - specific.  Accordingly, the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration  
Act, 1886 be repealed and Births and Deaths Registration Act, 1969 be re-named as  
“Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act” with a provision that officials working  
and  records  maintained  under  the  former  Act  shall  be  deemed  to  be  working  and  
maintained under the latter Act.
The recommendations, if accepted and implemented, will hopefully address the  
concern of the Supreme Court lying behind the Court’s repeated directive to the State  
Governments to ensure compulsory registration of all marriages in the country.
I acknowledge the extensive contribution made by Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood,  
Full-time Member, in preparing this Report.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 001.
7

CONTENTS
Chapter             Page No.
Chapter I   
Introduction 10
Chapter II  
Registration of Civil Marriages 
A. Old Special Marriage Act 1872 11
B. New Special Marriage Act 1954 12
C. Foreign Marriage Act 1969 13
Chapter III
Registration of Hindu, Buddhist, Jain and Sikh Marriages
A. Hindu Marriage Act 1955 14
B. Hindu Marriage Registration Rules 15
C. Special and Local Laws 16
Chapter IV 
Registration of Muslim Marriages
A. Certification by the Kazis 18
B. The Kazis Act 1880 18
C. Local Muslim Marriage and Divorce Registration Acts 19
Chapter V 
Registration of Christian, Parsi, Jewish and Bahai Marriages
A. Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872 22
B. Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936 23
C. Bahai and Jewish Marriages 24
8

Chapter VI 
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1886 
A. Limited Scope of the Act 25
B. Transmission of Marriage Records 25
Chapter VII  
General State Laws on Marriage Registration
 A.  Bombay Registration of Marriages Act 1954 27
 B.  Laws of Other States 29
Chapter VIII 
Registration of Divorces
A. Divorces Obtained Outside the Court 30
B. Divorces Obtained in Courts 31
Chapter IX
Findings and Recommendations
A.  Findings 32
B.  Recommendations 34
9

CHAPTER I 
Introduction
Since February 2006 the Supreme Court has in Seema v. Ashwani Kumar  directed 
the State governments thrice to frame Rules for compulsory registration of all  
marriages irrespective of the religion and personal law of the parties. The States  
are now in the process of implementing these directives in various ways. 
Technically,  rules  having  the  effect  of  law  can  be  framed  by  any  
government only under an authority delegated to it by proper legislation. We have,  
therefore, to examine for this purpose provisions relating to marriage registration  
under various central and local laws in force in the country. 
As is well known, our country has a dual system of matrimonial laws.  
Various communities or groups of communities are ordinarily governed by their  
personal laws, codified or uncodified, while at the same time individuals can opt  
out  of  the  community-specific  family-law  regime  and  voluntarily  subject  
themselves to the national laws on civil marriages.  Provisions for registration of  
marriages, optional or mandatory, are found under most of these laws. 
Provisions are found in some but not all matrimonial laws for registration  
of divorces with State-appointed officials. There is more legal diversity in this  
respect than in regard to registration of marriages.
It is high time we took a second look at the entire gamut of Central and  
State laws on registration of marriages and divorces to assess if a uniform regime  
of marriage and divorce registration laws is feasible in the country at this stage of  
social development and, if not, what necessary legal reforms may be introduced  
for streamlining and improving upon the present system.  
10

CHAPTER II
Registration of Civil Marriages 
A.  Old Special Marriage Act 1872
The first law of civil marriages of India was the Special Marriage Act 1872. It was  
enacted on the recommendation of the First Law Commission set up during the  
British rule. Mainly meant to facilitate inter-religious marriages, initially it could  
be availed only by those who did not claim to profess any of the established  
religions. Later, by an amendment effected in 1923 it was made available – as an  
alternative to personal law – also to marriages both parties to which belonged to  
the Hindu, Buddhist, Jain or Sikh religious faiths.
Under this Act the processes of solemnization and registration of marriage  
were combined into the same transaction. Marriage Registrars, independent or ex 
officio, were to be appointed under its provisions by the Local Government for  
various territories under its administration (Section 3); and they would play the  
key role in the solemnization of marriages under the Act. The process would begin  
with a notice of the intended marriage to be given to the Marriage Registrar in the  
prescribed form, and end with its solemnization in his presence (Sections 4, 12).  
After  solemnization  of  a  marriage,  the  Marriage  Registrar  would  “enter  a  
certificate thereof” in the prescribed form in his Marriage Certificate Book, signed  
by the parties and three witnesses (Section 13).   
Every Marriage Registrar acting under the Act was required to send, at  
prescribed intervals, certified true copies of all entries in his Marriage Certificate  
Book  to  the  Registrar-General  of  Births,  Deaths  and  Marriages  of  the  region 
(Section 13-A). The Marriage Certificate Book would “at all reasonable times be  
open  for  inspection  and  shall  be  admissible  as  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  
11

statements therein contained” and its copies would be provided to the applicants  
(Section 14). 
The Special Marriage Act 1872 remained in force until after independence  
and was eventually repealed by and replaced with the new Special Marriage Act  
1954.  Its  provisions  on  solemnization-cum-registration  of  marriages  were,  
however, more or less retained under the new Act.
B.  New Special Marriage Act 1954 
The new Special Marriage Act 1954 also combines solemnization and registration  
of civil marriages into the same transaction. It enables the State governments to  
appoint one or more Marriage Officers for its purposes for various administrative  
units. The Act does not apply in the State of Jammu and Kashmir but provides for  
the appointment of Marriage Officers there for the people domiciled outside but  
living within the State (Section 3).  
The procedure for civil marriages under this Act is more or less the same as  
under the first Special Marriage Act of 1872 – beginning with a notice of an  
intended marriage to be given in the prescribed form to the Marriage Officer of the 
district in which at least one party has lived for at least 30 days (Section 5) and  
ending with its solemnization in his presence (Sections 11-12). The provision of  
the old Act of 1872 for a Marriage Certificate Book to be maintained by the  
Marriage Officers is retained in the new Act which also provides that the marriage  
certificate “shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage  
under this Act has been solemnized and all formalities respecting the signatures of  
witnesses have been complied with.” (Section 13)
By a new provision not found in the old Special Marriage Act of 1872 the  
12

new Special Marriage Act of 1954 provides the facility of converting an existing  
religious marriage into a civil marriage by its registration under its provisions  
(Section 15). The procedure for this is the same as for marriages to be originally  
solemnized under the Act, including the issuance of a marriage certificate. 
The  provision  for  periodical  transmission  of  marriage  records  by  all  
Marriage Officers to the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages is  
retained in the new Act, periodicity and forms for which are to be prescribed by  
the State governments under the Rules to be framed for carrying out purposes of  
the Act (Sections 48-50). 
C.  Foreign Marriage Act 1969
The  Foreign  Marriage  Act  was  enacted  to  facilitate  solemnization  of  civil  
marriages by Indian citizens in foreign countries. Marriage  Officers  are  to be  
appointed by the Central Government for this purpose in its Diplomatic Missions  
abroad (Section 3). Under this Act an Indian citizen may marry another Indian or a  
foreigner (Section 4). 
Like in the Special Marriage Act 1954, under this Act too solemnization  
and registration of marriages are parts of the same transaction. The procedure for  
solemnization and registration of such marriages is more or less the same as under  
the Special Marriage Act 1954 (Sections 5-13). Marriage Certificate Books are to  
be maintained in all Diplomatic Missions. There is no provision in this Act for  
transmission of records to any general registry of the country.    
Besides solemnization of new marriages, this Act also makes a provision  
for registration of pre-existing marriages solemnized in foreign countries under the 
laws of those countries (Section 17). 
13

CHAPTER III
Registration of Hindu, Buddhist, Jain and Sikh Marriages
A.  Hindu Marriage Act 1955
Hindu law was first codified in the princely state of Baroda under the title “Baroda  
Hindu Nibandh 1937”. Before that the Mysore State had enacted a Hindu Law  
(Women’s Rights) Act 1933. 
In what was called ‘British India’ a number of laws were enacted one after  
the other to reform certain aspects of the Hindu law of marriage. 
None  of  the  local  and  central  laws  referred  to  above  contained  any  
requirement for registration of marriages with the State authorities. The first law  
making a provision for registration of Hindu, Buddhist, Jain and Sikh marriages  
was the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 enacted after Independence.
The Hindu Marriage Act 1955 does not apply in the State of Goa and the  
Union  Territory  of  Daman  and  Diu.  In  Puducherry  it  does  not  apply  to  the  
‘Renoncants’ (those who opted for the local Franco-Indian law at the time of the  
assimilation of the territory into the Indian Union in 1954). 
The State of Jammu and Kashmir has got its own Hindu Marriage Act  
enacted on the pattern of the central Act.
“For the purpose of facilitating the proof of Hindu marriages” Section 8 of  
the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 enabled the State governments to make Rules for  
optional registration of marriages, “in such manner and subject to such conditions  
as may be prescribed,” by getting their particulars entered in a Hindu Marriage  
14

Register kept for the purpose.  Such Registers “shall at all reasonable times be  
open for inspection and shall be  admissible  as evidence  of statements therein  
contained.”  Certified  copies  of  entries  in  the  Register  would  be  provided  on  
payment of a fee.   
The Act further empowered the State Governments to issue a “direction” to  
make registration of marriages compulsory “if it is of opinion that it is necessary  
or expedient so to do.” The Government could take such an action either for the  
whole State or for any part thereof and could also decide whether registration will  
be compulsory “in all cases or in such cases as may be specified.”  If a State  
Government issued such a direction for compulsory registration of marriages, its  
violation would be punishable with a fine of Rs. 25. Non-registration of a marriage 
in any case will not, however, affect the validity of any marriage. .
As ordinarily the Hindu Marriage Act does not apply to the Scheduled  
Tribes, tribal marriages remained outside the scope of Section 8 of the Act and the  
Rules framed thereunder by the State Governments. 
B.  Hindu Marriage Registration Rules
The States of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh were the first to make Rules under  
Section 8 of the Hindu Marriage Act, both in 1956. The latter State replaced its  
Rules by new Rules made in 1984. Gradually almost all States made the required  
Rules, but provisions of the various State Rules have not been uniform.
The  Assam  Hindu  Marriage  Rules  1961,  for  instance,  provided  that  
“notwithstanding anything contained in the Act and these Rules, registration of  
Hindu marriages in Assam, excepting those areas where the Registration Act 1908  
does not apply, shall be optional” (Rule 19).
15

The  Kerala  Hindu  Marriage  Registration  Rule  1957  classified  various  
regions in the State into “Compulsory Registration Areas” (where the Government  
can  make  registration  of  all  marriages  compulsory)  and  “other  areas”  (where 
registration is optional).
Registration of marriages was kept optional under the Rules made by most  
of the other States including the West Bengal Hindu Marriage Registration Rules  
1958,  Andhra  Pradesh  Hindu  Marriage  Registration  Rules  1965,  Karnataka  
Registration of Hindu Marriages Rules 1966, and Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage  
Registration Rules 1973.
In  later  years  some  States  but  not  all  provided  rules  for  compulsory  
registration, or selectively compulsory, governed by the Hindu Marriage Act 1955. 
It was only after the Supreme Court directive of 2006 that the remaining State  
Governments began initiating action in this regard.
The  Rules  made  under  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act  generally  mention  the  
Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages appointed and working under  
the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1886 as the supervisory and  
appellate authority in respect of Marriage Officers in the State. Some of these laws  
require  Marriage Officers  to transmit their records  to the  Registrar-General at  
prescribed intervals.  
C.  Special and Local Laws
The  Anand  Marriage  Act  1909,  still  in  force,  was  passed  to  recognize  Sikh  
marriages performed by the religious rites known as “ Anandkaraj.” It, however,  
contained no provision for registration of any such marriage. Recently some Sikh  
leaders have demanded that the 1909 Act should be enlarged into a full-fledged  
16

“Sikh Marriage Act” and registration of all Sikh marriages should be made under  
that law. 
The Arya Marriage Validation Act 1937 was passed to recognize inter-caste 
and inter-sect marriages among the Hindus. Strangely, this Act which remains in  
force said nothing about the well-established Arya Samaj system of certification of 
marriages. 
Marriages governed by both these Acts can, of course, be registered under  
Section 8 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 and the State Rules made under that  
provision. So can the marriages among the  Brahmosamajis who also have their  
own  system  of  certification  of  marriages.  Both  the  Aryasamajis and  the  
Brahmosamajis are specifically described by the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 as  
“forms” or “developments” of the Hindu religion -- while the Act applies, besides  
the Hindus, also to the Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs (Section 2). 
In Jammu and Kashmir the local Hindu Marriage Act 1980 dittoed almost  
all  provisions  of  the  central  Hindu  Marriage  Act  1955  as  originally  enacted.  
Section 8 of the State Act literally reproduced Section 8 of the central Act relating  
to  registration  of  marriages.  The  State  Government  has  not  provided  for  
compulsory registration of any marriage governed by the local Hindu Marriage  
Act.
17

CHAPTER IV
Registration of Muslim Marriages 
A.  Certification by the Kazis  
A system of private registration of marriages with the kazis has always prevailed  
among the Indian Muslims.
Though in principle Islamic law does not require a ritual solemnization of  
marriage, among the Muslims of India marriages are invariably solemnized by  
religious officials known as the “kazi”. The short ceremony performed by the kazi, 
known as “ nikah”, begins with formally obtaining consent of the parties – first of  
the bride and then of the groom – and ends with recitation from the Holy Quran  
followed by prayers. Before, or immediately after, the ceremony the kazi prepares  
a  nikah-nama (marriage certificate) which gives full details of the parties and is  
signed by both of them, and by two witnesses. The kazi authenticates the nikah-
nama by putting his signatures and seal on it.  
Printed forms of standard nikah-nama in Urdu and Hindi are stocked by all  
kazis who fill in it the details of the marriages they solemnize, issue copies to both  
parties, and always preserve a copy in their records.
Under the law of India the nikah-namas issued by the kazis are admissible  
in evidence.   
B.  The Kazis Act 1880
There  is  an  old  central  law  called  the  Kazis  Act  1880  empowering  State  
governments to appoint kazis for the purpose of helping desiring local Muslims  
18

with  solemnization  of  marriages,  etc.   The  Government  in  British  India  had  
inherited the power to appoint kazis from the Mughal rulers but had abdicated it in  
1864. On the demand of Muslim leadership led by the great Sir Syed Ahmad  
Khan, the power was resumed by enacting the Kazis Act 1880. 
Under this Act kazis may be appointed by a State Government for various  
areas under its control. A kazi can also be removed by the appointing authority on  
the grounds of misconduct, long absence, insolvency or incapability (Section 2).  
The Act, now in force in most States, makes it clear that presence of a State-
appointed kazi will not be mandatory for any marriage (Section 4).  
The central Kazis Act does not till now apply to private kazis and contains  
no provision relating to kazis’ function of preparing and preserving records of  
marriages. 
In  Maharashtra,  however,  the  Act  was  amended  in  1980  to  make  it  
applicable also to private kazis and require all kazis – private and State-appointed  
– to maintain proper records of marriages which they may be invited to solemnize. 
C.  Local Muslim Marriage and Divorce Registration Acts  
There are Muslim Marriage and Divorce Registration Acts in force in six States  
providing for voluntary registration of marriages and divorces among the local  
Muslims.  These States are as follows:
(i) West Bengal
(ii) Bihar
(iii) Jharkhand
(iv) Assam
19

(v) Orissa 
(vi) Meghalaya
The parent law among these is the old Bengal Mohammedan Marriage and  
Divorce Registration Act 1876 which is now in force in the first three of the  
above-named States. 
The  Orissa  legislature  re-enacted  in  1949,  with  some  changes,  the  old  
Bengal law of 1876 referred to above. Titled Orissa Mohammedan Marriage and  
Divorce Registration Act 1949, it extends to the whole State.
The Assam legislature had enacted a similar law in 1935 – the Assam  
Moslem  Marriage  and  Divorce  Registration  Act.  The  newly  created  State  of  
Meghalaya locally re-enacted this law in 1974 with no substantive change.
All these Acts empower the local governments to license suitable persons in 
various areas authorizing them to register marriages and divorces among the local  
Muslims. These persons, to be known as “Mohammedan Marriage Registrars”,  
have to act as per the procedure laid down at length in the Acts. All the Acts also  
prescribe  various  forms  for  registration  of  marriages  and  different  forms  of  
divorce, including talaq (divorce by husband) and khula (divorce at the instance of 
wife).  
The  position  of  the  Mohammedan Marriage  Registrars  appointed  under  
these Acts is akin to the kazis appointed under the central Kazis Act 1880. Like  
the latter, all these local Acts also clarify that the presence of a State-appointed  
Mohammedan Marriage Registrar will not be obligatory for any marriage, and also 
that neither non-registration would affect the validity of any marriage nor will  
mere registration validate a marriage which is otherwise invalid under Muslim  
20

law.  Registration under these Acts is thus a mere facility provided by law.
All the Mohammedan Registrars licensed under these Acts have to function  
under the general superintendence of District Registrars functioning under the  
Registration  Act  1908  and  are  required  to  transmit  to  them  their  registration  
records every month. The Inspector-General of Registration functioning in the  
State  under  that  Act  has  to  exercise  control  on  all  Mohammedan   Marriage  
Registrars and issue regulations for their guidance. 
All these Acts empower the State Government to make Rules for carrying  
out their purposes, and such Rules have been made and amended from time to  
time. 
Under  the  Rules  framed  under  the  Bengal  law  of  1876  a  Permanent  
Committee headed by the Inspector-General of Registrar oversees appointments,  
suspension and removal of Mohammedan Registrars.  With the approval of the  
Government the Committee can also examine from time to time their knowledge  
of Muslim law.   
In  some  of  the  States  where  such  Acts  are  in  force  the  Rules  made  
thereunder have been made applicable also to the kazis functioning under the  
central Kazis Act 1880 (detailed above). These Rules are, however, not being  
followed in practice for fear of resentment by the clerics who do have a strong  
hold upon the society.
In the State of Jammu and Kashmir a Muslim Marriage Registration Act  
was enacted in 1981, providing for compulsory registration, but had to be soon  
withdrawn due to stiff opposition by community leaders.    
CHAPTER V
21

Registration of Christian, Parsi, Jewish and Bahai Marriages
A.  Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872
The Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872 provides that every marriage both parties  
to  which  are,  or  either  party  to  which  is,  Christian  shall  be  solemnized  in  
accordance  with  its  provisions  (Section  4).  This  provision  conflicts  with  the  
Special  Marriage  Act  1954  which  is  available,  like  everyone  else,  also  to  
Christians for marrying within or outside their community. It has, however, not  
been amended or repealed.
The Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872 is obsolete in so far as it makes a  
distinction  between  “Christians”  (defined  as  “persons  professing  Christian  
religion”) and “Indian Christians” (defined as “Christians descendants of natives  
of  India  converted  to  Christianity  as  well  as  such  converts”).  It  also  makes  
separate  provisions  for  followers  of  various  Churches  –  including  Church  of  
England (also called Anglican Church), Church of Scotland and Church of Rome  
(also called Roman Catholic Church). The Act provides separate rules for the  
solemnization  and  registration  of  marriages  of  Indian  Christians  and  other  
Christians, and also for the followers of various Churches. 
Due  to  the  aforestated  classification  and  distinctions  the  system  of  
registration of marriages provided by the Act is quite complicated. Marriages may,  
according to the Act, be solemnized by the following: 
(i) Ministers of  Church who have received episcopal ordination; 
(ii) Clergymen of the Church of Scotland;
(iii) Ministers of Religion licensed under the Act;
(iv) Marriage Registrars appointed under the Act; and
22

(v) Persons  licensed  under  the  Act  to  grant  certificates  of  marriage  
between “Indian Christians”.
Part  IV  of  the  Act  (Sections  27-37)  contains  elaborate  provisions  for  
registration  of  marriages  solemnized  by  Ministers  and  Clergymen  covered  by 
categories (i) to (iii) above. There are in this Part separate registration provisions  
for marriages of Christians in general and of Indian or Native Christians. 
Part V of the Act (Sections 38-59) provides rules for solemnization-cum-
registration of marriages directly by Marriage Registrars appointed under the Act. 
Part  VI  (Sections  60-65)  relates  to  marriages  of  “Indian  Christians”  
solemnized by licensees under the Act and provides rules for certification. 
There are different provisions in the Act for the transmission of records of  
registration of various categories of marriage to the Registrar-General of Births,  
Deaths and Marriages.  
This Act, thus, has a very complicated system of registration of marriages  
solemnized under this Act and it suffers from a tremendous lack of uniformity.
B.  Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936  
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act was first enacted in 1865 which was replaced  
by a new Act bearing the same caption in 1936.  The new Act was amended in  
some respects in 1988.
23

Parsi marriages are to be solemnized under the Act by the Parsi priests who  
are required to certify them in a prescribed form to be signed by the priest, the  
contracting parties and two witnesses (Section 6).  
The officiating priests are required by the Act to periodically transmit their  
records to Marriage Registrars appointed under the Act. A priest who neglects  
either to so certify a marriage or to transmit its copy to the Marriage Registrar will  
be guilty of an offence punishable with simple imprisonment up to three months,  
or with fine up to a hundred rupees, or with both (Section 12).
The Marriage Registrars are to be appointed by the State Government for  
various  areas  except  within  the  local  limits  of  the  ordinary  original  civil  
jurisdiction of a High Court for which they are to be appointed by the Chief  
Justice or a senior Judge of the Court (Section 7). 
The  Marriage  Registrars  except those  appointed by the  High Court  are  
required to periodically transmit copies of their records to the Registrar-General of  
Births, Deaths and Marriages (Section 9).  
C.  Bahai and  Jewish Marriages
Bahai marriages are solemnized by religious officials of the community which has  
a system of certification of marriages very similar to the nikah-namas issued by  
the kazis in Muslim marriages (see above). 
The Jewish system of solemnization is also similar to that of the Muslims.  
Jewish priests known as Rabbis solemnize marriages and issue certificates.  There  
is no system among either the Bahais or the Jews of transmission of marriage  
records to any authority under control of the State. 
There is no legal requirement, or practice, of registering the Bahai or the  
Jewish marriages with the State registry.
24

CHAPTER VI
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1886
A.  Limited Scope of the Act
A  Births,  Deaths  and  Marriages  Registration  Act was  enacted by  the  Central  
Legislature in 1886. It remains in force till this day. 
A new Registration of Births and Deaths Act was passed by Parliament in  
1969. It had no provision relating to registration of marriages and clarified that its  
provisions  are  not  “in  derogation  of”  the  old  Births,  Deaths  and  Marriages  
Registration Act 1886 (Section 29). The provisions of the old Act of 1886 relating  
to marriage registration, whatever they are, thus remain in force.
The  title  of  the  Births,  Deaths  and Marriages  Registration Act 1886 is  
somewhat misleading as it does not require registration of marriages – voluntary  
or compulsory – under its provisions.  
B.  Transmission of Marriage Records
The  Births,  Deaths  and  Marriages  Registration  Act  1886  provides  for  the  
establishment of a “general registry office” in each State under the charge of a  
“Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages” (Section 6). It also provides  
for  the  appointment  of  “Registrars  of  Births  and  Deaths”  by  the  State  
Governments  (Sections  12-18).  There  is,  however,  no  provision  for  the  
appointment of Marriage Registrars. 
The Act requires the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages  
appointed and working under the Act to keep proper indexes of the certified copies 
25

of  Marriage  Registers  received  by  him  from  the  officials  working  under  the  
provisions of three old laws, viz.: 
(i) Parsi  Marriage  and  Divorce  Act  1865  (now  Parsi  Marriage  and  
Divorce Act 1936;
(ii) Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872 (still in force); and
(iii) Special Marriage Act 1872 (now Special Marriage Act 1954).
The Act adds that these indexes like those of registers of births and deaths,  
maintained by the Registrar-General, have “at all reasonable times be open to  
inspection” and copies of entries in them given to applicants for the same are  
admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving a marriage (Sections 8-9). 
26

CHAPTER VII
General State Laws on Marriage Registration
A. Bombay Registration of Marriages Act 1954  
Before the reorganization of States, the legislature of the former State of Bombay  
had enacted a law for compulsory registration of marriages. Titled as Bombay  
Registration of Marriages Act 1954, it was made applicable to all marriages other  
than  those  solemnized  under  the  following  laws  all  of  which  had  their  own  
provisions for marriage registration: 
(i) Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936, 
(ii) Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872, and 
(iii) Special Marriage Act 1872 (now Special Marriage Act 1954). 
After the re-organization of states in 1956 the Bombay Act of 1954 was  
retained in force, with necessary adaptation, in the present States of Maharashtra  
and Gujarat. In both States it was later amended in certain respects.
Under this Act the State Government may appoint, by name or ex officio, so 
many persons to act as Registrars of Marriages for such local areas as it may think  
necessary  and  prescribe  their  duties  and  powers  under  the  Rules  to  be  made 
thereunder. The Act, read with the Rules made under it, lays down an elaborate  
procedure for registration of marriages.
Every marriage contracted in the State has to be compulsorily registered as  
provided by this law. The requirement applies not only to the first but also to all  
subsequent marriages of any person. Also, it applies in whatever form or manner a  
marriage may have been contracted or solemnized. This obligation applies from  
27

the date on which the registration law of 1954 is brought in force in any local area,  
as per the State government's gazette notification.
Failure to register a marriage as required by the law will attract a statutory  
penalty by way of fine up to two hundred rupees but shall not make the marriage  
invalid if it is otherwise valid under the law applicable to it.
For the purpose of registration of a marriage a memorandum of marriage is  
to be prepared and signed by the parties to the marriage. If either party is under the  
age of eighteen years at the time of marriage the memorandum will be prepared  
and signed by that party's father or guardian. However, where such party has  
married  without  the  consent  of  father  or  guardian,  that  party  -  and  not  the  
guardians - will prepare and sign the memorandum. It has to be in a statutory form  
providing  all  the  details  as  laid  down  in  the  Rules.  The  officiating  priest  or  
whoever else solemnizes a marriage has to sign the memorandum. 
Within the prescribed period the memorandum so prepared is to be sent in  
duplicate  and  with  the  prescribed  fee  by  registered  post  to  the  Registrar  of  
Marriages of the local area where the marriage takes place. The Registrar will file  
one copy of the memorandum in his Register of Marriages and send the other copy 
to the State’s Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages working under  
the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1886. 
A penalty of fine of two hundred rupees is prescribed by the law imposable  
on conviction for:
(i) willfully omitting or neglecting to deliver or send a memorandum of  
marriage as required by the law, 
28

(ii) willfully omitting or neglecting to deliver or send a memorandum of  
marriage within the prescribed time, and 
(iii) making in such a memorandum any statement which is false in any  
material particular and which the person making it knows or has reason  
to believe to be false.
B.  Laws of Other States 
The Bombay Registration of Marriages Act 1954, now applicable in Maharashtra  
and Gujarat, has been adopted mutatis mutandis by local legislation in some other  
States including Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal. 
Nowhere failure to register a marriage, which is otherwise compulsory,  
affects the validity of marriage in any way. It also does not adversely affect the  
conjugal or post-divorce rights of either party to marriage or the availability of  
matrimonial remedies under the law applicable. 
In  the  former  Mysore  State  a  Registrar-General  of  Births,  Deaths  and  
Marriages Act was passed in 1956. 
The  Rajasthan  legislature  passed  a  Registration  of  Births,  Deaths  and  
Marriages Act in 1958.  This Act provides that the State Government may in its  
discretion establish a general registry office separately for keeping certified copies  
of registers of marriages and appoint to the charge of such separate office an  
officer to be called the Registrar-General of Marriages for the State [Section 4(b)].  
It  makes  the  central  Births,  Deaths  and  Marriages  Registration  Act  1886  
inapplicable in the merged territories where it was earlier in force [Section 25 (i)].  
It  also  repeals  the  local  Acts  on  this  subject  earlier  enforced  in  some  such  
territories [Section 25 (ii) – (vi)].  
29

CHAPTER VIII
Registration of Divorces
A. Divorces Obtained Outside the Court
The Hindu Marriage Act 1955 recognizes and protects divorces obtained under  
customary  law  (Section  29),  but  makes  no  provision  for  registration  of  such  
divorces effected outside the court.  
The Muslim Marriage and Divorce Registration Acts applicable in West  
Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, Assam and Meghalaya – referred to above –  
provide for voluntary registration of out-of-court divorces with the Mohammedan  
Marriage Registrars appointed under those Acts by the State Governments. The  
following forms of divorce can be so registered in all the States:
(i) talaq (divorce by the husband),
(ii) khula (divorce at the instance of wife), and
(iii) mubara’at (divorce by mutual consent).
Separate forms are prescribed by these Acts for the registration of each of  
these categories of divorce.
The  Orissa  Mohammedan  Marriage  and  Divorce  Registration Act  1949  
provides  also  for  registration  of  talaq-tafwiz (divorce  by  wife  in  terms  of  a  
stipulation for this purpose in the marriage contract). It prescribes special forms  
for the registration of such divorces.
30

Registration  of  all  divorces  under  all  these  laws  is  to  be  made  on  a  
voluntary  basis;  and  non-registration  of  any  divorce  does  not  vitiate  its  legal 
validity.   
B. Divorces Obtained in Courts
Under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936 a divorce can be obtained only  
through the intervention of a court.
The  Act  requires  the  Courts  passing  a  decree  of  divorce,  nullity  or  
dissolution to send a copy of each such decree for registration to the Marriage  
Registrar within its jurisdiction (Section 10). 
There is no such provision for registration of divorces under any of the  
following laws:
(i) Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872, 
(ii) Special Marriage Act 1954, and
(iii) Hindu Marriage Act 1955.   
31

CHAPTER IX
 Findings and Recommendations
A. Findings
We now proceed to summarize our findings based on our survey of the existing  
Central and State laws relating to registration of marriages:
(i) There  has  been,  and  remains,  tremendous  diversity  of  laws  
relating to registration of marriages. The present state of the law  
on the subject is indeed complicated and confusing.
(ii) The  only  laws  which  provide  for  any  kind  of  registration  of 
divorces  relate  to  Muslims  and  Parsis.  All  other  marriage  
registration  laws  do  not  provide  for  registration  of  divorces  
although it is a socially beneficial proposition.
(iii) Registration  of  out-of-court  divorces  among  the  Hindus,  
Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs – which the Hindu Marriage Act 1955  
recognizes – is extremely desirable. 
(iv) In the Muslim society there is a system of private registration of  
marriages by the kazis, which needs to be streamlined and linked  
with registration of marriage with State Registry. 
(v) Among the Muslims divorces are never registered with a kazi. In  
those cases where a divorce takes place with the intervention of a  
kazi  no  record  of  the  divorce  is  maintained  by  him.   The  
provisions of the local laws in the Eastern States for registration  
of divorces among the Muslims are dormant and are hardly used  
32

in practice. Absence of registration of divorces in a community  
whose personal law allows out-of-court divorce leaves abundant  
room  for  misuse  of  law  and  often  causes  great  hardship  to  
women.       
(vi) In very few States all marriages irrespective of the law under  
which these may have been solemnized have to be compulsorily  
registered. The majority of States have not enacted any general  
law on marriage registration applicable to all communities. 
(vii) In those States where there are laws for compulsory registration  
of  all marriages,  such laws  are  faulty and ineffective.  People  
generally do not adhere to them, as non-registration entails only  
fine of a petty amount.
(viii) The administrative machinery for registration of marriages is not  
regulated everywhere by one and the same law. This creates a lot  
of confusion with registration officials as well as people wanting  
or required to register their marriages.  
(ix) As various communities are still governed by different marriage  
laws, Rules for compulsory registration of all marriages in all  
communities  cannot  obviously  be  made  under  any  particular  
community-specific law. 
(x) There  is  a  general confusion  in the  minds  of the  people  that  
registration of a marriage solemnized as per religious rites and  
desired to be governed by the religion-based law of the parties  
will turn it into a civil marriage to be governed by the general  
33

law of civil marriages. This is a great inhibition against marriage  
registration which needs to be effectively removed.
(xi) Advantages of registration of marriage and disadvantages of non-
registration are not specified in any law or policy document and  
therefore there is little clarity in the mind of the people in this  
respect.  
B. Recommendations
Under  the  Constitution  of  India  family  matters  are  in  the  concurrent  
jurisdiction  of  the  Centre  and  States  [List  III,  Entry  5].  Parliamentary  
legislation  on  compulsory  registration  of  marriages  is  therefore  not  only  
possible but also highly desirable. This will bring country-wide uniformity in  
the  substantive  law relating to marriage registration and will be helpful in  
effectively achieving the desired goal. Rules under the proposed Act may of  
course be made by the State Governments, and this will take care of the local  
social variations. 
We therefore recommend enactment of a central law on the subject. We  
further recommend consequential changes in all the relevant central and local  
laws. 
Our detailed recommendations are as follows:  
(i)  A “Marriage and Divorce Registration Act” [hereinafter referred to  
as the “proposed law”] should be enacted by Parliament, to be made  
applicable in the whole of India and to all citizens irrespective of  
34

their  religion  and  personal  law  and  without  any  exceptions  or  
exemptions. 
(ii) The proposed law should deal only with registration of marriages  
and  divorces  and  must  not  touch  any  substantive  aspect  now  
governed by various matrimonial laws – general and community-
specific.
(iii)               A proper and common machinery for registration of  
marriages  and  divorces,  including  registration  offices  at  the  
district/sub-district levels should be provided for under the proposed  
law.  The  State  Governments  may  set  up  such  offices,  appoint  
Marriage and Divorce Registration Officers by name or ex officio at 
various levels, and prescribe rules to regulate their working.     
(iv)             Since in all communities marriages are solemnized with a  
religious ceremony, the religious officials solemnizing the marriages  
can play a major role in respect of registration of marriage. The  
proposed law should make it mandatory for the “officiating priest”  
of  every  marriage  to  prepare  and  maintain  proper  records  of  all 
marriages in a prescribed form. The term “officiating priest” should  
for this purpose include the following:
a) pundits, purohits and other Hindu religious officials by whatever  
name called who officiate at a marriage; 
b) kazis and all other Muslim religious officials by whatever name  
called who solemnize a nikah; 
c) Christian pastors  and other  Church officials  who solemnize  a  
Christian marriage; 
35

d) Parsi, Jewish and Bahai religious leaders who officiate at any  
marriage among these communities; 
e) clerics of all other religions performing this function; and
f) any other person, whether religious official or not, who performs  
religious or customary rites at any marriage.  
(v)               It should be made mandatory for every “officiating priest”  
(as defined above) to transmit copies of all their records at regular  
intervals to the local Marriage and Divorce Registration Officer. 
(vi)                While transmitting his records to the Marriage and Divorce  
Registration  Officer,  the  officiating  priest  should  also  send  a  
certificate that every marriage included in the record was to the best  
of his knowledge and belief in accordance with the requirement of  
the marriage law applicable to parties. 
(vii)               The proposed law should amend the following Acts to insert 
in them the requirements stated above at paras (v) and (vi) above:
a) Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872;
b) Kazis Act 1880;
c) Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936; and
d) Hindu Marriage Act 1955. 
. 
(viii)               The Kazis Act 1880 should be further amended to make it  
applicable both to private kazis and to every person who performs  
the nikah ceremony at any Muslim marriage. 
36

(ix)                The Special Marriage Act 1954 should be amended to  
provide that Marriage Officers working under its provisions shall  
transmit their records at prescribed intervals to the Marriage and  
Divorce Registration Officer of the concerned district.   
(x)                The Foreign Marriage Act 1969 should be amended to  
provide that Indian Diplomatic Missions in all countries shall send at  
prescribed intervals their records to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs  
in Delhi for onward transmission to the State Registry of the State  
concerned. 
(xi)                  The Kazis Act 1880 should be further amended to provide  
that every divorce among the Muslims, in whatever form it takes  
place,  must  be  communicated  in  writing  to  the  kazi  of  the  area 
within a prescribed time. The kazis should be required to maintain  
proper records of all such divorces and periodically transmit their  
records of divorces to the Marriage and Divorce Registration Officer  
of the area along with marriage records.
(xii)                   Section 29 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 should be  
amended to provide that all customary divorces among the Hindus,  
Buddhists,  Jains  and  Sikhs  should  be  duly  registered  with  the  
Marriage  and  Divorce  Registration  Officers  working  under  the  
proposed law.
(xiii)                    The following Acts should be amended, on the pattern of  
the provision to this effect found in the Parsi Marriage and Divorce  
Act  1936,  to  require  the  registries  of  courts  granting  decrees  of 
37

divorce or nullity of marriage to periodically send information about  
the same in a prescribed form to the local Marriage Registration  
Office: 
(a) Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872; 
(b) Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936;    
(c) Special Marriage Act 1954; and
(d) Hindu Marriage Act 1955.
(xiv)                 The proposed law should declare failure to register a  
marriage or divorce as required by its provisions to be an offence  
punishable with heavy fines and, in default of payment of fine, with  
imprisonment for a prescribed period. 
  
(xv)                  The proposed law should also provide that no judicial  
relief will be granted in a disputed matter if the concerned marriage  
or divorce is not duly registered under its provisions.
(xvi)                   The proposed law should be given an overriding effect on 
all other laws through a non obstante clause duly inserted in it. 
(xvii)                 The following laws should be repealed with necessary  
saving provisions:  
a) Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1886; 
b) All State laws dealing with registration of marriages in general;  
38

c) Muslim Marriage and Divorce Registration Acts (by whatever name  
called) in force in West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, Assam  
and Meghalaya; and
d) Any  provision  relating  to  registration  of  marriages  in  any  pre-
existing  law  which  comes  in  conflict  with  the  provisions  of  the 
proposed law (to the extent of such conflict). 
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Professor Dr. Tahir Mahmood) (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal)
    Member     Member-Secretary
39