GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Laws of Civil Marriages in India – 
A Proposal to Resolve Certain Conflicts
Report No. 212  
OCTOBER  2008

 LAW  COMMISSION  OF INDIA
         (REPORT  NO. 212)
Laws of Civil Marriages in India –
A Proposal to Resolve Certain Conflicts
Forwarded to Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj, Union Minister for  
Law  and  Justice,  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice,  
Government of India by Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan,  
Chairman,  Law  Commission  of  India,  on  17th  day  of  
October, 2008.
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of  
three  years  from  1 st September,  2006  by  Order  No.  
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the  16 th October,  
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law 
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the  
Member-Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  and  seven  
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar            : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar            : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the  Government  
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or  
medium provided that it is reproduced accurately and not 
used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material  must  be  
acknowledged as the Government of India copyright and  
the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed  
to the Member-Secretary and sent either by post to the  
Law  Commission  of  India,  2 nd Floor,  ILI  Building,  
Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India or by email  
to lci-dla@nic.in
5

DO No. 6(3)133/2007-LC(LS)                        17 October, 2008
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji, 
Sub: Laws of Civil Marriages in India –
                A Proposal to Resolve Certain Conflicts
I  have  great  pleasure  in  forwarding  herewith  the  212 th Report  of  the  Law  
Commission of India on the above subject.
The subject has been taken up suo motu for a pressing need to amend the Special  
Marriage Act, 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969. Numerous marriages take place  
within India and in foreign countries which are outside the ambit of various personal laws 
as well as they cannot be governed by the general and common law of civil marriages for  
the reason of not having been formally solemnized or registered under it.  Though these  
enactments  are  meant  equally  for  all  communities  of  India,  yet  they  contain  few  
provisions which greatly inhibit people of certain communities to avail them. For the  
Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas and Sikhs marrying within these four communities the Special  
Marriage Act, 1954 is an alternative to the Hindu Marriage Act.  The Muslims too have  
choice between their uncodified personal law and the Special Marriage Act, 1954. But  
the issue of availability of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 for a marriage, both parties to  
which are Christians, remains unresolved. 
In view of the conflicts of various personal laws, all equally recognized in India, it 
will be in the fitness of things that all inter-religious marriages (except those within the  
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh and Jaina communities) be required to be held only under the  
Special marriage Act, 1954.  Even if such a marriage has been solemnized under any  
other law, for the purpose of matrimonial causes and remedies the Special Marriage Act,  
1954  can  be  made  applicable  to  them.   Such  a  move  will  bring  all  inter-religious  
marriages  in  the  country  under  uniform  law.   This  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  
underlying principle of Article 44 of the Constitution of India relating to uniform civil  
code.  
The present linkage between civil marriages and the applicable law of succession  
greatly inhibits or discourages certain communities for opting for a civil marriage under  
the Special Marriage Act, 1954 as it would deprive them of their laws of succession. The  
Muslims and Parsis give utmost importance to their personal laws of succession and they  
do not make use of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.   There seems to be no reason why  
the Special Marriage Act, 1954 should have a provision regarding succession law to be  
applied in case of civil marriages.
6

Keeping this in mind, the Law Commission has suggested certain amendments in  
both the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 so that their  
provisions become uniformly available to a larger number of marriages of all Indian  
communities.   If accepted and implemented, the recommendations will go a long way in  
popularizing civil marriages.
 
I acknowledge the extensive contribution made by Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood,  
Full-time Member, in preparing this Report. 
           With warm regards,
 
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 001.
7

CONTENTS
Chapter           Page No.
Chapter I:  Introduction 09       
Chapter II:  The Special Marriage Act 1954
A. Old Special Marriage Act 1872                                           11
B. New Special Marriage Act 1954   12 
C. Inter-Religious Civil Marriages                                           13
Chapter III: The Foreign Marriage Act 1969           
A.        Solemnization of New Marriages 15
B.        Registration of Existing Marriages 16
Chapter IV:  The Prohibited Degrees in Marriage       
A.         Special Marriage Act 1872 17
B.         Special Marriage Act 1954        17
C.         Foreign Marriage Act 1969 20
       
Chapter V: The Applicable Law of Succession       
A.          Under the Special Marriage Act 1872 21  
B.          Under the Special Marriage Act 1954 22
C.          Effect of the Amendment of 1976 23  
D.          Under the Foreign Marriage Act 1969          26 
Chapter VI:  Recommendations       27 
 
CHAPTER I  
8

Introduction
Under  the  present  legal  system of  India  citizens  have  a  choice  between  their  
respective religion-based and community-specific marriage laws on the one hand  
and, on the other hand, the general and common law of civil marriages. While the  
laws of the first of these categories are generally described by the compendious  
expression  “personal  laws”,  the  latter  law  is  found  in  the  following  two  
enactments:
(i) Special Marriage Act 1954; and
(ii) Foreign Marriage Act 1969. 
The first of these Acts is meant for those getting married within the country and  
the latter for those Indian citizens who may marry in a foreign country. 
The Special Marriage Act 1954 is not concerned with the religion of the  
parties  to  an  intended  marriage.  Any  person,  whichever  religion  he  or  she  
professes, may marry under its provisions either within his or her community or in  
a community other than his or her own, provided that the intended marriage in  
either case is in accord with the conditions for marriage laid down in this Act  
[Section 4]. 
The Special Marriage Act 1954 also provides the facility of turning an  
existing  religious  marriage  into  a  civil  marriage  by  registering  it  under  its  
provisions, provided that it is in accord with the condition for marriage laid down  
under this Act [Section 15]. 
9

The Act provides for the appointment of Marriage Officers who can both  
solemnize an intended marriage and register a pre-existing marriage governed by  
any other law [Section 3].
The Foreign Marriage Act 1969 facilitates solemnization of civil marriages  
by Indian citizens outside the country, with another citizen or with a foreigner.  
This Act also is not concerned with the religion of the parties to an intended  
marriage; any person can marry under its provisions either within his or her own  
community or in a different community.
For carrying its purposes the Foreign Marriage Act empowers the Central  
Government to designate Marriage Officers in all its diplomatic missions abroad. 
Numerous marriages take place in India which are outside the ambit of  
various personal laws but cannot be governed by the Special Marriage Act either  
for the reason of not having been formally solemnized or registered under it. The  
question which law would then apply to such marriages remains unresolved. 
Both the Special Marriage Act 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act 1969 are  
meant equally for all Indian communities. Yet they contain some provisions which  
greatly inhibit members of certain communities to avail their provisions. 
To  meet  these  concerns  the  present  report  seeks  to  suggest  certain  
amendments in both the Special Marriage Act 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act  
1969.  The purpose of these suggestions is to make the two Acts available to a  
larger number of marriages than they now are and to make them widely acceptable  
to all communities of India.
10

CHAPTER II  
The Special Marriage Act 1954
A.  Old Special Marriage Act 1872
The  first  law  of  civil  marriages  in India  was  the  Special  Marriage  Act  1872  
enacted  during  the  British  rule  on  the  recommendation  of  the  first  Law  
Commission  of  pre-independence  era.  It  was  an  optional  law  initially  made  
available only to those who did not profess any of the various faith traditions of  
India. The Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains and Parsis were  
all outside its ambit. So, those belonging to any of these communities but wanting  
to marry under this Act had to renounce whatever religion they were following.  
The main purpose of the Act was to facilitate inter-religious marriages.  
The Special Marriage Act 1872 contained no provision for dissolution or  
nullification of marriage. For these matrimonial remedies it only made the Indian  
Divorce Act 1869 applicable to the marriages governed by it.
In 1922 the Special Marriage Act 1872 was amended to make it available to 
Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists and Jains for marrying within these four communities  
without renouncing their religion. As so amended, the Act remained in force until  
after independence.
11

B.  New Special Marriage Act 1954
 
In 1954 the first Special Marriage Act of 1872 was repealed by and replaced with  
a new law bearing the same title. This is an optional law, an alternative to each of  
the various personal laws, available to all citizens in all those areas where it is in  
force. Religion of the parties to an intended marriage is immaterial under this Act;  
one can marry under its provisions both within and outside one’s community.
The Special Marriage Act does not by itself or automatically apply to any  
marriage; it can be voluntarily opted for by the parties to an intended marriage in  
preference  to  their  personal  laws.  It  contains  its  own  elaborate  provisions  on 
divorce, nullity and other matrimonial causes and, unlike the first Special Marriage 
Act  of  1872,  does  not  make  the  Divorce  Act  1869  applicable  to  marriages  
governed by its provisions.
For  the  Hindus,  Buddhists,  Jains  and Sikhs  marrying within these  four  
communities  the  Special  Marriage  Act  1954  is  an  alternative  to  the  Hindu  
Marriage Act 1955. The Muslims marrying a Muslim have a choice between their  
uncodified personal law and the Special Marriage Act. 
The Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872, however, says that all Christian  
marriages shall be solemnized under its own provisions [Section 4]. The issue of  
availability of the Special Marriage Act for a marriage both parties to which are  
Christians thus remains unresolved. 
12

C.  Inter-Religious Civil Marriages 
The Special Marriage Act is available also for inter-religious marriages and does  
not exempt any community from its provisions in this respect. 
The Hindu Marriage Act 1955 applicable to the Hindus, Buddhists, Jains  
and Sikhs does not allow them to marry outside these four communities. So, if any  
member of these communities wishes to marry a person not belonging to these  
communities, the only choice available would be the Special Marriage Act 1954. 
The Muslim law allows certain inter-religious marriages to be governed by  
its own provisions. Under this law a man can marry a woman of the communities  
believed by it to be Ahl-e-Kitab (People of Book) – an expression which includes  
Christians and Jews and may include followers of any other monotheistic faith.  
Since Muslim law only permits an inter-religious marriage and does not require  
that such a marriage must take place under its own provisions, it does not come in  
conflict with the Special Marriage Act 1954.
The Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872 says that apart from Christian-
Christian marriages the marriage of a Christian with a non-Christian must also be  
solemnized under this Act (Section 4). The Special Marriage Act on the other hand 
says that any two persons (whatever be their religion) can marry in accordance  
with its provisions. There is, thus, a conflict-of-law situation in respect of marriage 
of a Christian with a non-Christian.
Unlike the first Special Marriage Act of 1872 the 1954 Act contains its own  
elaborate  provisions  on  divorce,  nullity  and  other  matrimonial  remedies.  The  
Indian Divorce Act 1869 would therefore not apply to marriages governed by it.  
13

The Indian Divorce Act, however, says that it will apply even if only one party is a 
Christian. This is another conflict-of-law situation.
In view of these conflicts of various personal laws, all equally recognized in 
India, it will be in the fitness of things that all inter-religious marriages [except  
those within the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh and Jain communities] be required to be  
held only under the Special Marriage Act 1954. Even if such a marriage has been  
solemnized  under  any  other  law,  for  the  purposes  of  matrimonial  causes  and 
remedies the Special Marriage Act can be made applicable to them. Such a move  
will bring all inter-religious marriages in the country under uniform law. This will  
be in accordance with the underlying principle of Article 44 of the Constitution of  
India relating to uniform civil code. 
The word “Special” in the caption of the Act needs reconsideration. In 1872 
when the first law of civil marriages was enacted a non-religious marriage could  
be regarded as “special” as the parties to such a marriage had to denounce their  
religion. Marriage by religious rites was then the rule and a civil marriage could be 
only  an  exception.  Now in the  twenty-first  century  calling non-religious  civil  
marriages “special” has little justification. Being a uniform law which the parties  
to any intended marriage can opt for irrespective of their religion or personal law,  
it need not be described as a law providing for a “special” form of marriage. It  
projects such marriages as unusual and extra-ordinary and creates misgivings in  
the minds of the general public.  
14

CHAPTER III
The Foreign Marriage Act 1969
A. Solemnization of New Marriages
A Foreign Marriage Act was first enacted in India in 1903 during the British rule.  
It remained in force till 1969 when a new Foreign Marriage Act was enacted on  
the pattern of the new Special Marriage Act 1954.
Under  this  Act  a  marriage  may  be  solemnized,  in  a  foreign  country,  
between two Indians or an Indian and a foreigner, irrespective in either case of the  
religion and personal law of the parties, if the conditions for marriage laid down in  
the Act are fulfilled (Section 4). 
The Government of India is empowered by this Act to appoint Marriage  
Officers in foreign countries from amongst its diplomatic and consular staff in  
those countries (Section 3).
The Act does not have any provision relating to divorce, nullity or any  
other matrimonial remedy or relief. For this purpose the Act makes the relevant  
provisions of the Special Marriage Act 1954 applicable, mutatis mutandis, also to 
all marriages solemnized or registered under its provisions (Section 18).
The Act is entirely optional and its provisions do not adversely affect the  
validity of a marriage solemnized in a foreign country otherwise than under its  
provisions (Section 27). 
15

B. Registration of Existing Marriages
A marriage solemnized in a foreign country under any other law including the  
local law of that country can be registered under the Foreign Marriage Act 1969 if  
it fulfils the conditions for validity of marriages laid down in this Act [Section 17  
(1) to (3)].   
The procedure for registration of pre-existing marriages under the Act is  
same as for solemnization of new marriages. 
16

CHAPTER IV
The Prohibited Degrees in Marriage
A.  Special Marriage Act 1872
The concept of “prohibited degrees in marriage” is recognized by all systems of  
family law and generally every family law has its own list of relatives with whom  
one cannot marry. The Special Marriage Act 1872 did not contain any such list  
and only laid down that: 
“The parties must not be related to each other in any degree of  
consanguinity or affinity which would, according to any law to  
which either of them is subject, render a marriage between them  
illegal.”
Thus, in respect to prohibited degrees in marriage in an intended civil marriage to  
be  regulated  by  the  Special  Marriage  Act  1872  personal  laws  of  the  parties,  
common or different, remained in force.
B.  Special Marriage Act 1954
The new Special Marriage Act 1954 wholly changes the situation in respect of  
prohibited  degrees  in  marriage.  One  of  the  conditions  for  an  intended  civil  
marriage to be solemnized under this Act is that “the parties are not within the  
degrees of prohibited relationship” [Section 4 (d)]. The expression “degrees of  
prohibited relationship” is defined in Section 2 (b) of the Act as “a man and any of  
the persons mentioned in Part I of the First Schedule and a woman and any of the  
persons mentioned in Part II of the said Schedule.” Thus, unlike the first Special  
Marriage Act 1872 this Act incorporates its own list of prohibited degrees in  
marriage, separate for men and women. 
17

In each of the two lists of prohibited degrees there are 37 entries. The  
relations mentioned in the first 33 entries in each list are regarded as prohibited  
degrees in marriage under all other laws, both codified and uncodified. These  
entries, therefore, do not inhibit any person of whatever religion from opting for a  
civil marriage. The last four entries in the two lists mentioned below, however,  
pose a problem for certain communities:  
(a) List I (for men)
       34. Father’s brother’s son
       35. Father’s sister’s son
       36. Mother’s sister’s son
       37. Mother’s brother’s son
(b) List II (for women)
34. Father’s brother’s daughter
35. Father’s sister’s daughter
36. Mother’s sister’s daughter
           37. Mother’s brother’s daughter
Thus  all first cousins  – paternal and maternal,  parallel and cross – are  
placed  by  the  Special  Marriage  Act  in  the  category  of  prohibited  marital  
relationship.
The Special Marriage Act 1954 makes a provision for relaxation of the rule  
of prohibited degrees in marriage. To the condition that parties to an intended civil  
marriage must not be within prohibited degrees of marriage the Act adds the  
following proviso:
18

“Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties  
permits a marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized  
notwithstanding  that  they  are  within  the  degrees  of  prohibited  
relationship.” [clause (d) of Section 4]
The word “custom” as used in this Proviso is defined by the Act in the  
following terms:  
“In this section ‘custom’ in relation to a person belonging to any tribe  
community,  group  or  family,  means  any  rule  which  the  State  
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in  
this behalf as applicable to members of that tribe, community, group  
or family.” [Explanation to Section 4].
The position of first cousins under the Special Marriage Act 1954 is in  
accord with the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 which also does not allow marriage  
with any first cousin. Relaxation of the net of prohibited degrees on the ground of  
custom  is  also  permissible  under  that  Act,  but  it  does  not  require  a  gazette  
notification by the State Government in this regard.
In Muslim law all first cousins both on the paternal and maternal sides are  
outside the ambit of prohibited degrees in marriage. Personal law of the Jewish  
and Bahai communities also permit marriage with a cousin. Under Christian law  
marriage with a cousin may be permitted by a special dispensation by the Church.  
It is doubtful if the expression “custom” as defined in the Special Marriage Act  
would include also personal law of the parties. And even if it does, the condition  
of recognition by the State Government through a gazette notification would have  
to be satisfied. 
Another important point worth noting here is that under the Hindu Marriage 
Act 1955 marriage with second cousins (father’s first cousin’s children) is also not  
allowed due to the restriction known as “ sapinda” relationship [Section 5(v)]. The  
19

Special Marriage Act 1954, however, does not place any second cousin in its two  
lists of prohibited degrees in marriage.
The consequence of these legal provisions is that if a Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist  
or Jain wants to marry a second cousin he can do so under the Special Marriage  
Act, though his personal law (now contained in the Hindu Marriage Act 1955)  
does not permit it. On the contrary, if a Muslim wants to marry a first cousin he  
cannot do so under the Special Marriage Act 1954 although the Muslim personal  
law  unconditionally  permits  such  a  marriage.  Members  of  all  those  other  
communities whose law allows, or may allow, marriage with a first cousin are also  
in the same position as the Muslims. The discrimination between various Indian  
communities inherent in this legal situation is too clear to be ignored.
C.  Foreign Marriage Act 1969      
The Foreign Marriage Act 1969 says that the parties to an intended marriage to be  
solemnized under it must not be within prohibited degrees of marital relationship.  
It does not, however, incorporate any list of such prohibited degrees and only says  
that the expression “degrees of prohibited relationship” as used under it will have  
the same meaning as under the Special Marriage Act 1954. Therefore, under the  
Foreign Marriage Act too all first cousins are deemed to be within the prohibited  
degrees of marriage.
The Foreign Marriage Act, however, specifically mentions both custom and  
personal law of the parties as grounds for relaxation of the rule of prohibited  
degrees  in  marriage.  Also,  there  is  no  condition  under  this  provision  for  
recognition  of  the  rule  of  personal  law  or  custom  in  this  respect  by  the  
Government through a gazette notification.
20

CHAPTER V 
The Applicable Law of Succession 
A.  Under the Special Marriage Act 1872
As has been stated above, the first Special Marriage Act 1872 could initially be  
availed only by those who did not claim to be Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Sikh,  
Buddhist, Jain or Parsi. This posed a question as to which law of succession would  
apply to the parties to such a marriage and their offspring.  Seven years before the  
enactment of this law a general law of succession had been enacted under the  
caption Indian Succession Act 1865. This Act was at the time of its enactment  
applicable to Christians and Jews but not to Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists,  
Jains and Parsis. It was now laid down in the Special Marriage Act 1872 that:
(i) A Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist or Jain who is a member of a joint family  
marries under this Act it would effect his severance from such  
family.
(ii) Succession to the property of any such person and of any issue of  
such marriage would be governed by the Indian Succession Act  
1865.
(iii) Protection  of  the  Caste  Disabilities  Removal  Act  1850  will  be 
available to the Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists and Jains marrying under  
the Special Marriage Act 1872. 
(iv) If  a  Hindu,  Sikh,  Buddhist  or  Jain marrying under  the  Special  
Marriage Act 1872 is the only son of his parents, his father can  
adopt  a  son  notwithstanding  the  prohibition  in  Hindu  law  on  
adopting a son in the presence of a natural son.  
21

In 1925 all succession laws then existing were incorporated into a new and  
comprehensive  Indian  Succession  Act.  Among  the  laws  merged  into  this  
consolidating law were the old Indian Succession of 1865, the Parsi Succession  
Act 1865 and the Hindu Wills Act 1870.  The chapter on inheritance under the old  
Indian Succession Act 1865 became Chapter II, and the Parsi Succession Act  
Chapter III, of Part V of the new Act. Provisions of the Hindu Wills Act 1870  
were incorporated into Schedule III of the new Act.
Since 1925 the reference to Indian Succession Act 1865 under the Special  
Marriage Act 1872 was to be deemed to be a reference to Chapter II in Part V of  
the new Indian Succession Act 1925.
B.  Under the Special Marriage Act 1954
Under the new Special Marriage Act 1954 the provision regarding severance from  
joint family in the case of a Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist or Jain opting for a civil  
marriage was retained (Section 19). The provision for the availability of the Caste  
Disabilities  Removal  Act  1850  was  extended  to  everybody  opting  for  a  civil 
marriage (Section 20). As regards inheritance, Section 21 of the Act provided as  
follows:
“Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in the Indian Succession  
Act  1925  with  respect  to  its  application  to  members  of  certain  
communities, succession to the property of any person whose marriage 
is solemnized under this Act and to the property of the issue of such  
marriage  shall be regulated by the provisions of the said Act and for  
the purposes of this Section that Act shall have effect as if Chapter III  
of  Part  V  (Special  Rules  for  Parsi  Intestates)  had  been  omitted  
therefrom.”
22

This provision was uniformly applicable to whoever opted for a civil marriage,  
whether within or outside  one’s  community.  As  a result,  all personal laws of  
succession ceased to apply in the cases of civil marriages.  .
C. Effect of the Amendment of 1976
On the  recommendation of the  Law Commission of India (59 th Report, 1974)  
Parliament enacted the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act 1976. This Act added  
Section 21-A to the Special Marriage Act 1954, which reads as follows: 
“Where the marriage is solemnized under this Act of any person who  
professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion with a person who  
professes the  Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh  or Jaina religion, section 19 and  
section  21  shall  not  apply  and  so  much  of  section  20  as  creates  a 
disability shall also not apply.”
Since  1976,  therefore,  the  position  of  succession  in  the  case  of  civil  
marriages is as follows: 
(i) Where both parties to a civil marriage are Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh  
or Jain the Hindu Succession Act will apply.
(ii) Where only one party is a Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain and the  
other party belongs to any other religion the Indian Succession  
Act will apply.
(iii) Where a Muslim opts for a civil marriage, whether within or  
outside the Muslim community the Indian Succession Act will  
apply.
23

(iv) Where a Parsi opts for a civil marriage, whether within or outside  
his  community  the  general  inheritance  law  under  the  Indian  
Succession Act  will apply  -- not  the  Parsi succession  law  as  
incorporated in that Act.
(v) Where a Christian opts for a civil marriage, whether within or  
outside the Christian community, the Indian Succession Act will  
apply.
Under  the  impact  of  the  Marriage  Laws  (Amendment)  Act 1976,  thus,  
citizens of India opting for a civil marriage are classified into three categories,  
viz.:
(a) Hindus,  Buddhists,  Sikhs  and  Jains  marrying  within  these  four  
communities;
(b) Hindus,  Buddhists,  Sikhs  and  Jains  marrying  outside  these  four  
communities; and
(c) All other citizens marrying either within or outside their respective  
communities. 
This seems to be an unreasonable classification as all personal laws have the  
same legal status in the country.  
The  Muslims  and Parsis  give  utmost importance  to their  personal laws  of  
succession. The Muslim law of inheritance is drawn direct from the Holy Quran and  
therefore a predominant section of Muslims wants to adhere to it. The prospect of  
losing it in case they go in for a civil marriage greatly inhibits them and compels them  
to remain away from the Special Marriage Act 1954. The Parsis had got their religion-
24

based law of inheritance codified in the form of the Parsi Succession Act 1865 which  
was, on their demand, preserved even under the new consolidating law called the  
Indian Succession Act 1925. For this reason no Parsi wants to make use of the Special  
Marriage Act 1954 as it would deprive them of their law of succession. 
There seems to be no reason why the Special Marriage Act 1954 should at all  
make a provision regarding succession law to be applied in case of civil marriages.  
Under the old Special Marriage Act 1872 parties to a civil marriage had to dissociate  
themselves from religion and so any community-specific law of succession could not  
apply in any such case. As this would create a vacuum, it was unavoidable to make  
the Indian Succession Act 1865 applicable to them.  But, this is not the case under the  
new Special Marriage Act 1954 under which there is no need to renounce religion in  
any case of a civil marriage. So, succession to the properties of the parties may well  
continue to be governed by their respective personal laws, whether they belong to the  
same community or to two different communities – especially since in this country  
there is no concept of a married couple’s joint property.
It may, of course, be made possible for any individual to opt for the Indian  
Succession Act 1925 irrespective of whether his or her marriage is a civil marriage or  
a religious marriage governed by a personal law. But the present linkage between civil 
marriages and the applicable law of succession serves no purpose. On the contrary,  
for certain communities it is a discouragement and a serious inhibition against opting  
for a civil marriage. 
25

D.  Under the Foreign Marriage Act 1969
None of the provisions relating to joint family status, inheritance rights of parties  
to a civil marriage and the succession law applicable to the parties and their minor  
children and their future descendants found in the Special Marriage Act 1954 finds 
a place in the Foreign Marriage Act 1969 which is silent on these issues. 
Thus, despite solemnization or registration of a marriage under the Foreign  
Marriage Act 1969 the parties, their issues and future descendants remain subject  
to the same law of succession which would apply otherwise. 
26

CHAPTER VI
Recommendations
In the light of all that has been said above we find that there is a pressing need to  
amend the Special Marriage Act 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act 1969. With a  
view to addressing this need we make the following recommendations:
1. The word “Special” be dropped from the title of the Special Marriage  
Act 1954 and it be simply called “The Marriage Act 1954” or “The  
Marriage and Divorce Act 1954.” The suggested change will create a  
desirable feeling that this is the general law of India on marriage and  
divorce  and  that  there  is  nothing  “special”  about  a  marriage  
solemnized under its provisions. It is in fact marriages solemnized  
under  the  community-specific  laws  which  should  be  regarded  as  
“special.” 
2. A provision be added to the application clause in the Special Marriage  
Act 1954 that all inter-religious  marriages  except those  within  the  
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh and Jain communities, whether solemnized or  
registered under this Act or not shall be governed by this Act.
  
3. The definition of “degrees of prohibited relationship” given in Section  
2 (b) in the Special Marriage Act 1954 and the First Schedule detailing 
such degrees appended to the Act be omitted. Instead, it should be  
provided in Section 4 of the Act that prohibited degrees in marriage in  
any  case  of  an  intended  civil  marriage  shall  be  regulated  by  the  
marriage law (or laws) otherwise applicable to the parties. 
4. The requirement of a gazette notification for recognition of custom  
relating to prohibited degrees in marriage found in the Explanation to  
Section 4 of the Special Marriage Act 1954 be deleted.
5. The same provision in respect of prohibited degrees in marriage (as  
suggested in paragraph 3 above) be incorporated also into Section 4 of  
the  Foreign Marriage  Act 1969.  The  proviso to  clause  (d)  of  that  
Section and clause (a) of Section 2 of the Act be deleted. 
27

6. All references to succession and joint family be removed from the  
Special Marriage Act 1954 and Sections 19, 20, 21 and 21-A of the  
Special Marriage Act 1954, dealing with succession and membership  
of joint family, be repealed.
7. A provision be inserted into the Indian Succession Act 1925 that any  
person  whichever  community  he  or  she  belongs  to  may,  by  a  
declaration on affidavit or by a written and duly attested will, opt for  
the application of this Act instead of the law of succession otherwise  
applicable to him or her.  
We have a considered opinion that these recommendations, if accepted  
and implemented, will go a long way in popularizing civil marriages and  
since all such marriages would be governed by the same law it will be a  
mighty step towards translating into action the ideal of uniformity in civil  
laws envisaged by Article 44 of the Constitution of India. 
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood) (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal) 
Member       Member-Secretary
28