GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Fast Track Magisterial Courts for
Dishonoured Cheque Cases
Report No. 213
NOVEMBER 2008

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 213)
Fast Track Magisterial Courts for
              Dishonoured Cheque Cases
Forwarded to Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj, Union Minister  
for Law and Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice,  
Government  of  India  by  Dr.  Justice  AR.  
Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of India,  
on the 24th  day of November, 2008. 
2

The 18 th Law Commission was constituted for a  
period of three years from 1 st September, 2006 by  
Order No. A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated  
the 16th October, 2006, issued by the Government  
of  India,  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice,  
Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman,  
the  Member-Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  
and seven part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar       : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar       : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at  
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the  
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of  
charge in any format or medium provided that it is  
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading  
context. The material must be acknowledged as the  
Government of India copyright and the title of the  
document specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be  
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either  
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2 nd Floor,  
ILI  Building,  Bhagwan  Das  Road,  New  
Delhi-110001, India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in  
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          ILI Building (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                            Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                        New Delhi-110 001
                                         Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                          Fax: 91-11-23383564 
DO No. 6(3)145/2008-LC(LS)                                          November 24, 2008
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj ji,
Subject: Fast Track Magisterial Courts for
              Dishonoured Cheque Cases
                            
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  213 th Report  of  the  Law  
Commission of India on the above subject.
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (“Act”)  
deals  with  the  offence  pertaining  to  dishonour  of  cheque  for  
insufficiency, etc., of funds in the  drawer’s account  on which the  
cheque is drawn for the discharge of any legally enforceable debt or  
other  liability.  The  Banking,  Public  Financial  Institutions  and  
Negotiable Instruments Laws (Amendment) Act, 1988 inserted in the  
Act, new Chapter XVII comprising sections 138 to 142 with effect  
from 1 April, 1989. These provisions were incorporated in the Act  
with a view to encourage the culture of use of cheques and enhancing  
the credibility of the instrument.   
As  sections  138  to  142  of  the  Act  were  found  deficient  in 
dealing  with  dishonour  of  cheques,  the  Negotiable  Instruments  
(Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2002, besides other  
amendments, amended sections 138, 141 and 142 and inserted new  
sections 143 to 147 in the Act aimed, inter alia, at speedy disposal of  
cases relating to dishonour of cheque through their summary trial as  
well  as  making  them  compoundable.  Punishment  provided  under  
section 138 too was enhanced from one year to two years. These  
amendments were brought into force on 6 February, 2003.
Due to large number of pendency of dishonoured cheque cases  
(over 38 lacs), the entire credibility of the business within and outside  
6

the country is suffering a serious setback. Dishonour of cheque by a  
Bank causes incalculable loss, injury and inconvenience to the payee  
and the credibility of issuance of cheque is also being eroded to a  
large extent. The very purpose of the above amendments made in the  
Act for speedy disposal of dishonoured cheque cases is being lost.
The Law Commission undertook this subject suo motu in view  
of the above circumstances and in pursuance of one of its terms of  
reference “to suggest suitable measures for quick redressal of citizens  
grievances,  in  the  field  of  law”.  The  Commission  examined  the  
subject  thoroughly along with the right to speedy  trial. The study  
indicates  that  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  ensure  restoration  of the  
credibility of the instrument/trade/business/commerce and, of course,  
fundamental right to speedy trial, to ensure that genuine and honest  
citizens/commercial  community  is  not  harassed  or  put  to  
inconvenience. Hence, we recommend setting up of Fast Track Courts  
at Magisterial level to deal with the huge pendency of dishonoured  
cheque cases.
We hope that the recommendations made in this report will  
serve the purpose and object of section 138 of the Act.
With warm regards,
      Yours sincerely,
  (AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001
7

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
FAST TRACK MAGISTERIAL COURTS FOR
          DISHONOURED CHEQUE CASES 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION                                                                                9
2. (a) SECTION 138 OF THE NEGOTIABLE                                      12
     INSTRUMENTS ACT 1881
  
(b) ALLIED PROVISIONS                                                                16
    
    (i)  MODE OF TRIAL: SUMMARY PROCEDURE 
(ii) COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCE
    
    (c) OBJECT OF SECTION 138                                                         18
    (d) PROBLEM OF DELAY IN DISPOSAL OF CASES                  22
3. EASY ACCESS TO JUSTICE                                                           24 
4. RIGHT TO FAIR AND SPEEDY TRIAL                                         33
5. FAST TRACK COURTS                                                                   35
6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                             38
1. INTRODUCTION
8

1.1 The  law  relating  to  negotiable  instruments  is  not  the  law  of  one  
country or of one nation; it is the law of the commercial world in general,  
for, it consists of “certain principles of equity and usages of trade which  
general  convenience  and  common  sense  of  justice  had  established  to  
regulate  the  dealings  of  merchants  and  mariners  in  all  the  commercial  
countries of the civilized world”.  Even now the laws of several countries in  
Europe are, at least so far as general principles are concerned, similar in  
many respects.  Of course, on questions of detail, different countries have  
solved the various problems in different ways, but the essentials are the  
same, and this similarity of law is a pre-requisite for the vast international  
transactions that are carried on among the different countries.1
1.2 A cheque is an acknowledged bill of exchange that is readily accepted  
in lieu of payment of money and it is negotiable.  However, by the fall in  
moral  standards,  even  these  negotiable  instruments  like  cheques  issued,  
started losing their creditability by not being honoured on presentment. It  
was found that an action in the civil court for collection of the proceeds of a  
negotiable instrument like a cheque tarried, thus defeating the very purpose  
of recognizing a negotiable instrument as a speedy vehicle of commerce.  It  
was  in  that  context  that  Chapter  XVII  was  inserted  in  the  Negotiable  
Instruments Act.2
1 Bhashyam & Adiga’s The Negotiable Instruments Act , rev. Justice Ranganath  Misra,  
Bharat Law House, New Delhi, 18th edn. (2008), p.1.
2  Ibid. at 734.
9

1.3 Over the years there have been many important changes in the way  
cheques  are  issued/bounced/dealt  with.  Commercial  globalization  has  
resulted  in  giving  big  boost  to  our  country.  With  the  rapid  increase  in  
commerce  and  trade  use  of  cheque  also  increased  and  so  the  cheque  
bouncing disputes.
1.4 Inclusion of additional forms of crime, for example, section 138 cases  
under the Negotiable Instruments Act or section 498A cases under the Indian 
Penal Code, contributed a large number of cases in the criminal courts. To  
deal with these types of cases we do not have additional number of courts,  
we do not have additional infrastructure. In many States sufficient budgetary  
provisions are not made for improving the infrastructure of the subordinate  
courts,  including  additional  improvement  of  existing  courts,  court  
complexes.3  
1.5 Over 38 lac cheque bouncing cases are pending in various courts in  
the country.4 There are 7,66,974 cases pending in criminal courts in Delhi at  
the Magisterial level as on 1 st June, 2008. Out of this huge workload, a  
substantial  portion  is  of  cases  under  section  138  of  the  Negotiable  
Instruments Act which alone count for 5,14,433 cases (cheque bouncing). 5 
According to Gujarat High Court sources, there are approximately two lac  
cheque bouncing cases all over the State, with the majority of them (84,000  
3  Presidential address by Hon’ble Mr. Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, CJI , at National  
Seminar on Delay in Administration of Criminal Justice System, 17.03.2007, Vigyan  
Bhavan, New Delhi [http://supremecourtofindia.nic.in speeches-2007].
4  The Hindustan Times, New Delhi, 14.10.2008.
5  Speech delivered by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajit Prakash Shah, Chief Justice, Delhi High  
Court, at the inaugural of Dwarka Courts Complex, on 6th September, 2008.
10

cases)  in Ahmedabad,  followed  by Surat, Vadodara and Rajkot. 6 73,000  
cases  were  filed  under  section  138  of  the  Negotiable  Instruments  Act  
(cheque bouncing) on a single day by a private telecom company before a  
Bangalore court, informed the Chief Justice of India, K. G. Balakrishnan,  
urging  the  Government  to  appoint  more  judges  to  deal  with  1.8  crore  
pending cases in the country. 7 The number of complaints which are pending  
in Bombay Courts seriously cast shadow on the credibility of our trade,  
commerce and business. Immediate steps have to be taken by all concerned  
to ensure restoration of the credibility of trade, commerce and business.8
1.6 Very recently, while allowing the appeal of an accused in a cheque  
bouncing  case,  the  Supreme  Court  has  ruled  that  speedy  trial  is  a  
fundamental right of an accused.9
1.7 The purpose of this Report is to recommend setting up of Fast Track  
Courts at Magisterial level with high-tech facilities. Huge backlog of cheque  
bouncing  or  dishonoured  cheque  cases  need  to  be  speedily  disposed  of  
through this measure,  lest  the  litigants lose  faith  in the  judicial  system.  
Unless there is sufficient number of courts for resolving cheque bouncing  
disputes speedily and efficiently, the problem will continue to be alarming.  
Commercial circles in India and abroad must be assured a fast and efficient  
judicial system in India.   
6  http://www.indianexpress.com, visited 26.09.2008.
7  http://www.deccanherald.com and http://www.aol.in, visited 29.09.2008.
8  KSL & Industries Ltd. v. Mannalal Khandelwal 2005 Cri.L.J. 1201 (Bom.), 1204.
9  S. Rama Krishna v. S. Rami Reddy AIR 2008 SC 2066.
11

2. (a) SECTION 138 OF THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT 
1881 
2.1 In India, there is reason to believe that instruments of exchange were  
in use from early times and we find that papers representing money were  
introduced into the country by one of the Muhammadan sovereigns of Delhi  
in the early part of the fourteenth century, the idea having been borrowed  
from China; and it is the accepted theory of the western savants, that in  
China a complete system of paper-currency and banking had been developed  
as early as the tenth century and it is not improbable that such an idea  
filtered into India sometime later.10
2.2 Before the passing of the Act, the law of negotiable instruments as  
prevalent in England was applied by the courts in India when any question  
relating to such instruments arose between Europeans.11
2.3 Though the Negotiable Instruments Act had been passed into law in  
1881, Chapter XVII comprising sections 138 to 142 was inserted by the  
Banking,  Public  Financial  Institutions  and  Negotiable  Instruments  Laws  
(Amendment) Act, 1988 (66 of 1988). 
2.4 The value of a cheque, which was reduced to merely a piece of paper,  
particularly amongst the business community, has been greatly enhanced  
since the introduction of this new Chapter XVII relating to penalties in case  
of dishonour of certain cheques for insufficiency of funds in the accounts.  
The implementation of these provisions for nearly 14 years revealed certain  
10  Supra note 1, p. 5.
11  Ibid.
12

shortcomings which have been endeavoured to be plugged by the Negotiable  
Instruments  (Amendment  &  Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act, 2002 (55 of  
2002).  The  Act  55  of  2002  has,  besides  other  amendments,  amended  
sections 138, 141 and 142 and inserted new sections 143 to 147 in the Act  
(section 143 - summary trial; section 144 - service of summons; section 145  
- evidence on affidavit;  section 146 - Bank’s slip  prima facie  evidence;  
section 147 - offences to be compoundable). 
2.5 Section 138 reads as under:
‘Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of  funds   in the account.  
- Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by  
him with a banker for payment of any amount of money  to another  
person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part,  
of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either  
because  of  the  amount  standing  to  the  credit  of  that  account  is  
insufficient  to  honour   the  cheque  or  that  it  exceeds  the  amount  
arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that  
bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and  
shall, without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with  
fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with  
both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless-
13

(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six  
months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of  
its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case  
may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of  
money by giving a notice, in writing, to the drawer of the cheque,  
within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the  
bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said  
amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder  
in due course of  the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of  
the said notice.
  Explanation.-  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  “debt  or  other  
liability” means a legally enforceable debt or other liability.’
 
2.6 To  constitute  an  offence  under  section  138  of  the  Negotiable  
Instruments Act the following ingredients need to be fulfilled:
(i) Cheque should have been issued for the discharge, in whole or  
part, of any debt or other liability;
(ii) The cheque should have been presented within the period of six  
months or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
Note: The cheque may be presented any number of times  
for collection within its validity.
(iii) The payee or the holder in due course should have issued a  
notice in writing to the drawer within thirty (fifteen prior to  
14

2002 amendments) days of the receipt of information by him  
from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid;
(iv) After the receipt of the said notice by the payee or the holder in  
due course, the drawer should have failed to pay the cheque  
amount within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice;
Note: Notice of dishonour is unnecessary when the party  
entitled to notice cannot after due search be found (see section  
98(d) of the Act).
(v) On non-payment of the amount due to the dishonoured cheque  
within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice by the drawer,  
the complaint should have been filed within one month from  
the date of expiry of the grace time of fifteen days, before a  
Metropolitan  Magistrate  or a Judicial  Magistrate  of the  first  
class.   The cognizance of a complaint  may  be taken by the  
Court after the prescribed period, if the complaint satisfies the  
Court that he had sufficient cause for not making a complaint  
within such period.
(vi) The offence under this Act is compoundable (see section 147 of  
the Act, inserted in 2002).12
2.7 Under law, when a person has tendered the amount payable by him he  
must be deemed to have discharged his obligation and the creditor is bound  
to accept the tender.  Where on dishonour of cheque issued by the accused,  
he disclaimed the liability to pay the cheque but on receiving notice tendered  
payment of the whole amount twice in front of the court but the complainant  
refused to accept it both the times, the accused could not be said to be guilty  
of non-payment of the amount.13
12  Supra note 1, p. 743.
13  Ibid.
15

2.8 The Supreme Court again spelt out necessary ingredients of section  
138 in  Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. v. Pennar Peterson Securities Ltd. 14, 
reiterated by the Apex Court in K. R. Indira v. Dr. G. Adinarayana 15. What 
follows therefrom is that the last ingredient to complete an offence under  
section 138 of the Act is failure of the accused to make payment within 15  
days after service of notice.  If payment is made within the said period, no  
offence is committed, but in case of failure, the offence gets completed.  
Even if the payment is made on the 16 th day the same is not sufficient to  
come  out  of  the  rigours  of  section  138  of  the  Act.   In  criminal  law,  
commission  of  offence  is  one  thing  and  prosecution  is  quite  another.  
Commission of offence is governed by section 138 of the Act.  Prosecution  
is governed by section 142 of the Act.16
(b) ALLIED PROVISIONS
(i) MODE OF TRIAL: SUMMARY PROCEDURE
2.9 Provisions of section 143, as inserted in the Act in 2002, state that  
offences under section 138 of the Act shall be tried in a summary manner.  
Though it begins with a non obstante clause carving out an exception to the  
provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code, sub-section (1) thereof clearly  
provides that the provisions of sections 262 and 265 of the Code, as far as  
may be, apply to such trials.  It empowers the Magistrate to pass a sentence  
of imprisonment for a term up to one year and an amount of fine exceeding  
five thousand rupees.  It also provides that if it appears to the Magistrate that  
14  AIR 2000 SC 954.
15  AIR 2003 SC 4689.
16  Supra note 1, p. 744.
16

the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for a term  
exceeding one year may have to be passed, he can do so after hearing the  
parties and recalling any witness who may have been examined.  Under this  
provision, so far as practicable, the Magistrate is expected to conduct the  
trial on a day-to-day basis until its conclusion and conclude the trial within  
six months from the date of filing of the complaint.
2.10 Chapter XXI of the Criminal Procedure Code, consisting of sections  
260 to 265, deals with the procedure to be followed when a case is being  
tried summarily. In every case tried summarily in which the accused does  
not plead guilty, the Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence  
and a judgment containing a brief statement of the reasons for the finding.  
(ii) COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCE
2.11 By inserting section 147 in the Act in 2002, offence punishable under  
section 138 of the Act has been made compoundable and it does not provide  
for any other or further qualification or embargo like sub-section (2) of  
section 320 of the Criminal Procedure Code.  The parties can compound the  
offence as if the offence is otherwise compoundable. Thus, the offence is  
made straightway compoundable like the case described under sub-section  
(1)  of  section  320.   No  formal  permission  to  compound  the  offence  is  
required to be sought for.17
2.12 Even prior to section 147, the opinions expressed by different High  
Courts and also the Apex Court appear to be in favour of approving such  
17  Rameshbhai Somabhai Patel v. Dineshbhai Achalanand Rathi 2005 Cri. L. J. 431 
(Gujarat).
17

compounding and settlement between the parties, taking into consideration  
the aim and object of the provisions of the Act. If the matter in relation to  
which the cheque had been issued has been settled between the parties, such  
settlement be given effect to keeping in mind the object of introducing the  
relevant provisions of the Act; the court can note the same and record the  
settlement between the parties.18
(c) OBJECT OF SECTION 138
2.13 The object of bringing section 138 on the statute is to inculcate faith  
in the efficacy of banking operations and credibility in transacting business  
on negotiable instruments. It is to enhance the acceptability of cheque in  
settlement of liabilities by making the drawer liable for penalties in case of  
bouncing of cheques due to insufficient arrangements made by the drawer,  
with adequate safeguards to prevent harassment of honest drawers. If the  
cheque is dishonoured for insufficiency of funds in the drawer’s account or  
if it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account, the drawer is  
to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, 
or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with  
both.
2.14 In  KSL  & Industries  Ltd. V. Mannalal Khandelwal 19, the Bombay  
High Court observed:
18  Employees’ State Insurance Corporation v. A. P. Heavy Machinery and Engg. Ltd. 
2005 Cri. L. J. 1080 (A. P.).
19  2005 Cri. L. J. 1201 (Bombay).
18

“Section 138, in fact, has been introduced to prevent dishonesty on the 
part of the drawer of negotiable instrument to draw a cheque without  
sufficient funds in the account maintained by him in bank and induce  
the payee or holder-in-due-course to act upon it. In other words, these  
provisions  have  been  introduced  to  give  greater  credibility  to  our 
trade,  business,  commerce  and  industry,  which  is  absolutely  
imperative in view of the growing international trade and business.  
The constitutional validity of these provisions has been upheld by the  
Supreme Court.”
2.15 The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill which  
became  the  Negotiable  Instruments  (Amendment  and  Miscellaneous  
Provisions) Act, 2002, inter alia, states:
“These provisions were incorporated with a view to encourage the  
culture  of  use  of  cheques  and  enhancing  the  credibility  of  the  
instrument. The existing provisions in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 
1881, namely, sections 138 to 142 in Chapter XVII have been found  
deficient  in  dealing  with  dishonour  of  cheques.  Not  only  the  
punishment  provided  in  the  Act  has  proved  to  be  inadequate,  the 
procedure prescribed for the Courts to deal with such matters has been  
found to be cumbersome. The Courts are unable to dispose of such  
cases expeditiously in a time bound manner in view of the procedure  
contained in the Act…. A large number of cases are reported to be  
pending under sections 138 to 142 of the Negotiable Instruments Act  
in various courts in the country…. The proposed amendments in the  
Act  are  aimed  at  early  disposal  of  cases  relating  to  dishonour  of 
19

cheques, enhancing punishment for offenders, introducing electronic  
image of a truncated cheque and a cheque in the electronic form as  
well  as  exempting  an  official  nominee  director  from  prosecution  
under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.”
2.16 The  Bombay  High  Court  in  KSL  &  Indutries  Ltd. 20 deemed  it  
appropriate, in order to accomplish the underlying object of the Act, to pass  
the following directions:
(a) Experience reveals that enormous time is spent at the stage of  
summoning/serving  the  accused.  The  court  must  adopt  
pragmatic methods and must serve them by all possible means  
of service, including e-mail…. The Court must ensure that the  
accused are not permitted to abuse the system.
(b) The  Court  concerned  must  ensure  that  examination-in-chief,  
cross-examination and re-examination of the complainant must  
be concluded within three months of assigning the case….
(c) Complaints must be disposed of as expeditiously as possible,  
and in any event, within six months from the date when the  
presence of the accused has been secured….21
2.17 In  Goa Plast (P) Ltd. v. Chico Ursula D’Souza 22, the Supreme Court, 
while considering the object and the ingredients of sections 138 and 139 of  
the Act, observed as under:
“The object and the ingredients under the provisions, in particular,  
sections  138  and  139  of  the  Act  cannot  be  ignored.   Proper  and  
20  Ibid.
21  Ibid. at 1208.
22  JT 2003 (9) SC 451. 
20

smooth  functioning  of  all  business  transactions,  particularly,  of  
cheques  as  instruments,  primarily  depends  upon  the  integrity  and  
honesty  of  the  parties.  In  our  country,  in  a  large  number  of  
commercial transactions, it was noted that the cheques were issued  
even merely as a device not only to stall but even to defraud the  
creditors.   The sanctity  and  credibility of issuance  of cheques in  
commercial transactions was eroded to a large extent.  Undoubtedly,  
dishonour of a cheque by the bank causes incalculable loss, injury and  
inconvenience to the payee and the entire credibility of the business  
transactions within and outside the country suffers a serious setback.  
The Parliament, in order to restore the credibility of cheques as a  
trustworthy  substitute  for  cash  payment  enacted  the  aforesaid  
provisions.   The remedy available in a civil court is a long drawn  
matter and an unscrupulous drawer normally takes various pleas to  
defeat the genuine claim of the payee.”23
(d) PROBLEM OF DELAY IN DISPOSAL OF CASES
2.18 Over 38 lac cheque bouncing cases are pending in various courts in  
the country.  There are 5,14,433 cases under section 138 of the Negotiable  
Instruments  Act,  1881  (cheque  bouncing  disputes)  pending  in  criminal  
courts in Delhi at the Magisterial level as on 1 st June, 2008. Similarly, in  
Gujarat 84,000 and in Mumbai 1,51,759 cases are pending. As reported in a  
23  Ibid. at 463.
21

newspaper, 73,000 cases were filed under section 138 of the Negotiable  
Instruments Act before a court in Bangalore. Such large number of cases  
would take long time for their disposal under the present set-up of the courts. 
These disputes are not merely criminal trials but they involve the interests of  
commercial circles/economy of the globe.
2.19 In the age of international trade and globalization, it is even more  
important that people must have implicit faith in the credibility and honesty  
of  the  system.  Unfortunately,  sanctity  and  credibility  of  cheques  in  
commercial transactions have been eroded to a large extent.24
2.20 Several central statutes including the Negotiable Instruments Act have  
contributed more than 50% to 60% of the litigation in the trial courts. These  
enactments are referable to List I or List III of the Seventh Schedule of the  
Constitution of India. Article 247 of the Constitution enables the Union  
Government to establish additional courts for better administration of laws  
made by Parliament or existing laws with respect to a matter enumerated in  
the Union List.
2.21 Mr. Justice R. C. Lahoti, ex-CJI, (on the ‘Law Day’ November 26,  
2004) on the matter of pendency of cases quoted the following from the  
speech of late Dr. L. M. Singhvi, Senior Advocate and the then President,  
Supreme Court Bar Association: 
“Increasing  institution  of  cases,  mounting  arrears,  accumulating  
congestion in courts and inevitable law’s delays have given rise not to  
24  Supra note 19.
22

a body of scientific and rational blueprints in terms of institutional  
organization and procedural methods or in terms of assessments of  
judicial manpower requirements, but to a spate of alarm signals and  
dire shibboleths.  If there are more and more cases in courts, that is  
because we have a population explosion, we have a more complex and 
friction-prone society, our dispute resolution and conciliation system  
are  bereft  of  efficacy,  we  have  increasingly  greater  awareness  of  
rights,  and  perhaps  because  we  have  more  injustice  and  more  
arbitrariness in our midst.   The Governments are under an obligation  
to provide an adequate machinery for justice, to appoint more judges  
and  to  give  them  better  emoluments  and  facilities,  to  build  more  
courthouses, to enact better laws, to devise better dispute resolution  
procedures, and to administer more effectively and equitably, rather  
than to blame lawyers and judges for the increase and proliferation of  
litigation.   Courts in India cannot apply a mechanical-statistical razor-
blade  or wave a magic wand to wipe out the enormous pendency of  
arrears.   Nor can the courts afford to turn a blind eye or a deaf ear to  
the rank injustices and incongruities of administration merely because  
they have already too much on their hands.  If the courts begin to do  
that  systematically,  they  might  endanger  the  confidence  and  
credibility they have come to enjoy.”25
3. EASY ACCESS TO JUSTICE
25  2004 (10) SCALE J-22, J-26 - J-27.
23

3.1 Hon’ble  Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman  of  the  Law  
Commission of India, has very beautifully explained the subject in his book  
‘Voice of Justice’. Some of the relevant paragraphs are reproduced as under:
“The Constitution of India guarantees to all its citizens right to life  
and personal liberty, right to equality, right to freedom etc. Apart from 
these public rights, there are various private rights arising from torts  
and contracts and also the various social welfare legislations such as  
Contract  Labour  (Regulation  and  Abolition)  Act,  1976,  Equal  
Remuneration Act, Minimum Wages Act and so on. But these rights  
are of no avail if an individual has no means to get them enforced.  
Rule of law envisages that all men are equal before law. All have  
equal rights but unfortunately all cannot enjoy the rights equally. The  
enforcement of the rights has to be through the courts, but judicial  
procedure  is  very  complex,  costly  and  dilatory  putting  the  poor  
persons at a distance.
The  Constitution  of  India  through  Article  14  guarantees  equality  
before law and equal protection of laws. It follows from this that equal 
opportunity  must  also  be  afforded  for  access  to  justice.  It  is  not  
sufficient  that  law  treats  all  persons  equally,  irrespective  of  the  
prevalent inequalities. But law must function in such a way that all the  
people have access to justice in spite of the economic disparities. The  
words 'access to justice'  focus on two basic  purposes of the  legal  
system.
1. the system must be equally accessible to all
2. it must lead to results that are individually and socially just.
24

Traditional concept of "access to justice" as understood by common  
man is access to courts of law. For a common man, a court is the place 
where justice is meted out. But the courts have become inaccessible  
due  to  various  barriers  such  as  poverty,  social  and  political  
backwardness, illiteracy and ignorance etc.
To get justice through courts, one must go through the complex and  
costly procedures of litigation. One has to bear the costs of litigation  
including court fee, stamp duties etc. and also the lawyers’ fees. Apart  
from these, the litigant loses much more in financial terms such as  
loss  of  income  arising  from  attending  the  court  hearings.  A  poor  
litigant who is barely able to feed himself will never be able to get  
justice  or obtain redress for a wrong done to him through courts.  
Further, a large part of the population in India is illiterate and live in  
abject poverty. Therefore, they are totally ignorant about the court  
procedures and will be terrified and confused when faced with the  
judicial machinery. Thus most of the citizens of India are not in a  
position to enforce their rights, constitutional or legal, which in effect  
generates  inequality  contrary  to  the  guarantees  of  Part  III  of  the  
constitution.
…
Large population, more litigation and lack of adequate infrastructure  
are  the  major  factors  that  hamper  our  justice  system.  Regular  
adjudication procedures through the constant efforts of Legal Services  
Authorities  will  act  as  catalysts  in  curing  these  maladies  of  our  
system.
25

…
Time has come to think of providing a forum for the poor and needy  
people  who  approached  the  law  courts  to  redress  their  grievance  
speedily. However, the delay in disposal of cases in law court, for  
whatever reason it may be, has really defeated the purpose for which  
the people approach the courts for their redressal. Justice delayed is  
justice denied and at the same time justice hurried is justice buried.  
So, one has to find out a via media between these two to render social  
justice  to  the  poor  and  needy  who  want  to  seek  their  grievance  
redressed through Law Courts.
…
The Constitutional  promise  of securing  to all  its citizens justice  -  
social, economic  and political as promised  in the Preamble  of the  
Constitution cannot be realised unless the three organs of the State i.e.  
legislature,  executive and judiciary  join together to find  ways and  
means for providing to the Indian poor equal access to its justice  
system.
The judiciary has tried to do this through Public Interest Litigation  
movement, but this movement has now lost much of its momentum.  
The executive  is balking at enforcing  the courts’ orders in Public  
Interest  Litigation  cases.  The  persons  undertaking  PIL  cases  are  
misusing the opportunity provided or they are not able to fully utilise  
the opportunity.
26

….infrastructure for the Fast Track Courts is to be provided by the  
State Government and the selection of the Judges is to be made by the  
High Court. The scheme includes construction of new court rooms,  
appointment of ad hoc judges, Public Prosecutors and supporting staff  
and arrangement for quick processors.   It would be appropriate to  
have, our in-service Judicial Officers to be appointed in these Courts,  
after  giving  them  promotions  on  purely  temporary  ad  hoc basis  
initially for two years, extendable by another two years or till they are  
promoted on regular basis. These appointments shall be made as far as 
possible in Fast Track Courts. Their future regular promotion shall  
depend on their performance in these Courts.  Those Officers who are  
not found fit to travel on fast track, shall be off-loaded and sent back  
to their regular cadre. It is a joint venture of the Central Government,  
State Government and the High Court to tackle the problem on war  
footing. It is needless to say that realization of real justice needs co-
operation of all the three wings of the Government with one single  
aim to reach out justice to individuals and thus, maintain rule of law.  
Interaction between the three wings of the Government is necessary to  
improve the justice delivery system and such co-operation should be  
seen in day-to-day dispensation of justice. Sessions trials in several  
Courts in the country are held up because of unwanted adjournments  
on just asking either by the defence counsel or Public Prosecutor, not  
examining the witnesses within the scheduled time and the non-co-
operation of the prosecuting agency. There is a general complaint that  
the  Police  has  no  sufficient  time  or  force,  to  serve  in  time  the  
summons on the witnesses and keep the undertrial prisoners present in  
the Court, at the time of trial. There are instances coming to light that  
27

the offenders are sentenced but sentences imposed, are not executed  
because the convicts had already jumped bail and the police has no  
will and time to search them out.
… 
It is not uncommon for any criminal case to drag on for years. During  
this time, the accused travels from the zone of "anguish" to zone of  
"sympathy". The witnesses are either won over by muscle or money  
power or they become sympathetic to the accused. As a result, they  
turn  hostile  and  prosecution  fails.  In  some  cases,  the  recollection  
becomes fade or the witnesses die. Thus, long delay in courts causes  
great hardship not only to the accused but even to the victim and the  
State. The accused, who is not let out on bail, may remain in jail for  
number  of  months  or  even  years awaiting  conclusion  of  the  trial.  
Thus, effort is required to be made to improve the management of the  
prosecution  in  order  to  increase  the  certainty  of  conviction  and  
punishment for most serious offenders. It is experienced that there is  
increasing  laxity  in  the  court  work  by  the  police  personnel,  
empowered to investigate the case.
Judiciary  today  is  more  deserving  of  public  confidence  than  ever  
before. The judiciary has a special role to play in the task of achieving  
socio-economic goals enshrined in the Constitution while maintaining  
their aloofness and independence; the Judges have to be aware of the  
social changes in the task of achieving socio-economic justice for the  
people.
…
28

The Indian Judicial system is constantly exposed to new challenges,  
new dimensions and new signals and has to survive in a world in  
which perhaps the only real certainty is that the circumstances  of  
tomorrow will not be the same as those of today.
The need of the hour is to correct misconception about the Judiciary  
by  making  it  more  accessible  and  more  explicit,  by  utilizing  the  
resources available to improve the service to the public, by reducing  
delays and making courts more efficient and less daunting.”26 
3.2 At the National  Seminar  on ‘Delay  in Administration  of Criminal  
Justice System’ held at New Delhi on 17 March, 2007, Hon’ble Mr. Justice  
K.  G.  Balakrishnan,  Chief  Justice  of  India,  in  his  Presidential  Address  
observed: 
 
“The criminal justice system in the country is designed to protect the  
citizens of this country from the onslaught of criminal activities of a  
section of the community which indulges in such acts.  The outcome  
of  any  criminal  justice  system  must  be  to  inspire  confidence  and 
create an attitude of respect for the rule of law.  An efficient criminal  
justice system is one of the cornerstones of good governance.  When  
we  think  of  criminal  justice  system  it  consists  of  the  police,  
prosecuting  agency,  various  courts,  the  jail  and  the  host  of  other  
institutions connected with the system.  The State as a guardian of  
fundamental rights of its citizens is duty-bound to ensure speedy trial  
26  Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Voice of Justice, Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., 
Delhi, (2006), pages 231-233, 236, 239, 245-247, 250.
29

and avoid excessively long delays in trial of criminal cases that could  
result  in  grave  miscarriage  of  justice.   It  is  in  the  interest  of  all  
concerned that the guilt or innocence of the accused   is determined as  
quickly as possible. But, unfortunately, there are a large number of  
cases pending in various courts…. Various factors contribute to large  
pendency of criminal cases in the subordinate courts.  Speedy trial of  
criminal cases should be recognized as an urgent need of the present  
judicial system in order to decide the fate of lakhs of litigants. It will  
help enhance the faith of general public in the present judicial system.  
In order to have a strong socio-economic system, it is important that  
each and every state of trial of an accused should move at reasonably  
fast  pace….  Speedy  trial  ensures  that  a  society  is  free  of   such  
vices….  The  new  system  of  plea  bargaining  incorporated  in  the  
Criminal  Procedure  Code  shall  be  available  to  the  under-trial  
prisoners and the court and the prosecuting agency and the lawyers  
should make them aware of the benefits of the benevolent provision  
incorporated in our statute. 
The challenges before the criminal justice system are to balance the  
rights of the accused while dispensing speedy and effective justice.  
The criminal justice system machinery must also meet the challenge  
of effectively dealing with the emerging forms of crime and behaviour 
of the criminals.   
On many occasions, delay in the process of trial is caused by the  
accused themselves.  The accused know that any delay in trial would  
30

only help him as the memory of the witnesses is likely to be blurred  
by the passage of time. …
In the trial of criminal cases a Judge should be a little more active and  
he can contribute to a  great extent  in preventing the delay  in the  
administration of justice.  On many occasions the Sessions Judges  
adjourn the cases for long period and the delay is thus caused and  
many witnesses who would have supported the prosecution case lose  
interest in the case and often forget the ethical duty cast on them. 
In most of the cases, the blame for delay in administration of criminal  
justice  system  is  put  at  the  door  of  the  courts.   Courts  are  over  
congested with petty cases and many legislations are being enacted  
which  result  in  filing  of large  number  of cases  before  the  courts.  
Inclusion of additional forms of crime, for example, Section 138 cases  
under the Negotiable Instruments Act or Section 498A in the Indian  
Penal  Code,  contributed  a  large  number  of  cases  in  the  criminal  
courts.  Some  of  the  new  legislations  like,  Domestic  Violence  
(Prevention) Act, have come up which contribute some more cases to  
the criminal courts. To deal with these types of cases we do not have  
additional number of courts, we do not have additional infrastructure.  
In  many  States  sufficient  budgetary  provisions  are  not  made  for  
improving  the  infrastructure  of  the  subordinate  courts,  including  
additional improvement of existing courts, court complexes.   
We require modernization and computerization of our criminal justice  
system.  In many States courts are functioning from rented places. The 
31

building which was constructed for the purpose of residence is being  
used to house courts.  There should be sufficient sitting arrangement  
for the witnesses or the clients.  There should be suitable building for  
the proper functioning of the courts.  The prosecuting agency should  
be given sufficient facilities for the court to conduct the cases.  The  
accused and the witnesses should have resting rooms if the trial has  
become lengthy.    All this could be provided only if there are courts  
with  modern  facilities.   The  States  should  gradually  improve  the  
infrastructure  and  there  must  be  sufficient  budgetary  allocation  in 
each year. Now the courts are provided only with budgetary allocation  
for the payment of salaries of staff members of the courts and for day-
to-day  expenses  for  running  the  courts.  This  situation  could  be  
changed, if sufficient funds are allocated every year for starting new  
courts and also to improve the conditions of the existing courts.  The  
starting  of  Fast  Track  Courts  have  helped  to  a  great  extent  in  
disposing of the pending Sessions cases and that, by itself, has proved  
that it is because of lack of large number of courts that the pendency  
of criminal cases is on the rise.”27 
4. RIGHT TO FAIR AND SPEEDY TRIAL
4.1 A fair trial implies a speedy trial. 28 While the Sixth Amendment to the  
US  Constitution  expressly  states  that  “in  all  criminal  prosecutions,  the  
accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial”, our Constitution  
does not expressly declare this as a fundamental right. The right to a speedy  
27  Supra note 3. 
28  State of Maharashtra v. Champalal Punjaji Shah AIR 1981 SC 1675.
32

trial  was  first  recognized  in  the  first  Hussainara  Khatoon  case29.   In  
Surinder Singh v. State of Panjab 30, the Supreme Court held that a speedy  
trial  is  implicit  in  the  broad  sweep  and  content  of  Article  21  of  the  
Constitution.   In  Hussainara Khatoon  case31, the Supreme Court directed  
that all undertrial prisoners against whom charge-sheets had not been filed  
within the limitation-period should be released.   The Court observed in the  
second  Hussainara  Khatoon  case32 that  the  State  can  not  avoid  its  
constitutional obligation to provide for a speedy trial by pleading financial  
or administrative inability. Directions were issued for taking positive action,  
like setting up new courts, providing more staff and equipment to courts,  
appointment of additional judges and other measures calculated to ensure  
speedy trial.
4.2 Subsequently,  the  Supreme  Court  has  repeatedly  emphasized  the  
importance of speedy trial in many cases.  State of Bihar v. Uma Shankar  
Kotriwal33;  Kadra Pahadiya v. State of Bihar 34;  State of Maharashtra v.  
Champalal Punjaji Shah 35;  S.  Guin V. Grindlays Bank 36;  Sheela Barse v.  
Union  of India 37;  Raghubir Singh v.  State of  Bihar 38;  Rakesh  Saxena  v. 
State39;  Srinivas Pal v. Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh 40;  State of  
29  AIR 1979 SC 1360.
30  (2005) 7 SCC 387.
31  Supra note 29.
32  AIR 1979 SC 1369.
33  AIR 1981 SC 641.  
34  AIR 1982 SC 1167.
35  Supra note 28.
36  AIR 1986 SC 289.
37  AIR 1986 SC 1773.
38  (1986) 4 SCC 481.
39  (1987) 1 SCR 173.
40  AIR 1988 SC 1729.
33

Andhra Pradesh v. P. V. Pavithran 41.   In  Abdul Rehman Antulay v. R.S.  
Nayak42,  the  Supreme  Court  summarized  11  principles  as  guidelines  
applicable to a speedy trial. These guidelines are only illustrative and not  
exhaustive.   They are not intended to operate as hard and fast rules or be  
applied as a straitjacket formula.    This decision was held to be correct in P. 
Ramachandra Rao v. State of  Karnataka43.     
4.3 The speedy trail is guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of  
India. Any delay in expeditious disposal of criminal trial infringes the right  
to life and liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.  
The debate on judicial arrears has thrown up number of ideas on how the  
judiciary can set its own house in order. Alarmed by the inordinate delay in  
disposal of the backlog of cases, it has been decided to introduce Fast Track  
Courts.  Thus, Fast Track Courts are to tackle the cases of undertrials first, as 
the graph of such persons in jail has gone high.   It is high time to restore the  
confidence  of  people  in  this  country  in  judiciary  by  providing  speedy  
justice.44
4.4 Fair trial obviously would mean a trial before an impartial judge, a  
fair prosecutor and atmosphere of judicial calm.   Fair trial means a trial in  
which bias or prejudice for or against the accused, the witnesses or the cause  
which is being tried is eliminated.  Failure to accord fair hearing either to the  
41  AIR 1990 SC 1266.
42  AIR 1992 SC 1701.
43  (2002) 4 SCC 578.
44  Supra note 26, p. 245.
34

accused or the prosecution violates even minimum standards of due process  
of law.45    
5. FAST TRACK COURTS
5.1 The  Eleventh  Finance  Commission  recommended  a  scheme  for  
creation  of  1734  Fast  Track  Courts  in  the  country  for  disposal  of  long 
pending Sessions and other cases. The Ministry of Finance, Government of  
India sanctioned an amount of Rs. 502.90 crores as “special problem and up-
gradation grant” for judicial administration. The scheme was for a period of  
5 years. Out of 18.46 lakh cases transferred to them, 10.66 lakh cases were  
disposed of by these courts at the end of the said scheme on 31.03.2005.  
Keeping in view the performance of Fast Track Courts and contribution  
made by them towards clearing the backlog, the scheme has been extended  
till 31.03.2010 with a provision of Rs. 509 crores as 100 percent central  
assistance.46
5.2 In his address 47 at a Joint Conference of Chief Ministers and Chief  
Justices, at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi on 08.04.2007, Hon’ble Mr. Justice  
K. G. Balakrishnan, CJI, expressed the view that these courts have been  
quite  successful  in  reducing  the  arrears.   Most  of  the  criminal  cases  in  
subordinate courts are pending at the level of Magistrates. Keeping in view  
the performance of Fast Track Courts of Session Judges, the Government of  
45  Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh v. State of Gujarat (2004) 4 SCC 158 (Best Bakery case).
46  Annual Report 2006-2007, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India, New  
Delhi, p.45.
47  (2007) 4 SCC J-13.
35

India should formulate a similar scheme for setting up Fast Track Courts of  
Magistrates in each State, as recommended by the previous Conference of  
Chief Ministers and Chief Justices held on 11.03.2006. Similar views were  
expressed by Hon’ble Mr. Justice B. N. Agrawal, Judge, Supreme Court of  
India, on 01.08.2007 at the Lecture Series organized by the Supreme Court  
Bar Association.48 Recently speaking at a function, the Chief Justice of India  
suggested setting up of separate courts to deal with dishonour of cheque case  
under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act to improve liquidity.49
5.3 In  this  era  of  globalization  and  rapid  technological  developments, 
which is affecting almost all economies and presenting new challenges and  
opportunities,  judiciary  cannot  afford  to  lag  behind  and  has  to  be  fully 
prepared to meet the challenges of the age.  It is heartening to note that use  
of  information  and  communication  technology  in  judiciary  is  growing  
despite various constraints.  Day-to-day management of courts at all levels  
can  be  simplified  and  improved  through  use  of  technology  including  
availability  of  case-law  and  meeting  administrative  requirements.  
Congestion  in  court  complex  can  also  be  substantially  reduced  through  
electronic dissemination of information. The objectives that can be achieved  
through use of technology include transparency of information, streamlining  
of judicial administration and reduction of cost.50
5.4 Increase  in  the  number  of  judicial  officers  will  have  to  be  
accompanied by proportionate increase in the number of court rooms.  The  
existing court buildings are grossly inadequate to meet even the existing  
48  (2007) 6 SCC J-1.
49  Supra note 4.
50  Supra note 47.
36

requirements and their condition particularly in small towns and moffusils is 
pathetic.  A visit to one of these courts would reveal the space constraints  
being faced by them, overcrowding of lawyers and litigants, lack of basic  
amenities such as regular water and electric supply and the unhygienic and  
insanitary conditions prevailing therein. The National Commission to review  
the working of the  Constitution noted that judicial administration  in the  
country suffers from deficiencies due to lack of proper planned and adequate  
financial  support  for  establishing  more  courts  and  providing  them  with  
adequate infrastructure. It is, therefore, necessary to phase out the old and  
outdated  court  buildings,  replace  them  by  standardized  modern  court  
buildings  coupled  with  addition  of  more  court  rooms  to  the  existing  
buildings and more court complexes.51
5.5 Litigation through the courts is just one way of resolving the disputes.  
Litigation as a method of dispute resolution leads to a win-lose situation  
leading to growth of animosity between the parties, which is not congenial  
for a peaceful society. We should, therefore, resort to alternative dispute  
resolution mechanisms such as negotiations, conciliation and mediation, in  
which nobody is a loser and all the parties feel satisfied at the end of the day. 
The main problem being faced in this regard is that there are not many  
trained mediators and conciliators. We need to impart training in mediation  
and conciliation not only to judicial officers but also to the lawyers. They  
will  have  to  develop  expertise  to  act  as  successful  mediators  and  
conciliators. We also need to provide adequate infrastructure for conciliation  
and mediation centres by giving them adequate space, manpower and other  
51  Ibid.
37

facilities.  The  Government  being  the  biggest  litigant  needs  to  be  fully  
involved in the process and its officers need to take lead in this cause.52
6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.1 Issuing a cheque which is dishonoured is crime in India.  But we  
hardly see any people being punished for bouncing of cheques.  People are  
dissuaded to trust bank cheques. This all because courts in India are awefully 
overburdened with dishonoured cheque cases.
6.2 Legal experts are unanimous in their opinion that the present system  
of criminal jurisprudence is destined to fail if the backlog of cases is not  
substantially reduced. Recently, the Law Commission of India mooted the  
concept of “plea-bargaining” – pre-trial negotiations between the accused  
and the prosecution in which if the accused agrees to plead guilty for the  
charges leveled against him he would get in exchange certain concessions as  
a quid pro quo, by taking a lenient view by the courts, particularly in cases  
of lesser gravity.   Actually, the courts have been practically following such  
a practice, for several years, now.
6.3 A speedy trial is not only required to give quick justice but it is also  
an integral part of the fundamental right of life and liberty, as envisaged in  
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.  
6.4 The Law Commission of India is of the firm opinion that considering  
the alarming situation of the pendency of cases and the constitutional rights  
52  Ibid.
38

of a litigant for a speedy and fair trial, the Government of India should direct  
the State authorities for setting up of Fast Track Courts in the country, which  
alone,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Law  Commission,  will  solve  the  perennial  
problem of pendency of cases, which are even summary in nature.
 6.5 The  Law  Commission  is  of  the  view  that  the  b acklog  of  cheque 
bouncing cases need to be speedily disposed of through this measure lest  
litigants may lose faith in the judicial system. The commercial circles should  
have confidence that we have quite faster judicial system. 
6.6 We, accordingly, recommend as under:
(a) Fast Track Courts of Magistrates should be created to dispose of the  
dishonoured  cheque  cases  under  section  138  of  the  Negotiable  
Instruments Act, 1881;
(b) The  Central  Government  and  State  Governments  must  provide  
necessary funds to meet the expenditure involved in the creation of  
Fast Track Courts, supporting staff and other infrastructure.
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr  Tahir Mahmood)            (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
       Member                 Member-Secretary
39

 
40