GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Proposal for Reconsideration of Judges cases I, II and III - S. P. Gupta  
Vs UOI reported in AIR 1982 SC 149, Supreme Court Advocates-on-
Record Association Vs UOI reported in   1993 (4) SCC 441 and Special  
Reference 1 of 1998 reported in 1998 (7) SCC 739
Report No. 214
November 2008

THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 214)
Proposal for Reconsideration of Judges cases I, II and III - S. P. Gupta Vs UOI  
reported  in  AIR  1982  SC  149,  Supreme  Court  Advocates-on-Record  
Association Vs UOI reported in   1993 (4) SCC 441 and Special Reference 1 of  
1998 reported in 1998 (7) SCC 739
Forwarded to the Union Minister for Law and Justice, Ministry of Law and  
Justice, Government of India by Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law 
Commission of India, on 21st   day of   November, 2008. 
2

The 18 th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three  
years  from  1 st September,  2006  by  Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-
Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the  16 th October,  2006,  issued  by  the  
Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of  
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the  Member-
Secretary, one full-time Member and seven part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :JointSecretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :JointSecretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©       Government Copyright 2008
Law Commission of India
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice 
Department of Legal Affairs
New Delhi-110001
India
The text in this document (excluding the Government Logos) may  
be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium provided  
that  it  is  reproduced  accurately  and  not  used  in  a  misleading  
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as  Government  
copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed to the 
Member- Secretary, the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor, ILI 
Building, Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi-110001, India.  Fax: 
91-11-23388870 or E-Mail to lci-dla@nic.in
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          ILI Building (IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                            Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                        New Delhi-110 001
                                         Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                          Fax: 91-23383564
21.11.208
Respected Shri Bhardwajji,
I am herewith enclosing our 214 th Report on “Proposal for Reconsideration of  
Judges cases I, I and III – S.P. Gupta Vs UOI reported in AIR 1982 SC 149,  
Supreme Court Advocates on Record Association Vs UOI reported in 1993  
(4) SCC 441 and Special Reference 1 of 1998 reported in 1998 (7) SC 739”.  
The proposal was placed before the Members of the Commission at 3.30 p.m.  
today.   The  Members  of  the  Commission  after  due  discussion  and  
deliberations have unanimously approved the report of the Commission.  The  
Commission, as already stated, examined the law on the subject.  Various  
recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committees and law of foreign  
jurisdiction like America, Australia, Canada and Kenya, where the executive  
is  the  sole  authority  to  appoint  Judges  or  the  executive  appoints  in  
consultation with the Chief Justice of the Country have also been considered.
I request you to consider this report and do the needful at the earliest.
Since the matter is of great importance, I am submitting this report  
today itself.
Yours sincerely,
( AR. Lakshmanan )
Shri H.R. Bhardwaj,
Hon’ble Minister for Law & Justice,
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Residence: No.1,Janpath, New Delhi-110011. Tel.:91-11-23019465.23793488.23792745
                                                    E-mail:ch.lc@sb.nic.in
6

PROPOSAL FOR RECONSIDERATION OF JUDGES CASES I, II &  
III – S.P..Gupta Vs UOI reported in AIR 1982 Supreme  
Court  Advocates  on  Record  Association  Vs  UOI  
reported in 1993(4) SCC 441 and Special Reference 1  
of 1998 reported in 1998 (7) SCC 739
Preface : Part 1
1) Why  reconsideration?  The  Supreme  Court  in  
Subhash Sharma Vs U.O.I. (reported in 1991(1)  
Supp. SCC 594) presided over by Ranganath Misra  
CJ, M.N. Venkatachaliah and M.M. Punchi JJ had  
expressed, doubts about the correctness of the  
interpretation of the word “consultation” in  
regard to the appointment of judges in S.P.  
Gupta Vs U.O.I. (reported in 1982 SC 149) in the 
following words (in paras 43 & 45 of the said  
judgment):-
“The  word  ‘consultation’  is  used  in  a  
constitutional provision in recognition of the  
status of the High constitutional dignitary who  
7

formally  expresses  the  result  of  the  
institutional process leading to the appointment 
of judges.  To limit that expression to its  
literal limitation shorn of its constitutional  
background and purpose is to borrow Justice  
Frankfurter’s phrase “to stick in the bark of  
words.”
The  judges  in  that  case  had  opined  that  
“Judicial  Review  is  a  part  of  the  basic  
constitutional structure and one of the basic  
features of the essential Indian constitutional  
policy.  The essential constitutional doctrine  
does not by itself justify or necessitate any  
primacy of the executive wing on the ground of  
its political accountability to the electorate.  
On  the  contrary  what  is  necessary  is  an  
interpretation  sustaining  the  strength  and  
vitality of Judicial Review.  It might under  
certain circumstances be said that government is 
not bound to appoint a Judge so recommended by  
8

the judicial wing.  But to contemplate a power  
for the executive to appoint a person despite  
his being disapproved or not recommended by the  
Chief Justice of the State and the Chief Justice 
of India would be wholly inappropriate and would 
constitute an arbitrary exercise of power. Then  
again, whenever there might be difference of  
opinion between the Chief Justice of a state and 
the Chief Justice of India – Some of the weighty 
reasons in this behalf are set out by the other  
three Judges in their opinion – the opinion of  
the Chief Justice of India should have the  
preponderant role.  We are of the view that the  
primacy of the Chief Justice of India in the  
process of selection would improve the quality  
of selection.  The purpose of the ‘consultation’ 
is  to  safeguard  the  independence  of  the  
judiciary and to ensure selection of proper  
persons.  The matter is not, therefore, to be  
considered that the final say is the exclusive  
9

prerogative of the executive government.  The  
recommendations  of  the  appropriate  
constitutional functionaries from the judicial  
organ of the State has an equally important  
role.   “Consultation  should  have  sinews  to  
achieve the constitutional purpose and should  
not  be  rendered  sterile  by  a  literal  
interpretation.  Who is able to decide the  
qualities of lawyers proposed to be elevated to  
the bench more than the judges of the Superior  
Courts before whom they practice?  There are  
preponderant and compelling considerations why  
the views of the Chief Justices of the States  
and that of the Chief Justice of India should be 
afforded a decisive import unless the executive  
has some material in its possession which may  
indicate  that  the  appointment  is  otherwise  
undesirable.(Para 44)
The View which the four learned judges shared in 
Gupta’s case, in our opinion, does not recognize 
10

the  special  and  pivotal  position  of  the  
institution of the Chief Justice of India.(Para  
45)  The correctness of the opinion of the  
majority in S.P. Gupta case relating to the  
status  and  importance  of  consultation,  the  
primacy of the position of the Chief Justice of  
India and the view that the fixation of Judge  
strength  is  not  justiciable  should  be  
reconsidered  by  a  larger  bench.  (Para  45)  
Emphasis Supplied  
The operative part of the order of reference is  
contained in para 49 “as in our opinion the  
correctness of the majority view in S.P. Gupta  
case should be considered by a larger bench we  
direct the papers of W.P. No. 1303 of 1987 to be 
placed before the learned Chief Justice for  
constituting a bench of nine Judges to examine  
the two questions we have referred to above,  
namely, the position of the Chief Justice of  
India with reference to primacy and, secondly,  
11

justiciability of fixation of judge strength”.  
In para 51 the Hon’ble Bench has clarified:-
We clarify that apart from the two questions  
which we have indicated, all other aspects dealt 
with by us are intended to be final by our  
present order. (Emphasis supplied)
Therefore, only two questions were referred to  
the bench of nine judges namely (1) The position 
of the Chief Justice of India with reference to  
primacy  and  (2)  The  justiciability  of  the  
fixation of the judge strength.  It is important 
to note that no other question was referred to  
the larger bench.
2. The first judges case S.P. Gupta Vs Union of  
India and Ors.  At this point it may be  
relevant to know as to what was decided by the 
majority judgment in the bench presided over  
by P.N. Bhagwati, A.C. Gupta, S.M. Fazal Ali,  
V.D. Tulzapurkar, D.A. Desai, R.S. Pathak and  
12

E.S. Venkataramaiah JJ, in S.P. Gupta’s case  
the  correctness  of  which  was  doubted  in  
Subhash Sharma’s case.
The relevant portion of the majority judgment  
delivered by Justice P.N.Bhagwati speaking for 
himself  in  regard  to  the  expression  
“consultation”  occurring  in  217  of  the  
constitution is extracted herebelow:
“Each  of  the  three  constitutional  
functionaries occupies a high constitutional  
office and Cl. (1) of Art. 217 provides that  
the appointment of a High Court Judge shall be 
made after consultation with the functionaries 
without assigning superiority to the opinion  
of one over that of another.  It is true that  
the Chief Justice of India is the head of the  
Indian  judiciary  and  may  be  figuratively  
described as paterfamilias of the brotherhood  
of Judges but the Chief Justice of a High  
Court  is  also  an  equally  important  
13

constitutional  functionary  and  it  is  not  
possible  to  say  that  so  far  as  the  
consultative process is concerned, he is in  
any way less important than the Chief Justice  
of India.  In fact, under the constitutional  
scheme, the Chief Justice of a High Court is  
not  subject  to  the  administrative  
superintendence of the Chief Justice of India  
nor is under the control of supervision of the 
Chief Justice of India………..
If primacy were to be given to the opinion of  
the Chief Justice of India, it would, in  
effect and substance amount to concurrence,  
because giving primacy would mean that his  
opinion must prevail over that of the Chief  
Justice of the High Court and the Governor of  
the  State,  which  means  that  the  Central  
Government must accept his opinion.  But it is 
only consultation and not concurrence of the  
14

Chief Justice of India that is provided in Cl. 
(1) of Art. 217.(Para 29). (emphasis supplied)
There  must  be  a  collegium  to  make  
recommendation to the President in regard to  
appointment of a Supreme Court or High Court  
Judge.  The recommending authority should be  
in consultation with wider interests. If the  
collegium  is  composed  of  persons  who  are 
expected to have knowledge of the persons who  
may be fit for appointment on the Bench and of 
qualities required for appointment and this  
last requirement is absolutely essential – it  
would go a long way towards securing the right 
kind of Judges, who would be truly independent 
and who would invest the judicial process with 
significance and meaning for the deprived and  
exploited sections of humanity.” (para 30)
Regarding  fixation  of  judge  strength  the  
majority judgment was of the view that this  
was not justiciable and no Mandamus could  
15

issue.  This  aspect  however  has  lost  its  
significance because in the case of Subhash  
Gupta the Attorney General made a statement  
that the government had no objection to the  
Hon’ble Court going into the question.
3. The second Judges case Supreme Court Advocates 
on Record Association and others vs U.O.I.  
(reported in 1993(4) SCC 441
It is in this backdrop that the nine judges  
bench  was  constituted  and  judgment  was  
delivered on 06/10/1993. The judgment runs  
into 306 pages and travels far beyond the  
order of reference.  Noted jurist Late H.M.  
Seervai in his Constitutional Law of India  
fourth edition Silver Jubilee Edition (Volume  
1) has criticized this judgment and called it  
“null  and  void ”  for  not  following  the  
mandatory provisions of article 145(4) and (5) 
– (which is clear from the dissenting judgment 
of Justice M.M. Punchi, the relevant portion  
16

of which is reproduced in the succeeding para) 
–  which  are  not  a  matter  of  form  or  
technicality but a matter of substance as  
pointed out in Mohhammad Akill vs Azad-un-
nisaa Bibi’s case by Sir Barrnes Peacock C.J., 
speaking on this point for a bench of nine  
judges.  “It is not a mere technical objection 
but is upon a fundamental principle essential  
to the due administration of justice that  
every  judicial  act  which  is  done  by  the 
several judges ought to be completed in the  
presence of the whole of them…  If after  
discussion, and after deliberately weighing  
the arguments of each other, the judges cannot 
agree, their several judgments ought to be  
delivered in open court in the presence of the 
others.” (Wyman’s Report Vol.5, p.69 quoted in 
Rohilkhand Kumaon Bank Ltd. vs Row (1884) 6  
All.  468  at  474.  (taken  from  Seervai’s  
Constitutional Law of India fourth edition  
17

vol.3).
The noted jurist calls the judgment “null and  
void” (please see page 2936 Constitutional Law 
of India by H M Seervai volume 3 fourth  
edition)
At this stage it is essential to note the  
lament contained in the opening paragraph of  
Justice M M Punchi’s dissenting judgment at  
para 488 of 1993 (4) SCC 441 referred to in  
the preceding paras.
“Para 488 – M.M. Punchi J. (dissenting) – This 
opinion is in the nature of epilogue, though  
not in stricto sensu.  Much has already been  
written on the two topics under reference to  
this Bench, and  on others as well without  
reference.  I on my part would have liked to  
avoid making any addition thereto but it seems 
the turn of events leave me no choice.  I feel 
it  would  be  dereliction  to  withhold  
18

contributing and leave unsaid what needs to be 
said (emphasis supplied)
Para 490 – “This nine judge bench sat from  
April 7, 1993, to hear this momentous matter  
concluding its hearing on May 11, 1993 close  
to the onset of the summer vacation.  I  
entertained the belief that we all, after July 
12, 1993, on the reopening of the Court, if  
not earlier, would sit together and hold some  
meaningful meetings, having a free and frank  
discussion on each and every topic which had  
engaged  our  attention,  striving  for  a  
unanimous decision in this historic matter  
concerning mainly the institution of the Chief 
Justice of India, relatable to this Court. I  
was indeed overtaken when I received the draft 
opinion dated June 14, 1993 authored by my  
learned brother J.S. Verma, J. for himself and 
on behalf of my learned Brethren Yogeshwar  
Dayal, G.N. Ray, Dr. A.S. Anand and S.P.  
19

Bharucha, JJ.  The fait accompli appeared a  
stark  reality;  the  majority  opinion  an  
accomplishment. The hopes I entertained of a  
free and frank discussion vanished.  But then  
came the opinion dated August 24, 1993 of my  
learned brother Ahmadi, J. like a pebble of  
hope  hewn  out  of  a  mountain  of  despair, 
followed  by  the  opinions  of  my  learned  
Brethern Kuldip Singh and Pandian, JJ. dated  
September  7,  1993  and  September  9,  1993  
respectively. No meaningful meeting thereafter 
was possible as the views by that time seemed  
to  have  been  polarized.  So  now  the  firm 
opinions  of  the  eight  Brethren,  as  
communicated, are known to me.  Loaded with  
these opinions, I set out to express my own,  
more as a duty to the venture embarked upon,  
for I owe it immeasurably, for being party to  
the referral.”
20

Para 491 – “At the outset, I must remove a  
misgiving  pertaining  to  the  contents  and  
thrust of the order of referral re correctness 
of S.P. Gupta vs Union of India, the opinion  
of  which  was  authored  by  the  then  Chief 
Justice of India, Shri Ranganath Misra, and  
concurred to by the present Chief Justice of  
India Shri M.N. Venkatachaliah (then as a  
puisne judge) and by me.  We had referred only 
two questions to a Bench of nine Judges,  
namely, to test the correctness of the opinion 
of the majority in S.P. Gupta case relating to 
the status and importance of consultation and  
the primacy of the position of the Chief  
Justice of India, and whether fixation of  
Judge strength was not justiciable, clarifying 
in the ultimate paragraph that apart from the  
two questions aforeindicated all other aspects 
dealt with were intended to be final by the  
said order.  As I view it, due to the rigidity 
21

of its terms, except for the two questions  
specifically referred, no other matter was  
open to canvass as has seemingly been done.  
(full text is not extracted for the sake of  
brevity.  “Please  see  page  712  of  the  
judgment).
In the penultimate para of his concurring  
judgment Kuldip Singh J. whose judgment came  
as  late  as  September  7,  1993  (when  the  
original majority judgment was signed on 14 th 
June, 1995) makes the following observations  
“Before parting with the judgment it would be  
appropriate to say that the opinion circulated 
by Verma J. was based on elaborate discussion  
amongst the Brother Judges who were available  
and participated in the discussion.  Although  
Verma, J. incorporated various suggestions in  
his original draft but a feeling left lurking  
in my mind that I have something more to say  
22

in  support  of  the  conclusions  reached  by 
Verma, J. and that is how I ventured to embark 
upon writing a separate opinion”.
It  is  therefore  clear  that  there  was  no 
discussion,  no  meeting  of  minds  and  no  
consensus among the 9 judges on 14 of June  
1993 when the final draft judgment was signed  
by Justice Verma who spoke for himself and on  
behalf of Yogeshwar Dayal, G.N. Ray, Dr. A.S.  
Anand and S.P. Bharucha, JJ.  The judgment  
therefore plainly is Per Incuriam.
4. What was decided by the majority judgment  
headed by Justice Verma?
Following  the  suggestion  made  by  Justice  
Bhagwati in the SP Gupta case that there  
should  be  a  ‘collegium’  which  should  be  
consulted by the Chief Justice of India in  
every  appointment  the  nine  judge  bench,  
speaking  through  Justice  Verma  laid  down  
fourteen conclusions which are as follows:-
23

1.The process of appointment of Judges to the  
Supreme Court and the High Courts is an  
integrated  ‘participatory  consultative  
process’ for selecting the best and most  
suitable persons available for appointment;  
and  all  the  constitutional  functionaries 
must perform this duty collectively with a  
view primarily to reach an agreed decision,  
sub serving the constitutional purpose, so  
that  the  occasion  of  primacy  does  not  
arise.
2.Initiation of the proposal for appointment  
in the case of the Supreme Court must be by  
the Chief Justice of India, and in the case  
of a High Court by the Chief Justice of that  
High  Court;  and  for  transfer  of  a  
Judge/Chief Justice of a High Court, the  
proposal has to be initiated by the Chief  
Justice of India.  This is the manner in  
which  proposals  for  appointments  to  the  
24

Supreme Court and the High Courts as well as  
for the transfers of Judges/Chief Justices  
of the High Courts must invariably be made.
3.In the event of conflicting opinions by the  
constitutional functionaries, the opinion of  
the judiciary sumbolised by the view of the  
Chief Justice of India, and formed in the  
manner indicated, has primacy.
4.No appointment of any Judge to the Supreme  
Court or any High Court can be made, unless  
it is in conformity with the opinion of the  
Chief Justice of India.
5. In exceptional cases alone for stated strong  
cogent  reasons,  disclosed  to  the  Chief  
Justice  of  India,  indicating  that  the  
recommendee is not suitable for appointment,  
the  appointment  recommended  by  the  Chief 
Justice of India may not be made.  However,  
if the stated reasons are not accepted by  
the Chief Justice of India and the other  
25

Judges of the Supreme Court who have been  
consulted in the matter,  on reiteration of  
the recommendation by the Chief Justice of  
India, the appointment should be made as a  
healthy convention.  (Emphases Supplied).
6. Appointment to the office of the Chief  
Justice  of  India  should  be  of  the  
seniormost  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court 
considered fit to hold the office.
7. The opinion of the Chief Justice of India  
has  not  mere  primacy,  but  is  
determinative in the matter of transfers  
of High Court Judges/Chief Justices.
8. Consent  of the  transferred Judge/Chief  
Justice is not required for either the  
first or any subsequent transfer from one  
High Court to another.
9. Any transfer made on the recommendation  
of the Chief Justice of India is not to  
26

be  deemed  to  be  punitive,  and  such  
transfer  is  not  justiciable  on  any  
ground.  
10.In making all appointments and transfers,  
the  norms  indicated  must  be  followed.  
However,  the  same  do  not  confer  any  
justiciable right in anyone.
11.  Only  limited  judicial  review  on  the  
grounds specified earlier is available in  
matters of appointments and transfers.
12.The initial appointment of a Judge can be  
made to a High Court other than that for  
which the proposal was initiated.
13.Fixation of Judge strength in the High  
Court  is  justiciable,  but  only  to  the 
extent and in the manner indicated.
14.The majority opinion in S.P. Gupta Vs Union  
of India in so far as it takes the contrary  
view relating to primacy of the role of the  
Chief  Justice  of  India  in  matters  of  
27

appointments  and  transfers,  and  the  
justiciability of these matters as well as  
in relation of Judge strength, does not  
commend itself to us as being the correct  
view.   The  relevant  provisions  of  the  
Constitution, including the constitutional  
scheme must now be construed, understood and 
implemented in the manner indicated herein  
by us. (para 486).
Para 487 states that this summary has to be read 
alongwith  the  earlier  part,  where  in  the  
conclusions  are  elaborately  stated  with  the 
reasons which in effect means that para 487 has  
to  be  read  and  incorporated  in  to  the  
conclusions enumerated above.  The said para  
provides as follows:-
“What is the meaning of the opinion of the  
judiciary ‘symbolised by the view of the Chief  
Justice of India?”
28

“This opinion has to be formed in a pragmatic  
manner and past practice based on convention is  
a  safe  guide.   In  matters  relating  to  
appointments in the Supreme Court, the opinion 
given by the Chief Justice of India in the  
consultative process has to be formed taking  
into account the views of the two seniormost  
Judges of the Supreme Court.  The Chief Justice  
of India is also expected to ascertain the views 
of the senior-most judge of the Supreme Court  
whose opinion it likely to be significant in  
adjudging the suitability of the candidate, by  
reason of the fact that he has come from the  
same High Court, or otherwise.  Article 124 (2)  
is an indication that ascertainment of the views 
of some other Judges of the Supreme Court is  
requisite.  The object underlying Article 124(2) 
is achieved in this manner as the Chief Justice  
of India consults them for the formation of his  
opinion.  This provision in Article 124 (2) is  
29

the basis for the existing convention which  
required the Chief Justice of India to consult  
some Judges of the Supreme Court before making  
his  recommendation.   This  ensures  that  the  
opinion of the Chief Justice of India is not  
merely his individual opinion, but an opinion  
formed collectively by a body of men at the apex 
level in the judiciary.
In matters relating to appointments in the High  
Courts, the Chief Justice of India is expected  
to take into account the views of his colleagues 
in the Supreme Court who are likely to be  
conversant with the affairs of the concerned  
High Court.  The Chief Justice of India may also 
ascertain the views of one or more senior Judges 
of that High Court whose opinion, according to  
the Chief Justice of India, is likely to be  
significant in the formation of his opinion.  
The opinion of the Chief Justice of High Court  
would be entitled to the greatest weight, and  
30

the opinion of the other functionaries involved  
must be given due weight, in the formation of  
the opinion of the Chief Justice of India.  The  
opinion of the Chief Justice of High court must  
be formed after ascertaining the views of at  
least the two seniormost Judges of the High  
Court.
The Chief Justice of India, for the formation of 
his opinion, has to adopt a course which would  
enable him to discharge his duty objectively to  
select the best available persons as judges of  
the Supreme Court and the High Courts.  The  
ascertainment of the opinion of the other Judges 
by the Chief Justices of India and the  Chief  
Justice of High Court, and the expression of  
their opinion, must be in writing to avoid any  
ambiguity. 
For a full coverage of all details and reasons  
which  are  summarized  in  the  conclusions  
aforementioned which are not being repeated for  
31

the sake of brevity, Please see page 702 to 706  
of the judgment (Supreme Court Advocates on  
Record Assn. Vs Union of India reported in 1993  
(4) SCC 441).
Clearly the court has transgressed far beyond  
the order of reference and covered many aspects  
which were not in the contemplation of the  
referring order.  Instead of clarifying matters  
the judgment of nine judges has created more  
ambiguity than before.
5. The third judges case : (special reference No.1  
of 1998) reported in (1998) (7) SCC 739.
The  President  of  India  who  required  
clarification and light on the second judges  
case made a reference to the Supreme Court under 
article 143 of the Constitution which is as  
follows:-
“Whereas the Supreme Court of India has laid  
down principles and prescribed procedural norms  
in regard to the appointment of Judges of the  
32

Supreme  Court  [Article  124  (2)  of  the  
Constitution  of  India],  Chief  Justices  and  
Judges of the High Court [Article 217(1)], and  
transfer  of  Judges  from  one  High  Court  to 
another  {Article  222  (1)},  in  the  case  of 
Supreme  Court  Advocates-on-Record  Assn.  Vs.  
Union of India; 
And  whereas  doubts  have  arisen  about  the  
interpretation of the law laid down by the  
Supreme Court and it is in public interest that  
the said doubts relating the appointment and  
transfer of Judges be resolved.
And whereas, in view of what is hereinbefore  
stated, it appears to me that the following  
questions of law have arisen and are of such a  
nature and of such public importance that it is  
expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme  
Court of India thereon;
Now,  therefore,  in  exercise  of  the  powers  
conferred upon me by clause (1) of Article 143  
33

of the Constitution of India, I, K.R. Narayanan, 
President of India, hereby refer the following  
questions to the Supreme Court of India for  
consideration and to report its opinion thereon, 
namely:-
1.Whether the expression ‘consultation with the  
Chief Justice of India in Articles 217 (1) and 
222(1) requires consultation with a plurality  
of Judges in the formation of the opinion of  
the  Chief  Justice  of  India  constitute  
consultation within the meaning of the said  
articles;
2.Whether the transfer of Judges in judicially  
reviewable in the light of the observation of  
the Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment  
that ‘such transfer is not justiciable on any  
ground’  and  its  further  observation  that  
limited  judicial  review  is  available  in  
matters of transfer, and the extent and scope  
of judicial review;
34

3.Whether Article 124(2) as interpreted in the  
said judgment required the Chief Justice of  
India  to  consult  only  the  two  seniormost 
Judges  or  whether  there  should  be  wider  
consultation according to past practice;
4.Whether the Chief Justice of India is entitled 
to act solely in his individual capacity,  
without consultation with other Judges of the  
Supreme Court in respect of all materials and  
information  conveyed  by  the  Government  of 
India  for  non-appointment  of  a  Judge  
recommended for appointment;
5.Whether the requirement of consultation by the 
Chief Justice of India with his colleagues,  
who are likely to be conversant with the  
affairs of the High Court concerned refers to  
only those Judges who have that High Court as  
a parent High Court and excludes Judges who  
had occupied the office of a Judge or Chief  
35

Justice of that Court on transfer from their  
parent or any other court;
6.Whether  in  the  light  of  the  legitimate  
expectations of senior Judges of the High  
Court in regard to their appointment to the  
Supreme Curt referred to in the said judgment, 
the ‘strong cogent reason’ required to justify 
the departure from the order of the seniority  
has to be recorded in respect of each such  
senior Judge, who is overlooked, while making  
recommendation of a Judge junior to him or  
her; 
7.Whether the Government is not entitled to  
require  that  the  opinions  of  the  other  
consulted Judges be in writing in accordance  
with the aforesaid Supreme Court judgment and  
that the same be transmitted to the Government 
of India by the Chief Justice of India along  
with his views;
36

8.Whether the Chief Justice of India is not  
obliged to comply with the norms and the  
requirement of the consultation process in  
making his recommendation to the Government of 
India;
9.Whether any recommendations made by the Chief  
Justice of India without complying with the  
norms and consultation process are binding  
upon the Government of India?
New Delhi Narayanan, K.R.
Dated: 23-7-1998 President of India
A  bench  of  nine  Judges  was  constituted  
comprising of S.P. Barucha, M.K. Mukherjee, S.B.  
Majumdar,  Sujata  V.  Manohar,  G.T.  Nanavati,  S.  
Saghir Ahmad, K. Venkataswami, B.N. Kirpal and G.B.  
Pattanaik,  JJ  and  the  court  answered  the  said  
reference unanimously in the following manner in  
para 44 of the reference:
“The questions posed by the reference are now  
answered  but  we  should  emphasize  that  the  
37

answers should be read in conjunction with the  
body of this references
1. The expression “consultation with the Chief   
Justice of India” in Articles 217(1) and  
222(1)  of  the  Constitution  of  India  
required consultation with a plurality of  
judges in the formation of the opinion of  
the  Chief  Justice  of  India.  The  sole  
individual opinion of the Chief Justice of  
India  does  not  constitute  “consultation” 
within the meaning of the said articles.
2. The transfer of puisne Judges is judicially   
reviewable only to this extent that the  
recommendation that has been made by the  
Chief Justice of India in this behalf has  
not been made in consultation with the four  
seniormost Judges of the Supreme Court and/
or that the views of the Chief Justice of  
High Court from which the transfer is to be  
effected and of the Chief Justice of High  
38

Court  to  which  the  transfer  is  to  be  
effected have not been obtained.
3. The Chief Justice of India must make a   
recommendation to appoint a Judge of the  
Supreme  Court  and  to  transfer  a  Chief  
Justice or puisne Judge of a High Court in  
consultation  with  the  four  seniormost  
puisne  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court.  
Insofar as an appointment to the High Court  
is concerned, the recommendation must be  
made  in  consultation  with  the  two  
seniormost  puisne  Judges  of  the  Supreme 
Court.
4. The Chief Justice of India is not entitled   
to act solely in his individual capacity,  
without consultation with other Judges of  
the Supreme Court, in respect of materials  
and information conveyed by the Government  
of India for non-appointment of a Judge  
recommended for appointment.
39

5. The  requirement  of  consultation  by  the   
Chief Justice of India with his colleagues  
who are likely to be conversant with the  
affairs of the High Court concerned does  
not refer only to those Judges who have  
that High Court as a parent High Court. It  
does not exclude Judges who have occupied  
the office of a Judge or Chief Justice of  
that High Court on transfer.
6. “Strong cogent reasons” do not have to be  
recorded as justification for a departure  
from the order of seniority in respect of  
each senior Judge who has been passed over.  
What has to be recorded is the positive  
reason for the recommendation.
7. The views of the other Judges consulted   
should be in writing and should be conveyed  
to the Government of India by the Chief  
Justice of India along with his views to  
40

the extent set out in the body of his  
opinion.
8. The Chief Justice of India is obliged to  
comply with the norms and the requirement  
of  the  consultation  process,  as  
aforestated, in making his recommendations  
to the Government of India.
9. Recommendations made by the Chief Justice  
of India without complying with the norms  
and  requirements  of  the  consultation  
process, as aforestated, are not binding  
upon  the  Government  of  India  (emphasis  
supplied)
Part-II
Analysis of the judges cases I, II & III – I, II &  
III – S.P. Gupta Vs. UOI reported in AIR 1982  
Supreme Court 149, Supreme Court Advocates on Record  
Association Vs. UOI reported in 1993(4) SCC 441 and  
41

Special Reference 1 of 1998 reported in 1998 (7) SCC  
739
1. In the three judges cases, I, II & III – S.P.  
Gupta Vs UOI reported in AIR 1982 Supreme Court  
149,  Supreme  Court  Advocates  on  Record  
Association Vs UOI reported in 1993(4) SCC 441  
and Special Reference 1 of 1998 reported in  
1998(7) SCC 739, the Supreme Court has virtually 
re-written  Articles  124(2)  and  Articles  217 
which pertain to appointment of Supreme Court  
Judges respectively. The text of Article 124(2)  
is as follows:-
124(2) Every judge of the Supreme Court shall be 
appointed by the President by warrant under his  
hand and seal after consultation with such of  
the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High  
Courts in the States as the President may deem  
necessary for the purpose and shall hold office  
until he attains the age of sixty-five years:
42

Provided that in the case of appointment of a  
Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief  
Justice of India shall always be consulted:
217(1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be  
appointed by the President by warrant under his  
hand and seal after consultation with the Chief  
Justice of India, the Governor of the State,  
and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other 
than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the 
High Court, and shall hold office, in the case  
of an additional or acting judge, as provided in 
Article 224, and in any other case, until he  
attains the age of sixty-two years.
The word “collegium” is no where present in the  
constitution.  It was first used by Bhagwati J  
in the majority judgement of S.P. Gutpa vs. UOI  
(4:3) In Para 29 “There must be a collegium to  
make recommendations etc.” …… (already extracted 
in Para 2 of Part-1)  Again in the Presidential  
reference  the  expression  “collegium”  and  
43

“collegium  of  judges”  has  been  freely  used 
(Paras 15 and 22 to cite a few instances)
It is submitted that any addition of words in  
the constitution would not be permissible under  
the interpretive jurisdiction of the Supreme  
Court.  The Supreme Court has to interpret the  
constitution as it is.
2. The advisory opinion in the guise of clarifying  
doubts raised regarding the norms laid down in  
the Judges II case has virtually reviewed its  
earlier decision.
It is respectfully submitted that the opinion  
expressed in an advisory opinion is contrary to  
the plain language of article 124(2).  What the  
article says is that the President shall consult 
the Chief Justice of India and such of the  
judges of the Supreme Court or the high court as 
he deems necessary. The article does not place  
any ceiling or limitation on the number of  
judges other than the Chief Justice of India to  
44

be consulted.  The President should always act  
on  the  aid  and  advice  of  the  Council  of  
Ministers (article 74).  However, contrary to  
what was said in the Constitution, both the  
Judges II and Judges III cases have laid down  
that consultation with the Chief Justice of  
India means a collegium consisting of the Chief  
Justice of India and two or four judges as the  
case may be. Further, in both the cases it was  
stated that it is the Chief Justice of India who 
should consult with collegium of judges, whereas 
Constitution  says  that  the  President  should 
consult the Chief Justice of India and such  
judges as he deems necessary.
3. The three judges cases, i.e. the two judgements  
of the Supreme Court and one opinion on a  
Special Reference have all dealt with the scope  
of “consultation” and it was in the Second  
Judges Case that the Supreme Court evolved the  
concept of ‘primacy’ for the opinion of the  
45

Chief Justice of India, which itself was to be  
based on a consultative process amongst the  
senior colleagues of the Chief Justice of India. 
At the hearing of the Special Reference for the  
opinion of the Court about the extent of the  
‘consultative’  process,  it  was  conceded  on  
behalf of the Executive (and recorded in the  
Court’s opinion) that the Government was not  
seeking  a  review  or  reconsideration  of  the 
judgement in the Second Judges case and that it  
would accept as binding (although an opinion and 
not a decision) the answers of the Court to the  
questions incorporated in the Special Reference. 
4. The  Supreme  Court’s  opinion  in  the  Special 
Reference  not  only  strongly  reinforced  the  
concept of “primacy” of the Chief Justice of  
India’s opinion but also increased the number of 
judges the Chief Justice of India must consult  
before providing his opinion and laid down a  
detailed set of guidelines on the procedure to  
46

be followed in arriving at the Chief Justice of  
India’s opinion to which “primacy” was attached. 
The  procedure  in  effect  transferred  the  
“primacy” from the Chief Justice of India to the 
group of Judges to be consulted.
5. The collegium is now to consist of the Chief  
Justice of India and four (instead of two)  
senior-most  judges  of  the  court  in  the  
appointment of a high court judge, the Supreme  
Court judge acquainted with that particular high 
court  should  also  be  consulted  raising  the 
number to six. The increased size of the group  
that has to be a part of the consultation  
process with several interests being involved  
has made the consultation process cumbersome and 
delays in filling up of vacancies is bound to  
arise.  The Presidential Reference also provides 
that every communication with the consultee has  
to  be  in  writing  and  the  views  should  be 
communicated to the Government.  There is no  
47

indication as to what happens if there is no  
consensus  among  the  consultees  or  if  the  
majority dis-agrees with the Chief Justice of  
India. S.P. Gupta has laid down that the entire  
correspondence and communication between various 
authorities are open to public scrutiny (since  
the entire record was summoned, perused and made 
public in that case).
Part-III 
Recommendations 
1. From what has been stated above it is clear  
that an entire reconsideration I, II & III  
judges cases – S.P. Gupta Vs UOI reported in  
AIR 1982 Supreme Court 149, Supreme Court  
Advocates  on  Record  Association  Vs  UOI  
reported  in  1993(4)  SCC  441  and  Special  
Reference 1 of 1998 reported in 1998(7) SCC  
48

739, is urgently and immediately called for in 
order to bring about clarity and consistency  
in the process of Appointment of Supreme Court 
and High Court Judges.
2. The  Eighty  Fifth  Report  on  Law’s  Delays: 
Arrears in Courts has expressed the same view. 
The same is extracted here below:
“The Committee is aware that for this state of 
affairs  the  Union  Law  Ministry  is  not  
blameworthy,  as  the  entire  process  of  
initiation of proposal for appointment of new  
judges is no longer the responsibility of the  
Executive as a result of a decision of the  
Supreme Court. Though it was not contemplated  
in  the  Constitution,  responsibility  for  
judicial appointments now rests in the domain  
of the judiciary. The Union Law Minister is  
accountable to Parliament for the delay in  
filling up of the vacancies of judges but he  
has functionally no contribution to make. The  
49

Supreme Court read into the Constitution a  
power to appoint judges that was not conferred 
upon it by the text or the context. The  
underlying  purpose  of  securing  judicial  
independence was salutary but the method of  
acquiring for the Court the exclusive power to 
appoint judges by the process of judicial  
interpretation is open to question. Against  
this backdrop the Committee recalls a recent  
discussion in the Rajya Sabha in which the  
Government  was  asked  regarding  alternate  
arrangements to fill up the vacancies and  
whether there was any scope for having a fresh 
review of the Supreme Court’s judgment.
The position as it exists in different countries 
may be noticed at this stage. On a scrutiny of  
several constitutions of other countries it may be  
seen that in all other Constitutions either the  
executive is the sole authority to appoint judges or  
the executive appoints in consultation with the  
50

Chief  Justice  of  the  country.  The  Indian  
Constitution  has  followed  the  latter  method.  
However, the 2 nd judges case Advocates on Record  
Association vs. U.O.I. (1993(4) SCC 441), as we have  
seen  in  the  discussion  above,  has  completely  
eliminated  and  excluded  the  executive  and  the  
opinion  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  the  
Presidential reference (Special Reference 1 of 1998)  
has reaffirmed this view with slight modifications.
In America the State judges are elected. When  
they are not elected their appointment is subject to  
legislative concurrence. In the Supreme Court it is  
the President who nominates the Judges but the  
nomination has to be confirmed by the Senate. In  
Australia it is the executive that appoints judges.  
In Canada the Governor General makes the appointment  
of judges.
In New Zealand the Chief Justice is appointed on 
the recommendations of the Prime Minister by the  
President. The Prime Minister in turn consults the  
51

Attorney General; the A.G. informally consults the  
President of Court of Appeal and other judges.
As  for  High  Court  Judges,  Chief  Justice  
recommends after consulting other Judges and gives  
the list to the AG for scrutiny. AG scrutinizes the  
list, consults New Zealand Law Society and then  
candidate’s  consent  is  sought.  Thereafter  the  
Cabinet finally recommends the names to the Governor  
General who issues the appointment letter.
Recently, the judges from the Apex Court and the 
High Court of Kenya came to the Supreme Court and  
they addressed the Supreme Court Bar. They confirmed  
that they have a National Judicial Commission which  
undertakes the selection process. In this National  
Judicial Commission there is the Attorney General  
and the Chief Justice, two senior most judges of the  
Apex Court and an expert. 
Thus  it  may  be  seen  that  in  all  the  
Constitutions, the executive has a role to play and  
in some countries a major and exclusive role. The  
52

Indian Constitution provides a beautiful system of  
checks and balances under Articles 124(2) and 217(1)  
for the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court  
and  High  Courts  where  both  the  executive  and  
judiciary  have  been  given  a  balanced  role.  As  
already stated this delicate balance has been upset  
by  the  2 nd Judges  case  (Advocate  on  Record  
Association Vs Union of India 1993(4) SCC 4412 and  
the opinion of the Supreme Court in the Presidential  
Reference (Special Reference No.1 of 1998). It is  
time the original balance of power is restored.
The above recommendation for the need for an  
urgent and immediate review of the present procedure  
for appointment of judges is further fortified by  
the views expressed by Justice J.S. Verma, who wrote  
the lead judgment in Advocates on Record vs. Union  
of India 1993(4) SCC 441, by his fortright views  
expressed in an interview in the Front Line Magazine  
dated  10.10.1998.   The  relevant  portion  is  
reproduced below: 
53

When asked “you said in one of your speeches  
that  judicial  appointments  have  become  judicial  
disappointments.  Do  you  now  regret  your  1993  
judgement? Justice Verma stated “My 1993 judgement,  
which holds the field, was very much misunderstood  
and misused. It was in that context I said the  
working of the judgment now for some time is raising  
serious  questions,  which  cannot  be  called  
unreasonable. Therefore, some kind of rethink is  
required. My judgement says the appointment process  
of High Court and Supreme Court Judges is basically  
a  joint  or  participatory  exercise  between  the  
executive and the judiciary, both taking part in it.
Broadly, there are two distinct areas. One is  
the area of legal acumen of the candidates to  
adjudge their suitability and the other is their  
antecedents. It is the judiciary, that is, the Chief  
Justice of India and his colleagues or, in the case  
of the High Courts, the Chief Justice of the High  
Court and his colleagues (who) are the best persons  
54

to adjudge the legal acumen. Their voice should be  
predominant.  So  far  as  the  antecedents  are  
concerned, the executive is better placed than the  
judiciary to know the antecedents of candidates.  
Therefore, my judgement said that in the area of  
legal  acumen  the  judiciary’s  opinion  should  be  
dominant  and  in  the  area  of  antecedents  the  
executive’s opinion should be dominant. Together,  
the  two  should  function  to  find  out  the  most  
suitable (candidates) available for appointment.”
The  views  of  the  Parliamentary  Standing  
Committee on Law & Justice recommended the scrapping  
of  the  present  procedure  for  appointments  and  
transfers by Supreme Court and High Court Judges are  
of great relevance in this context. As reported in  
the Hindustan Times of 20.10.2008 “the Law Ministry  
has agreed to review the 15-year-old system after  
the  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Law  &  
Justice recommended doing away with the committee of  
55

judges (collegium). Presently, the collegium decides  
the  appointments  and  transfer  of  judges.  
Interestingly, the recommendations come close on the  
heels of recent cases of corruption against judges  
of the top courts in the country. Law Minister H.R.  
Bhardwaj  told  Hindustan  Times  that  the  House  
Committee’s recommendation had been accepted, and an  
action-taken report prepared by the Ministry would  
now be placed before Parliament. “Collegium system  
has  failed.  Its  decisions  on  appointments  and  
transfers lack transparency and we feel courts are  
not getting judges on merit.(……) The government  
cannot be a silent spectator on such a serious  
issue”, Bhardwaj said. The House Committee had said:  
“Through a Supreme Court judgement in 1993, the  
judiciary wrested the control of judges appointments  
and transfers. The collegium system has been a  
disaster and needs to be done away with”. H.R.  
Bhardwaj, Minister for Law & Justice, said “It is  
the right time to review this important matter”.  
56

“There was no problem till 1993 when the judiciary  
tried to re-write the Article of the Constitution  
dealing with appointments. They created a new law of  
collegium which was wrong. In a democracy, the  
primacy of Parliament cannot be challenged”, he  
said.
The  Chairman  of  the  Departmental  Related  
Parliament Standing Committee of Personnel, Public  
Grievances  Law  and  Justice  in  its  28 th Report  
presented  to the Hon’ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha on  
August 2008 has stated thus:-
“I would like to conclude by saying that the  
Government  should  expeditiously  see  to  it  that  
appointment of Judges in High Courts and Supreme  
Court  are  done  in  a  transparent  way.  We  have  
recommended in two ways: One is, we have to see to  
it that the collegium system has to be done away  
with, since appointments will be delayed, we have  
57

said that from the very beginning of identifying the  
eligible  persons,  the  various  places  of  
recommendations, be it at the level of the High  
Courts, or, at the Governor’s level or at the level  
of the Departments, and finally be the Supreme  
Court, should be transparent, and this should be put  
up in the web site then and there so that the  
person, who is going to occupy the Constitutional  
place, is known to the public, and their background  
should be allowed to be discussed by the public and,  
finally, it has to go through the process of issuing  
warrant by the President of India. But, what is  
happening presently is that from the day one of  
identifying the person till the issuance of the  
warrant, nothing is known to anybody except to the  
persons who are involved in it. Even the persons,  
who are identified and who are going to be made as  
judges of the High Court or of the Supreme Court,  
may not know about it. This type of secrecy is not  
good for democracy”.
58

It may be noted in this context that in every  
High Court the Chief Justice is from outside the  
State as per the policy of the Government. The  
senior most Judges who form the collegium are also  
from outside the State. The resultant position is  
that the judges constituting the collegium are not  
conversant with the names and antecedents of the  
candidates and more often than not, appointments  
suffer from lack of adequate information.
59

Two alternatives are available to the Government 
of the day. One is to seek a reconsideration of the  
three judgments aforesaid before the Hon’ble Supreme  
Court. Otherwise a law may be passed restoring the  
primacy of the Chief Justice of India and the power  
of the executive to make the appointments.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood) (Dr.Brahm A.Agrawal)
Member Member-Secretary
Dated: 21.11.2008
60