 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
L. Chandra Kumar be revisited by 
Larger Bench of Supreme Court
Report No. 215
 
December 2008

        LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
         (REPORT NO. 215)
L. Chandra Kumar be revisited by 
Larger Bench of Supreme Court
Presented  to  Dr  H.  R.  Bhardwaj,  Union
Minister for Law and Justice, Ministry of Law
and  Justice,  Government  of  India  by  Dr
Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman,  Law
Commission  of  India,  on  17th  day  of
December, 2008. 
2

The 18th Law  Commission was  constituted for a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
Order No. A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the
16th October, 2006, issued by the Government of
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law  Commission consists of the Chairman,
the Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and
seven part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr (Mrs) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr (Mrs) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar          : Joint Secretary & Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma :  Additional  Law
Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr V. K. Singh :  Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar          : Joint Secretary & Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced  accurately  and  not  used  in  a
misleading  context.  The  material  must  be
acknowledged  as  the  Government  of  India
copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed  to  the  Member-Secretary  and  sent
either by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd
Floor, ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-
110001, India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in  
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          ILI Building
(IInd Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)                            Bhagwandas Road, 
Chairman, Law Commission of India                                        New Delhi-110 001
                                         Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                         Fax: 91-11-23383564
DO No. 6(3)/146/2008-LC(LS)                                        17
December 2008
Dear Dr Bhardwaj ji,
Subject: L. Chandra Kumar be revisited by
              Larger Bench of Supreme Court
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  215th Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject.
A radical change was brought about in the constitutional law
through section 46 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act,  1976,  which  inserted  new  Part  XIVA  on  ‘Tribunals’  in  the
Constitution. Article 323A empowers Parliament to provide, by law,
for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes
and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service
of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with
the affairs of the Union or of any State. The law may provide for the
establishment  of  an  administrative  tribunal  for  the  Union  and  a
separate administrative tribunal for each State or for two or more
States. The law may take out adjudication of disputes relating to
service matters from the hands of the civil courts and the High
Courts.
Pursuant to the provisions of article 323A, Parliament enacted
the  Administrative  Tribunals  Act,  1985  (Act)  to  establish  an
Administrative  Tribunal  for  the  Union,  viz.,  the  Central
6

Administrative Tribunal and a separate Administrative Tribunal for a
State or a Joint Administrative Tribunal for two or more States. The
establishment of Administrative Tribunals became necessary since
a large number of cases relating to service matters were pending
before various courts. It was expected that the setting up of the
Administrative Tribunals would not only reduce the burden of courts,
but  would  also  provide  speedy  relief  to  the  aggrieved  public
servants.
In  S. P. Sampath Kumar [(1985) 4 SCC 458], the Supreme
Court directed the carrying out of certain measures with a view to
ensuring  the  functioning  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  along
constitutionally sound principles. The changes were brought about
in the Act by an amending Act (Act 19 of 1986). Jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court under article 32 was restored. Constitutional validity
of the Act was finally upheld in S. P. Sampath Kumar [(1987) 1 SCC
124] subject, of course, to certain amendments relating to the form
and  content  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals.  The  suggested
amendments were carried out by another amending Act (Act 51 of
1987). 
Thus became the Administrative Tribunals an effective and
real substitute for the High Courts. 
In 1997, a seven-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in  L.
Chandra Kumar [JT 1997 (3) SC 589] held that clause 2 (d) of
article 323A and clause  3(d) of article  323B,  to the extent  they
empower Parliament to exclude the jurisdiction of the High Courts
and  the  Supreme  Court  under  articles  226/227  and  32  of  the
Constitution, are unconstitutional. Section  28 of the  Act and the
“exclusion of jurisdiction” clauses in all other legislations enacted
under  the  aegis  of articles  323A and  323B would,  to the same
extent,  be  unconstitutional.  The  Court  held  that  the  jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Courts under articles 226/227 and upon
the Supreme Court under article 32 of the Constitution is part of the
inviolable basic structure of our Constitution. All decisions of the
Administrative Tribunals are subject to scrutiny before a Division
Bench  of  the  High  Court  within  whose  jurisdiction  the  Tribunal
concerned falls.
7

As a result, orders of the Administrative Tribunals are being
routinely appealed against in High Courts, whereas this was not the
position prior to the L. Chandra Kumar’s case. 
On  18th March  2006,  the  Administrative  Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 (Bill No. XXVIII of 2006) was introduced in
Rajya Sabha to amend the Act by incorporating therein,  inter alia,
provisions  empowering  the  Central  Government  to  abolish
Administrative Tribunals, and for appeal to High Court to bring the
Act  in  line  with  L.  Chandra  Kumar.  The  Department-related
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Personnel,  Public
Grievances, Law and Justice in its 17th Report on the said Bill did
not subscribe to the same and as for the provision for appeal to
High Court expressed the view that the original conception of the
Administrative Tribunals be restored and appeal to High Court is
unnecessary,  and  that  if a statutory appeal  is  to be provided it
should lie to the Supreme Court only. 
In the above backdrop, the Law Commission took up the study
on  the  subject  suo  motu. The  Administrative  Tribunals  were
conceived as and constitute an effective and real substitute for the
High Courts as regards service matters. Moreover, the power of
judicial review of the High Courts cannot be called as inviolable as
that  of  the  Supreme  Court.  The  very  objective  behind  the
establishment of the Administrative Tribunals is defeated if all the
cases adjudicated by them have to go before the concerned High
Courts. If one appeal is considered to be a must, an intra-tribunal
appeal would be the best option, and then the matter can be taken
to the Supreme Court by way of special leave petition under article
136. The Law Commission is of the view that L. Chandra Kumar’s
case needs to be revisited by a Larger Bench of the Supreme Court
or necessary and appropriate amendments may be effected in the
Act in accordance with law and we have recommended accordingly.
With warm regards,
                                                                                         Yours
sincerely,
8

(AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr H.R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001
9

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
L. CHANDRA KUMAR BE REVISITED BY
LARGER BENCH OF SUPREME COURT  
     TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION
10
2. BACKGROUND OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE                        19
TRIBUNALS ACT 1985                
3. LAW COMMISSION’S 162nd REPORT
28
4. THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS
33
(AMENDMENT) ACT 2006 (1 of 2007) AND
THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS
(AMENDMENT) BILL 2006
5. FROM S. P. SAMPATH KUMAR TO
40                                           
          L. CHANDRA KUMAR AND 
THE IMPLICATIONS
6. THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL ACT 2007
55
7. ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS – ESSENTIAL                    61
8. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
66
10

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 With a view to easing the congestion of pending cases in various
High Courts and other courts in the country, Parliament had enacted the
Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 which, insofar as its provisions relate
to the Central Administrative Tribunal, came into force on 1st July 1985.
The Central Administrative Tribunal was established with effect from 2nd
October 1985. Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal are located
at 17 places throughout the country. State Administrative Tribunals have
also been established in certain States. 
1.2 The Administrative Tribunals were established for adjudication of
disputes with respect to recruitment, matters concerning recruitment and
conditions of service of persons appointed to civil services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or
other authority under the control of the Government or of any corporation
or  society owned  or controlled  by the  Government.  This  was  done  in
pursuance of the provisions of article 323A inserted in the Constitution by
section 46 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act 1976. In the
Statement  of  Objects  and  Reasons  for  introducing  the  Bill  for  the
Administrative Tribunals Act 1985, it was mentioned that the setting up of
such  Administrative  Tribunals  to  deal  exclusively  with  service  matters
would go a long way in not only reducing the burden of the various courts
and thereby giving them more time to deal with other cases expeditiously
11

but  would  also  provide  to  the  persons  covered  by  the  Administrative
Tribunals speedy relief in respect of their grievance.  The provisions of the
Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 do not apply to members of the military
or any paramilitary force, officers or employees of the Supreme Court or
any High Court or courts subordinate thereto, persons appointed to the
secretarial staff of either House of Parliament or any State Legislature. A
person  who  is,  or  has  been,  a  Judge  of  a  High  Court  heads  an
Administrative Tribunal as its Chairman.  
1.3 After  the  constitution  of  the  Central  Administrative  Tribunal  in
1985, in the beginning, under section 29 of the Administrative Tribunals
Act 1985, the Tribunal received on transfer from the High Courts and
subordinate courts 13,350 cases, which were pending there.  Thereafter, till
November 2001, 3,71,448 cases were instituted in the Tribunal.  Out of
these, 3,33,598 cases have already been disposed of.  The total number of
cases received on transfer as well as those instituted directly at various
Benches of the Tribunal till 30.06.2006 is 4,76,336 of which the Tribunal
has disposed of 4,51,751 cases leaving a balance of 24,585 cases, which
constitutes disposal of 94%.  The institution of cases in the Tribunal has
increased  tremendously  but  the  rate  of  disposal  of  the  cases  has  also
quantitatively increased and in the Principal Bench of the Tribunal at New
Delhi, the disposal is 94%.  During the year 2000, over 91% of cases of the
Principal Bench of the Tribunal have been upheld in writ petition by the
Delhi High Court and so qualitatively also the Tribunal has performed
well.1 
1   http://cgat.gov.in/intro.htm, visited 08.12.2008
12

1.4 The  enactment  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  Act  1985
opened a new chapter in the sphere of administering justice to the
aggrieved Government servants in service matters. The setting up
of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  is  founded  on  the  premise  that
specialist bodies comprising both trained administrators and those
with  judicial  experience  would,  by  virtue  of  their  specialized
knowledge, be better  equipped to dispense speedy and efficient
justice. It was expected that a judicious mix of judicial members and
those with grass-root experience would best serve this purpose.2
      
1.5 The  Administrative  Tribunals  are  distinguishable  from  the
ordinary courts with regard to their jurisdiction and procedure. They
exercise jurisdiction only in relation to the service matters of the
litigants covered by the Act. They are also free from the shackles of
many of the technicalities of the ordinary courts. The procedural
simplicity  of  the  Act  can  be  appreciated  from  the  fact  that  the
aggrieved  person  can  also  appear  before  it  personally.  The
Government  can  also  present  its  case  through  its  Departmental
officers or legal practitioners. Further, only a nominal fee of Rs.50/-
is  to  be  paid  by  the  litigant  for  filing  an  application  before  the
Tribunal [Rule 7 of the Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure)
Rules 1987]. Thus, the objective of the Tribunal is to provide speedy
and inexpensive justice to the litigants.3 
2 Department-related  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Personnel,  Public
Grievances,  Law  and  Justice,  Seventeenth  Report  on  the  Administrative  Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2006, December 2006, paragraph 6
3    Ibid., paragraph 6.1
13

1.6 Administrative adjudication, which is quasi-judicial in nature, is
the  main  function  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals.   The  basic
objective of enacting the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 was:
i) to relieve congestion in the ordinary courts; and
ii) to provide for speedy disposal  of disputes  relating to
service matters.4
1.7 The establishment of the Administrative Tribunals was a right
step in the direction of providing an effective alternative authority to
Government employees who feel aggrieved by the decisions of the
Government,  in  spite  of  the  elaborate  system  of  rules  and
regulations which govern personnel management, for judicial review
over service matters to the exclusion of all courts including High
Courts  other  than  the  Supreme  Court,  with  the  end  in  view  of
reducing the burden of such Courts and of securing expeditious
disposal of such matters.5            
1.8 The Supreme Court has on many occasions examined the
constitutional validity of the various provisions of the Administrative
Tribunals Act 1985. In S. P. Sampath Kumar v. UOI6, the Supreme
Court directed the carrying out of certain measures with a view to
ensuring  the  functioning  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  along
constitutionally sound principles. The changes were brought about
4 Department-related  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Personnel,  Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, First Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, August 2004, paragraph 28.1
5    Supra note 2, paragraph 6.2
6   (1985) 4 SCC 458
14

in the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 by an amending Act (Act 19
of 1986). Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 32 of the
Constitution  was  restored.  Constitutional  validity  of  the  Act  was
finally  upheld  in  the  said  case7,  subject,  of  course,  to  certain
amendments relating to the form and content of the Administrative
Tribunals. The suggested amendments were carried out by another
amending Act (Act 51 of 1987). Thus became the Administrative
Tribunals an effective and real substitute for the High Courts.
1.9 But, in 1997, a seven-Judge Constitution Bench in L. Chandra
Kumar v. UOI 8 held as under: 
‘In view of the reasoning adopted by us, we hold that clause 2
(d) of Article 323A and clause 3(d) of Article 323B, to the
extent they exclude the jurisdiction of the High Courts and the
Supreme  Court  under  Articles  226/227  and  32  of  the
Constitution, are unconstitutional. Section 28 of the Act and
the “exclusion of jurisdiction” clauses in all other legislations
enacted under the aegis of Articles 323A and 323B would, to
the  same  extent,  be  unconstitutional.  The  jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Courts under Articles 226/227 and
upon the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution is
part of the inviolable basic structure of our Constitution.  While
this jurisdiction cannot be ousted, other courts and Tribunals
may perform a supplemental role in discharging the powers
conferred by Articles 226/227 and 32 of the Constitution. The
7   (1987) 1 SCC 124
8    JT 1997 (3) S.C. 589
15

Tribunals created under Article 323A and Article 323B of the
Constitution  are  possessed  of  the  competence  to  test  the
constitutional  validity of statutory provisions and rules.   All
decisions  of  these  Tribunals  will,  however,  be  subject  to
scrutiny  before  a  Division  Bench  of  the  High  Court  within
whose jurisdiction the concerned Tribunal falls.  The Tribunals
will, nevertheless, continue to act like Courts of first instance
in  respect  of  the  areas  of  law  for  which  they  have  been
constituted.   It  will  not,  therefore,  be  open  for  litigants  to
directly approach the High Courts even in cases where they
question the  vires of statutory legislations (except where the
legislation which creates the particular Tribunal is challenged)
by  overlooking  the  jurisdiction  of  the  concerned  Tribunal.
Section 5 (6) of the Act is valid and constitutional and is to be
interpreted in the manner we have indicated.’ 
1.10 The  Constitution  Bench  also  addressed  the  issue  of  the
competence of those who man the Tribunals and the question as to
who is to exercise administrative supervision over them etc. and
made  suggestions  to  improve  the  function  of  the  Administrative
Tribunals. 
1.11 As a result, orders of the Administrative Tribunals are being
routinely appealed against in High Courts, whereas this was not the
position prior to the L. Chandra Kumar’s case.
16

1.12 On  18th March  2006,  the  Administrative  Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 (Bill No. XXVIII of 2006) was introduced in
Rajya Sabha to amend the Act by incorporating therein,  inter alia,
provisions contained in the proposed new Chapters IVA and IVB,
empowering  the  Central  Government  to  abolish  Administrative
Tribunals, and for appeal to High Court to bring the Act in line with
L. Chandra Kumar. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its
Seventeenth Report on the said Bill did not subscribe to the same
and as for the provision for appeal to High Court expressed the view
that  the  original  conception  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  be
restored and appeal to High Court is unnecessary, and that if a
statutory appeal is to be provided it should lie to the Supreme Court
only. In regard to the provision proposing omission of section 17 of
the  Administrative  Tribunals  Act  1985  conferring  power  on  the
Administrative Tribunals to punish for contempt, the Committee was
of the view that in order to ensure implementation of the orders of
the Tribunals, their “civil contempt” powers should be retained. 
1.13 It  may  be  noted  that  the  Administrative  Tribunals  were
conceived as and constitute an effective and real substitute for the
High Courts as regards service matters. 
1.14 The Law Commission of India in its 58th Report on ‘Structure
and Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary’ (1974) observed:
17

“8.29. The creation of Special Service Courts in India may …
provide to the honest and efficient government servant greater
and  more  effective  protection  against  discrimination  or
victimization, than at present. … Furthermore, the creation of
service Courts may reduce the growing volume of arrears in
the High Courts and the Supreme Court,  provided they are
not made subject to the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226 and of the Supreme Court under Articles 133 and
136 of the Constitution.
…
“8.31.   But, if the supervisory jurisdiction  of the High
Court and the Supreme Court remains intact, and the decision
of  the  service  Court  is  subject  to  review  by  these  higher
Courts, we do not see how the creation of Service Courts will
reduce the growing volume of arrears in these Courts.
…
“8.32. … In our opinion, the existing legal and constitutional
position  affords  sufficient  protection.  We  do  not,  therefore,
recommend the creation of a separate Service Tribunal.”
1.15 The Law Commission of India in its 124th Report on ‘The High
Court  Arrears  –  A  Fresh  Look’  (1988)  took  note  of  the
recommendation  of  “The  High  Courts  Arrears  Committee”,
constituted in 1969 under the chairmanship of the then Chief Justice
of India, Hon’ble Mr. Justice J. C. Shah, favouring setting up of
Service Tribunals (vide  paragraph 1.14 of the Report).  The Law
Commission, after taking note of its 58th Report, also observed:
18

“1.15.  …  It  is  here  a  germ  for  the  first  time  of  creating
specialist Tribunals as alternatives to the High Court with a
view to curtailing the jurisdiction of the High Court to control
the inflow of work which may indirectly help in tackling the
problem of arrears and backlog of cases.
…
“1.21.  …  The  Law  Commission  is  of  the  firm  view  that,
wherever possible,  proliferating  appellate  and  wide  original
jurisdiction should be controlled or curtailed without impairing
the quality of justice.
…
“1.27.  To  sum  up,  the  approach  of  the  commission  is  to
reduce  number  of  appeals,  to  set  up  specialist
courts/tribunals, simultaneously eliminating the jurisdiction of
the  High  Court  which,  when  translated  into  action  by
implementing  the  reports  submitted  by  the  present  Law
Commission, would, on a very superficial assessment, reduce
the inflow of work into the High Court by nearly 45% of its
present inflow.” 
1.16 In  its  162nd Report  on  ‘Review  of  Functioning  of  Central
Administrative  Tribunal;  Customs,  Excise  and  Gold  (Control)
Appellate Tribunal and Income-tax Appellate Tribunal’ (1998), the
Law Commission of India recommended that an appeal should be
provided to the High Court, to be necessarily heard by a Division
Bench against the orders of the Administrative Tribunals, keeping in
19

view the criticism against L. Chandra Kumar that there cannot be a
judicial review of an order passed by an authority in exercise of its
power of judicial review (vide paragraph 4.5). 
1.17 Nevertheless, the fact remains that the very objective behind
the establishment of the Administrative Tribunals is defeated if all
the cases adjudicated by them have to go before the concerned
High Courts. Moreover, the power of judicial review of the High
Courts cannot be called as inviolable as that of the Supreme Court.
1.18 In the light of the above, the Law Commission of India  suo
motu took up the study of the subject to find out if there is any
option to end the impasse.
2. BACKGROUND  OF  THE  ADMINISTRATIVE  TRIBUNALS
ACT 1985
2.1 The  Department-related  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee
on  Personnel,  Public  Grievances,  Law  and  Justice  in  its
Seventeenth Report on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment)
Bill  2006  (as  introduced  in  the  Rajya  Sabha  on  18.03.2006),
submitted to the Parliament on 5th December 2006, described the
background,  objective  and  significance  of  the  Administrative
Tribunals Act 1985 in the following words:
‘5. The framers of the Constitution of India in their wisdom
invested the Supreme Court and the various High Courts with
the power of judicial review by specifically enacting Articles
20

32, 136, 226 and 227 of the Constitution.   With the enactment
of Articles 12, 14, 15, 16, 309 and 311 in the Constitution, a
large number of service matters calling for the adjudication of
disputes relating to the recruitment and conditions of service
of Government servants and also of employees in other fields
of public employment started coming up before the various
High Courts whose power of judicial review was invoked for
the said purpose by the aggrieved employees.    
5.1. The High Courts played a definite and significant role in
evolving  the  service  jurisprudence  in  the  exercise  of  their
power of judicial review. The positive contribution by the High
Courts  made  as  aforesaid,  coupled with the  growth  in the
number  of  employees  in  the  public  field  and  the  manifold
problems  arising  in  the  context  of  their  recruitment  and
conditions of service and their implicit faith and confidence in
the High Courts as the unfailing protector of their rights and
honour,  led  to  a  gradual  increase  in  the  institution  and
pendency of service matters in the High Courts. This, in turn,
focused  the  attention  of  the  Union  Government  on  the
problem  of  finding  an  effective  alternative  institutional
mechanism for the disposal of such specialized matters.  
5.2. A Committee set up by the Union Government in 1969
under  the  Chairmanship  of  Mr.  Justice  J.C.  Shah
recommended for setting up of an independent Tribunal
to  handle  service  matters  pending  before  the  High
21

Courts and the Supreme Court. In the 124th Report of
the  Law  Commission  of  India,  it  was  cited  that  in
Australia, Tribunals outside the established courts have
been  created  –  Administrative  Appeal  Tribunals,
Arbitration Tribunals, Workers’ Compensation Tribunals,
Pension  Tribunals,  Planning  Appeal  Tribunal,  Equal
Opportunity Tribunals, to name a few.  This activity of
creating  Tribunals  is  founded  on  a  belief  that  the
established  Courts  are  too  remote,  too  legalistic,  too
expensive and, above all too slow.
5.3. The Law Commission of India had recommended for the
establishment  at  the  Centre  and  the  State  of  an
appellate Tribunal or Tribunals presided over by a legally
qualified Chairman and with experienced civil servants
as Members to hear appeals from Government servants
in respect of disciplinary and other action against them.
The First Administrative Reforms Commission had also
recommended  for  the  setting  up  of  Civil  Services
Tribunals  to  deal  with  the  appeals  of  Government
servants against disciplinary actions. Some of the State
Legislatures  thereupon  enacted  laws  setting  up
Tribunals to decide such cases.  Part XIV A comprising
Articles  323-A  and  323-B  was  also  inserted  in  the
Constitution  of  India  by  the  42nd Constitutional
Amendment Bill, 1976 with effect from 3rd January 1977.
Article 323-A inter alia authorized Parliament to provide
22

by law for setting up of Administrative Tribunals for the
adjudication of disputes and complaints with respect to
recruitment  and  conditions  of  service  of  certain
categories  of  employees  in  the  field  of  public
employment including Government servants and also to
provide for the exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts,
except that of the Supreme Court under Article 136, with
respect to disputes or complaints of such nature.  No
immediate step was, however, taken in the direction of
enacting  a  law  for  the  setting  up  of  Administrative
Tribunals as contemplated by the said Article.
5.4. Ultimately,  Parliament  enacted  the  Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985 which received the assent of the
President on the 27th February 1985.  In pursuance of
the provisions contained in the Act, the Administrative
Tribunals set up under it exercise original jurisdiction in
respect of service matters of employees covered under
the Act.
Objective of the Act
5.5. The Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying
the Constitutional Amendment Bill by which Article 323-A was
sought to be inserted in the Constitution states the following
words:
23

“To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to secure
the  speedy  disposal  of  service  matters….it  is  considered
expedient to provide for administrative tribunals for dealing
with  such  matters  while  preserving  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Supreme Court in regard to such matters under Article 136 of
the Constitution.”
5.6. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the
introduced version of the Administrative Tribunals Bill, which
on being passed and approved became the Act of 1985, also
contained  similar  recitals:  “…..The  establishment  of
Administrative Tribunals under the aforesaid provision of the
Constitution has become necessary since a large number of
cases  relating  to  service  matters  are  pending  before  the
various Courts.   It is expected that the setting up of such
Administrative  Tribunals  to  deal  exclusively  with  service
matters would go a long way in not only reducing the burden
of the various Courts and thereby giving them more time to
deal with other cases expeditiously but would also provide to
the persons covered by the Administrative Tribunals speedy
relief in respect of their grievances.”
5.7. In pursuance of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985,
the Central Administrative Tribunal was set up on 1.11.1985.
At present, it has 17 regular Benches, 15 of which operate at
the principal seats of High Courts and the remaining two at
Jaipur and Lucknow.  These Benches also hold circuit sittings
24

at other seats  of High Courts.  The Tribunal consists of a
Chairman,  a  Vice  Chairman  and  Members.   The  Vice
Chairman  and  Members  are  drawn  both  from  judicial  and
administrative spheres.  State Administrative Tribunals were
set up by the Governments of the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Himachal  Pradesh,  Orissa,  Karnataka,  Maharashtra,  Tamil
Nadu,  Madhya  Pradesh  and  West  Bengal  under  the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
5.8. The  appointment  of  the  Chairman,  Central
Administrative  Tribunal,  as  per  practice,  is  initiated  by  the
Chief Justice of India on a reference made to this effect by the
Union Government.  The appointment of Vice Chairman and
Members in Central Administrative Tribunal are made on the
basis of recommendations of a Selection Committee chaired
by a nominee of the Chief Justice of India, who is a sitting
judge of the Supreme Court.  The appointments are made
with the approval of Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
after obtaining the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India.
5.9. The  appointments  to  the  vacancies  in  State
Administrative Tribunals are made on the basis of proposals
sent  by  the  State  Governments,  with  the  approval  of  the
Governors.  Thereafter, their appointments undergo the same
process  as  the  one  in  respect  of  Central  Administrative
Tribunal.
25

Significance of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
6. The enactment of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
opened a new chapter in the sphere of administering justice to
the aggrieved Government servants in service matters.  The
Act  provides  for  establishment  of  Central  Administrative
Tribunal and the State Administrative Tribunals.  The setting-
up of these Tribunals is founded on the premise that specialist
bodies comprising both trained administrators and those with
judicial  experience  would,  by  virtue  of  their  specialized
knowledge,  be  better  equipped  to  dispense  speedy  and
efficient justice.  It was expected that a judicious mix of judicial
members and those  with grass-root experience would best
serve this purpose.
6.1. The  Administrative  Tribunals  are  distinguishable  from
the  ordinary  courts  with  regard  to  their  jurisdiction  and
procedure.  They exercise jurisdiction only in relation to the
service matters of the litigants covered by the Act.  They are
also free from the shackles of many of the technicalities of the
ordinary Courts.  The procedural simplicity of the Act can be
appreciated from the fact that the aggrieved person can also
appear  before  it  personally.   The  Government  can  also
present  its  case  through  its  Departmental  officers  or  legal
practitioners.  Further, only a nominal fee of Rs.50/- is to be
paid by the litigant for filing an application before the Tribunal
26

[Section 7 of the Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure)
Rules, 1987].  Thus, the objective of the Tribunal is to provide
speedy and inexpensive justice to the litigants.
6.2. The  establishment  of  Administrative  Tribunals  was  a
right step in the direction of providing an effective alternative
authority to Government employees who feel aggrieved by the
decisions of the Government, in spite of the elaborate system
of rules and regulations which govern personnel management,
for judicial review over service matters to the exclusion of all
courts including High Courts other than the Supreme Court,
with the end in view of reducing the burden of such Courts
and of securing expeditious disposal of such matters.’
2.2 In Kamal Kanti Dutta v. UOI9, the then Chief Justice of India,
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Y. V. Chandrachud, speaking for the majority,
observed:
“The constitution of Service Tribunals by State Governments
with an apex Tribunal at the Centre, which, in the generality of
cases, should be the final arbiter of controversies relating to
conditions of service, including the vexed question of seniority,
may save the courts from the avalanche of writ petitions and
appeals in service matters. The proceedings of such tribunals
can have the merit of informality and if they will not be tied
down to strict rules of evidence, they might be able to produce
solutions which will satisfy many and displease only a few.”  
9   (1980) 4 SCC 38 
27

2.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill which led to
the enactment of the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 reads as
follows:
“Article  323A  of  the  Constitution  stipulates  that
Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by
Administrative  Tribunal  of  disputes  and  complaints  with
respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons
appointed to public services and posts in connection with the
affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other
authority within the territory of India or under the control of the
Government  of  India  or  of  any  Corporation  owned  or
controlled by the Government.
2.   The  Bill  seeks  to  give  effect  to  the  aforesaid
constitutional provision by providing for the establishment of
an  Administrative  Tribunal  for  the  Union  and  a  separate
Administrative Tribunal for a State or a Joint Administrative
Tribunal for two or more States.  The Bill also provides for-
(a) the  jurisdiction,  powers  (including  the  power  to
punish for contempt) and authority which may be
exercised by each Tribunal; 
(b) the procedure (including provision as to limitation
and rules of evidence) to be followed by the State
Tribunals;
(c) exclusion of the jurisdiction  of all courts, except
that of the Supreme Court under article 136 of the
Constitution relating to service matters;
(d) the transfer to each Administrative Tribunal of any
suit or other proceedings pending before any court
or  other  authority  immediately  before  the
establishment  of  such  Tribunal  as  would  have
been within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal if the
causes  of  action  on  which  such  suits  or
proceedings  are  based  had  arisen  after  such
establishment.
28

3.  The establishment of Administrative Tribunal under
the  aforesaid  provision  of  the  Constitution  has  become
necessary since a large number of cases relating to service
maters are pending before the various courts. It is expected
that the setting up of such Administrative Tribunals to deal
exclusively with service matters would go a long way in not
only reducing the burden of the various courts and thereby
giving them more time to deal with other cases expeditiously
but  would  also  provide  to  the  persons  covered  by  the
Administrative  Tribunals  speedy  relief  in  respect  of  their
grievances.”
2.4  Section  22(1)  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  Act  1985
provides that the Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid
down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by
the principles of natural justice and subject to the other provisions of
the Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the
Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure including
the fixing of places and times of its inquiry and deciding whether to
sit in public or in private.
2.5 Section  28  of  the  Administrative  Tribunals  Act  excludes
jurisdiction of all courts except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court,
as envisaged under sub-clause (d) of clause (2) of the Article 323A
of  the  Constitution.  Accordingly,  the  jurisdiction  of  High  Courts
under articles 226/227 as regards service matters is excluded by
the Act.
29

3. LAW COMMISSION’S 162nd REPORT
3.1 The Law Commission in its 162nd Report10 made an alternative
recommendation  for  constitution  of  National  Appellate
Administrative Tribunal in the following words:
“The Supreme Court has laid down in L. Chandra Kumar’s
case (supra) that an aggrieved party can have recourse to the
jurisdiction of the respective High Court under Article 226/227
of the Constitution of India, against the decision of the Central
Administrative  Tribunal.   The  repercussions  of  this
development of law have already been felt.  The Karnataka
Government  has  sought  to  abolish  the  Karnataka  State
Administrative Tribunal.  In the news items in the recent past,
it  has  appeared  that  even  the  Central  Government  is
proposing to abolish CAT.  The remedy of judicial review by
the  High  Court  provided  against  the  decision  of  the
Administrative Tribunal and a possible further appeal to the
Supreme Court under Article 136 is not only time-consuming
but also expensive.  Besides this, the various High Courts
may interpret differently any statutory provision concerning the
10    Supra paragraph 1.16
30

service conditions governing the employees.  Thus the lack of
uniformity in the High Court decisions and consequently in
CAT benches will create confusion in the mind of the litigant.
It will further make the public loose faith in seeking justice
through  the  judiciary,  and  thus  undermine  the  democratic
norms.
The  Commission  is  of  the  considered  view  that  a
National Appellate Administrative Tribunal be constituted on
the  lines  of  the  National  Consumer  Disputes  Redressal
Commission under section 20 of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986.  It shall be manned by a retired Chief Justice of a High
Court or a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India.  An
appeal, on substantial questions of law and fact may lie to the
proposed Appellate forum, against the decision of the Central
Administrative Tribunal.
The proposed forum may have branches  all over the
country to reduce the cost of litigation to the litigant.
The  decision  of  the  proposed  Appellate  court  will be
binding on all benches of CAT.  The proposed forum will be of
status higher than a High Court but below the Supreme Court.
An appeal may lie against the decision of the proposed
appellate forum to the Supreme Court.  Under section 130-E
of the Customs Act, 1962, an appeal lies from the decision of
31

the CEGAT to the Supreme Court.  Similarly, under section 23
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, an appeal lies against
the National Commission’s decision to the Supreme Court.  It
will not be advisable to convert the Supreme Court to a first
appellate  court,  because  flooding  of  appeals  against  the
Tribunals’ orders may dilute the importance of the Supreme
Court and consequently our democratic polity will suffer (1994
(2) Journal Section SCALE J1 by Justice A.M. Ahmadi).  In
this  manner,  an  aggrieved  party  will  not  have  a  right  of
recourse to the writ jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the
High Court  against  the  decision of CAT inasmuch  as  it  is
settled law that where adequate remedy of appeal is there,
one cannot  have recourse to the writ jurisdiction  (see AIR
1996 SC 1209; AIR 1997 SC 2189). Though it is undisputed
that where the vires of the statute under which the Tribunal is
constituted, is challenged, one can have recourse to the writ
jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India
but such cases will be insignificant in number.  Similarly when
a  right  to  appeal  is  contemplated  to  the  Supreme  Court
against the decision of the proposed Appellate Administrative
Tribunal, one cannot have recourse to the writ jurisdiction of
the High Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution.
This procedure will take care of the ensuing problems
cropping up after the decision in L. Chandra Kumar’s case
(supra).
32

The  proposed  President  of  the  Appellate  forum  will
continue  to  draw  the  same  salaries  and  perks  as  are
admissible to a sitting Judge.
All  pending  writ  petitions  against  the  decision  of
CAT/SAT in pursuance of L. Chandra Kumar’s case (except
those  in  which  the  vires  under  which  the  Tribunal  is
constituted,  is  challenged),  may  be  transferred  to  the
proposed Appellate Forum.
This  proposal  can  be  effective and  beneficial,  only if
Benches  of  the  Appellate  Forum  are  established  at  all
important centres, at least in the capital of every State, on the
pattern of the High Court.
… It is the need of the hour that for expeditious disposal
of  cases,  all  cases  which  raise  one  or  more  common
questions of law and on the basis of which, the cases can be
disposed  of  by  a  common  judgment,  should  be  grouped
together and heard together.  Thus in the 79th Report of the
Law Commission of India on delay and arrears in High Courts
and  other  appellate  courts,  this  recommendation  has  been
echoed….”
(vide paragraphs 4.8 and 4.9)
33

3.2 The Law Commission in the aforesaid Report, as regards the
position of the Administrative Tribunal after L. Chandra Kumar, also
observed:
“It is no longer an alternative mechanism to the High Court,
but a tribunal whose decisions are subject to scrutiny by the
High Court, albeit by a Division Bench. (As a matter of fact,
Shri  Justice  Shiva  Shankar  Bhat,  a  retired  Judge  of  the
Karnataka High Court, who was appointed as Chairman of the
Karnataka  State  Administrative  Tribunal,  tendered  his
resignation soon after the decision in L. Chandra Kumar was
rendered,  complaining  that  inasmuch  as  the  position  and
status  of  the  Tribunal  has  been  downgraded  by  the  said
decision, he cannot continue as the Chairman of the State
Administrative Tribunal). While striking down certain clauses
of  Articles  323-A  and  323-B  of  the  Constitution  …,  the
Supreme Court has at the same time affirmed the soundness
of the principle on which these administrative tribunals are
created.   It  did  not  agree  with  the  contention  that  these
tribunals  should  be  abolished  inasmuch  as  they  have  not
proved effective in discharge of their duties and have failed to
achieve  the  object  with  which  they  were  created.   The
Supreme Court has also held that though these tribunals are
subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts, they are yet
competent to decide questions relating to the constitutional
validity of the statutory provisions and rules except, of course,
the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 under
34

which they have been constituted.  The Supreme Court has
also rejected that there ought to be no technical/administrative
members in these tribunals.  They said that these non-judicial
members provide an input which may not be available with the
judicial members.
In the light of the above dicta of the Supreme Court, not
much room is left for the Law Commission of India to suggest
any substantial measures or recommendations with respect to
the functioning of these tribunals.”
(vide paragraph 4.5) 
4. THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS (AMENDMENT) ACT 
2006 (1 of 2007) AND THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS
(AMENDMENT) BILL 2006
4.1 The  Administrative  Tribunals  (Amendment)  Act  2006  (1  of
2007)  has  brought  about  many  changes  in  the  Administrative
Tribunals Act 1985. A new section 6 has been substituted pertaining
to the qualification for appointment of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
other members. Sub-section (1) of new section 6 provides that a
person  shall  not  be  qualified  for  appointment  as  the  chairman
35

unless he is, or has been, a judge of a High Court. Sub-section (2)
of the said section lays down the qualifications for appointment of
Administrative Members and Judicial Members. A Secretary to the
Government  of  India  with  two  years  of  service  and  Additional
Secretary to the Government of India with five years of service are
eligible for appointment  as an Administrative Member. A person
who is or qualified to be a Judge of a High Court and Secretary,
Department  of  Legal  Affairs  or  Legislative  Department  including
Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India, Government of India,
with two years of service and Additional Secretary, Department of
Legal Affairs or Legislative Department with five years of service are
eligible for appointment as a Judicial Member. Further, sub-section
(3) of the said section provides that the Chairman and every other
Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be appointed
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India by the President. 
4.2 The Act 1 of 2007 has abolished the post of “Vice-Chairman”
which existed before as an independent class. However, new clause
(u) of section 3 defines “Vice-Chairman” as a Member who has
been  authorized  by  the  appropriate  Government  to  perform
administrative functions at each of the places where Benches of the
Tribunal have been set up.  
4.3 The Parliamentary Standing Committee11 has recommended
as follows:
11   Supra note 2, paragraph 11.10
36

‘As a remedial step, the Committee expressed the
following view:  
“….Maybe, a retired judge of the Supreme Court can
preside over.  And, maybe, the other member could
be from the judiciary; not from the district judges, but
from the level of High Courts, we can keep one.  And,
then, the third and fourth members can be from the
administration so that the dignity and strength of the
tribunal is enhanced to that extent.”’
4.4 The  background  note  on  the  Administrative  Tribunals
(Amendment)  Bill  2006,  furnished  to  the  Parliamentary  Standing
Committee12 by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions states as follows:
“…….Initially it was envisaged that litigation relating to service
matters  should  be  adjudicated  upon  by  Administrative
Tribunals  and  should  not  increase  the  burden  of the  High
Courts.  Thus,  the  appellate  jurisdiction  was  only  with  the
Supreme Court of India. However, the Supreme Court in  L.
Chandra Kumar Vs UOI (AIR 1997 SC 1125) has held that the
writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226/227 of the
Constitution cannot be extinguished by any Act since it is a
part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Thus, appeals
from judgments of the Administrative Tribunals now lie to the
Division Bench of the corresponding High Court.  
 
12   Ibid., paragraph 7
37

A  number  of  State  Governments  have  proposed  for  the
abolishing of SATs essentially on the ground that since the
orders of the SAT have been made appealable before the
Division Bench of the High Court, it has merely added one
more tier in the  judicial hierarchy. The State Governments
have also stated that the SATs have become very expensive
to administer. At the Central level too, it has been found that
some Benches of the CAT have now become unnecessary (or
will become unnecessary in the near future) since the cases
pending before them have diminished in number. 
…
Currently,  the  Administrative  Tribunals  Act,  1985  does  not
provide for either the abolishing of an Administrative Tribunal
or for the transfer of cases to any Court outside the Tribunal. 
…
As a result of the Supreme Court judgment in  L. Chandra
Kumar, orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal have now
routinely been appealed against in High Courts whereas this
was  not  the  position  earlier.  Across  the  board,  the
interpretation  given  by  High  Courts  to  the  L.  Chandra
Kumar/T.  Sudhakar  Prasad judgment  is  that  High  Courts
function  as  Courts  of  Appeal  to  the  Central  Administrative
Tribunal.  It  should  be  observed  that  though  the  Chandra
Kumar/Sudhakar  Prasad judgments  only  reaffirmed  the
existing legal and constitutional provisions, the interpretation
has  been  such  as  to  place  the  Tribunal  in  a  position
38

subordinate  to  the  High  Courts  in  the  matter  of  appellate
jurisdiction.”
4.5 A provision was made in the aforesaid Bill for an appeal to the
High Court.  Section 27D(1), as proposed in the Bill, provides as
follows:
“Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Tribunal
may file an appeal to the High Court.”
4.6 The  aforesaid  Bill  also seeks  to  amend  the  Administrative
Tribunals Act 1985 to provide for an enabling provision for abolition
of Tribunals as well as for transfer of pending cases to some other
authority after a Tribunal has been abolished since the parent Act
does not contain any specific provision for abolition of Tribunals.    
4.7 The  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee13 also  invited
views/suggestions from various organizations on the aforesaid Bill.
A number of representations/memoranda were received. One of the
major points raised in the memoranda were:
“The record of disposal of cases of Administrative Tribunals
has been excellent as compared to the subordinate Courts
and High Courts. The abolition of the Administrative Tribunals
will increase the pending cases in the High Courts whereby
speedy  justice  will  be  denied  to  the  citizens  by  putting
additional burden on the High Courts.”   
13   Ibid., paragraph 3
39

4.8 Mr. Justice V. S. Malimath deposed before the Parliamentary
Standing Committee14 as under:
“…….Because Supreme Court can always interfere with any
decision  of  the  Tribunal  and  High  Court  can  also  do  it,
therefore, High Court jurisdiction will continue to be operative.
But, if you provide an appeal against an order of the Tribunal,
technically, you may say that Article 226 and 227 can still be
exercised, but no judge will exercise jurisdiction. If you say
that an appeal to the High Court, I mean, you are burdening
the High Court with another set of cases and thereby delaying
the disposal of the service matters…….
… 
He also stated that the aggrieved persons would like to use
appeal if it is available and that the High Court will then be
flooded with a number of cases. If there are more cases, there
will be more delay and it will defeat the entire purpose of the
enactment under the Constitutional provisions.    
Another pertinent point raised by him was that the way the Act
is  being  implemented  now,  it  is  weakening  the  Tribunal.
Firstly, it is making the Tribunal subordinate to the High Court
and its stature is lowered. Secondly, earlier, the retired Chief
Justice used to be the Chairman of the Tribunal and now, this
practice seems to have been given up. Now a retired Judge of
the  High  Court  can  be  appointed  as  Chairman  since  the
14   Ibid., paragraph 4.3
40

statute does not provide that the Chairman of the Tribunal
should  be  former  Chief  Justice.  Thus  the  stature  of  the
Tribunal is lowered.”  
4.9 Speaking before the Parliamentary Standing Committee15 on
the issue of abolition of Administrative Tribunals, Mr. Justice Ashok
Agarwal deposed that the proposal for abolition was not legal and
that what the Government could do by legislation should be done by
that method only. He opined that the legislature should not delegate
that power to the executive. He deposed as under: 
“…….If a particular Tribunal is not working satisfactorily, steps
can  be taken  against  that  particular  Tribunal.  But,  on that
account we cannot abolish all the Tribunals across the country
in  one  stroke  because  different  States  are  governed  by
different conditions of service…….” 
 
4.10 The amendment of the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 by
Act 1 of 2007 has brought in changes which are seminal in nature.
The Administrative Members can be appointed only from among
persons who have had a minimum incumbency in the highest post
of executive machinery. The status of members appointed,  both
judicial and administrative, has been equated with that of Judges of
the  High  Court.    The  statistics  would  show  that  only  a  small
percentage  of  the  decisions  is  unsettled,  ultimately,  but  the
pendency of service cases in the High Courts is a reality.   The
remedial measures appear to be two-fold.  One is to come with a
15   Ibid., paragraph 4.4
41

provision for an in-house appeal, the modalities of which could be
discussed and finalized, and the Act could be amended accordingly.
By constituting such an appellate body, the parameters presently
followed naturally would get supplanted, and the period of pendency
always limited.   
42

5. FROM S. P. SAMPATH KUMAR TO L. CHANDRA KUMAR
AND THE IMPLICATIONS
5.1 In S. P. Sampath Kumar v. UOI16, the constitutional validity of
the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 was challenged on the ground
of exclusion of power of judicial review both of the Supreme Court
under article 32 and of the High Courts under articles 226 and 227
of the Constitution.  During the hearing of the case, the Act was
amended and the jurisdiction of the apex Court under article 32 was
restored.   The Supreme Court in final decision held that section 28
of the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 which excludes jurisdiction
of the High Courts under articles 226/227 is not unconstitutional.
The Court ruled that this section does not totally bar judicial review.
It also said that Administrative Tribunals under the 1985 Act are
substitute of High Courts and will deal with all service matters even
involving articles 14, 15 and 16.   It also advised for changing the
qualifications of Chairman of the Tribunal.  As a result, the Act was
further amended in 1987.17   
 5.2 In Union of India v. Parma Nanda18, a three-Judge Bench of
the  Supreme  Court  upheld  the  authority  of  the  Administrative
Tribunals to decide the constitutionality of service rules.
5.3 In  Sampath  Kumar’s  case,  the  issue  of  constitutionality  of
article 323A (2) (d) was neither challenged nor upheld and it could
not be said to be an authority on that aspect.  Subsequently, a Full
16   Supra note 7
17   K. C. Joshi, Constitutional Status of Tribunals, 41 JILI 116 (1999)
18   AIR 1989 SC 1185
43

Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in  Sakinala Harinath v.
State of AP19 declared sub-clause (d) of clause (2) of Article 323A
unconstitutional.   It held that this provision is repugnant to the ruling
of the Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala20.
Meanwhile, the two three-Judge Benches of the apex Court in R.K.
Jain v. UOI21 and  L. Chandra Kumar v. UOI22 also recommended
that  the  Sampath  Kumar ruling be reconsidered.    Therefore,  a
Bench of seven Judges of the Supreme Court examined the issues
in a wider perspective including the constitutionality of article 323A
(2) (d).  It also considered the power of the Administrative Tribunals
to exercise the powers and jurisdiction of the High Courts under
articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.23
5.4 In L. Chandra Kumar’s case, the Supreme Court, contrary to
Sampath Kumar, held that these tribunals are not equal to the High
Courts.   It further declared that the decisions of such tribunals shall
be appealable before a Bench of two Judges in the High Court
under  whose  jurisdiction  the  tribunal  falls.    However,  most
importantly, these tribunals have been given the quasi-equal status
of High Courts in restricted areas.   Thus, the tribunals established
under  article  323A  can  still  examine  the  constitutionality  of  an
enactment or rule concerning matters on the anvil of articles 14, 15
and 16 of the Constitution.    A similar power will vest in the tribunals
created under the authority of article 323B.24
19   (1994) 1 APLJ (HC) 1
20   (1973) 4 SCC 225
21   (1993) 4 SCC 119
22   (1995) 1 SCC 400
23   Supra note 17
24   Ibid. 
44

5.5 The justification for inserting articles 323A and 323B in the
Constitution remains valid today. The pendency of cases in the High
Courts and the Supreme Court has posed an imminent danger to
the administration of justice. Therefore, there is ample scope for the
administrative tribunals. The short experience of working of these
tribunals  has  not  been  bad  although  there  is  need  for  further
improvement.  In  view  of  the  common  law  prejudice,  the
constitutionality of these tribunals created under articles 323A and
323B has been frequently impugned.   Fortunately, the Supreme
Court has upheld the objective for which these tribunals have come
into existence. Their journey from Sampath Kumar to  L. Chandra
Kumar has not been sterile.  L. Chandra Kumar  has not overruled
Sampath Kumar. It has firmly accepted the role of the administrative
tribunals in the administration of justice system.25
5.6 The Supreme Court in Sampath Kumar further elaborated this
point:
“The basic and essential feature of judicial review cannot be
dispensed  with  but  it  would  be  within  the  competence  of
Parliament to amend the Constitution so as to substitute in
place  of  the  High  Court,  another  alternative  institutional
mechanism or arrangement for judicial review, provided it is
not less efficacious than the High Court.”26
25   Ibid.
26   Supra note 7, page 130
45

5.7 Hon’ble Mr. justice Ranganath Misra, who wrote the majority
judgment in Sampath Kumar, after mentioning that judicial review by
the Supreme Court is left wholly unaffected held:
‘Thus exclusion of the jurisdiction of the High Court does not
totally bar judicial review. This court in Minerva Mills’ (case)
(AIR 1980 SC 1789) did point out that “effective alternative
institutional mechanisms or arrangements for judicial review”
can be made by Parliament. Thus it is possible to set up an
alternative institution in place of the High Court for providing
judicial review. … The Tribunal has been contemplated as a
substitute and not as supplemental to the High Court in the
scheme of administration of justice. … Thus barring of the
jurisdiction of the High Court can indeed not be a valid ground
of attack.’27
5.8 In L. Chandra Kumar, the seven-Judge Constitution Bench of
the Supreme Court considered the following broad issues:
(1) Whether the power conferred upon Parliament or the State
Legislatures, as the case may be, by sub-clause (d) of clause
(2) of Article 323A or by sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of Article
323B of the Constitution, to totally exclude the jurisdiction of
‘all courts’, except that of the Supreme Court under Article
136,  in respect  of   disputes  and  complaints  referred  to  in
clause (1) of Article 323A or with regard to all or any of the
matters specified in clause (2) of Article 323B, runs counter to
27   Ibid., pages 138-139 
46

the  power  of  judicial  review conferred  on the  High Courts
under  Articles  226/227  and  on  the  Supreme  Court  under
Article 32 of the Constitution?
(2)  Whether  the  Tribunals,  constituted  either  under  Article
323A or under Article 323B of the Constitution, possess the
competence to test the constitutional  validity of a statutory
provision/rule?
(3)  Whether  these  Tribunals,  as  they  are  functioning  at
present, can be said to be effective substitutes for the High
Courts in discharging the power of judicial review? If not, what
are  the  changes  required  to  make  them  conform  to  their
founding objectives?
5.9 The Supreme Court, on 18.03.1997, held as under:
‘… clause 2(d) of Article 323A and clause 3(d) of Article 323B, to
the extent they exclude the jurisdiction of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court under Articles 226/227 and 32 of the Constitution,
are unconstitutional. Section 28 of the Act and the “exclusion of
jurisdiction” clauses in all other legislations enacted under the aegis
of  Articles  323A  and  323B  would,  to  the  same  extent,  be
unconstitutional. The jurisdiction conferred upon the High Courts
under Articles 226/227 and upon the Supreme Court under Article
32 of the Constitution is part of the inviolable basic structure of our
Constitution. While this jurisdiction cannot be ousted, other courts
47

and Tribunals may perform a supplemental role in discharging the
powers conferred by Articles 226/227 and 32 of the Constitution.’28
5.10 It was further held: 
“The Tribunals are competent to hear matters where the vires
of  statutory  provisions  are  questioned.  However,  in
discharging this duty, they cannot act as substitutes for the
High Courts and the Supreme Court which have, under our
constitutional set-up, been specifically entrusted with such an
obligation. Their function in this respect is only supplementary
and  all  such  decisions  of  the  Tribunals  will  be  subject  to
scrutiny  before  a  Division  Bench  of  the  respective  High
Courts. The Tribunals will consequently also have the power
to  test  the  vires  of  subordinate  legislations  and  rules.
However, this power of the Tribunals will be subject to one
important  exception.  The  Tribunals  shall  not  entertain  any
question regarding the vires of their parent statutes following
the settled principle that a Tribunal which is a creature of an
Act cannot  declare  that  very Act  to  be unconstitutional.  In
such  cases  alone,  the  concerned  High  Court  may  be
approached directly. All other decisions of these  Tribunals,
rendered in cases  that  they are  specifically empowered  to
adjudicate upon by virtue of their parent statutes, will also be
subject to scrutiny before a Division Bench of their respective
High Courts. We may add that the Tribunals will, however,
continue to act as the only courts of first instance in respect of
28   Supra note 8, paragraph 101
48

the areas of law for which they have been constituted. By this,
we  mean  that  it  will  not  be  open  for  litigants  to  directly
approach the High Courts even in cases where they question
the vires of statutory legislations (except, as mentioned, where
the  legislation  which  creates  the  particular  Tribunal  is
challenged) by overlooking the jurisdiction of the concerned
Tribunal.”29 
5.11 It was also held:
“So long as the jurisdiction of the High Courts under Articles
226/227 and that of this Court under Article 32 is retained,
there  is  no  reason  why  the  power  to  test  the  validity  of
legislations against the provisions of the Constitution cannot
be conferred upon Administrative Tribunals created under the
Act  or  upon  Tribunals  created  under  Article  323B  of  the
Constitution.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  apart  from  the
authorisation that flows from Articles 323A and 323B, both
Parliament  and  the  State  Legislatures  possess  legislative
competence to effect changes in the original jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court and the High Court. This power is available to
Parliament under Entries 77, 78, 79 and 95 of List I and to the
State Legislatures under Entry 65 of List II; Entry 46 of List III
can  also  be  availed  of  both  by  Parliament  and  the  State
Legislatures for this purpose.”30  
29   Ibid., paragraph 95
30   Ibid., paragraph 82
49

The  Supreme  Court  has  also  held  that  no  individual  may
directly approach the Supreme Court in any matter decided by the
Administrative  Tribunal.  He  must  first  approach  the  High  Court
(Division Bench) and only thereafter he may approach the Supreme
Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
 
5.12 The  Supreme  Court  recommended  that  the  Union
Government may initiate action in respect of appointments/issue of
the  competence  of those  who man the tribunals,  funds  and the
question as to who is to exercise administrative supervision over
them and place all the tribunals under one single nodal department,
preferably, the Legal Department (Ministry of Law).   
5.13 As  a  result  of  this  judgment,  orders  of  the  Central
Administrative Tribunal have now routinely been appealed against in
High Courts whereas this was not the position earlier.
Implications of L. Chandra Kumar:
5.14 Professor K. C. Joshi, formerly Head of Law Department and
Dean,  Faculty  of  Law,  Kumaon  University,  has  in  his  article
‘Constitutional Status of Tribunals’31 stated:
“Administrative Tribunals provide simple, cheap and speedy
justice.  Dicey apprehended danger from such tribunals to the
liberty of subjects, but they have become a regular part of the
system  of  judicial  administration.  The  British  Parliament
31   Supra note 17 
50

enacted the Tribunals and the Inquiries Act in 1958 which has
not  been  consolidated  in  the  1971  Act.  Prior  to  the
Constitution of India 1950, administrative adjudication was in
vogue. The Constitution prior to 1973 used the word tribunal in
articles 136 and 227. In 1973, provision for the administrative
tribunals  was  specifically  made  by the  Constitution  (Thirty-
second Amendment) Act.
With the acceptance of welfare ideology, there was mushroom
growth of public services and pubic  servants.   The courts,
particularly,  the  High  Courts  were  inundated  with  cases
concerning service matters.   The Swaran Singh Committee,
therefore,  inter  alia,  recommended  the  establishment  of
administrative tribunals as a part of constitutional adjudicative
system.  Resultantly,  the  Constitution  (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976 inserted Part XIVA in the Constitution
consisting of articles 323A and 323B.   Article 323A provides
for  the  establishment  of  administrative  tribunals  for
adjudication or trial of disputes and complaints with respect to
recruitment and condition of service of persons appointed to
public services. Article 323B makes provision for the creation
of tribunals for adjudication or trial of disputes, complaints or
offences connected with tax, foreign exchange, industrial and
labour  disputes,  land  reforms,  ceiling  on  urban  property,
elections to Parliament and State Legislatures, etc. None of
these two articles is self-executory.   Parliament has exclusive
power  to  enact  a  law  under  article  323A,  while  both
51

Parliament and State Legislatures can make laws on matters
of article 323B subject to their legislative competence.’
5.15 The  opinion  expressed  by  the  Supreme  Court  about  the
retired Judges presiding the tribunals is not quite correct.  These
retired Judges are experienced people, having spent a major part of
their  life  in  adjudication  work.   They  have  decided  causes  and
controversies  coming  before  them.  They  have  collected  a  rich
experience and decision-making process.  They are well versed in
the  art  of  adjudication.   They  are  fully  conversant  with  court
processes.  They have acquired a certain expertise in dealing with
matters, civil, criminal, tax, labour and constitutional coming before
them.  In short, they represent a rich pool of talent.  
5.16 As stated earlier, in order to annihilate the monster of backlog,
a multi-pronged attack  is indispensable.  Constitution-makers had
the vision to foresee that a situation may develop where the talent of
retired Judges  will have to be enlisted  and,  therefore,  they had
made  ample  provision  in  this  behalf.   Article  224A  of  the
Constitution provides that notwithstanding anything in Chapter IV in
Part V of the Constitution, the Chief Justice of a High Court for any
State may at any time, with the previous consent of the President,
request any person who has held the office of a Judge of any High
Court, to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State, and
every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be
entitled  to  such  allowances  as  the  President  may  by  order
determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but
52

shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court.
There  is  a  proviso  which  says  that  this  power  could  only  be
exercised with the consent of the person concerned.  Rarely, if ever,
this power is invoked.
5.17 Now, in every High Court, there are numerous cases more
than five years old.  Some of them may have become obsolete;
some of them may have become irrelevant; some may have as well
abated  and  there  may  be  some  in  which  the  parties  have  lost
litigating interest sheerly on account of delay in disposal of cases.
Undoubtedly, there may be many in which the matter had to be
adjudicated upon and judgment delivered.
5.18 It is also pertinent to notice  that some State Governments
have abolished the State Administrative Tribunals. For example, the
Government of Tamil Nadu has abolished the State Administrative
Tribunal functioning at Chennai as, according to them, disposals
were minimal and not satisfactory and expensive. Therefore, the
state government servants of Tamil Nadu have to approach  the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for redressal of their
grievances, since the Tribunal has already been abolished.  So, the
High  Court  is  the  court  of  first  instance  so  far  as  the  state
government  servants  are  concerned,  whereas  the  central
government servants who live within the jurisdiction of the Central
Administrative Tribunal at Chennai have two forums to agitate their
grievances  in  regard  to  their  service  matters.  The  central
government servants, if aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal,
53

can make an air dash to the High Court and invoke its jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution for redressal.  There is an
anomaly.  The result is that central government staff at Chennai can
avail the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and also of the High Court and
then come to the Supreme Court, whereas the state government
servants  after  the  abolition  of  the  State  Administrative  Tribunal,
should  only  approach  the  High  Court  under  Article  226  of  the
Constitution,  which  case  may  be  heard  by  a  single  Judge  or
sometimes by a Division Bench.  If it is heard by a single Judge,
then the aggrieved party will have a right of appeal in the High Court
itself before a Division Bench.  Thus, the service matters will be
pending  before  the  single  Judge  and  thereafter  before  Division
Bench for years before coming to the Supreme Court.  Thus, the
state government servants of Tamil Nadu are deprived of the rule of
speedy justice.   It  is  a  matter  of  record  that  lots  of  cases  are
pending before the High Court on service matters and that the same
cannot be disposed of within a short period because of the various
other factors such as non-filling of the vacancies in the High Court
and also non-availability of infrastructure, etc. etc.
5.19 The judgment of the Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar is
also likely to lead to consequences, which are undesirable.  The
Supreme Court is not correct in its assumption that the reach and
range of the power of judicial review of the Supreme Court and that
of the High Courts are identical.   It has already been pointed out
above that the power of judicial review in India, after Kesavananda’s
54

case, covers the following three cases.  The courts have the power
to strike down the following:
i) subordinate legislation which is ultra vires the parent Act;
ii) legislations of Parliament and the State Legislatures if they
contravene the provisions of the Constitution; and
iii) the  constitutional  amendments  which  violate  the  basic
structure of the Constitution.32
5.20 The Supreme Court in  Kesavananda  for the first time in the
history of democratic Constitutions of the world, assumed to itself
the  third  power  mentioned  above,  i.e.,  the  power  to  declare
constitutional  amendments  as  unconstitutional  if  they violate  the
basic  structure  of  the  Constitution.    Some  might  feel  that  the
assumption of this power by the Supreme Court is bad enough in
the context of representative democracy.   But what is worse would
be to extend the exercise of this enormous power to the High Courts
also and after  Chandra Kumar to all manner of tribunals.   One
bizarre consequence would be that different High Courts are likely
to strike down different provisions of constitutional amendments in
different  States  and  the  Constitution  of  India  which  is  the
fundamental law of the country would be in operation in a fractured
and fragmented manner. In fact, a Division Bench of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in  Sakinala Harinath v. Andhra Pradesh has
struck down Article 323A (2) (d) which ousted the jurisdiction of the
High Courts in service matters.   Given the vagaries of unstable
32   V. Nageswara Rao and G. B. Reddy, Doctrine of Judicial Review and Tribunals:
Speed Breakers Ahead, 39 JILI 411 (1997)
55

coalition governments which depend on survival politics at any cost,
the possibility cannot be ruled out of collusive writ petitions in the
High Courts seeking the striking down of inconvenient provisions of
constitutional  amendments,  past,  present  or  future,  without  any
party seeking a further appeal to the Supreme Court conveniently.
Now,  thanks  to  the  Chandra  Kumar judgment,  these  disastrous
results can be extended to different tribunals within the same State
striking down different provisions of the constitutional amendments
on the ground of violation of the so-called basic structure of the
Constitution.33   
5.21 Thus,  as  stated  above,  the  Supreme  Court  ought  not  to
assimilate  the  judicial  review  of  the  High  Courts  to  that  of  the
Supreme Court of India with regard to the basic structure doctrine
as  propounded  in  Kesavananda.    The  Supreme  Court  should
exclusively reserve to itself the power to strike down constitutional
amendments for violating the basic structure of the Constitution.
Bestowing  this  power  on  the  High  Courts  would  create  terrible
constitutional  confusion  and  this  confusion  would  be  worse
confounded if it is further extended to all manner of tribunals.  While
the Supreme Court on one hand expressed its serious reservations
about the quality of justice dispensed by these service tribunals, the
court on the other hand was willing to distribute the power of judicial
review under  the  Kesavananda doctrine  to  all  sorts  of  tribunals
throughout the country.34
33   Ibid.
34   Ibid.
56

5.22 It  should  be  remembered  that  though  Parliament  has  the
power under Article 32(3) to confer the power of judicial review on
“other courts” without prejudice to the power of the Supreme Court
under Article 32(1), it has not done that so far even when it has
established different tribunals under different enactments. But in an
extraordinary gratuitous gesture the Supreme Court has done that
in Chandra Kumar’s case while professing to uphold the supremacy
of judicial review in the name of upholding the supremacy of the
Constitution.35
5.23 The power of judicial review of the High Courts under article
226 is not as inviolable as that of the Supreme Court under article
32. While article 32(4) preserves the supremacy of judicial review of
the Supreme Court there is no saving provision under Article 226.
Establishment of tribunals as substitutes and not supplements to
the High Courts as held by the Supreme Court in Sampath Kumar’s
case  is  perfectly  in  tune  with  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the
Constitution.36
5.24 As the Supreme Court itself observed in  Chandra Kumar’s
case, the establishment of tribunals system was necessitated by
certain compelling circumstances like the need for expert bodies to
deal with specialized categories of dispute settlement, the need for
cutting down delays in the justice delivery modalities, and docket
explosion in the ordinary courts of the land. The very purpose and
35   Ibid.
36   Ibid.
57

rationale of those tribunals would be defeated if all those cases
have to go before the concerned High Courts again.37
5.25 It is too late in the day to go back to Dicey’s puritanical view of
Rule  of  Law  vis-à-vis  Droit  Administratif.  Establishment  of
Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  mechanism  is  now  universally
accepted in common law as well as continental legal systems and
also in other jurisdictions. In L. Chandra Kumar, the Supreme Court
was justifiably perturbed over the functioning and quality of justice
dispensed by the tribunals. The composition of the tribunals also
needs particular attention. There is no doubt, that many remedial
measures have to be taken regarding the composition, qualifications
and mode of appointment of members of the tribunals as well as the
judges of different High Courts and of the Supreme Court.38
6. THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL ACT 2007
6.1 The Armed Forces Tribunal Act 2007 (No. 55 of 2007) has recently
reached  the  Statute  Book.  In  all  essential  features,  it  has  copied  its
precursor viz. the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985. The Supreme Court
in Prithi Pal Singh v. UOI39 had emphasized the need of an independent
appellate forum for the armed forces. The Law Commission of India in its
169th  Report  on  ‘Amendment  of  the Army,  Navy  and  Air  Force Acts’
37   Ibid.
38   Ibid.
39   AIR 1982 SC 1413
58

(1999) also recommended establishment of an Armed Forces Appellate
Tribunal. 
6.2 The Armed  Forces  Tribunal  Bill  2005  was  introduced  in
Parliament to provide for the adjudication or trial by Armed Forces
Tribunal of disputes and complaints with respect to commission,
appointments,  enrolment  and  conditions  of  service  in respect  of
persons subject to the Army Act 1950, the Navy Act 1957 and the
Air Force Act 1950 and also to provide for appeals arising out of
orders, findings or sentences of court-martial held under the said
Acts and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
6.3 Chapter 5 of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act 2007 deals with
appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court.   Sub-section  (1)  of  section  30
provides that an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court against the
final decision or order of the Tribunal (other than an order passed
under  section  19) within a period of 90 days.  Section  30(1) is
subject to the provisions of section 31.  It also provides that there
shall be no appeal against an interlocutory order of the Tribunal and
that as provided in sub-section (2) of section 30, an appeal shall lie
to the Supreme Court as of right against any order or decision of the
Tribunal in the exercise of its jurisdiction to punish for contempt
which  shall  be  filed  within  60  days  from  the  date  of  the  order
appealed against.  Section 31 clearly says that an appeal to the
Supreme Court shall lie with the leave of the Tribunal and such
leave shall not be granted unless it is certified by the Tribunal that a
point of law of general public importance is involved in the decision,
59

or it appears to the Supreme Court that the point is one which ought
to be considered by that Court.  Section 33 excludes the jurisdiction
of civil courts in relation to service matters under this Act.
6.4 Section 6(1) of the 2007 Act provides that a person shall not
be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he is a retired
Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High
Court and as per section 6(2) a person shall not be qualified for
appointment as a Judicial Member unless he is or has been a Judge
of a High Court. An Administrative Member will be drawn from the
Forces, holding the rank of Major General/above or equivalent who
have served at least three years in that rank and in case of Judge
Advocate General at least one year, according to  section 6(3). 
6.5 Section 7 provides that the Chairperson and Members shall
be appointed by the President with the consultation of the Chief
Justice of India.
6.6 On  the  exclusion  of  jurisdiction  of  civil  courts,  section  33
reads:
“On and from the date from which any jurisdiction, powers and
authority becomes exercisable by the Tribunal in relation to
service matters under this Act, no Civil Court shall have, or be
entitled  to exercise,  such jurisdiction,  power or authority in
relation to those service matters.”
60

6.7 It may be mentioned here that as per article 136(2) of the
Constitution, the provisions of article 136(1) pertaining to special
leave to appeal by the Supreme Court are not applicable to any
judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any
court  or tribunal  constituted  by or under any law relating to the
Armed Forces. Similarly, article 227(4) of the Constitution provides
that nothing in article 227 shall be deemed to confer on a High
Court  powers  of  superintendence  over  any  court  or  tribunal
constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces. 
6.8 We may also beneficially record the Statement of Objects and
Reasons of the Armed Forces Tribunal Bill 2005, which reads thus:
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The existing system of administration of justice in the
Army  and  Air  Force  provides  for  submission  of  statutory
complaints against grievances relating to service matters and
pre  and  post  confirmation  petitions  to  various  authorities
against the findings and sentences of courts-martial.  In Navy,
an aggrieved person has a right to submit a complaint relating
to service matters and has a right  of audience  before the
Judge Advocate General in the Navy in regard to the finding
and sentence of a court-martial before the same are finally put
up to the Chief of the Naval Staff.
2.  Having regard to the fact that a large number of
cases  relating  to  service  matters  of  the  members  of  the
above-mentioned  three  armed  forces  of  Union  have  been
pending  in  the  courts  for  a  long  time,  the  question  of
constituting  an  independent  adjudicatory  forum  for  the
Defence personnel has been engaging the attention of the
Central  Government  for  quite  some  time.  In  1982,  the
Supreme Court in Prithi Pal Singh v. Union of India and others
(AIR 1982 SC 1413) held that the absence of even one appeal
61

with power to review evidence, legal formulation, conclusion
and adequacy or otherwise of punishment in the laws relating
to the armed forces was a distressing and glaring lacuna and
urged the Government to take steps to provide for at least one
judicial review in service matters.  The Estimates Committee
of the Parliament in their 19th Report presented to the Lok
Sabha on 20th August, 1992 had desired that the Government
should constitute an independent statutory Board or Tribunal
for service personnel.
3.  In view of the above, it is proposed to enact a new
legislation by constituting an Armed Forces Tribunal for the
adjudication  of  complaints  and  disputes  regarding  service
matters and appeals arising out of the verdicts of the courts-
martial of the members of the three services (Army, Navy and
Air Force) to provide for quicker and less expensive justice to
the members of the said Armed Forces of the Union.
4.   Establishment  of  an  independent  Armed  Forces
Tribunal will fortify the trust and confidence amongst members
of the three services in the system of dispensation of justice in
relation to their service matters.
5.  The Bill seeks to provide a judicial appeal on points
of law and facts against the verdicts of courts-martial which is
a  crying  need  of  the  day  and  lack  of  it  has  often  been
adversely  commented  upon  by  the  Supreme  Court.  The
Tribunal  will  oust  the  jurisdiction  of  all  courts  except  the
Supreme Court whereby resources  of the Armed Forces in
terms  of  manpower,  material  and  time  will  be  conserved
besides  resulting  in  expeditious  disposal  of  the  cases  and
reduction  in  the  number  of  cases  pending  before  various
courts.  Ultimately, it will result in speedy and less expensive
dispensation  of  justice  to  the  Members  of  the  above-
mentioned three Armed Forces of the Union.
6.  The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
7.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
62

NEW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE
The 15th December, 2005”
6.9 A careful perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons
would  clearly  reveal  that  the  Armed  Forces  Tribunal  has  been
founded to provide for quicker and less expensive justice to the
members  of  the  said  Armed  Forces  of  the  Union  and  that  the
establishment of an independent Armed Forces Tribunal will fortify
the  trust  and  confidence  amongst  the  members  of  the  three
services in the system of dispensation of justice in relation to their
service matters.  Another important feature to be noted is that the
Act seeks to provide for an appeal on points of law of general public
importance against verdicts of the courts-martial, which is the crying
need of the day and lack of it has often been adversely commented
upon by the Supreme Court.  It is also specifically provided that the
Tribunal will oust the jurisdiction of all courts except the Supreme
Court,  whereby  resources  of  the  Armed  Forces  in  terms  of
manpower, material and time will be conserved besides resulting in
expeditious disposal of the cases and reduction in the number of
cases pending before various courts and that it ultimately will result
in  speedy  and  less  expensive  dispensation  of  justice  to  the
members of the three Armed Forces of the Union.
6.10 It may be mentioned that the decisions rendered/recorded by
the Tribunal constituted under the Armed Forces Tribunal Act 2007
can only be challenged by way of Special Leave Petition in the
Supreme  Court.   When  finality  is  possible  to  be  suggested  in
service matters relating to Armed Forces, a differential treatment
63

need not be continued to the Administrative Tribunal when it deals
with  issues  of  civil  servants.   It  would  be  possible  to  suitably
incorporate an amendment in article 227(4) of the Constitution by
including the Central Administrative Tribunal side by side with the
Armed Forces Tribunal.  As long as it is ensured that the Supreme
Court continues to enjoy the appellate jurisdiction in respect of the
orders  passed  by  the  Administrative  Tribunal  in  original  and
appellate jurisdiction by way of intra-tribunal appeal, for imaginary
or historical reasons, the dockets of the High Court need not be
exploded  by  a  barrage  of  writ  petitions  from  the  Administrative
Tribunals.
7. ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS - ESSENTIAL
7.1 The reasons for which the Administrative Tribunals were constituted
still persist; indeed, those reasons have become more pronounced in our
times. We have already indicated that our Constitutional scheme permits
setting up of such tribunals.40
7.2 In respect of the grave concern with the increasing pendency
of  litigation  before  the  High  Courts,  the  theory  of  ‘alternative
institutional mechanisms’ has also been propounded to defend the
establishment  of  Administrative  Tribunals.  These  Administrative
Tribunals are expected to function as a viable substitute for the High
Courts.
40   Supra note 8, paragraph 91
64

7.3 As per the statistics furnished to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee41 by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions,  from  the  period  1.11.85  to  28.02.06,  the  total  cases
instituted in the Central Administrative Tribunal were 470365, those
disposed of were 446369 and those pending were 23996. Taking
into  account  the  excellent  rate  of  disposal  of  the  cases,  the
Committee  found  no  coherent  reason  to  favour  the  abolition  of
Administrative Tribunals. The Committee noted that the record of
disposal of cases of Administrative Tribunals has been excellent as
compared to that of the subordinate courts and High Courts. The
abolition of the Administrative Tribunals will increase the pending
cases in the High Courts whereby speedy justice will be denied to
the citizens by putting additional burden on the High Courts. After
detailed discussion, the Committee unanimously opined as under: 
“… if an appeal is to be provided, it should be provided to
the Supreme Court only.”42
7.4      Further, the Committee noted with grave concern that the High
Courts are already overburdened with huge number of pending cases…..
there are approximately 34 lakh cases pending before High Courts.43
7.5 Hon’ble  Mr.  Justice  V.  S.  Malimath  stressed  before  the
Committee as under:
41   Supra note 2, paragraph 11.17
42   Ibid., paragraph 13.5
43   Ibid., paragraph 13.8
65

“……..Parliament enacted Article 323A to provide for special
Tribunals for the purpose of hearing specialized matters like
service matters on two grounds.  One is, High Court is so
much burdened with other types of works and, therefore, it is
not possible for it to expeditiously dispose of service matters. 
Second is, service matters need an amount of specialization
and, therefore, an element of experience of service matters is
necessary.  Therefore, specialized tribunals were constituted
excluding the jurisdiction of all courts of the country including
the High Court.  If these cases are pending for a long time, the
Government  servant,  who  is  expected  to  assist  in
administration,  will  go  on  lingering  before  courts  and  his
service will be affected.  With this heart, will he be able to do
work  in  the  Government?  So,  expeditious  disposal  is
necessary from the point of view of administration and that is
the intention, and that is what has been debated when Article
323A was enacted.”44
7.6 The Committee took note of the fact that the Hon’ble Supreme
Court has made it amply clear that the Tribunals will continue to act
as the only courts of first instance in respect of the areas of law for
which they have been constituted and that it will not be open for
litigants to directly approach the High Courts even in cases where
they question the vires of statutory legislations. The Committee was
of the considered opinion that since the apex Court has upheld the
necessity of Administrative Tribunals in such clear terms, there is no
iota  of  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that  Administrative  Tribunals  are
44   Ibid., paragraph 13.13
66

absolutely  essential  for  the  speedy  redressal  of  grievances  of
Government employees.
7.7 Hon’ble Mr. Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, the Chief Justice of
India, has expressed the view that in the light of L.Chandra Kumar
decision, it is desirable to continue with the administrative tribunals,
despite the power of the High Courts to scrutinize their decisions.45
 
7.8 The High Court is at the apex of the State Judicial apparatus.
Unless  the  base  level,  where  litigation  is  initiated  and  vertically
moves upward to the High Court by way of appeal or revision, is re-
structured  and  this  proliferating  appellate  jurisdiction  is  either
controlled or curtailed, the inflow of work in the High Court would
neither  be  regulated  nor  diminished.   The  Law  Commission
expressed the view that, wherever possible, proliferating appellate
and  wide  original  jurisdiction  should  be  controlled  or  curtailed
without  impairing  the  quality  of  justice.  The  approach  of  the
Commission is to reduce number of appeals, to set up specialist
courts/tribunals,  simultaneously  eliminating  the  jurisdiction  of  the
High Court.46
7.9 On the issue of delay which continues to affect the system in
the matter of resolution of service disputes, it has been generally
noted that the disposal of the applications before the Administrative
Tribunal always has been expeditious and hardly there is pendency
45   Keynote address at the inaugural session of the ‘All India Conference of the Central
Administrative Tribunal’ held at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi, on 2nd August 2008
46   Supra pages 17-18
67

of old cases in most of the Benches. But, because orders of the
Administrative Tribunal are subjected to challenge before the High
Courts  and  thereafter  some  matters  are  taken  to  the  Supreme
Court, ultimate remedy comes only at late stages, thus effectively
defeating  the  very  purpose  of  constituting  the  Administrative
Tribunals. 
7.10 When the Armed Forces Tribunal Act 2007 is a reality, members
participating in the Conference47 were of opinion that the Administrative
Tribunals Act could be suitably amended in line with the prescriptions of
the  latest  Act  of  the  Parliament.    Thus  an  amendment  of  the
Administrative  Tribunals  Act  and  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution
would result in tremendous changes for the good.
7.11 The Law Commission is of the view that Administrative Tribunals
are a valuable and indeed an essential part of adjudicatory system of a
democratic State. The tribunals have come to stay. Special tribunals are
likely to grow rather than diminish.
 
7.12 In view of the enhanced minimum required qualifications of
Chairman,  Members  –  Judicial/Administrative,  in  particular,
Administrative, and giving the status of Chief Justice of High Court
to the Chairman, and that of Judges of High Court to Members –
Judicial/Administrative, the best persons available in the judiciary
and  administration  are  now attracted  and  are  being  accordingly
47   Supra note 45
68

selected to occupy the respective posts, as mentioned above.  The
Tribunal is thus now manned by persons having vast experience in
judiciary and administration, resulting not only into quick disposal of
cases, but quality judgments as well.  In the beginning when the Act
of 1985 came into being and cases came to be disposed of by the
Tribunal, there may have been an impression that Members of the
Tribunal may not be having legal expertise to deal with intricate
questions of law and fact.  With the advent of time, the situation has
improved vastly and speedy and quality justice dispensed by the
Tribunal has come for appreciation by all.  
8. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
8.1 The impression that the Tribunal constituted under the Act of
1985 may be dependent upon the Government is misconceived.
The  functioning  of  the  Tribunal  is  not  at  all  controlled  by  the
Government,  in  any  manner  whatsoever.  The  Chairman,  Vice-
Chairmen and Members – Judicial/Administrative, are discharging
their duties similarly as are being discharged by higher judiciary in
the country.  However, to allay the apprehension that the Tribunal
may  be  controlled  in  certain  matters  by  the  Government,  the
Chairman of the Tribunal can be given powers akin to that of Chief
Justice of a High Court.  In that connection, a provision in the Act of
69

1985, similar  to the one as article  229 of the Constitution, with
regard to laying down conditions of service of employees of the
Tribunal can be vested with the Chairman.  More independence in
financial matters, as enjoyed by the Chief Justice of a High Court
can be vested with the Chairman of the Tribunal.  Nodal Ministry for
the Tribunal can be Ministry of Law and Justice, instead of Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
8.2 We feel that if there may be an impression that there has to
be at least one appeal provided against the orders passed by the
Tribunal before the matter may reach the Supreme Court, intra-
tribunal appeal, similar to the one provided in every High Court
either  by way of letters  patent  appeal or a writ appeal, can be
provided  under  the  Act  of  1985  itself.   By  way  of  suitable
amendment thus brought about in the Act of 1985, a provision for
intra-tribunal appeal can be made so that an order passed by a
single  Member  Bench  would  be  amenable  to  appeal  before  a
Division  Bench,  and  the  decision  of  a  Division  Bench  can  be
challenged before a Bench consisting of three or more Members.
Four zones in the country, viz., North, East, West, and South, can
be made where the appeals from various Benches may be filed.
This may only involve creation of, at the most, eight to ten posts of
Members  in  the  Tribunal.   After  the  decision  recorded  by  an
appellate Bench, the matter can be taken to the Supreme Court by
way of special leave petition.
70

8.3 A  Judge,  sitting  or  retired,  is  eligible  to  be  appointed  as
Chairman in view of the provisions contained in section 6 of the Act
of  1985.   However,  by  tradition  and  practice,  considering  the
importance of functions entrusted to the Tribunal, a Chief Justice of
High Court, sitting or retired, is appointed as Chairman.  The first
seven Chairmen appointed since 1985 were all sitting or former
Chief Justices of High Courts.  Only for a brief period, two Chairmen
thereafter were not Chief Justices of High Courts.  Presently, the
Chairman is also former Chief Justice.  It is, however, learnt that an
order by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India on the administrative side
has been passed that the post of Chairman of the Tribunal would be
always occupied by a sitting or former Chief Justice of High Court.
A suitable amendment in section 6 of the Act of 1985 can be made
to make only a sitting or former Chief Justice of High Court or Judge
of the Supreme Court to be qualified for appointment as Chairman.  
8.4 The Parliamentary Standing Committee48 expressed the view: 
“….Maybe, a retired judge of the Supreme Court can preside
over.  And, maybe, other member could be from the judiciary;
not from the district judges, but from the level of High Courts,
we can keep one.  And, then, the third and fourth members
can be from the administration so that the dignity and strength
of the tribunal is enhanced to that extent.”
48   Supra note 2, paragraph 11.10
71

8.5 The Law Commission is of the opinion that  in view of the
circumstances  stated  in  previous  chapters,  the  subject  definitely
requires the attention of the Government of India and the State
Governments and that the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in  L. Chandra Kumar’s case requires reconsideration by a larger
Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  interest  of  the  government
servants, both Central and the State, to achieve the object of the
Act, namely, speedy and less expensive justice. If this proposal is
taken up in the right perspective, it will not only reduce the heavy
expenditure by way of fees etc. to the counsel and also the time. 
    
8.6 The  Law  Commission,  therefore,  recommends  to  the
Government  of  India  to  request  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  to
reconsider L. Chandra Kumar’s case. In the alternative, necessary
and appropriate amendments  in the Administrative Tribunals Act
1985 may be effected in accordance with law.
                 
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
            Chairman
(Prof. Dr  Tahir Mahmood)                     (Dr Brahm A.
Agrawal)
Member                      Member-Secretary
72