 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW  COMMISSION OF INDIA
Irretrievable Breakdown of Marriage – 
Another Ground for Divorce
Report No. 217
March 2009

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 217)
Irretrievable Breakdown of Marriage –
Another Ground for Divorce
Forwarded  to  the  Union  Minister  for  Law  and
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of
India  by Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,  Chairman,
Law Commission of India, on  the    30th     day of
March, 2009. 
2

The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the
16th October,  2006,  issued  by the Government of
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh :Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as
Government copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor,
ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001,
India or by  email to lci-dla@nic.in  
5

D.O. No. 6(3)/155/2009-LC (LS)      30th March, 2009
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji,
Subject: Irretrievable Breakdown of Marriage – 
                 Another Ground for Divorce
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  217th Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject. 
Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 provides grounds
for presentation of a petition for divorce.  Section 27 of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 similarly provides grounds for grant of divorce in
the case of a marriage solemnized under the Act.  However, the said
Acts  do  not  provide  “irretrievable  breakdown  of  marriage”  as  a
ground for divorce. The Law Commission of India in its 71st Report
titled  “The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 - Irretrievable Breakdown of
Marriage as a Ground of  Divorce”  recommended amendments in
the Hindu Marriage Act to make irretrievable breakdown of marriage
as a new ground for granting divorce among the Hindus. Recently,
the Supreme Court also in Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli (AIR 2006 SC
1675)  recommended  to  the  Union  of  India  to  seriously  consider
bringing  an  amendment  in  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955  to
6

incorporate irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a ground for the
grant of divorce.
 In view of the above, the Law Commission of India suo motu
took  up the study of the subject. The Commission examined the
extant legislations as well as a number of judgments of the Supreme
Court  and  High  Courts  on  the  subject  and  is  of  the  view  that
“irretrievable  breakdown  of  marriage”  should  be  incorporated  as
another  ground for granting divorce under the provisions of  the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954. The
Court before granting a decree for divorce on the ground that the
marriage has irretrievably broken down should also examine whether
adequate financial arrangements have been made for the parties and
children.
 
The Commission has accordingly made its recommendations in
this Report.      
With warm regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001.  
7

Irretrievable Breakdown of Marriage – 
Another Ground for Divorce
Table of Contents
PAGE NO.
 
 I. INTRODUCTION                                         9-
11    
 
II. JUDICIAL VIEW/SUGGESTIONS             12-
22
III. RECOMMENDATION                                 23
 
8

 I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Whenever the question of inclusion of irretrievable breakdown
of marriage as a ground for divorce is mooted, the opponents argue
that “divorce by mutual consent” introduced in the Hindu Marriage
Act in 1976 more than covers the situation.  It is important to note
that “mutual consent” requires the consent of both the parties and if
one or the other does not cooperate, the said ground is not available.
‘Irretrievable breakdown of marriage’, on the other hand, is a ground
which the Court can examine and if the Court, on the facts of the
case,  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  marriage  cannot  be
repaired/saved, divorce can be granted.  The grant of divorce is not
dependent on the volition of the parties but on the Court coming to
the  conclusion,  on  the  facts  pleaded,  that  the  marriage  has
irretrievably broken down.
1.2 Irretrievable  breakdown  of marriage- The foundation  of  a
sound marriage is tolerance, adjustment and respecting one
another.   Tolerance to each other’s fault to a certain bearable
extent has to be inherent in every marriage.  Petty quibbles,
trifling differences should not be exaggerated and magnified to
destroy  what  is  said  to  have  been  made  in  heaven.    All
9

quarrels must be weighed from that point of view in determining
what constitutes  cruelty in  each  particular  case  and  always
keeping  in  view  the  physical  and  mental  conditions  of  the
parties, their character and social status.  A too technical and
hypersensitive  approach  would  be  counter-productive  to  the
institution of marriage.  The Courts do not have to deal with
ideal husbands and ideal wives.   It has to deal with particular
man and woman before it.1
1.3 In  Naveen  Kohli  v.  Neelu  Kohli2  the  Supreme  Court
recommended to the Union of India to seriously consider bringing an
amendment  in  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955  to  incorporate
irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a ground for divorce in the
following words: 
“Before  we part  with this  case,  on the  consideration  of  the
totality of facts, this Court would like to recommend the Union
of India to seriously consider bringing an amendment in the
Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955  to  incorporate  irretrievable
breakdown of marriage as a ground for the grant of divorce. A
copy of this judgment be sent to the Secretary, Ministry of Law
& Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, Government of India for
taking appropriate steps”3
1.4 Earlier, in Ms. Jorden Diengdeh v.  S. S. Chopra4 the Supreme
Court observed:
1 Mayne’s Treatise on Hindu Law & Usage (16th Ed.) Revised by Justice Ranganath Misra (New Delhi:
Bharat Law House, 2008),  page 292.2 AIR 2006 SC 1675.3  Ibid., para 96.4  AIR  1985 SC 935.
10

“It  appears  to  be  necessary  to  introduce  irretrievable
breakdown  of  marriage  and  mutual  consent  as  grounds  of
divorce in all cases.…We suggest that the time has come for
the intervention of the legislature in those matters to provide for
a uniform code of marriage and divorce and to provide by law
for a way out of the unhappy situation in which couples like the
present have found themselves.”5
1.5 It is pertinent to notice that the Law Commission of India has
already submitted a very comprehensive 71st Report on irretrievable
breakdown of marriage as a ground of divorce.  The matter had been
taken up   by the Commission as a result of a reference made by the
Government of India. The Law Commission under the Chairmanship
of Shri Justice H. R. Khanna presented its Report on April 7, 1978.
The Report considered the suggestion and analyzed the same in
extenso. Before embarking upon further action on the suggestion that
irretrievable breakdown of marriage should be made as a ground for
divorce,  the  Law  Commission  considered  it  appropriate  to  invite
views  on  the  matter  by  issuing  a  brief  questionnaire.  The
Commission in its 71st Report have accepted in principle irretrievable
breakdown of marriage as a ground of divorce and also examined the
question as to how exactly to incorporate it into the Act and also
further examined the question  whether the introduction of such a
ground should  be coupled with any safeguards.  The Commission
also in Chapter II of the said Report considered present law under
the  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  merits  and  demerits  of  the  theory  of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage in Chapter IV and retention of
5  Ibid., para 7.
11

other grounds of divorce in Chapter V. In Chapter VI the Commission
also considered the requirement of living apart and also suggested
many  safeguards  like  welfare  of  children,  hardship  and
recommended  amendments  to  Sections  21A,  23(1)(a)  and  also
recommended insertion of new sections 13C, 13D and 13E.
1.6 In the light of the above, the Law Commission suo motu took
up the study on the subject.
II. JUDICIAL VIEW/SUGGESTIONS
2.1 A law of divorce based mainly on fault is inadequate to deal
with a broken  marriage.   Under  the  fault  theory, guilt has to be
proved;  divorce  Courts  are  presented  with  concrete  instances  of
human behaviour as bring the institution of marriage into disrepute.6
Once  the  marriage  has  broken  down  beyond  repair,  it  would  be
unrealistic for the law not to take notice of that fact, and it would be
harmful to society and injurious to the interest of the parties.   Where
there has been a long period of continuous separation, it may fairly
be  surmised  that  the  matrimonial  bond  is  beyond  repair.    The
marriage  becomes  a  fiction,  though  supported  by a  legal  tie,  by
refusing to sever that tie, the law in such cases does not serve the
sanctity of marriage; on the contrary, it shows scant regard for the
feelings and emotions of the parties.  Public interest demands not
only  that  the  married  status  should,  as  long  as  possible,  and
whenever possible, be maintained, but where a marriage has been
6  71st Report of the Law Commission of India.
12

wrecked  beyond  the  hope  of  salvage,  public  interest  lies  in  the
recognition of that fact.  Since there is no acceptable way in which a
spouse can be compelled to resume life with the consort, nothing is
gained by trying to keep the parties tied for ever to a marriage that in
fact has ceased to exist.  Human life has a short span and situations
causing misery cannot be allowed to continue indefinitely. A halt has
to be called at some stage.  Law cannot turn a blind eye to such
situations,  nor  can  it  decline  to  give  adequate  response  to  the
necessities arising therefrom.7 The Supreme Court in Naveen Kohli
vs.  Neelu Kohli8 recommended to the Union of India to seriously
consider bringing an amendment in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 to
incorporate  irretrievable  breakdown  of  marriage  as  a  ground  for
divorce. 
2.2 The irretrievable breakdown of marriage is not a ground for divorce
by  itself.   But  while  scrutinizing  the  evidence  on  record  to  determine
whether  the  grounds  on  which  divorce  is  sought  are  made  out,  the
circumstances can be taken into consideration.    No divorce can be granted
on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage if the party seeking
divorce on this ground is himself or herself at fault.  The decree of divorce
on  the  ground  that  the  marriage  has  irretrievably  broken  down  can  be
granted in those cases where both the parties have levelled such allegations
against each other that the marriage appears to be practically dead and the
parties cannot live together.  The power of the Court to grant divorce on the
ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage should be exercised with
7  Supra note 1, pages 292 – 293. 8  Supra note 2.
13

much care and caution in exceptional circumstances only in the interest of
both the parties.9 
2.3 In  Geeta  Mullick  v.  Brojo  Gopal  Mullick10 the Calcutta  High
Court held:
“In our considered opinion, the marriage between the parties
can not be dissolved by the trial Court or even by the High
Court only on the ground of marriage having been irretrievably
broken  down,  in  the  absence  of  one  or  more  grounds  as
contemplated under section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955.”11 
2.4 The concept of irretrievable breakdown of marriage cannot be
used as magic formula to obtain a decree for divorce where grounds
for divorce are not proved.
2.5 In V. Bhagat v. D. Bhagat12 the Supreme Court held :
“Irretrievable breakdown of the marriage is not a ground
for divorce by itself. But while scrutinizing the evidence on
record  to  determine  whether  the  ground(s)  alleged  is
made out and in determining the relief to be granted, the
said circumstance can certainly be borne in mind.”13 
9   Supra note 1, page 293.10 AIR 2003 Cal. 321.11 Ibid., para 7.12 AIR 1994 SC 710.
13 Ibid., para 23. 
14

2.6 The  Calcutta  High  Court  in  Tapan  Kumar  Chakraborty  v.
Jyotsna Chakraborty14 held that in a petition for divorce on a
ground as mentioned in the Hindu Marriage Act or the Special
Marriage Act, court cannot grant divorce on the mere ground of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage.   
2.7 In Kanchan  Devi  v.  Pramod  Kumar  Mittal15, however,  the
Supreme Court held:
“…the marriage between the appellant and the respondent has
irretrievably broken down and that there was no possibility of
reconciliation, we in exercise of our powers under Art. 142 of
the  Constitution  of  India  hereby  direct  that  the  marriage
between  the  appellant  and  the  respondent  shall  stand
dissolved by a decree of divorce.”16 
2.8 There  is  no  use  of  keeping  two  persons  tied  by  the  matrimonial
relationship when they cannot live peacefully.   Where wedlock has become
a deadlock, since parties are living separately, and after marriage the wife
has lived only for a few months in the matrimonial home, wife having made
allegations of cruelty and desertion against the husband and husband having
made counter-allegations against her, the court in  Krishna vs.  Som Nath17
held that marriage is irretrievably broken and it is in the interest of justice
that decree of divorce be granted so that both the parties can live in peace.
When  the  court  finds  in  facts  as  well  as  from talks  of  resettlement  or
reconciliation  between  parties  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  reunion
14 AIR 1997 Cal. 134.15 AIR 1996 SC 3192.16 Ibid., para 6.17 (1996) DMC 667 (P&H).
15

between husband and wife and refusal of decree of divorce would only
prolong the agonies of the spouses, it can dissolve the marriage on this
ground.18    Where the husband and the wife are living separately from each
other for the last 19 years and there is no chance of settlement between the
parties  a  decree  for  divorce  can  be  granted.19 Where  there  was  no
consummation  of  marriage,  wife  being  adverse  to  cohabitation,  wife
disobeyed instructions of the court to undergo medical examination to prove
that marriage had not consummated, there was indecent behaviour of wife to
her in-laws reflecting her mental imbalance, and the parties have been living
separately  for  a  period  of  16  years  without  any  serious  attempt  for
reconciliation, a decree dissolving the marriage would be proper.20 
2.9 The  Supreme  Court  in  Savitri  Pandey v.  Prem  Chandra
Pandey21 held that  marriage between  the parties  cannot  be
dissolved only on the averments made by one of the parties
that as the marriage between them has broken down, no useful
purpose would be served to keep it alive.  The legislature, in its
wisdom,  despite  observation of the  Supreme  Court  has not
thought it proper to provide for dissolution of the marriage on
such averments.   There may be cases where it is found that as
the marriage has become dead on account of contributory acts
of commission and omission of the parties, no useful purpose
would be served by keeping such marriage alive. The sanctity
of marriage cannot be left at the whims of one of the annoying
spouses. 
18 Ashok v. Rupa, 1996 (2) HLR 512 (Guj).19 Shankar v. Puspita, AIR 2005 Jhar. 92.20 Rita v. Trilokesh, AIR 2007 Gau.122. 21 AIR 2002 SC 591.
16

2.10 In  Vinita  Saxena v.  Pankaj  Pandit22, the  marriage  between
Vinita Saxena and her husband Pankaj Pandit was dissolved by an
order of  the  Supreme  Court.   The marriage  between  the  parties
lasted only for five months.  Both of them were living separately for
over 13 years.  Marriage also was not consummated.   Wife filed a
petition for the dissolution of marriage on the ground of physical and
mental cruelty and insanity on the part of the husband.  Trial court
however dismissed  the  petition.    High Court also  dismissed  the
appeal despite the failure of the husband to appear before the court.
Allowing the appeal of the wife, a division bench of the Supreme
Court speaking through Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan ( as he then
was ) held that the orders of the courts below had resulted in grave
miscarriage of justice to the wife who had been constrained into living
with a dead relationship for over 13 years and that the fact situation
clearly showed that the husband and wife can never ever stay as
husband and wife and the wife’s stay with the respondent husband
would be injurious to her health.  Accordingly, a decree of divorce
was granted in favour of the wife against the husband. The Court
held as follows:
“36.  As  to  what  constitute  the  required  mental  cruelty  for
purposes  of  the  said  provision,  will  not  depend  upon  the
numerical count of such incidents or only on the continuous
course of such conduct but really go by the intensity, gravity
and stigmatic impact of it when meted out even once and the
deleterious  effect of it on the mental attitude, necessary for
maintaining a conducive matrimonial home.
22  JT 2006 (3) SC 587.
17

37. If the taunts, complaints and reproaches are of ordinary
nature  only,  the  court  perhaps  need  consider  the  further
question as to whether their continuance or persistence over a
period of time render, what normally would, otherwise, not be
so serious an act to be so injurious and painful as to make the
spouse charged with them genuinely and reasonably conclude
that the maintenance of matrimonial home is not possible any
longer.
……
44. Spouses owe rights and duties each to the other and in
their relationship they must act reasonably.   In every case
where cruelty exists it is possible to say that the spouse at fault
has been unreasonable.  The list of cruelty, therefore, should
be reach of the duty to act reasonably, whether in omission or
commission,  causing  injury  to  health.   Such  a  list  avoids
imputing an intention where in fact none may exist.  Further all
such matters are foresight, desires, wishes, intention, motives,
perception,  obtuseness,  persistence  and  indifference  would
remain relevant but merely as matter of evidence bearing upon
the  requirement  to  act reasonably or  as  aggravation  of the
matters charged.
….
49. Humane aspects which this Court should consider:
- The appellant was 24 years of age when she got married.
- The marriage lasted for four to five months only when she
was compelled to leave the matrimonial home.
18

- The marriage between the parties was not consummated as
the respondent was not in a position to fulfil the matrimonial
obligation.
- The  parties  have been  living separately since  1993.   13
years have passed they have never seen each other.
- Both the parties have crossed the point of no return.
- A workable solution is certainly not possible.
- Parties at this stage cannot reconcile themselves and live
together forgetting their past as a bad dream.
- Parties  have been  fighting  the  legal battle from  the  year
1994.
- The situation between the parties would lead to a irrefutable
conclusion that the appellant and the respondent can never
ever stay as husband and wife and the wife’s stay with the
respondent is injurious to her health.
- The  appellant  has  done  her  Ph.D.    The  respondent,
according  to  the  appellant,  is  not  gainfully  employed
anywhere.
- As a matter of fact, after leaving his deposition incomplete
during the trial, the respondent till date has neither appeared
before the trial court nor before the High Court.
50. The facts and circumstances of the case as well as all
aspects  pertain  to  humanity  and  life  would  give  sufficient
cogent  reasons  for  us  to  allow  the  appeal  and  relieve  the
appellant from shackles and chain of the respondent and let
her live her own life, if nothing less but like a human being.”
19

2.11 In Samar Ghosh vs Jaya Ghosh23 the Supreme Court referred
to the 71st Report of the Law Commission of India on "Irretrievable
Breakdown  of Marriage" with approval as follows:
“90. We have examined and referred to the cases from the various
countries. We find strong basic similarity in adjudication  of cases
relating to mental cruelty in matrimonial matters. Now, we deem it
appropriate to deal with the 71st Report of the Law Commission of
India on "Irretrievable Breakdown of Marriage".
91. The 71st Report of the Law Commission of India briefly dealt with
the concept of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. This Report was
submitted to the Government on 7th April, 1978. In this Report, it is
mentioned that during last 20 years or so, and now it would be around
50  years,  a  very  important  question  has  engaged  the  attention  of
lawyers,  social  scientists  and  men  of  affairs,  should  the  grant  of
divorce be based on the fault of the party, or should it be based on the
breakdown of the marriage? The former is known as the matrimonial
offence theory or fault theory. The latter has come to be known as the
breakdown  theory.  It  would  be  relevant  to  recapitulate
recommendation of the said Report.
92. In the Report, it is mentioned that the germ of the breakdown
theory, so  far as Commonwealth  countries  are concerned,  may be
found  in the legislative  and  judicial  developments  during  a much
earlier period. The (New Zealand) Divorce and Matrimonial Causes
Amendment Act, 1920, included for the first time the provision that a
separation  agreement  for  three  years  or  more  was  a  ground  for
making a petition to the court for divorce and the court was given a
discretion (without guidelines) whether to grant the divorce or not.
The  discretion  conferred  by  this  statute  was  exercised  in  a  case
Lodder v. Lodder (1921 New Zealand Law Reports 786). Salmond J.,
in  a  passage  which  has  now  become  classic,  enunciated  the
breakdown principle in these words:
23  (2007) 4 SCC 511.
20

‘The Legislature must, I think, be taken to have intended
that separation for three years is to be accepted by this
Court, as prima facie a good ground for divorce. When
the  matrimonial  relation  has  for  that  period ceased  to
exist de facto, it should, unless there are special reasons
to the contrary, cease to exist de jure also. In general, it
is not in the interests of the parties or in the interest of the
public  that  a  man  and  woman  should  remain  bound
together as husband and wife in law when for a lengthy
period they have ceased to be such in fact. In the case of
such  a  separation  the  essential  purposes  of  marriage
have been frustrated, and its further  continuance is in
general not merely useless but mischievous.’
93. In the said Report, it is mentioned that restricting the ground of
divorce  to  a  particular  offence  or  matrimonial  disability,  causes
injustice in those cases where the situation is such that although none
of the parties is at fault, or the fault is of such a nature that the parties
to the marriage do not want to divulge it, yet such a situation has
arisen in which the marriage cannot survive. The marriage has all the
external appearances of marriage, but none in reality. As is often put
pithily, the marriage is merely a shell out of which the substance is
gone. In such circumstances, it is stated, there is hardly any utility in
maintaining the marriage as a facade, when the emotional and other
bonds which are of the essence of marriage have disappeared.
94. It is also mentioned in the Report that in case the marriage has
ceased to exist in substance  and in reality, there is no reason for
denying  divorce,  then  the  parties  alone  can  decide  whether  their
mutual relationship provides the fulfilment which they seek. Divorce
should be seen as a solution and an escape route out of a difficult
situation. Such divorce is unconcerned with the wrongs of the past,
but is concerned with bringing the parties and the children to terms
with the new situation and developments by working out the most
satisfactory basis upon which they may regulate their relationship in
the changed circumstances.
95. Once the parties have separated and the separation has continued
for  a  sufficient  length  of  time  and  one  of  them  has  presented  a
21

petition for divorce, it can well be presumed that the marriage has
broken  down.  The  court,  no  doubt,  should  seriously  make  an
endeavour  to  reconcile  the  parties;  yet,  if  it  is  found  that  the
breakdown is irreparable, then divorce should not be withheld. The
consequences  of  preservation  in  law  of  the  unworkable  marriage
which has long ceased to be effective are bound to be a source of
greater misery for the parties.”
2.12  Similarly, in Sanghamitra Ghosh vs Kajal Kumar Ghosh24 the
Supreme Court while referring to its earlier decision in Ashok Hurra v
Rupa  Bipin  Zaveri25,  also  reproduced  some  excerpts  from  the
aforesaid 71st Report of the Law Commission.
2.13 As stated earlier, the recent decision of the Apex Court in the
case of Naveen Kohli vs. Neelu Kohli26 fully establishes the need for
immediate  amendment  of  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act  to  incorporate
‘irretrievable breakdown of marriage’ as a ground for grant of divorce.
The Court in that case was dealing with a case where the parties
were living separately for ten years.   There were, during this period,
many  proceedings  between  the  parties,  mostly  by  the  wife.
Allegations of misconduct were made on both sides, maintenance
was demanded and paid and the proceedings lingered on causing
deep anxiety and frustration to both sides.  The husband filed for
divorce on the ground available – cruelty.  The Trial Court granted
him relief but the High Court turned down the divorce petition on the
ground that the conduct of the wife did not fall within the parameters
of ‘cruelty’ as defined in various judgments.   The husband was back
24  (2007) 2 SCC 220.25  (1997) 4 SCC 226.26  Supra note 2.
22

to square one. On appeal, the Supreme Court granted him relief.
This was a classic case of consent being withheld by a spouse just
for harassing the other spouse.  The Court recommended to the
Union of India to seriously consider bringing an amendment in the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 to incorporate ‘irretrievable breakdown of
marriage’ as a ground for grant of divorce.  
2.14 It  would  also  be  in  the  fitness  of  things  that  the  Special
Marriage  Act,  1954,  which  deals  with  the  civil marriages,  is  also
considered for an amendment on similar lines. 
III. RECOMMENDATION
3.1 It is, therefore, suggested that immediate action be taken to
introduce an amendment in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the
Special Marriage Act, 1954 for inclusion of ‘irretrievable breakdown
of marriage’ as another ground for grant of divorce.
23

3.2 The  amendment  may  also  provide  that  the  court  before
granting a decree for divorce on the ground that the marriage has
irretrievably broken  down should  also  examine  whether  adequate
financial arrangements have been made for the parties and children.
3.3 We recommend accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood)                  (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal)
Member                                   Member-Secretary
24