 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Need to accede to the Hague Convention on
the  Civil  Aspects  of  International  Child
Abduction (1980)
Report No. 218
March 2009

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 218)
Need to accede to the Hague Convention on the
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
(1980)
Forwarded  to  the  Union  Minister  for  Law  and
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of
India  by Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,  Chairman,
Law Commission of India, on  the     30th    day of
March, 2009. 
2

The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the
16th October,  2006,  issued  by the Government of
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh :  Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as
Government copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor,
ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001,
India or by  email to lci-dla@nic.in  
5

D.O. No. 6(3)/136/2007-LC (LS)        30th
March, 2009
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji,
Subject: Need to accede to the Hague Convention on
the Civil Aspects of International Child
Abduction (1980)  
I am forwarding herewith the 218th Report of the Law
Commission of India on the above subject.
 
Statistics show that the number of divorce cases and custody
disputes has increased ever since the advent of globalization and
technological development leading to a very busy life-style and work
culture.  The international parental child abduction/child removal finds
its root here.
International  parental  child  abduction  or  removal  can  be
defined as the removal of a child by one parent from one country to
another without the approval of the other parent.  Child removal, in
this context, encompasses an interference with the parental rights or
right to contact with the removed child.  These acts by a parent when
brought before a court of law have in the past created considerable
amount of confusion specifically in the area of competence of courts
with regard to jurisdictional aspects.
 
The  international  community  acted  to  solve  this  crisis  by
adopting on October 25, 1980 an International Convention on the
Civil  Aspects  of  International  Child  Abduction  which  entered  into
force on December 1, 1983.
6

Many States of the world (81) have become signatory to this
Convention.  Some  States  like  Australia  have  brought  about
amendments  in  their  family  law  legislations  to  make  the  Hague
Convention  operative  in  their  nation.   India,  however,  is  not  a
signatory  to  this  Convention.  The  time  has  come  for  some
international perspective in this regard. The fact of India not being a
signatory  to  the  Hague  Convention  on  the  Civil  Aspects  of
International Child Abduction may have a negative influence on a
foreign judge who is deciding on the custody of a child.  Without the
guarantee afforded by the Hague Convention to the effect that the
child will be swiftly returned to the country of origin, the foreign judge
may be reluctant to give permission for the child to travel to India.  As
a  logical  upshot,  India  should  become  a  signatory  to  the  Hague
Convention and this will, in turn, bring the prospect of achieving the
return to India of children who have their homes in India.
The Commission is of the view that India should keep pace and
change  according  to  the  changing  needs  of  the  society.  The
Commission,  therefore,  recommends  that  the  Government  may
consider  that  India  should  become  a  signatory  to  the  Hague
Convention which will in turn bring the prospects of achieving the
return to India of children who have their homes in India.  
With warm regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001.  
7

Need to accede to the Hague Convention on the
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
(1980)
Table of Contents
                                                                                             Pa
ge No. 
II. INTRODUCTION    9-11
II. THE HAGUE CONVENTION                         12-20
III. RECOMMENDATION                                     21
8

I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Owing to the advent of technology with the establishment of
easier and economic forms of travel and communication, national
boundaries have increasingly become irrelevant for the purposes of
cultural exchanges.1
1.2  The globe has shrinked to an extent that cultural taboos do not
hold back anybody to go in search of greater achievements.  This
brings in a package of both desirable and undesirable effects.  Every
employment opportunity especially the ones established under the
modern technological umbrella comes with a lot of responsibility and
financial benefits with the aftereffect being increasing independence
of individuals and ego inflations, which paves the way for undesirable
familial problems.2
1.3 Earlier spousal and interparental conflict were simply equated
with  divorce,  or  with  various  measures  of  marital  dissatisfaction,
hostile attitudes, and physical aggression. This failure to distinguish
among types of conflict has confounded the debate about the extent
to which different kinds of divorce conflict are normal and functional.
Divorce conflict has at least three important dimensions which should
be considered when assessing incidence and its effects on children.
First,  conflict  has  a  domain  dimension,  which  can  refer  to
disagreements  over  a  series  of  divorce  issues  such  as  financial
support, property, division, custody, and access to the children, or to
1  Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, International Child Abduction - Parental Removal (2008) 48 IJIL 4272  Ibid.
9

values and methods of child-rearing.  Second, conflict has a tactics
dimension, which can refer to the manner in which divorcing couples
informally try to resolve disagreements or it can refer  to ways in
which divorce disputes are formally resolved by the use of attorney
negotiation,  mediation,  litigation,  or arbitration by a judge.  Third,
conflict  has  an  attitudinal  dimension,  referring  to  the  degree  of
negative emotional feeling or hostility directed by divorcing parties
towards each other, which may be covertly or overtly expressed.3
1.4  Statistics show that the number of divorce cases and custody
disputes has increased ever since the advent of globalization and
technological development leading to a very busy life-style and work
culture.  The international parental child abduction/child removal finds
its root here.4
1.5 International  parental  child  abduction  or  removal  can  be
defined as the removal of a child by one parent from one country to
another without the approval of the other parent.  Child removal, in
this context, encompasses an interference with the parental rights or
right to contact with the removed child.  These acts by a parent when
brought before a court of law have in the past created considerable
amount of confusion specifically in the area of competence of courts
with regard to jurisdictional aspects.5
1.6 The international community acted to solve this crisis by adopting on
October  25,  1980  an  International  Convention  on  the  Civil  Aspects  of
3  Ibid.4  Ibid.5  Ibid.
10

International  Child Abduction  which entered  into  force on  December 1,
1983. This Convention seeks to protect children from harmful effects of
abduction  and  retention  across  international  boundaries  by  providing  a
procedure  to  bring  about  their  prompt  return.  The  main  objects  of  the
Convention are:
a) to  secure  the  prompt  return  of  children  wrongfully
removed to or retained in any Contracting State; and
b) to ensure that rights of custody and of access under
the  law  of  one  Contracting  State  are  effectively
respected in the other Contracting States.6
1.7 Many States of the world (81) have become signatory to this
Convention.  Some  States  like  Australia  have  brought  about
amendments  in  their  family  law  legislations  to  make  the  Hague
Convention  operative  in  their  nation.   India,  however,  is  not  a
signatory to this Convention.7
6  The Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (1980),  Article 17  Supra note 1
11

II. THE HAGUE CONVENTION
2.1 The  Hague  Convention  lays  down  that,  when  a  court  has
jurisdiction over a child, the first question to determine is whether the
Hague  Convention  applies  to  the  case.  Two  conditions  must  be
satisfied before the Convention applies:
(a) the child must be under 16 years of age; and
(b) the  child  must  have  been  habitually  resident  in  a
Convention  country  immediately  before  any  breach  of
custody or access rights.8
2.2 In Cooper and Casey9,  it was held that a child can have only
one  place  of  habitual  residence  which  should  be  determined  by
focusing on the child’s past experience and not on its or its parents’
intentions.
2.3 The Hague Convention is expressly intended to enhance the
international recognition of rights of custody and access arising in the
place of habitual residence, and to ensure that any child wrongfully
removed or retained from that place is promptly returned (Article 1).
In most cases, therefore, the court’s obligation to act in the best
interests of the child is displaced as a consideration bearing on who
is  to  have care  or  control  of  the  child.   The  Hague  Convention
8  Supra note 6, Article 49  [1995] 18 Fam LR 433
12

creates central  authorities throughout  the Convention countries to
trace  an  unlawfully  removed  child  and  secure  its  return.   It  is
important to consider what principles and rules determine whether a
child  is  or  is  not  to  be  returned  to  a  Convention  country.   The
Convention mandates return of the child only when there has been a
wrongful removal or retention of a child from a Convention country
(Article 12).  In securing rights of access, the following issues should
be considered:
• wrongful removal or retention;
• excusable removal or retention; and
• access.10
WRONGFUL REMOVAL OR RETENTION
2.4  Article 3 of the Hague Convention provides that  removal or
retention of a child  is wrongful  where it is in breach  of rights  of
custody and at the time of removal or retention those rights were
actually  exercised  or  would  have  been  so  exercised  but  for  the
removal or retention. Removal occurs when a child is taken out of the
place of habitual residence, whereas retention occurs when a child
who has, for a limited period, been outside the place of habitual
residence is not, on the expiration of the period, returned. It is not the
removal or retention of the child from the parent which constitutes a
breach of Article 3 but the removal or retention from the place of
habitual residence that creates the wrong.  It is important to identify
the event constituting removal or retention because on an application
10  Supra note 1
13

made within one year of such removal or retention, the court must
order the return of the child, whereas if this is done after one year,
the court must also order the return of the child unless it is satisfied
that the child has settled into its new environment.11
EXCUSABLE REMOVAL OR RETENTION
2.5 There are also some grounds  which enable the  removal or
retention of the child to be excused (vide Articles 12, 13 and 20) and
these are:
(i) Applicant not exercising custodial rights – The Court can refuse to order
the return of the child if the applicant was not actually exercising rights of
custody when the child was removed or first retained.
(ii) Consent to or subsequent acquiescence – The order for the return
of the  child can be refused if the  applicant  had consented  to or
subsequently acquiesced in the removal or retention. This consent or
acquiescence  may  be  expressed  or  inferred  from  conduct  in
circumstances in which different conduct might be expected if there
was no consent or acquiescence.
(iii) Risk to the child – The Court may refuse a return if there is a grave risk
that the return of the child to the country in which it habitually resided
immediately  before  the  removal  or retention  would  expose  the  child  to
11  Ibid.
14

physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in an intolerable
situation.
(iv) Child’s objection – The Court may refuse to order return if a child, who
has obtained an age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take
account of the child’s views, objects to the return.  It should be an emphatic
objection and not a mere preference to remain where it is.
(v) Protection of rights and freedoms – The Court may refuse to order return
if it would be contrary to the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
(vi) Expiry of one year – The application for return was made more
than one year after a wrongful removal or retention and the child
settled into its new environment.12
ACCESS
2.6 The Hague Convention does not give rights of access either
the importance or attention but it devotes to rights of custody.  It
defines “rights of access” as including “the right to take a child for a
limited  period  of  time  to  a  place  other  than  the  child’s  habitual
residence”  [vide  Article  5(b)].   The  Hague  Convention  does  not
impose  any  specific  duty  on  a  court  in  a  Convention  country  in
relation  to  rights  of  access  and  it,  therefore,  appears  that  the
12  Ibid.
15

question of access should therefore be decided with reference to the
best interests of the child as a paramount consideration.13
2.7 India  is  not  a  signatory  to  the  Hague  Convention.   The
Supreme Court has observed in the case of  Sumedha Nagpal v.
State of Delhi14 as under:
“No decision by any court can restore the broken home or give
a child the care and protection of both dutiful parents.  No court
welcomes such problems or feels at ease in deciding them.
But a decision there must be, and it cannot be one repugnant
to normal concepts of family and marriage.  The basic unit of
society  is  the  family  and  that  marriage  creates  the  most
important  relation  in  life,  which  influences  morality  and
civilization of people, than any other institution. During infancy
and  impressionable  age,  the  care  and  warmth  of  both  the
parents are required for the welfare of the child.”15
2.8 A case law study will depict a clear picture in this regard.  The
Supreme  Court  in  Smt.  Surinder  Kaur  Sandhu  v.  Harbax  Singh
Sandhu16 and  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Dinshaw  v.  Arvand  M.  Dinshaw17
exercised summary jurisdiction in returning the minor children to the
country of their parent.  In a later case of Dhanwanti Joshi v. Madhav
Unde18, the Supreme Court observed that the order of the foreign
court  will  only  be  one  of  the  facts  which  must  be  taken  into
consideration  while  dealing  with  child  custody  matters  and  India
being a country which is not a signatory to the Hague Convention,
13  Ibid.14  JT 2000 (7) SC 45015  Ibid., page 45316  AIR 1984 SC 1224
17  AIR 1987 SC 3
18  (1998) 1 SCC 112
16

the law is that the Court within whose jurisdiction the child is removed
will consider the question on merits bearing the welfare of the child
as of paramount importance.  It was in this case the Supreme Court
changed the earlier view and did not exercise summary jurisdiction in
returning children to its parent and observed that the welfare and
best  interest  of  the  child  or  children  should  be  of  paramount
consideration. This observation by the Supreme Court was followed
in  a  later  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  Sarita
Sharma v. Sushil Sharma19. In 2004, the Supreme Court, in the case
of Sahiba Ali v. State of Maharashtra20 declined to grant the custody
of her children to the mother but at the same time issued directions
for visitation rights in the interest and welfare of the minor children.
In another case of Kumar V. Jahgirdar v. Chethana Ramatheertha21,
the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that a female child of
growing age needs company more of her mother compared to the
father  and  remarriage  of  the  mother  is  not  a  disqualification  in
safeguarding interest of the child.  Further, in a recent case of Paul
Mohinder Gahun v. State of NCT of Delhi22 the Delhi High Court
refused to grant custody of the child to the father and observed that
the question of conflict of laws and jurisdictions should take a back
seat in preference to what lies in the interest of the minor.
2.9 In a recent decision dated March 3, 2006 of the High Court of
Bombay, at Goa, the Court declined to issue a writ of habeas corpus
thereby  refusing  the  custody  of  a  girl  child  to  her  mother  while
19  JT 2000 (2) SC 25820  2004 (1) HLR 21221  2004 (1) HLR 46822  2005 (1) HLR 428
17

relegating  the  parties  to  normal  civil  proceedings  in  Goa  for  a
decision on the point of the custody of the child without disturbing the
custody with the father in Goa. The High Court clearly declined the
return of the child to Ireland in exercise of its writ jurisdiction and held
that this question requires analysis of disputed question of facts.23
2.10 Indian laws that deal with the principles of custody of children
are not too many.  To name a few:
• The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
• The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956
• The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890
2.11 Section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, states that a court
can pass orders and make such provisions in the decree in any
proceedings under the Act with respect to the custody, maintenance
and education of minor children upon an application for that purpose
as expeditiously as possible.
2.12 Section 4(a) of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956
defines “minor” to mean “a person who has not reached the age 18
years”.  And, under the Act, the custody of a child is given to any
person, be it the child’s natural parents or guardian (appointed by the
court) with the prime importance given to the welfare of the child.  A
landmark  case  that  decided  the  same  was  Githa  Hariharan  v.
Reserve Bank of India.24 
23  Mandy Jane Collins v. James Michael Collins, (2006) 2 HLR 44624  (1999) 2 SCC 228
18

2.13 The High Court by way of the writ of habeas corpus can order
custody of a minor at the behest of a parent applying for the same,
with predominant focus placed on the welfare of the child.25
2.14 In  Dhanwanti  Joshi  v.  Madhav  Unde26,  the  Supreme  Court
referred  to  the  Hague  Convention  on  the  Civil  Aspects  of
International Child Abduction and observed as follows:
‘32.  In  this  connection,  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to  the  Hague
Convention  of  1980  on  "Civil  Aspects  of  International  Child
Abduction".  As  of  today,  about  45  countries  are  parties  to  this
Convention. India is not yet a signatory. Under the Convention, any
child below 16 years who had been "wrongfully" removed or retained
in another contracting State, could be returned back to the country
from which the child had been removed, by application to a central
authority. Under Article 16 of the Convention, if in the process, the
issue goes before a court, the Convention prohibits the court from
going into the merits of the welfare of the child. Article 12 requires
the child to be sent back, but if a period of more than one year has
lapsed from the date of removal to the date of commencement of the
proceedings before the court, the child would still be returned unless
it is demonstrated that the child is now settled in its new environment.
Article 12 is subject to Article 13 and a return could be refused if it
would  expose  the  child  to  physical  or  psychological  harm  or
otherwise place the child in an intolerable position or if the child is
quite mature and objects to its return. In England, these aspects are
covered by the Child Abduction and Custody Act, 1985.
33. So far as non-Convention countries are concerned, or where the
removal related to a period before adopting the Convention, the law is
that  the  court  in  the  country  to  which  the  child  is  removed  will
consider the question on merits bearing the welfare of the child as of
paramount importance and consider the order of the foreign court as
only a factor to be taken into consideration as stated in McKee v.
McKee unless the Court thinks it fit to exercise summary jurisdiction
25  Supra note 126  Supra note 18
19

in the interests of the child and its prompt return is for its welfare, as
explained in L., Re. As recently as 1996-1997, it has been held in P
(A  minor)  (Child  Abduction:  Non-Convention  Country),  Re:  by
Ward,  L.J.  [1996  Current  Law  Year  Book,  pp.  165-166]  that  in
deciding whether to order the return of a child who has been abducted
from his or her country of habitual residence -- which was not a party
to  the  Hague  Convention,  1980,  --  the  courts'  overriding
consideration must be the child's welfare. There is no need for the
Judge  to  attempt  to  apply  the  provisions  of  Article  13  of  the
Convention by ordering the child's return unless a grave risk of harm
was established. See also A (A minor) (Abduction: Non-Convention
Country)  [Re,  The  Times  3-7-97  by  Ward,  L.J.  (CA)  (quoted  in
Current  Law,  August  1997,  p.  13].  This  answers  the  contention
relating to removal of the child from USA.’
2.15 From the above, it can be observed that, the Indian Courts
while deciding cases pertaining to minor children have not followed a
uniform  pattern.   There  also  is  an  absence  of  progressive
development in the subject.  If some matters are decided with prime
importance placed on the welfare of the child, some are based on the
technicalities of various provisions of law and jurisdictional tiffs.  The
reason cited for this can be the absence of any law that governs this
aspect.   This  only  will  affect  the  condition  both  physical  and
emotional  of  the  child,  who  is  caught  in  the  fire  of  shattered
relationships.27
2.16 This situation  only shows that the time has come for some
international perspective in this regard. The fact of India not being a
signatory  to  the  Hague  Convention  on  the  Civil  Aspects  of
International Child Abduction may have a negative influence on a
27  Supra note 1
20

foreign judge who is deciding on the custody of a child.  Without the
guarantee afforded by the Hague Convention to the effect that the
child will be swiftly returned to the country of origin, the foreign judge
may be reluctant to give permission for the child to travel to India.  As
a  logical  upshot,  India  should  become  a  signatory  to  the  Hague
Convention and this will, in turn, bring the prospect of achieving the
return to India of children who have their homes in India.28
III RECOMENDATION
We believe that India should keep pace and change according
to the changing needs of the society. The Commission, therefore,
recommends that the Government may consider that India should
become a signatory to the Hague Convention which will in turn bring
the prospects of achieving the return to India of children who have
their homes in India.  
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. (Dr.) Tahir Mahmood)                (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal)
                Member                                                        Member-Secretary
28  Ibid.
21