GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Need for Family Law Legislations for 
Non-resident Indians
Report No. 219
March 2009

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 219)
Need for Family Law Legislations for
Non-resident Indians
Forwarded to the Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by
Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman,  Law
Commission of India, on  the   30th      day of  March,
2009. 
The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period
of three years from 1st September, 2006 by Order No.
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the 16th October,
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of
2

Law  and  Justice,  Department of Legal Affairs,  New
Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one  full-time  Member  and  seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
3

Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
4

©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The text in this document (excluding the Government
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format
or medium provided that it is reproduced accurately
and not used in a misleading context. The material
must be acknowledged as Government copyright and
the title of the document specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either by
post to the Law  Commission of India, 2nd Floor, ILI
Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India
or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
5

D.O. No. 6(3)/135/2007-LC (LS)          30th
March, 2009
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji,
Subject: Need for Family Law Legislations for
 Non-resident Indians
I am forwarding herewith the 219th Report of the Law Commission
of India on the above subject. 
Over the years a large number of Non-resident Indians (NRI) have
multiplied in every jurisdiction abroad and so the problems. Abandoned
bride in distress due to runaway foreign country resident Indian spouse,
stressed non-resident Asian parent frantically searching spouse in India
who has removed their child from a foreign jurisdiction in violation of a
foreign  court  order,  desperate  parent  seeking  child  support  and
maintenance,  non-resident  spouse  seeking  enforcement  of  foreign
divorce  decree  in  India,  agitated  children  of  deceased  non-resident
Indian turning turtle in trying to seek transfer of property in India and its
repatriation  to  foreign  shores,  anxious  and  excited  foreign  adoptive
parents desperately trying to resolve Indian legal formalities for adopting
a child in India, bewildered officials of a foreign High Commission trying
to  understand  the  customary  practices  of  marriage  and  divorce
exclusively saved by Indian legislation, foreign police officials trying to
understand intricacies of Indian law in apprehending offenders of law on
foreign soil: these are some instances of problems arising every day
from cross-border migration. Thus the number of problems is myriad,
but the solutions are a few or non-existent. 
In view of this, the Law Commission took up the subject suo motu
for  study.  The Commission  examined  various  issues  and is of  the
opinion  that  the  following  remedies  by making  appropriate  law may
solve the problems of NRIs.:
6

A. Registration of marriages must be made compulsory;
B. Dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  ground  of  irretrievable
breakdown of marriage be introduced in the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954;
C. Where one of the spouses is an NRI, parallel additions must be
made  in  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955  and  the  Special
Marriage Act, 1954 to provide for provisions for maintenance
and alimony of spouses, child custody and child support and as
also settlement of matrimonial property;
D. In the matter of succession, transfer of property, repartition of
NRI funds etc., the respective State governments must simplify
and streamline procedures;
E. The Commission has already recommended in its 218th Report
as to the need to accede to the Hague Convention on the Civil
aspects of International Child Abduction;
F. Inter-country Child Adoption Procedures must be simplified and
a single uniform legislation must be provided for in the matter of
adoption of Indian children by NRIs. India has also ratified the
Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of Children and Co-
operation  in  Respect  of  Inter-country  Adoption.  Thus  a
simplified law should be enacted on the subject in the light of
this Convention.
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001
7

Need for Family Law Legislations for
Non-resident Indians
TABLE OF CONTENTS        
PAGE NO.
 
 I. THE PROBLEMS IN BRIEF                              9-
10
 
II. THE SEARCH FOR SOLUTION IN LAW        10-
11
III. DIFFICULTIES FACED UNDER 
INDIAN  LAW
11-19
IV. INTER-PARENTAL CHILD 
REMOVAL – A PECULIAR PROBLEM          20
 
V. SUGGESTED SOLUTIONS AND 
REMEDIES
20-26
8

I THE PROBLEMS IN BRIEF 
1.1 Many a man and woman of this land with different personal laws have
migrated  and  are  migrating  to  different  countries  either  to  make  their
permanent  abode  there  or  for  temporary  residence.  Likewise  there  is  also
immigration  of  the  nationals  of  other  countries.  The  advancement  in
communication and transportation has also made it easier for individuals to hop
from one country to another. It is also not unusual to come across cases where
citizens of this country have been contracting marriages either in this country
or abroad with nationals of the other countries or among themselves, or having
married here, either both or one of them migrate to other countries. There are
also cases where parties having married here have been either domiciled or
residing separately in different foreign countries. This migration, temporary or
permanent, has also been giving rise to various kinds of matrimonial disputes
destroying in its turn the family and its peace.1 
1.2 Abandoned  bride  in  distress  due  to  runaway  foreign  country
resident Indian spouse, stressed non-resident Asian parent frantically
searching spouse in India who has removed their child from a foreign
jurisdiction in violation of a foreign court order, desperate parent seeking
child  support  and  maintenance,  non-resident  spouse  seeking
enforcement  of  foreign  divorce  decree  in  India,  agitated  children  of
deceased non-resident Indian turning turtle in trying to seek transfer of
property in India  and  its  repatriation  to foreign  shores,  anxious  and
1  Y. Narasimha Rao vs.  Y. Venkata Lakshmi, JT 1991 (3) SC 33
9

excited  foreign  adoptive parents  desperately trying to resolve Indian
legal formalities for adopting a child in India, bewildered officials of a
foreign High Commission trying to understand the customary practices
of marriage and divorce exclusively saved by Indian legislation, foreign
police  officials  trying  to  understand  intricacies  of  Indian  law  in
apprehending offenders of law on foreign soil: these are some instances
of problems arising every day from cross-border migration.
1.3 There are a large number of legal issues that concern a sizeable
section of the Global Indian Community residing abroad.  Though the
non-resident Indians have increased multifold in foreign jurisdictions,
family law disputes and situations are handicapped for want of proper
professional information and advice on Indian laws.  The lure for settling
in  foreign  jurisdictions  attracts  a  sizeable  Indian  population  but  the
problems created by such migration largely remain unresolved.  
II THE SEARCH FOR SOLUTION IN LAW
2.1 Solicitors  and  litigants  overseas  worldwide  frantically  look  for
professional opinions and advice when the problems come to the Indian
resident  abroad.   Instances  of  conditions  of  validity  of  marriages
solemnized in India, modes and means of divorce under Indian law,
legal formalities to be complied with for adopting children from India,
remedies available in Indian law for enforcing parental rights in child
abduction and other family law issues relating to non-resident Indians
abound.   Likewise,  there  are  a  plethora  of  problems  in  matters
concerning succession and transfer of property, banking affairs, taxation
10

issues,  execution  and  implementation  of  wills  and  other  commercial
propositions for non-resident Indians. However, application of multiple
laws,  their  judicial  interpretation  &  other  legalities  often  leave  the
problems unresolved even though remedies partially exist in Indian law
and partly need new urgent legislation.
2.2 The number of non-resident Indians (NRI) has multiplied in every
jurisdiction abroad.  However, family, property, kith and kin or the love
for the motherland keeps bringing the NRI back on Indian soil in body or
in soul. With this return the NRI seeks a remedy for his legal problem
connected  with  his  temporary  or  permanent  return  to  India.  This
invariably  makes  the  NRI  import  the  foreign  law  of  the  overseas
jurisdiction from where he has migrated.  Such a situation is created
because either Indian law provides him no remedy or because he finds
it easier and quicker to import a foreign court judgment to India on the
basis of alien law which has no parallel in the Indian jurisdiction.  This
clash of jurisdictional law is commonly called Conflict of Laws in the
realm  of  Private  International  Law  which  is  not  yet  a  developed
jurisprudence in the Indian territory.  
III DIFFICULTIES FACED UNDER INDIAN LAW
3.1 Areas of family law in which the problems of jurisdiction are seen
occurring very frequently relate to dissolution of marriage, inter-parental
child abduction, inter country child adoption and succession of property
of  non-resident  Indians.   In  matters  of  divorce,  since  irretrievable
breakdown of marriage is not a ground for dissolving the marriage under
11

Indian  law,  Indian  Courts  in  principle  do  not  recognise  foreign
matrimonial  judgments  dissolving  marriage  by  such  breakdown.
Surprisingly, even very little help is available in areas of matrimonial
offences and problems arising out of child abduction. Leaving a helpless
deserted Indian spouse on Indian shores confronted with a matrimonial
litigation of a foreign court which he or she neither has the means or
ability  to  invoke  often  results  in  despair,  frustration  and  disgust.
Likewise, enforcement of a foreign court order in whose violation a child
of the family has been removed and brought to Indian soil brings a
parent to India desperately seeking a legal remedy.  The list of problems
is myriad but the solutions are few or non-existent.  
3.2 Unfortunately, no special Indian legislation exists to combat such
remedies.  The numbers of Indians on foreign shores have increased
multifold but the multiple problems which bring them back to India are
still left to be resolved by the conventional Indian legislation. Times have
changed but laws have not.  However, the dynamic, progressive and
open minded judicial system in the Indian Jurisprudence often comes to
the rescue of such problems by interpreting the existing laws with a
practical  application  to  the  new  generation  problems  of  immigrant
Indians.  Fortunately, judicial legislation is the only crutch available.  
3.3  In  Y. Narasimha Rao  vs.  Y. Venkata Lakshmi2, the Supreme Court
observed that no country can afford to sacrifice its internal unity, stability and
tranquility for the sake of uniformity of rules and comity of nations which
considerations are important and appropriate to facilitate international trade,
commerce,  industry,  communication,  transport,  exchange  of  services,
2  Ibid.  
12

technology,  manpower  etc.  This  glaring  fact  of  national  life  has  been
recognised  both  by the  Hague  Convention  of 1968  on  the  Recognition  of
Divorce and Legal Separations as well as by the Judgments Convention of the
European Community of the same year. Article 10 of the Hague Convention
expressly provides that the contracting States may refuse to rocognize a divorce
or legal separation if such recognition is manifestly incompatible with their
public  policy.  The  Judgments  Convention  of  the  European  Community
expressly excludes from its scope (a) status or legal capacity of natural persons,
(b) rights in property arising out of a matrimonial relationship, (c) wills and
succession, (d) social security and (e) bankruptcy. A separate convention was
contemplated for the last of the subjects. The Supreme Court referred to the 65th
Report of the Law Commission on “Recognition of Foreign Divorces” and
elaborately discussed the import of section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure in
the context of recognizing foreign matrimonial judgments in the country, and
further observed:
“11.  The  rules  of  Private  International  Law  in  this  country  are  not
codified  and  are  scattered  in  different  enactments  such  as  the  Civil
Procedure Code, the Contract Act, the Indian Succession Act, the Indian
Divorce Act, the Special Marriage Act etc. In addition, some rules have
also been evolved by judicial decisions. In matters of status or legal
capacity of natural persons, matrimonial disputes, custody of children,
adoption, testamentary and intestate succession etc. the problem in this
country is complicated by the fact that there exist different personal laws
and no uniform rule can be laid down for all citizens. The distinction
between matters which concern personal and family affairs and those
which  concern  commercial  relationships,  civil  wrongs  etc.  is  well
recognised in other countries and legal systems. The law in the former
area tends to be primarily determined and influenced by social, moral
and  religious  considerations,  and  public  policy  plays  special  and
important  role  in  shaping  it.  Hence,  in  almost  all  the  countries  the
jurisdictional,  procedural  and  substantive  rules  which  are  applied  to
13

disputes arising in this area are significantly different from those applied
to claims in other areas. That is as it ought to be. … 
12. We are in the present case concerned only with the matrimonial law
and what we state here will apply strictly to matters arising out of and
ancillary to matrimonial disputes. The Courts in this country have so far
tried to follow in these matters the English rules of Private International
Law whether common law rules or statutory rules. The dependence on
English Law even in matters which are purely personal, has however
time  and  again  been  regretted.  But  nothing  much  has  been  done  to
remedy the situation. The labours of the Law Commission poured in its
65th Report on this very subject have not fructified since April 1976,
when the Report was submitted. Even the British were circumspect and
hesitant  to  apply  their  rules  of  law  in  such  matters  during  their
governance of this country and had left the family law to be governed by
the customary rules of the different communities. It is only where there
was a void that they had stepped in by enactments such as the Special
Marriage Act, Indian Divorce Act, Indian Succession Act etc. In spite,
however,  of  more  than  43  years  of  independence  we  find  that  the
legislature has not thought it fit to enact rules of Private International
Law in this area and in the absence of such initiative from the legislature
the courts in this country have been forced to fall back upon precedents
which have taken their inspiration, as stated earlier, from the English
rules. Even in doing so they have not been uniform in practice with the
result that we have some conflicting decisions in the area. 
13. We cannot also lose sight of the fact that today more than ever in the
past, the need for definitive rules for recognition of foreign judgments in
personal and family matters, and particularly in matrimonial disputes has
surged  to  the  surface.  …  A  large  number  of  foreign  decrees  in
matrimonial  matters  is  becoming  the  order  of  the  day.  A  time  has,
therefore,  come to  ensure  certainty in  the  recognition  of  the  foreign
judgments in these matters. The minimum rules of guidance for securing
the  certainty  need  not  await  legislative  initiative.  This  Court  can
accomplish the modest job within the framework of the present statutory
provisions if they are rationally interpreted and extended to achieve the
purpose. It is with this intention that we are undertaking this venture. We
are  aware  that  unaided  and  left  solely  to  our  resources  the  rules  of
guidance  which  we  propose  to  lay  down  in  this  area  may  prove
14

inadequate or miss some aspects which may not be present to us at this
juncture. But a beginning has to be made as best as one can, the lacunae
and the errors being left to be filled in and corrected by future judgments.
14. We believe that the relevant provisions of Section 13 of the Code are
capable of being interpreted to secure the required certainty in the sphere
of this branch of law in conformity with public policy, justice, equity and
good conscience, and the rules so evolved will protect the sanctity of the
institution  of marriage and  the  unity of family which  are the  corner
stones of our societal life.
15. Clause (a) of Section 13 states that a foreign judgment shall not be
recognised  if  it  has  not  been  pronounced  by  a  court  of  competent
jurisdiction. We are of the view that this clause should be interpreted to
mean that only that court will be a court of competent jurisdiction which
the Act or the law under which the parties are married recognises as a
court of competent jurisdiction to entertain the matrimonial dispute. Any
other court should be held to be a court without jurisdiction unless both
parties  voluntarily  and  unconditionally  subject  themselves  to  the
jurisdiction of that court. The expression "competent court" in Section 41
of the Indian Evidence Act has also to be construed likewise.
16. Clause (b) of Section 13 states that if a foreign judgment has not
been given on the merits of the case, the courts in this country will not
recognise such judgment. This clause should be interpreted to mean (a)
that the decision of the foreign court should be on a ground available
under the  law  under  which  the  parties  are married,  and  (b)  that  the
decision should be a result of the contest between the parties. The latter
requirement is fulfilled only when the respondent is duly served and
voluntarily  and  unconditionally  submits  himself/herself  to  the
jurisdiction of the court and contests the claim, or agrees to the passing
of the decree with or without appearance. A mere filing of the reply to
the claim under protest and without submitting to the jurisdiction of the
court,  or  an  appearance  in  the  Court  either  in  person  or  through  a
representative for objecting to the jurisdiction of the Court, should not be
considered as a decision on the merits of the case. In this respect the
general rules of the acquiescence to the jurisdiction of the Court which
15

may be valid in other matters and areas should be ignored and deemed
inappropriate.
17. The second part of Clause (c) of Section 13 states that where the
judgment is founded on a refusal to recognise the law of this country in
cases  in  which  such  law  is  applicable,  the  judgment  will  not  be
recognised by the courts in this country. The marriages which take place
in this country can only be under either the customary or the statutory
law in force in this country. Hence, the only law that can be applicable to
the matrimonial disputes is the one under which the parties are married,
and no other law. When, therefore, a foreign judgment is founded on a
jurisdiction or on a ground not recognised by such law, it is a judgment
which  is  in  defiance  of  the  Law. Hence,  it  is  not  conclusive  of the
matters adjudicated therein and, therefore, unenforceable in this country.
For the same reason, such a judgment will also be unenforceable under
Clause (f) of Section 13, since such a judgment would obviously be in
breach of the matrimonial law in force in this country.
18.  Clause  (d)  of  Section  13  which  makes  a  foreign  judgment
unenforceable on the ground that the proceedings in which it is obtained
are  opposed  to  natural  justice,  states  no  more  than  an  elementary
principle on which any civilised system of justice rests. However, in
matters concerning the family law such as the matrimonial disputes, this
principle  has  to  be  extended  to  mean  something  more  than  mere
compliance with the technical rules of procedure. If the rule of  audi
alteram partem has any meaning with reference to the proceedings in a
foreign  court,  for  the  purposes  of  the  rule  it  should  not  be  deemed
sufficient that the respondent has been duly served with the process of
the court. It is necessary to ascertain whether the respondent was in a
position to present or represent himself/herself and contest effectively
the  said  proceedings.  This  requirement  should  apply  equally  to  the
appellate proceedings if and when they are filed by either party. If the
foreign court has not ascertained and ensured such effective contest by
requiring  the  petitioner  to  make  all  necessary  provisions  for  the
respondent  to  defend  including  the  costs  of  travel,  residence  and
litigation where necessary, it should be held that the proceedings are in
breach of the principles of natural justice. It is for this reason that we
find that the rules of Private International Law of some countries insist,
even in commercial matters, that the action should be filed in the forum
16

where the defendant is either domiciled or is habitually resident. It is
only in special cases which is called special jurisdiction where the claim
has some real link with other forum that a judgment of such forum is
recognised.  This  jurisdictional  principle  is  also  recognised  by  the
Judgments Convention of the European Community. If, therefore, the
courts  in  this  country  also  insist  as  a  matter  of  rule  that  foreign
matrimonial judgment will be recognised only if it is of the forum where
the respondent is domiciled or habitually and permanently resides, the
provisions of Clause (d) may be held to have been satisfied.
19. The provision of Clause (e) of Section 13 which requires that the
courts in this country will not recognise a foreign judgment if it has been
obtained by fraud, is self-evident. However, in view of the decision of
this Court in Smt. Satya v. Teja Singh … it must be understood that the
fraud need not be only in relation to the merits of the matter but may also
be in relation to jurisdictional facts. 
20. From the aforesaid discussion the following rule can be deduced for
recognising  foreign  matrimonial  judgment  in  this  country.  The
jurisdiction assumed by the foreign court as well as the ground on which
the relief is granted must be in accordance with the matrimonial law
under which the parties are married. The exceptions to this rule may be
as follows: (i) where the matrimonial action is filed in the forum where
the respondent is domiciled or habitually and permanently resides and
the relief is granted on a ground available in the matrimonial law under
which the parties are married; (ii) where the respondent voluntarily and
effectively submits to the jurisdiction of the forum as discussed above
and contests the claim which is based on a ground available under the
matrimonial  law under which  the  parties  are married;  (iii) where the
respondent consents to the grant of the relief although the jurisdiction of
the forum is not in accordance with the provisions of the matrimonial
law of the parties.
21. The aforesaid rule with its stated exceptions has the merit of being
just and equitable. It does no injustice to any of the parties. The parties
do and ought to know their rights and obligations when they marry under
a particular law. They cannot be heard to make a grievance about it later
or allowed to bypass it by subterfuges as in the present case. The rule
17

also has an advantage of rescuing the institution of marriage from the
uncertain  maze  of  the  rules  of  the  Private  international  Law  of  the
different countries with regard to jurisdiction and merits based variously
on domicile, nationality, residence - permanent or temporary or ad hoc,
forum, proper law etc. and ensuring certainty in the most vital field of
national life and conformity with pubic policy. The rule further takes
account  of  the  needs  of  modern  life  and  makes  due  allowance  to
accommodate them. Above all, it gives protection to women, the most
vulnerable section of our society, whatever the strata to which they may
belong. In particular it frees them from the bondage of the tyrannical and
servile rule that wife's domicile follows that of her husband and that it is
the  husband's  domiciliary  law  which  determines  the  jurisdiction  and
judges the merits of the case.
22. Since with regard to the jurisdiction of the forum as well as the
ground on which it is passed the foreign decree in the present case is not
in accordance with the Act under which the parties were married, and the
respondent had not submitted to the jurisdiction of the court or consented
to its passing, it cannot be recognised by the courts in this country and is,
therefore, unenforceable.”
3.4 In the case of  Smt. Neeraja Saraph vs.  Shri Jayant V. Saraph3, the
Supreme Court held that although it is a problem of Private International Law
and is not easy to be resolved, but with change in social structure and rise of
marriages with NRI the Union of India may consider enacting a law like the
Foreign Judgments (Reciprocal Enforcement) Act, 1933 enacted by the British
Parliament under Section 1 in pursuance of which the Government of United
Kingdom issued Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments (India) Order, 1958.
The Court recommended that feasibility of a legislation safeguarding interest of
women may be examined by incorporating such provisions as-
3 JT 1994 (6) SC 488
18

(a) no marriage between a NRI and an Indian woman which has taken
place in India may be annulled by a foreign court; 
(b)  provision  may be  made for  adequate  alimony to  the  wife in  the
property of the husband both in India and abroad; 
(c)  the  decree  granted  by Indian  courts  may be  made  executable  in
foreign courts both on principle of comity and by entering into reciprocal
agreements like Section 44A of the Civil Procedure Code which makes a
foreign decree executable as it would have been a decree passed by that
court.
3.5 The following Conventions4 need to be examined as to their relevancy
and adaptability in the Indian context:
1. Convention of 24 October 1956 on the law applicable to  
maintenance obligations towards children 
2. Convention of 15 April 1958 concerning the recognition and  
enforcement of decisions relating to maintenance obligations
towards children 
3. Convention of 5 October 1961 concerning the powers of  
authorities and the law applicable in respect of the protection of
infants 
4. Convention of 15 November 1965 on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law  
and Recognition of Decrees Relating to Adoptions 
5. Convention of 1 June 1970 on the Recognition of Divorces and  
Legal Separations 
4  http://www.hcch.net/index_en.php?act=conventions.listing, visited 23.03.2009
19

6. Convention of 2 October 1973 Concerning the International  
Administration of the Estates of Deceased Persons 
7. Convention of 2 October 1973 on the Recognition and  
Enforcement of Decisions Relating to Maintenance Obligations 
8. Convention of 2 October 1973 on the Law Applicable to  
Maintenance Obligations 
9. Convention of 14 March 1978 on the Law Applicable to  
Matrimonial Property Regimes 
10. Convention of 14 March 1978 on Celebration and Recognition of  
the Validity of Marriages 
11. Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of  
International Child Abduction 
12. Convention of 1 August 1989 on the Law Applicable to  
Succession to the Estates of Deceased Persons 
13. Convention of 19 October 1996 on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law,  
Recognition, Enforcement and Co-operation in Respect of
Parental Responsibility and Measures for the Protection of
Children 
14. Convention of 23 November 2007 on the International Recovery of  
Child Support and Other Forms of Family Maintenance 
15. Protocol of 23 November 2007 on the Law Applicable to  
Maintenance Obligations 
20

IV INTER-PARENTAL  CHILD  REMOVAL  –  A  PECULIAR
PROBLEM 
4 A very interesting, human and engrossing area of cross-border
litigation arises in cases of inter-parental child abduction from foreign
shores when a spouse removes the child to India in violation of a foreign
court order.  Unfortunately, India is not a party to the Hague Convention
on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, 1980.  Neither was
Pakistan.  But the UK-Pakistan Judicial Protocol was signed on January
17, 2003 by the President of the Family Division of the High Court of
England and Wales and by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of
Pakistan.  It  incorporated  the  effective  provisions  of  the  Hague
Convention for the return of the abducted children to the country of the
habitual residence.  Perhaps, the crying need of the day exists for one
in India also.  Even though the British and Indian Governments have
recently signed a treaty to extradite offenders of criminal law but in
respect of matrimonial problems there is no such agreement, treaty or
protocol. Even Legislative changes are still a far cry.
V SUGGESTED SOLUTIONS AND REMEDIES 
5.1 What then is the remedy as a panacea for all such ills and legal
problems?  
5.2 A reading in totality of the matters in the overseas  family law
jurisdictions gives an indication  that in such affairs, it is the judicial
precedents  which  provide  the  much  available  guidance  and  judicial
21

legislation  on  the  subject.   With  the  large  number  of  non-resident
Indians  now permanently living in overseas jurisdictions,  it  has  now
become important that some composite legislation is enacted to deal
with the problems of non-resident Indians to avoid them from importing
judgments from foreign courts to India for implementation of their rights.
The answer, therefore, lies in giving them law applicable to them as
Indians  rather  than  letting  them  invade  the  Indian  system  with
judgments of foreign jurisdictions which do not find applicability in the
Indian system.  Hence, it is the Indian legislature which now seriously
needs to review this issue and come out with a composite legislation for
non-resident Indians in family law matters.  Till this is done, foreign court
judgments in domestic matters will keep cropping up and courts in India
will continue with their salutary efforts in interpreting them in harmony
with the Indian laws and doing substantial justice to parties in the most
fair and equitable way.  However, in this process, the Indian judiciary
has made one thing very clear, i.e., the Indian Courts would not simply
mechanically enforce judgments and decrees of foreign courts in family
matters.  The Indian courts have now started looking into the merits of
the matters and deciding them on the considerations of Indian law in the
best interest of the parties rather than simply implementing the orders
without examining them.  Fortunately, we can hail the Indian Judiciary
for these laudable efforts and till such time when the Indian legislature
comes to rescue with appropriate legislation, we seek solace with our
unimpeachable  and  unstinted  faith  in  the  Indian  Judiciary  which  is
rendering a yeoman service.  
22

5.3 In the context of the NRI, the following suggestions are mooted for
improving the existing family law problems posed daily before NRIs and
faced by affected people resident in India when they come in contact
with  NRIs.   The  solutions  partly  exist  in  proper  implementation  of
existing laws, framing of proper regulations, creation of Family Courts
and Fast-track Courts and amendment of existing legislation.  The six
point  charter  summary  is  set  down  as  hereunder  in  the  following
sequence:  
A. Registration of marriages must be made compulsory.  This will in
turn ensure compliance of conditions of a valid marriage, provide proof
of marriage and act as a deterrent for bigamous practices.  Section 8 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 makes it optional for State Governments
to provide for rules for providing for registration of marriages.  It is
opined that States with significant NRI migration must make marriage
registration compulsory particularly when one of the spouses is an NRI.
Simultaneously, it should be made obligatory that the NRI spouse must
give  intimation  of  registration  of  his  marriage  to  the  concerned
Embassy / High Commission in India, in which country he is presently
resident. The States in India with high migration incidence should make
and notify rules under Section 8 providing for compulsory registration of
marriages and incidental matters related thereto. The Commission has
already made similar recommendation as to registration of marriage and
divorce in its 211th Report titled “Laws on Registration of Marriage and
Divorce - A Proposal for Consolidation and Reform”.
23

B. Dissolution  of  marriage  on  the  ground  of  breakdown  of
marriage as an additional ground for divorce should be introduced
when at least one of the spouses is an NRI subject to safeguards
provided by legislation.  This would require amendment  of the
provisions  of  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955  and  the  Special
Marriage Act, 1954.  Such a ground would provide NRI spouses a
judicial forum in India to seek a remedy on Indian soil rather than
importing foreign judgments of alien courts on breakdown grounds
and give a chance to the Indian spouse to defend on convenient
and  equitable  terms  in  Indian  courts.   The  need  for  this
amendment must be strongly mooted by the States with high NRI
population  to  the  Government  of  India  to  enact  appropriate
legislation by suitable amendments in the existing Hindu Marriage
Act,  1955  and  Special  Marriage  Act,  1954  since  inter-country
migration from such States is significant and in large numbers.
The Commission has recently recommended in its 217th Report as
to  incorporation  of  “irretrievable  breakdown  of  marriage”  as  a
ground for divorce in the said Acts. Further, the Law Commission
in  its  65th Report  on “Recognition  of  Foreign  Divorces”  (1976)
made a radical departure in suggesting that, in considering the
questions about the recognition of foreign decrees of divorce, our
courts should base their decisions not only on the question of
domicile,  but  also  on  the  basis  of  habitual  residence  and
nationality. The said Report also considered the problem about
the ancillary orders passed by the foreign courts in dealing with
matrimonial proceedings and on this matter, the conclusion of the
Commission was that these ancillary orders should not be treated
24

as binding by our courts even though the foreign decrees  of
divorce  are  recognized.  These  ancillary  orders  concern  the
custody of children and other allied questions, and it was felt that
it would be juristically imprudent to treat them as binding. The
Commission  had  appended  a  Bill  entitled  “The  Recognition  of
Divorces and legal Separation Bill, 1976” with the said Report to
give shape to its recommendations.
C. Wherever one of the spouses is an NRI, parallel additions
must be made in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 to provide for provisions for maintenance and
alimony  of  spouses,  child  custody  and  child  support  as  also
settlement  of  matrimonial  property.   This  will  ensure  that  the
spouse / children on Indian soil are maintained and provided for in
accordance with the income and standard of the NRI spouse in
the foreign jurisdiction.  It may also be worthwhile to suggest that
under section 3 of The Family Courts Act, 1984, the respective
State  Governments  where  Family  Courts  have  not  been
established should be directed to provide for Family Courts.  The
States with high NRI population which essentially needs Family
Courts as a matter of dire urgency should immediately create such
Courts  to  deal  with  family  law  problems  and  give  priority  to
settlement of family law issues where parties are NRIs.  
D. In the matters of succession, transfer of property, making /
execution / implementation of wills, repatriation of NRI funds, the
respective  State  Governments  must  simplify  and  streamline
25

procedures.   Ideally  speaking,  in  matters  having  property
problems,  Fast-track Courts  must  be set up to deal with such
cases expeditiously in accordance with a time bound schedule.
The  Punjab  Government  has  made  amendments  in  The  East
Punjab Rent Restrictions Act and the Punjab Security of Land
Tenures  Act  for  the  summary  trial  of  disputes  regarding
agricultural,  commercial and residential  property.  However, no
special  Fast-track  Courts  exist  in  most  States  with  high  NRI
population to settle these matters on priority.  A fresh proposal
should be mooted to set up such courts as soon as possible.  
E. In the area of inter-parental child abduction or removal of
children to India from foreign jurisdictions against court orders,
India must become a signatory to the Hague Convention on the
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, 1980.  As of now,
there is no international convention or treaty applicable in India
since India is not a signatory to the said Convention and other
than conventional procedures, there are no remedies for enforcing
such rights.  Till such time there is no signing of such treaty, the
State Governments with high NRI population should permit liaison
with foreign  missions  in India  through  whom courts  should  be
assisted to ensure return of children to the country of their foreign
residence if they are removed in violation of foreign court orders.
The administrative and police authorities in Indian States with high
NRI population should give some uniform guidelines to observe to
assist such parents in distress who often land in such States in
India with no clue as to whom to approach for assistance. The
26

Commission has already recommended in its 218th Report as to
the need to accede to the said Convention of 1980.
F. Inter-country child adoption procedures must be simplified
and a single uniform legislation must be provided for in matter of
adoption of Indian children by NRIs.  This should be hedged with
ample checks and safeguards but at the same time should provide
a  unified,  straightforward  and  single  agency  procedure.   The
present  system  is  lengthy,  complicated,  involves  multiple
agencies, is very time consuming and thus needs to be suitably
amended.  Further,  again  the  States  in  India  with  high  NRI
population should lay down some uniform policy guidelines to be
observed by State agencies, adoption homes and administrative
authorities  so  that  proper  help  and  guidance  is  available  in
adoption  matters.  The Law Commission  in its  153rd Report  on
“Inter-country Adoption” prepared draft of a Bill on Inter-country
Adoption. India has also ratified the Convention of 29 May 1993
on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Inter-
country Adoption. Thus a simplified law should be enacted on the
subject in the light of this Convention.
5.4 The  above  changes  can  be  made  either  by  providing  a  new
composite legislation  for  NRIs  or suitable  changes  can be made  in
existing legislations  for  streamlining the  laws and  procedures.   It  is
suggested that a core committee of specialists in the field of Private
International  Law should be constituted  at  the  earliest to prepare a
comprehensive draft to suggest the said changes in legislation in the
27

best  possible  way.  It  is  the  endeavour  of  the  Law  Commission  to
suggest to the Government of India to do whatever possible to improve
the life of the NRIs in India. It is important to see what India can do for
the NRI and not what the NRI can do for India. 
We recommend accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
     Chairman
(Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood)                       (Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal)
    Member                                      Member-Secretary
28