“LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
(CHRISTIAN MARRIAGH AND MATRIMONIAL

CAUSES BELL, 1961)

DECRMBER, 1961

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA: MINISTRY OF LAW.


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
New Delhi.
December 15, 1961.
Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My pear MINISTER,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Twenty-
second Report of the Law Commission on the Christian
Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Bill, 19671.

2. After the sukmissicn of the Fifteenth Report of the
Commission (Law relating to Marriage and Divorce among
Christians in India), the Ministry of Law prepared a formal
Bill implementing the Report. Government decided that the
Bill should be referred to the Commission for eliciting public
opinion thereon. The Bill having been so referred to the
Commission, the Commission circulated it for public opinion.
Several comments were received from the public, and these
were tabulated according to each clause of the Bill, and
considered at the meeting of the Commission held on the 8th
December, 1961. It was left to the Chairman to prepare the
Report of the Commission on the subject in the light of the
discussions that tock place at this meeting. This Report has
been drawn up accordingly,

3. Member Shri N. A. Palkhivala could not attend the
deliterations held at the meeting of the 8th December, 1961,
and has therefore been unable to sign the Report.

4. The Commission desires to express its appreciation of
the services rendered by Shri P. M. Bakshi, Deputy
Draftsman, in the preparation of the Report.

Yours sincerely,
T. L. VENKATARAMA ATYAR.
339 M of—1 पु


KEPORT ON THE CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE AND MATRIMONIAL

CAUSES BILL, 1961

cd Ginuse Subject Page
1 Genesis of the Report. .  . 9. :- क्र
2 Action taken for inviting comments I
3-4 Clause 7 Recognition of Churches—objection to princi- va
Clause 7 Advisory Committee—composition. . . 3
6 Clause 7 Reoogattion of {Churches—which Government 3-4
7 Other points
3 Clause 2(a) = “Christian"—defnition = st 4
9 Clause अब) “ Desertion "—definition 4
10 Clause आफ) “ Licensed Minister”—definition - - +s
1 Clause 2) “ Prohibited relationship” ५ . - $
2 Clause. 3 Marriage between Christians 5
3 Clause 4() Conditions of marriage—prohibited relationship 5-6
14 Clause 4(@2) Conditions of marriage~age. 5 6
15 Clause 4(v) Conditions of marriage—consent of guardian 6
16 Clanse 4(vt) Conditions of marriage—domicile . न . 6-7
17-18 Clause s(x) Consent of guardian in marriage . 7
19 Clauses 5(4) Permission of district court.» sek
and 565)
20 Clause 6(a) © Who may solemnize marriages—Ministers of
recognised Church . 8
ar Clause 7 Recognition of Churches . : पु . 8
az Clause = 9{1) Marriage Registrars in India . . 8
23 Clause = 11(1) Solemnization of marriages by Ministers of
recognised Churches. sgh
a4 11)(6) Solemnization of marriages by Ministers of
recognised Chi 9
25 Clause 13(d) Procedure to be followed by licensed Minister
on receipt of notice . दि
26 16 (3) and 17{1) Objection to certificate. पु . . . >



(B®)

आज mee as
27 20 Solemnization of marriage by licensed Minister - 10
38 24° Restitution . . . . पु पु . 10
29 25 Judicial separation + . . . . १५५]
३०३1. 77 Void marriages. 6 eek, या
32 282) - Macriage voidable for under-age or want of

consent of guardian . . ar
33 30 Grounds of divorce—general . - : It
34 ६० ६ ॥ (18 Grounds of divorce—conversion  - न पु It
35 BOXT (oii) Grounds of divorce——wilful refusal co consum-

mate . 7 . TI-Iz
36 30D) Grounds of divorcescruelty. 9. 2. 2
37 3० (1) Grounds of divorce—mutual consent. . 12
38 = Divorce—other suggestions . पु . . १0 £ 1
39 33 Remarriage of divorced persons . 0. 33
40 36(3) Court to which petition to be made . 13
ब्रा 36 Exparte decree. . wk, 13
42 3663) . Court ta which petition to be made—backward

areas : + 13-14
43 First Schedule Prohibited relationships - : . पु न 14
44 o Concsion |... ५5 9. < 14
45 Appendix T4-15

APPENDIX—Changes recommended in the Bill. . . पु : 16



REPORT ON THE CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE AND
MATRIMONIAL CAUSES BILL, 1961

The Ministry of Law referred to the previous Law
Commission the subject of revision of the law relating
to marriage and divorce amongst Christians in India. On
receipt of the reference, the present Commission prepared
a draft Bill, and circulated it for comments to the State
Governments, High Courts, High Court Bar Associations
and other interested bodies and persons, including several
Churches and other organisations of Christians. The Com-
mission also recorded the evidence of a number of persons
on the subject. After considering the comments received
and the oral evidence recorded, the Commission submitted
its Report on the subject, being the 15th Report of the Com-
mission (Law relating to Marriage and Divorce amongst
Christians in India). In conformity with the usual practice
of the Commission, the Report discussed the main changes
recommended in the law and contained an Appendix which
showed, in the form of a draft Bill, the recommendations
of the Commission.

The Ministry of Law, in implementation of the Report
of the Commission, prepared a formal Bill for approval of
Government before introduction in Parliament. It was,
however, decided by the Government that public opinion
should again be. elicited on the Bill and that this should
be done through the Law ‘Commission. That is how the
matter has come up again before the Commission.

2. On receipt of the reference from Government, we
decided to circulate the Bill prepared by the Ministry to
all persons or bodies who had shown their interest in the
subject at the time of our previous Report by sending writ-
ten comments or offering oral evidence on the draft Bill
circulated at that time. Further, we sent copies of the Bill
to the State Governments, High Courts and High Court Bar
Associations for their comments. Copies were also supplied
to several other persons and bedies who applied for the
same. A large number of comments were received, and
from a perusal of them it will be seen that while the Bill
has in general been received with satisfaction some of its
provisions have come in for some comment or criticism.
Most of these are repetitions of what had been stated be-
fore us, and as they have been fully discussed in the
previous Report, we shall deal with them briefly in this
report.

Genesis of
the Report.

Action
taken for
inviting 4

3. There is, however, one point on which there has been Clause 7—
a considerable body of criticism, and as that is one of sub- Recognition

stance, we shall consider it fully at the very outset. That

Churches—

has reference to the category of recognised Churches under objection to

clause 7.


z

Section 5 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872,
enumerates five different modes in which marriage could
be solemnized. At the time when we invited comments
and heard oral evidence for our previous Report, we found
that there was a large body of opinion that this differentia-
tion should be abolished, and one uniform mode prescrib-
ed for all marriages between Christians. If we were to
accept this view, it would have been necessary to provide
that all marriages should be solemnized by Ministers of
Religion licensed by the State. In our previous Report,
we declined to accede to this suggestion, because there
were certain ancient and well-established Churches, like
the Roman Catholic Church, and the Anglican Church, in
which Ministers who derived their authority from episcopal
ordination solemnized marriages in accordance with well-
defined rules prescribed by the Church. To require that
marriages between persons belonging to those Churches
should be solemnized by a Minister licensed by the State,
might be challenged as constituting the super-imposition
-of an outside authority on the Churches in what is a matter
of religion and therefore repugnant to the Constitution.
It was also pointed out that there were likewise other
teligious denominations, which had also well-defined rules
as to the persons who could solemnize marriages between
its members, and the procedure te be followed in such
solemnization, and that they would also be entitled to
claim similar constitutional protection. It was in view of
this that we recommended the enactment of a general pro-
vision whereunder every Church which satisfied the condi-
tions laid down in clause 7(2), might be classed as a recog-
nised Church, such recognition being for the purpose of
protecting the rights conferred on religious denominations
under the Constitution.

4. (a) On this, the question arose as to what Churches
should be recognised for the purpose of clause 7. The
Indian Christian Marriage Act had referred to certain
Churches. There could be no difficulty with reference to
them. Similarly, there are other Churches which also
satisfy all the requirements of clause 7. If these were all
the Churches, we should ourselves have included them in
a Schedule to the Bill, That could be seen from what we
have observed in our_previous Report. But the evidence
disclosed that several new Churches had been formed or
were in the course of formation. If they are in fact
religious denominations, they can also claim the same
protection as the older Churches. To exclude them from
the Schedule svould have been unjust, apart from such
exclusion being open to criticism on constitutional grounds.
That is the reason why we left the recognition of Churches
as a whole to he made by the Government. Therefore, the

Tigh Report, pages TI-12, partsto—2.


3

complaint that the provision for recognition of a Church
under clause 7 is unconstitutional, is, in our view, based
on a misapprehension and is wholly unfounded. To set
the controversy at rest, we suggest that the definition of
“recognised Church” in clause 50 may now be modified
so as to include expressly the Churches referred to in sec-
tion 5 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, while at
the same time making provision for the recognition of
other Churches which satisfy the prescribed conditions.
It will, as modified, run as follows:—

“Recognised Church means—
(i) the Church of Rome,
{ii} the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon,

(ili) the Church of Scotland. and any other
Church declared to be a recognised Church under
section 7.”

(b) Consequential on this, we recommend that defini-
tions of the “Church of Rome” and the “Church of Scat-
land” may be included in clause 2 of the Bill! (The
Anglican Church has now come to be known as the Church
of India, Burma and Ceyion.)

5. Another question which has been raised is as regards
the composition of the Advisory Committee. It is obvious
that in the matter of appointing members to the Commit-
tee, the statute should not impose any restriction. but
should leave the whole matter to the discretion of the
Government. We had already recommended that certain
well-established Churches should be recognised by the
statute itself. In the circumstances, the only Churches
which would like to apply for recognition would be
new Churches, and we have no doubt that the Government
would bear this in mind when appointing members to the
Advisory Committee.

6. Another point raised with reference to the recogni-
tion of Churches is, that it is better done at the level Poe
the Centre, rather than States. The matter was. left to
the State Government with a view to expeditious dis] posal.
in view of the large number of applications that might be
received, But in view of the change which we have re-
commended in the definition of “recognised Churches”! we
think that this matter could advantageously be dealt with
by the Central Government, and the Advisory Committee
should also be appointed by the Central Government. This
has the additional advantage of securing uniformity in
the standards to be applied in according recognition. We,

40f, the definitions of these expressions in the Indian Christian Marriage
Act, 1872.

*See para. 4, supra,

Clmse 7

Advisory
ittes—

composition,

Clause 7—
Recognition
o =
ches— which
Government
to have
power.


Other
poines.

‘Clause 2(¢)—

therefore, recommend that clause 7 should. be modified by
substituting the Central Government in place of the State
Government wherever the State Government is mentioned
in that clause.

7. Taking up now the other points raised in the repre-
sentations, we shall deal only with such of them as call for
consideration and further elucidation, and we proceed to
do so in the order of the clauses in the Bill.

8. Clause 2(a) of the Bill defines a Christian as a per-

“ Christian”. son professing the Christian religion. It has now been

Clause 2(c)—
“desertion”,

‘Clare 2(0--

“Licensed
Minister 7.

suggested that a Christian may be defined as “one who is
baptised and is a follower of Church”, or as “a member of
a recognised Church” or as a “person, who is an official
member of any Christian Church in aceordance with the
rules and regulations governing a particular Church”.
These arc merely repetitions of the suggestions made be-
tore, which have been carefully considered in the previous
Report!, Religion is primarily a matter of faith and belief,
anid it is not desirable to cut down its connotation by
reference to organisational and ceremonial prescriptions.
There is, therefore, no reason for modifying the definition
given in the Bil

9. A criticism has been made against the definition of
“desertion” given in the Bill, that it will be difficult. to
prove objectively the intention to bring cchabitation per-
manently to an end. The definition given in section 16(2),
Explanation, of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, is, it is said,
better and might be adopted for uniformity. But that defi-
nition does not bring out all the ingredients of desertion,
and its precise scope has been the subject of consideration
in a Bombay case. .The definition in the Bill has been
framed in the light of that decision with a view to avoid-
ing further controversies. This has been fully explained
in the previous Report’. As for the difficulty in proving
intention, there are several other questions im which the
intention of a person becomes a material element, and the
courts heve to record a finding thereon on evidence plaged
before them. It has been observed that “the state of a
man’s mind is as much a question of fact as his digestion”,
and that it is a matter of inference from the facts proved.
We consider that there is no ground fcr modifying the
definition. है

10, An objection is taken to the expression “Minister of
Church” occurring in thé definition of “licensed, Minister”.
It is stated, that is not the correct. phrase and that the cor-
rect phrase is “Minister of religion’ .. We had adopted the
expression “Minister of Church” in preference to “Minister
of religion”, because the word “religion” means primarily

18ee the 1507 Report, page 85, Notes to clause 2— Christian”.
2, 5th Report, pages &s—87, Notes to clause 2—“ desertion mo


5

the faith and belief of a person who professes religion and
is of a wide import. On the other hand, the word
“Church” signifies the creed and the practice of religion
associated with a particular institution, and is more defi-
nite. in view of the fact that there area number of
Churches which, though they profess the Christian faith,
differ from each other in their doctrines and rituals, the
expression “Minister of Church” was considered more
appropriate. We do not recommend any change.

11. It has been suggested that the words “ancestor” Clause हुक
and “ancestress" in Explanations II and III to the defini- ee,
tion of “prohibited relationship” are inappropriate in the
context and that the words “father”, and “mother” should
be substituted as more appropriate. The words “ancestor”
and “‘ancestress” are, however, terms of art, meaning the
fineal ascendant with reference to the concept of full blood.

These are the words used in the Hindu Marriage Act and
the Hindu Succession Act, and for uniformity it has been
considered advisable to retain these words.

12. A point urged against clause 3 is, that it does not ee 2-

provide for solemnisation of a marriage between a Chris- between
tian and a non-Christian according to Church rites. This Christians,
point was raised at the hearing held before the previous
Report, and it has been fully? dealt with by us. It has tobe
noted that the Bill puts ne impediments in the way of a
Christian marrying a non-Christian, It has been pointed
out in the previous Report that “the scheme of legislation
has, latterly, been that laws governing marriages in a par-
ticular religious denomination should have application
only when both the parties to the marriage belong to that
religious denomination”, It has also further been pointed
out, that to permit such marriage under this legislation
would lead to conflict in the application of laws relating to
succession and so forth. There does not appear to be any
good reason why a sacramental form of marriage should
be insisted upon when a Christian marries a non-Christian.
It has not been shown that there is any advantage to be
gained in performing such marriages. The Special Mar-
riage Act, 1954 is an enactment which is specially intended
to provide for solemnizing such marriages, and can be
availed of in such cases.

13. The main attack against clause 4(ii)—prohibited Clause 4()—
relationship—is with reference to the exception in favour Cond tions of
of custom. It is said that it should not be recognised, But prohibited
custom is a well-recognised source of law according to the telationship.
jurisprudence of this country as well as other countries. It
has played ari important part in shaping the society of this
country; an exception has also been made in its favour
in section 5 (iv) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Now to
prohibit custom would produce mischief and confusion in

~ASee asth Report, page 3, pars gs SSCSCSC~CS<S7S; TT
339 MofL.—2 हु coy


6

the. law relating to family reiations. We are therefore
unable to agree that the custom should be excluded.

it has been suggested that the custom must he one re-
cognised by the Church. But custom is, according to its
true concept, some rule in derogation of the general law, in
rogue in a parciecler religion or a community. There can
se fo suck thing as the customs of a Chuzeh” It can only
mean “rules of the Church”,

One other suggestion with reference to this clause is,
that the custom should be recognised if it is permitted by
the Church to which either of the parties belong. This is to
forget that marriages are bilateral’, and cannot be accepted.

Clause gz) 14. We have received a number of suggestions as to the
* Conditions age of the bride and the bridegroom. Ine suggestion is,
ae 8, that the ege should be 21 years for bovh the parties in
86% a ceordance witn the canon law. Another suggestion is,
that it should be 25 years for the bridegroom ont 2 21 foy the
bride. A third suggestion is, that it should be 16 for the
bride. It must be remembered in this connection that
there is no uniformity in the marriage laws of several
tountries, and this is due to differences in the local condi-
tions. In India, the age fixed for marriage in the other
statutes 18 18 for the bridegroom and 15 for the bride, and
that is also the age adopted in the Child Marsiage Restraint
Act. In conformity with the othe: pieces egislssion
‘seating on this top.c, arc having regard to the conditions of
this country, we consider that the age of marriage should
be a8 proposed in the Bill,

Clause 4@)— 45, Clause 4(v) provides that, where the bride has not

मिला 4 completed the age of 18 years, the consent in writing of

consent of ‘her guardian or the district court should be obtained for

gvardien, the marriage. It has been suggested that the consent of
the minor bride 2lso should be obtained, and conformably
tc that suggesticn, it jg said that jn the declasation form,
sze should put ker signatures. We are waab's to accept this
suggestion. It was pointed out in cur previous report that,
as a mincr is in law inespable of giving a consent, it can-
not be prescribed as e condition of a valid matriags that
she should give the consent. We are, therefore, unable to
recommend any change.

are sete 16. It is provided in clause 4(vi) that, where the mar-
‘age Tiage is solemnized outside India, both parties should be
denise domiciled in India. Ik has been scggested that the Bill
should provide for marriages outside india even when both

the parties are not domicifed im India. This Suggestion pro-

ceeds on a misconception as to the trie scope of this legisle-

tion. According to the rules of private international law,

the Legislature of a country can ecact ६ law with reference

“Gf. agth Report, page #6, pera 2g



7

to marriages performed inside its territory, or where it is

formed outside, if both parties thereto are domiciled
in the country. The object of the Bill, as explained in the
Report!, is to provide for both these classes of marriage.

17. As regards clause 5(1), it has been suggested that cas a
9 in

where the minor bride is nct living with her parents, bu!

is under the care and custody of some other relation or marriage.

person, that other person should have the authority to give
consent to the marriage as a de facto guardian. We do not
accept this suggestion. The trend of legislation and judi-
cial decisions latterly has been to construe narrowly the
powers of the de facto guardian, and there is very good rea-
son for this, because it is easy for any stranger to put him-
self in the position of a de facto guardian and expose the
minor to risks by his acts. As already observed by us in
our previous Report?, the de facto guardian can obtain the
leave of the district court, and, therefore, it is unnecessary
to specifically mention him in the list of guardians.

18. (9) It has also been suggested that, failing the father
and mother and a de facto guardian, the parties should have
a right to apply. tc the ecclesiastical’ authorities for obtain-
ing consent for the marriage. This has also been consider-
ed by us in our previous Report’ wherein we have expres-
sed the opinion that the function of granting permission
to an intended marriage in such cases is one which per-
tains to the domain of civil rights and is properly co! nffdled
to the courts.

(9) Another criticism which has been levelled against
the scheme of clause 5 may be mentioned. Under sub-
clause (3), when a person, entitled to guardianship under
sub-clause (1) refuses, or is for any cause unable or unfit
to act as such, the person next in order should be entitled
to be the guardian. It is said that under this clause, when
the father refuses to give his consent, the brother might
act as guardian and give consent to the marriage and that
would lead to disharmony in the family. This criticism
proceeds on a misapprehension as to the true scope of the
provision. It is only when the person first in order refuses
to act as guardian that the person next in order will have
the right to act as guardian, Where there is a refusal to
give consent, there is no refusal to act as guardian, and the
person next in the order of guardianship will have no right
to act as guardian.

19. Under clause 5(4), when a guardian tefuses to con- Clauses
sent without just cause, "the parties to the intended mar- and road

riage may apply to the district court for permission. It

315th Report, page 4, et seq. para. § (marriages inside India) and aps कक .
dia),

Notes to clause 1 fe} \—Marciage—Application (marriages outside
3866 rsth Report, page 17, para, 26,
*Sec 15th Report. page 17, para. 27.

Permission
of district


8

is suggested that this provision should not apply where the
guardian is a father or a mother. We have considered this
aspect in our previous report', and do not see any reason
to change our decisicn,

Clause 6(¢)- 20. Coming to clause 6(a), it has been suggested -that
Whe may some guthority in a recognised Chureh should have the
marriages duty of informing the State Government of the names of
Ministers of Ministers entitled to perform the marriage. At one stage
recognised we were of the view that such a prevision would be useful
Churches. 16 the Registrar-General in checking up the marriage re-
cords, and a suitable clause to that effect was inserted in
the Bill originally circulated for comments” before prepara-
tion of' our previous Report. However, after evidence was
taken, we came to the conclusion that, having regard tc the
large number of Ministers functioning atl over the coun-
try, the provision would be unworkable and, accordingly,
we dropped it. We do not see any necessity for restoring
it.
‘Clause 7. 21. Suggesticns relating to clause 7 have been already
dealt with’,

Clause 9(r) 22. Under clause 9(1), the State Government may by

Marriage notification appoint any person to be a Marriage Registrar

Registrars for any district. It has been suggested by a number of

in India, persons that the Registrar should be a Christian. Section
7 ot the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, does provide
that all Marriage Registrars shall be Christians. We made
a departure from this provision, because we wanted tc pro-
vide for a contingency when no Christian may be available
in an area for being appointed as a Marriage Registrar.
And as there is no question of the marriage being sacra-
mental when it is performed before the Registrar, we con-
sidered that it would be convenient if no condition were
imposed as to who should be the Marriage Registrar. Our
intention was, that the Registrar should ordinarily be a
Christian, but in case where one was not ‘available, it
should be open to the Government to appcint a non-Chris-
tian as Registrar. We have once again considered the mat-
ter, and we think that there is no need to make any change
in the provision, because we have no doubt that the Gov-
ernment will appoint Christians as Marriage Registrars
wherever practicable.

3See isth Report, page 91, Notes on clause 5 (4).

2Clause 75 of the Bill which was circulated for opinion before preparing
the 15th Repott made such @ provision. It ran as follows — :

© The prescribed authority of every Church entered in the Second
Schedule shall send to the Central Government at the prescribed in-
tervals a list of its functionaries authorised to solemnize marriages under
this Act and the churches or chapels where they are authorised to solem-
nize such marriages.”

386४ paras. 3 to 6, supra.


23. A criticism has been levelled against clause 11 that Clause rr
there is no guidance in it as to what a Minister on, ole
of a recognised Church should do, if an objection ion
is preferred against an intended marriage. But it o¢ मु
will be seen that subclause (2) contains several by Minisery
directions which the Minister has to observe, and of recognised
they are sufficient guidance to him in deciding objec- ™
tion to the marriage. It should, further, be remem-
bered that this provision applies only to recognised
Churches, and these Churches have detailed regulations
governing the matter, and the Minister would certainly be
guided by these rules.

24, Clause 11 (2) (9) provides that no marriage shall Clause रा)
be solemnized if a lawful impediment is shown to the Om i a
solemnization thereof. It has been suggested that after tion of
the words ‘lawful impediment’, the words ‘according to the marriages
rules of the Church to which the Minister belongs, for the by Minis-
solemnization of the marriage’ should be added. We have Coenked g
discussed in the previous Report? the impediments contain- Churches
ed in the Church Rules and given our reasons for not
adopting them. We adhere to that opinion. It may be
noted in this connection that, under clause 70 of the Bill,

a Minister of a recognised. Church cannot be compelled to
solemnize any marriage, the solemnization of which may
be contrary to the rules of the Chureh.

25, Clause 13(d) provides that, where the bride is a Cause 13
minor, the licensed Minister shall send a copy of the @—
notice of the intended marriage to the Senior Marriage Procedure to
Registrar of the district, who shall send a_ copy of the Pe followed
notice again to each of the other Marriage Registrars. It Minister on
has been suggested, that this provision is cumbersome, ex- receipt of
pensive and unnecessary and that it would be sufficient if notice.
the notice of marriage is sent not to the Senior Marriage
Registrar, but to the Marriage Registrar for the part of the
district where the bride resides, As to this, it may be
pointed out that the Bill follows the existing law as enact-
ed in sections 15 and.16 of the Indian Christian Marriage
Act, 1872 and we do not consider it necessary to change it.

26. Clause 16(3) provides that the licensed Minister or Clause 16
the Marriage Registrar shall decide an objection _ to the कि
marriage within 30 days. A point has been raised as to oi ern
what would happen if the licensed Minister or the Marriage and clause |
Registrar fails to decide the objection withi the period 170)
prescribed.. The suggestion is that they should, in that
case, apply to the district court for extension of time, We
do not accept the suggestion: We think that ‘the better
course would be to provide that where the irtquiry is not
concluded within 30 days, any party shall have the right
to apply to the district court for determination of the
objection. This can be done by suitable amendment of
clause 17 of the Bill.

जड़ा Report, page 17, para. 29.



Clause 20—
Solemniza-
tion of
matriage
‘by lieensed
ster,

Clause 24-+
Restitution,

Clause 25—
_ Tudicial
‘separation.

10

27, Clause 20 provides for a licensed Minister solem-
nizing marriage according te such form or ceremony as
obtains in the Church to which the licensed Minister be-
longs. It has been suggested, that this provision would
create difficulties, where the marriage takes place between
a Catholic and a non-Catholic, or between a Christian and
a non-Christian, and that as the marriage in the above
cases is not sacramental, the parties should be free to
choose the form of marriage. We agree that marriage
between a Christian and a non-Christian is not sacramen-
tal, and that is why we have excluded it from the opera-
tion of this Bill. As for marriage between a Catholic and
a non-Catholic Christian, we do not agree that it is not
sacramental. For the sake of uniformity and clarity, it
would be advantageous to provide that the marriage must
be performed in accordance with the rules of the Church
to which the Minister belongs. This will make for uni-
formity and simplification, and we do not consider that it
is likely to cause inconvenience.

28. A suggestion has heen made by the High Court of
Andhra Pradesh that the adjudications under clauses 24,
26, 27, 28 and 30 should be described not as ‘decrees’, but as
‘orders’, because they would not be ‘decrees’ within section
2(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. But that definition
has a bearing only on the question of appealability of de-
cisions under that Code. A decree is appealable under
section 96 and section 100 of the Code, whereas an order
is appealable only under section 104. But so far as appeals
under the Bill are concerned, they are governed not by
section 2(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, but by clause 49
of the Bill, and, therefore, the question whether the ad-
judications under clauses 24, 26, 27, 28 and 30 amount to
“decrees” within section 2(2) of the Civil Procedure Code
is not relevant. Moreover, even on a question of termino-
logy, adjudications in_matrimonia] causes have been des-
crtbed as decrees in England [vide the (English) Matri-
monial Causes Act, 1950] and that has also been the legis-
lative practice in India. We do not consider that a depar-
ture from practice is called for.

29. Regarding clause 25, the suggestion has been reo
peated that there is no need to provide for the passing of
decrees for judicial separation, as on the same grounds,
divorce could be granted. But it has been explained in
the previous Report,! that the Roman Catholics do not
recognise divorce and that there are also considerable
sections among Protestants who are averse to divorce, and
that they would prefer a decree for a judicial separation
to a decree of dissolution of marriage. In our opinion, no
ground has been shown for going back on the view taken

us.

3See rgth Report, page 23, pata. 44.


li

30, With reference to clause 27, it has been suggested Clause 27-0
that if either party is a lunatic or idiot, marriage should Void mar-
be void and not merely veidable as provided in clause "#8
28(1) (a). In our previous Report! we have observed that
a large preponderance of opinion was in favour of limiting
the category of void marriages within the narrowest limits,
because the children of such marriages would be illegi-
timate. We, therefore, do not accept the suggestion that
Inarriage with a lunatic or idiot should be declared void.

31. Another suggestion which has been made with re-
ference to this clause is, that a third party should not fave
the right to move the court for nullity of marriage, and
that such a right should be given only either to the
parties to the marriage or to the previous marriage. This
question has been fully considered in our previous
Report*, There is a well-established distinction between
marriages which are void and which are voidable, and
as observed in Halsbury,® “suits for annulling void as dis-
tinct from voidable marriages may be instituted not only
by the parties to the marriage, but also by persons having
a financial interest in the matter and even after both
parties are dead”. We are, therefore, not for restricting
the clause in the manner suggested.’ We may point out
that section 24(1) of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, also
does not contain any such restriction.

32. Under clause 28(2), a marriage is voidable, if the Clause 28
bridegroom has not completed the age of 18 years, or if Ora
{the bride being under 18 years of age), consent of the Jondabe for
Suardian has not been obtained. It has been suggested under-age
that this is too drastic a provision and that the marriage or want of
should not be liable to be avoided on the aforesaid grounds. वा रण
This question has been considered by us in our previous .
Report! and we déiot find any sufficient ground for
coming to a different conclusion.

., 38. Coming next to clause 30, a number of suggestions Ciause 30.
have been put forward as to the grounds on which divorce Grounds of
could be granted, It is strongly pressed on us that divorce divorce—
is repugnant to Christian faith, and to canon law, and eneral.
should not be permitted except on the ground of adultery

or conversion. We have given in our previous Report our

Teasons why we cannot accept this’, Nothing has ber

said to persuade us to change the view taken ry us.

34. Referring to clause 30(1) (ii) which confers a right Clause 30
on the husband or the wife to sue for divorce on the ground (1) (॥)--
that the respondent has ceased to be a Christian by con- Grounds of
version te ancther religion, it has been suggested that in divorce

“~4sth Report, page 19, par gq Report, page 19, para. 33.

*tsth Report, pages to0-101—Notes on clause 27.

*Halsbury, 3rd edition, Vol. KIL, p. 236 para. 422, second sub-para,

‘r5th Report, page 1o1, Notes on clause 28 @).

*rsth Report, page 26, para. 48.



12

such a case, there should be a provision for granting divorce
at the instance of the converted spouse also. Advancing
the same suggestion with a more limited objective, it is.
urged that under the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution
Act, 1886, a person, who is converted to Christianity, could
sue for dissolution of marriage when: the non-converted
spouse deserts or repudiates the convért, and that a pro-
vision to that effect should also be inserted in the present
clause. The question of dissolving a marriage contracted
before conversion, at the instance of the very party, who
becomes a convert, arises not merely when the conversion
is to Christianity, but also to other religions, and is one of
general importance. In our view there should be a law
applicable to all conversions irrespective of the fact whe-
ther it is to Christianity or some other religion, and on
that basis a separate Report! has been submitted by the
Law Commission. In view of this, there is no need to
consider these suggestions in this Report.

‘Clause 3०1) 35. It has been suggested with reference to clause
iD os of 30(1)(vii) that wilful refusal to consummate a marriage
divoree— Should not be a ground for divorce but that the marriage
wilfulre- itself should be declared a nullity. This question has been
fusal to discussed in our previous Report* and we do not see any
consummate. sround for changing our views.

Clause ३०1) 36. It has also been suggested that whet is cruelty for
©, ds of the purposes of clause 30{1) (x) should be defined. “This
unds of question, again, has been-diseussed by us in our previous
cruelty, report? and for the reasons given there; we consider that
it would be inexpedient to lay down any rules as to what

would amount to cruelty; .

Clause 30 37. It has been suggested that a provision should be
® |- Grounds inserted to the effect that both the wife and the husband
शक may present a joint petition for dissolution of marriage
Soneent, Without assigning any reason thereto. This practically
amounts to granting divorce by consent and goes even
farther than section 28 of the Special Marriage Act. We,
have, in our previous report’, given our reasons for reject-
ing divorce on any such grounds, and we see no reason for

adopting a different view.

Divorce— 38. Apart from the above, same suggestions have been
other sug- made touching matters of detail, such as that the period
gestions, mentioned in clause 30(1) (४1), (iv) and (v) should be
ineréased from three to five years, and that the periods
specified in clause 30(1) (viii) and (ix) should be reduced
by half. We see no force in them. The suggestion has
also been repeated that leprosy should’ be a ground for

"18th Report (Conyerts’ Marriage Dissolution Act).
4tsth Report, page 28, para. 53.
*isth Report, page 28, para. 56.
‘i5th Report, page 30, para. 61.


8

divorce only if it had net. been contracted from-the peti-
tioner. These and similar .euggestions' have been ‘fully
considered by us in our previous report and we do not
consider it necessary to travel the same. ground over again.
Suffice it to say that we see no reason for modifying the
decisions taken thereon.

39. With reference to clause 33 which allows remarriage Clause 33
after final decree of divorce, it has been suggested that at Remarriage
least one year should elapse between the inal order of of divorced
divorce and remarriage; such a provision, it is argued, will

act as a moral check on the parties as well as on the society.

We may, however, point out that the Bill prescribes an

interval between the decree nisi and the decree absolute

for divorce—clause 42. The purpose of prohibiting
marriage after the dissolution, namely, to prevent resort -

to divorce proceedings for getting rid of the wife so as to

be able to marry another woman is, as pointed out in our

previous Report!, better served by prescribing an interval

between the two decrees as proposed in the Bill, rather

than by having a provision barring remarriage after. the

final decree. Questions of paternity of children born after

the final decree would also not arise when a minimum

interval between the two decrees is laid down. No change

is, therefore, necessary in the Bill on this point.

40. We have received some suggestions as to the condi- Clause 36(3)
tions under which Indian courts could grant relief with “jCQut 0
reference to marriages sdlemnized outside India, as propns- tion (० be
ed in clause 35(a); and the courts in which proceedings made.
could be taken for relief in matrimonial causes when the
respondent is residing outside India as provided in clause 36.

The provisions in the Bill are in accordance with the

accepted principles applicable to the matter, and we are

of opinion that they are ample for doing justice.

41. There is also no need to add a provision that. when Clause 36—
a respondent does not eppear in a proceeding under this ge pas parte
legislation, and-an ex parte decree is passed, he or she *
should have the right to have it set aside for sufficient cause.
because the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code will be
applicable by force of clause 38%, and an a application, for that
relief will be competent. under 0.9, r. 13, Civil Procedure
Code. 4 . हु . .

42, Tt bas been suggested that in backward areas, suck Clause 36
as the Union Territory of Tripura, there are no communi- o.
cations and parties are unedueated, and that to confer juri which pete
diction on the ordinary civil courts in matrimonial cases it tion to be
such-an area would be most inconvenient. But’ decisions on made—
matrimonial disputes must have serious repercussion on
family life, and they must be.entrusted to competent-courts. ="
There is no reason why, on such a matter, the people of

पड Report, page 40, para. 78. .
4xsth Report, pp. 99-100, Notes on Clauses—clause 26 (४).


Conclusions,

Appendix,

14

Tripura should be dealt with differently from Christians
in other places. Even now, the Indian Divorce Act, 1869,
applies to the whole of India (excopt Jammu and Kashmir) -
including Tripure, and. gives juri: diction to the civil courts.

The proposal in the Bill does not introduce any change in
the existing law. What is now suggested is that a depar-
ture should be made from the existing law. We are unable
to accept the suggestion. In this connection, it may be
noted that the expression “District Court” is so defined as
to include any court suberdinate to a District Court, which
may be specified in this behalf.

43. The first Schedule to the Bill gives a list of prohibit-
ed relations. The question as to who should be placed in
this list is one of considerable difficulty, as there is no agree-
ment among the several sections of the Christians thereon.
In view of the serious consequences which marriage be-
tween prohibited relations entails, it was considered desir-
able to enumerate in the list only those relations marriage
between whom was prohibited by all sections of the society.
There is a large body of opinion that father's sister, mother’s
sister, father’s brother and mother’s brother should be put
in the list of prohibited relations. At one stage we shared
this opinion and that is why we included them in the list
attached to the draft Bill, which was originally circulated
for opinion. After evidence was taken, the matter
assumed a different complexion. As pointed out in our
previous Report’, marriage between some of the relations,
though not favoured generally by the community, could be
solemnized after obtaining Papal dispensation therefor. As
there is no place for a Papal dispensation in the scheme of
the Act, we considered thet the proper course was to omit
these relations from the list and leave the prohibition of
marriages between those relations to be regulated by public
opinion and not by statute. Again there is a suggestion
that marriage with the daughter or son of the maternal
uncle and. paternal uncle should also be prohibited. As
to this, i tf appears that marriages between them are special.
ly favow in certain communities, especially in South
India, and it was considered that to prohibit those marriages
would strike at the very root of family life. This is pre-
eminently a subject in which custom should be the para-
mount law, We have accordingly considered it inadvisable
to ignore it. We do not, therefore, recommend any change.

44. We have considered all the suggestions of substance
put forward before us and we recommend for adoption the
छा as drafted, subject to the modifications suggested here.

45. We have, in the Appendix, given a summary of the
points on which we have recommended changes in the Bill.

31501 Report, page 15, para. 23.


15

1, 7. 1.. VENKATARAMA ATYAR—Chairman.
2. L, 5. MISRA.

3. 5. R. RAJAGOPAUL.

4. 8. CHAUDHURL
+5, N. A. PALKEHIVALA. J

6. D. BASU—Member-Secretary.

Members.

- New Detui;
The Ath December, 1961.

“Shri N. A. Palkhivala could not attend the deliberations pertaining to
the Report and has therefore been unable to sign it.

\


APPENDIX

Changes recommended in the Christian Marriage sents
. Matrimonial Cavises Bill, 1961

Clause 2 .
New definitions to be added Definition of the Church
of Rome and Church of Scotland may be addedi,
Clouse 2 “Recognised Church”

The definition of recognised Church should be altered
80 as to read as follows:—

“recognised Church” means the Church of ‘Rome, *
the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon and the Church
of Scotland, and includes a Church declared to be a
recognised Church under section 7%.

Clause 7

The power of recognition of Churches and the 9} =
ment of an Advisory Committee for such recognition id’
be vested in the Central Government instead of the ite
Government?

Clause 17

Where the licensed Minister or the Marriage ete
does not decide the objection to an intendéd riage
within 30 days, any party should be free to apply.*ta the
district court for a determination of the matter. Clause Nf.
may be widened to cover such a situation alsot

1Para. 4(5), body of the Report.
*Para, 4 (a), body of the Report.
*Para, 6, body of the Report.
“Para, 26, body of the Repurt.

16
GMGIPND—T.S.S.— 399 M, of 1ew—8-2-1962—a0ca