 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Need to fix Maximum Chargeable Court-fees in
Subordinate Civil Courts
Report No. 220
March 2009

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 220)
Need to fix Maximum Chargeable Court-fees in
Subordinate Civil Courts
Forwarded  to  the  Union  Minister  for  Law  and
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of
India  by Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,  Chairman,
Law  Commission  of  India,  on   the   30th  day of
March, 2009. 
The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the
16th October,  2006,  issued  by the Government of
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.

The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff

Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh :  Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in

©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as
Government copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor,
ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001,
India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in 
 

D.O. No. 6(3)/154/2007-LC (LS)        30th
March, 2009
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji,
Subject: Need to fix Maximum Chargeable Court-fees in
    Subordinate Civil Courts
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  220th Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject. 
Justice  Krishna  Iyer  Committee  on  Legal  Aid  stated  that
“something  must  be  done,  we  venture  to  state,  to  arrest  the
escalating vice of burdensome scales of court fee.  That the State
should not sell justice is an obvious proposition, but the high rate of
court fee now levied leaves no valid alibi is also obvious”. 
The Supreme Court in Secretary to Government of Madras v.
P. R. Sriramulu [(1996) 1 SCC 345] observed that there should also
be  some  measures  of  uniformity  in  the  scales  of  court-fees
throughout the country as there appears to be a vast difference in the
scales of court-fees in various States of the country. The feasibility of
a  fixed  maximum  chargeable  fee  also  deserves  serious
consideration.
The Law Commission had also as far back as 1958 in its 14th
Report  on  “Reform  of  Judicial  Administration”  recommended  that
there should be a broad measure of equality in the scales of court-
fees  all  over  the  country,  and  that  there  should  also  be  a  fixed
maximum to the fee chargeable.
In  its  189th Report  titled  “Revision of Court  Fees  Structure”
(2004), the Commission did not find any reason to take a different
view  than  the  one  expressed  by  the  Supreme  Court  and  the
Commission in its 14th and 128th Reports that the underlying real
reason for enhancement of court fees appears to be the collection of
more revenue by the States which is not sound public policy. On the
other hand, higher court fee will discourage the honest and genuine
poor litigant. The Commission emphasized that any enhancement of

court fee should not adversely affect the right of access to justice.
Further, the amount collected by way of court fee should not be more
than the expenditure incurred in administration of civil justice. Subject
to these limitations only, the amount of fixed court fee prescribed
under Schedule 2 of the Court-fees Act, 1870 may be enhanced in
proportion to the extent of devaluation of the rupee.
In view of the above, the Law Commission of India took up the
study suo motu and is of the considered opinion that there is a need
to fix maximum chargeable court fees. 
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely,
(Dr. AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001

Need to fix Maximum Chargeable Court-fees in
Subordinate Civil Courts
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No.
I. INTRODUCTION 9-10
II.    JUDICIAL VIEW AND EARLIER 
   REPORTS OF LAW COMMISSION 
   OF INDIA                                11-18
III. RECOMMENDATION 19
I. INTRODUCTION

 
1.1 Court-fees in civil courts appear to have been first levied in the
18th century by Madras Regulation III of 1782, Bengal Regulation
XXXVIII of 1795 and a Bombay Regulation of 1802.1 Paradoxically,
the  preamble to the  Bengal  Regulation  justified  the  imposition  of
court-fees  on  the  ground  that  it  would  prevent  the  institution  of
frivolous litigation.2
1.2 Justice  Krishna  Iyer  Committee  on  Legal  Aid  stated  that
“something  must  be  done,  we  venture  to  state,  to  arrest  the
escalating vice of burdensome scales of court fee.  That the State
should not sell justice is an obvious proposition, but the high rate of
court fee now levied leaves no valid alibi is also obvious”.3
1.3 Notwithstanding the above, the court-fees have come to stay.
It is settled law that a fee should broadly commensurate with the
services and bear a reasonable correlation to the cost of services
and that court-fee legislation is intended almost purely as a source of
additional revenue to the State, either necessitated or even to some
extent justified by the present day economic conditions, and hoped
that  with all-round  improvement  of  economic  condition,  the  State
would be in a  position to  afford  relief to the  litigants  by gradual
reduction and ultimate abolition of court-fee.   Now the question is
whether  the  State  is  inclined  to  follow  such  a  course  and  the
periodical revision of court-fee is justified either on facts or in law.
1   Law Commission of India, 14th  Report on “Reform of Judicial Administration” (1958)2   Ibid.3  Referred to in P. M. Ashwathanarayana Setty v.  State of Karnataka, 1989 Supp  (1) SCC 696

1.4 Setting out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons that it was
expedient  to  make  a  general  reduction  in  the  rates  of  court-fee
charged on civil suits and to revert to the principle of maximum fee
which obtained under the former law, Court-fees Act, 1870 (Act 7 of
1870)  was  enacted  by  the  Central  Government.   This  Act  was
amended in its application to the Madras State in 1922, setting out
the reason as to meet the increased cost of administration through
additional revenue in the Objects and Reasons of the amending Act.
The rates were though revised, the slab system was retained.4
1.5 The Supreme Court in Secretary to Government of Madras v.
P. R. Sriramulu5 observed that there should also be some measures
of uniformity in the scales of court-fees throughout the country as
there appears to be a vast difference in the scales of court-fees in
various States of the country. The feasibility of a fixed maximum
chargeable fee also deserves serious consideration. 
1.6 The  Law  Commission  had  also  as  far  back  as  1958
recommended that there should be a broad measure of equality in
the scales of court-fees all over the country, and that there should
also be a fixed maximum to the fee chargeable.6
1.7 In view of the above, the Law Commission of India  suo  motu
took up the study of the subject.
4  Meenakshisundaram Panchapakesan, Court Fees At Ad Valorem Scale Collected in Subordinate Civil
Courts, (2008) 6 MLJ 1315  (1996) 1 SCC 345
6  Supra note 1

II. JUDICIAL VIEW AND EARLIER REPORTS OF LAW
COMMISSION OF INDIA 
2.1 The State of Madras enacted the Madras Court-fees and Suits
Valuation Act, 1955 (Act 14 of 1955) which provides for a uniform ad
valorem fee at seven-and-a-half per cent without limit.   The High
Court of Madras, accordingly, revised its rules on the Original Side
and by rule 1 of Order 2 of the High Court Fees Rules, fixed the
court-fees in all suits instituted on or after 19.05.1955 to be levied
according to the Act 14 of 1955 and the rules framed thereunder.
Series of litigations before the High Court and the Supreme Court
questioning the validity and vires of the Act 14 of 1955 were filed on
the ground that there was no justification at all for the increase of
court-fees in 1955 and also questioned the levy of court-fee on a flat
rate of seven-and-a-half per cent on all claims without limit giving up
the slab system on tapering basis which was in vogue till 1955.7 
2.2 The  Madras  High  Court  in  the  case  of  Zenith  Lamps  and
Electricals Ltd. v. The Registrar, High Court, Madras8 rejected the
contentions  of  the  State  and  held  that  the  levy in  question  was
excessive, unreasonable and grossly disproportionate to the services
rendered and struck down the same as unconstitutional.
2.3 The State filed an appeal in the Supreme Court and the five-
Judge  Bench  of  the  Court  remanded  the  matter  to  consider  the
additional counter-affidavit filed by the State.9 On remand, the High
7  Supra note 48  1968 (1) MLJ 37
9  Secretary, Government of Madras v. Zenith Lamp and Electrical Ltd., 1974 (I) MLJ 43

Court in 197510 held that Article 1 in Schedule I of the Court-fees Act
and sub-rule (1) of rule 1 of Order 2 of the High Court Fees Rules as
invalid, holding that there is no correlation between the receipts and
the expenditure on the cost of administration of civil justice in courts.
The Division Bench of the High Court also denounced the levy of
seven-and-a-half per cent  ad valorem flat rate without limit, stating
that even Sathyamurthy’s Report did not recommend such a heavy
ad valorem fee at a flat rate without limit, but in fact suggested lower
rates of court-fee.
2.4 The above judgment came up in appeal before the Supreme
Court and the three-Judge Bench of the Court by its judgment dated
22.11.1995 in the case of Secretary To Government of Madras v. P.
R. Sriramulu11 upheld the validity of levy of  ad valorem court-fee,
holding that the amounts collected by way of court-fee on ad valorem
scale  need  not  tally  or  correspond  to  expenditure  incurred  in
administration of civil justice and the State enjoys the widest latitude
in the matters of economic regulations and the increase in the court-
fees has to be appreciated having regard to the increased need of
revenue by reason of the increased cost of the administration justice.
However, the Court did not consider the plea of justifiability for the
increase in the levy by the Act 14 of 1955, on which the case had
been earlier remanded by the Court.
2.5 On the other hand, in P. M. Ashwathanarayana Setty v.  State
of Karnataka12 a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court had held
10  P. R. Sriramulu v. Registrar, High Court, Madras, 1975 (I) MLJ 39011  (1996) 1 SCC 345
12  Supra note 3

that there should be a broad and general correlation between the fee
and expenses, not accurate or arithmetical equivalence. 
2.6 The  Madras  High  Court  in  the  case  of  Zenith  Lamps  and
Electricals Ltd. Vs The Registrar, High Court, Madras13 held that for a
fee  there  has  to  be  a  correlation  between  the  income  and  the
expenditure, that the levy should be reasonable and that any levy on
a suitor in the civil court whereby revenues are realized generally and
unrelated to his cause will to that extent, be an impost in the nature
of a tax. 
2.7 The holding of the Supreme Court in Secretary, Government
of Madras v. Zenith Lamp & Electrical Ltd14 is as follows:
“In this case we are concerned with the administration of
civil justice in a State. The fees must have relation to the
administration of civil justice…. It is free to levy a small
fee  in  some  cases,  a  large  fee  in  others,  subject  of
course to the provisions of Article 14. But one thing the
Legislature is not competent to do, and that is to make
litigants  contribute  to  the  increase  of  general  public
revenue…. There must be a broad correlationship with
the fees collected and the cost of administration of civil
justice…. We agree with the Madras High Court in the
present  case  that  the  fees  taken  in Courts  are  not  a
category by themselves and must contain the essential
elements of the fees as laid down by this Court.”
13  Supra note 814  Supra note 9

2.8 The holding of the Madras High Court in P. R. Sriramulu v. The
Registrar, High Court, Madras15 is as follows:
“What is, however, necessary to see in testing the validity
of the levy is, its essential character, as to whether it
satisfies the concept of fee. … A litigant pays court-fee on
the theory that he is bound to compensate for the cost of
services  rendered  to  him  in  the  administration  of  civil
justice by the Court, and he is not called upon to pay
towards pension charges which relate to past services
rendered  by  retired  judicial  officers  to  other  litigants
previously. … On an analysis of the foregoing statements
and figures, we are clearly of the opinion that even as in
1954-55  and  the  subsequent  years  mentioned  in  the
Statements  I  to  III  appended  to  the  supplementary
counter-affidavit of Mr. Shivakumar, the State had been
making profits running to several lakhs and in some years
nearly  half  a  crore  of  rupees  over  the  actual  cost  of
administration of civil justice in Courts.” 
2.9 The holding of the Supreme Court in Secretary To Government
of Madras v. P. R. Sriramulu16 is as follows: 
“In any case it is also not the requirement of law that  the
collection  raised  through  the levy should exactly tally  or
correspond  to  the expenditure  in the administration
of  civil justice.  It has already been ruled by this Court
15  Supra note 1016  Supra note 11

that the correlation between the amount raised through
the   fee  and   the  expenses  incurred  in providing  the
services should  not be examined with exactitude with a
view  to  ascertain   any  accurate   and  arithmetical
equivalence but the  test   would  be  satisfied  if  a broad
and  general correlation is found to exist. … Once it is
established that the primary and essential purpose is the
rendering  of  specific  services  to  a  specified  class,  it
becomes immaterial   that the State has earned certain
benefits out of it indirectly. … Before parting with these
matters, we may point out that it could not be disputed
that the administration of justice is a service which the
State is under an obligation to render to its subject. There
can be no two opinions that the amount  raised from the
suitors  by way of fee should not normally exceed the
cost of the administration of justice because,  possibly
there  could be  no justification with the  State to  enrich
itself  from  high  court  fees  or  to  secure  revenue   for
general administration.  The total receipts from the court
fees should be such as by and large can cover the cost of
administration of justice.  There should also  be some
measure  of  uniformity  in  the  scales  of  court  fees
throughout the  country as there appears to be a vast
difference  in the  scales of  court  fee in  various States
of   the  country.  The  feasibility  of  a  fixed  maximum
chargeable fee also deserves serious consideration.”

2.10 The holding of the Supreme Court in P. M. Ashwathanarayana
Setty v.  State of Karnataka17 is as follows:
“The correlationship between the amount raised through
the  ‘fee’  and  the  expenses  involved  in  providing  the
services  need  not  be  examined  with  a  view  to
ascertaining  any  accurate,  arithmetical  equivalence  or
precision in the correlation; but it would be sufficient that
there is a broad and general correlation. …  Now at the
end of the day, what remains is the suggestion necessary
in regard to the rationalisation of the court-fees under the
'Rajasthan Act' and the 'Karnataka  Act.  The
arguments in the case highlight an important aspect. The
levy of court-fee at rates reaching 10 per cent ad valorem
operates harshly and almost tends to price justice out of
the  reach  of  many  distressed  litigants.  The  Directive
Principles of State Policy, though not strictly enforceable
in courts of law, are yet fundamental in the governance in
the country. They constitute fons juris in a Welfare State.
The prescription of such high rates of court fees even in
small  claims  as  also  without  an  upper  limit  in  larger
claims  is  perilously  close  to  arbitrariness,  an
unconstitutionality.  The  ideal  is,  of  course,  a  state  of
affairs where the State is enabled to do away with the
pricing of justice in its courts of justice. In this reach for
the ideal it serves to recall the  words  of  Robert
Kennedy: "Some men see things as they are and say
why, I dream things that never  were  and  say  why
17   Supra note 3

not?  "  …The  governments  concerned  should  bestow
attention on these matters and bring out a rationalization
of the levies.” 
2.11 The Law Commission of India has examined the issue of levy of court
fees in its following Reports:
(a) 14th Report titled “Reform of Judicial Administration” (1958) - 
The Commission observed that the argument that it is
necessary to impose high court-fees to prevent frivolous
litigation has no substance; these increases have been
generally justified on the ground of the need of increased
revenue  by  reason  of  the  increased  cost  of  the
administration of justice, and recommended as under:
(1) It is one of the primary duties of the State to
provide the machinery for the administration
of justice and on principle it is not proper for
the  State  to  charge  fees  from  suitors  in
courts.
(2) Even if court fees are charged, the revenue
derived from them should not exceed the cost
of the administration of civil justice.
(3) The making of a profit by the State from the
administration of justice is not justified.
(4) Steps should be taken to reduce court fees so
that the revenue from it is sufficient to cover
the  cost  of  the  civil  judicial  establishment.

Principles  analogous  to  those  applied  in
England  should  be  applied  to  measure  the
cost of such establishment.  The salaries of
judicial  officers  should  be  a  charge  on  the
general tax-payer.
(5) There should be a broad measure of equality
in the scales of court fees all over the country.
There should also be a fixed maximum to the
fee chargeable.18  
(b) 128th Report  titled  “Cost  of  Litigation”  (1988)  –  The
Commission  affirmed  the  views  expressed  in  its  14th
Report.
(c) 189th Report  titled  “Revision  of  Court  Fees  Structure”
(2004) -The Commission did not find any reason to take a
different view than the one expressed by the Supreme
Court and the Commission in its 14th and 128th Reports
that the underlying real reason for enhancement of court
fees appears to be the collection of more revenue by the
States  which  is  not sound  public policy. On  the  other
hand,  higher  court fee  will discourage  the  honest  and
genuine poor litigant. The Commission emphasized that
any enhancement of court fee should not adversely affect
the  right  of  access  to  justice.  Further,  the  amount
collected by way of court fee should not be more than the
expenditure  incurred  in  administration  of  civil  justice.
18  Supra note 1, Vol. I, pages 505, 509, 510

Subject to these limitations, the amount of fixed court fee
prescribed under Schedule 2 of the Court-fees Act, 1870
may  be  enhanced  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of
devaluation of the rupee.19 
III. RECOMMENDATION
3 As  observed by the  Supreme Court,  there  should  be some
measure  of  uniformity  in  the  scales  of  court-fees.  There  is  no
justification  for  any  differential  treatment  of  different  suitors.  The
Government should, therefore, seriously consider the feasibility of a
fixed maximum chargeable court-fee.  We recommend accordingly.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
  Chairman
(Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood)                   (Dr. Brahm A.
Agrawal)
 Member
19  Law Commission of India, 189th Report on “Revision of Court Fees Structure” (2004), pages 96, 112-113