 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW  COMMISSION OF INDIA
Need for Speedy Justice – Some Suggestions
Report No. 221
April 2009
                           
  
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 221)

Need for Speedy Justice – 
Some Suggestions
Forwarded  to  the  Union  Minister  for  Law  and
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of
India  by Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,  Chairman,
Law  Commission of India, on  the  30th  day of
April, 2009. 
The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the
16th October,  2006,  issued  by the Government of
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
2

The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
3

Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh :  Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
4

©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as
Government copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor,
ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001,
India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in 
 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former  Judge,  Supreme  Court  of
India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI  Building  (IInd
Floor) 
Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi – 110 001
Tel. 91-11-23384475
Fax.   91-11 –
23383564
D.O. No. 6(3)/149/2008-LC (LS)          30th
April, 2009
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji,
Subject:  Need  for  Speedy  Justice  –  Some
Suggestions
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  221st Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject. 
Mounting  of  arrears  of  cases  in  courts,  particularly  in  High
Courts and District Courts, has been a cause of great concern for
litigants as well as for the State.   It is a fundamental right of every
citizen  to  get  speedy  justice  and  speedy  trial  which  also  is  the
fundamental  requirement of good judicial  administration.    In this
Report, we have made few proposals which when given effect to, will
be helpful not only in providing speedy justice but also in controlling
frivolous, vexatious and luxurious litigations.
The  Law  Commission  took  up  the  study  suo  motu and
recommends the following amendments:
1. Amendment of section 80 and Order V of CPC and
also  the  concerned  Court’s  Rules  -  In  order  to
shorten  delay,  it  is  necessary  that  provisions
parallel  to  section  80  CPC  be  introduced  for  all
kinds of civil suits and cases proposed to be filed by
a litigant.
2. Amendment of sections 378, 397 and 401 CrPC - 
6

(i) In  complaint  cases  also,  appeal  against  an
order of  acquittal  passed  by a Magistrate  to  the
Sessions Court be provided, of course, subject to
the grant of special leave by it.
(ii) Where  the  District  Magistrate  or  the  State
does  not  direct  the  Public  Prosecutor  to  prefer
appeal against an order of acquittal, the aggrieved
person or the informant  should have the right to
prefer  appeal,  though  with  the  leave  of  the
Appellate Court. 
(iii) There  should  be  only  one  forum  for  filing
revisions  against  orders  passed  by  Magistrates,
that  is,  the  Sessions  Court,  instead  of  two
alternative forums as now provided.
(iv) The Legislature should specifically categorize
revisable orders,  instead of leaving the matter  to
confusion caused by various interpretations of the
expression “interlocutory order”. 
3. Amendment of Transfer of Property Act 1882 – It
should be made mandatory that the consideration
for every sale shall be paid through Bank Draft.
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely,
               
               (Dr AR.
Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
7

New Delhi – 110 001
8

Need for Speedy Justice – Some Suggestions
          TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No.
I. INTRODUCTION 9
II. PROVISIONS CONSIDERED
(a) Code of Civil Procedure 1908
 – Section 80 and Order V 10-16
(b) Code of Criminal Procedure 1973
 – Sections 378, 397 and 401 16-20
(c) Transfer of Property Act 1882 20-21
 
III. RECOMMENDATIONS 22-23
9

I. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Mounting  of  arrears  of  cases  in  courts,  particularly  in  High
Courts and District Courts, has been a cause of great concern for
litigants as well as for the State.   It is a fundamental right of every
citizen  to  get  speedy  justice  and  speedy  trial  which  also  is  the
fundamental  requirement of good judicial  administration.    In this
Report, we have made few proposals which when given effect to, will
be helpful not only in providing speedy justice but also in controlling
frivolous, vexatious and luxurious litigations.
1.2 In the courts, arrears are mounting by leaps and bounds and
there is no respite in sight.  This is particularly because institution of
cases is much more than their disposal at all the levels of judicial
administration.    The  fundamental  requirement  of  good  judicial
administration is speedy justice.  Quite often, frivolous, vexatious and
luxurious litigations also come up and add to the mounting arrears.
Such type of litigation has to be controlled, rather stopped.  Efforts
should be made to decide cases, particularly miscellaneous matters
(excluding the matters, which require evidence of witnesses), at the
admission stage after affording opportunity to the concerned parties. 
1.3 The  present  Report  is  in  the  continuum  of  the  Law
Commission’s various earlier reports recommending legal changes
for speedy justice.
10

II. PROVISIONS CONSIDERED
(a) Code of Civil Procedure 1908 – Section 80 and Order V
2.1 In order to shorten delay in disposal of cases, it is necessary that
provisions parallel to section 80 CPC be introduced for all kinds of civil
suits and cases proposed to be filed by a litigant. 
2.2 The Supreme Court has held in Bihari Chowdhary v. State of Bihar1
that the object underlying section 80 CPC is to ensure that before a suit is
instituted against the Government or a public officer, the Government or the
officer  concerned  is  afforded  an  opportunity  to  scrutinise  the  claim  in
respect of which the suit is proposed to be filed and if it be found to be a
just claim, to take immediate action and thereby avoid unnecessary litigation
and save public time and money by settling the claim without driving the
person,  who  has  issued  the  notice,  to  institute  the  suit  involving
considerable  expenditure and  delay. The relevant  passages  are extracted
below:
“3. We are concerned in this case with Section 80 CPC as it stood
prior to its amendment, by Act 104 of 1976 (even under the amended
provision,  the  position  remains  unaltered  insofar  as  a suit  of this
nature is concerned). 
…
1  (1984) 2 SCC 627
11

The  effect  of  the  section  is  clearly  to  impose  a  bar  against  the
institution of a suit against the Government or a public officer in
respect of any act purported to be done by him in his official capacity
until the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been
delivered to or left at the office of the Secretary to Government or
Collector of the concerned district and in the case of a public officer
delivered  to  him  or  left  at  his  office,  stating  the  particulars
enumerated in the last part of sub-section (1) of the section. When we
examine the scheme of the section it becomes obvious that the section
has been enacted as a measure of public policy with the object of
ensuring that before a suit is instituted against the Government or a
public officer, the Government or the officer concerned is afforded an
opportunity to scrutinise the claim in respect of which the suit is
proposed to be filed and if it be found to be a just claim, to take
immediate action and thereby avoid unnecessary litigation and save
public  time  and  money  by  settling  the  claim  without  driving  the
person,  who  has  issued  the  notice,  to  institute  the  suit  involving
considerable expenditure and delay. The Government, unlike private
parties, is expected to consider the matter covered by the notice in a
most objective manner, after obtaining such legal advice as they may
think fit, and take a decision in public interest within the period of
two months allowed by the section as to whether the claim is just and
reasonable and the contemplated suit should, therefore, be avoided by
speedy negotiations and settlement or whether the claim should be
resisted by fighting out the suit if and when it is instituted. There is
clearly  a  public  purpose  underlying  the  mandatory  provision
contained in the section insisting on the issuance of a notice setting
out the particulars of the proposed suit and giving two months’ time
to  Government  or a public  officer  before a suit  can  be instituted
against them. The object of the section is the advancement of justice
and  the  securing  of  public  good  by  avoidance  of  unnecessary
litigation.”
2.3 The existing provisions of section 80 CPC are culled out below:
“Notice.- (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), no
suit shall be instituted against the Government (including the
Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir) or against a
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by
such public officer in his official capacity, until the expiration of
12

two months next after notice in writing has been delivered to, or
left at the office of-
(a) in the case of a suit against the Central Government,
except  where  it  relates  to  a  railway,  a  Secretary  to  that
Government;
(b) in the case of a suit against the Central Government
where  it  relates  to  railway, the  General  Manager  of  that
railway;
(bb) in the case of a suit against the Government of the
State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Chief Secretary to that
Government  or  any  other  officer  authorised  by  that
Government in this behalf;
(c) in the case of suit against any other State Government, a
Secretary to that Government or the Collector of the district; 
and, in the case of a public officer, delivered to him or left at his
office, stating the cause of action, the name, description and
place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims;
and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has
been so delivered or left.
(2) A suit to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against the
Government (including the Government of the State of Jammu
and  Kashmir)  or  any  public  officer  in  respect  of  any  act
purporting  to  be  done  by  such  public  officer  in  his  official
capacity, may be instituted, with the leave of the Court, without
serving any notice as required by sub-section (1); but the Court
shall not grant relief in the suit, whether interim or otherwise,
except after giving to the Government or public officer, as the
case may be, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause in
respect of the relief prayed for in the suit:
Provided  that  the  Court  shall,  if  it  is  satisfied,  after
hearing the parties, that no urgent or immediate relief need be
13

granted in the suit, return the plaint for presentation to it after
complying with the requirements of sub-section (1).
(3)  No  suit  instituted  against  the  Government  or  against  a
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by
such public officer in his official capacity shall be dismissed
merely by reason of any error or defect in the notice referred to
in sub-section (1), if in such notice -
(a) the name, description and the residence of the plaintiff
had been so given as to enable the appropriate authority or
the public officer to identify the person serving the notice
and such notice has been delivered or left at the office of the
appropriate authority in sub-section (1), and
(b) the cause of action and the relief claimed by the plaintiff
had been substantially indicated.”
2.4 The existing provisions of Rules 1 to 8 of Order V, CPC on
issue of summons read as under: 
“1. Summons.- (1) When  a suit has been duly instituted,  a
summons  may  be  issued  to  the  defendant  to  appear  and
answer  the  claim  and  to  file  the  written  statement  of  his
defence, if any, within thirty days from the date of service of
summons on that defendant:
Provided that no such summons shall be issued when a
defendant  has  appeared  at  the  presentation  of  plaint  and
admitted the plaintiffs' claim:
Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the
written statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall
be allowed to file  the  same  on such  other  day as may be
14

specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, but
which  shall  not  be  later  than  ninety  days  from  the  date  of
service of summons.
(2) A defendant to whom a summons has been issued
under sub-rule (1) may appear -
(a) in person, or
(b) by a pleader duly instructed and able to answer all
material questions relating to the suit, or
(c) by a pleader accompanied by some person able to
answer all such questions.
(3) Every such summons shall be signed by the Judge or
such officer as he appoints, and shall be sealed with the seal of
the Court.
2. Copy of plaint annexed to summons.- Every summons shall
be accompanied by a copy of the plaint.
3. Court may order defendant or plaintiff to appear in person.-
(1)  Where  the  Court  sees  reason  to  require  the  personal
appearance of the defendant, the summons shall order him to
appear in person in Court on the day therein specified.
(2) Where the Court sees reason to require the personal
appearance of the plaintiff on the same day, it shall make an
order for such appearance.
4. No party to be ordered to appear in person unless resident
within certain limits.- No party shall be ordered to appear in
person unless he resides -
15

(a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary original
jurisdiction, or
(b)  without  such  limits  but  at  place  less  than  fifty  or
(where  there  is  railway  or  steamer  communication  or
other established public conveyance for five-sixths of the
distance between the place where he resides and the
place where the Court is situate) less than two hundred
miles distance from the court-house.
5. Summons to be either to settle issues or for final disposal.-
The Court shall determine, at the time of issuing the summons,
whether it shall be for the settlement of issues only, or for the
final disposal  of the suit; and the summons shall contain a
direction accordingly:
Provided that, in every suit heard by a Court of Small
Causes, the summons shall be for the final disposal of the suit.
6. Fixing day for appearance of defendant.- The day under sub-
rule (1) of rule 1 shall be fixed with reference to the current
business of the Court, the place of residence of defendant and
the time necessary for the service of the summons; and the day
shall be so fixed as to allow the defendant sufficient time to
enable him to appear and answer on such day.
7.  Summons to order defendant to produce documents relied
on by him.- The summons to appear and answer shall order the
defendant to produce all documents or copies thereof specified
in rule 1A of Order VIII in his possession or power upon which
he intends to rely in support of his case.
8.  On issue of summons for final disposal, defendant to be
directed to produce his witnesses.- Where the summons is for
the final disposal of the suit, it shall also direct the defendant to
produce, on the day fixed for his appearance,  all witnesses
upon whose evidence he intends to rely in support of his case.”
16

2.5 At present, a litigant proposing to sue the State or a public
officer  has  to  give  two  months’  notice  in  writing  and  in  case  of
emergency can file the case with the permission of the Court.   A
similar provision can be introduced for all the other matters.  When a
person has to file a civil case, he can be required to give two months’
notice  to the affected  party.  Before he presents his case in the
Court,  he  must  serve a  copy of  the  plaint  on  the  affected  party
through registered post or recognized courier service and should file
affidavit along with his plaint stating the fact of service of notice along
with a copy of the plaint.   
2.6 Similarly, when a litigant files any writ petition in a High Court or
the Supreme Court he should be required to give at least four weeks’
notice and also to serve a copy of the petition through registered post
or recognized courier service on the opposite party.   In such cases,
when the notice and a copy of the petition is served, he shall not be
required  to  take  fresh  steps  again  through  Court  except  for  the
information of date of hearing that may be fixed by the Court.   If this
is done, the Court will get the occasion to hear all the parties and will
be able to decide the case at the admission stage itself except where
the  Court  directs  the  parties  to  lead  evidence.   Moreover,  the
presence of both the parties will eliminate frivolous litigation.   
2.7 However, if any matter is urgent and notice will frustrate the
purpose, the Court can dispense with the notice and hear the plaintiff
or petitioner, giving reasons for urgency.   If the urgency is not found,
17

the plaint/petition can be returned for filing, if necessary, after giving
notice and serving a copy of the plaint/petition.   This will necessitate
amendment of section 80 and Order V of the Civil Procedure Code
and also the concerned Court’s Rules.  This may also encourage
pre-litigation mediation and settlement of disputes.
(b)  Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 – Sections 378, 397 and
401
2.8  Sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 378 CrPC, which provides
for appeal in case of acquittal, as it stands today, read thus:
 “(4)  If  such  an  order  of  acquittal  is  passed  in  any  case
instituted upon complaint and the High Court, on an application
made to it by the complainant  in this behalf,  grants special
leave to appeal from the order of acquittal, the complainant
may present such an appeal to the High Court.
(5) No application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special
leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall be entertained
by the High Court after the expiry of six months, where the
complainant is a public servant, and sixty days in every other
case, computed from the date of that order of acquittal.”
2.9 All appeals against orders of acquittal passed by Magistrates
were being filed in High Court prior to amendment of section 378 by
Act 25 of 2005. Now, with effect from 23.06.2006, appeals against
orders of acquittal passed by Magistrates in respect of cognizable
and non-bailable offences in cases filed on police report are being
filed in the Sessions Court, vide clause (a) of sub-section (1) of the
18

said section.   But, appeal against order of acquittal passed in any
case  instituted  upon  complaint  continues  to  be  filed  in  the  High
Court, if special leave is granted by it on an application made to it by
the complainant, vide sub-section (4) of the said section.   
2.10 Section  378  needs  change  with  a  view  to  enable  filing  of
appeals in complaint cases also in the Sessions Court, of course,
subject to the grant of special leave by it.
2.11 Further,  at  present,  against  orders  of  acquittal  passed  by
Magistrates (where the offence is cognizable and non-bailable) or by
Sessions Courts, appeal in cases filed on police reports can be filed
only  at  the  instance  of  the  District  Magistrate  or  the  State
Government, as the case may be,  vide  sub-section (1) of section
378.   In such matters, the aggrieved person or the informant cannot
himself file an appeal.   However, he can prefer a revision.   If the
revisional Court finds that the accused has been wrongly acquitted, it
cannot convict him in view of sub-section (3) of section 401, but it
has to remand the case.   It is a cumbersome process and involves
wastage of money and time.  This provision also needs a change and
in such matters also, where the District Magistrate or the State does
not direct the Public Prosecutor to prefer appeal against an order of
acquittal, the aggrieved person or the informant should have the right
to prefer appeal, though with the leave of the Appellate Court.   This
will also give an opportunity to the aggrieved person to challenge the
findings of fact recorded by lower court.  Also, this will introduce more
19

transparency and accountability in the lower judiciary, as at present,
the percentage of acquittal is quite high.
2.12 Section 397 CrPC provides for calling for records to exercise
powers of revision and reads as under:
“(1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and
examine  the  record  of  any  proceeding  before  any  inferior
Criminal Court situate within its or his local jurisdiction for the
purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness,
legality or propriety of any finding, sentence or order, recorded
or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of such
inferior Court, and may, when calling for such record, direct that
the execution of any sentence or order be suspended, and if
the accused is in confinement, that he be released on bail or on
his own bond pending the examination of the record.
Explanation.-  All  Magistrates,  whether  Executive  or  Judicial,
and whether exercising original or appellate jurisdiction, shall
be  deemed  to  be  inferior  to  the  Sessions  Judge  for  the
purposes of this sub-section and of section 398.
(2)  The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall
not be exercised in relation to any interlocutory order passed in
any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding.
(3)  If an application under this section has been made by any
person either to the High Court or to the Sessions Judge, no
further application by the same person shall be entertained by
the other of them.”
20

2.13  Section 401  CrPC  laying  down  High  Court’s  powers  of
revision, as it stands today, reads thus:
“High  Court's  powers  of  revision.-  (1)  In  the  case  of  any
proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself or
which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may,
in its discretion, exercise any of the powers conferred  on a
Court of Appeal by sections 386, 389, 390 and 391 or on a
Court  of  Session  by  section  307  and,  when  the  Judges
composing the Court of revision are equally divided in opinion,
the  case  shall  be  disposed  of  in  the  manner  provided  by
section 392.
(2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice
of  the  accused  or  other  person  unless  he  has  had  an
opportunity of being heard either personally or by pleader in his
own defence.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High
Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction.
(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is
brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be entertained
at the instance of the party who could have appealed.
(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application for
revision has been made to the High Court by any person and
the  High Court  is  satisfied  that  such  application  was  made
under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that
it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do, the High
Court may treat  the application for  revision as a petition  of
appeal and deal with the same accordingly.”
2.14 At present, a revisable order passed by a Magistrate can be
challenged either in the Sessions Court or the High Court.   This
provision is often misused.  If there are several accused persons in a
case and an adverse order is passed, some come to Sessions Court
21

and others to High Court and try their luck.   There may be occasions
when one party may file revision in Sessions Court and the opposite
party in High Court against the same order.  Such type of forum-
hunting should be immediately stopped.   There should be only one
forum for revision, that is, the Sessions Court against orders passed
by Magistrates.  When there is only one forum for revisions against
orders  passed  by  the  Sessions  Court,  there  is  no  necessity  for
having two alternative forums for challenging an order passed by a
Magistrate.  This will not only be less time-consuming, but will also
be less expensive for the litigants, and pendency in High Courts will
also be reduced.   All such pending revisions in the High Courts can
also be transferred to the Sessions Courts.
2.15 As noted above, sub-section (2) of section 397 Cr PC provides
that no revision shall be maintainable against an interlocutory order
passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding.  The Code of
Criminal  Procedure  does  not  define  the  expression  “interlocutory
order”.   Though the said expression has been judicially interpreted2,
but  this  has created  confusion  and  litigants  have to suffer  for  it.
Now, there is a need for specific categorization of revisable orders by
the  Legislature  and  it  should  indicate  the  list  in  the  Criminal
Procedure Code itself.   This will reduce unnecessary litigation.   The
residuary matters, if any, can be left to the judicial discretion of the
concerned courts.
(c)  Transfer of   Property Act 1882
2 See, for example,  S. Kuppuswami Rao v. The King, AIR 1949 FC 1;  Amar Nath v. State of Haryana,
(1977) 4 SCC 137;  Madhu Limaye v. State of Maharashtra, [1978] 1 SCR 749; V. C. Shukla v. State
through C.B.I., AIR 1980 SC 962; K. K. Patel v. State of Gujarat, (2000) 6 SCC 195; State v. N.M.T. Joy
Immaculate, (2004) 5 SCC 729
22

2.16 When a person purchases immovable property, the sale deed
is required to be registered.   Normally, the vendor and the vendee
show cash transaction for sale consideration and an endorsement is
also made by the Registrar/Sub-Registrar to that effect.  But when a
person  has  to  play  a  foul  game,  the  major  portion  of  the  sale
consideration is shown to have been paid outside and not before the
Registrar/Sub-Registrar and it gives rise to unnecessary litigation,
both criminal and civil.3   With the vast network of Banks and the
growing awareness amongst the common people, a time has come
to make it mandatory that the consideration for every sale shall be
paid through Bank Draft.  This will check frivolous transactions as
well as unnecessary litigation.
3
 See, for example, Kaliaperumal v. Rajagopal, 2009 (4) SCALE 60; Akula Madhava Rao v. P. Rukmini
Bai, 1995 (3) ALT 61; C. Abdul Shukoor Saheb v. Arji Papa Rao, AIR 1963 SC 1150
23

III. RECOMMENDATIONS
3.1 We are sure that if amendments on the above-said lines are
carried out,  not  only litigants  will get  speedy and  less  expensive
justice but the pendency of the cases will be reduced and frivolous
litigation will be checked.
3.2 We feel that there is need for following amendments:
1. Amendment of section 80 and Order V of CPC and
also  the  concerned  Court’s  Rules  -  In  order  to
shorten  delay,  it  is  necessary  that  provisions
parallel  to  section  80  CPC  be  introduced  for  all
kinds of civil suits and cases proposed to be filed by
a litigant.
2. Amendment of sections 378, 397 and 401 CrPC - 
24

(i) In  complaint  cases  also,  appeal  against  an
order of  acquittal  passed  by a Magistrate  to  the
Sessions Court be provided, of course, subject to
the grant of special leave by it.
(ii) Where  the  District  Magistrate  or  the  State
does  not  direct  the  Public  Prosecutor  to  prefer
appeal against an order of acquittal, the aggrieved
person or the informant  should have the right to
prefer  appeal,  though  with  the  leave  of  the
Appellate Court. 
(iii) There  should  be  only  one  forum  for  filing
revisions  against  orders  passed  by  Magistrates,
that  is,  the  Sessions  Court,  instead  of  two
alternative forums as now provided.
(iv)The  Legislature  should  specifically  categorize
revisable orders, instead of leaving the matter to
confusion caused by various interpretations of the
expression “interlocutory order”.
25

3. Amendment  of  Transfer  of  Property  Act  1882  –  It
should be made mandatory that the consideration for
every sale shall be paid through Bank Draft. 
3.3 We recommend accordingly.
  
 (Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
                                                             Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood)                    (Dr Brahm A.
Agrawal)
             Member                                                           Member-Secretary
26