 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Need  for  Justice-dispensation  through  ADR
etc.
Report No. 222
April 2009
 

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 222)
Need for Justice-dispensation through ADR etc.
Forwarded  to  the  Union  Minister  for  Law  and
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of
India  by Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,  Chairman,
Law Commission of India, on  the  30th day of  April,
2009. 
The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the
16th October,  2006,  issued  by the Government of
2

India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
3

Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh :  Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as
Government copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor,
ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001,
India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI  Building
(IInd Floor) 
Bhagwandas
Road,
New  Delhi  –
110 001
Tel.  91-11-
23384475
Fax.   91-11 –
23383564
6

D.O. No. 6(3)/154/2007-LC (LS)        30th April, 2009
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji,
Subject: Need for Justice-dispensation through ADR etc.
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  222nd  Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject. 
The  Law  Commission  has  already  given  varied
recommendations  in  its  earlier  reports  on  the  subject  of  judicial
reforms, which is a subject very dear to my heart. The present Report
is in the continuum of those reports.
The present Report has drawn on my two-volume book titled
Voice of Justice, and re-emphasizes and reaffirms that there is an
urgent need for justice-dispensation through ADR mechanisms. The
ADR movement  needs  to be carried  forward with greater  speed.
Besides,  many  other  suggestions,  which  may  now  be  called
hackneyed, need a fresh look.
 With warm regards, 
                                                                                       
                                                                                   Yours sincerely,
(Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H.R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
7

Need for Justice-dispensation through ADR etc.
  
CONTENTS                                                   Page Nos.
I. PROPOSITIONS                                                 8 - 37
 
II. RECOMMENDATIONS 38
8

I. PROPOSITIONS
1.1 One of the terms of reference of the 18th Law Commission of India
reads:
“To keep under review the system of judicial administration to ensure
that it is responsive to the reasonable demands of the time and in
particular to secure:-
(i) Elimination  of  delays,  speedy  clearance  of  arrears  and
reduction  in  costs  so  as  to  secure  quick  and  economical
disposal of cases without affecting the cardinal principle that
decision should be just and fair.
(ii) Simplification  of  procedure  to  reduce  and  eliminate
technicalities and devices for delay so that it operates not as an
end in itself but as a means of achieving justice.
(iii) Improvement  of  standards  of  all  concerned  with  the
administration of justice.” 
1.2 The present Report is in the continuum of the Law Commission’s
various earlier reports on the subject of judicial administration.
1.3 Man is not made for law, but the law is for man. Law is a regulator of
human conduct. No law works smoothly unless the interaction between the
two is voluntary. An act is justified by law, only if it is warranted, validated
and made blameless by law.
1.4 The Indian Constitution guarantees justice to all. All Indian citizens
are guaranteed equal rights of life and personal liberty, besides many other
fundamental  rights.  There  are  various  other  legal  rights  conferred  by
different social welfare legislations, such as, Contract Labour (Regulation
9

and Abolition) Act 1970, Equal Remuneration Act 1976, Minimum Wages
Act 1948. But, these rights are of no avail if an individual has no means to
get them enforced. Rule of law envisages that all men are equal before law.
All have equal rights, but, unfortunately, all cannot enjoy the rights equally.
Enforcement  of  the  rights  has  to  be  through  courts,  but  the  judicial
procedure is very complex, costly and dilatory putting the poor persons at a
distance.
1.5 The  Constitution  of  India  through  article  14  guarantees  equality
before the law and the equal protection of the laws. Article 39A of the
Constitution mandates the State to secure that the operation of the legal
system promotes justice on a basis of equal opportunity, and ensure that the
same is not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.
Equal opportunity must be afforded for access to justice. It is not sufficient
that  the  law  treats  all  persons  equally,  irrespective  of  the  prevalent
inequalities. But the law must function in such a way that all the people
have  access  to  justice  in  spite  of  economic  disparities.  The  expression
“access to justice” focuses on the following two basic purposes of the legal
system:
1. The system must be equally accessible to all.
2. It must lead to results that are individually and socially just.
1.6 Traditional concept of "access to justice" as understood by common
man is access to courts of law. For a common man a court is the place where
justice is meted out to him/her. But the courts have become inaccessible due
to  various  barriers  such  as  poverty,  social  and  political  backwardness,
illiteracy, ignorance, procedural formalities and the like.
10

1.7 To get justice through courts one has to go through the complex and
costly  procedures  involved  in  litigation.  One  has  to  bear  the  costs  of
litigation,  including  court  fee  and,  of  course,  the  lawyer’s  fee.  A  poor
litigant who is barely able to feed himself will not be able to afford justice
or obtain legal redressal for a wrong done to him, through courts. Further a
large part of the population in India is illiterate and live in abject poverty.
Therefore, they are totally ignorant about the court-procedures, are terrified
and confused when faced with the judicial machinery. Thus, most of the
citizens of India are not in a position to enforce their rights, constitutional or
legal, which in effect generates inequality.
1.8 It is one of the most important duties of a welfare state to provide
judicial  and  non-judicial  dispute-resolution  mechanisms  to  which  all
citizens  have  equal  access  for  resolution  of  their  legal  disputes  and
enforcement of their fundamental and legal rights. Poverty, ignorance or
social inequalities should not become barriers to it. The  Maneka Gandhi1
principle,  as  enunciated  by the  Indian  Supreme Court,  that  fundamental
rights do not constitute separate islands unto themselves but constitute a
continent ushered in what Krishna Iyer, J. terms the jurisprudence of access
to justice. He said:
"We  should  expand  the  jurisprudence  of  Access  to  Justice  as  an
integral part of Social Justice and examine the constitutionalism of
court-fee levy as a facet of human rights highlighted in our Nation's
Constitution. If the State itself should travesty this basic principle, in
the  teeth  of  Articles  14  and  39A,  where  an  indigent  widow  is
involved, a second look at its policy is overdue. The Court must give
the benefit of doubt against levy of a price to enter the temple of
justice until one day the whole issue of the validity of profit-making
1 (1978) 1 SCC 248
11

through sale of civil justice, disguised as court-fee is fully reviewed
by this Court".2
1.9 Article 39A, as noted above, provides for equal justice and free legal
aid. The said article obligates the State to in particular provide free legal
aid, by suitable legislation  or schemes or in any other way, to promote
justice on the basis of equal opportunity. Article 39A puts stress upon legal
justice. The directive requires the State to provide free legal aid to deserving
people so that justice is not denied to anyone merely because of economic
disability. The Supreme Court in Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra3 has
emphasized that legal assistance to a poor or indigent accused arrested and
put in jeopardy of his life or personal liberty is a constitutional imperative
mandated not only by article 39A but also by articles 14 and 21 of the
Constitution. In the absence of legal assistance, injustice may result. Every
act  of  injustice  corrodes  the  foundation  of democracy  and  rule  of  law.
Article 39A makes it clear that the social objective of equal justice and free
legal aid has to be implemented by suitable legislation or by formulating
schemes for free legal aid.
1.10 Though Article 39A was introduced in the Constitution in 1976, its
objective of providing access to justice could never have been fulfilled but
for  the  majestic  role  played  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  ‘Public  Interest
Litigation  Movement’.  This  is  a movement  whereby  any  public-spirited
person can move the Court for remedying any wrong affecting the public.
This is a significant step by the Supreme Court in giving access to justice to
the people belonging to the lowest strata of society. Further, it was only
through cases filed in public interest that the Supreme Court was able to
2 State of Haryana v. Darshana Devi, AIR 1979 SC 8553 AIR 1983 SC 378
12

encourage legal aid service to poor and indigent persons. Through public
interest litigation the courts are able to deal with poor people suffering from
injustice and exploitation, such as, bonded labour, dalits, women, children,
physically challenged, mentally challenged and so on.
1.11 The Lok Adalats, Nyaya Panchayats, Legal Services Authorities are
also part of the campaign to take justice to the people and ensure that all
people have equal access to justice in spite of various barriers, like social
and economic backwardness.
1.12 The Judiciary is playing a significant role in providing justice to the
under-privileged, indigent and helpless individuals through public interest
litigation. The legal  aid  network is  taking  firm roots  and legal  services
functionaries are actively engaged in fulfilling the constitutional promise of
equality before the law. The provision of legal aid to eligible persons, the
speedy settlement of their legal disputes by counselling and conciliation and
failing  that  by  Lok  Adalats  rank  high  on  the  agenda  of  legal  services
functionaries, as high as running legal education awareness programmes. Of
course, we have miles to go before we can claim that the realm of equal
justice for all has become a reality. Dr. A. S. Anand, a former Chief Justice
of  India,  has  wished  that  the  next  century  would  not  be  a  century  of
litigation, but a century of negotiation, conciliation and arbitration. This
dream has to be fulfilled for settling disputes both pending in courts as well
as at pre-litigative stage. Where there is a huge pendency of cases, the only
panacea is establishment of more and more permanent Lok Adalats where
the expertise of the judicial officers both in service and retired could be
effectively utilized in resolution of matters by conciliation. A large number
13

of  consumers  in  our  country  feel  handicapped  in  getting  justice  due  to
poverty, illiteracy, social backwardness and also geographical barriers. 
1.13 Earlier, in India, disputes were settled by a council of village elders,
known as a Panchayat. This was an accepted method of conflict resolution.
Since  the  Vedic times,  India  has  been  heralded  as  a  pioneer  in  the
achievement  of  the  social  goal  of  speedy  and  effective  justice  through
informal but culminating resolution systems. ADR methods are not new to
India and have been in existence in some form or the other in the days
before the modern justice delivery system was introduced by the colonial
British rulers. There were various types of arbitral bodies., which led to the
emergence of the celebrated Panchayati Raj system in India, especially in
the rural locales. The decisions of the Panchayat were accepted and treated
as  binding.  In  1982,  in  Junagarh  in  the  State  of  Gujarat,  a  forum  for
Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  was  created  in  the  form  of  Lok  Adalat
(People's  Court).  Keeping  in  view  the  usefulness  of  Lok  Adalats,  the
Government  of  India  also  set  up  in  1980  a  Committee  under  the
chairmanship of Mr. P. N. Bhagwati, a former Chief Justice of India, and
later, the Parliament enacted the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 in
view of the mandate of article 39A of the Constitution. The Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987 implemented in its true spirit has created popularity
for and utility of Lok Adalats for speedy resolution of disputes. 
1.14 The philosophy behind setting up of permanent and continuous Lok
Adalats  is  that  in  our  country,  the  litigant  public  has  not  so  far  been
provided any statutory forum for counselling and as such, these Lok Adalats
may take upon themselves the role of counsellors as well as conciliators.
Experiment of Lok Adalat as an ADR mode has come to be accepted in
14

India  as  a viable,  economic,  efficient  and  informal  one.  The  provisions
relating  to Lok  Adalat  are contained  in sections  19  to  22  of the  Legal
Services Authorities Act 1987.
1.15 Section 22B of  the  Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, as
amended in 2002, enables establishment of permanent Lok Adalats
and its sub-section (1) reads as follows:
“Notwithstanding anything contained in section 19, the Central
Authority or, as the case may be, every State Authority shall, by
notification, establish Permanent Lok Adalats at such places
and for exercising such jurisdiction in respect of one or more
public utility services and for such areas as may be specified in
the notification.”
1.16 Permanent and continuous Lok Adalats established in every District
Court’s Complex provide a statutory forum to the litigants where they may
go themselves before litigation and courts may also refer to them, pending
cases, for counselling and conciliation. These permanent and continuous
Lok  Adalats  would  certainly  be  in  a  better  position  to  try  conciliatory
settlements in more complicated cases arising out of matrimonial, landlord-
tenant, property and commercial disputes, etc., where repeated sittings are
required for persuading and motivating the parties to settle their disputes in
an atmosphere of give and take.
1.17 The disposal of legal disputes at pre-litigative stage by the permanent
and continuous Lok Adalats provides expense-free justice to the citizens of
this country. It also saves courts from additional and avoidable burden of
petty cases, enabling them to divert their court-time to more contentious and
old matters.
15

1.18 The philosophy of permanent and continuous Lok Adalats sprouts
from the seeds of compassion and concern for the poor and downtrodden in
the country and deserves support from all of us to make it grow as a tree
giving fruit, fragrance and shade to all.
1.19 The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill
preceding  the  Legal  services  Authorities  (Amendment)  Act  2002
points  out  that  the  system  of Lok Adalat,  which  is  an innovative
mechanism for alternate dispute resolution, has proved effective for
resolving disputes in a spirit of conciliation outside the courts.
1.20 The Delhi Legal Services Authority has set up 9 permanent Lok
Adalats in Government bodies/departments and 7 MACT permanent
Lok  Adalats  have  been  functioning  regularly  in  Delhi.4 Similarly,
permanent Lok Adalats have also been set up in some other States.
But,  there  is  a  need  to  establish  more  permanent  Lok  Adalats
throughout the country.
1.21 We firmly believe that the legal literacy and legal awareness are the
principal means to achieve the objective of equality before the law for the
citizens of our country. All efforts should be made to achieve the object of
the  Legal  services  Authorities  Act  and  make the  legal  aid  programmes
meaningful and purposeful. 
1.22 Legal aid without legal literacy is less meaningful and purposeful. So,
it would be highly useful if some important legal topics are included as
compulsory  subjects  from  primary  education  stage  itself.  Such  legal
4 http://dlsa.nic.in/lokadalat.html, visited 14.04.2009
16

education would enable the people to settle several of their disputes outside
the courts at the grass roots level without seeking help from legal experts
who are generally expensive.
1.23 It is high time that fora for the poor and needy people for redressal of
their grievances speedily are created. As we all know, delay in disposal of
cases in law courts, for whatever reason it may be, has really defeated the
purpose for which the people approach the courts for redressal. It is said that
justice delayed is justice denied. So, we will have to find out a via media to
render  social  justice  to  the  poor  and  needy  who  want  their  grievances
redressed through law courts.
1.24 It is heartening to note that the Parliament has very recently enacted
the Gram Nyayalayas Act 2008. Justice to the poor at their doorstep as the
common man’s dream is sought to be achieved through the setting up of
Gram Nyayalayas which will travel from place to place to bring to the
people of rural areas speedy, affordable and substantial justice.
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) in modern India
1.25 The  first  avenue  where  the  conciliation  has  been  effectively
introduced and recognized by law is in the field of labour law, namely,
Industrial Disputes Act 1947. Conciliation has been statutorily recognized
as an effective method of dispute resolution in relation to disputes between
workers and the management. The provision in the Industrial Disputes Act
1947  makes  it  attractive  for  disputing  parties  to  settle  disputes  by
negotiation and failing that through conciliation through an officer of the
Government, before resorting to litigation.
17

1.26 In Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation v. Krishna Kant5, the
Supreme Court observed:
“The policy of law emerging from Industrial Disputes Act and its
sister  enactments  is  to  provide  an  alternative  dispute-resolution
mechanism  to  the  workmen,  a  mechanism  which  is  speedy,
inexpensive,  informal  and  unencumbered  by  the  plethora  of
procedural laws and appeals upon appeals and revisions applicable to
civil courts. Indeed, the powers of the courts and tribunals under the
Industrial Disputes Act are far more extensive in the sense that they
can grant such relief as they think appropriate in the circumstances
for putting an end to an industrial dispute.”
1.27 The only field where the courts in India have recognized ADR is in
the  field  of  arbitration.  The  arbitration  was  originally  governed  by  the
provisions contained in different enactments, including those in the Code of
Civil Procedure; the first Indian Arbitration Act was enacted in 1899, which
was  replaced  by the  Arbitration  Act  1940.  The  courts  were  very much
concerned over the supervision of Arbitral Tribunal and they were very
keen  to  see  whether  the  arbitrator  has  exceeded  his  jurisdiction  while
deciding the issue which was referred to him for arbitration.
1.28 There was much delay in settlement of disputes between parties in
law  courts,  which  prevented  investment  of  money  in  India  by  other
countries. India has undertaken major reforms in its arbitration law in the
recent years as part of economic reforms initially in 1991. The Arbitration
5 1995 (5) SCC 75
18

and Conciliation Act of 1996 was thus enacted by the Parliament bringing
in substantial reforms in arbitration, regarding domestic and international
disputes.
1.29 The decision of the Supreme Court in Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. v.
M/S.  Mehul  Construction  Co.6 summarizes  the  evolvement  of  the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act 1996 and the main provisions of the Act
thus:
“4. At the outset, it must be borne in mind that prior to the 1996 Act,
the Arbitration Act of 1940, which was in force in India provided for
domestic  arbitration  and  no  provision  was  there  to  deal  with  the
foreign awards. So far as the Foreign Awards are concerned, the same
were being dealt with by the Arbitration (Protocol and Convention)
Act, 1937, and the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement)
Act, 1961. The increasing growth of global trade and the delay in
disposal  of  cases  in  Courts  under  the  normal  system  in  several
countries made it imperative to have the perception of an alternative
Dispute  Resolution  System,  more  particularly,  in  the  matter  of
commercial disputes. When the entire world was moving in favour of
a  speedy  resolution  of  commercial  disputes,  the  United  Nations
Commission on International Trade Law way back in 1985 adopted
the UNCITRAL Model Law of International Commercial Arbitration
and since then number of countries have given recognition to that
Model  in  their  respective  legislative  system.  With  the  said
UNCITRAL  Model  Law  in  view  the  present  Arbitration  and
Conciliation  Act of 1996  has  been  enacted  in India  replacing  the
Indian Arbitration Act, 1940, which was the principal legislation on
Arbitration in the country that had been enacted during the British
Rule. The Arbitration Act of 1996 provides not only for domestic
arbitration  but  spreads  its  sweep  to  International  Commercial
Arbitration too. The Indian law relating to the enforcement of Foreign
Arbitration  Awards  provides  for  greater  autonomy  in  the  arbitral
process and limits judicial intervention to a narrower circumference
than under the previous law. To attract the confidence of International
6 2000 (6) SCALE 71
19

Mercantile community and the growing volume of India's trade and
commercial  relationship  with  the  rest  of  the  world  after  the  new
liberalisation  policy  of  the  Government,  Indian  Parliament  was
persuaded to enact the Arbitration and Conciliation Act of 1996 in
UNCITRAL model and, therefore, in interpreting any provisions of
the 1996 Act Courts must not ignore the objects and purpose of the
enactment of 1996. A bare comparison of different provisions of the
Arbitration Act of 1940 with the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act 1996 would unequivocally indicate that 1996 Act
limits intervention of Court with an arbitral process to the minimum
and it is certainly not the legislative intent that each and every order
passed by an authority under the Act would be a subject matter of
judicial scrutiny of a Court of Law. Under the new law the grounds
on which an award of an Arbitrator could be challenged before the
Court  have  been  severely  cut  down  and  such  challenge  is  now
permitted  on  the  basis  of  invalidity  of  the  agreement,  want  of
jurisdiction on the part of the arbitrator or want of proper notice to a
party of the appointment of the arbitrator or of arbitral proceedings.
The  powers  of  the  arbitrator  have  been  amplified  by insertion  of
specific provisions of several matters. Obstructive tactics adopted by
the parties in arbitration proceedings are sought to be thwarted by an
express provision inasmuch as if a party knowingly keeps silent and
then suddenly raises a procedural objection will not be allowed to do
so. The role of institutions in promoting and organising arbitration
has  been  recognised.  The  power  to  nominate  arbitrators  has  been
given to the Chief Justice or to an institution or person designated by
him. The time limit for making awards has been deleted. The existing
provisions in 1940 Act relating to arbitration through intervention of
Court, when there is no suit pending or by order of the court when
there  is  a  suit  pending,  have  been  removed.  The  importance  of
transnational commercial arbitration has been recognised and it has
been specifically provided that even where the arbitration is held in
India, the parties to the contract would be free to designate the law
applicable to the substance of the dispute. Under the new law unless
the agreement provides otherwise, the arbitrators are required to give
reasons for the award. The award itself has now been vested with
status of a decree, inasmuch as the award itself is made executable as
a decree and it will no longer be necessary to apply to the court for a
decree in terms of the award. All these aim at achieving the sole
object to resolve the dispute as expeditiously as possible with the
20

minimum  intervention  of  a  Court  of  Law  so  that  the  trade  and
commerce is not affected on account of litigations before a court.
When United Nations established the Commission on International
Trade Law it is on account of the fact that the General Assembly
recognised that disparities in national laws governing international
trade created obstacles to the flow of trade. The General Assembly
regarded the Commission on International Trade Law as a medium
which could play a more active role in reducing or removing the
obstacles.  Such  Commission,  therefore,  was  given  a  mandate  for
progressive harmonization and unification of the law of International
Trade.  With  that  objective  when  UNCITRAL  Model  has  been
prepared and the Parliament in our country enacted the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act of 1996 adopting UNCITRAL Model, it would
be appropriate to bear the said objective in mind while interpreting
any provision of the Act. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of
the Act clearly enunciates that the main objective of the legislation
was  to  minimise  the  supervisory  role  of  Courts  in  the  arbitral
process.”
1.30 The  Family  Courts  Act  1984  was  enacted  to  provide  for  the
establishment of Family Courts with a view to promote conciliation in, and
secure speedy settlement of, disputes relating to marriage and family affairs.
Section 5 of the Family Courts Act provides enabling  provision for the
Government to require the association of Social Welfare Organisations to
help a Family Court to arrive at a settlement. Section 6 of the Act provides
for appointment  of  permanent  counsellors  to  effect settlement  in  family
matters. Further, Section 9 of the Act imposes an obligation on the Family
Court to make efforts for settlement before taking evidence in the case. To
this extent the ADR has got much recognition in the mater of settlement of
family  disputes.  Similar  provision  is  contained  in  Order  XXXIIA  CPC
which deals with family matters. According to section 4(4) (a) of the Act, in
selecting  persons  for  appointment  as  Judges  for  Family  Courts,  every
21

endeavour shall be made to ensure that persons committed to the need to
protect and preserve the institution of marriage and to promote the welfare
of children and qualified by reason of their experience and expertise to
promote  the  settlement  of  disputes  by  conciliation  and  counselling  are
selected.
1.31 Another  right  and  welcome  step  taken  was  the  enactment  of  the
Consumer Protection Act 1986 for the settlement of consumers’ disputes.
The Act provides  effective, inexpensive, simple and speedy redressal of
consumers’ grievances, which the civil courts are not able to provide. This
Act is another example of ADR for the effective adjudication of consumers’
disputes. The Act provides for three-tier fora, that is, District Forum, State
Commission and the National Commission for redressal of grievances of
consumers. Large numbers of consumers are approaching these fora to seek
quick redressal of their grievances. There has also been a spurt in social
action litigation on behalf of consumers by Consumer Activists, Voluntary
Consumer Organisations and other Social Action Groups.
1.32 Advantages of ADR:
1) It is less expensive.
2) It is less time-consuming.
3) It is free from technicalities as in the case of conducting cases
in law Courts.
4) Parties are free to discuss their differences of opinion without
any fear of disclosure of this fact before any law courts.
22

5) Parties have the feeling that there is no losing or winning side
between them but at the same time their grievance is redressed
and their relationship is restored.
1.33 Justice in all its facets – social, economic and political – is required to
be rendered to the masses of this country without any further loss of time –
the need of the hour. The new strategy consists in dispute-resolution by
conciliation,  mediation  and  negotiation.  The  constitutional  promise  of
securing to all citizens justice, social, economic and political, as promised in
the Preamble of the Constitution, cannot be realised unless the three organs
of the State, i.e., the legislature, the executive and the judiciary join together
to find ways and means for providing to the Indian poor equal access to the
State’s justice system.
1.34 In Sitanna v. Marivada Viranna7, the Privy Council affirmed
the decision of the Panchayat in a family dispute. Sir John Wallis,
J. stated the law in the following words:
“Reference  to  a  village  Panchayat  is  the  time-honoured
method  of  deciding  disputes  of  this  kind,  and  has  these
advantages,  that  it  is  comparatively  easy  for  the
panchayatdars to ascertain the true facts, and that, as in this
case, it avoids protracted litigation which, as observed by
one  of  the  witnesses,  might  have  proved  ruinous  to  the
estate.  Looking at the evidence as a whole their Lordships
see no reason for doubting that the award was a fair and
honest settlement of a doubtful claim based both on legal
and moral grounds, and are therefore of opinion that there is
no grounds for interfering with it.”
1.35 There is lot of flexibility in the use of ADR methods. The
flexibility is available in the procedure as well as the way solutions
7  AIR 1934 PC 105
23

are found to the dispute.  The solutions can be problem-specific.
The rigidity of precedent as used in adversarial method of dispute-
resolution  will not  come  in the  way of finding  solutions  to the
disputes in a creative way.  
1.36 If  the  ADR  method  is  successful,  it  brings  about  a
satisfactory solution to the dispute and the parties will not only be
satisfied, the ill-will that would have existed between them will also
end. ADR methods, especially mediation and conciliation not only
address the dispute, they also address the emotions underlying
the dispute.  In fact, for ADR to be successful, first the emotions
and ego existing between the parties will have to be addressed.
Once the emotions and ego are effectively addressed, resolving
the dispute becomes very easy. This requires wisdom and skill of
counselling on the part of the Mediator or Conciliator.
1.37 The ADR method is participatory and there is scope for the
parties to the dispute to participate in the solution-finding process.
As a result, they honour the solution with commitment. Above all,
the ADR methods are cheaper and affordable by the poor also. As
of  now,  there  are  some  aberrations  when  it  comes  to  the
expenses incurred in arbitration. In course of time, when there is
good number of quality arbitrators, the expenses of arbitration will
also decrease. The promotion of institutional arbitration will go a
long way in improving the quality of ADR services and making
them really cheaper.
24

1.38 The development of ADR methods will provide access to
many litigants.  It helps in reducing the enormous work-load that is
put on the Judiciary. This will go a long way in improving not only
the access to justice, but even the quality of justice.
1.39 We  have  discussed  above  about  arbitration,  which  is  a
process  of  dispute-resolution  between  the  parties  through  the
arbitration tribunal appointed by the parties to the dispute or by the
Chief Justice or a designate of the Chief Justice under section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996. The parties have the
option  to  go  for  ad  hoc arbitration  or  institutional  arbitration
depending on their convenience. 
1.40 Ad hoc arbitration is arbitration agreed to and arranged by
the parties themselves without recourse to an arbitral institution. In
ad hoc arbitration, if the parties are not able to agree as to who
will be the arbitrator or one of the parties is reluctant to cooperate
in appointing the arbitrator,  the other party will have to invoke
section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 whereunder
the Chief Justice of a High Court or the Supreme Court or their
designate  will  appoint  the  arbitrator.   In  case  of  domestic
arbitration,  it  will  be  the  Chief  Justice  of  a  High  Court  or  his
designate. In case of international commercial arbitration, it will be
the Chief Justice of India or his designate.  In ad hoc arbitration,
the fee of the arbitrator will have to be agreed to by the parties
and the arbitrator.  The present Indian experience is that the fee of
the arbitrator is quite high in ad hoc arbitration.
25

1.41 Institutional arbitration is an arbitration administered by an
arbitral  institution.  The  parties  may  stipulate  in  the  arbitration
agreement to refer an arbitral dispute between them for resolution
to a particular institution.  The Indian institutions include the Indian
Council of Arbitration and the International Centre for Alternative
Dispute  Resolution.  International  institutions  include  the
International Court of Arbitration, the London Court of International
Arbitration and the American Arbitration Association.  All these
institutions  have  rules  expressly  formulated  for  conducting
arbitration.  These rules are formulated on the basis of experience
and hence, they address all possible situations that may arise in
the course of arbitration.
1.42 The  following  advantages  accrue  in  the  case  of  institutional
arbitration in comparison with ad hoc arbitration:
1. In  ad  hoc arbitration,  procedures  will  have  to  be
agreed to by the parties and the arbitrator. This needs
cooperation between the parties. When a dispute is in
existence, it is difficult to expect such cooperation. In
institutional  arbitration,  the  rules  are  already  there.
There is no need to worry about formulating rules or
spend time on making rules.
2. In  ad  hoc arbitration,  infrastructure  facilities  for
conducting  arbitration  is  a  problem,  so  there  is
temptation to hire facilities of expensive hotels. In the
process,  arbitration  costs  increase.  Getting  trained
26

staff is difficult. Library facilities are another problem.
In  institutional  arbitration,  the  arbitral  institution  will
have infrastructure facilities for conduct of arbitration;
they will  have trained  secretarial  and  administrative
staff. There will also be library facilities.  There will be
professionalism in conducting arbitration.  The costs of
arbitration also are cheaper in institutional arbitration.
3. In institutional arbitration, the institution will maintain a
panel  of  arbitrators  along  with  their  profiles.   The
parties can choose from the panel.  It also provides for
specialized arbitrators.   While  in  ad hoc arbitration,
these advantages are not available.
4. In  institutional  arbitration,  many  arbitral  institutions
have  an  experienced  committee  to  scrutinize  the
arbitral awards. Before the award is finalized and given
to  the  parties,  it  is  scrutinized  by  the  experienced
panel.  So the possibility of the court setting aside the
award is minimum.  This facility is not available in ad
hoc arbitration.  Hence, there is higher risk of court-
interference.  
5. In institutional arbitration, the arbitrator’s fee is fixed by
the arbitral institution.  The parties know beforehand
what  the  cost  of  arbitration  will  be.   In  ad  hoc
arbitration,  the  arbitrator’s  fee  is  negotiated  and
agreed to. The Indian experience shows that it is quite
expensive.
6. In institutional arbitration, the arbitrators are governed
by the rules of the institution and they may be removed
27

from  the  panel  for  not  conducting  the  arbitration
properly, whereas in  ad hoc arbitration,  there is no
such fear.
7. In  case,  for  any  reason,  the  arbitrator  becomes
incapable  of  continuing  as  arbitrator  in  institutional
arbitration, it will not take much time to find substitutes.
When  a  substitute  is  found,  the  procedure  for
arbitration  remains  the  same.  The  proceedings  can
continue  from  where  they  were  stopped,  whereas
these facilities are not available in ad hoc arbitration.
8. In  institutional  arbitration,  as  the  secretarial  and
administrative staff is subject to the discipline of the
institution, it is easy to maintain confidentiality of the
proceedings.   In  ad  hoc arbitration,  it  is  difficult  to
expect professionalism from the secretarial staff.
1.43 In  Food Corporation of India v. Joginderpal Mohinderpal8,
the Supreme Court observed: 
“We should make the law of arbitration simple, less technical
and more responsible to the actual realities of the situations,
but must be responsive to the canons of justice and fair play
and make the arbitrator adhere to such process and norms
which  will  create  confidence,  not  only  by  doing  justice
between  the  parties,  but  by  creating  sense  that  justice
appears to have been done.” 
8 (1989) 2 SCC 347
28

1.44 The object of the alternative dispute resolution process of
arbitration  is  to have expeditious  and  effective disposal  of the
disputes through a private forum of parties' choice.9
1.45 Favouring institutional arbitration to save arbitration from the
arbitration cost, the Supreme Court has recently in Union of India
v. M/S. Singh Builders Syndicate10 observed:
“When the arbitration is by a Tribunal consisting of serving
officers, the cost of arbitration is very low.  On the other
hand,  the  cost  of  arbitration  can  be  high  if  the  Arbitral
Tribunal consists of retired Judge/s.  When a retired Judge
is appointed as Arbitrator in place of serving officers, the
government is forced to bear the high cost of Arbitration by
way  of  private  arbitrator’s  fee  even  though  it  had  not
consented for the appointment of such non-technical non-
serving  persons  as  Arbitrator/s.   There  is  no  doubt  a
prevalent opinion that the cost of arbitration becomes very
high in many cases where retired Judge/s are Arbitrators.
The large number of sittings and charging of very high fees
per sitting, with several add-ons, without any ceiling, have
many a time resulted in the cost of arbitration approaching
or even exceeding the amount involved in the dispute or the
amount of the award.  When an arbitrator is appointed by a
court without indicating fees, either both parties or at least
one  party  is  at  a  disadvantage.   Firstly,  the  parties  feel
constrained to agree to whatever fees is suggested by the
Arbitrator,  even  if  it  is  high  or  beyond  their  capacity.
Secondly, if a high fee is claimed by the Arbitrator and one
party agrees to pay such fee, the other party, who is enable
to afford such fee or reluctant to pay such high fee, is put to
an embarrassing position.  He will not be in a position to
express his reservation or objection to the high fee, owing to
an apprehension that refusal by him to agree for the fee
suggested by the arbitrator, may prejudice his case or create
a bias in favour of the other party who readily agreed to pay
the high fee.  It is necessary to find an urgent solution for
9 Union of India v. M/S. Singh Builders Syndicate, 2009 (4) SCALE 49110 Ibid.
29

this  problem to  save arbitration  from  the  arbitration cost.
Institutional  arbitration  has  provided  a  solution  as  the
Arbitrators’ fees is not fixed by the Arbitrators themselves on
case  to  case  basis,  but  is  governed  by  a  uniform  rate
prescribed  by  the  institution  under  whose  aegis  the
Arbitration is held.  Another solution is for the court to fix the
fees at the time of appointing the arbitrator, with the consent
of  parties,  if necessary  in consultation  with the  arbitrator
concerned.  Third is for the retired Judges offering to serve
as Arbitrators, to indicate their fee structure to the Registry
of the respective High Court so that the parties will have the
choice  of  selecting  an Arbitrator  whose  fees  are  in  their
‘range’ having regard to the stakes involved.  What is found
to  be  objectionable  is  parties  being  forced  to  go  to  an
arbitrator appointed by the court and then being forced to
agree for a fee fixed by such Arbitrator.  It is unfortunate that
delays,  high  cost,  frequent  and  sometimes  unwarranted
judicial  interruptions  at  different  stages  are  seriously
hampering the growth of arbitration as an effective dispute
resolution  process.   Delay  and  high  cost  are  two  areas
where  the  Arbitrators  by  self  regulation  can  bring  about
marked improvement”.
1.46 Section 89 providing for settlement of disputes outside the
Court was inserted in CPC in 1999 and brought into force with
effect  from  01.07.2002.  The  ‘Notes  on  Clauses’  of  the  CPC
(Amendment) Bill 1999 stated with regard to this provision thus:
“Clause 7 provides for the settlement of disputes outside the
court.   The  provisions  of  Clause  7  are  based  on  the
recommendations made by Law Commission of India and
Malimath Committee.  It was suggested by Law Commission
of India that the Court may require attendance of any party
to the suit or proceedings to appear in person with a view to
arriving at an amicable settlement of dispute between the
parties and make an attempt to settle the dispute between
the parties amicably. Malimath Committee recommended to
make it obligatory for the court to refer the dispute, after
issues are framed, for settlement either by way of arbitration,
30

conciliation,  mediation,  judicial  settlement  or  through  Lok
Adalat.  It is only when the parties fail to get their disputes
settled  through  any  of  the  alternate  dispute  resolution
method that the suit could proceed further.  In view of the
above, clause 7 seeks to insert a new section 89 in the
Code in order to provide for alternate dispute resolution.”
1.47 Section  89  has  been  introduced  for  the  first  time  for
settlement  of  disputes  outside  the  Court,  with  the  avowed
objective of providing speedy justice:
1. It is now made obligatory for the Court to refer the
dispute after issues are framed for settlement either by way
of -
(a) Arbitration,
(b) Conciliation,
(c) Judicial settlement  including  settlement  through  Lok
Adalat, or
(d) Mediation.
2. Where  the  parties  fail  to  get  their  disputes  settled
through any of the alternative dispute resolution methods,
the suit could proceed further in the Court in which it was
filed.
3. The procedure to be followed in matters referred for
different modes of settlement is spelt out in sub-section (2).
4. Clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 89 empowers
the Government and the High Courts to make rules to be
followed in mediation proceedings to effect the compromise
between the parties.
31

1.48 In Salem Advocate Bar Association v. Union of India11, the
Supreme Court rejected the challenge to the constitutional validity
of the amendment made in CPC and took note of the Reports of
the  Committee  headed  by  M.  Jagannadha  Rao,  J.,  a  former
Supreme Court Judge and Chairman of the Law Commission of
India,  including the one dealing with Model Alternative Dispute
Resolution and Mediation Rules. 
1.49 We  should  endeavour  to  inspire  parties  to  settle  their
disputes outside the Court by more and more utilizing section 89
CPC.  It is a very beneficial provision.  
1.50 A new section 16 has been inserted in the Court-fees Act
1870 by the CPC (Amendment) Act 1999, which reads as follows:
“Where the Court refers the parties to the suit to any one of
the mode of settlement of dispute referred to in section 89 of
the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908,  the  plaintiff  shall  be
entitled  to a certificate  from the Court authorising  him to
receive back from the collector, the full amount of the fee
paid in respect of such plaint.”
1.51 Where a matter referred to a Lok Adalat in terms of section
89(2)  CPC  read  with  section  20(1)  of  the  Legal  Services
Authorities Act is settled, the refund of the court-fee is governed
11 AIR 2003 SC 189 and (2005) 6 SCC 344
32

by section 16 of the Court-fees Act read with section 21 of the
Legal Services Authorities Act and the plaintiff is entitled to the
refund of the whole of the court-fee paid on the plaint.12 
1.52 A  Lok  Adalat  award  is  on  a  par  with  a  decree  on
compromise,  final,  unappealable,  binding  and  equivalent  to  an
executable decree, and ends the litigation between the parties.13
1.53 Public confidence in the Judiciary is the need of the hour
more than ever before. The Judiciary has a special role to play in
the  task  of  achieving  socio-economic  goals  enshrined  in  the
Constitution. While maintaining their aloofness and independence,
the Judges have to be aware of the social changes in the task of
achieving socio-economic justice for the people.
1.54 Socrates said that four things improve a great Judge:
(a)To hear courteously;
(b)To answer wisely;
(c) To consider soberly; and
(d)To decide impartially.
1.55 The  judges  of  the  subordinate  judiciary,  which  can  be
termed as the root of our judicial system, must be able to inspire
confidence in themselves and do justice to the society. It is rightly
said that judicial officers discharge divine functions though they
are not divine themselves. Every judicial officer of the subordinate
12 Vasudevan V. A. v. State of  Kerala, AIR 2004 Kerala 43 13 P. T. Thomas v. Thomas Job, (2005) 6 SCC 478
33

judiciary has to lead a disciplined life. The judges of all cadres
should strictly observe punctuality in court. Integrity is an essential
quality of a judicial officer.    A judicial officer must follow the
standards of integrity, morality and behaviour. The members of the
judiciary should pronounce judgments within the stipulated time.
Judges must decide cases without fear or favour, affection or ill
will, or the feeling of a friend or foe. They must work very hard, be
very honest  and  courteous  to  the  litigants,  witnesses  and  the
members of the Bar and discharge their judicial functions with all
humility at their command. They should not speak out their verdict,
unless they propose to pronounce it in open court then and there.
Judges should cultivate the art of writing judgments, which is a
creative process.   The language should be plain, precise and
pointed.  Long  sentences  lose  their  punch.  Words  should  be
chosen with apt precision. The facts should be stated precisely,
the  issues  written  clearly,  the  evidence  should  be  discussed
threadbare, ratiocination should be logical and should follow in a
sequence from one point to another and then a case be decided.
In the present times, judicial education and training too is a must,
which may be called an effective and rather indispensable means
to  enhance  fair  administration  of  justice.  Education  enhances
knowledge and sensitivity, whereas training revolves round skills,
attitude  and  professionalism.  The  two  reinforce  each  other  in
judicial performance. That is why there have come into existence
the  National  Judicial  Academy  at  Bhopal  and  other  judicial
academies or training directorates at the State level. Dr A. P. J.
Abdul Kalam, a former President of India, has been supportive of
34

mediation and conciliation as ADR mechanisms and emphasized
the  need  for  their  training  in  order  that  they  are  persons  of
impeccable integrity and ability to persuade and create conviction
among parties. 
1.56 The issue of under-trials detained in various prisons in the
country has been a matter of concern.  The Central Government
realizing the plight of under-trials and to ensure justice to common
man, made allocation of Rs.502.90 crores for creation of 1734
courts named as “Fast Track Courts” all over the country. The
scheme was for a period of five years, which after intervention of
the Supreme Court has been continued for another five years, that
is, until 31st March 2010 with a provision of Rs.509 crores.
1.57 A  successful  judicial  system  is  a  hallmark  of  any  developed
civilization. The failure of criminal justice system in bringing criminal
conduct under tight control is viewed as leading to the breakdown of the
public  order  and  disappearance  of  an  important  condition  of  human
freedom.  The  crime-control  implies  orderly  and  efficient  method  for
arresting,  prosecuting,  convicting  and  punishing  the  guilty  and  for
deterring  crime  by  others.  The  protection  of  individual  rights  is
necessary to guard the accused against arbitrary exercise of powers by
the State. Long delay in courts causes great hardship not only to the
accused but even to the victim and the State. The accused, who is not out
on bail, may sit in jail for number of months or even years awaiting
conclusion of the trial. Thus, effort is required to be made to improve the
35

methods of investigation and prosecution. More professionalism needs to
be infused in them. The State Government should create a special wing
in the Police Department solely for the purpose of investigation  and
attending  to  court-work,  and  the  prosecuting  agency  should  be
independent. 
1.58 A prosecutor occupies a unique position in the criminal justice
system.   In  Hitendra  Vishnu  Thakur  v. State  of  Maharashtra14, the
Supreme Court observed that a public prosecutor is an important officer
of the State Government and is appointed by the State under the Code of
Criminal Procedure. He is not a part of the investigating agency. He is an
independent statutory authority. The success of a trial depends mainly on
effective  prosecution,  which  is  possible  only  through  well-qualified,
trained,  fair  and  dedicated  prosecutors.  It  goes  without  saying  that
integrity and  impartiality  of the  public  prosecutor  is  essential  in  the
administration of justice. It is essential that efforts are made to improve
the quality of the management of prosecution in order to secure fair, just
and expeditious conclusion of trials.
1.59 In criminal matters also, settlement is recognized by the Code of
Criminal Procedure in that its section 320 provides for compounding of
offences mentioned therein. 
Lawyers
1.60 Lawyers,  as  the  general  public  expects,  should  be  thorough
professionals, persons of integrity and competence, who can uphold the
14 AIR 1994 SC 2623
36

cause of justice. Lawyers must be men or women of substance having
full  sense  of  their  social  responsibilities  as  social  technicians  and
architects of the justicing process. They must have a grasp of the endless
tradition and must be aware of the greatness of their task. They must
have necessary humility, being servants of justice and the conscience of
the community.
1.61 The vulnerable sections of the society who are marginalized
have to be dealt with sensitively and with care. Being powerless,
poor  and  ignorant,  they need  assistance  for  empowerment  with
knowledge and capacity to uphold their own rights as being integral
part  of  the  society.   Legal  literacy  campaign,  paralegal  training
programmes,  mobilization  of public opinion against  injustice and
exploitation, out-of-court settlement of disputes, legal advice, etc.
are  some  of  the  ways  through  which  the  poor  and  the
underprivileged can be made to realize their rights and also learn
about their own importance in shaping and rejuvenating this great
nation.
1.62 Since the lower judiciary does the bulk of judicial work, it needs
to be strengthened. Not only the infrastructure of the lower courts
needs to be improved, but also the service conditions of the judicial
officers need to be revamped. More courts needs to be created, so
that  justice  is  taken  to  the  doorsteps  of  the  people.  The  recent
creation by the Union Government of Fast Track Court at the district
level, to dispose of old cases, is a step in the right direction.
37

1.63 In our country, the ratio between the population and the judges
is unrealistic. Therefore, the Judiciary is unable to cope up with the
flood  of  litigation.  Hence,  the  number  of  judges  needs  to  be
increased in proportion to the population. India has fewer than 15
judges per million people, a figure that compares very poorly with
countries, such as Canada (about 75 per million) and the US (104
per  million). In 2002,  the Supreme Court  had directed  the Union
Government  that  the  judge-population  ratio  be  raised  to  50  per
million in a phased manner.15  
1.64 Our antediluvian laws either need to be deleted or rejuvenated.
The procedure laws should be pruned and streamlined. The right to
appeal on both the civil and the criminal sides needs to be restricted.
1.65 The  work  culture  of  the  courts  should  be  improved.  The
relationship  between  the  Bar  and  the  Bench  should  be  cordial.
Strikes and adjournments only delay disposal of cases.
1.66 The quality of legislation needs to be improved.  Poorly drafted
laws encourage litigation. If the law is clear, chances of litigation are
less.
1.67 With  a view to  avoid  inordinate  delay in  furnishing  certified
copies of judgments and final orders, etc., copies should be taken
and  authenticated  immediately  after  their  pronouncement  and
preserved in the copying section, for the purposes of issuing certified
15 The Hindu, 06.09.2007
38

copies, whenever necessary. Sufficient number of Xerox machines
for that purpose be made available.
1.68 Judicial reform is the concern not only of the Judiciary, but it is
the responsibility of the Executive, of the Legislature, of the Bar and
of the people also.  It is not a one-time remedy, but an on-going
process. They must stop blaming each other, for the malice. They
must unite, to prevent and control the litigation-epidemic.  
1.69 With the advent of the ADR, there is a new avenue for the
people to settle their disputes. More and more ADR centres should
be created for settling disputes out-of-court as is being done in
many other countries. ADR methods will really achieve the goal of
rendering social justice to the people, which really is the goal of the
successful judicial system.
1.70 Technology  has  a  role  to  play  in  diminishing  dockets.
Computers should be introduced in courts with a faster speed. This
facilitates dissemination of information, creation of data, upkeep of
the judicial records and betters judicial delivery system. The National
E-Courts Project launched by the President on 09.07.2007 needs
fillip.
39

II. RECOMMENDATIONS
2.1 We are aware that the propositions contained in the preceding
Chapter are not new. Nevertheless, we feel that they need to be re-
emphasized  and  reaffirmed.  There  is  an  urgent  need  for  justice-
dispensation through ADR mechanisms. The ADR movement needs
to  be  carried  forward  with  greater  speed.  Besides,  many  other
suggestions, which may now be called hackneyed, need a fresh look.
40

2.2 We recommend accordingly.
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
   Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood)                       (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
   Member                                      Member-Secretary
41