 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Need for Ameliorating the lot of the Have-nots
–
Supreme Court’s Judgments 
Report No. 223
April 2009
 

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 223)
Need for Ameliorating the lot of the Have-nots
–
Supreme Court’s Judgments
Forwarded  to  the  Union  Minister  for  Law  and
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of
India  by Dr.  Justice  AR. Lakshmanan,  Chairman,
Law Commission of India, on  the   30th day of  April,
2009. 
The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the
16th October,  2006,  issued  by the Government of
2

India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
3

Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh :  Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as
Government copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor,
ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001,
India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI  Building
(IInd Floor) 
Bhagwandas
Road,
New  Delhi  –
110 001
Tel.  91-11-
23384475
Fax.   91-11 –
23383564
6

D.O. No. 6(3)/134/2007-LC (LS)           30th  April, 2009
Dear Dr. Bhardwaj Ji,
Subject: Need for Ameliorating the lot of the Have-nots –
    Supreme Court’s Judgments
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  223rd Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject. 
The  United  Nations  Committee  on  Economic,  Social  and
Cultural Rights defines poverty as a human condition characterized
by sustained  or chronic  deprivation of the resources,  capabilities,
choices,  security  and  power  necessary  for  the  enjoyment  of  an
adequate  standard  of  living  and  other  civil,  cultural,  economic,
political  and  social  rights.    Poverty  has  been  and  remains  a
constructed social and economic reality.   The poor are not poor
simply  because  they  are  less  human  or  because  they  are
physiologically or mentally inferior to others whose conditions  are
better off.   On the contrary, their poverty is often a direct or indirect
consequence of society’s failure to establish equity and fairness as
the basis of its social and economic relations. Extreme poverty is
denial of human rights.
In a large number of cases, our Supreme Court has considered
the scope of article 21 of the Constitution, which assures right to life.
To make right to life meaningful and effective, the Supreme Court put
up expansive interpretation and brought within its ambit a myriad of
rights. 
Various laws have been enacted to eradicate poverty: some of
them  directly  deal  with  them  and  some  of  them  indirectly.
Nevertheless,  their  tardy  implementation  makes  us  lag  behind  in
effectively dealing with the problem.
In spite of the constitutional safeguards and State legislative
intervention in favour of the poor and the needy, their socio-economic
condition is deteriorating. Social and economic equality still remains
a mirage for them. 
7

We are of the view that the Union and the State Governments should
accord top priority to implementation of the judgments rendered by our
Supreme Court in their letter and spirit in order that the lot of the have-nots
is ameliorated.  
 With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely,
(Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. H. R. Bhardwaj,
Union Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
8

Need for Ameliorating the lot of the Have-nots – 
           Supreme Court’s Judgments
Table of Contents 
                                                            
                           CHAPTER                                       
PAGE NOS.        
I. EXTREME POVERTY: DENIAL OF HUMAN RIGHTS         9 -
17                             
II. A PETITION ON BEGGARS’ HUMAN RIGHTS                   18 -
20
III. EXPANSE OF ARTICLE 21 OF THE CONSTITUTION        21 -
37
IV. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                          38 -
39
                             
9

CHAPTER I
EXTREME POVERTY: DENIAL OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
1.1 The  United  Nations  Committee  on  Economic,  Social  and
Cultural Rights defines poverty as a human condition characterized
by sustained  or chronic  deprivation of the resources,  capabilities,
choices,  security  and  power  necessary  for  the  enjoyment  of  an
adequate  standard  of  living  and  other  civil,  cultural,  economic,
political  and  social  rights.    Poverty  has  been  and  remains  a
constructed social and economic reality.   The poor are not poor
simply  because  they  are  less  human  or  because  they  are
physiologically or mentally inferior to others whose conditions  are
better off.   On the contrary, their poverty is often a direct or indirect
consequence of society’s failure to establish equity and fairness as
the basis of its social and economic relations.1 
1.2 The  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights  proclaims2 that
everyone is entitled to a standard of living adequate to provide for the
health  and  well-being  of  oneself  and  one's  family.  Moreover,  in
1 Voice of Justice by Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., Delhi (2006),
page 121
2 Statement to the 49th session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights
10

accordance  with  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,
International Covenants recognize that freedom from fear and want
can  be  achieved  only  if  everyone  enjoys  economic,  social  and
cultural rights, in addition to civil and political rights. The increasing
disparity  between  the  rich  and  the  poor  is  a  major  destabilizing
influence  in  the  world.  It  produces  or  exacerbates  regional  and
national  conflicts,  environmental  degradation,  crime  and  violence,
and  the  increasing  use  of  illicit  drugs.  These  consequences  of
extreme poverty affect all individuals and nations. Increasingly we are
becoming aware that we are all members of a single human family. In
a family the suffering of any member is felt by all, and until that
suffering is alleviated, no member of the family can be fully happy or
at ease.  Few are able to look at starvation and extreme poverty
without feeling a sense of failure.
1.3 Every man and woman has the human right to a standard of
living adequate for health and well-being, to food, clothing, housing,
medical care and social services.   These fundamental human rights
are defined in our Constitution.   On 10 December 1948, the United
Nations General Assembly adopted  and proclaimed the  Universal
Declaration of Human Rights “as a common standard of achievement
for all peoples and all nations”.   Article 1 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights reads thus:
“All human beings  are born  free  and equal  in dignity and rights.
They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards
one another in spirit of brotherhood.”
11

1.4 The human right to live in dignity, free from want, is itself a
fundamental right, and is also essential to the realization of all other
human rights – rights that are universal, indivisible, interconnected
and interdependent.   The right to be free from poverty includes the
human right to an adequate standard of living.   Poverty is a human
rights violation.   The right to be free from poverty includes:
The human right to an adequate standard of living;
The human right to work and receive wages that contribute to
an adequate standard of living;
The human right to a healthy and safe environment;
The human right to live in adequate housing;
The human right to be free from hunger;
The human right to safe drinking water;
The human right to primary health care and medical attention in
case of illness;
The human right to access to basic social services;
The human right to education;
The human right to be free from gender or racial discrimination;
The human right to participate in shaping decisions which affect
oneself and one’s community.3
1.5 The human right for children includes their development in an
environment appropriate for their physical, mental, spiritual, moral
and social development.4
3 Supra note 1, pages 121-1224 Ibid.
12

1.6 Very little attention has been paid to poverty and the extreme
poverty  in  the  logic  of  human  rights;  the  explanation  for  this  is
unhappily simple.  A poor person hardly exists  and can only lay
claim,  modestly,  to  ‘poor’  rights.   We  have  gradually  become
accustomed to consider the poor person as having exhausted his
entitlements.  As for the extremely poor, they do not exist at all, at
best they may benefit from charity.  Even the help they receive is, in
most  cases,  an additional  token  of exclusion from  a society  that
makes them feel guilty.  The public authorities ignore them.
1.7 Poverty and extreme poverty are not peripheral phenomena
confined  to  this  country  alone.   They  are  universal.   Poverty  is
increasing everywhere.  The phenomenon occurs on a more massive
scale in the Least Developed Countries and in countries undergoing
rapid  structural  transformation,  but  it  has  equally  serious
consequences for the victims in rich countries.  As we said earlier,
poverty is increasing everywhere: Increasing wealth is accompanied
by increasing poverty.  Poverty renders all human rights inoperative.
The violation of right to a reasonable standard of living entails the
violation of all the other human rights, since their observance are
simply  made  materially  and  structurally  impossible.   Poverty
aggravates  discrimination  since  it  particularly  affects  women,  the
elderly and the disabled.  Moreover, the very poor are, in most cases,
unable even to discover their own rights and this violation not only
affects  individuals  through  and  within  their  precarious  day-to-day
existence,  but  it  entraps  their  entire  social  world  over  several
generations in a spiral from which it is virtually impossible to escape.
13

Poverty is, undoubtedly, a general phenomenon, a social relation,
which as such is subject to law, and whose overall logic needs to be
understood.  Poverty is a situation of uncertainty, whereas extreme
poverty is a spiral of different kinds of uncertainty with each kind
aggravating the effects of the others in a circular process that hems
the individual completely.   
1.8 Fundamentally, a human rights approach to poverty is about
the empowerment of the poor, extending their freedom of choice and
action  to  structure  their  own  lives.    The  international  normative
framework empowers the poor by granting them human rights and
imposing the legal obligations on others.    Rights and obligations are
required to be supported by a system of accountability, or else they
become no more than window dressing.   Accordingly, the human
rights  approach  to  poverty  reduction  emphasizes  obligations  and
requires that all duty-holders, including States and intergovernmental
organizations,  be held  to account  for  their  conduct  in relation to
international human rights.   The enjoyment of the right to participate
is deeply dependent on the realization of other human rights.   If the
poor are to participate meaningfully, they must be free to organize
without restriction (right to association), to meet without impediment
(right to assembly) and to say what they want without intimidation
(freedom of expression), they must know the relative facts (right to
information) and they must enjoy an elementary level of economic
security and the well-being (right to a reasonable standard of living
and associated rights).   It is less openly recognized that the poor
also suffer from a lack of information.   Over and over again poor
14

people mention their isolation from information, information about the
programmes  of  assistance,  their  rights,  contacts  about  work  that
affect their lives directly.
1.9 Poverty is indisputably the most potent violation of all human
rights,  and  constitutes  a  threat  to  the  survival  of  the  greatest
numbers of the human population. As poverty has intensified in both
rich and poor nations alike, the view of poverty as a human rights
and social justice issue has gained increased recognition. The United
Nations General Assembly has resolved that extreme poverty and
exclusion  from  society  constitute  a  violation  of  human  dignity
(General  Assembly  Resolution  53/146  on  Human  Rights  and
Extreme  Poverty  adopted  December  18  1992).  The  existence  of
widespread extreme poverty inhibits the full and effective enjoyment
of human rights and might, in some situations, constitute a threat to
the right to life.  A human rights-based approach to poverty views the
poor  as  holding  inalienable  fundamental  rights  that  must  be
respected, protected and fulfilled. 
1.10 If injustices and discriminations in society are the main reasons
for poverty, then as an effective operational mechanism, the human
rights-based approach to development demands:
15

- Participation  and  transparency  in  decision-making  –  this
implies  making  participation  throughout  the  development
process a right and the obligation of the State and other
actors to create an enabling environment for participation of
all stakeholders;
- Non-discrimination – this implies that equity and equality cut
across all rights and are the key ingredients for development
and poverty reduction;
- Empowerment – this implies empowering people to exercise
their human rights through the use of tools such as legal and
political  action  to  make  progress  in  more  conventional
development areas;
- Accountability of actors – this implies accountability of public
and private institutions and actors to promote, protect and
fulfill human rights and to be held accountable if these are
not enforced.
1.11 Human rights are for everyone, as much for people living in
poverty  and  social  isolation  as  for  the  rich  and  educated.
International law prohibits discrimination in the enjoyment of human
rights  on  any  ground,  such  as  ethnicity,  colour,  sex,  language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status.   The term “or other status” is interpreted to
include  personal  circumstances,  occupation,  lifestyle,  sexual
orientation and health status.   People living with HIV and AIDS, for
instance, are entitled to the enjoyment of their fundamental human
rights and freedoms without any unjustified restriction.
16

1.12 Equality also requires that all persons within a society enjoy
equal access to the available goods and services that are necessary
to fulfill basic human needs.   It prohibits discrimination in law or in
practice in any field regulated and protected by public authorities.
Thus, the principle of non-discrimination applies to all State policies
and  practices,  including  those  concerning  health  care,  education,
access  to  services,  travel  regulations,  entry  requirements  and
immigration.
1.13 An  essential  principle  of  the  international  human  rights
framework  is  that  every  person  and  all  peoples  are  entitled  to
participate in, contribute to, and enjoy civil, economic, social, cultural
and political development in which human rights and fundamental
freedoms can be realized.  This means that participation is not simply
something  desirable  from  the  point  of  view  of  ownership  and
sustainability, but rather a right with profound consequences for the
design  and  implementation  of  development  activities.    It  is
concerned  with  access  to  decision-making,  and  is  critical  in  the
exercise of power.    The principles  of participation and  inclusion
mean  that  all  people  are  entitled  to  participate  in  society  to  the
maximum of their potential.   This in turn necessitates provision of a
supportive environment to enable people to  develop and express
their full potential and creativity.
1.14 States have the primary responsibility to create the enabling
environment in which all people can enjoy their human rights, and
17

have the obligation to ensure that respect for human rights norms
and principles is integrated into all levels of governance and policy-
making.   The principle of accountability is essential for securing an
enabling environment for development.   Human rights do not simply
define the needs of people, but recognize people as active subjects
and claim-holders,  thus  establishing  the  duties and obligations  of
those  responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  needs  are  met.    As  a
consequence, the identification of duty-holders has to feature as an
integral part of programme development.
1.15 Law must protect rights.  Any dispute about them is not to be
resolved  through  the  exercise  of  some  arbitrary  discretion,  but
through the adjudication by competent, impartial and independent
processes.  These procedures will ensure full equality and fairness to
all parties, and determine the questions in accordance with clear,
specific and pre-existing laws, known and openly proclaimed.  All
persons  are  equal  before  the  law,  and  are  entitled  to  equal
protection.   The rule of law ensures that no one is above the law,
and that there will be no impunity for human rights violations.
1.16 From the human development perspective, good governance is
democratic governance, meaning:
- People’s  rights and fundamental  freedoms  are respected,
allowing them to live with dignity;
- People have a say in decisions that affect their lives;
- People can hold decision-makers accountable;
18

- Inclusive  and  fair  rules,  institutions  and  practices  govern
social interactions;
- Women are equal partners with men in public spheres of life
and decision-making;
- People  are  free  from  discrimination  based  on  ethnicity,
gender, or any other attribute;
- The  needs  of  future  generations  are  reflected  in  current
policies;
- Economic  and  social  policies  are  responsive  to  people’s
needs and aspirations.
1.17 The importance  of discrimination  in reaching  the  Millennium
Development  Goals  –  based  on  ethnicity,  colour,  sex,  language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status – cannot be overstated.  Discrimination is a form
of social exclusion, and often a cause of poverty.   In extreme cases,
discrimination  and  exclusion  may  lead  to  conflict.    Systemic
discrimination reduces the ability of individuals to benefit from and
contribute to human development.   
19

                   CHAPTER II
A PETITION ON BEGGARS’ HUMAN RIGHTS
2.1 A  civil  writ  petition  (No.  117/2000)  under  article  32  of  the
Constitution filed by way of public interest litigation challenging the
alleged action of the Union of India, Government of NCT of Delhi and
the Commissioner of Police, New Delhi, in violating the provisions of
the Bombay Prevention of Begging Act 1959, as extended to Delhi, is
pending before the Supreme Court.  The writ petitioner (Ms Karnika
Sawhney), who happened to be a law student of the University of
Delhi, undertook a research project on the subject of “Problem of
beggars in Delhi”. She saw the plight of beggars housed in Beggar
Homes  who  were  being  deprived  of  the  basic  essentials  and
amenities of life like adequate food, clean water, proper shelter and
personal hygiene.   According to her, the inmates were leading a
mere animal existence with no proper provision of adequate drinking
water,  bathing,  sanitation,  food,  clothing  and  clean  bedding  or
hygienic surroundings in the shelter.   The inmates also complained
of extremely poor medical facilities.
2.2 The writ petition has pointed out that the concept of the right to
life and livelihood is a part of the overall constitutional structure and
is recognized also by various articles of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights that,  inter alia, declare the right of every member of
society to social security and protection against unemployment and
20

economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for the dignity and
free development of his  personality.  It  is also  of  significance  to
highlight here that to combat the problem of beggary a scheme for
beggary prevention was formulated and introduced during 1992-93
for the care, treatment and rehabilitation of beggars by the Union
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.   It is essential to briefly
set out its primary objectives which are as follows:
1. Providing facilities for the technical education and vocational
training of beggars;
2. To encourage beggars in productive work so as to facilitate
their reintegration in the society;
3. Involving voluntary welfare organizations;
4. Mobilizing  community  resources  for  training  and
employment.
2.3 Another scheme of assistance was to provide for establishment
of work centres in the existing Beggar Homes for providing vocational
training and technical education to the beggars.   It is pertinent to
note that since the main objective in case of Beggar Homes is the
economic rehabilitation together with the physical, psychological and
social rehabilitation, it is expected that the allocation of expenditure
would reflect the relative importance of these objectives, but when
the expenditure pattern of these bodies is examined in this light, it is
found that the administrative expenses form predominantly part of
the total expenditure.   
21

2.4 The  writ  petition  also  states  that  there  is  an  attitude  of
indifference,  laxity and  lack  of commitment  towards  the  assigned
roles among the officials statutorily empowered with the duty to arrest
beggars for  protective  and  corrective  custody.    The un-arrested
female beggars are deprived of access to rehabilitation which the
State  is  required  to  ensure  through  the  special  institutions
established under the Act.   This degree of laxity nullifies in effect,
the presence of the laudatory, rehabilitative provisions in the welfare
legislation.    As  a  result,  while  the  institutions  exist  they  hardly
serve/cater to the needs of the destitute who continue to beg on the
streets.
2.5 The  writ  petition  further  states  that  there  is  a  lack  of
transparency due to lapse on the part of governmental authorities in
observing statutory provisions.   There is dire need to establish more
beggar institutions in Delhi and other big cities in order to provide
proper and clean accommodation, adequate essential facilities and
meaningful rehabilitation to the beggars.
22

CHAPTER III
EXPANSE OF ARTICLE 21 OF THE CONSTITUTION
3.1 Article 21 of our Constitution deals with protection of life and
personal liberty and reads thus:
“No  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  life  or  personal  liberty
except according to procedure established by law.”
3.2 This article, drafted in clear and simple language, has been the
subject matter of extensive litigation.   Its scope has been expanded
over the last 50 years and life and liberty now include education,
health  and  even  roads  in  hilly  areas.    The  article  prohibits
deprivation of life or personal liberty except according to procedure
established by law.   In a sense, it corresponds  to the Fifth and
Fourteenth  Amendments  to  the  United  States  Constitution,  the
relevant portions of which read:
23

“Nor be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process
of law…” and “… nor shall any State deprive any person of life,
liberty or property without due process of law.”
3.3 In A. K. Gopalan v.  State of Madras5, the Supreme Court had
given a literal and narrow interpretation to article 21 and refused to
infuse  the procedure with the principles of natural justice.  Three
decades  later,  this  view was  overruled  and  it  was  held  that  the
procedure contemplated under article 21 must answer the test of
reasonableness.6   Such a procedure should be in conformity with the
principles of natural justice.   This is an example of the expansive
interpretation of the fundamental right.
3.4 Thus, article 21 not only protects life and personal liberty but
also envisages a fair procedure.
3.5 The initial view was that article 21 did not include the right to
livelihood.   The later decisions have categorically held that the right
to life includes the right to livelihood.   In  Olga Tellis v. Bombay
Municipal Corporation7, it was held that the sweep of the right to life
conferred by article 21 is wide and far-reaching.   It does not mean
merely  that  life  cannot  be  extinguished  or  taken  away  as,  for
example, by the imposition and execution of the death sentence,
except according to procedure established by law. That is but one
aspect of the right to life. An equally important facet of that right is
the right to livelihood because no person can live without the means
5 AIR 1950 SC 276 Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 2487 AIR 1986 SC 180 
24

of living, that is, the means of livelihood.  If the right to livelihood is
not treated as a part of the constitutional right to life, the easiest way
of depriving a person of his right to life would be to deprive him of his
means of livelihood to the point of abrogation.  That, which alone
makes it possible to live, leave aside what makes life livable, must be
deemed to be an integral component of the right to life.
3.6 The right to reputation is a facet of right to life under article 21.
Adverse remarks by a Commission of Inquiry about a person without
hearing him  violates  principles  of  natural  justice  and renders  the
action non est as well as the consequences thereof.8   
3.7 Economic  empowerment  through  distributive  justice  for  the
poor, dalits and tribes is an integral part of the right to life, equality
and of status and dignity to the poor, weaker sections,  dalits and
tribes.  Bonded  labourers  have to  be  identified  and  released  and
rehabilitated in terms of article 21 read with articles 39, 41 and 42.9
Women  have  right  to  work  with  dignity  and  without  sexual
harassment.  A reasonable residence is an indispensable necessity
for fulfilling the constitutional goal in the matter of development of
man and should be taken as included in the right to life under article
21.10    For residence on hilly areas, access to road is access to life
itself.11
8  State of Bihar v. Lal Krishna Advani, (2003) 8 SCC 361; State of Mahrashtra v. Public Concern
for Governance Trust, 2007 (1) SCALE 72
9   Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 802
10 M/s. Shantistar Builders v. Narayan Khimalal Totame, AIR 1990 SC 630
11 State of Himachal Pradesh v. Umed Ram Sharma, AIR 1986 SC 847
9
10
11
25

3.8 National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has been formed
under the Protection of Human Rights Act 1993.   The scheme of this
Act  is  to  protect  and  implement  human  rights  including  those
envisaged under article 21 and international law.
3.9 The Court has always regarded personal liberty as the most
precious  possession  of  mankind  and  refused  to  tolerate  illegal
detention, regardless of the social cost involved in the release of a
possible renegade.  This is an area where the Court has been most
strict and scrupulous in ensuring observance of the requirements of
the law, and even where a requirement of the law is breached in the
slightest measure, the Court has not hesitated to strike down the
order of detention.
3.10 The  expression  “personal  liberty”  in  article  21  is  of  the  widest
amplitude  and  it  covers  a  variety  of  rights  which  go  to  constitute  the
personal liberty of man and some of them have been raised to the status of
distinct fundamental rights and given additional protection under article 19
of the Constitution. The said expression includes the right to go abroad and
no person can be deprived of this right except according to the procedure
prescribed by law.12
3.11 Personal liberty of a person in preventive detention is curtailed.
Beyond a point, it would be violative of article 21.   The law depriving
such liberty, after the judgment in Maneka Gandhi13, must be right,
12 Satwant Singh v. Passport Officer, [1967]3 SCR 52513 Supra note 6
26

just and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive. The Court did
not uphold solitary confinement  of a prisoner sentenced  to death
under  section  30(2)  of  the  Prisons  Act  1894  on  the  ground  that
articles 14, 19 and 21 are as much available to a prisoner in a jail,
and  the liberty to  move, mix, mingle,  talk  and company with co-
prisoners cannot be substantially curtailed.14
3.12 The right to a speedy trial has been held by the Supreme Court
to form part or as one of the dimensions of the fundamental right to
life and personal liberty guaranteed by article 21.15  This right is not
confined to any particular category of offences. The importance of a
speedy trial has been repeatedly emphasized by the Supreme Court
in  many cases.  In  Abdul  Rehman  Antulay  v.  R.  S.  Nayak16,  the
Supreme Court examined consequences of denial of the right to a
speedy trial  and  laid  down  11,  but  in-exhaustive,  propositions  to
serve  as  guidelines.  This  decision  was  held  to  be  correct  in  P.
Ramachandra Rao v State of Karnataka17. The Court, however, held
that it is neither advisable, nor feasible, nor judicially permissible to
draw  or  prescribe  an  outer  limit  for  conclusion  of  all  criminal
proceedings. 
3.13 Unnecessary  handcuffing  of  under-trial  prisoners  would  be
against article 21.18 In Sheela Barse v. Union of India19, the Supreme
Court deprecated detention of children in jails.
14 Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, (1978) 4 SCC 49415 Hussainara Khatoon v. State of Bihar, 1979 Cri.L.J. 1036 (SC); Raghubir Singh v. State of Bihar, 1987
Cri.L.J. 157 (SC)
16 AIR 1992 SC 1701    17 (2002) 4 SCC 578 18 Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Administration, (1980) 3 SCC 52619 AIR 1986 SC 1773
27

3.14 The right to education also flows from article 21. Article 21A
was,  however,  inserted  in  the  Constitution  by  the  Constitution
(Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act 2002 specifically making the right to
education as a fundamental right. However, this is not an absolute
right. Its content and parameters should be determined in the light of
the directive principle contained in article 41 of the Constitution. The
right to education in the context of the said directive principle means:
(a) Every child has a right to free and compulsory education
until the age of 14 years;
(b) After  the  age  of  14  years,  his  right  to  education  is
circumscribed by the limits of the economic capacity of the
State and its development.
3.15 In Malak Singh v.  State of Punjab20, the Supreme Court held
that the right to privacy is implicit in article 21. It has been held that
surveillance, if intrusive, so seriously encroaches on the privacy of a
citizen  as  to  infringe  his  fundamental  right  to  personal  liberty
guaranteed by article 21 and the freedom of movement guaranteed
by article 19(1) (d). Surveillance must be to prevent crime. The right
to privacy in terms of article 21 has been discussed in various other
cases.
3.16 In  Mr.  “X”  v.  Hospital  “Z”21,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that
disclosure by the hospital or the doctor concerned to the persons
20 (1981) 1 SCC 42021 (2003) 1 SCC 500
28

related to the  girl who intended  to marry, of information  that  her
fiancée had been suffering from HIV (+) did not involve violation of
article 21 in the context of his right to privacy. Right to privacy is not
absolute.22
3.17 Illegal detention and custodial torture are recognized as violation of
the fundamental rights of life and personal liberty guaranteed under article
21.   To begin with, only the following reliefs were being granted in the writ
petitions under article 32 or 226:
(a)Direction  to  set  at  liberty  the  person  detained,  if  the
complaint was one of illegal detention;
(b)Direction to the Government concerned to hold an inquiry
and  take  action  against  the  officers  responsible  for  the
violation;
(c) If the enquiry or action taken by the department concerned
was found to be not satisfactory, to direct an inquiry by an
independent  agency,  usually,  the  Central  Bureau  of
Investigation.
3.18 Compensation for violation of article 21 or “constitutional tort”
was for the first time awarded by the Supreme Court in Rudul Shah
v. State of Bihar23, and later in  Sebastian M. Hongray v. Union of
India24 and  Bhim Singh v. State of Jammu and Kashmir25. The law
was crystallized in Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa26 and D.K. Basu
22 Mr. “X” v. Hospital “Z”, (1998) 8 SCC 29623 (1983) 4 SCC 14124 AIR  1984 SC 102625 AIR 1986 SC 49426 (1993) 2 SCC 746
29

v.  State  of W.  B.27, where the  Court observed that  the award of
compensation is a remedy available in public law based on strict
liability for contravention of fundamental rights to which the principle
of sovereign immunity does not apply.
3.19 Construction  of  dams  results  in  dislocation  of  thousands  of
persons.   Rehabilitation of people who have been ousted from their
homes is a logical corollary to article 21. Rehabilitation is not only
about providing food, clothes and shelter, but includes support to
rebuild means of livelihood and ensuring necessary amenities of life.
3.20 Our Supreme Court is one of the first courts to develop the
concept of the right to healthy environment as a part of the right to
life under article 21. The responsibility of the State to protect the
environment is now a well-accepted notion in all countries. It is this
notion that, in international law, gave rise to the principle of “state
responsibility”  for  pollution  emanating  from  within  one’s  own
territories. This responsibility is clearly enunciated in the Stockholm
Declaration  of  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  the  Human
Environment (1972), to which India is a party.  Thus, there is no
doubt about the fact that there is a responsibility bestowed upon the
Government  to  protect  and  preserve  the  tanks,  which  are  an
important part of the environment of the area.28 Hygienic environment
is an integral  facet  of the right to a healthy life and it would be
impossible to live without a humane and healthy environment.29
27 (1997) 1 SCC 41628 Intellectuals Forum v. State of A. P., AIR 2006 SC 135029 T. N. Godavarman Thirumalpad  v. Union of India, (2002) 10 SCC 606
30

3.21 The right to life under article 21 has been interpreted to also
include the right to health of workmen.30 The health and strength of a
worker is an integral facet of his right of life. In  Murli S. Deora v.
Union of India31, the Supreme Court after considering the harmful
effects that smoking has on non-smokers, gave directions to ban
smoking  in  public  places,  namely,  (1)  auditoriums,  (2)  hospital
buildings,  (3)  health  institutions,  (4)  educational  institutions,  (5)
libraries,  (6)  court  buildings,  (7)  public  offices,  and  (8)  public
conveyances,  including  railways.  The  language  used  gives  the
impression that the list of places is exhaustive. Airports, for example,
are not included, although they are impliedly included.
3.22 An accused who cannot afford legal assistance is entitled to
free legal aid at the cost of the State. This right is part of the fair, just
and reasonable procedure under article 21. The court must inform
the accused of his right to be represented by a lawyer through legal
aid and at the expense of the State.   Failure to do so will vitiate his
trial and his conviction can be set aside.32
3.23 In Jolly George Varghese v. Bank of Cochin33, the question of
putting a person in prison in execution of a money decree, who did
not have the necessary means to pay the debt, was considered by
the  Supreme  Court.   The  Court  while  dealing  with  the  issue
harmonized section 51 of the CPC with the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. Article 11 of the Covenant provides that “no
30 C.E.S.C. Limited v. Subhash Chandra Bose, (1992) 1 SCC 44131 (2001) 8 SCC 76532 Suk Das v. Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh, (1986) 2 SCC 40133 AIR 1980 SC 470
31

one shall be imprisoned merely on the ground of inability to fulfill a
contractual  obligation”.  The  Court  held  that  a  simple  default  to
discharge the debt is not enough to detain a person in prison.   There
must be some element of bad faith beyond mere indifference to pay.
If the judgment-debtor once had the means but now has not or if he
has money now on which there are other pressing claims, he should
not be cast in prison as the same would be violative of the spirit of
article 11 of the Covenant as well as article 21 of the Constitution.
3.24 Public  interest  litigation  is  a  strategic  arm  of  the  legal  aid
movement,  intended  to bring justice  within the  reach  of the  poor
masses, who fall within the low-visibility area of humanity. Public
interest litigation is brought before the court not for the purpose of
enforcing the rights of one individual against another as happens in
the  case  of  ordinary litigation,  but  it  is  intended  to  promote  and
vindicate  public  interest  which  demands  that  violations  of
constitutional or legal rights of large numbers of people who are poor,
ignorant or in a socially or economically disadvantageous position
should not go unnoticed and un-redressed.  
3.25 In  Bandhua  Mukti  Morcha  v. Union of India34,  the  Supreme
Court held that the writ petition under article 32 by way of public
interest  litigation  by  a  public-spirited  organization  on  behalf  of
persons  belonging  to  socially  and  economically  weaker  sections
complaining violation of their human rights on being forced to serve
as bonded labourers, was maintainable. According to the Court, a
public interest litigation is not in the nature of an adversary litigation34 (1984) 3 SCC 161
32

but it is a challenge and an opportunity to the government and its
officers to make basic human rights meaningful to the deprived and
vulnerable sections of the community and to assure them social and
economic justice  which  is  the  signature  tune  of  our  Constitution.
Certain directions were given by the Court to the governments and
other authorities with a view to improve the life conditions of the poor
workers of the stone quarries and ensure social justice to them so
that they may be able to breathe the fresh air of social and economic
freedom. 
3.26 Though article 24 of the Constitution prohibits employment of
children below the age of 14 years in any factory or mine or in any
other hazardous employment, it is a hard reality that due to poverty
child is driven to such employment. The Supreme Court in another
case bearing the above title35 directed the Government of India to,
inter  alia,  evolve  the  principles  and  policies  for  progressive
elimination of employment of the children below the age of 14 years
in all employments.
3.27 Conceptually,  parens  patriae theory  is  the  obligation  of  the
State to protect and take into custody the rights and privileges of its
citizens  for  discharging  its  obligation.  The  Constitution  makes  it
imperative for the State to secure to its citizens the rights guaranteed
by the Constitution and where the citizens are not in a position to
assert and secure their rights, the State must come into picture and
protect and fight for the rights of the citizens. Therefore, the State
can be activated and approached to effectively come on the scene35 Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, AIR 1997 SC 2218
33

and take over the claims of the victims of a disaster to protect their
human rights.36
3.28 A newspaper carried a report about the non-payment of wages
to a large number of employees in different public undertakings. The
report also indicated that several employees died due to starvation or
committed suicide owing to acute financial crisis. A writ petition was
filed by a lawyer on the basis of the said news. In Kapila Hingorani v.
State of Bihar37, the Supreme Court  interfered  with the  matter  in
public  interest  and  held  that  there  is  failure  to  perform  the
constitutional duties by the State in controlling the functions of the
public sector companies. In such circumstances, the Court would not
hesitate to lift the corporate veil when corporate personality is found
to be opposed to justice, convenience and interest of the revenue or
workman or against public interest.38
3.29 To  help  the  poor  litigants,  article  39A  of  the  Constitution
provides,  inter  alia, that  the  State  shall  provide free  legal  aid  to
ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any
citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities. Invoking the said
article and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Supreme
Court held that it is the duty of the State to provide amicus curiae to
defend an indigent accused. The Court also held that he would be
meted out  with unequal  defence, if,  as is common knowledge, a
youngster  from  the  Bar  who  has  either  a  little  experience  or  no
experience is assigned to defend him and, therefore, it is high time
36 Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India, (1990) 1 SCC 61337 (2003) 6 SCC 138 Ibid., pages 19-20
34

that  senior  counsel  practising  in  the  court  concerned  should
volunteer  to  defend  such  indigent  accused  as  a  part  of  their
professional duty.39 
3.30 Poverty is indisputably the most potent violation of all human
rights and constitutes a threat to the survival of the greatest numbers
of the human population. Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam stated at the
Human Rights Day function on 10.12.2002:
“People, who are economically or socially in the lower strata,
are vulnerable to human rights exploitation by those who are in
the  higher  strata.  One  way to  reduce  this  exploitation is to
narrow this divide. In our country, about 300 million people are
below the poverty line.  After five decades  of progress,  the
aspirations  of  people  are  rightly mounting  that  India should
become a developed country. This is the second vision for the
nation.”
3.31 Another  former  President  of  India,  Mr.  Zail  Singh,  had
suggested that no person in the country should be allowed to have
more than one house, as a measure of reducing economic disparities
and ensuring proper distribution of prosperity. Permitting one house
per person, the extra houses could be given to the needy who should
be facilitated to pay for them in instalments. Equal protection of the
laws is not a formal declaration but a dynamic actualization. So, to
create conditions of life where social and economic disabilities do not
deny equal justice in the enjoyment of basic facilities is the task of
the  legal  system.  Articles  14,  15  and  39A,  read  together,  mean
nothing less, nothing else. The right to life, preserved in article 21,
39 Kishore Chand v.  State of Himachal Pradesh, (1991) 1 SCC 286
35

has the same broad élan, viewed in the benign light of the Preamble
which assures to all citizens liberty, equal opportunity, fraternity and
the dignity of the individual. There is need to brain-scan article 21
because  judicial  illusion  raises  false  expectation  and  the  Court,
viewed as a whole, being stuffed with artists of the Establishment,
may give a jolt when the right to life is pressed seriously, disturbing
the status quo conscience of the robed brethren.    Article 21 which
has incarnated  as the last hope of the least  and the lost of our
countrymen, is a proud heritage of the judicial revolution midwifed by
the Supreme Court in all innocence. Its anatomy is in two parts. First,
a basic assumption that everyone has a right to life and personal
liberty,  too  fundamental  to  be  negotiable.  Second,  this  basic
postulate of liberty may be truncated or annihilated if the power to do
so is duly legislated. No cannibal legislation can do away with life or
personal liberty regardless of humanism and realism.
3.32 In the words of Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer, what is guaranteed by
this fundamental right is not mere animal existence nor vegetable
survival but rightful opportunity to unfold the human potential and
share in the joy of creative living.
3.33 In Veena Sethy v.  State of Bihar40, the Supreme Court was
considering the cases of mentally sick prisoners languishing in jail for
nearly two or three decades.  Some of them were acquitted being of
unsound  mind.   Some  under-trial  prisoners  of  unsound  mind
regained sanity long before, but no steps were taken to commence
proceedings  against  them.  In  view  of  the  inordinately  long
40 (1982) 2 SCC 583
36

incarceration  already  suffered  by  them  without  justification,  the
Supreme  Court  ordered  all  of  them  to  be  released  forthwith  by
providing necessary funds for meeting expenses of their journey to
their respective native places as also for maintenance for a period of
one  week.   The  above case  was  filed  by way  of  public  interest
litigation by the Free Legal Aid Committee, Bihar, by addressing a
letter to a Judge of the Supreme Court, drawing the Court’s attention
to unjustified and illegal detention of certain prisoners in the Central
Jail, Hazaribagh, for almost two or three decades.  Treating this letter
as a writ petition, the Supreme Court issued notice to the State of
Bihar  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  facts  and  after  giving
opportunity to the State to file the counter affidavit, the Supreme
Court held that if the poor are allowed to languish in jails without the
slightest justification, the rule of law would become meaningless for
the rule of law does not exist merely for those who have the means to
fight for their rights and very often for perpetuation of the status quo
which protects and preserves their dominance and permits them to
exploit large sections of the community but it exists also for the poor
and the down-trodden, the ignorant and the illiterate who constitute
the large bulk of humanity in this country.  3.34 The  Supreme
Court thus held that it is the solemn duty of the Court to protect and
uphold the basic human rights of the weaker sections of the society.
3.35 The case of Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee v. Union of
India41  arose  under  the  Legal  Services  Authorities  Act,  1987.
Chapter III of the Act providing for constitution of High Court Legal
Services Committee, etc. had not been extended to all the States
41 (1998) 5 SCC 762
37

and Union territories as rules under section 28 of the Act had not
been framed by many States and Union territories nor were made
regulations  under  section  29A.  The  Supreme  Court  directed  the
States and Union territories to make rules and regulations as well as
constitute various Committees within two months.
3.36 The decision in  Suthendraraja v. State42 reflects difference of
opinion amongst Judges in regard to the sentence of death awarded
to Nalini in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case. K. T. Thomas, J.
partly dissented from the majority view and altered her sentence to
life imprisonment. After referring to the Constitution Bench judgment
in Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab43 which narrowed down the scope
for awarding death sentence  to the extremely restricted  radius of
“rarest  of rare cases”  in which the  alternative lesser  sentence of
imprisonment for life is unquestionably foreclosed, he observed:
‘In a case where a Bench of three Judges delivered judgment
in  which  the  opinion  of  at  least  one  Judge  is  in  favour  of
preferring  imprisonment  for  life  to death  penalty  as  for  any
particular accused, I think it would be a proper premise for the
Bench to review the order of sentence of death in respect of
that accused. Such an approach is consistent with Article 21 of
the  Constitution  as  it  helps  saving  a  human  life  from  the
gallows and at the same time putting the guilty accused behind
the bars for life. In my opinion, it would be a sound proposition
to make a precedent that when one of the three Judges refrains
from awarding death penalty to an accused on stated reasons
in preference to the sentence of life imprisonment that fact can
be regarded sufficient to treat the case as not falling within the
narrowed ambit of “rarest of rare cases when the alternative
option is unquestionably foreclosed”. 
42 (1999) 9 SCC 32343 (1980) 2 SCC 684
38

… I may add as an explanatory note that the reasoning is not
be understood as a suggestion that a minority opinion in the
judgment can supersede the majority view therein. In the realm
of  making  a  choice  between  life  imprisonment  and  death
penalty the above consideration is germane when the scope for
awarding death penalty has now shrunk to the narrowest circle
and that too only when the alternative action is “unquestionably
foreclosed”.’
3.37 Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh v. State of Gujarat44 relates to the
communal riots in Gujarat, popularly known as “Best Bakery Case”.
In this case, the Supreme Court observed:
“The principles of rule of law and due process are closely linked
with  human  rights  protection.  Such  rights  can  be  protected
effectively when a citizen has recourse to the courts of law. …
Denial of a fair trial is as much injustice to the accused as is to
the victim and the society. Fair trial obviously would mean a
trial  before  an  impartial  judge,  a  fair  prosecutor  and
atmosphere of judicial calm. Fair trial means a trial in which
bias or prejudice for or against the accused, the witnesses, or
the cause which is being tried is eliminated. If the witnesses get
threatened or are forced to give false evidence that also would
not result in a fair trial. The failure to hear material witnesses is
certainly denial of fair trial. … Failure to accord fair hearing
either to the accused or the prosecution violates even minimum
standards of due process of law.”  
3.38 The Supreme Court in Murlidhar Dayandeo Kesekar v. Vishwanath
Pandu Barde45 observed:
‘Article 21 of the Constitution assures right to life.  To make right to
life  meaningful  and  effective,  this  Court  put  up  expansive
interpretation and brought within its ambit right to education, health,
44 (2004) 4 SCC 15845 1995 Supp (2) SCC 549
39

speedy  trial,  equal  wages  for  equal  work  as  fundamental  rights.
Articles 14, 15 and 16 prohibit discrimination and accord equality.
The Preamble to the Constitution as a socialist republic visualizes to
remove  economic  inequalities  and  to  provide  facilities  and
opportunities  for  decent  standard  of  living  and  to  protect  the
economic interest of the weaker segments of the society, in particular,
Scheduled Castes i.e. Dalits and the Scheduled Tribes i.e. Tribes and
to protect them from “all forms of exploitations”.  Many a day have
come and gone after 26-1-1950 but no leaf is turned in the lives of the
poor and the gap between the rich and the poor is gradually widening
on the brink of being unbridgeable. … Lest Fundamental Rights in
Chapter III would remain teasing illusions to the poor, disadvantaged
and  deprived  sections  of  the  society,  the  disadvantaged  cannot
effectively exercise their fundamental rights.  Society, therefore, must
help them to enjoy freedom accorded in Chapter III on Fundamental
Rights.’
CHAPTER IV
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
4.1 Various laws have been enacted to eradicate poverty: some of
them directly deal with them and some of them indirectly.  
40

4.2 The Code of Civil Procedure 1908 has some provisions for the
poor.  Order  XXXIII  CPC  deals  with  suits  by  indigent  persons,
defence  by an  indigent  person  as  well  as  free  legal  services  to
indigent persons. Appeals by indigent persons are dealt with under
Order XLIV CPC. 
4.3 Section 304 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 enables
legal  aid to  accused  at State  expense  in certain  cases.  Chapter
XXXIII CrPC, inter alia, provides for release of an indigent accused
person on executing a personal bond instead of taking bail, if he is
unable to furnish surety. 
4.4 Various labour laws, including the Minimum Wages Act 1948
providing for minimum wage for the means of livelihood, Workmen’s
Compensation  Act  1923,  Maternity Benefit  Act  1961,  Payment  of
Bonus  Act  1965,  Equal  Remuneration  Act  1976,  Bonded  Labour
System  (Abolition)  Act  1976,  Child  Labour  (Prohibition  and
Regulation) Act 1986, the Indian Penal Code prohibiting buying or
disposing of any person as a slave, habitual dealing in slaves, selling
or buying of minors for purposes of prostitution or illicit intercourse
and unlawful compulsory labour (sections 370 to 374) are but a few
examples in the direction of alleviating the lot of the poor. There are
many others. Nevertheless, their tardy implementation makes us lag
far behind in effectively dealing with the problem.
41

4.5 In spite of the constitutional safeguards and State legislative
intervention in favour of the poor and the needy, their socio-economic
condition is deteriorating. Social and economic equality still remains
a mirage for them. 
4.6 We are of the view that the Union and the State Governments should
accord top priority to implementation of the judgments rendered by our
Supreme Court in their letter and spirit in order that the lot of the have-nots
is ameliorated.  
4.7 We recommend accordingly.
  
 (Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
                                                         Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood)                  (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
             Member                                                            Member-Secretary
42