 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Amendment  of  Sections  7,  7A  and  7B  of
Industrial Disputes Act 1947 Making Advocates
Eligible to man Labour Courts and Industrial
Tribunals
Report No. 225
June 2009

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 225)
Amendment of Sections 7, 7A and 7B of
Industrial Disputes Act 1947 Making Advocates
Eligible to man Labour Courts and Industrial
Tribunals
Submitted to the Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by
Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman,  Law
Commission of India, on  the 25th day of  June, 2009.
The  18th Law  Commission  was  constituted  for  a
period of three years from 1st September, 2006 by
2

Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the
16th October,  2006,  issued  by the Government of
India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
3

2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh :  Assistant  Legal
Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar :  Joint  Secretary&  Law
Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet
at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the
Government  Logo)  may  be  reproduced  free  of
charge in any format or medium provided that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.  The  material  must  be  acknowledged  as
Government copyright and the title of the document
specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either
by post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor,
ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001,
India or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI  Building  (IInd
Floor) 
Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi – 110 001
Tel. 91-11-23384475
Fax.   91-11 –
23383564
D.O. No. 6(3)/162/2009-LC (LS)                   25 June, 2009
Dear Dr Veerappa Moily ji,
Subject:  Amendment of Sections 7, 7A and 7B of Industrial
Disputes  Act  1947 Making  Advocates  Eligible  to  man
Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  225th Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject. 
 
One  Advocate  filed a petition  in  public  interest  (PIL)  in the
Punjab and Haryana High Court [Civil Writ Petition No. 2798/2006
titled H. C. Arora v. Union of India] praying for quashing Sections 7
and 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 inasmuch as the said
provisions do not make advocates with any length of experience at
the Bar eligible to be appointed as presiding officers of the Labour
Courts and/or Tribunals constituted by the Central Government. The
petitioner  argued  that  members  of  the  Bar  with  7-10  years’
experience in the legal profession should be made eligible for such
appointment by suitable amendment in the said provisions. The High
Court disposed of the writ petition by its Order dated 23.10.2008
declining the above prayer but  advising the  petitioner  to make  a
representation to the Law Commission and the latter to examine the
feasibility of making a recommendation for a suitable amendment in
the said provisions.
The petitioner, thereafter, addressed a letter dated 03.03.2009
to the undersigned requesting the Law Commission to consider the
6

matter  for  submitting  appropriate  report  to  the  Government  for
amending Sections 7 and 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 for
making  advocates  with  10  years’  practice  at  the  Bar  eligible  for
appointment  as  presiding  officers  of  the  Labour  Courts/Tribunals
constituted by the Central Government.
In view of the above, the Law Commission decided to take up
the subject for consideration.
The observations of the Supreme Court in Sampath Kumar’s
case  [AIR  1987  SC  386  and  1987  (1)  SCALE  1317]  and
qualifications for appointments in many tribunals and other quasi-
judicial  bodies  make  it  very  clear  that  advocates  with  requisite
number of years’ practice at the Bar, of course, in the concerned
legal field, are competent to man any tribunal. 
It seems to be an oversight that Sections 7, 7A and 7B of the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947 do not include advocates as persons
eligible for appointment as presiding officers of Labour Courts and
Industrial Tribunals.
We, therefore, are of the view that Sections 7, 7A and 7B of the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947 should be suitably amended to make
advocates with the requisite number of years’ practice at the Bar, in
the relevant legal field, eligible for appointment as presiding officers
of Labour Court and Industrial Tribunals.
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely,
(Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
7

Dr M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
Amendment of Sections 7, 7A and 7B of Industrial
Disputes Act 1947 Making Advocates Eligible to
man Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals
Contents                         Page
Nos.
I. INTRODUCTION           9-10
II. SECTIONS 7, 7A and 7B OF THE INDUSTRIAL         11-
18 
DISPUTES ACT 1947
III. S. P. SAMPATH KUMAR v. UNION OF INDIA           19-
20
IV. TRIBUNALS WHICH ADVOCATES CAN MAN
21-23
V. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                 24
8

I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 One  Advocate  filed a petition  in  public  interest  (PIL)  in the
Punjab and Haryana High Court [Civil Writ Petition No. 2798/2006
titled H. C. Arora v. Union of India] praying for quashing Sections 7
and 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 inasmuch as the said
provisions do not make advocates with any length of experience at
the Bar eligible to be appointed as presiding officers of the Labour
Courts and/or Tribunals constituted by the Central Government. The
petitioner  argued  that  members  of  the  Bar  with  7-10  years’
experience in the legal profession should be made eligible for such
appointment by suitable amendment in the said provisions. The High
Court disposed of the writ petition by its Order dated 23.10.2008
declining the above prayer along with the following observation:
“A Writ  Court  is  not  competent  to issue  a mandamus
either to the Parliament or to any other Legislature to amend
the provisions of a statute to any particular effect. The proper
course for any such change to be brought about is to approach
the Law Commission of India who could examine the issue in
the light of the observations made in S. P. Sampath Kumar’s
case … and make suitable recommendations to the Parliament.
9

Mr. Arora was, we must say, in fairness, agreeable to making a
representation  to  the  Law  Commission  seeking
recommendations  for  an  amendment  in  the  provisions
contained in Sections 7 and 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947. All that, we need say, is that if such representation is
made by Mr. Arora, the Law Commission may examine the
feasibility  of  making  a  recommendation  for  a  suitable
amendment in the provisions.”
1.2 The  petitioner,  Mr.  H.  C.  Arora,  Advocate,  thereafter,
addressed  a  letter  dated  03.03.2009  to  the  Chairman,  Law
Commission  of  India,  also  enclosing  therewith   a  copy  of  the
aforesaid Order of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, requesting
the  Law  Commission  to  consider  the  matter  for  submitting
appropriate report to the Government for amending Sections 7 and
7A of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 for making advocates with 10
years’  practice  at  the  Bar  eligible  for  appointment  as  presiding
officers  of the Labour Courts/Tribunals  constituted  by the  Central
Government.
1.3 In view of the above, the Law Commission decided to take up
the subject for consideration. 
10

II. SECTIONS 7, 7A  and 7B OF THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES
ACT 1947
2.1 The Industrial Disputes Act 1947 was enacted by Parliament,
as its preamble and the long title show, to provide machinery and
forum for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes. V. R.
Krishna  Iyer,  J.  in  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of  India  v.  D.  J.
Bahadur1 observed:
“The ID Act  is a benign  measure  which seeks  to pre-empt
industrial  tensions,  provide  the  mechanics  of  dispute
resolutions and set up the necessary infrastructure so that the
energies of partners in production  may not be dissipated  in
counter-productive battles and assurance of industrial justice
may create a climate of goodwill.  Industrial peace is a national
need and, absent law, order in any field will be absent.  Chaos
is the enemy of creativity sans which production will suffer.
Thus, the great goal to which the ID Act is geared is legal
1 AIR 1980 SC 2181
11

mechanism  for  canalising  conflicts  along  conciliatory  or
adjudicatory processes”.
2.2 The  Industrial  Disputes  Act  1947  is  intended  to  be  self-
contained one and enables the State to compel the parties to resort
to dispute resolution mechanisms provided therein, namely, collective
bargaining,  conciliation,  arbitration  and  failing  that,  compulsory
adjudication. 
2.3 Present Sections 7, 7A, 7B and 7C were substituted for the
former  Section  7  by  the  Industrial  Disputes  (Amendment  and
Miscellaneous) Provisions Act 1956 with effect from 10.03.1957. 
2.4 Industrial Tribunals were created for the first time by Section 7
of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 for the purpose of adjudicating
upon  industrial  disputes  referred  to  them  by  the  appropriate
Government,  thus  introducing  compulsory  adjudication  where
voluntary  negotiations  or  mediation  through  the  machinery  of
conciliation  authorities  fail.  The  Industrial  Disputes  Act  1947,  as
originally enacted, did not contain provisions regarding creation of
Labour Courts. 
2.5 The  Industrial  Disputes  (Appellate  Tribunal)  Act  1950  was
enacted  as  there  had  been  felt  a  need  for  a  Central  Appellate
Authority which, by its decisions, would coordinate the activities of
the large number of Industrial Tribunals set up by the Central and
Provincial Governments. Some Tribunals had been known to take
divergent views on important  issues. Thus was created a Labour
12

Appellate Tribunal for hearing appeals from the awards or decisions
of Industrial Tribunals.
2.6 There was then a large volume of criticism that appeals filed
before  the  Appellate  Tribunal  took  a  long  time  for  disposal  and
involved a great deal of expenditure which the workers could not
afford. It was proposed to repeal the Industrial Disputes (Appellate
Tribunal) Act, 1950, and at the same time, to substitute the then
system  of  tribunals  by  a  three-tier  system  of  original  tribunals,
manned by personnel of appropriate qualifications. Thus came into
being the present Sections  7, 7A, 7B and 7C, as pointed  out in
paragraph 2.3 (supra).  The Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal)
Act 1950 was also repealed by the Industrial Disputes (Amendment
and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1956.
13

2.7 Section  7 provides for  constitution of Labour Courts  by the
appropriate  Government  and  reference  for  adjudication  of  certain
specified industrial disputes. Section 7A provides for constitution of
Industrial Tribunals by the appropriate Government for adjudication
of  wider  category  of  industrial  disputes.  Section  7B  enables  the
Central  Government  to  constitute  National  Industrial  Tribunals.
References  to  National  Industrial  Tribunals  are  be  made  by  the
Central Government and they are to cover disputes which involve
questions of national importance or which are of such a nature that
industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to
be interested in, or affected by, the disputes. Section 7C provides for
disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour Courts, Industrial
Tribunals and National Industrial Tribunals.
2.8 It would not be inapposite to state here itself that one of the
reasons for the huge backlog of cases is that the references are not
being  decided  for  long periods  as  the  posts  of presiding officers
remain vacant too often. 
2.9 We may now reproduce the relevant provisions: 
Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947, as it was
originally enacted –
Industrial Tribunals.
“(1) The appropriate Government may constitute one or
more Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial
disputes in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
14

(2) A Tribunal shall consist of such number of members
as  the  appropriate  Government  thinks  fit.  Where  the
Tribunal consists of two or more members, one of them
shall be appointed as the chairman.
(3) Every  member  of  the  Tribunal  shall  be  an
independent person,
(a) who is or has been a Judge of a High Court or a
District Judge, or
(b) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High
Court:
Provided that the appointment to a Tribunal of any
person  not  qualified  under  part  (a)  shall  be  made  in
consultation with the High Court of the Province in which
the Tribunal has or is intended to have, its usual place of
sitting.”
Sections  4  and  5  of  the  Industrial  Disputes  (Appellate
Tribunal) Act 1950 –
Section 4 – Constitution of the Appellate Tribunal.
“The  Central  Government  may,  by  notification  in  the
Official  Gazette  and  with  effect  from  a  date  specified
therein, constitute a Labour Appellate Tribunal for hearing
appeals  from  the  awards  or  decisions  of  industrial
tribunals in accordance with the provisions of this Act.”
Section 5 – Composition of the Appellate Tribunal and
term of office of its members.
“(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman
and  such  number  of  other  members  as  the  Central
Government may, from time to time, think fit to appoint.
(2) Every member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a
person who -
(a) is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or
15

(b) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High
Court; or
(c) has been a member of an industrial tribunal for not
less than two years:
Provided  that  the  appointment  to  the  Appellate
Tribunal of any person not qualified under clause (a) or
clause (c) shall be made in consultation with the Supreme
Court.
(3) A member shall, unless otherwise specified in the
order of appointment, hold office for a term of five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office and
shall, on the expiry of the term of his office, be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that no member shall hold office after he
has attained the age of sixty-five years.
(4) A  member  shall  be  entitled  to  such  salary  and
allowances and to such rights in respect of leave and
pensions as may be prescribed:
Provided that the salary of a member shall not be
varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
Sections 7, 7A and 7B of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 –
Section 7 – Labour Courts.
“(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in
the  Official  Gazette,  constitute  one  or  more  Labour
Courts for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating
to any matter specified in the Second Schedule and for
performing such other functions as may be assigned to
them under this Act. 
(2) A Labour Court shall consist of one person only to
be appointment by the appropriate Government. 
16

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a
presiding officer of a Labour Court, unless -
(a) he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) he has, for a period of not less than three years,
been  a  District  Judge  or  an  Additional  District
Judge; or
****
(d) he has held any judicial office in India for not less
than seven years; or 
(e) he has been the presiding officer of Labour Court
constituted under any Provincial Act or State Act for not
less than five years.”
Section 7A – Tribunals.
“(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in
the  Official  Gazette,  constitute  one  or  more  Industrial
Tribunals  for  the  adjudication  of  industrial  disputes
relating to any matter, whether specified in the Second
Schedule or the Third Schedule and for performing such
other functions as may be assigned to them under this
Act. 
(2)A  Tribunal  shall  consist  of  one  person  only  to  be
appointed by the appropriate Government. 
(3)A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the
presiding officer of a Tribunal, unless-
(a)he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or
17

(aa) he has, for a period of not less than three years,
been  a  District  Judge  or  an  Additional  District
Judge. 
(4) The appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit,
appoint two persons as assessors to advise the Tribunal
in the proceedings before it.”
Section 7B – National Tribunals.
“(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official  Gazette,  constitute  one  or  more  National
Industrial  Tribunals  for  the  adjudication  of  industrial
disputes which, in the opinion of the Central Government,
involve questions of national importance or are of such a
nature  that  industrial  establishments  situated  in  more
than one State are likely to be interested in, or affected
by, such disputes.  
        
(2) A National Tribunal shall consist of one person only
to be appointed by the Central Government. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as
the presiding officer of a National Tribunal, unless he is,
or has been, a Judge of a High Court. 
(4) The  Central  Government  may,  if  it  so  thinks  fit,
appoint two persons as assessors to advise the National
Tribunal in the proceeding before it.”
2.10 It may be seen that original Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes
Act 1947 as well as Section 5 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate
Tribunal) Act 1950, while laying down qualifications for appointment
as a member of the Industrial Tribunal  and as a member of the
Labour Appellate Tribunal, respectively, included, inter alia, persons
18

“qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court”. According to
article 217 of the Constitution, a person who has for at least ten
years been an advocate of a High Court is eligible for appointment as
a Judge of a High Court, amongst others. Thus, advocates with 10
years’ practice at the Bar were eligible for appointment as a member
of the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Appellate Tribunal under the
then provisions.
2.11 It is not discernible as to why the present provisions of Sections
7, 7A and 7B of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 omitted the above
category  of  persons  from  the  qualifications  for  appointment  of
presiding officers of Labour Courts, Industrial Tribunals and National
Industrial Tribunals.
2.12 “Industrial and labour disputes” is a subject covered under the
Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution (vide
Entry 22). Some State Legislatures have amended the provisions of
Sections  7  and  7A  of  the  Industrial  Disputes  Act  1947  in  their
application to the respective States Concerned.  For example, the
States of Goa, Gujarat and Maharashtra have amended Section 7
expressly making advocates with 7 years’ practice at the Bar eligible
for appointment as a presiding officer of a Labour Court, amongst
others; the State of Haryana has amended Section 7 stating that a
person qualified for appointment as a District Judge will be eligible,
which read with article 233 of the Constitution also means that an
advocate  with  7  years’  practice  at  the  Bar  will  be  eligible  for
appointment as a presiding officer of a Labour Court. The States of
19

Assam,  Goa,  Kerala,  Madhya  Pradesh  and  Maharashtra  have
amended Section 7A stating that a person qualified for appointment
as a Judge of a High Court will be eligible for appointment as a
presiding officer of an Industrial Tribunal, which read with article 217
of the Constitution means that an advocate with 10 years’ practice at
the Bar will be eligible for the said appointment, amongst others,
while  the  State  of  Haryana  has  amended  Section  7A  making  a
person qualified for appointment as a District Judge eligible, that is,
an advocate with  only 7 years’ practice at the Bar.
III. S. P. SAMPATH KUMAR v. UNION OF INDIA
3.1 In S. P. Sampth Kumar v. Union of India2, a Constitution Bench
of  the  Supreme  Court  observed  that  the  then  provisions  in  the
Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 which did not consider advocates
with 10 years’ practice at the Bar as eligible for appointment as a
Vice-Chairman of an Administrative Tribunal were liable to be struck
down, as such advocates who are eligible for appointment as High
Court Judges must be considered eligible for appointment as Vice-
Chairmen of Administrative  Tribunals.  
2 AIR 1987 SC 386
20

3.2 P. N. Bhagwati, J., the then CJI, observed in Sampath Kumar’s
case:
“I also fail to see why a District Judge or an advocate who
is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court should not be eligible
to  be  considered  for  appointment  as  Vice-Chairman  of  the
Administrative  Tribunal.  It  may  be  noted  that  since  the
Administrative Tribunal has been created in substitution of the
High Court, the Vice-Chairman of the Administrative Tribunal
would be in the position of a High Court Judge and if a District
Judge or an advocate qualified to be a Judge of the High Court,
is eligible to be a High Court Judge, there is no reason why he
should  not equally be eligible to be a vice-Chairman of the
Administrative Tribunal. Can the position of a Vice-Chairman of
the Administrative Tribunal be considered higher than that of a
High Court Judge so that a person who is eligible to be a High
Court Judge may yet be regarded as ineligible for becoming a
Vice-Chairman of the Administrative Tribunal. It does appear
that  the  provisions  of  the  impugned  Act  in  regard  to  the
composition of the Administrative Tribunal are a little weighted
in favour of members of the Services. This weightage in favour
of the members of the Services and value-discounting of the
judicial  members  does  have  the  effect  of  making  the
Administrative Tribunal less effective and efficacious than the
High Court. I would therefore suggest that a District Judge or
an advocate who is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court
should be regarded as eligible for being Vice-Chairman of the
Administrative Tribunal and unless an amendment to that effect
is carried out on or before 31st March, 1987, the impugned Act
would have to be declared to be invalid, because the provision
in  regard  to  the  composition  of  the  Administrative  Tribunal
cannot be severed from the other provisions contained in the
impugned Act.”
3.3 In its Order3 on the review petition filed in  Sampath Kumar’s
case, the Supreme Court observed:
3 1987 (1) SCALE 1317
21

“The second contention of the learned Attorney General is that
the observations of Bhagwati, CJI that for the appointment to the post
of Vice-Chairman of the Administrative Tribunal, besides a District
Judge an Advocate who is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court
should also be regarded as eligible, calls for reconsideration because
an Advocate will not have the administrative experience which is
required for a member of the Administrative Tribunal. We are unable
to  accept  the  contention.  In  the  first  place,  an  Advocate  who  is
qualified to be a Judge of the High Court is an Advocate who by
implication is qualified to perform not only the Judicial Duties but the
Administrative functions which a High Court Judge is expected to
discharge. Secondly, whether an Advocate applying for recruitment to
the  Administrative  Tribunal  has  sufficient  administrative  potential
can be examined and judged during the process of selection. We,
therefore, do not propose to interfere with the observations made by
Bhagwati, CJI in his Judgment.”
IV. TRIBUNALS WHICH ADVOCATES CAN MAN 
4 The following tribunals and other quasi-judicial bodies can be
manned by advocates under the respective enactments mentioned
against each:
[i] Income-tax Appellate Tribunal 
(Income-tax Act 1961)
[ii] Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal 
(Customs Act 1962)
22

[iii] Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange
(Foreign Exchange Management Act 1999)
[iv] Railway Claims Tribunal
(Railway Claims Tribunal Act 1987)
[v] Administrative Tribunals
(Administrative Tribunals Act 1985)
[vi] National Environment Tribunal
(National Environment Tribunal Act 1995)
[vii] Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal
(Information Technology Act 2000)
[viii] Securities Appellate Tribunal
(Securities and Exchange Board of India Act 1992)
[ix] National Company Law Tribunal
(Companies Act 1956)
[x] National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
(Companies Act 1956)
[xi] Company Law Board
{CLB (Qualifications etc.) Rules 1993}
[xii] Competition Appellate Tribunal
(Competition Act 2002)
[xiii] Debts Recovery Tribunal
(Recovery  of  Debts  Due  to  Banks  and  Financial
Institutions Act 1993)
[xiv] Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal
(Recovery  of  Debts  Due  to  Banks  and  Financial
Institutions Act 1993)
[xv] Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
{Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act 1985}
23

[xvi] Appellate  Authority  for  Industrial  and  Financial
Reconstruction
{Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act 1985}
[xvii] Consumer Disputes Redressal Agencies
(Consumer Protection Act 1986)
[xviii] Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
(Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1969)
[xix] Appellate Tribunal 
(Prevention of Money-laundering Act 2002)
[xx] Adjudication Authority
(Prevention of Money-laundering Act 2002)
[xxi] Copyright Board
(Copyright Act 1957)
[xxii] Appellate Tribunal for Forfeited Property
{Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators 
(Forfeiture of Property) Act 1976}
[xxiii] Advisory Boards
{Article 22(4) (a) of the Constitution; National Security Act
1980; Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention
of Smuggling Activities Act 1974}
[xxiv] Appellate Tribunal for Electricity
(Electricity Act 2003)
[xxv] Airports  Economic  Regulatory  Authority  Appellate
Tribunal
(Airports  Economic  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  Act
2008)
[xxvi] Information Commissions
(Right to Information Act 2005)
[xxvii]Electricity Regulatory Commissions
(Electricity Act 2003)
24

[xxviii]Competition Commission of India
 (Competition Act 2002)
[xxix] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
(Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act 1997)
[xxx] Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board
(Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act 2006)
[xxxi] Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
(Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority  Act
1999)
[xxxii]Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
(Airports  Economic  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  Act
2008)
[xxxiii]Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
 (PFRDA Bill 2005)
V. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
5.1 The observations of the Supreme Court in Sampath Kumar’s
case  [paragraphs  3.2  and  3.3  supra]  and  qualifications  for
appointments  in  various  tribunals  and  other  quasi-judicial  bodies
[paragraph 4 supra] make it very clear that advocates with requisite
25

number of years’ practice at the Bar, of course, in the concerned
legal field, are competent to man any tribunal. 
5.2 It seems to be an oversight that Sections 7, 7A and 7B of the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947 do not include advocates as persons
eligible for appointment as presiding officers of Labour Courts and
Industrial Tribunals.
5.3 We, therefore, are of the view that Sections 7, 7A and 7B of the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947 should be suitably amended to make
advocates with the requisite number of years’ practice at the Bar, in
the relevant legal field, eligible for appointment as presiding officers
of Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals.
5.4 We recommend accordingly. 
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood) (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
Member   Member-Secretary
26