LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Report   submitted  to  the    Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
India  for  its  consideration  in  the  pending  proceedings
filed by one Laxmi in W.P. (Crl.) No. 129 of 2006
ON
“The  Inclusion  of  Acid  Attacks as  Specific  Offences in 
the Indian Penal Code and a law for Compensation for
Victims of Crime”
July, 2008
Report No. 226
July 2009
1

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
PROPOSAL FOR THE INCLUSION OF  ACID  ATTACKS AS 
SPECIFIC OFFENCES IN THE INDIAN PENAL CODE AND A 
LAW FOR COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Serial No.                                    Title                                                   Page
1.  Chapter I                Introduction                                              3
2.  Chapter II              A Brief Overview                                      7
3.  Chapter III            The Courts & Acid Attacks                    16
4.  Chapter IV             The Law In Other Countries                  22
5.  Chapter V               Compensation for the Victim                  37
6.  Chapter VI              Conclusion & Recommendations           41
2

CHAPTER1
Introduction
The victim of a gruesome acid attack, Laxmi, has filed a writ petition in the
Supreme Court of India in May, 2006 in which the Law Commission of India has
been arrayed as the Respondent No.2.  Though the Law Commission had pointed
out to the Court that the reliefs in the petition cannot be prayed for from the Law
Commission, it has decided to take up the matter suo moto in view of the gravity
of the offence of acid attacks. 
Acid attacks are becoming a growing phenomenon in India. Laxmi’s case is an
example of what normally occurs in such cases. The petition states that Laxmi, a
young girl,  was  subject to  an acid  attack  following her  refusal to  marry the
accused. As a result of the attack the victim’s arms, face and other body parts
were  severely  disfigured  and  deformed.  Though  the  victim  and  her  parents
were/are poor they were fortunately helped by a benefactor who bore the medical
expenses approximating to Rs. 2.5 Lakhs. However, even after 4 plastic surgeries
the victim’s physical appearance remains horrific and many more surgeries would
be required to make her physical appearance a semblance of what it was. The
victim can of course never look as she did before the attack.
Though  acid  attack  is  a  crime  which  can  be  committed  against  any man  or
woman, it has a specific gender dimension in India. Most of the reported acid
attacks have been committed on women, particularly young women for spurning
suitors, for rejecting proposals of marriage, for denying dowry etc. The attacker
cannot bear the fact that he has been rejected and seeks to destroy the body of the
woman who has dared to stand up to him. 
Thus, acid throwing is an extremely violent crime by which the perpetrator of the
crime seeks to inflict severe physical and mental suffering on his victim. As stated
above this kind of violence is often motivated by deep-seated jealousy or feelings
of  revenge  against  a  woman.  For  instance,  in  Bangladesh  78  percent  of  the
reported acid violence is inflicted on women with the most common reasons for
attack  being the refusal of  marriage,   the  denial   of   sex, and   the   rejection of 
3

romance.1 The acid is usually thrown at the victim’s face. The perpetrator wants
to disfigure the victims and turn them into a monster. Aside from the reasons
stated above the other reasons for acid attacks include robbery, land disputes etc.
Perpetrators  of  the  crime  act  cruelly  and  deliberately.  Acid  violence  is  a
premeditated act of violence as the perpetrator of the crime carries out the attack
by first obtaining the acid, carrying it on him and then stalking the victim before
executing the act.   
Furthermore, an acid attack has long-lasting consequences on the life of the victim
who faces perpetual torture, permanent damage and other problems for the rest of
her life. Victims normally feel worthless, afraid and modified and become social
outcasts  because  of their  appearance. They may become too traumatized  and
embarrassed to walk out of their house and carry out simple tasks let alone get
married, have children, get a job, go to school, etc. Even if they are willing to
pursue a normal life, there is no guarantee that society itself will treat them as
normal human beings given their appearance and disabilities after an attack. They
may not be able to work, or be able to find a job, and thus perpetually struggle to
survive.2
It has been contended by those working for these victims that the Criminal law
relating to grievous hurts in Sections 320, 322, 325 and 326 of the Indian Penal
Code (I.P.C) is insufficient to deal with the phenomenon of acid attacks. Section
320 deals with grievous hurt and reads as under-
Section 320. Grievous hurt. - The following kinds of hurt only are designated as
"grievous":-
First. - Emasculation.
Secondly. - Permanent privation of the sight of either eye.
Thirdly. - Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear,
Fourthly. - Privation of any member or joint.
Fifthly.-Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint
1 1.Acid Survivors Foundation. Acid Throwing Fact Sheet. Dhaka, Bangladesh, 2001
2 Baseline Survey with International Comparative Analysis of the Legal Aspects of Acid Violence
in Uganda, Commissioned by: Acid Survivors Foundation Uganda with funding support from the
US Democracy & Human Rights Fund, Legal Consultant: Rachel Forster , November, 2004 
4

 Sixthly. - Permanent disfiguration of the head or face.
Seventhly. - Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth.
Eighthly. - Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be
during the space of twenty days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his
ordinary pursuits.
This definition of grievous hurt has been criticized as the definition does not take
within  its  purview  the  various  kinds  of  deliberate  hurt  that  is  inflicted  on
important parts of a female’s body nor does this definition apply to offences like
acid attack in which multiple types of grievous hurts occur.
Section 322  15 IPC defines voluntarily causing grievous hurt and Section 3254
IPC provides for punishment for grievous hurt. The offence is punishable by
imprisonment upto seven years and is cognizable, bailable, and compoundable as
well as being triable by a first class Magistrate. The offence of grievous hurt is not
caused  unless  the  offender  both  causes  grievous  hurt  and  intends,  or  knows
himself to be likely, to cause grievous hurt
Section  326  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  which  applies  in  cases  of  voluntarily
causing grievous hurt by means of any corrosive substance is punishable with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend  to  10  years and  fine5.  Thus,  punishment  for  voluntarily causing
grievous hurt even by corrosive substances like Acid can be imprisonment for life
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 10 years. It has been argued
that this period of punishment does not match the gravity of the offence.
  
153  Section 322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.- Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which
the intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is
grievous hurt, is said to “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt."
Explanation. - A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when he both causes grievous
hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt. But he is said voluntarily to cause
grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt of one kind; he actually
causes grievous hurt of another kind.
4 Section 325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.- Whoever, except in the case provided
for by section 335(Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation), voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine. 
5 Section 326 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means- Whoever , except in
the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for
shooting, stabbing or cutting , or any instrument which , used as a weapon of offence , is likely to cause
death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or
by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the human body
to inhale , to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.  
5

The petition argues that though in some cases like the petitioner’s case Section
307 of the I.P.C has been applied, even this is not enough as courts tend to grant
bail easily in cases of Sec.307 I.P.C and mens rea is extremely difficult to prove.
The  Laxmi  Writ  petition  further  states  that  compensation  to  victims  of  acid
attacks  is  of vital importance as huge medical  costs are often involved. The
victims  of acid attack need both short term as well as long term specialized
medical treatments and plastic surgeries. The provisions in the Indian law for
giving compensation to the victims are insufficient. The writ petition therefore
prays that: 
• An amendment be made in the Indian Penal Code, Evidence Act and the
Criminal Procedure Code for dealing with acid attack as a special offence;
• Guidelines be framed and an act be passed to attend to the needs of all the
acid attack victims in India;
• A committee be constituted and appointed for adopting measures for the
proper treatment, aftercare and rehabilitation of the victims of acid attacks;
• That acid in all forms be made a scheduled banned chemical which is not
readily available over the counter. 
 
It is therefore important to examine and analyse the various provisions of the
Indian Penal Code to see whether the law as it exists in India is sufficient to deal
with the phenomenon of acid attacks. The Law Commission has also examined
the  laws  relating  to  acid  attacks  in  different  countries  before  giving  its
recommendations, both for punishing the perpetrators of these attacks and for
monetary and economic rehabilitation of the victim of the attack.
6

CHAPTER II
A Brief Overview
A Statistical Overview:
While very little data is available on acid attacks in India some studies have
reported an increasing trend in cases relating to acid attack. According to a study
174 cases of acid attack were reported in India in 2000. This was a per capita
incidence of about 1/15 of that of Bangladesh, which has the highest incidence
rate as well as the highest number of acid attack cases in the world. However, the
absolute number of cases was approaching those of Bangladesh.6  
35 cases of acid attacks were reported in Karnataka between 1999 and 20047. This
figure does not include victims that do not report their case because they fear
further violence or being socially stigmatized. In this regard, the Campaign and
Struggle Against Acid Attacks on Women (CSAAAW) noted one incidence in
Bangalore in July 2004 that was not included as part of the reported cases partly
because the victim and her family have opted not to go public with their trauma 8.
The number of cases added up to 53 by 2006 in Karnataka and, as reported by the
CSAAAW, verdicts were given in only 9 of these 53 cases9. A newspaper report10
put the total number of acid attacks as 60 by 2007 in Karnataka alone adding 8
more cases till February 2007. 
In most of these cases Hydrochloric and sulphuric acid were used and all the
victims were women. The victims in Karnataka were very young women between
16 and 25 years of age, and were attacked by men known to them. Most attacks
took place in public places or at home. 11 
6 Acid Attacks: Bangladesh's Efforts to Stop the Violence, Jordan Swanson, Harvard Health Policy
Review Archives, Spring 2002; Vol 3, No 1
7 Burnt Not Defeated, Report by CSAAAW, April 2007, CSAAAW Bangalore publication
8 The Hindu, Another Face of Violence, 15.08.2004
9 The Hindu, PIL filed for steps to curb acid attacks, 20.09.2006 
10 The Hindu, The ‘acid test’: will Government regulate sale of deadly chemicals?, Bageshree S.
and M.V. Chandrashekhar, 5 February 2007
11 Deccan Herald News Service, Bangalore, Acid test of Humanity,   Bala Chauhan
7

These cases showed the kind of injuries that victims of acid attack suffered. The
injuries range from burns to permanent disfigurement to death.  In many acid
attacks the victim suffers a slow and painful death.  On the other hand, some
victims who do survive the attack like Hasina12 (in April 1999) and Shruti (in
October 2001) are permanently disfigured, maimed and confined to homes for
life.  13Acid  attack  survivors  are  physically,  psychologically  and  socially
traumatized. The physical extents of their injuries are deep, permanent and have a
direct impact on their psychological well-being and social functionality.
Hydrochloric, Sulphuric and other acids all have a catastrophic effect on human
flesh. These corrosive substances  cause the skin tissue to melt. The bones of
victims  become  exposed  and  sometimes  the  acid  dissolves  the  bones  too.
Permanent scars as can be seen in Hasina’s 14case disfigure a human being’s body
for life.  Furthermore, if acid enters the eyes of the victim during an attack, as is
common in acid attack cases, it damages these vital organs permanently. Many
acid attack survivors have lost the use of one or both eyes. 
As a result of disfigurement and disability victims are permanently debilitated and
are forced  to  give up  their  lives,  their  work,  their  education.  In this  regard,
compensation to cover vital surgeries for victims  who can no  longer support
themselves becomes imperative.
However aside from compensation there are other points as well that the law
should be sensitized to when it comes to dealing with acid attack victims.  In an
interview with the Hindu newspaper CSAAAW’s lawyer, Sheela Ramanathan,
pointed out that acid attack victims had to be handled separately as their situation
entails a series of “medical complications, social stigma, psychological trauma,
gender bias and a complete loss of livelihood.”15 Ms. Ramanathan particularly
drew attention to the medical negligence on these victims: "Medical awareness on
the mode of treatment is also abysmal," "(t)here have been cases where     coconut
12 State of Karnataka Vs. Joseph Rodrigues, Decided by the Hon’ble Karnataka High Court on
22/8/2006
13 The Hindu, The ‘acid test’: will Government regulate sale of deadly chemicals?, Bageshree S.
and M.V. Chandrashekhar, 5 February 2007
14 Supra note 11
15 The Hindu, PIL filed for steps to curb acid attacks, 20.09.2006
8

oil has been applied on the affected area and the victim wrapped in blankets. Such
mishandling can cause irreparable damage."16
Acid attacks and their Consequences     
As stated earlier acid attacks are a form of violence against women, where the
perpetrator splashes a person or object with acid in order to deface or kill them. 17
Although acid throwing, also known as vitriol age, has been a form of violence
known to be committed throughout history, there has been a steep rise in the cases
documented in recent years, particularly in certain South Asian countries.  Some
of this increase has been attributed to better documentation of cases and also to
the  fact  that  victims  of  attacks  have  begun  to  report  an  attack  more  often.
However, there appears to be a substantive increase in the number of acid attacks
that are being committed in recent times due to various factors. 
Acid attacks are seen as one of the most vicious crimes as it causes perpetual
suffering to the victim. As acid melts flesh and even the bones of a person, it
causes an unparalleled degree of pain to the victim and leaves her mutilated and
scarred  as  well  as  giving  permanent  disabilities  at  times  such  as  blindness.
Victims face lifetime physical, social, psychological and economic consequences.
Some of the well known effects of acid are as under:
•  Acids are corrosive substances that will cause visible necrosis (death) of
human skin tissue and will even corrode a metal in higher concentration.
• They can cause serious poisoning, burning and serious injury can result
from exposure to strong acids.
• Commonly available acids include Sulphuric acid, Hydrochloric acid
Hydrofluoric acid, Phospaic acid etc. Acids are used in laboratories and
factories/industries. 
• In an acid attack the skin is the main organ of contact. The effects of acid
on the skin may include redness, and burns. In severe cases, it could lead
to shock and death. Some other effects include permanent hair loss and
16 Ibid
17
 17 Wikipedia Encyclopedia  
9

scaring.  If  inhaled  in  large  quantity  it  can  also  lead  to  pulmonary
disorders.
The consequences of acid attack have been well documented and include the
following18:
INJURIES AND PHYSICAL CONSEQUENCES: 
Acid eats through two layers of the skin, i.e. the fat and muscle underneath, and
sometimes not only eats through to the bone but it may even dissolve the bone.
The deepness of injury depends on the strength of the acid and the duration of
contact with the skin.  Burning continues until the acid is thoroughly washed off
with water.
Thrown on a person’s face, acid rapidly eats into eyes, ears, nose and mouth.
Eyelids and lips may burn off completely. The nose may melt, closing the nostrils,
and ears shrivel up.
Acid can quickly destroy the eyes, blinding the victim. Skin and bone on the skull,
forehead, cheeks and chin may dissolve. When the acid splashes or drips over the
neck, chest, back, arms or legs, it burns everywhere it touches.
The biggest immediate danger for victims is breathing failure. Inhalation of acid
vapors can create breathing problems in two ways: i.e. by causing a poisonous
reaction in the lungs or by swelling the neck, which constricts the airway and
strangles the victim. 
When the burns from an acid attack heal, they form thick scars which pull the skin
very tight and can cause disfigurements. For instance, eyelids may no longer
close, the mouth may no longer open; and the chin becomes welded to the chest. 
The following information on physical consequences has been described by an
NGO19:
18 Living in the Shadows: Acid Attacks in Cambodia, 
2003 LICADHO Report
19 Medecins Du Monde and doctors at Calmette hospital in Phnom Penh
10

Skull: May be partly destroyed or deformed. Hair is often lost.
Forehead: Skin may shrink, as though stretched tightly, and be scarred.
Ears: Shriveled up and deformed. Deafness may occur immediately or later.
Cartilage in the ear is usually partly or totally destroyed, exposing the victim to future
infection and hearing loss.
Eyes: Direct acid contact or acid vapors can damage eyes, causing blindness.
Even if the eyes survive the acid attack, they remain vulnerable to other threats which can
cause blindness during the victim’s recovery. Eyelids may have been burned off, or may
be deformed by scarring, leaving the eyes to dry up and go blind. This is very difficult to
prevent.
Nose: Shrunken and deformed. Nostrils may close completely because the cartilage is
destroyed.
Cheeks: Scarred and deformed.
Mouth:  Shrunken and narrowed, and may lose its shape. Lips may be partly or totally
destroyed. Lips may be permanently flared, exposing the teeth. Movement of the lips,
mouth and face may be impaired. Eating can be difficult.
 
Chin: Scarred and deformed. The scars may run downward, welding the chin to the neck
or chest.
Neck: Often badly damaged. It may have a thick cord of scarred flesh running down from
the chin to the upper chest, or a wide, heavily-scarred area on one side of the neck.
Victim may be unable to extend the neck, or the head may constantly lean to one side.
Chest: Often badly scarred. The chest may have narrow lines of scars or wide patches of
scars from acid splashes or drips. In girls and young women, the development of their
breasts may be stopped, or their breasts may be destroyed completely.
Shoulder:  May be badly scarred, especially around the underarm, which may limit the
victim’s arm movement. In some cases, one or both of the victim’s upper arms may be
stuck like glue to the sides of their body.
TREATMENT
11

The first thing that should be done when the acid gets in contact with the skin is to
flush the burned flesh with water for at least 60 minutes and to wash off the acid
with water for as long as possible.
Emergency treatment  at  hospitals  should  include  cleaning  and  bandaging  the
burns, and relieving any breathing problems caused by acid fumes. 
Infection is a major danger because the dead tissue around deep burns becomes
easily infected and prevents the burns from healing. Infection may spread to the
healthy part of the skin, and may even kill the victim and it can attack the victim
at any stage during the weeks and months right after the attack. Thus the wounds
need to be kept clean and antibiotics need to be given to fight infection. 
The eyes are very vulnerable to infection and can cause blindness. Most important
is to ensure that victims can close their eyes, preventing them from becoming dry
and infected. Surgery may be needed to rebuild the eyelids, if they were destroyed
by acid, or remove thick scars around the eyes as burns heal.
Eating enough food is vital because victims’ bodies require a lot of energy to fight
infection and heal the wounds. This may be difficult if the victim has burns
around the mouth and has difficulty swallowing, or cannot afford the necessary
diet. 
It can take 3 to 12 months for burn wounds to heal. Thick scars, which are painful
and itchy, grow over the healed burns. The scars grow and change over 1 to 2
years. As the scars thicken and contract, they can cause permanent disability by
stiffening joints and restricting movement. For example, the scarring on the neck
and shoulders, can prevent a patient from moving his head or arms. Doctors may
need to perform many operations to release the scars and graft new skin over
them. Scars may also grow over the nostrils or ear canals, and surgery is required
to remove them.
Long  periods  of  physical  therapy  are  needed  to  minimize  victims’  lack  of
movement from scarring, and special elastic bandages can dramatically reduce the
thickness and stiffness of scars. 
The final stage of treatment is to try to restore the appearance of the victim as
much as possible. By now, the wounds must have healed completely and the full
extent of scarring and deformities of the body must be visible. The victim may
require many operations over a period of two to three years. 
12

PSYCHOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES
Victims of attacks do not only undergo severe physical trauma but also undergo
traumatic changes in the way they feel and think. Psychological trauma is caused
by both the terror victims suffer during the attack, as they feel their skin burning
away, and after the attack by the  disfigurement or disabilities that they have to
live with for the rest of their lives. Victims suffer psychological symptoms such as
depression,  insomnia,  nightmares,  fear about another  attack and/or  fear about
facing  the  outside  world,  headaches,  weakness  and  tiredness,  difficulty  in
concentrating and  remembering things,  etc.   They feel  perpetually depressed,
ashamed, worried, and lonely. 
Victims suffer severe psychological symptoms for years, if not forever,
because they are reminded every day of their physical scars. The feeling of lack of
hope and worth may never leave them.  
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONSEQEUNCES
Victims face a lifetime of discrimination from society and they become
lonely.  They are embarrassed that people may stare or laugh at them and may
hesitate to leave their homes fearing an adverse reaction from the outside world.
Victims who are not married are not likely to get married and those victims who
have got serious disabilities because of an attack, like blindness, will not find jobs
and earn a living.   Discrimination from other people, or disabilities such as
blindness, makes it very difficult for victims to fend for themselves and they
become dependent on others for food and money.  
It has therefore been argued that acid attacks need to be classified as a separate
offence and harsher punishment needs to be prescribed. It has been further stated
that  the  new  law  must  include  guidelines  for  handling/supporting  victims
economically,  socially,  and  psychologically  as  well  as  compensation.   It  is
relevant to mention that in 2006 CSAAAW filed a Public Interest Litigation in the
Karnataka High Court seeking a court order to the State Government to ensure
speedy and gender-sensitive trials for victims of acid attacks as well as better
medical  treatment  and  rehabilitation.  The  CSAAAW  also  demanded  the
13

production, distribution and storage of toxic acids be strictly monitored by the
State. 20
Infact since acid is so readily available across the counter in medical and other
stores, acid attacks become a relatively cheap and effective way of committing
acts of violence against women.  In a random check carried out by The Hindu
newspaper in Karnataka in 2007, the researchers found that buying “Hydrochloric
acid is as easy as cheap as buying a bar of soap.” A litre of acid goes at anywhere
between Rs. 16 and Rs. 25 and can be bought at various locations including
Nagaratpet, Ragipet and Raja Market.21
There  is  however  no  law  to  regulate  acid  sales  except  for  the  Manufacture,
Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989 (amended in 2000) and
this  only  applies  to  industrial  situations.22 Furthermore  there are no  regular
inspections and stock checking for acid sales as there are for explosives.23 
It  has  been  argued  by  some  that  controlling  or  regulating  acid  sales  is  an
impossible task, as acid is used for many things including car batteries etc. Thus,
the  deterrence  should  come  in  the  form  of  stringent  laws  that  punish  the
perpetrators. However, Bangladesh, a country with the highest incident rate of
acid attacks, has passed a law in 2002 to control acid sales. Thus, Acid violence
can be tackled on both fronts simultaneously with a harsher punishment on the
perpetrator as well controlling the sale of acid to stop it from getting into the
hands of  the criminal. Besides as a member CSAAAW perhaps   rightly said, it
is unconscionable “how  any  responsible  democracy  can  cite  difficulty  in
regulation as an excuse for not framing laws.”24
International commerce of sulphuric acid is controlled under the United Nations
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances,
1988, which lists sulfuric acid under Table II of the convention as a chemical
20 The Hindu, Acid Attack victims yet to get assistance, 27.04.2007
21 Ibid.
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid.
14

frequently  used  in  the  illicit  manufacture  of  narcotic  drugs  or  psychotropic
substances. 
The next chapter therefore discusses how the courts in India have dealt with the
issue of acid attacks and what the cases show.
15

CHAPTER III
Cases Relating to Acid Attack in India
As India does not have a separate law governing the crime of acid attack, cases
have been registered under different sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC)
particularly the sections relating to hurt, grievous hurt, grievous hurt by corrosive
substances and attempt to murder and murder. However, as discussed earlier, the
after effects of an acid attack even if the victim survives are distinct and scar the
victim; who is usually a woman throughout her life both physically and mentally.
In some of the positive cases the accused have been charged with murder, as the
intention of the attacker has been construed as an intention to kill the victim. Even
in these positive cases however the amount of fine which has been levied has
often been an insignificant amount. The victim has also often not been given this
fine by the court.
In a 1998  Maharashtra case  25acid was thrown  on  a woman, while  she  was
holding her two and a half year old baby, by her brother-in-law for refusing to
give money to maintain her husband’s second wife. She sustained acid burns on
the left side of her face, left hand and left breast and both she and her infant
daughter lost their eyesight. The woman finally died due to burn injuries. In this
case, the brother-in-law was sentenced by the Court under Section 302 of IPC, to
undergo imprisonment for life and pay a fine of Rs. 1000 and also sentenced to
rigorous imprisonment for a month. Under Section 326 of the IPC he was awarded
5 years of imprisonment apart from a fine of Rs. 2000/-and 3 months of rigorous
imprisonment. Though the accused was found guilty the learned Judge failed to
appreciate that he should levy an adequate amount as fine and give this fine to the
victim’s child, who suffered from the attack in multiple ways.
 In a 2002 case26, the accused was suspicious about the character of his wife and
inserted  mercuric  chloride  into  her  vagina,  she  died  due  to  renal  failure.
The accused was charged and convicted under Section 302 and 307 IPC.
25 Gulab Sahiblal Shaikh Vs. The State of Maharashtra, (1998 Bom CR(Cri))
26 Marepally Venkata Sree Nagesh Vs. State of A.p ( 2002 CriLJ3625)
16

In another case 27 before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 1975, acid was poured on
a woman by her husband for refusing to grant him divorce. The husband was
involved in an extra-marital  affair. Due to the attack, the victim suffered multiple
acid burns on her face and other parts of her body, leading to her death. The
accused was charged and convicted under Section 302 of the IPC. However, life
imprisonment was not imposed even though the victim had died.
In a case before the Madras High Court  28, a person suspected his wife had
developed an illicit relationship with one of his acquaintances. In that fit of anger
he threw acid on her resulting in severe burns and death of the victim.  The
husband was convicted under Sec 302 IPC and 313 IPC (causing miscarriage of a
woman without her consent) with life imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 2000. The
fine was thus again a meager amount.
In Devanand  Vs.The State 29 a man threw acid on his estranged wife because she
refused to cohabit with him. The wife suffered permanent disfigurement and loss
of one eye. The accused was convicted under Section 307 and was imprisoned for
7 years. 30
In a case before the Calcutta High Court31 the accused had made a previous
abortive attempt to throw acid on the victim and succeeded on a second attempt.
The motive for the crime was revenge as the victim had rebuffed the overtures of
the main accused Ramesh. The accused along with two others went to the victims
house and threw a bottle of acid on the victim outside her house where she, her
mother, her aunt and her little son were sitting. The victim, her mother, her aunt
and her son sustained injury. The victim Padma died due to extensive acid burns
on the neck, chest, right alna, breasts, legs, knees and scalp. Her aunt received
25% burns and her aunt’s son received 11% burns. The additional sessions Judge
27 Revinder Singh Vs. State of Harayana(AIR 1975 SC 856)
28 Balu Vs. State Represented Inspector of police decided on 26/10/2006
29 (1987 (1) Crimes 314)
30  See also Veerla Stayanarayna Vs State of A.P 2002(Supp)1 SC 489
31 Ramesh Dey and Ors. vs. State of West Bengal, Decided on 16/5/2007
17

awarded imprisonment for life and a fine for Rs. 5000 under Section 302 and 34
of the IPC. The appellants were also convicted under S. 324/34 IPC and sentenced
to R.I. for one year and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/- each in default to suffer S.I. for
two months. Both sentences were to run concurrently. The High Court on appeal
however, set aside the conviction and sentence against the other two accused by
stating that there was no evidence to show they had a common intention and their
presence with the accused on the scene of the crime was not enough.32
In  Srimanthula Chinna Sathaiah and Anr. Vs. State of A.P33 enmity developed
between two men. The accused was suspicious that the other person had falsely
implicated him in a case. He also suspected that his wife was having an affair with
the victim’s elder son. As a  revenge the accused threw acid on the victim, which
resulted in severe acid burns on the face and body. The accused was charged
under Section 302 and 34 of the IPC and was awarded rigorous imprisonment for
life. 
In some cases which are targeted against women dowry and property can be the
reasons for acid attacks. Property and land disputes and sometimes revenge34 can
prove to be a motive for acid attacks against  men. It appears that the idea that
acid is an easy effective method of harming and killing enemies can spread to
general attacks against both women and men.
In case before the  Supreme Court of India35 the accused was the husband of the
deceased, Sushila and wanted to kill her and their daughters, Bindu and Nandini
to grab property as he was the immediate beneficiary to her estate. He poured acid
over her to kill her. She received extensive burn injuries on large parts of their
bodies including the face, chest, neck, etc. According to the Doctor the death was
due  to  the  corrosive  acid  burns  and  shock.  The  High  Court  convicted  the
appellants  Ram  Charittar  and  Kishori  Lal  under  Section  302/34 IPC,  and
sentenced them to life imprisonment. The appeal for their acquittal was dismissed
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. No compensation was awarded to the victims.
32 See also Smt. Bhagwan Kuar Vs Krishna Maharaja ( AIR 1973 SC 1346)
33 ( 998(4) ALD 18)
34 See State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Jhaddu and Ors. (1991 Supp(1)545)
35 Ram Charittar and Anr. etc. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh etc. (04.04.2007 - SC)
18

In another case  36 before the Madras High Court a nurse and a compounder
conspired and poured a mixture of acid and kerosene over a doctor as revenge for
an alleged rape by him of the nurse. The doctor sustained 100% burn injuries and
later expired due to them. The accused were charged under Sec 302 and 109 of the
IPC but were acquitted for the lack of evidence.
In a case before the Supreme Court37 in a dispute between the deceased and
accused regarding encroachment, the accused poured acid on the deceased and
this caused severe acid burns resulting in death. The main accused was charged
under Section 302 of the IPC and awarded rigorous imprisonment for life. 
Many cases in which death doesn’t occur get registered under the sections related
to hurt and grievous hurt and not attempt to murder as no intention of killing or
knowledge that the offence is likely to cause death is attributed to the accused.
In a case before the Jharkhand High Court  38 the victim was standing with her
friend at a Bus Stop in Dhanbad. The Appellant came and poured acid over her
head and face.The appellant had a photograph of the victim and was blackmailing
her but she refused to accede to his demands. The victim suffered burn injuries
over the left side of her eye, neck and chest and had to be hospitalized. A case was
registered under Sections 324, 326, 307 IPC. The police investigated the case and
finally submitted a chargesheet against the appellant under the aforesaid sections.
The learned 2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Dhanbad held the appellant guilty
under Section 324 IPC and convicted and sentenced him to undergo RI for three
years. The appellant’s conviction was upheld by the Hon’ble High Court.  No
compensation whatsoever was awarded to the victim. In this case the court seems
to have been guided by the nature of injuries which in its opinion did not amount
to grievous hurt. 39
36 Mahesh and Parimaladevi Vs. State, Decided on 10/4/2003 by the Madras High Court
37 Barati  Vs. State of U.P.(AIR 1974 SC 839)
38 Awadhesh Roy Vs. State of Jharkhand (Decided on 12/6/2006)
39 See also Students of A.P.A.U and Miss Anuradha, Student Vs The Registrar, A.P.A.U,
N.Sreeniwasa Reddy, Student and Ors. (1997(1) ALT 547)
19

In one of the most famous cases involving acid attack40 the accused threw acid on
a  girl,  Hasina,  for  refusing  his  job  offer.  This  deeply  scarred  her  physical
appearance, changed the colour and appearance of her face and left her blind. The
accused was convicted under Section 307 of IPC and sentenced to imprisonment
for life. A compensation of Rs. 2,00,000/- in addition to the Trial Court fine of Rs
3,00,000 was to be paid by the accused to Hasina’s parents.
This was a landmark case as it was the first time that a compensation which was
quite a large sum was given to the victim to meet the medical expenses including
that of plastic surgeries. However, no compensation was awarded for the after
effects of the attack such as loss of income etc.
In a case from Delhi41  the accused threw acid on the victims face.  The liquid
splashed or her face produced some redness (erythema) on the skin over a part
of her face involving her upper eye-lids. There was no corrosion, of the skin or
other deformity. The accused was convicted for causing hurt under Section 323 of
the IPC and a meager fine of Rs. 300 along with 15 days imprisonment was
awarded. This sort of punishment for acid attack is in itself a mockery of sorts and
does not take into consideration the gravity of the crime and its after effects  like
trauma which affects the victim throughout her life.
In Syed Shafique Ahmed Vs. State of Maharashtra42 personal enemity with his
wife was the reason behind a gruesome acid attack by the husband on his wife as
well as another person . This caused disfiguration of the face of both the wife as
well as that of the other person  and loss of vision of right eye of wife. The
accused  was charged under Section 326 and 324 of the IPC and was awarded Rs
5000 as fine and 3 years imprisonment. This case again shows that the punishment
that is often awarded does not take into account the deliberate and gruesome
nature of the attack and rests on technicalities of injuries.
40 State of Karnataka by Jalahalli Police Station vs. Joseph Rodrigues S/o V.Z. Rodrigues 
(Decided in the Hon’ble High Court of Kerala on 22/8/2006)
41 State(Delhi Administration)  Vs. Mewa Singh 5(1969) DLT 506
42 2002 CriLJ1403
20

In another case43 due to enemity acid was poured by a mother and son duo over
the victims. One of the victim suffered from multiple acid burns on the whole
back  extending  from  scapular  spine  to  iliac  crest.  The  other  victim  suffered
Chemical burns on the right side  forehead just above medial end of right eye
brow  and  the  skin  blackened.  He  also  suffered  from  multiple  acid  burn  on
the lateral aspect of left upper arm and skin was blackened apart from other
burns.  The accused were  convicted under Section 304 (punishment for culpable
homicide not amounting to murder) and 323/34 IPC (punishment for voluntarily
causing hurt with common intention), with imprisonment of a year and rigorous
imprisonment for one year.
Thus over the years various kinds of acid attacks have been registered under the
sections related to hurt, grievous hurt, murder etc. However, the nature and effect
of the crime of acid attack is very distinct and complex and the Sections relating
to hurt and grievous hurt do not provide an adequate relief and punishment. Apart
from this the police often use their discretion to decide what sections should be
registered in the case of acid attacks and this discretion is at times influenced by
gender bias and corruption or is a wrong assessment.  
 In most of the cases no compensation has been awarded. In those in which
compensation has been awarded the sum is minimal and is totally inadequate to
meet  even the medical expenses. Normally courts just levy fines without even
giving these to the victims. The section  on Compensation in the CrPC should
therefore clearly spell out that the fines levied should be given to the victim or
their dependents.
The  victims  suffer  a  great  deal  due  to  a  slow  judicial  process,  inadequate
compensation and obviously from the after affect of the acid attack itself.
Thus, there is an urgent need to legislate distinct sections in the I.P.C to deal with
acid attacks and to setup a Criminal Injuries Compensation Board in India to deal
with such cases in an effective and efficient manner, to help the victims of acid
attack to get compensation for medical expenses and rehabilitation apart from
making Section 357 CrPC mandatory in certain respects.
43 State of U.P Vs. Smt. Aqueela and Others (1999 CriLJ 2754)
21

CHAPTER 4
Law in Other Countries
Acid Violence in Other Countries: A Situational Analysis 
Acid  attacks  have  been  documented  in  various  different  parts  of  the  world
including Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Italy,
Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Uganda, UK, USA, and
Vietnam.  However,  the number of incidences  in Bangladesh,  India,  Pakistan,
Cambodia and Uganda are much higher and are on the rise. Certain social and
cultural issues responsible for these attacks have been “refusals of a relationship
or marriage proposal, failures of a girl to bring a dowry to her husband, marital
disputes,  family  disputes,  political  rivalries,  land  disputes  and  the  accidental
presence of the victims at the scene.”44  Most of the reasons are specifically
related to gender and are common reasons in countries like Bangladesh, India,
Pakistan, Cambodia, and Uganda; where other crimes against women like dowry
related crimes, domestic violence and honor crimes exist. Infact in India, it has
been said that “acid attacks on women are a systemic form of gendered sexual
violence. Unlike acid attacks on men, these attacks are used as a weapon to
silence and  control women by destroying what is  constructed as the primary
constituent of her identity, i.e., her body. It is important then for any campaign
against acid attacks to mobilize public opinion towards recognizing acid attacks as
a  form  of  gendered  sexual  violence  and  more  importantly  to  recognize  the
patriarchal notions underlying these attacks”.45
Furthermore, depicting country specific trends is  useful while drawing up  an
appropriate legislation to address the problem. For instance, as many of cases of
acid violence in Cambodia occur in the household, the crime has been proposed to
be addressed in their Domestic Violence Act. A similar approach was taken in
Bangladesh in  1995 when the government initially thought acid attacks to be a
gender specific crime and passed the Cruelty to Women and Children Act. In
2000 the Prevention of Oppression against Women and  Children Act  again  dealt
44 Internet Edition Holiday, The acid violence against women, Shadnaz Khan,  May 27, 2005
45 Burnt not Destroyed-Report by CSAAAW.
22

with acid attacks on women and children. However the rise in trends of acid
violence against men that ensued in the late 1900s made it necessary for the
Bangladeshi government to pass a law that dealt with the crime against both
women  and  men in specific terms.  Hence,  in  2002  two  new laws, the Acid
Offences Prevention Act 2002 and Acid Control Act were enacted in 2002 to
address the growing problem. 
Bangladesh:
There  has  been  a  steady  increase  in  acid  attacks  in  Bangladesh  from
approximately  12  per  year  to  50  per  year in  the  mid-1990s.  An  even  more
significant  jump  was  observed  in  the  late  1990s  when  NGOs  in  Bangladesh
reported up to 250 cases per annum. The sudden increase in cases has been partly
attributed to better reporting and making the cases more visible by NGOs like
Naripokkho, a women’s advocacy organization, in 1995 and the Acid Survivors
Foundation in Dhaka in 1999. These NGOs made sure that as many cases as
possible  were  reported  and  recorded  and  that  the  victims  received  help  and
compensation.46 However, only part of this increase can be explained by this
progress that was made in the documentation of cases47.In 2001, 340 cases were
reported, in 2002, 336 cases were reported and in 2003, 335 cases were reported48.
Earlier attacks were almost always committed against young women and girls by
men  who  were  angered  by  their  victims  rejecting  their  sexual  advances  or
marriage proposals. However, as the crime became more common the motives for
attacks grew more varied and presently more than 30% of victims are men, and
land disputes are one of the biggest reasons for attacks. 49
Between 1999 and 2002, acid attacks in Bangladesh increased at a rate of 50% per
year, culminating in 485 attacks in 2002. In 2003 there was a 15% decrease in
cases to 410 per year.50 
46 Acid Attacks: Bangladesh's Efforts to Stop the Violence, Jordan Swanson, Harvard Health Policy Review
Archives, Spring 2002; Vol 3, No 1
47 Baseline Survey with International Comparative Analysis of the Legal Aspects of Acid Violence in
Uganda, Commissioned by: Acid Survivors Foundation Uganda, Legal Consultant: Rachel Forster ,
November, 2004 
48 Acid Violence Against Women, Quoting ASF statistics.
49 Acid Survivors Foundation Bangladesh.
50 Acid Survivors Foundation Bangladesh
23

The experience in Bangladesh was that acid violence cases took up to 10 years to
be prosecuted in court and as many as 1 in 10 cases did not go to trial. 51. By 1999
only 10 men had been imprisoned as a result of an acid crime. Between 1999 and
2001 of the 750 acid attack cases reported and only 25 were convicted.52
The Acid Offences Prevention Act 200253 reads as follows-
Section 4: Punishment for killing of a person by acid: Whoever kills anyone by
acid shall be punished with, death or rigorous imprisonment for life and also with
fine no exceeding One Lac Taka
Section 5: Punishment for hurt by acid: Whoever causes such bodily injury to a
person, by acid, that-
a) His/Her sight or ear is damaged fully or partly  or face or breast  or sexual
organ  is  disfigured  or  damaged,  he  shall  be  punished  with,  death  or
rigorous imprisonment  for life and also a fine not exceeding One Lac
Taka.
b) Any member or joint of his/her body is disfigured or damaged or injured in
any  part  thereof,  he  shall  be  punished  with,  imprisonment  of  either
description which may extend to 14 years but not less than 7 years of
rigorous imprisonment.
Section 6: Punishment for acid throwing or attempt to throwing: Whosoever
throws or attempts to throw acid on any other person even if such an act causes no
damage or injury to that other person whether physically, mentally or otherwise,
he shall be punished with, imprisonment of either description which may extend
to 7 years but not less than 3 years of rigorous imprisonment also with a fine not
exceeding Fifty Thousand Taka.
It is relevant to mention that prior to 1983, all acid crimes in Bangladesh were
prosecuted using the penal code. In 1983, the word “acid” was included in the
51 Monira Rahman, Executive Director, Acid Survivors Foundation, Bangladesh.
52 supra 21
53 Unofficial translation of Act 2 of 2002, The Parliament of Bangladesh.
24

penal code to try to provide some clarity, but there were still gaps in the law when
considering the very specific nature of acid crimes.  54In 1995 the government
enacted the Cruelty to Women and Children Act and this Act addressed acid
attacks specifically. At that point in time, acid violence was thought to be a gender
specific issue and all acid crimes against women and children were prosecuted
through  this  Act.  However  any  attack  committed  against  a  man  had  to  be
prosecuted  through  the  old  penal  code.  From  1995  onwards  there  was  an
increased trend in the use of acid against men and so a new law was needed to
prosecute cases inflicted on men. When the law was revised and in 2002, the
maximum punishment was increased from 7 years under the penal code to death. 
1. The law addresses the problem of delay in prosecuting cases by providing a
fixed time for investigations:
o The investigating police officer must complete the investigation within 30
days  following  the  reported  attack  or  the  Magistrate’s  order  for  an
investigation.
o Two extensions of 15 days each can be granted on application to the court
o If after 60 days, the officer is unable to complete the investigation, a new
officer must be assigned and action will be taken against the first officer 
o The new officer has 15 days to complete the investigation.
2. Trial Procedures:
o The total time allowed for investigations is 90 days. The trial then has to
be completed and a conviction secured within 90 days of the end of the
investigation period.
3. The court is very proactive in ensuring that the police investigate acid cases.
Section 13 in the Act states that legal action will be taken against any officers
who are negligent or corrupt in investigating the crime.
4. Medical Examination of the Victim: This Section is to ensure that the acid
attack  victim  gets  proper  medical  examination  immediately and  receive a
certificate regarding the examination. The Section also lays down that action
will be taken against a negligent doctor.
5. All  offences  under  the  Act  are  cognizable,  non-compoundable  and  non-
bailable. 
6. Although the crime is regarded as non-bailable in Section 13 of the Act,
Section  14  of  the  act  is  a  specific  provision  that  gives  the  Court  some
discretion as to when it can grant bail.  This Section states that a bail petition
54 supra 21
25

cannot be filed if the Court is convinced that the complainant is not given the
chance for hearing on the bail petition,    or there are reasonable ground for
conviction or He/she is not woman or child, or not physically impaired and the
tribunal is not satisfied that ends of justice will not be hampered if he is enlarged
on bail.If the Court is satisfied that the person is not involved in the offence, it
can grant bail.  
7.  Acid-offences Prevention Tribunals have been set up solely to try acid cases,
headed by district or session judges. These topic-specific Tribunals are to
ensure that members on the Tribunals are properly sensitized to acid attack
cases.
The Acid Control Act, deals with restricting and controlling the sale and supply of
acid in Bangladesh This Act attempts to control the sale and supply of acid in
Bangladesh. 15-member National Acid Control Councils have been established
across the country. Each council is headed by a District Commissioner. Members
of the Councils are selected from the government and also lawyers, commerce
people, medical professionals, specialists in women’s issues and members of the
media. The councils make proposals to take action to enforce and monitor the
laws regarding acid sale in their respective area as well as to assist in the proper
reporting, treatment and rehabilitation of victims.
The councils raise public awareness about the consequences of acid crime. In spite
of the enactment of the new law the experience in Bangladesh has been that it is
still very hard to restrict the sale of acid. It is first difficult to find the source of the
acid used during the attack and thus to prosecute the supplier. It is also easy
disguising  the  reason  for  requiring  acid  by  proposing  legitimate  excuses.
Furthermore, covering up the real supply of acid in their records is an effortless
task for suppliers and as bribery is common in Bangladesh, acid is easy to obtain.
Cambodia 
In a 2003 report on acid attacks in Cambodia55, collected from newspapers it was
reported  that  between  December  1999  and  November  2002,  63  people  were
subject  to  acid  attack.  Out  of  these,  30  victims  were  female  and  31  male.
55  2003 report by licadho, living in the shadows: acid attacks in cambodia.published by project
against torture cambodian league for the promotion of human rights (licadho).
26

However, 29% of the victims were not targets of the attack and 12 males and 4
females,  plus  two  others  whose  sex  had  not  been  reported  were  injured  by
accidents and included friends and family members of the victims or their drivers
and  other  nearby  passers.  Thus,  most  the  intended  victims  were  women.
Thereafter it has been reported  56 that atleast  60 known cases of acid attack
violence occurred in 2005.  However, others 57suspect that the annual incidence
rate could be as high as 100.A newspaper report 58 states that from October 1999
to December 2006 there have been 111 cases of acid attacks with a total of 181
victims.  Most  of  these  attacks  were  perpetrated  on  women  59and  involved
husbands throwing acid on their wives or former wives, wives throwing acid on
the second wives or mistresses and in some cases women throwing acids at their
husband because of husband’s violence (beating and abusing) towards them.  
The Law : 
Acid  Violence  is  not  specifically  addressed  in  Cambodian  criminal  law.
Perpetrators can be charged with battery with injury, which carries a sentence of
up to 10 years imprisonment. 
Article 41: assault and battery60
1. Anyone who voluntarily strikes another resulting in injury leading to permanent
disability or temporary disability lasting more than six months, is guilty of battery
and shall be liable to a punishment of one to five years in prison.
2. If the disability lasts less than six months, the offence shall be punished by a
term of imprisonment of six months to two years.
56Data provided by Cambodian Acid Survivors Charity (CASC)
57 suspectAcid Survivors Trust International (ASTI)
58 The Cambodia Daily, 5 Dec 06
59 2003 report by LICADHO, Living in the Shadows: Acid Attacks in Cambodia
60 Provisions dated September 10, 1992 relating to the judiciary and criminal law and procedure
applicable in Cambodia during the transitional period, www.licadho.org
27

3. If there is no disability, the punishment shall be a term of imprisonment of two
months to one year.
4. If any weapon is used to strike the blows, the period of imprisonment shall be
doubled.
If the victims dies or receives life-threatening injuries, more serious charges such
as murder, attempted murder or manslaughter should be laid. They carry sentences
of 10 years to life imprisonment.
Article 31: murder
1. Anyone who kills or attempts to kill another person after premeditating the
crime, or by preparing an ambush, or who kills or attempts to kill another person
in the course of theft or rape, is guilty of the murder, and shall be liable to a
punishment of imprisonment for a term of ten to twenty years.
2. Premeditation is the process of conceiving and preparing an attack on another
person before the actual execution of the attack. An ambush consists of lying in
wait with the intention of committing an act of violence against another person.
Article 32: voluntary manslaughter
Anyone who voluntarily kills or attempts to kill another person without any of the
aggravating circumstances mentioned in Article 31, whether or not a weapon is
used, is guilty of the crime of voluntary manslaughter, and shall be liable to
imprisonment for a term of eight to fifteen years.
However,  convictions  have  been  reported  in  only  6  cases  and  women  have
normally received more severe punishments than men 61
A draft provision in Cambodia’s domestic violence law is being approved by the
National Assembly and Senate. It proposes a punishment for acid throwers of
between  5  –  10  years  imprisonment.  Activists  are  still  campaigning  for  the
61 2003 LICADHO report
28

wording to be changed to apply to any person who throws acid, rather than just the
current  application only to  family members who  throw  acid  on  other family
members.  This would exclude people w ho throw acid at victims who are not
related to them. Also, activists argue that the maximum penalty for acid throwing
should  be  increased,  especially if  permanent  disfigurement  or  disability,  like
blindness, has been caused.  This would be the first time that Cambodian law
specifically refers to acid attacks.
However till date the Domestic Violence Law, which was approved in 2005 does
not deal with acid attacks in specific terms. 
Uganda
In Uganda according to Acid Survivor’s Foundation(ASFU) Acid violence in
affects both men(48%) and women(52%) in almost equal numbers62. The motives
behind the attacks are domestic arguments, land disputes, business rivalry etc.
There are also cases of victims that have been injured by mistake for being there
at the time of the acid throwing as there were in Cambodia. These are often
children who were being carried by the mother victims at the time of the attack.
ASFU is also aware of many cases where victims have no idea why they were the
target of an attack. Acid violence crosses the social strata of society in Uganda –
from the very poorest to some very influential and wealthy people. ASFU has
found that attacks are not only carried out by the person with the grievance but in
15 % of cases, the acid is thrown by an assassin; who can be hired at a very low
cost. 
ASFU  suspects  under-reporting  of  acid  violence  cases  due  to  public  stigma
attached to victims, poor access to justice, police inefficiency and the victim’s
lack of finances to fight the case through the police system and then the courts. 
The relevant section to arrest, prosecute, convict and sentence perpetrators of acid
violence under the Ugandan Penal Code is Section 216(g) (formerly S209) and it
carries life imprisonment and reads as under:-
“Any person who, with intent to maim, disfigure or disable any person, or to
do some grievous harm to any person or to resist or prevent the lawful arrest
or detention of any person –
(f) puts any corrosive fluid or any destructive or explosive substance in
any place; or
62 ,  Baseline Survey with International Comparative Analysis of the Legal Aspects of Acid
Violence in Uganda,2004.
29

(g) unlawfully casts or throws any such fluid or substance at or upon any
person, or otherwise applies any such fluid or substance to the person of
any person, commits a felony and is liable to imprisonment for life.”
However, it has been reported that the above section is not applied consistently by
the police or the courts. Many attackers have been charged under other sections of
the Penal Code, for example, under Section 219 for “grievous harm” which carries
a sentence of upto seven years only. Another problem that arises is that police
officers have too much discretion in terms of the degree of charges that they are
able to bring on. Moreover, the police are not consistent in bringing charges, as
charges that are filed often seem to be dependent on the individual decision of the
police officer rather than one of policy.
A charge is  also often levied according to the level of injury rather than by
investigating the intent and motive behind the attack. Therefore if the victim
manages to avoid major injuries, the perpetrator is released or only charged with a
minor assault, despite the fact that the perpetrator had intended to disfigure or kill
the victim. ASFU has recorded cases where there had not been physical injury and
therefore no prosecution of the perpetrator or only a light sentence, resulting in the
victim living in fear of a later attack. In Uganda only a few acid attacks have been
charged  under  attempted  murder  which  seems  unfair  given  the  premeditated
nature of acid attacks.  63.Apart from this in Uganda the police are often corrupt,
the prosecutors inefficient and sometimes cases are dropped because the victims
are either silenced by threats or paid off.
As  eluded  to  above, there  is  no  consistency in  sentencing,  a fact  confirmed
generally in the sentencing system of Uganda. Sentences vary from a few months
(most of which is spent on remand) to life imprisonment. Police and judiciary
discretion apply and since many do not understand the severity of acid cases, often
light charges and lenient sentences result. Generally sentences are too lenient
given the permanent damage caused to the victim in terms of health, job, family
and social status. Prior to ASFU intervention, in 62% of known acid cases in
Uganda, perpetrators received custodial sentences of less than 10 years. Since the
intervention of ASFU, the figure has dropped to 46%.
63 ASFU Report 2004
30

There is currently no form of compensation available to victims of acid attacks,
despite the significant costs incurred by victims and their families as a result of
the attacks. No government fund exists to provide any form of compensation,
fines are not imposed on perpetrators and ASFU has no records of any civil
actions being brought against perpetrators.
 Concentrated sulphuric acid, commonly used in Uganda for re-charging batteries
is readily available at petrol stations, street sides and from outlets in the industrial
areas of cities for purchase by any individual without any questions being asked.
 Currently there is no adequate legislation to control and regulate the sale and
supply of acid and there are no laws to control businesses that use acid in their
manufacturing  process,  nor  for  those  who  transport,  import  and  export  such
chemicals. There are no licensing laws controlling the sale and supply of acid by
vendors and no records are kept of those who buy acid and the reasons for their
purchase. 
However,  though  it  is  hardly used  Section  230  of  the  Ugandan  Penal  Code
punishes a person with imprisonment for 6 months and a fine of two thousand
shillings “ who does with any poisonous substance any act in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any
other  person  or  knowingly  or  negligently omits  to  take  such  care  with  any
poisonous substance in his or her possession as is sufficient to guard against
probable danger to human life from such poisonous substance.”
 Nigeria.
Acid violence first reported in the city of Port Harcourt in the early 1990’s. 64The
reported cases of acid attacks on women between 2001 and 2004 was 21 and
another 14 cases between 1990 and 2000. 65 Although acid violence is a gender-
based crime in Nigeria, there have also been reported cases of attacks against men
more recently. Between 2003 and 2004 reported 7 attacks that were committed
against men by women. 66
64 Project Alert on Violence Against Women, 2004
65 Ibid.
66 Ibid.
31

There  is  no  law  currently  in  Nigeria  that  specifically  deals  with  acid
attacks.Offenders are prosecuted under the penal code for battery or for causing
grievous harm67. The relevant sections of the Penal Code in Nigeria reads as
under- 
Chapter 28
Offences Endangering Life or Health
332.         Any person who, with intent to maim, disfigure or disable, any person, or to do some
grievous harm to any person, or to resist or prevent the lawful arrest or detention of any
person-
 (1)          unlawfully wounds  or  does  any  grievous  harm  to  any  person  by  any  means
whatever; or
 
 (2)           unlawfully attempts in any manner to strike any person with any kind of projectile
or with a spear, sword, knife, or other dangerous or offensive weapon; or
 
 (3)            unlawfully causes any explosive substance to explode; or
 
 (4)            sends or delivers any explosive substance or other dangerous or noxious thing to
any person; or
 
 (5)            causes any such substance or thing to be taken or received by any person; or
 
 (6)            puts any corrosive fluid or any destructive or explosive substance in any place; or
 
 (7)           unlawfully casts or throws any such fluid or substance at or upon any person, or
otherwise applies any such fluid or substance to the person of any person;
 
                is guilty of a felony, and is liable to imprisonment for life.
335.         Any person who unlawfully does grievous harm to another is guilty of a felony, and is
liable to imprisonment for seven years
Thus in Nigeria a person can be punished with imprisonment upto life for putting a
corrosive fluid in any place or for unlawfully casting or throwing any such fluid at
or upon any person even if no injury is caused . 
Jamaica 
67Acid Survivors Foundation Uganda, supra 36
32

In  Jamaica  the  offences  against  Persons  Act  (OAPA)  provides  for  a  life
imprisonment for causing grievous bodily harm. There is no specific law dealing
with acid attack even though Jamaica is said to have the largest number of absolute
acid attack victims.The relevant sections of the OAPA read as follows-
 
33

Offences Against the Persons Act
Penalty for Murder: Death or life imprisonment, not being less than 15 years. 
Attempts to Murder:
13. Whosoever shall administer to, or cause to be administered to, or to be taken
by any person, any poison or other destructive thing, or shall, by any means
whatsoever, wound, or cause any grievous bodily harm to any person, with intent,
in any of the cases aforesaid, to commit murder, shall be guilty of felony, and,
being convicted thereof, shall be liable to be imprisoned for life, with or without
hard labour.
Acts Causing or Tending to Cause Danger to Life, or Bodily Harm:
  20.  Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously, by any means whatsoever,
wound, or cause any grievous bodily harm to any person, or shoot at any person,
or, by drawing a trigger, or in any other manner attempt to discharge any kind of
loaded arms at any person, with intent in any of the cases aforesaid, to maim,
disfigure or disable any person, or to do some other grievous bodily harm to any
person, or with intent to resist or prevent the lawful apprehension or detainer of
any person, shall
be guilty of felony, and, being convicted thereof, shall be liable, to be imprisoned
for life with or without hard labour.
22.  Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously wound or inflict any grievous
bodily  harm  upon  any  other  person,  either  with  or  without  any  weapon  or
instrument, shall be guilty of a misdemeanour, and, being convicted thereof, shall
be liable to be imprisoned for a term not exceeding three years, with or without
hard labour.
29. Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously by the explosion of gunpowder
or other explosive substance, burn, maim, disfigure, disable, or do any grievous
bodily harm to any person, shall be guilty of felony and, being
convicted thereof, shall be liable to be imprisoned for life, with or without hard
labour.
34

United Kingdom 68.
Although acid violence is not common in the UK, the courts have punished the
perpetrators harshly, when there have been such attacks. Attacks are charged
under Section 29 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 (OAPA). This
section of the Act specifically refers to “casting or applying any corrosive fluid
with intent to burn maim disfigure or disable any person.” If not charged under
this provision, they are dealt with as murder or attempted murder.
Offences against the Person Act 1861
20. Inflicting bodily injury, with or without weapon.
Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously wound or inflict any grievous bodily harm upon any
other person, either with or without any weapon or instrument, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and being convicted thereof shall be liable […] 34 to be kept in penal servitude […] 35
29. Causing gunpowder to explode, or sending to any person an explosive substance, or throwing
corrosive fluid on a person, with intent to do grievous bodily harm.
Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously cause any gunpowder or other explosive substance to
explode, or send or deliver to or cause to be taken or received by any person any explosive
substance or any other dangerous or noxious thing, or put or lay at any place, or cast or throw at or
upon  or  otherwise  apply  to  any  person,  any corrosive  fluid  or  any destructive  or  explosive
substance, with intent in any of the cases aforesaid to burn, maim, disfigure, or disable any person,
or to do some grievous bodily harm to any person, shall, whether any bodily injury be effected or
not, be guilty of felony, and being convicted thereof shall be liable, at the discretion of the court, to
be kept in penal servitude for life or to be imprisoned 
The sentencing guidelines under Section 29 of OAPA 1861, state that there should
always be a custodial sentence for this offence and the maximum sentence is life
imprisonment. Lengthy sentences have mostly been given by the courts in tune
with the premeditated nature of the crime. Sentences of 5- 6 years imprisonment
have been upheld in cases where there was no or minimal injury to the victim. For
cases  of  severe  disfigurement,  sentences  of  14  –  16  years imprisonment  are
awarded. The case of Radford upheld in 1986 where the victim substantially lost
vision in one eye and the perpetrator was given only a 5 year sentence, now seems
to be out of line with the lengthier sentences imposed in the 1990’s and 2000’s.
68 The facts in this chapter have been taken from The Baseline Survey with International
Comparative Analysis of the Legal Aspects of Acid Violence in Uganda
35

Below are some cases taken from judgments of the UK courts are as under:
• Radford (1986) 8CR App R (S) 60: 5 years imprisonment was upheld
when a corrosive substance was squirted into the victim’s face causing
substantial loss of vision in one eye. The appellant had pleaded guilty at
the trial and claimed that he had not intended to blind the victim only to
disable. However the Appeal judge held that because the attack was
premeditated  and  deliberate,  the  conviction  and  sentence  would  be
upheld.
• Ismail (1992) 13  CR App R (S) 395:  14  years imprisonment  was
upheld for throwing nitric acid into the face of an estranged partner,
causing gross disfigurement and blindness.
• In the case Boumphrey (1994) 15 Cr.App.R.(S.) 733, a sentence of 13
years imprisonment  was upheld for the total blinding of an innocent
young man. There was a plea of guilty and the appellant was a 47-year-
old  man  with  a  serious  heart  condition.  And  although  there  were
indications  of previous violence, he had no  previous convictions for
violence. These facts reduced the length of the sentence slightly.
• Carrington  (1999) 2CR App R (S) 206:  6 years imprisonment  was
upheld when sulphuric acid was thrown into the face of the offender’s
former girlfriend. No long term damage was sustained due to prompt
first aid but because the attack was premeditated and no remorse was
shown, the sentence was upheld. The judge stated that the fact that the
victim did not sustain any serious permanent injury was not something
that could go to the credit of the appellant. It was due solely to assistance
given by others.
• In the case of Newton [1999] 1 Cr.App.R.(S.) 438 a planned acid attack
occurred on an estranged wife by her husband at her place of work,
leaving her with 10 per cent burns to her body and with the aggravating
feature that he robbed her till at the same time. A 15- year sentence was
reduced by the Court of Appeal to 12 years. However, it is important to
note that in that case there was no permanent scarring and no element of
conspiracy, which serve to increase the length of a sentence.
• In the case of Jones [1999] 1 Cr.App.R.(S.) 473 a man was held in a car
for 45 minutes and acid poured over him following a dispute between
him and the attacker over money, which was said to be owed as the
proceeds of a fraudulent enterprise on their mutual behalves. Extensive
36

burns to the face and the possible loss of one eye was incurred. Sixteen
years  was  upheld  as  a  proper  sentence  on  the  tariff basis  for  that
offence, although a four-year sentence then being served was ordered to
run concurrently on the basis of the totality principle.
• In Krishan Raja Rai & Earl Robinson (2000) 2 CR App R (S) 120: 15
years imprisonment  was upheld for both offenders – one who had the
intent and the other who actually threw the acid. Rai had issued threats
to his former girlfriend that “you think you’re so pretty, you won’t be for
long” and to the girlfriend’s father he had said “If I don’t get her I’ll
spoil her face or I will kill her.” Robinson, who was unknown to the
girlfriend ran up one evening on the street and poured concentrated nitric
acid over her head from a lucozade bottle. As a result of the attack the
girlfriend lost her right ear, significant scarring to her face, neck, scalp
and chest. She required several surgical procedures. She also needed
regular counselling from a clinical psychologist.
The judge in the first instance held that the penalty for an offence of this
nature must be longer than a normal sentence. Also he felt that the public
needed to be protected from such offenders.
• The English courts have been equally severe against those behind an
attack  who  have  hired  someone  else  to  commit  the  crime.  In  the
unreported case of  Humphries (1996),  Mr Peter Humphries, hired a
stranger  to  throw  acid  on  his  former  wife.  Miss  Hammett  was
babysitting for the former wife and was injured in a case of mistaken
identity as the attacker  did not know that she was  not the intended
victim. Although the attacker was never caught, Humphries received a
12 year sentence.
The table below shows the kind of sentences that have been awarded in cases of
acid attack in different countries where such data was available till ……..
37

Source  Tables taken from  the Baseline Survey with International Comparative
Analysis of the Legal Aspects of Acid Violence in Uganda 
CHAPTER V
Compensation for the Victim
In the Delhi Domestic Working Women’s Forum case  69the Supreme Court of
India had pronounced upon the need by the government to  setup a Criminal
Injuries Compensation Board for rape victims within 6 months. The Supreme
Court had suggested that this board should give compensation whether or not a
conviction takes place. The Supreme Court explained the justification for this
proposal as under-
“It is necessary, having regard to the Directive Principles contained under Article
38(I) of the Constitution of India to setup Criminal Injuries Compensation Board.
Rape victims frequently incur substancial financial loss. Some, for example are
too traumatised to continue in employment. 
Compensation for victims should be awarded by the court on conviction of the
offender and by the Criminal Injuries Compensation  Board  whether  or  not a
conviction  takes  place.  The  board  will  take  into  account  pain,  suffering  and
69 Delhi Domestic Working Women’s Forum Vs. Union of India (1995) I SCC 14
38

shocks as well as loss of earnings due to pregnancy and the expenses of the child
but if this occurred as a result of the rape.
In the present situation, the third respondent will have to evolve such scheme as to
wipe out the fears of such unfortunate victims…..”
In Bodhisattwa Gautam’s case 70, The Supreme Court again reiterated the above
decision  and  further  laid  down  that  courts  had  arrived  to  award  interim
compensation which should also be provided for in the scheme.
An examination of acid attack cases again underlines the urgent need for a scheme
of compensation for the victims. Acid attack victims often have to, as stated
earlier, undergo multiple  surgeries costing Lakhs of Rupees. They are also in
urgent need of rehabilitation as they often need financial help to exist. They may
not be able to seek employment.
The National commission for Women has suggested a separate legislation to deal
with  the  offence  of  acid  attack  and  as  part  of  the  proposed  legislation  has
suggested that the Central government should establish a National Acid Attack
Victims Assistance Board which will provide assistance to the acid attack victims
by way of ensuring medical treatment and other services such as psychological
counseling.  The  board  has  also  been  given  the  task  to  recommend  to  the
Government strategies to regulate and control inter-alia the production and sale of
acids. It has been suggested that the board administers a fund to be called The
National Acid Attack Victims Assistance Fund  to which the Central and State
government can give grants apart from others. It has been provided that the board
can give interim financial relief upto Rs. 1 Lakh within a period of 30 days
directly to  the  hospital.  Apart  from  other  issues  the  main  problem  with  the
suggestions of the N.C.W is that it is restricting the function of the board to only
acid attack cases.
The Commission  has  also  examined  the Canadian  legislation  for payment of
compensation under the “ Compensation for Victims of Crime Act”. This act
applies to compensation claims arising from an injury or death resulting from
certain offences. Thus, the act provides for compensation inter-alia to victims of
offences  like sexual  assault, aggravated  sexual  assault,  murder, manslaughter,
sexual exploitation, assault, kidnapping etc. The act sets up a Criminal Injuries
Compensation Board, which can pay compensation to the victim or a person who
is responsible for maintenance of the victim or where death has occurred, the
70 Bodhisattwa Gautam Vs. Shubhra Chakraborty AIR 1996 SCC 922
39

dependants or any of them of the victim or the person who was responsible for the
victim’s maintenance. The compensation can be awarded under the following
heads –
a) Expenses actually and reasonably incurred or to be incurred as a result of
the victims injury or death;
b) Pecuniary loss or damages incurred by the victim as a result of total or
partial disability affecting the victims capacity for work;
c) Pecuniary loss or damages incurred by the dependants as a result of the
victim’s death;
d) Pain and suffering ;
e) Maintenance of a child born as a result of sexual assault;
f) Other pecuniary loss or damages resulting from the victims injury and any
expense that in the opinion of the board it is reasonable to incur.
Interim payments to the applicant preceding the award can also be made. The total
compensation ordered to be paid cannot exceed $100,000 in lump sum payments
for one occurrence. The payment of the compensation has to be paid out of the
consolidated fund.
The  U.K  Criminal  Injuries  Compensation  Act  199571 makes  the  government
responsible for setting up a scheme and states as under-
“(1)The Secretary of State shall make arrangements for the payment of
compensation to, or in respect of, persons who have sustained one or more
criminal injuries. 
(2) Any such arrangements shall include the making of a scheme providing, in
particular, for— 
(a) the circumstances in which awards may be made; and 
(b) the categories of person to whom awards may be made. 
(3) The scheme shall be known as the Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme.”72
It states that a standard amount of compensation will be  determined by reference
of the nature of the injury and additional amounts with respect to special expenses
and fatal injuries can be provided for. The act states that the government should
prepare a table showing the amount which should be paid in different cases or for
71 http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1995/ukpga_19950053_en_1#l1g1
72 Section 1 of Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 1995
40

different injuries. A claim officer to award the claim and adjudicators to hear an
appeal have also been specified under the act
It has been pointed out that Financial Compensation for the victim can be very
generous in the UK. The UK Criminal Injuries Compensation Board provided a
victim GBP £86,250 (approximately US $140,000).   The Assessment of general
damages  read as under:- 
“The women was aged 44 at the date of the assault and 50 when she was injured
in an acid attack. 31 She had 8% thickness burns to her face, right arm, dorsum of
both hands and the left upper chest plus damage to both eyes. She had to have
several skin grafts 10 months, two years eight months and two years 11 months
after the assault. She was left with extensive scarring to her whole face, loss of
hair above the left forehead, severe scarring to the right arm and left forearm and
scarring  to  both  hands.  All  scarring  was  permanent.  Her  left  earlobe  was
destroyed, she suffered a perforated left eardrum, likely to have been caused by
chemical burns and suffered permanent hearing loss, tinnitus and a persistent and
foul smelling variable discharge from the left ear. She also experienced pain in the
throat, on the left side of the face and ear, particularly when in the cold, soreness
in her eyes with extensive watering on a permanent basis. There was some visual
impairment. She also suffered from headaches, dizziness and a loss of balance.
Prior to the attack she had worked full time in a supermarket that she ran with her
husband  and  was outgoing and  sociable. Following the  attack  she  developed
agoraphobic tendencies and suffered from sleep disturbance, anxiety, frequent
flashbacks, excessive sensitivity to heat and became socially withdrawn and more
distant in her relationships. There was a diagnosis of severe post traumatic stress
disorder  and  a  moderately severe  depressive  reaction.  The  prognosis  for  the
psychiatric injuries was poor although there had been some small improvement by
the hearing. Due to the severity of her injuries, S was unable to work again.”
After looking at the various legislations we feel that a separate act should be
proposed for dealing with compensation to victims of acid attacks, rape, sexual
assault, kidnapping etc. We are suggesting a broader legislation so that it can deal
with the problems of victims  of different crimes who need rehabilitation and
compensation for survival. 
41

CHAPTER VI
Conclusion and Recommendations
The preceding chapters highlight that acid attacks are an increasing phenomenon
in India. However, since no special section in the Indian Penal Code deals with
acid attacks, the incidents are not even recorded separately. Section 326 of the
I.P.C,  which  deals  with  causing  grievous  hurt  by  throwing  of  a  corrosive
substance  etc.  is  insufficient/  inadequate  to  deal  with  the  issue.  Firstly,  the
definition of grievous hurt is not broad enough to cover the various kinds of
injuries which are inflicted during acid attacks.  Secondly, the section does not
cover the act of administering acid. Thirdly, the section gives a wide discretion to
the courts as far as punishment is concerned. The cases on acid attacks in India
show that normally inadequate punishment is awarded in these cases. Fourthly,
the section in the I.P.C does not punish the intentional act of throwing of acid if
no injuries occur. Lastly, the section also does not specify who the fine should be
awarded to. 
We also feel that if a person has thrown or administered the acid on another
person a presumption should be raised against the person, who has thrown or
administered the acid, that he has done so deliberately.
Apart from the above we feel that the distribution and sale of Acid should be
banned except for commercial and scientific purposes. Acid should be made a
scheduled banned chemical which should not be available over the counter. The
particulars of purchasers of acid should be recorded. 
We  have  also  examined  the  various  laws  in  different  countries  relating  to
compensation for criminal injuries. While the U.K Act provides for the setting up
of a scheme, the Canadian statute sets up a Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
to dispense compensation to victims of violence. The suggestion of the National
Commission for Women for setting up a board specifically for acid victims has
also been examined by us. We however feel that since not only victims of acid
attacks  but  other  victims  of  different  crimes  also  need  compensation  for
rehabilitation,  like  victims  of  rape,  a  law  should  be  enacted  to  set  in  place
Criminal Injuries Compensation Boards at the Centre, State and District levels in
our country.    
42

1. We therefore propose that a new section 326A be added to the Indian
Penal Code. The proposed Section 326 A will read as follows-
326 A. (i) Hurt by acid attack- Whoever burns or maims or disfigures or
disables any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt
by throwing acid on or administering acid to that person, with the intention
of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such injury or
hurt, shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description which
shall not be less than 10 years but which may extend to life and with fine
which may extend to Rs. 10 Lakhs.
Provided that any fine levied under this section shall be given to the
person on whom acid has been thrown or administered.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Minimum Imprisonment of 10 years extendable upto imprisonment for life
and  fine--cognizable--  non-bailable—triable  by court  of  session—non-
compoundable.
(ii) Intentionally throwing or administering acid- Whoever throws acid
on, or administers acid to, any person with the intention of causing burns
or  maiming or disfiguring or disabling or causing grievous hurt to that
person shall be liable to imprisonment of either description for a term not
less than 5 years but which may extend to 10 years and with fine which
may extend to Rs. 5 Lakh. 
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Minimum Imprisonment of 5 years extendable upto 10 years and fine--
cognizable--  non-bailable—triable  by  court  of  session—non-
compoundable.
2. We further propose, for the reasons stated above, that in cases of acid
attack  a  presumption  be  incorporated  in  the  Indian  Evidence  Act  as
Section 114B. The proposed Section 114B of the Indian Evidence Act
shall read as under. 
43

Section 114 B: Presumption as to acid attack-If a person has thrown
acid on, or administered acid to, another person the court shall presume
that such an act has been done with the intention of causing, or with the
knowledge that such an act is likely to cause such hurt or injury as is
mentioned in Section 326 A of the Indian Penal Code. 
3. We propose that a law known as “Criminal Injuries Compensation Act” be
enacted  as a separate Law by the government . This law should provide
both interim and final monetary compensation to  victims of certain acts of
violence like Rape, Sexual Assault, Acid Attacks etc. and should provide
for their medical and  other expenses  relating to    rehabilitation,   loss   of
earnings etc. Any compensation already received by the victim can be
taken into account while computing compensation under this Act.
4. We further recommend  that the distribution and sale of acid be strictly
regulated and the sale  of Acid across shop counters be banned. 
(Justice  AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman, Law Commission of India
44

Bibliography
• Acid Attack victims yet to get assistance, Staff Reporter, The Hindu,
27.04.2007; available at
<www.thehindu.com/2007/04/27/stories/2007042717250400.htm> 
• Acid Survivors Foundation Bangladesh, Acid Throwing Fact Sheet 2001.
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
• Acid Survivors Foundation Bangladesh, available on the ASF website
<www.acidsurvivors.org/> 
• Acid Survivors Foundation Uganda available on its website Acid
Survivors Foundation Uganda <www.acidsurvivorsuganda.org/>  
• Acid Survivors Foundation Uganda, Baseline Survey with International
Comparative Analysis of the Legal Aspects of Acid Violence in Uganda,
Commissioned by ASFU, Legal Consultant Rachel Forster, November,
2004 
• Benninger-Budel, Carin, World Organisation Against Torture, Geneva. 
45

• Cambodian Acid Survivors Charity (CASC), available at
<www.cambodianacidsurvivorscharity.org/> 
• Cambodian League for the Promotion & Defense of Human Rights
(LICADHO), Living in the Shadows: Acid Attacks in Cambodia,
published by Project Against Torture, 2003. 
• Cambodian League for the Promotion & Defense of Human Rights
(LICADHO), A Briefing on the Situation of Women in Cambodia May
2005; http://www.licadho.org/ 
• CEDAAAW Pakistan country report, 2004 
• Chauhan, Bala, Acid test of Humanity, Deccan Herald News Service,
Bangalore, August 14, 2007 available at
<www.deccanherald.com/Content/Aug142007/state2007081419024.asp>
• Criminal Code Act Nigeria available at <www.nigeria-law.org/Criminal%
20Code%20Act-Tables.htm> 
• Gillani, Waqar, Pakistan: Women's Commission Recommends Qisas Law
Be Amended, The Daily Times [Pakistan], 1 April 2004 
 
• Human Rights Watch available on its website <www.hrw.org/> 
 
• Jacinto,  Leela, Acid Test - Victims of Acid Attacks Battle to Beat the
System,  ABC News, September 28, 2003  
 
46

• Joseph, Ammu, Another Face of Violence, The Hindu, 15.08.2004 
 
• Khan, Shadnaz, The acid violence against women, Internet Edition
Holiday, May 27, 2005 
 
• Mannan A  , Ghani S, Clarke A, Butler PE, Cases of chemical assault
worldwide: A literature review, 2006 
 
• Offences against the Person Act 1861; <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/> 
• Offences Against the Persons Act,  Jamaica;
<www.moj.gov.jm/laws/statutes/Offences%20Against%20the%
20Person%20Act.pdf> 
 
• Pakistan Penal Code;  
<www.punjabpolice.gov.pk/user_files/File/pakistan_penal_code_xlv_of_
1860.pdf -> 
 
• PIL filed for steps to curb acid attacks, Special Correspondent, The
Hindu, 20.09.2006, available at
<www.thehindu.com/2006/09/20/stories/2006092004580400.htm > 
 
• Progressive Women’s Association, Pakistan available on its website
<www.pwaisbd.org/> 
 
• Project Alert on Violence Against Women, 2004, available at
<http://prolert.kabissa.org/> 
 
• Provisions dated September 10, 1992 Relating to the Judiciary and
Criminal Law and Procedure Applicable in Cambodia during the
Transitional Period; available at
<www.bigpond.com.kh/Council_of_Jurists/Judicial/jud005g.htm> 
 
47

• Rahman, Monira (Executive Director), Acid Survivors Foundation,
Bangladesh; , available on the ASF website <www.acidsurvivors.org/> 
 
• S., Bageshree and M.V. Chandrashekhar, The ‘acid test’: will
Government regulate sale of deadly chemicals?,The Hindu , 5 February
2007 
 
• Swanson, Jordan, Acid Attacks: Bangladesh's Efforts to Stop the
Violence, Harvard Health Policy Review Archives, Spring 2002; Vol 3,
No 1 
 
• The Acid Control Act 2002. (Parliament of Bangladesh)
(http://www.parliamentofbangladesh.org/)
 
• The Acid-Offences Prevention Act 2002. (Parliament of Bangladesh)
(http://www.parliamentofbangladesh.org/)
 
• The Children Surgical Center (CSC) available at http://www.csc.org/ 
 
• The Cruelty to Women and Children Act. (Parliament of Bangladesh)
(http://www.parliamentofbangladesh.org/)
 
• Wikipedia Online Encyclopedia  (www.Wikipedia.Com)
48