GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Preventing Bigamy via Conversion to Islam – A 
Proposal for giving Statutory Effect to Supreme 
Court Rulings 
Report No. 227
August  2009

THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 227)
Preventing Bigamy via Conversion to Islam – A 
Proposal for giving Statutory Effect to Supreme 
Court Rulings
Forwarded  to  the  Union  Minister  of  Law  and  Justice,  
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by Dr.  
Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of  
India, on 5th day of August, 2009.
2

The 18 th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three  
years  from  1st September,  2006  by  Order  No.  A.45012/1/2006-
Admn.III  (LA),  dated  the  16 th October,  2006,  issued  by  the  
Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of 
Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the  Member-
Secretary, one full-time Member and seven part-time Members.
Chairman
The Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal 
Full-time Member
Prof. (Dr.) Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. Mrs. Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K.N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
    Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the  Government  
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or  
medium provided that it is reproduced accurately and not 
used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material  must  be  
acknowledged as Government copyright and the title of  
the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed  
to the Member-Secretary and sent either by post to the  
Law  Commission  of  India,  2 nd Floor,  ILI  Building,  
Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India or by email  
to lci-dla@nic.in
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI Building (IInd Floor) 
Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi – 110 001
Tel. 91-11-23384475
Fax.   91-11 – 23383564
D.O. No. 6(3)/159/2009-LC (LS)                 5 August, 2009
Dear Dr Veerappa Moily ji, 
Subject: Preventing Bigamy via Conversion to Islam – A Proposal  
for giving Statutory Effect to Supreme Court Rulings 
I am forwarding herewith the 227 th Report of the Law Commission of  
India on the above subject. 
2. For a long time past, married men whose personal law does not allow  
bigamy  have  been  resorting  to  the  unhealthy  and  immoral  practice  of  
converting to Islam for the sake of contracting a second bigamous marriage  
under a belief that such conversion enables them to marry again without  
getting their first marriage dissolved.
3. The Supreme Court of India outlawed this practice by its decision in  
the case of Sarla Mudgal v Union of India , AIR 1995 SC 1531. The ruling  
was re-affirmed five years later in Lily Thomas v Union of India  (2000) 6  
SCC 224.
4. In view of the above, the Law Commission  suo motu  took up the  
subject to examine the existing legal position on Bigamy in India along with  
judicial rulings on the subject and to suggest changes in various family law  
statutes. 
5. We have recommended in this Report as under:
i) In the Hindu Marriage Act 1955, after Section 17 a new  
Section 17-A be inserted to the effect that a married  
person whose marriage is governed by this Act cannot  
marry again even after changing religion unless the first  
6

marriage  is  dissolved  or  declared  null  and  void  in  
accordance  with  law,  and  if  such  a  marriage  is  
contracted  it  will  be  null  and  void  and  shall  attract  
application  of  Sections  494-495  of  the  Indian  Penal  
Code 1860.
ii) A similar provision be inserted at suitable places into  
the Christian  Marriage Act 1872, the Parsi Marriage  
and Divorce Act 1936 and the Dissolution of Muslim  
Marriages Act 1939.
iii) The Proviso to Section 4 of the Dissolution of Muslim  
Marriages Act 1939 – saying that this Section would  
not apply to a married woman who was originally a  
non-Muslim  if she  reverts  to  her  original  faith  –  be  
deleted.
iv) In  the  Special  Marriage  Act  1954  a  provision  be  
inserted to the effect that if an existing marriage, by  
whatever  law  it  is  governed,  becomes  inter-religious 
due  to  change  of  religion  by  either  party  it  will  
thenceforth  be  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  
Special  Marriage  Act  including  its  anti-bigamy  
provisions.
v) The  offences  relating  to  bigamy  under  Sections  
494-495  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  1860  be  made  
cognizable  by  necessary  amendment  in  the  Code  of  
Criminal Procedure 1973.  
 
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely,
(Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
7

Preventing Bigamy via Conversion to Islam - A Proposal for giving 
Statutory Effect to Supreme Court Rulings
                        
Contents
Page Nos.
Chapter I
Introduction 9-11
Chapter II
Penal Law on Bigamy 12-15
Chapter III
Bigamy under Civil Marriage Laws 16-19
Chapter IV
Bigamy under Community-Specific Legislation 20-27
Chapter V
Bigamy under Muslim Personal Law 28-32
Chapter VI
Bigamy by Non-Muslims on Embracing Islam 33-34
Chapter VII
Judicial Rulings on Bigamy by Conversion 35-39
Chapter VIII
Recommendations 40-42
8

Chapter I
Introduction
Marriage laws other than that of the Muslims now in force in the country  
prohibit bigamy and treat a bigamous marriage as void. For this reason a  
marriage  to  which  any  of  these  laws  apply  attracts  the  anti-bigamy  
provisions of the Indian Penal Code which are applicable to a bigamous  
marriage  if  it  is  void  under  the  governing  law  for  the  reason  of  being  
bigamous [Sections 494-495]. 
For a long time past, married men whose personal law does not allow  
bigamy  have  been  resorting  to  the  unhealthy  and  immoral  practice  of  
converting to Islam for the sake of contracting a second bigamous marriage  
under a belief that such conversion enables them to marry again without  
getting their first marriage dissolved.
The Supreme Court of India outlawed this practice by its decision in  
the case of Sarla Mudgal v Union of India , AIR 1995 SC 1531. The ruling  
was re-affirmed five years later in Lily Thomas v Union of India  (2000) 6  
SCC 224.
Though  these  cases  related  to  marriages  governed  by  the  Hindu  
Marriage  Act  1955,  their  ratio  decidendi would  obviously  apply  to  all  
marriages whose governing laws do not permit bigamy.
9

The Supreme Court decision on this subject is now the law of the  
land,  and  yet  it  is  being  widely  violated  across  the  country.   Two  
conspicuous cases of unlawful bigamy through the route of conversion to  
Islam have made headlines in recent days. 
In one of these cases a prominent politician, already a husband and a  
father, mysteriously disappeared and surfaced a month later with a new bride 
claiming that they had become husband and wife under the law of Islam to  
which both of them had since converted. The fact that the new bride in this  
case, who is a lawyer and has been a law officer with the government of her  
State, keeps on publicly claiming that her marriage to the convert-bigamist is 
fully legal due to his conversion to Islam clearly shows the ignorance about  
the law settled in this respect by the Supreme Court prevails also in the  
community of lawyers.
In the second case another married man, an army physician of India  
serving in Afghanistan, converted to Islam in order to marry an Afghan  
Muslim girl serving him as an interpreter. The poor girl was kept in the dark  
about his marital antecedents and discovered the same only when years later  
he returned to India leaving her behind in Afghanistan. 
These are, of course, not the only prominent instances where married  
non-Muslim men claiming to have converted to Islam have duped their first  
wives; many such cases go unnoticed. There is, thus, a need to make the  
legal position as settled by the Supreme Court clear enough by introducing  
necessary provisions to that effect in all the existing legislative enactments  
governing marriages among various communities.  
10

This Report examines the existing legal position of bigamy in India  
and suggests ways to check the social malaise of bigamy through the route  
of sham conversion.
Depending on the number of plural marriage in a particular case and  
the  gender  of  the  person  indulging  in  them,  etymologists  use  different  
expressions for various situations of plural marriages  – bigamy (double  
marriages by a man or woman), polygamy (triple or more marriages by a  
man  or woman), polygyny (bigamy  by men) and polyandry (bigamy  by  
women). Avoiding these subtle differences and for the sake of brevity and  
convenience, we are using in this Report the common terms ‘bigamy’ or  
`polygamy’  which are opposite of monogamy and may be applied to all  
cases of plural marriages irrespective of gender and number of spouses.      
11

Chapter II
Penal Law on Bigamy
Bigamy in General
The Chapter on Offences relating to Marriage under the Indian Penal Code  
of  1860  contains  two  provisions  relating  to  bigamy  –  the  first  of these  
applicable to married persons marrying again without concealing from the  
second spouse the fact of the first marriage, and the second to those who do  
so by keeping the second spouse in the dark about the first marriage. Section  
494 of the Code reads as:-  
“Whoever having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in  
which such marriage is void by reason of its taking place during  
the  life  of  such  husband  or  wife,  shall  be  punished  with  
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to  
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception. --   This section does not extend to any person whose  
marriage with such husband or wife has been declared void by a  
court of competent jurisdiction, nor to any person who contracts a  
marriage  during  the  life  of  a  former  husband  or  wife,  if  such  
husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have  
been continually absent from such person for the space of  seven  
years, and shall not have been heard of by such person as being  
alive  within  that  time,  provided  the  person  contracting  such  
subsequent  marriage  shall,  before  such  marriage  takes  place,  
12

inform the person with whom such marriage is contracted of the  
real  state  of  facts  so  far  as  the   same  are  within  his  or  her  
knowledge.”
Coming to the cases of bigamy where a person indulges in it by deceiving  
the second spouse, Section 495 of the Indian Penal Code says:- 
“Whoever  commits  the  offence  defined  in  the  last  preceding  
section  having  concealed  from  the  person  with  whom  the  
subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact of the former marriage,  
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a  
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to  
fine”.
It will be seen that application of these provisions of the Indian Penal  
Code would be attracted only if the second marriage is void, for the reason  
of being bigamous, under the law otherwise applicable to the parties to a  
particular case; but not so otherwise. 
As such the anti-bigamy provisions of the Indian Penal Code apply to  
all those whose marriages are governed by any of the following legislative  
enactments all of which regard a second bigamous marriage, by a man or  
woman, as void :
(i) Special Marriage Act 1954
(ii) Foreign Marriage Act 1969
(iii) Christian Marriage Act 1872
13

(iv) Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936 
(v) Hindu Marriage Act 1955 
As regards the Muslims, the IPC provisions relating to bigamy apply to  
women  –    since  Muslim  law  treats  a  second  bigamous  marriage  by  a  
married woman as void – but not to men  as under a general reading of the  
traditional  Muslim  law  men  are  supposed  to  be  free  to  contract  plural  
marriages. The veracity of this belief, of course, needs a careful scrutiny.
The anti-bigamy provisions of the Indian Penal Code would not apply  
also to tribal men and women if their customary law and practice does not  
treat  their  plural  marriages  as  void.  It  has  been  judicially  affirmed  that 
Section  494  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  will  not  apply  to  members  of  
Scheduled Tribes unless the tribal law applicable to a case treats a bigamous  
marriage as void. See, for instance,  Surajmani Stella Kujur (Dr.) v Durga  
Charan Hansdah AIR 2001 SC 938.  
Nature of Offence
The offence under Section 494 of the Indian Penal Code is non-cognizable,  
bailable and compoundable by the aggrieved spouse with the permission of  
the court. That the offence is compoundable by mutual consent of the parties  
was affirmed in Narotam Singh v State of Punjab AIR 1978 SC 1542.  
In the State of Andhra Pradesh, however, by a local amendment of  
1992 the offence under Section 494 was made cognizable, non-bailable and  
non-compoundable
14

The offence under Section 495 of the Penal Code is non-cognizable,  
bailable and – unlike that under Section 494 -- non compoundable. Notably,  
in Andhra Pradesh this offence  too has been made  cognizable and non-
bailable.
IPC Provisions in Action
Bigamy by women is very exceptional in the society, but bigamy by men is  
indeed rampant. However, since the anti-bigamy provisions of the Indian  
Penal Code are (except in Andhra Pradesh) non-cognizable most cases of the 
offence  of  bigamy  remain  unpunished.  The  aggrieved  first  wives  of  all  
communities silently suffer the miseries caused by the practice of bigamy.
There is also a trend in the society to use devices, supposed to be  
‘legal’,  to  escape  application  of  the  IPC  provisions.  Among  these  are  
holding  incomplete  and  defective  marriage  ceremonies,  non-marital  
cohabitation and fake change of religion.
With  the  sole  exception  of  Andhra  Pradesh,  nowhere  have  any  
changes  in  the  IPC  provisions  or  the  related  procedural  law  been  yet  
considered in order to improve upon the working of the said provisions.   
15

Chapter III
Bigamy under Civil Marriage Laws
Special Marriage Act 1954
Monogamy is the rule under the Special Marriage Act 1954. Among the  
conditions for solemnization of  a civil marriage spelt out in the Act the  
foremost is that “neither party has a spouse living” – Section 4 (a).
In respect of bigamy there are two different penal provisions under the 
Act. If a person already married, under whatever law, fraudulently contracts  
a civil marriage the provision of Section 43 of the Act reproduced below will 
apply:
“Save as otherwise provided in Chapter III, every person who, being  
at the time married, procures a marriage of himself or herself to be  
solemnized under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an  
offence under section 494 or section 495 of the Indian Penal Code,  
as the case may be, and the marriage so solemnized shall be void.” 
The other provision contained in Section 44, reproduced below, is  
meant for a person married under the Special Marriage Act who contracts a  
second marriage under any other law:   
“Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and  
who, during the lifetime of his or her wife or husband, contracts any  
other marriage shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section  
494 and Section 495 of the Indian Penal Code, for the offence of  
16

marrying again during the lifetime of a husband or wife, and the  
marriage so contracted shall be void.”
Chapter III of the Act, referred to in Section 43 reproduced above,  
provides the facility of turning a pre-existing marriage solemnized as  
per religious or customary rites into a civil marriage by registering it  
under this Act. This facility is also available subject to the condition  
that “neither party has at the time of registration more than one spouse  
living” – Section 15 (b). If a person having more than one spouse living  
fraudulently registers either of his marriages under this Act he will be  
guilty of the offence of knowingly making a false statement punishable  
under Section 45 of the Act. 
The anti-bigamy provisions of the Special Marriage Act apply to  
every  marriage  contracted  under  its  provisions  irrespective  of  the  
religion of the parties. A court has specifically held that if a Muslim  
contracts a civil marriage under the Special Marriage Act instead of his  
personal law the anti-bigamy provisions of the Act will apply to him.  
See  S.  Radhika  Sameena  v.  S.H.O.,  Habeeb  Nagar  Police  Station,  
Hyderabad 1997 CriLJ 1655 (AP). 
However, if a person who has registered his pre-existing marriage  
under  the  Special  Marriage  Act  in  terms  of  Section  15  contracts  a 
second bigamous marriage, it is not clear from the language of the Act  
if the provision of Section 44 reproduced above will apply to the case.  
The words “Save as otherwise provided in Chapter III” in Section 43  
are not clear in their meaning. In the fitness of things, since  ex post  
facto registration of a religious or customary marriage turns it into a  
17

civil marriage for all purposes, the anti-bigamy provisions of the Act  
should also apply to such a case. 
Foreign Marriage Act 1969
This Act facilitates solemnization of civil marriages in foreign countries  
between two Indians or an Indian and a foreigner. Monogamy is the  
rule under this Act as well, the first condition for the solemnization of  
marriage under its provisions being that “neither party has a spouse  
living” – Section 4 (a).
If  the  condition  of  monogamy  and  the  other  conditions  
mentioned  in Section 4 of the Act are met,  a pre-existing marriage  
between  two  Indians  or  an  Indian  and  a  foreigner  solemnized  in  a 
foreign country under a local law can be registered under the Foreign  
Marriage Act, upon which it shall be deemed to have been solemnized  
under the said Act – Section 17.
The anti-bigamy penal provision of Section 19 of the Foreign  
Marriage Act, reproduced below, applies to both marriages originally  
solemnized under its provisions and those solemnized as per a foreign  
law but later registered under  the Foreign Marriage Act:
“(1) Any person whose marriage is solemnized or deemed to have  
been solemnized under this Act and who, during the subsistence of  
his marriage, contracts any other marriage in India shall be subject  
to the penalties provided in sections 494 and 495 of the Indian  
Penal Code, and the marriage so contracted shall be void.
18

(2) the provisions of sub-section (1) apply also to any such offence  
committed by any citizen of India without and beyond India.”
The anti-bigamy provisions of the Foreign Marriage Act, like those of  
the Special Marriage Act 1954, are applicable to all cases governed by 
it, irrespective of the religion of the parties.    
Effect of change of religion
 Post-marriage conversion by either party to a civil marriages has no  
legal consequences – the convert remains subject to the provisions of  
the Special Marriage Act 1954 or the Foreign Marriage Act 1969, as the 
case  may,  and  neither  the  converting  spouse  can  contract  another  
marriage  nor  the  other  spouse  can  seek   divorce  on  the  ground  of  
change of religion. 
If  either  party  in  such  a  situation  marries  again  after  changing  
religion, but without obtaining divorce or a decree of nullity, his or her  
conduct  will  still  attract  anti-bigamy  provisions  of the  Indian Penal  
Code.     
 
19

Chapter IV
Bigamy under Community-Specific Legislation
Christian Marriage Act 1872
As is well known, the Christian religion prohibits bigamy. In India Christian  
marriages are governed by an old Act of the British period – the Christian  
Marriage Act 1872. It applies to all sorts of marriages among the Christians  
of India and requires them to be solemnized under its provisions not only  
when both parties are Christian but also when one of them is a Christian and  
the other a non-Christian (see Section 4  of the Act).
Marriages can, under this Act, be either solemnized by a ‘Minister of  
Religion’ of a Church, or by or in the presence of a Marriage Registrar. 
In the first case, the notice to be given for marriage by either party is  
to be accompanied by a declaration of the parties’ marital status at the time  
of marriage, and the prescribed form for this purpose mentions only two  
possibilities – the person giving a notice may be either a bachelor/spinster or  
widower/widow. A certificate of compliance with the notice requirement is  
to be issued upon the applicant filing a declaration affirming that “he or she  
believes that there is not any impediment of kindred or affinity or other  
lawful  hindrance,  to  the  said  marriage;”  and  the  marriage  shall  be  
solemnized only after such a certificate has been issued (Sections 12, 18, 25  
& Schedule I).
 For obtaining a certificate in the case of a marriage solemnized by or  
in  the  presence  of  a  Marriage  Registrar,  instead  of  filing  a  written  
declaration the person giving the notice has to take an oath to the same effect 
20

– that “he or she believes that there is not any impediment of kindred or  
affinity or other lawful hindrance, to the said marriage”  (Sections 41-42).
The  marriage  of  a  native  Christian  can  be  certified  without  the  
preliminary notice mentioned above subject to the condition, inter alia, that 
“neither of the persons intending to be married shall have a wife or husband  
still living”(Section 60).
The Act provides that a person making a false oath or declaration or  
signing  a  false  notice,  intentionally  and  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  a  
marriage, shall be guilty of the offence punishable under Section 193 of the  
Indian Penal Code – Section 66. 
There is no specific reference in this Act to the anti-bigamy provisions 
contained in Sections 494-495 of the Indian Penal Code. Since bigamy is  
strictly prohibited by the Christian religious law and the Act also impliedly  
prohibits it, applicability of the said IPC provisions to married Christians  
may be seen as a foregone conclusion. Yet, there is a case for making the  
Act specific on this point.
A post-marriage change of religion by either spouse may have no  
effect  on  prohibition  of  bigamy  under  the  Christian  law  since  both  the  
Christian Marriage Act 1872 and its divorce supplement, the Indian Divorce  
Act 1869, apply also to cases where only one spouse is a Christian.
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936
Unlike the Christian Marriage Act 1872, the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act  
1936 specifically prohibits bigamy and says that Sections 494-495 of the  
21

Indian Penal Code will be attracted by every case of bigamy in any marriage  
governed by that Act. Sections 4 and 5 of the Act read as follows: 
Section 4
“(1) No Parsi (weather such Parsi has changed his or her religion  
or domicile or not) shall contract any marriage under this Act or  
any  other  law  in  the  life  time  of  his  or  her  wife  or  husband,  
whether a Parsi or not, except after his or her lawful divorce from  
such wife or husband or after his or her marriage with such wife or  
husband has lawfully been declared null and void or dissolved;  
and, if the marriage was contracted with such wife or husband  
under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865, or under this Act,  
except after a divorce, declaration or dissolution as aforesaid under  
either of the said Acts. 
(2) Every marriage contracted contrary to the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall be void.”
Section 5
“Every Parsi who during the lifetime of his or her wife or husband,  
whether a Parsi or not, contracts a marriage without having been  
lawfully divorced from such wife or husband, or without his or her  
marriage with such wife or husband having legally been declared  
null  and  void  or  dissolved,  shall  be  subject  to  the  penalties  
provided in sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  
1860) for the offence of marrying again during the lifetime of a  
husband or wife”.
22

The reference to bigamy after change of religion and its prohibition  
constitute a unique feature of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936  
which has no parallel under any other family-law enactment for the time  
being in force. 
Hindu Marriage Act 1955
Since times immemorial it was believed – rightly or wrongly – that Hindu  
religious law allowed an unrestricted polygamy and imposed no specific  
conditions on the polygamist-husband.  The Muslim rulers of India had left  
the Hindu law on polygamy – whatever it was – untouched and did not  
impose  on  any  non-Muslim  the  rules  of  Islamic  law  tolerating  limited  
polygamy in a well-defined discipline of equal justice to co-wives.  The  
British rulers, who did reform many other aspects of Hindu law, also did not  
abolish the rules on polygamy under the traditional Hindu law and custom.  
Only the Brahmosamajis had managed to legally adopt monogamy under a  
special law enacted for them in the erstwhile Bengal province in 1872.
After the advent of independence anti-bigamy laws were enacted for  
the Hindus by provincial legislatures in Bombay, Madras, Saurashtra and  
Central Provinces. Finally, in 1955 Parliament enacted the Hindu Marriage  
Act putting a blanket ban on bigamy for the Hindus. Buddhists, Jains and  
Sikhs, declaring bigamous marriages on their part in future to be void and  
penal (see Sections 5, 11 & 17).
One of the conditions for a valid marriage under the Hindu Marriage  
Act is that “neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage”  
[Section 5 (i)]. Violation of this condition shall make the marriage null and  
23

void and liable to be so declared by a decree of nullity on a petition filed by  
either party against the other party ( Section 11). 
Section  17  of  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act  once  again  declares  every 
bigamous  marriage  among  persons governed by  the Act to be void and  
makes it punishable under the anti-bigamy provisions of the Indian Penal  
Code 1860. It reads as follows: 
“Any  marriage  between  two  Hindus  solemnized  after  the  
commencement of this Act is void if at the date of such marriage  
either party had a husband or wife living; and the provisions of  
sections  494  and  495  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  shall  apply  
accordingly.”
Though Section 7 (2) says that if a marriage is solemnized through the  
saptpadi ceremony the marriage will be complete and binding on taking the  
sevenths step, some High Courts took the view that this is not a special rule  
of evidence requiring in a case of bigamy proof of the seventh step having  
been duly taken. – Padullapath Mutyala v Subbalakshmi  AIR 1962 AP 311,  
Trailokya Mohan v State AIR 1968 Ass 22.
In 1988 a learned judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, Radha  
Krishna Rao, had issued an important note of caution: 
"During the subsistence of the first marriage the second marriage  
will generally be done in secrecy. It is too idle to expect direct  
testimony.  In  some  cases  the  purohit  also  who  performed  the  
marriage will be treated as abettor. The courts are giving acquittals  
24

on the ground that the required ceremonies for the second marriage  
have  not  been  proved  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  Suitable  
legislation has to be made with regard to the mode of proof of the  
second marriage. If the marriage was done publicly and openly to  
the knowledge of one and all, the court can expect direct evidence.  
When second marriage is being performed in secrecy, knowing  
fully well that it is an offence, if the courts insist on strict proof, it  
amounts to encouraging perjury. The motto of the court is not to  
encourage perjury, but to find out the real truth and convict the  
accused if there is a second marriage. Unfortunately, none of the  
social organizations which' claim about the protection of the rights  
of women, have taken any steps to see that suitable legislation be  
made with regard to the mode of proof for performance of the  
second marriage." – [1988 CriLJ 1848].
However,  linking  the  anti-bigamy  provisions  of  the  Act  with  the  
requirement of a ceremonial solemnization of marriages under Section 7 (2)  
of the Act, the Supreme Court later held that if a customary ceremony is  
incompletely or defectively performed (to get married again), the resulting  
second marriage will be non-existent in eyes of law and hence will not  
attract the anti-bigamy provisions of the Act, or of the IPC.  See Bhaurao v  
State of Maharashtra AIR 1965 SC 1564. 
Going  by  this  interpretation,  if  the  saptpadi ceremony  has  been  
incompletely employed in view of the rule of Section 7 (2) there is all the  
more reason to treat the second allegedly bigamous marriage as non-existent. 
25

If the anti-bigamy provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act are to be  
strictly enforced, there is a case for de-linking them from the provision of  
Section 7 of the Act under which some  ceremony  has to be necessarily  
employed for solemnizing a marriage.
Effect of Change of Religion
Post-marriage change of religion by either party is under the Hindu Marriage 
Act a ground for divorce in the hands of the other non-converting spouse  
[Section 13 (1) (ii)]. Without obtaining this relief the non-converting spouse  
cannot marry again. 
As regards the converting spouse, the Act says nothing as to weather  
its anti-bigamy provision, or any other provision for that matter, would cease 
to apply to him or her. In the absence of a clear statutory provision on this  
point, it has always been a contentious issue if a married man governed by  
this  Act  can  upon  his  conversion  to  Islam  contract  a  second  bigamous  
marriage which, it is generally believed, is permissible under Muslim law. 
Unexceptional abolition of bigamy for the Hindus, Buddhists, Jains  
and Sikhs has created a serious problem for those married men among these  
communities who for some reason or the other, justifiable or unjustified,  
want to marry again. The new law wants them to first have the existing  
marriage legally dissolved.  This is not easy. The Hindu Marriage Act makes  
room for dissolution of marriages, but the cumbersome judicial process in  
the ordinary civil courts given the jurisdiction under the Act has turned  
divorce-proceedings into vexatious and long-drawn out struggles. There are  
26

genuine cases of broken marriages, as also those in which people dishonestly 
want to kick out their first wives and take new partners – the former cases,  
of course, outnumber the latter. Those married men who want to marry again 
have no religious inhibition, since they believe that their religion allows  
them to have their wish; and they do not mind violating the newly imposed  
legal ban on bigamy without any religious sanction for it. To avoid the  
penalties  threatened  by  the  new  law  to  be  inflicted  on  bigamists  they,  
however, need a 'device'. And, different 'devices' are suggested by those who  
are always ready to help lawbreakers – a fake conversion to Islam being  
foremost among these devices. 
The law of monogamy under the Hindu Marriage Act is, indeed, full  
of serious shortcomings and loopholes. Combined with the Act's provisions  
relating to marriage-rites, it provides in-built devices for an easy avoidance  
of all the consequences of its violation. 
27

Chapter V
Bigamy under Muslim Personal Law
Traditional Law  
It is generally believed that under Muslim law a husband has an unfettered  
right to marry again even where his earlier marriage is subsisting. On a  
closer examination of the relevant provisions of the Qur'an and the other  
sources of Islamic law, this does not seem to be the truth.  The rule of  
Muslim law conditionally permitting bigamy in fact visualized two or more  
women happily living with a common husband – taking a second wife after  
forsaking or deserting the first was not Islam’s concept of bigamy. 
Bigamy with no restrictions or discipline whatsoever was rampant in the  
society  where  Islam  made  its  first  appearance  and  also  in  many  other  
societies across the globe. The Holy Qur'an put restrictions on it, allowing it  
within limits, and even within those limits subjecting it to a strict discipline.  
The Qur'an permitted polygamy subject to a strict condition that the man  
must be capable of ensuring equal treatment of two wives in every respect.  
Asserting that this may not be possible even with the best of intentions, the  
Holy Book at the same time advised men to keep to monogamy as “this  
would  keep  you  away  from  injustice”  (Qur’an,  IV:  3  &  129).  To  this  
Qur'anic reform the Prophet added a highly deterrent warning: "A bigamist  
unable to treat his wives equally will be torn apart on the Day of Judgment."  
This was the reform that the Islamic religious law could, and did, introduce  
in the 7th century AD. 
28

If bigamy means forsaking of the first wife without divorcing her and  
bringing in a new wife, the Qur'an certainly does not permit it. In Muslim  
law bigamy envisages two women happily married to the same man actually  
living with him and getting from him equally all that a wife can expect from  
her husband. Where this is not possible, the Qur'an enjoins the husband to  
remain a monogamist. Bigamy of the type now prevalent in India  in which  
the first wife is wholly forsaken and thereby tortured and a second wife is  
allowed to usurp her place in the husband's home is not approved anywhere  
in Islamic legal texts. 
The Muslim law -- as now traditionally understood, interpreted and  
applied in India -- is however believed to permit four marriages during the  
subsistence of one another.  Though the capacity to do justice between co-
wives is in law a condition precedent for bigamy, whether a man has such  
capacity or not is, for inexplicable reasons, not justiciable before he actually  
contracts a bigamous marriage. The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act  
1939 treats unequal treatment between co-wives as a ground for divorce  
available to the aggrieved wife; but there is no law under which a man’s  
right  and  capacity  to  contract  a  second  marriage  can  be  examined  by  
anybody before he enters upon such a course of action.
Rules of Muslim law empower women to restrict the freedom of their  
would-be husbands to indulge in bigamy  by entering a condition to that  
effect in their marriage contract. And since Muslim law allows out-of-court  
divorce at the instance of both men and women, it further provides that a  
woman who after availing the legally provided facility to get rid of her  
husband  marries  again,  will  not  face  the  charge  of  bigamy.  These  pro-
29

women provisions of Muslim law have been judicially recognized in India in 
several cases.        
Social & Judicial Trends
Bigamy  has been  fully  abolished  or  severely  controlled  by  law in most  
Muslim  countries  of  the  world.  Turkey  and  Tunisia  have  completely  
outlawed it while in Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Iraq, Yemen, Morocco, Pakistan  
and Bangladesh, it has been subjected to administrative or judicial control.  
(Details of these reforms can be seen in Tahir Mahmood’s book Statutes of  
Personal Law in Islamic Countries, 2nd edition, 1995). 
In India bigamy is not very common among the Muslims and cases of  
men having more than one wife at a time are few and far between. The  
Muslim society of India in general in fact looks at polygamy with great  
disfavour and a bigamist is generally looked down upon in and outside his  
family. Despite this, unfortunately, the religious leaders are not prepared for  
any legislative reform in this respect  and the religious sensitivities have  
never allowed the State to introduce any reform in this regard.
The courts in India also greatly look down upon bigamy and provide  
all  sorts of relief to the first  wives of bigamist  husbands.  Several High  
Courts have held that bigamy amounts to cruelty which can be pleaded as an  
answer to the man’s suit for restitution of conjugal rights against the first  
wife – see  Itwari v Asghari  AIR 1960 All 684,  Raz Mohammad v Saeeda  
Amina Begum  AIR 1976 Kant 200, Shahina parveen v Mohd Shakeel  AIR  
1987 Del 210.
30

The Supreme Court of India has held that the provision of Section 125  
of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 allowing separate maintenance to a  
wife  on the  ground  of her husband’s cruelty  applies to Muslim women  
whose  husbands  contract  a  second  bigamous  marriage.  See  Khatoon  v  
Yaamin AIR 1982 SC 853.
In another case the Supreme Court has severely criticized the practice  
of bigamy and observed that there is no difference between a second wife  
and a concubine. See Begum Subhanu v Abdul Ghafoor AIR 1987 SC 1103. 
Administrative Service Rules
The Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules 1964 provide that a person who  
has contracted a bigamous marriage or has married a person having a spouse  
living shall not be eligible for appointment to such services – Rule 21.  The  
All India Services (Conduct) Rules 1968 place the same restrictions on those  
who are already member of any such service – Rule 19. Both the Rules,  
however, empower the government to exempt a person from the application  
of  these  restrictions  if  the  personal  law  applicable  permits  the  desired  
marriage and “there are other grounds for so doing.” 
These provisions of Service Rules apply to the Muslims and their  
constitutional  validity  has  been  upheld  by  the  Central  Administrative  
Tribunal  and  the  courts.  See,  e.g.,  Khaizar  Basha  v  Indian  Airlines  
Corporation, New Delhi  AIR 1984 Mad 379 [relating to a similar provision  
found in the Regulations framed under the Air Corporation Act 1953].    
31

Effect of Change of Religion 
Under the traditional Muslim law if a married Muslim woman converts to  
another religion her marriage would be automatically dissolved. This rule is,  
however, not applicable in India. The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act  
1939 provides that apostasy of a Muslim wife shall not dissolve her marriage 
(Section 4). So, although the 1939 Act does not specifically say so, if a  
married  Muslim  woman  renounces  Islam  and,  believing  that  her  first  
marriage has been ipso facto dissolved marries again, her second marriage  
will attract application of Section 494-495 of the Indian Penal Code. 
There is an exception to this rule under the Dissolution of Muslim  
Marriages Act 1939 – if a married convert Muslim woman by renouncing  
Islam reverts to her original religion the provision of Section 4 will not  
apply.  In other words, in this case her re-conversion will automatically  
dissolve her marriage with her Muslim husband. In such a case, therefore,  
anti-bigamy  provisions  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  will  not  apply.  The  
exceptional provision clearly seems to be discriminatory. 
32

Chapter VI
Bigamy by non-Muslims on Embracing Islam
Bigamy by conversion – viz. a second marriage by a married non-Muslim  
man after conversion to Islam – is a common practice in India.  The man  
having resort to it is given to believe by the lawyers ignorant of the true  
Islamic law that on becoming a Muslim he will be legally entitled to freely  
marry again irrespective of his previous marital status. This mistaken belief  
militates against the letter and spirit of the Islamic law on bigamy.  If the  
conversion in any such case is sham – as in most such cases it indeed is – the 
second marriage will be a fraud on Islamic law and can have no recognition  
in it.  If the conversion is genuine the second marriage can be allowed  
subject to the bar of equal treatment of the co-wives, which obviously would  
be impossible in such a case.  In either case therefore the second marriage  
will be repugnant to the Islamic religion and law.
As regards converts to Islam opting for bigamy, their conversion must  
be judged by the Prophet’s general verdict saying that “Effect of an action is  
governed by the underlying intention” and so conversion by a married non-
Muslim  man  motivated  by  a  desire  to have another wife  is of doubtful  
religious validity. But even where conversion seems to be genuine, it cannot  
be a license for indulging in bigamy by deserting the first wife in violation  
of Islam’s insistence on treating co-wives with unexceptional equality and  
equal justice. 
The fact, of course, is that conversion in such cases is invariably a  
humbug and is generally followed by formal or informal re-conversion of  
33

the newly-wed to their original faith – in fact they never convert to Islam  
from  the  heart.   This  shuttle-cock  playing  with  various  religions  is  not  
checked by our existing law, though it is neither allowed by the religion  
which is dishonestly adopted nor sanctioned by the one that is forsaken for  
selfish  ends.  What  married  Hindu  men  do  and  are  helped  with  by  ill-
educated  religious  functionaries  and  misinformed  lawyers  is  a  fraud  on  
Hinduism, a disgrace to Islam, a cruel joke on the freedom-of-conscience  
clause in the Constitution of the country and a criminal scheming against the  
law of the land. 
34

Chapter VII
Judicial Rulings on Bigamy by Conversion
There has always been a simmering discontent in the judiciary regarding the  
tendency  of  converting  to  Islam  for  the  sake  of  contracting  a  second  
bigamous marriage and the courts have tried to control it.
In Vilayat Raj v  Sunila AIR 1983 Delhi 351 Justice Leela Seth of the  
Delhi High Court had decided that the Act would continue to apply to a  
person who was a Hindu at the time of marriage despite his subsequent  
conversion  to  Islam  and  that  he  could  still  seek  divorce  under  the  Act  
(except on the ground of his own conversion). 
In In re P Nagesashayya (1988) Mat LR 123 Justice Bhaskar Rao of  
Andhra Pradesh High Court severely criticized the unhealthy practice of  
bigamy by conversion and observed that the old rule that the motive behind  
conversion could never be questioned had to be rejected at least in the cases  
of conversion coupled with bigamy. Similar observations were made in the  
case  of  B  Chandra  Manikyamma  v  B.  Sudarsana  Rao  alias  Saleem  
Mohammed, 1988 CriLJ 1849.
Finally, in the leading case of  Smt.  Sarla Mudgal v Union of India  
(1995) 3 SCC 635 the Supreme Court decided that every bigamous marriage  
of a Hindu convert to Islam would be void and therefore punishable under  
the Indian Penal Code.  The court observed:
35

"Since it is not the object of Islam nor is the intention of the  
enlightened Muslim community that the Hindu husbands should 
be encouraged to become Muslim merely for the purpose of  
evading their own personal law by marrying again, the courts  
can be persuaded to adopt a construction of the laws resulting in 
denying  the  Hindu  husband  converted  to  Islam  the  right  to  
marry again without having his existing marriage dissolved in  
accordance with law". 
As  regards  the  logic  by  which  a  married  non-Muslim’s  second  
bigamous marriage contracted after conversion to Islam could be treated as  
void under the Hindu Marriage Act, the court argued as follows:
“It is no doubt correct that the marriage solemnized by a Hindu  
husband  after  embracing  Islam  may  not  strictly  be  a  void  
marriage under the Act because he is no longer a Hindu, but the  
fact remains that the said marriage would be in violation of the  
Act which strictly professes monogamy. The expression ‘void’  
for the purpose of the Act has been defined under Section 11 of  
the  Act.   It  has  a  limited  meaning  within  the  scope  of  the  
definition  under  the  section.   On  the  other  hand  the  same  
expression has a different purpose under Section 494 IPC and has  
to  be  given  meaningful  interpretation.  The  expression  ‘void’  
under Section 494 IPC has been used in the wider sense.  A  
marriage which is in violation of any provisions of law would be  
void in terms of the expression used under Section 494 IPC. A  
Hindu marriage solemnized under the Act can only be dissolved  
on any of the grounds specified under the Act.  Till the time a  
Hindu marriage is dissolved under the Act none of the spouses  
can contract second marriage.  Conversion to Islam and marrying  
again would not, by itself, dissolve the Hindu marriage under the  
Act.  The second marriage by a convert would therefore be in  
violation of the Act and as such void in terms of Section 494 IPC. 
36

Any act which is in violation of mandatory provisions of law is  
per  se void.  The  real  reason  for  the  voidness  of  the  second  
marriage  is  the  subsisting  of  the  first  marriage  which  is  not  
dissolved even by the conversion of the husband.  It would be  
giving a go-by to the substance of the matter and acting against  
the spirit of the statute if the second marriage of the convert is  
held to be legal.”
The court further observed that the second marriage of an apostate-husband  
married under the Hindu Marriage Act would be in violation of the rules of  
equity, justice and good conscience, as also those of natural justice.  The  
court concluded that: 
“The  interpretation  we  have  given  to  Section  494  IPC  would  
advance the interest of justice. It is necessary that there should be  
harmony between the two systems of law just as there should be  
harmony  between  the  two  communities.   The  result  of  the  
interpretation, we have given to Section 494 IPC, would be that the  
Hindu law on the one hand and the Muslim law on the other hand  
would operate within their respective ambits without trespassing  
on the personal laws of each other.” 
 
In a separate judgment given in the Sarla Mudgal  case Justice R.M.  
Sahai  indeed  spoke  the  truth when  he  said  that “much  misapprehension  
prevails  about  bigamy  in  Islam”.  Grossly  caricatured  now,  the  Qur’anic 
concept of bigamy envisaged two women happily married to the same man  
and getting from him equally all that a lawfully wedded wife could rightfully 
expect from the husband.  Where this was not possible, the Qur’an enjoined  
monogamy.  While the Qur’anic norms must be strictly observed also by  
born Muslims,  the popular belief that the Qur’an enables a non-Muslim  
husband who has kicked out his wife without a legal divorce to marry again  
37

by  announcing  a  sham  conversion  to  Islam  is  absolutely  false.  
Derecognizing bigamous marriages of non-Muslim husbands contracted in  
such a fraudulent manner indeed enforces Qur’anic justice.  On this point the 
Sarla Mudgal ruling of the Supreme Court is unassailable. 
The Sarla Mudgal ruling was looked with disfavour in certain circles  
on the ground that it infringed a person’s fundamental right to freedom of  
conscience  and  profession  of  religion  guaranteed  by  Article  25  of  the  
Constitution.  The  matter  was  brought  before  the  Supreme  Court  which  
dismissed the idea. In Lily Thomas v Union  of India (2000) 6 SCC 227 the  
court observed: 
“The grievance that the judgment of the Court amounts to  
violation of the freedom of conscience and free profession,  
practice and propagation of religion is also far-fetched and  
apparently  artificially  carved  out by  such  persons who  are  
alleged  to  have  violated  the  law  by  attempting  to  cloak  
themselves under the protective fundamental right guaranteed  
under  Article  25  of  the  Constitution.   No  person,  by  the  
judgment  impugned,  has  been  denied  the  freedom  of  
conscience  and  propagation  of  religion….  Freedom  
guaranteed  under  Article  25  of  the  Constitution  is  such  
freedom which does not encroach upon a similar freedom of  
other persons.  Under the constitutional scheme every person  
has a fundamental right not merely to entertain the religious  
belief of his choice but also to exhibit this belief and idea in a  
manner  which  does  not  infringe  the  religious  right  and  
personal freedom of others. It was contended in Sarla Mudgal 
case that making a covert Hindu liable for prosecution under  
the Penal Code would be against Islam, the religion adopted  
by  such  person  upon  conversion.   Such  a  plea  raised  
demonstrates the ignorance of the petitioners about the tenets  
of Islam and its teachings.”  
38

As  regards  the  true  position  of  the  permission  for  bigamy  under  the  
traditional Muslim law, the court said:
“Even  under  the Muslim  law plurality  of marriages  is not  
unconditionally  conferred  upon  the  husband.  It  would,  
therefore, be doing injustice to Islamic law to urge that the  
convert  is  entitled  to  practice  bigamy  notwithstanding  the  
continuance  of  his  marriage  under  the  law  to  which  he  
belonged before conversion.  The violators of law who have  
contracted a second marriage cannot be permitted to urge that  
such  marriage  should  not  be  made  the  subject-matter  of  
prosecution  under  the  general  penal  law  prevalent  in  the  
country.   The  progressive  outlook  and  wider  approach  of  
Islamic law cannot be permitted to be squeezed and narrowed  
by unscrupulous litigants, apparently indulging in sensual lust  
sought to be quenched by illegal means, who apparently are  
found to be guilty of the commission of the offence under the  
law to which they belonged before their alleged conversion.  
It is nobody’s case that any such convertee has been deprived  
of practicing any other religious right for the attainment of  
spiritual  goals.  Islam  which  is  a  pious,  progressive  and  
respected religion with a rational outlook cannot be given a  
narrow concept as has been tried to be done by the alleged  
violators of law.”
39

Chapter VIII
Recommendations
All said and done, the Supreme Court of India settled the law once for all  
in its Sarla Mudgal ruling of 1995 affirmed in Lily Thomas case of 2000. 
We are in complete agreement with the thinking of the Supreme Court.  
The verdict that a married non-Muslim even on embracing Islam cannot  
contract another marriage without first getting his first marriage dissolved is  
undoubtedly  in  conformity  with  the  letter  and  spirit  of  Islamic  law  on  
bigamy. 
In any case, this is now the inviolable law of India -- whatever one may  
erroneously presume the Islamic law to be. Unfortunately this law as settled  
by the Supreme Court is now widely known to the public at large and is  
being constantly violated in numerous cases. The need of the hour, therefore, 
is to turn the apex court’s ruling into a clear legislative provision inserted  
into all matrimonial-law statutes of the country.  
Though these rulings were handed down in the context of the Hindu  
Marriage Act 1955 they will apply to all marriages governed by the other  
family-law statutes that are pari materia. 
On a careful consideration of all aspects of the trend prevailing among  
married non-Muslims to try to defy the law by marrying again on embracing  
to Islam, we recommend insertion of the following additional provisions into 
various family-law statutes:
40

1. In the Hindu Marriage Act 1955, after Section 17 a new  
Section 17-A be inserted to the effect that a married person  
whose  marriage  is  governed  by  this  Act  cannot  marry  
again even after changing religion unless the first marriage  
is dissolved or declared null and void in accordance with  
law, and if such a marriage is contracted it will be null and  
void and shall attract application of Sections 494-495 of  
the Indian Penal Code 1860.
2. A similar provision be inserted at suitable places into the  
Christian  Marriage  Act  1872,  the  Parsi  Marriage  and  
Divorce  Act  1936  and  the  Dissolution  of  Muslim  
Marriages Act 1939.
3. The Proviso to Section 4 of the Dissolution of Muslim  
Marriages Act 1939 – saying that this Section would not  
apply  to  a  married  woman  who  was  originally  a  non-
Muslim if she reverts to her original faith – be deleted.
4. In the Special Marriage Act 1954 a provision be inserted to 
the effect that if an existing marriage, by whatever law it is  
governed,  becomes  inter-religious  due  to  change  of  
religion by either party it will thenceforth be governed by  
the provisions of the Special Marriage Act including its  
anti-bigamy provisions.
5. The offences relating to bigamy under Sections 494-495 of  
the  Indian  Penal  Code  1860  be  made  cognizable  by  
necessary amendment in the Code of Criminal Procedure  
1973.  
41

    Although we fully agree with the fact that traditional understanding  
of the Muslim law on bigamy is gravely faulty and conflicts with the true  
Islamic law in letter and spirit, to keep our recommendations away from  
any unhealthy controversy we are not recommending any change in this  
regard in Muslim law.  
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Professor Dr Tahir Mahmood) (Dr  Brahm  A.  
Agrawal)
              Member     Member-Secretary
42