GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
NEED  FOR  LEGISLATION  TO  REGULATE  ASSISTED  
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY CLINICS AS WELL AS  
RIGHTS  AND  OBLIGATIONS  OF  PARTIES  TO  A  
SURROGACY 
Report No. 228
AUGUST 2009

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 228)
NEED FOR LEGISLATION TO REGULATE ASSISTED 
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY CLINICS AS WELL AS 
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO A 
SURROGACY
Submitted to the Union Minister of Law and Justice,  
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by  
Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman,  Law  
Commission of India, on  the 5th day of  August, 2009. 
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period  
of three years from 1 st September, 2006 by Order No.  
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the 16 th October,  
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of  
Law  and  Justice,  Department  of  Legal  Affairs,  New  
Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the  
Member-Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  and  seven  
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The text in this document (excluding the Government  
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format  
or medium provided that it is reproduced accurately  
and  not  used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material  
must be acknowledged as Government copyright and  
the title of the document specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be  
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either by  
post to the Law Commission of India, 2 nd Floor, ILI  
Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India  
or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
 
5

D.O. No. 6(3)/157/2009-LC (LS)      5 August, 2009
Dear Dr Veerappa Moily ji,
Subject:  Need for Legislation to regulate Assisted Reproductive  
Technology Clinics as well as Rights and Obligations  
of Parties to a Surrogacy
I am forwarding herewith the 228 th Report of the Law Commission  
of India on the above subject. 
2. The world's second and India's first IVF (in vitro fertilization) baby,  
Kanupriya alias Durga was born in Kolkata on October 3, 1978 about two  
months after the world's first IVF boy, Louise Joy Brown born in Great  
Britain on July  25, 1978. Since  then the field of assisted  reproductive  
technology (ART) has developed rapidly.
3. The  growth  in  the  ART  methods  is  recognition  of  the  fact  that  
infertility as a medical condition is a huge impediment in the overall well-
being  of  couples  and  cannot  be  overlooked  especially  in  a  patriarchal 
society like India. A woman is respected as a wife only if she is mother of  
a child, so that her husband's masculinity and sexual potency is proved and  
the  lineage  continues.  Some  authors  put  it  as  follows:  The  parents  
construct  the  child biologically, while  the  child constructs  the parents  
socially. The  problem  however  arises  when  the  parents  are  unable  to  
construct the child through the conventional biological means. Infertility is  
seen  as  a  major  problem as  kinship  and  family  ties are  dependent  on  
progeny. Herein surrogacy comes as a supreme saviour.
 
4. The legal issues related with surrogacy are very complex and need  
to  be  addressed  by  a  comprehensive  legislation.  Surrogacy  involves  
conflict of various interests and has inscrutable impact on the primary unit  
6

of society viz. family. Non-intervention of law in this knotty issue will not 
be proper at a time when law is to act as ardent defender of human liberty  
and an instrument of distribution of positive entitlements. At the same  
time, prohibition on vague moral grounds without a proper assessment of  
social ends and purposes which surrogacy can serve would be irrational.  
Active legislative intervention is required to facilitate correct uses of the  
new  technology  i.e.  ART  and  relinquish  the  cocooned  approach  to  
legalization of surrogacy adopted hitherto. The need of the hour is to  
adopt  a  pragmatic  approach  by  legalizing  altruistic  surrogacy  
arrangements and prohibit commercial ones.
5. The subject was suo motu taken up for study. Most important points 
in regard to the rights and obligations of the parties to a surrogacy and  
rights of the surrogate child the proposed legislation should include  have 
been given in this Report.
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely,
(Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
7

NEED FOR LEGISLATION TO REGULATE ASSISTED 
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY CLINICS AS WELL AS 
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO A 
SURROGACY
Contents                 Page Nos.
I. INTRODUCTION              9-16   
II. THE DRAFT ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE          17-19
TECHNOLOGY (REGULATION) BILL 
AND RULES 2008     
III. SEMINAR ON                                                           20-24
‘SURROGACY – BANE OR BOON’
IV. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION         25-27     
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The world's second and India's first IVF (in vitro fertilization) baby,  
Kanupriya alias Durga was born in Kolkata on October 3, 1978 about two  
8

months after the world's first IVF boy, Louise Joy Brown born in Great  
Britain on July  25, 1978. Since  then the field of assisted  reproductive  
technology (ART) has developed rapidly.
1.2 The  growth  in  the  ART  methods  is  recognition  of  the  fact  that  
infertility as a medical condition is a huge impediment in the overall well-
being  of  couples  and  cannot  be  overlooked  especially  in  a  patriarchal 
society like India. A woman is respected as a wife only if she is mother of  
a child, so that her husband's masculinity and sexual potency is proved and  
the  lineage  continues.  Some  authors  put  it  as  follows:  The  parents  
construct  the  child biologically, while  the  child constructs  the parents  
socially. The  problem  however  arises  when  the  parents  are  unable  to  
construct the child through the conventional biological means. Infertility is  
seen  as  a  major  problem as  kinship  and  family  ties are  dependent  on  
progeny. Herein surrogacy comes as a supreme saviour.
Surrogacy - meaning
1.3 The  word  ‘surrogate’  has  its  origin  in  Latin  ‘ surrogatus’,  past 
participle of ‘ surrogare’, meaning a substitute, that is, a person appointed  
to act in the place of another. Thus a surrogate mother is a woman who  
bears a child on behalf of another woman, either from her own egg or from  
the  implantation  in  her  womb  of  a  fertilized  egg  from  other  woman.  
According to the Black’s Law Dictionary, surrogacy means the process of  
carrying and delivering a child for another person. The New Encyclopaedia 
Britannica  defines  ‘surrogate  motherhood’  as  the  practice  in  which  a  
woman bears a child for a couple unable to produce children in the usual  
9

way. The Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilization and  
Embryology  or  the  Warnock  Report  (1984)  defines  surrogacy  as  the  
practice whereby one woman carries a child for another with the intention  
that the child should be handed over after birth. 
1.4 The Black’ Law Dictionary categorizes surrogacy into two classes:  
‘gestational surrogacy’ and ‘traditional surrogacy’. They are defined as  
follows:
Gestational  surrogacy.  A  pregnancy  in  which  one  woman  (the  
genetic mother) provides the egg, which is fertilized, and another  
woman (the surrogate mother) carries the fetus and gives birth to the  
child.
Traditional surrogacy. A pregnancy in which a woman provides her  
own egg, which is fertilized by artificial insemination, and carries  
the fetus and gives birth to a child for another person.
1.5 ‘Gestational surrogacy’ is total in the sense that an embryo created  
by the process of IVF is implanted into the surrogate mother. ‘Traditional  
surrogacy’  may  be  called  partial  or  genetically  contracted  motherhood  
because  the  surrogate  mother  is  impregnated  with  the  sperm  of  the  
intended father making her both the genetic and the gestational mother; the  
child  shares  make-up  of  the  commissioning  father  and  the  surrogate  
mother.
1.6 Surrogacy  is  commercial  or  altruistic  depending  on  whether  the  
surrogate receives financial reward for her pregnancy or the relinquishment 
of the child, or not.
10

India – a reproductive tourism destination
1.7 In commercial surrogacy agreements, the surrogate mother enters  
into an agreement with the commissioning couple or a single parent to bear  
the burden of pregnancy. In return of her agreeing to carry the term of the  
pregnancy, she is paid by the commissioning agent for that. The usual fee  
is around $25,000 to $30,000 in India which is around 1/3 rd of that in  
developed  countries  like  the  USA.  This  has  made  India  a  favourable  
destination for foreign couples who look for a cost-effective treatment for  
infertility and a whole branch of medical tourism has flourished on the  
surrogate practice. ART industry is now a 25,000 crore rupee pot of gold.  
Anand, a small town in Gujarat, has acquired a distinct reputation as a  
place for outsourcing commercial surrogacy. It seems that wombs in India  
are on rent which translates into babies for foreigners and dollars for Indian 
surrogate mothers.
 
Legal and moral issues 
1.8 The moral issues associated with surrogacy are pretty obvious, yet of 
an eye-opening nature. This includes the criticism that surrogacy leads to  
commoditization of the child, breaks the bond between the mother and the  
child, interferes with nature and leads to exploitation of poor women in  
underdeveloped countries who sell their bodies for money. Sometimes,  
psychological  considerations  may  come  in  the  way  of  a  successful  
surrogacy arrangement.
1.9 As far as the legality of the concept of surrogacy is concerned it  
would  be  worthwhile  to  mention  that  Article  16.1  of  the  Universal 
11

Declaration of Human Rights 1948  says, inter alia, that “men and women  
of full age without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion have  
the right to marry and found a family”. The Judiciary in India too has  
recognized the reproductive right of humans as a basic right. For instance,  
in B.  K.  Parthasarthi  v.  Government  of  Andhra  Pradesh 1, the  Andhra 
Pradesh High Court upheld “the right of reproductive autonomy” of an  
individual as a facet of his “right to privacy” and agreed with the decision  
of the US Supreme Court in Jack T. Skinner v. State of Oklahoma 2, which 
characterised the right to reproduce as “one of the basic civil rights of  
man”.  Even in  Javed v. State of Haryana 3, though the Supreme  Court  
upheld the two living children norm to debar a person from contesting a  
Panchayati  Raj  election  it  refrained  from  stating  that  the  right  to  
procreation is not a basic human right.
1.10 Now, if reproductive right gets constitutional protection, surrogacy  
which allows an infertile couple to exercise that right also gets the same  
constitutional protection. However, jurisdictions in various countries have  
held different views regarding the legalization of surrogacy. In England,  
surrogacy  arrangements are legal  and the Surrogacy Arrangements Act  
1985 prohibits advertising and other aspects of commercial surrogacy.  In  
the US also, commercial surrogacy seems prohibited in many states. In the  
famous Baby M case 4, the New Jersey Supreme Court, though allowed  
custody to commissioning parents in the “best interest of the child”, came  
to the conclusion that surrogacy contract is against public policy. It must  
1 AIR 2000 A. P. 1562 316 US 5353 (2003) 8 SCC 3694 537 A.2d 1227
12

be noted that in the US, surrogacy laws are different in different states.
1.11 If the 1988  Baby M case  in the US forced many to put on legal  
thinking  caps,  then  that  year  also  saw  Australia  battling  with  societal  
eruptions  over  the  Kirkman  sisters’  case  in  Victoria.  Linda  Kirkman  
agreed to gestate the genetic child of her older sister Maggie. The baby  
girl, called Alice, was handed over to Maggie and her husband at birth.  
This sparked much community and legal debate and soon Australian states  
attempted to settle the legal complications in surrogacy. Now in Australia,  
commercial  surrogacy  is  illegal,  contracts  in  relation  to  surrogacy  
arrangement  unenforceable  and  any  payment  for  soliciting  a  surrogacy 
arrangement is illegal.
Motherhood – an enigma
1.12 How surrogacy can lead to an array of legal complexities regarding  
motherhood was shown by Jaycee B. v. Superior Court 5. A child was born  
to  a  surrogate  mother  using  sperm  and  eggs  from  anonymous  donors  
because the infertile couple was unable to create their own embryo using  
the in vitro fertilization techniques. The couple chose to use anonymous  
donors rather than asking the surrogate to use her own eggs because of the  
Baby M case in New Jersey in which the surrogate had eventually refused  
to hand over the baby saying that she was its biological mother and her  
right to raise the child pre-empted the commissioning parents’. The child  
thus had five people who could lay claim to parenthood – a genetic mother, 
a  commissioning  mother,  a  surrogate  mother,  a  genetic  father  and  a  
5 42 Cal.App.4Th 718 (1996)
13

commissioning father. One month prior to the birth of the baby Jaycee the  
intended parents John and Luanne separated and John sought to rescind his  
obligations under the surrogacy contract so as to avoid having to pay child-
support for Jaycee. Luanne sought both custody and support from her ex-
husband. The court battle continued and for three years Jaycee did not have 
a legal parent. A Californian court granted temporary custody of the baby  
Jaycee to Luanne and ordered John to pay for child-support.
1.13 Different countries have taken different stands to address this issue.  
In UK, the surrogate mother is the legal mother, vide section 27(1) of the  
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 . Section 30 of the said Act  
at the same time provides that if the surrogate mother consents to the child  
to be treated as the child of the commissioning parents the court may make  
a parental order to that effect. This section also prohibits giving or taking  
of money or other benefit (other than expenses reasonably incurred) in  
consideration of the making of the order or handing over of the child.
1.14 In India,  according to the  National  Guidelines for  Accreditation,  
Supervision and Regulation of ART Clinics, evolved in 2005 by the Indian  
Council  of  Medical  Research  (ICMR)  and  the  National  Academy  of  
Medical Sciences (NAMS), the surrogate mother is not considered to be  
the legal mother. The birth certificate is made in the name of the genetic  
parents.  The US position as per the  Gestational Surrogacy Act 2004  is  
pretty similar to that of India.
Indian Baby M case
14

1.15 Baby  Manji  Yamada  v.  Union  of  India 6 concerned  
production/custody of a child Manji Yamada given birth by a surrogate  
mother in Anand, Gujarat under a surrogacy agreement with her entered  
into by Dr Yuki Yamada and Dr Ikufumi Yamada of Japan. The sperm had  
come from Dr Ikufumi Yamada, but egg from a donor, not from Dr Yuki  
Yamada.  There  were  matrimonial  discords between  the  commissioning  
parents. The genetic father Dr Ikufumi Yamada desired to take custody of  
the child, but he had to return to Japan due to expiration of his visa. The  
Municipality at Anand issued a birth certificate indicating the name of the  
genetic  father.  The  child  was  born  on  25.07  2008  and  moved  on  
03.08.2008 to Arya Hospital in Jaipur following a law and order situation  
in Gujarat. The baby was provided with much needed care including being  
breastfed by a woman. 
1.16 The grandmother of the baby Manji, Ms Emiko Yamada flew from  
Japan to take care of the child and filed a petition in the Supreme Court  
under  article  32  of  the  Constitution.  The  Court  relegated  her  to  the  
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights constituted under the  
Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act 2005. Ultimately, baby  
Manji left for Japan in the care of her genetic father and grandmother.
Israeli gay couple’s case
6 JT 2008 (11) SC 150
15

1.17 Thereafter was in the news the Israeli gay couple’s case 7. The gay  
couple Yonathan and Omer could not in Israel adopt or have a surrogate  
mother.  They  came  to  Mumbai.  Yonathan  donated  his  sperm.  They  
selected a surrogate. Baby Evyatar was born. The gay couple took son  
Evyatar to Israel. Israeli government had required them to do a DNA test  
to prove their paternity before the baby’s passport and other documents  
were prepared.
II. THE  DRAFT  ASSISTED  REPRODUCTIVE  
TECHNOLOGY  (REGULATION)  BILL  AND  RULES  
2008
2.1 The legal issues related with surrogacy, as we have seen, are very  
complex and need to be addressed by a comprehensive legislation. After  
7 The Times of India, Mumbai, 18.11.2008
16

a long wait for so many years, the Indian Council of Medical Research  
(ICMR) has come out with a draft Assisted Reproductive Technology  
(Regulation) Bill  and  Rules  2008.  The draft  Bill  contains  50  clauses  
under nine chapters.  
2.2 The  Bill  acknowledges  surrogacy  agreements  and  their  legal  
enforceability. This will ensure that surrogacy agreements are treated on  
par with other contracts and the principles of the Indian Contract Act  
1872 and other laws will be applicable to these kinds of agreements. The  
Bill provides that single persons may also go for surrogacy arrangements.
2.3 The Bill provides that a foreigner or foreign couple not resident in  
India or a non-resident Indian individual or couple, seeking surrogacy in  
India, shall appoint a local guardian who will be legally  responsible for  
taking care of the surrogate during and after pregnancy till the child is  
delivered to the foreigner or foreign couple or the local guardian. It is  
further provided that the commissioning parents or parent shall be legally  
bound to accept the custody of the child irrespective of any abnormality  
that the child may  have, and the refusal  to do so shall constitute an  
offence. A surrogate mother shall relinquish all parental rights over the  
child. The birth certificate in respect of a baby born through surrogacy  
shall bear the name(s) of genetic parents/parent of the baby. 
2.4 The Bill also provides that a child born to a married couple or a  
single  person  through  the  use  of  ART  shall  be  presumed  to  be  the  
17

legitimate child of the couple or the single person, as the case may be. If  
the  commissioning  couple  separates  or  gets  divorced  after  going  for  
surrogacy  but  before  the  child  is  born,  then  also  the  child  shall  be  
considered to be the legitimate child of the couple.
2.5 The Bill further provides that a couple or an individual shall not  
have the service of more than one surrogate at any given time. A couple  
shall also not have simultaneous transfer of embryos in the woman and in  
a surrogate.
2.6 Chapter I of the Bill contains definitions. Chapter II provides for  
constitution of a National Advisory Board for ART and State Boards for  
ART  for  laying  down  policies,  regulations  and  guidelines,  and  
Registration  Authorities  for  registering  ART  clinics.  Chapter  III  lays  
down procedure for registration of ART clinics. Chapter IV prescribes  
duties  of  ART  clinics.  One  of  the  duties  is  to  make  couples  or  
individuals,  as the  case  may  be,  aware of the  rights of a  child  born  
through the use of ART. The duties also include the obligation not to  
offer to provide a couple with a child of a pre-determined sex. Chapter V  
provides for sourcing, storage, handling and record-keeping for gametes,  
embryos  and  surrogates.  Chapter  VI  regulates  research  on  embryos.  
Chapter VII discusses rights and duties of patients, donors, surrogates  
and children. Chapter VIII deals with offences and penalties therefor.  
Chapter IX is titled ‘Miscellaneous’ and includes power to search and  
seize  records etc. and the power to make  rules and regulations. This  
legislation is intended to be in addition to, and not in derogation of, other  
18

relevant laws in force.
III. SEMINAR ON ‘SURROGACY – BANE OR BOON’
3.1 A seminar on “Surrogacy – Bane or Boon” was held at the India  
International  Centre  on  13.02.2009.  The  discussion  focused  on  the  
aforesaid draft Bill and Rules. Certain lacunae were noted in the Bill. 
19

3.2 The Bill neither creates, nor designates or authorizes any court or  
quasi-judicial forum for adjudication of disputes arising out of surrogacy,  
ART  and  surrogacy  agreements.  Disputes  may,  inter  alia ,  relate  to  
parentage, nationality, issuance of passport, grant of visa. There is already  
a conflict on adoption and guardianship as non-Hindus cannot adopt in  
India. Such disputes need to be resolved before a child is removed from  
India to a foreign country.
3.3 A suggestion at the above Seminar emerged that if a specialized  
court called “Surrogacy Court” is created, it could comprehensively look  
at all the above problems for adjudicating disputes. 
3.4 The points highlighted in the discussion at the Seminar included: 
(i) what  would  be  the  remedy  available  to  biological  
parents to obtain exclusive legal custody of surrogate  
children,  
(ii)      how can the rights of the surrogate mother be waived  
completely, 
(iii)     how can the rights of the ovum or sperm donor be  
restricted,  
(iv)     how can the genetic constitution of the surrogate baby  
be established and recorded with authenticity, 
(v) whether a single or a gay parent can be considered to  
be the custodial parent of a surrogate child, 
20

(vi)     what  would  be  the  status  of  divorced  biological  
parents in respect of the custody of a surrogate child,  
and 
(vii) would  a  biological  parent/s  be  considered  the  legal 
parent of the surrogate child? 
3.5 The answers discussed at the Seminar were: 
a)       Surrogacy in India is legitimate because no Indian law  
prohibits  surrogacy.  To  determine  the  legality  of  
surrogacy agreements, the Indian Contract Act would  
apply  and  thereafter  the  enforceability  of  any  such  
agreement would be within the domain of section 9 of  
the Code of Civil Procedure (CPC). Alternatively, the  
biological parent/s can also move an application under  
the  Guardians  and  Wards  Act  1890  for  seeking  an  
order of appointment or a declaration as the guardian  
of the surrogate child. 
b)       In the absence  of any law to govern surrogacy, the  
2005 Guidelines8 apply. But, being non-statutory, they  
are not enforceable or justiciable in a court of law.  
Under paragraph 3.10.1  of the Guidelines a child born  
through  surrogacy  must  be  adopted  by  the  genetic  
8 Supra paragraph 1.14
21

(biological)  parents.  However,  this  may  not  be  
possible in case of those parents who cannot adopt in  
India. 
c)       Under Section 10 of the Contract Act , all agreements  
are  contracts,  if  they  are  made  by  free  consent  of  
parties  competent  to  contract,  for  a  lawful  
consideration  and with a lawful  object, and are not  
expressly  declared  to  be  void.  Therefore,  if  any  
surrogacy agreement satisfies these conditions, it is an  
enforceable contract. Thereafter, under section 9, CPC, 
it can be the subject of a civil suit before a civil court  
for  adjudication  of  all  disputes  relating  to  the  
surrogacy agreement and for a declaration/injunction  
as to the relief prayed for. 
d)       As of today, it may be stated that a single or a gay  
parent can be considered to be the custodial parent by  
virtue of being the genetic or biological parent of the  
child born out of a surrogacy arrangement. Japanese  
baby Manji Yamada’s case and the Israel gay couple’s  
case who fathered the child in India are clear examples  
to  establish  that  this  is  possible.  Under  paragraph  
3.16.1  of  the  Guidelines  dealing  with  legitimacy  of 
children born through ART (which was the basis of the 
claim  in  the  Japanese  baby’s  case  in  the  Supreme  
Court), this claim can be made. However, only in a  
22

petition  for  guardianship  under  the  Guardians  and  
Wards Act and/or in a suit for declaration in a civil  
court, the exclusive custodial rights can be adjudicated  
by a court of competent jurisdiction upon appreciation  
of evidence and considering all claims made in this  
regard. 
e)       Essentially,  this  is  a  question  which  will  require  
determination  in  accordance  with  the  surrogacy  
agreement  between  the  parties.  There  would  
apparently be no bar to either of the divorced parents  
claiming  custody  of  a  surrogate  child  if  the  other  
parent  does  not  claim  the  same.  However,  if  the  
custody is contested, it may require adjudication by a  
court of competent jurisdiction. 
f)       In  answer  to  this  question  it  can  be  stated  that  the 
biological parents would be considered to be the legal  
parents  of  the  child  by  virtue  of  the  surrogacy  
agreement executed between them and the surrogate  
mother.  Under  paragraph  3.16.1  of  the  Guidelines  
dealing  with  legitimacy  of  the  child  born  through  
ART, it is stated that “a child born through ART shall  
be presumed to be the legitimate child of the couple,  
born within wedlock, with consent of both the spouses, 
and with all the attendant rights of parentage, support  
and  inheritance”.  Even  in  the  2008  draft  Bill  and  
23

Rules, a child born to a married couple, an unmarried  
couple, a single parent or a single man or woman, shall 
be the legitimate child of the couple, man or woman,  
as the case may be. 
g) However,  the  moot  question  which  may  arise  for  
determination  is  as  to  whether  a  judicial  verdict  
determining  rights  of  parties  in  a  surrogacy  
arrangement  is  essential  in  respect  of  a  foreign  
biological  parent  who  wishes  to  take  the  surrogate  
child  to  his/her  country  of  origin  or  permanent  
residence. It can be said that either a declaration from  
a civil court and/or a guardianship order ought to be a  
must to conclusively establish the rights of all parties  
and  to  prevent  any  future  discrepancies  arising  in  
respect of any claims thereto. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                 
4.1 Surrogacy involves conflict of various interests and has inscrutable  
impact on the primary unit of society viz. family. Non-intervention of  
law in this knotty issue will not be proper at a time when law is to act as  
ardent defender of human liberty and an instrument of distribution of  
24

positive  entitlements.  At  the  same  time,  prohibition  on  vague  moral  
grounds without a proper assessment of social ends and purposes which  
surrogacy can serve would be irrational. Active legislative intervention is  
required to facilitate correct uses of the new technology i.e. ART and  
relinquish the cocooned approach to legalization of surrogacy adopted  
hitherto.  The  need  of  the  hour  is  to  adopt  a  pragmatic  approach  by  
legalizing  altruistic  surrogacy  arrangements  and  prohibit  commercial  
ones. 
4.2 The draft Bill prepared by the ICMR is full of lacunae, nay, it is  
incomplete. However, it is a beacon to move forward in the direction of  
preparing  legislation  to  regulate  not  only  ART  clinics  but  rights  and  
obligations  of  all  the  parties  to  a  surrogacy  including  rights  of  the  
surrogate  child.  Most  important  points  in  regard  to  the  rights  and  
obligations of the parties to a surrogacy and rights of the surrogate child  
the proposed legislation should include may be stated as under:
[1] Surrogacy  arrangement  will  continue  to  be  governed  by  
contract amongst  parties, which will contain all the terms  
requiring  consent  of  surrogate  mother  to  bear  child,  
agreement of her husband and other family members for the  
same,  medical  procedures  of  artificial  insemination,  
reimbursement of all reasonable expenses for carrying child  
to full term, willingness to hand over the child born to the  
commissioning  parent(s),  etc.  But  such  an  arrangement  
should not be for commercial purposes. 
25

[2] A  surrogacy  arrangement  should  provide  for  financial  
support  for  surrogate  child  in  the  event  of  death  of  the  
commissioning couple or individual before delivery of the  
child,  or  divorce  between  the  intended  parents  and  
subsequent willingness of none to take delivery of the child.
[3] A  surrogacy  contract  should  necessarily  take  care  of  life  
insurance cover for surrogate mother.
[4] One  of  the  intended  parents  should  be  a  donor  as  well,  
because the bond of love and affection with a child primarily  
emanates from biological relationship. Also, the chances of  
various kinds  of child-abuse,  which  have  been  noticed  in  
cases of adoptions, will be reduced.  In case the intended  
parent is single, he or she should be a donor to be able to  
have a surrogate child. Otherwise, adoption is the way to  
have  a  child  which  is  resorted  to  if  biological  (natural)  
parents and adoptive parents are different. 
[5] Legislation itself should recognize a surrogate child to be the  
legitimate child of the commissioning parent(s) without there  
being any need for adoption or even declaration of guardian. 
[6] The birth certificate of the surrogate child should contain the  
name(s) of the commissioning parent(s) only.
[7] Right to privacy of donor as well as surrogate mother should  
be protected.
[8] Sex-selective surrogacy should be prohibited.
26

[9] Cases  of  abortions  should  be  governed  by  the  Medical  
Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 only.
4.3 We recommend accordingly.
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood) (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
   Member     Member-Secretary
27