GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW 
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Need  for  division  of  the  Supreme  Court  into  a  
Constitution Bench at Delhi and Cassation Benches in  
four regions at Delhi, Chennai/Hyderabad, Kolkata and  
Mumbai 
Report No. 229
August 2009

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 229)
Need for division of the Supreme Court into a Constitution 
Bench at Delhi and Cassation Benches in four regions at Delhi, 
Chennai/Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai
Submitted to the Union Minister of Law and Justice,  
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by  
Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman,  Law  
Commission of India, on  the 5th day of  August, 2009. 
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period  
of three years from 1 st September, 2006 by Order No.  
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the 16 th October, 
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of  
Law  and  Justice,  Department of Legal Affairs,  New  
Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of the  Chairman,  the  
Member-Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  and  seven 
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The text in this document (excluding the Government  
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format  
or medium provided that it is reproduced accurately  
and  not  used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material  
must be acknowledged as Government copyright and  
the title of the document specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be  
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either by  
post to the Law Commission of India, 2 nd Floor, ILI  
Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India 
or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI Building (IInd Floor) 
Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi – 110 001
Tel. 91-11-23384475
Fax.   91-11 – 23383564
D.O. No. 6(3)/166 /2009-LC (LS)                       5 August, 2009
Dear Dr Veerappa Moily ji,
Subject:  Need for division of the Supreme Court into a Constitution  
Bench at Delhi and Cassation Benches in four regions at  
Delhi, Chennai/Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai
I am forwarding herewith the 229 th Report of the Law Commission  
of India on the above subject. 
 
2. Constitutional  adjudication  or  determination  of  constitutional  
controversies  by  the  Supreme  Court  has  its  own  importance.  This  
includes the authority to rule on whether or not laws that are challenged  
are in fact unconstitutional. All sorts of facts and their consequences, and  
the values we attach to them, questions of economics, politics, social  
policies etc. going beyond purely legal disputes, are for determination by  
the Court.
3. As  constitutional  adjudication  occupies  a  place  of  its  own,  it  
always merits consideration as to whether there should be a separate  
constitutional court, as is the position in about 55 countries of the world  
(Austria  established  the  world’s  first  separate  constitutional  court  in  
1920),  or  at  least  the  Supreme  Court  should  have  a  Constitutional  
Division. Many continental countries have constitutional courts as well as 
final courts of appeal called courts of cassation ( Cour de Cassation  in  
French) for  adjudication  of  non-constitutional  matters.  A  court  of  
cassation  is  the  judicial  court  of  last  resort  and  has  power  to  quash 
(casser in French) or reverse decisions of the inferior courts.
4. We are today also in dire search for solution for the unbearable  
load of arrears under which our Supreme Court is functioning as well as  
6

the unbearable cost of litigation for those living in far-flung areas of the  
country. The agonies of a litigant coming to New Delhi from distant  
places  like  Chennai,  Thiruvananthapuram,  Puducherry  in  the  South,  
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa in the West, Assam or other States in the East  
to attend a case in the Supreme Court can be imagined; huge amount is  
spent on travel; bringing one’s own lawyer who has handled the matter in  
the High Court adds to the cost; adjournment becomes prohibitive; costs  
get multiplied. 
5. Whether  the  Supreme  Court  should  be  split  into  Constitutional 
Division and Legal Division for appeals, the latter with Benches in four  
regions  –  North,  South,  East  and  West,  is  a  subject  of  fundamental  
importance for the judicial system of the country. This Report considers  
the question as to whether there is need for creating a Constitutional  
Court or Division in our Supreme Court that shall exclusively deal with  
matters of constitutional law and four Cassation Benches one each in the  
four regions.
6. We  suo  motu  took  up  the  subject  for  consideration  and  have  
recommended that a Constitution Bench be set up at Delhi to deal with  
constitutional and other allied issues and four Cassation Benches be set  
up  in  the  Northern  region  at  Delhi,  the  Southern  region  at  
Chennai/Hyderabad,  the  Eastern  region  at  Kolkata  and  the  Western  
region  at  Mumbai  to  deal  with  all  appellate  work  arising  out  of  the 
orders/judgments of the High Courts of the particular region. 
With warm regards, 
     Yours sincerely,
(Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
7

Need for division of the Supreme Court into a Constitution 
Bench at Delhi and Cassation Benches in four regions at Delhi, 
Chennai/Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai
Contents Page Nos.
I. INTRODUCTION    9 - 11
II. RECOMMENDATIONS AND VIEWS            12 - 19
          EXPRESSED
III. BENCHES UNDER ARTICLE 130                         20 - 23
          OF THE CONSTITUTION
IV. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION  24 - 25
APPENDIX                                                                          26 - 28
8

I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Ever since the High Courts were founded in 1860, they were the  
highest courts of appeal in each province (in the Chief Commissioners’  
Provinces the Judicial Commissioner’s Courts were the highest courts of  
appellate jurisdiction) and an appeal lay from them to the Privy Council  
in England.  The Government  of India Act 1935 created the Federal  
Court  of  India  with  an  original  jurisdiction  in  disputes  between  the  
provinces  inter se  and between the provinces and the federation.  The  
Federal  Court  had  jurisdiction  only  in  constitutional  matters,  but  the  
federal legislature could confer on the court the power to hear appeals in  
civil matters decided by the High Courts.  The jurisdiction of the Privy  
Council was abolished by the Abolition of the Privy Council Jurisdiction  
Act 1949, the appeals pending before the Privy Council before October  
10,  1949,  standing  transferred  to  the  Federal  Court.   Under  our  
Constitution, the Supreme Court of India became the highest court of  
appeal for the whole of India.  Its jurisdiction is wider than that of any  
Federal Supreme Court.  It has original jurisdiction in disputes between  
the Union and the States, and between the States inter se. It has original  
jurisdiction  under  article  32  of the  Constitution  for  the  protection  of  
fundamental rights.  It is the highest court of civil and criminal appeal;  
and it has overriding powers to grant special leave to appeal from any  
judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter  
passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India except a  
court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed  
9

Forces.1 It  also  has  advisory  jurisdiction  under  article  143  of  the  
Constitution.
1.2 Constitutional  adjudication  or  determination  of  constitutional  
controversies  by  the  Supreme  Court  has  its  own  importance.  This  
includes the authority to rule on whether or not laws that are challenged  
are in fact unconstitutional. All sorts of facts and their consequences, and  
the values we attach to them, questions of economics, politics, social  
policies etc. going beyond purely legal disputes, are for determination by  
the Court.
1.3 As  constitutional  adjudication  occupies  a  place  of  its  own,  it  
always merits consideration as to whether there should be a separate  
constitutional court, as is the position in about 55 countries 2 of the world  
(Austria  established  the  world’s  first  separate  constitutional  court  in  
1920),  or  at  least  the  Supreme  Court  should  have  a  Constitutional  
Division. Many continental countries have constitutional courts as well as 
final courts of appeal called courts of cassation ( Cour de Cassation  in  
French) for  adjudication  of  non-constitutional  matters.  A  court  of  
cassation  is  the  judicial  court  of  last  resort  and  has  power  to  quash 
(casser in French) or reverse decisions of the inferior courts.
1.4 We are today in dire search for solution for the unbearable load of  
arrears under which our Supreme Court is functioning as well as the  
1 H. M. Seervai, Constitutional Law of India – A Critical Commentary, 3 rd ed. (1984), Vol. 2, pages  
2181-21822 For example, Central African Republic, Colombia, Egypt, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, Myanmar,  
Russia,  South Africa 
10

unbearable cost of litigation for those living in far-flung areas of the  
country. The agonies of a litigant coming to New Delhi from distant  
places  like  Chennai,  Thiruvananthapuram,  Puducherry  in  the  South,  
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa in the West, Assam or other States in the East  
to attend a case in the Supreme Court can be imagined; huge amount is  
spent on travel; bringing one’s own lawyer who has handled the matter in  
the High Court adds to the cost; adjournment becomes prohibitive; costs  
get multiplied. 
1.5 Whether  the  Supreme  Court  should  be  split  into  Constitutional 
Division and Legal Division for appeals, the latter with Benches in four  
regions  –  North,  South,  East  and  West,  is  a  subject  of  fundamental  
importance for the judicial system of the country. This Report considers  
the question as to whether there is need for creating a Constitutional  
Court or Division in our Supreme Court that shall exclusively deal with  
matters of constitutional law and four Cassation Benches one each in the  
four regions. 
 
11

II. RECOMMENDATIONS AND VIEWS EXPRESSED
2.1 The tenth Law Commission in its 95 th Report titled “Constitutional  
Division within the Supreme Court – A proposal for”, submitted in 1984,  
recommended that the Supreme  Court of India should consist of two  
Divisions, namely, (a) Constitutional Division, and (b) Legal Division.  
The proposed Constitutional Division of the Supreme Court should be  
entrusted with matters of constitutional law, i.e., every case involving a  
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution or  
an  order  or  rule  issued  under  the  Constitution  and  every  other  case  
involving a question of constitutional law. Other matters coming to the  
Supreme  Court will be assigned  to its Legal Division. It was further  
recommended that judges appointed to the Supreme Court would, from  
the very beginning, be appointed to a particular division. For effecting  
these recommendations, it was opined in the said Report, amendment of  
the Constitution would be necessary; ordinary legislation,  vide  article 
246(1) read with Entry 77 of the Union List or statutory rules, vide article 
145 of the Constitution would not be adequate. 
2.2 It  may  be  noted  that  the  tenth  Law  Commission  had  also  
considered  the  question  as  to  whether  there  should  be  created  a  
Constitutional  Court  to  decide  constitutional  questions,  instead  of  a  
Constitutional Division, but keeping in view that creation of a separate  
Court  for  dealing  with  constitutional  issues  would  involve  structural  
changes of a more extensive and complex character than those that would  
be necessitated by a proposal for creating, within the Supreme Court as  
structured at present, separate divisions for dealing with constitutional  
12

and non-constitutional matters, as well as an overwhelming opinion in  
favour of a Constitutional Division, the Commission did not pursue the  
idea of creating a Constitutional Court.
2.3 The  eleventh  Law  Commission  in  its  125 th Report  titled  “The  
Supreme Court – A Fresh Look”, submitted in 1988, reiterated the above  
recommendation for splitting the Supreme Court into two and gave an  
additional reason for the same. The Commission stated the additional  
reason in paragraph 4.17 of the said Report as under:
“The Supreme Court sits at Delhi alone. Government of India, on  
couple of occasions, sought the opinion of the Supreme Court of  
India for setting up a Bench in the South. This proposal did not  
find  favour  with  the  Supreme  Court.  The  result  is  that  those  
coming from distant places like Tamil Nadu in the South, Gujarat  
in the West and Assam and other States in the East have to spend  
huge amount on travel to reach the Supreme Court.  There is a  
practice of bringing one’s own lawyer who has handled the matter  
in the High Court to the Supreme Court. That adds to the cost.  
And  an  adjournment  becomes  prohibitive.  Adjournment  is  a  
recurrent phenomenon in the Court.  Costs get multiplied.  Now if  
the Supreme Court is split into Constitutional Court and Court of  
Appeal or a Federal Court of Appeal, no serious exception could  
be  taken  to  the  Federal  Court  of  Appeal  sitting  in  Benches  in 
places North, South, East, West and Central India. That would not  
only considerably reduce costs but also the litigant will have the  
advantage of his case being argued by the same advocate who has  
helped him in the High Court and who may not be required to  
travel to long distances. Whenever questions of constitutionality  
occur, as pointed out in that report 3, the Supreme Court can sit en 
banc at Delhi and deal with the same. This cost benefit ratio is an  
additional  but  important  reason  for  reiterating  support  to  the  
recommendations made in that report4.”
3 95th Report of the Law Commission of India4 Ibid.
13

2.4 The problem of delay in trial and disposal of cases and consequent  
pendency of cases in the apex court and the courts subordinate has been a  
matter of great concern, debate, discussion and criticism. The Department 
Related  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Personnel,  Public  
Grievances, Law and Justice in its 28 th Report dealing with the Supreme  
Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill 2008 has noted thus:  
“The Committee has felt that inordinate delay in delivering justice  
to  the  people  defeats  the  very  purpose  of  the  judiciary  as  an  
institution. The magnitude of the problem of the pendency of cases  
in various levels in the judiciary must be understood in the context  
that the people resort to judicial remedy as a last resort for the  
redressal of their grievances and to get justice. This is so because  
people have reposed their ultimate faith and trust in the judicial  
system  above  the  legislature  and  executive.  In  this  context  
pendency  of  cases  hits  the  common  man,  seeking  justice,  the  
hardest.  Perhaps, that is the reason that it is said justice delayed is  
justice denied. However, in spite of the various measures taken by  
the Government and the judiciary itself, it is a matter of serious  
concern that the pendency or arrears of cases has been increasing  
steadily over the years bringing the judicial system as a whole to  
near stagnation. Further, the pendency of cases in the Supreme  
Court is very reflective of the delays in the judicial system, thus, a  
cause of extreme concern requiring immediate remedial steps.” 
2.5 The background note of the Department of Justice on the Bill for  
increasing  number  of  Supreme  Court  Judges  presented  before  the  
Standing Committee stated: 
“The Chief Justice of India has informed that there were 41,078  
cases  pending in the Supreme  Court as on 01.03.2007 and the  
Judges  feel  over-burdened  and  have  been  working  under  acute 
work pressure. He has further stated that despite satisfactory high  
rate  of  disposal,  pendency  of  cases  in  the  Supreme  Court  has  
constantly been on the rise due to comparatively higher rate of  
institution  of  cases.  Pendency  of  cases  in  the  courts  could  be  
14

directly  ascribed  to  complex  factors,  with  inadequate  judge  
strength coming at the top”. 
2.6 What  has been  stated  before  the Standing Committee  is amply  
proved  by  the  fact  that in 1950, there were 1,215 cases  which  were  
instituted  (1,037  admission  matters  and  178  regular  matters).  The  
disposal rate was 525 (491 admission matters and 34 regular matters) and  
pendency of cases at the end of the year was 690 (546 admission cases  
and  144  regular  cases).  Therefore,  as  against  1,215  institutions,  the  
disposal of cases was 690 and the number of Judges was 7. In successive  
years, the number of Judges rose from 7 in 1950 to 10 in 1956, 13 in  
1960, 17 in 1977 and 25 in 1986 and now the strength of Judges in 2009  
is 30, excluding the Chief Justice of India. The total number of institution  
of cases from January to April in the year 2008 was 28,007 and the  
disposal  of cases was 28,559, i.e., 552 cases above the institution of  
cases. Yet the pendency of cases remained as 46,374. This clearly shows  
that  pendency  of cases  as  accumulated  over  the  years has  also  been  
carried forward. In three years notably, i.e., 1989, 1990 and 1991 the  
pendency-figure crossed over one lakh. The complete chart of institution,  
disposal and pendency of cases in the Supreme Court from the year 1950  
to April, 2008 is at Appendix. 
2.7 The said chart demonstrates that increase in number of Judges in  
the  apex  court  does  not  result  in  reduction  of  pending  cases.  It  is,  
therefore, clear that there are reasons other than the inadequacy of judge-
strength which are responsible for accumulation of undecided cases in the 
Supreme Court.
15

2.8 An important factor which needs to be kept in view is that in India,  
according  to  the  Law  Commission’s  120 th Report  titled  “Manpower  
Planning in Judiciary: A Blueprint”, submitted in 1987, the ratio between  
judges  and  population  is  10.5  judges  per  million  (Shri  Justice  S.  P.  
Bharucha, a former Chief Justice of India, in his Law Day address in  
2001 stated this figure to be 12 or 13), whereas it is 107 per million in  
USA, 75.2 per million in Canada, 50.9 per million in U.K. and 41.6 per  
million in Australia.
2.9 It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  the  ratio  between  judges  and  
population is hopelessly low in our country. The same is apparent in the  
apex court as well since the Judges were 25 and the institution of cases  
was 28,007 cases in January-April 2008. The ratio works out to 1: 112.  
The figure given above is of institution of new cases only.  If the pending  
arrears of 46,374 are taken into account, the ratio will be 1: 1855.
2.10 Therefore,  it  is  argued  that  the  bench-strength  of  the  Supreme  
Court should be increased drastically to cover the backlog of pending  
cases and to promote future developmental programmes in the judiciary  
and thereby minimize delays in the justice-delivery system and promote  
speedy justice which is the avowed goal of the Constitution. But it is  
equally effectively argued that mere increase in number of Judges might  
not help improve the system.
2.11 Dr.  P.  C.  Alexander,  former  Governor  of  Tamil  Nadu  and  
Maharashtra and Member of Parliament, has thrown considerable light on 
16

the malaise that ails the judicial system. In his article “Justice is pending”  
published in The Asian Age5 Dr. Alexander has stated:
“No doubt, increasing the number of judges, promptness in filling  
up  the  vacancies  and  improving  working  facilities  are  all  very 
important for the efficiency of the judicial system, but these alone  
cannot be an adequate solution to the pendency problem. There are  
many measures which the judiciary can take without waiting for  
additional financial support from the government, but very little  
effective action has been taken on these by the judiciary and they  
continue to cause delays in the disposal of cases. They include  
laxity shown by the courts in matters like production of witnesses  
on the dates posted for their examination, granting requests for  
adjournments of cases without good reasons, inordinate delays in  
giving copies of documents, allowing lengthy arguments by the  
advocates,  and  the  practice  of  judges  themselves  writing  
unnecessarily long judgments. 
The liberal attitude of the courts in entertaining appeals from the  
lower  courts has  also  contributed  to  the  steady  increase  in  the  
backlog. Those who have the financial resources go on appeal on  
the decisions of the lower courts to the next higher court, and  
finally to the Supreme Court, even when no interpretation of the  
law may be involved. When the accused are influential politicians  
or rich businessmen, the cases can go on endlessly, bringing down  
in this process the reputation of the judicial system itself. If appeals 
can be limited to a small number, say one or two, depending on the  
nature of the crime, it can help a great deal in reducing pendency. 
The practice of some judges in delaying the delivery of judgments  
for several months, and in certain cases, even till they retire from  
service,  has  been  another  cause  of  delayed  justice.  Though  a  
maximum time limit of one month has been considered reasonable  
for  the  delivery  of  judgment,  there  is  no  mechanism  for  
enforcement of any time limit, and this malpractice on the   part of  
some judges thus goes on unchecked. Again, no serious attempts  
are being made by the judiciary to make use of the provisions in  
the Constitution for engaging the services of retired judges both at  
the Supreme Court and at the High Courts for temporary periods  
5 http://www.asianage.com, visited 22.07.2009
17

for help in clearing the backlog of cases. It appears that retired  
judges are reluctant to serve in this capacity as they consider such  
service not befitting their status. There is no reason why this issue  
cannot be sorted out to the satisfaction of the retired judges, but the  
judiciary does not appear to be very keen about resorting to these  
Constitutional provisions.” 
2.12 We have tried some of the above-mentioned measures for the last  
59 years of the functioning of the judicial system in our country. The  
result appears to be far from satisfactory. Time has come when the entire  
judicial set-up will have to be overhauled and refurbished in order to  
make the goal of speedy justice a pulsating reality. It is quite often argued 
that the present pattern of working of the Supreme Court needs to be  
revised  if  any  success  in  this  direction  is  to  be  achieved.  The  
indiscriminate  acceptance  of  appeals on trivial issues  of  facts by  the  
Supreme Court quite often overloads itself.  In fact, only important issues  
need be litigated in the Supreme Court.  Also, the present situation makes  
the Supreme Court inaccessible to a majority of people in the country.   
2.13 In this context, it may be noted that in its 2 nd (2004), 6th (2005) and 
15th  (2006) Reports the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Law and  
Justice has repeatedly suggested that in order to promote speedy justice  
available to the common man, benches of the Supreme Court have to be  
established  in  the  Southern,  Western  and  North-Eastern  parts  of  the  
country.  In  its  20th (2007),  26 th (2008)  and  28 th (2008)  Reports,  the  
Standing  Committee  suggested  that  a  bench   of  the  Supreme  Court  
should be established at least in Chennai on trial basis as this would be of  
immense help to the poor who cannot travel from their native places to  
18

Delhi. Despite these Reports, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has so far not  
agreed with the suggestion regarding setting up of its benches.  
2.14 Paragraph 8.36 of the aforesaid 15th Report reads as under:
“The Committee is not satisfied with the persistent opposition for  
establishing benches of the Supreme Court in other parts of the  
country  without  giving  any  convincing  reasons  or  justification  
thereof. The Committee, therefore, endorses its earlier view that  
establishment of benches of the Supreme Court in other parts of  
the country would be of immense help to the poor who can not  
afford to travel from their native places to Delhi. The Committee,  
therefore,  feels  that  the  Ministry  should  come  forward  with  a  
necessary Constitutional amendment to address this deadlock.”  
2.15 Again,  in  paragraph  6.8  of  the  28 th Report  of  the  Standing  
Committee, the same view has been reiterated in the following words:
“The  Committee  in  its Second, Sixth,  Fifteenth,  Twentieth  and  
Twenty-sixth Reports on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry  
of Law and Justice has impressed upon for setting up of benches of  
the Supreme Court in Southern, Western and Eastern parts of the  
country. The Committee’s recommendation rests on the premise  
that it is not possible for the people living in far-flung and remote  
areas  to  come  to  the  National  Capital  for  seeking  justice  for  
various  reasons.  The  Committee  reiterates  this  
recommendation.”
19

III. BENCHES  UNDER  ARTICLE  130  OF  THE  
CONSTITUTION
Cassation Benches in four zones
3.1 A feasible, workable and efficient system of judicial administration 
could be established if India were to be divided into four zones/regions,  
namely, (I) Northern Zone – Bench to be established in Delhi dealing  
with the litigation of  the States of Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan,  
Punjab,  Haryana,  Madhya  Pradesh,  Chhattisgarh,  Himachal  Pradesh,  
Jammu  and Kashmir, the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the  
Union  territory  of  Chandigarh;  (II)  Southern  Zone  –  Bench  to  be  
established in Chennai/Hyderabad in order to deal with the litigation of  
the States of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and the  
Union territories of Puducherry and Lakshadweep; (III) Eastern Zone –  
Bench  to be established  in Kolkata  dealing with the litigation of the  
States of West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, Assam and the North-
eastern States including Sikkim and the Union territory of Andaman and  
Nicobar Islands; (IV) Western Zone - Bench to be established at Mumbai  
dealing with the litigation of the States of Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa and  
the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and Daman and Diu.   
3.2 The  said  Benches  shall  act  as  Cassation  Benches  to  deal  with 
appeals from a High Court in the particular region. The apex court could  
then  deal  with  constitutional  issues  and  other  cases  of  national  
importance on a day to day basis since the accumulated backlog of cases  
would go to the respective zones to which they pertain. 
20

Constitution Bench at Delhi
3.3 The  apex  court  would  thus  be  relieved  of  the  backlog  of  
accumulated cases which are causing a burden and continuous strain on  
the resources of the apex court. Since the accumulated cases pertaining to  
a particular region would be dealt with by the particular zonal bench, the  
apex court would be free to deal with only constitutional cases such as  
interpretation of the Constitution, matters of national importance such as  
references made by the zonal benches to larger benches due to conflict of  
authority or any other reason, cases where the interests of more than one  
State are involved such as interstate disputes on land, electricity, water,  
etc.,  references  for  advisory  opinion  made  under  article  143  of  the  
Constitution,  references  made  under  article  317  of  the  Constitution,  
election petitions concerning Presidential and Vice-Presidential elections,  
suits between two or more States, etc. This list is merely illustrative and  
not exhaustive. 
3.4 It is also suggested that all public interest litigations (PILs) from  
any part of India should be decided by the apex Constitution Bench so  
that  there  are  no  contradictory  orders  issued  and  also  to  arrest  the  
mushrooming of cases increasingly. 
3.5 The advantage of setting up of benches in the manner aforesaid is  
that this can be made effective without any delay since the constitution of  
benches is a matter within the purview and jurisdiction 6 of the Supreme  
Court itself under the Supreme Court Rules 1966. 
6 Order VII, Supreme Court Rules 1966
21

3.6 Article  130  of  the  Constitution  providing  for  the  seat  of  the  
Supreme Court may now be noted, which is extracted below:
“The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or  
places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the  
President, from time to time, appoint.”
3.7 Article 130 is an enabling provision which empowers the Chief  
Justice of India, with the approval of the President, to appoint place or  
places other than Delhi as the seat of the Supreme Court. Article 130  
cannot  be  construed  as  casting  a  mandatory  obligation  on  the  Chief  
Justice of India to appoint place or places other than Delhi as the seat of  
the Supreme Court. No court can give a direction either to the Chief  
Justice of India or the President to exercise the power under article 130.7
3.8 If article 130 is liberally interpreted, no constitutional amendment  
may be required for the purpose of setting up of Cassation Benches in  
four regions and a Constitution Bench  at Delhi. Action by the Chief  
Justice of India with the President’s approval may be enough. It may also  
be  noted  that  under  article  130  the  Chief  Justice  of  India  acts  as  a  
persona  designata  and  is  not  required  to  consult  any  other  
authority/person. Only Presidential approval is necessary. However, in  
case  this  liberal  interpretation  of  article  130  is  not  feasible,  suitable  
legislation/Constitutional amendment may be enacted to do the needful.
3.9 If the judge-strength of each zonal Cassation Bench is confined to  
six Judges, then only 24 Judges will be required for all the four zones to  
7 Union of India v. S. P. Anand, AIR 1998 SC 2615
22

constitute Cassation Benches all over India. The other Judges will be  
available in the apex court, which will have a Constitution Bench at  
Delhi working on a regular basis.
IV. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
23

4.1 The concept of having a Constitution Bench along with a Cassation 
Bench is nothing new. The democratic transition that occurred in many  
parts of the world in the late 20 th century resulted in the proliferation of  
courts with  constitutional  adjudication and  powers of cassation  being  
exercised simultaneously; there is a blend of functions of judicial review  
usually by the constitutional court or constitutional tribunal and also the  
exercise of powers of cassation. Italy has a Constitutional Court with the  
sole power of constitutional review and a Supreme Court of Cassation  
with  the  power  to  review  the  decisions  of  the  ordinary  courts  for  
consistency with the law. Egypt also maintains a Court of Cassation that  
monitors the uniformity of lower court fidelity to the law but only its  
Supreme  Constitutional  Court  has  the  authority  to  declare  laws  
unconstitutional  and  to  determine  and  rule  upon  legislative  intent.  
Portugal’s Constitutional Tribunal has the greatest jurisdiction exercising  
both concrete review of lower court decisions and abstract review of all  
laws  and  legal  norms.  Other  countries  which  blend  the  functions  of  
judicial review and cassation or the review of lower court decisions are  
Ireland, the United States and Denmark. 
4.2 It is, therefore, recommended that:
[1] A  Constitution  Bench  be  set  up  at  Delhi  to  deal  with  
constitutional and other allied issues as aforesaid. 
[2] Four Cassation Benches be set up in the Northern region/zone  
at Delhi, the Southern region/zone at Chennai/Hyderabad, the  
Eastern region/zone at Kolkata and the Western region/zone at  
24

Mumbai  to  deal  with  all  appellate  work  arising  out  of  the  
orders/judgments of the High Courts of the particular region. 
[3] If it is found that article 130 of the Constitution cannot be  
stretched  to  make  it  possible  to  implement  the  above  
recommendations,  Parliament  should  enact  a  suitable  
legislation/Constitutional amendment for this purpose.
4.3 We  further  recommend  that  with  a  view  to  reducing  the  heavy  
backlog of cases in the higher courts and meet the problem of finding  
suitable  persons  for  appointment  of  judges  in  these  courts,  the  
retirement age for the Supreme Court and High Court Judges be raised 
to 70 and 65 years, respectively.
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood) (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
    Member               Member-Secretary
25