 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
REFORMS IN THE JUDICIARY – SOME SUGGESTIONS
Report No. 230
August 2009

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 230)
REFORMS IN THE JUDICIARY – SOME SUGGESTIONS
Submitted to the Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by
Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman,  Law
Commission of India, on  the 5th day of August, 2009.
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period
of three years from 1st September, 2006 by Order No.
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the 16th October,
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of
Law  and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New
Delhi.
The Law  Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  and  seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
4

http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The text in this document (excluding the Government
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format
or medium provided that it is reproduced accurately
and  not  used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material
must be acknowledged as Government copyright and
the title of the document specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either by
post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor, ILI
Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India
or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI Building (IInd Floor)
 
Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi – 110 001
Tel. 91-11-23384475
Fax.   91-11 – 23383564
D.O. No. 6(3)/163/2009-LC (LS)                    5 August, 2009
Dear Dr Veerappa Moily ji,
Subject: REFORMS IN THE JUDICIARY – SOME SUGGESTIONS
I am forwarding herewith the 230th Report of the Law Commission
of India on the above subject. 
 
2. The Law Commission has already given varied recommendations
in its earlier reports on the subject of reforms in the judiciary, which is a
subject very dear to my heart. The present Report is in the continuum of
those reports and has drawn on my very recent book titled  The Judge
Speaks.
3. The recommendations in this Report are the suggestions made by
the Hon’ble Shri Justice Asok Kumar Ganguly, a Judge of the Supreme
Court, which are as under:
[1] There must be full utilization of the court working hours.
The  judges  must  be  punctual  and  lawyers  must  not  be
asking for adjournments, unless it is absolutely necessary.
Grant  of  adjournment  must  be  guided  strictly  by  the
provisions of Order 17 of the Civil Procedure Code.
[2] Many cases are filed on similar points and one judgment can
decide  a  large  number  of  cases.  Such  cases  should  be
clubbed with the help of technology and used to dispose
other such cases on a priority basis; this will substantially
reduce the arrears. Similarly, old cases, many of which have
become infructuous, can be separated and listed for hearing
and their disposal normally will not take much time. Same is
6

true for many interlocutory applications filed even after the
main cases are disposed of. Such cases can be traced with
the help of technology and disposed of very quickly.
[3] Judges must deliver judgments within a reasonable time and
in that matter, the guidelines given by the apex court in the
case of Anil Rai v. State of Bihar, (2001) 7 SCC 318 must
be scrupulously observed, both in civil and criminal cases.
[4] Considering the staggering arrears, vacations in the higher
judiciary must be curtailed by at least 10 to 15 days and the
court working hours should be extended by at least half-an-
hour.
[5] Lawyers must curtail prolix and repetitive arguments and
should supplement it by written notes. The length of the oral
argument in any case should not exceed one hour and thirty
minutes, unless the case involves complicated questions of
law or interpretation of Constitution.
[6] Judgments  must  be  clear  and  decisive  and  free  from
ambiguity, and should not generate further litigation.
[7] Lawyers must not resort to strike under any circumstances
and must follow the decision of the Constitution Bench of
the Supreme Court in the case of Harish Uppal (Ex-Capt.) v.
Union of India reported in (2003) 2 SCC 45.
With warm regards, 
                                                                                            Yours sincerely,
(Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
7

REFORMS IN THE JUDICIARY – SOME SUGGESTIONS
 Contents          Page Nos.
I. THEMES AND THOUGHTS             9 - 35
          II. RECOMMENDATIONS   36 - 37
8

I. THEMES AND THOUGHTS
1.1 The formation and functioning of the High Courts in India need
drastic changes  so  that  the people of the country may have fair and
speedy justice and more faith in the system.
Selection and appointment of High Court Judges
1.2 The post of the Judge of a High Court has importance under our
Constitution and the incumbent is supposed to be not only fair, impartial
and independent, but also intelligent and diligent. The general eligibility
criterion is that a person should have put in ten years of practice/service
in the legal/judicial field.
1.3 As a matter of practice, a person, who has worked as a District
Judge or has practised in the High Court in a State, is appointed as a
Judge of the High Court in the same State. Often we hear complaints
about ‘Uncle Judges’. If a person has practised in a High Court, say, for
20-25 years and is appointed a Judge in the same High Court, overnight
change is not possible. He has his colleague advocates – both senior and
junior - as well as his kith and kin, who had been practising with him.
Even wards of some District Judges, elevated to a High Court, are in
practice in the same High Court. There are occasions, when advocate
judges either settle their scores with the advocates, who have practised
with them, or have soft corner for them. In any case, this affects their
impartiality and justice is the loser. The equity demands that the justice
shall not only be done but should also appear to have been done. In
government services, particularly, Class II and upward, officers are not
9

given posting in their home districts except for very special reasons. In
any case, the judges, whose kith and kin are practising in a High Court,
should not be posted in the same High Court. This will eliminate “Uncle
Judges”.
1.4 Sometimes it appears that this high office is patronized. A person,
whose near relation or well-wisher is or had been a judge in the higher
courts or is a senior advocate or is a political high-up, stands a better
chance  of  elevation.  It  is  not  necessary  that  such  a  person  must  be
competent because sometimes even less competent persons are inducted.
There  is  no  dearth  of  such  examples.  Such  persons  should  not  be
appointed and at least in the same High Court. If they are posted in other
High Courts, it will test their calibre and eminence in the legal field.
1.5 The post of Chief Justice should not be transferable. This practice
was introduced in our country after the ‘Emergency’ had been imposed.
If  we  look  back,  we  find  that  the  High  Courts  earlier  had  better
reputation than what they have at present. The Chief Justice, who comes
on transfer for a short period of six months, one or two years, is a new
man, rather alien for the place and passes his time anyhow. He has to
depend on others for policy decisions in administrative matters. If the
Chief Justice is from the same High Court, he will be in a better position
to not only control the lower judiciary but also to assess the persons both
from the bench and the bar for elevation to the High Court. This will also
curtail  the unnecessary delay in filling  up the  vacancies  in the High
Courts. If the functioning of the High Courts is to be improved, the
policy of transferring the Chief Justices should be given up forthwith.
10

When the policy of transfer of Chief Justices was finally upheld by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, an eminent jurist of the country commented that
the judiciary had committed suicide. Now the time has come when this
policy needs re-evaluation.
Age of retirement
1.6 When we adopted and gave to ourselves the Constitution in 1949,
the retirement age of Judges was fixed at 60 years for High Courts and
65 years for the Supreme Court. For the High Court Judges, 60 years was
increased to 62 years in 1963. At that time the normal life expectancy
was about 60 years. With the changes in social and financial set-up as
well as medical facilities, the present normal life expectancy is about 70
years. Barring few exceptions, a person is fit and fine at the age of 62 or
even 65 years. In our country, except for the judges, the retirement age in
some quasi-judicial bodies has been increased. The retirement age in
different tribunals has now been increased to 70 for chairmen and 65 for
members.  In  the  circumstances,  the  constitutional  provisions  need  a
change for enhancing the age of retirement of High Court and Supreme
Court Judges at least by three years.
Increase in number of judges and creation of new Benches
1.7 In almost every High Court, there is huge pendency of cases and
the present strength of the judges can hardly be said to be sufficient to
cope with the alarming situation. The institution of cases is much more
than the disposal and it adds to arrears of cases. The litigating citizens
have a fundamental right of life i.e. a tension-free life through speedy
justice-delivery system. Now it has become essential that the present
11

strength of the judges should be increased manifold according to the
pendency, present and probable.
1.8 It  is  also  necessary  that  the  work  of  the  High  Courts  is
decentralized, that is, more Benches are established in all States. If there
is manifold increase in the strength of the judges and the staff, all cannot
be housed in one campus. Therefore, the establishment of new Benches
is necessary. It is also in the interest of the litigants. The Benches should
be so established that a litigant is not required to travel long.   
1.9 It is true that the new establishments will require money, but it is
necessary as a development measure, particularly, when efforts are being
made for all-round development of the country. Therefore, the money
should not be a problem.  We have to watch and protect the interest of
the litigants. We must always keep in mind that the existence of judges
and advocates is because of the litigants and they are there to serve their
cause only.
1.10 Sometimes, some advocates object to creation of new Benches and
selection of new sites for construction of new buildings. But they raise
objections in their personal, limited interest. Creation of new Benches is
certainly beneficial for the litigants and the lawyers and a beginning has
to be made somewhere.
1.11 There is huge pendency of cases in the apex court also. Now the
time has come when not only the strength of the Hon’ble Judges in the
Supreme Court should be increased and recommendations are made to
12

fill  up  the  vacancies  soon  but  new  Benches  be  also  established  in
southern and eastern regions.
Number of working days and vacations
1.12 Considering the huge pendency of cases at all levels of judicial
hierarchy, it has become necessary to increase the number of working
days.
1.13 It has to be introduced at all levels of judicial hierarchy and must
start from the apex court. With the increase in the salaries and perks of
the  Judges,  it  is  their  moral  duty  to  respond  commensurately.
Opportunities to attend conferences/legal seminars in foreign countries
should  be  given  to  all  the  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  and  Chief
Justices  of  the  High  Court  in  turn.  Frequent  visits  by the  Judges  to
foreign countries at very high cost should be avoided in view of the
austerity measures by the Government of India.   
Work culture
1.14 Of  late,  there  has  been  a  general  erosion  of  work  culture
throughout  the  country. Government  servants  avoid  discharging  their
duties and responsibilities. The Judiciary has also been affected by this
evil.
1.15 It is high time when all the judges at different levels of judicial
hierarchy must devote full time to judicial work and should not be under
any misconception that they are Lords or above the society. Though this
feeling should come from within, but some guidelines  are necessary.
13

Once judgments are reserved on constitutional matters by larger bench or
otherwise, the judgments should be delivered within a reasonable time.
There is long and inordinate delay in delivering judgments which should
be avoided in public interest. If these suggestions are implemented, the
functioning of the courts shall certainly improve.
Speedy justice
1.16 Speedy justice is the right of every litigating person. There is no
denying the fact that delay frustrates justice. In the present set-up it often
takes 10 – 20 – 30 or even more years before a matter is finally decided.
In the recent past, litigation has increased immensely. The population
growth,  improved  financial  conditions,  lack  of  tolerance  and
materialistic way of life may be some of the causes. But the delay in
dispensation  of justice has to be eliminated by taking effective steps
otherwise  the  day  is  not  far  when  the  whole  system  will  collapse.
Recently, one Hon’ble Judge of Delhi High Court calculated that 464
years will be required to clear the arrears with the present strength of the
judges in that High Court. The position may not be that gloomy but is
still alarming.
1.17 In Allahabad High Court, more than eight and a half lacs of cases
are pending. Criminal appeals of the year 1980-82, criminal revisions of
the  year 1990-95  are  still  pending.  In  second  civil  appeals  and  writ
matters the position is almost same. The position is the same in all other
High Courts. Institution of cases is much more than disposal and it adds
to  the  arrears  almost  at  all  levels  of  judicial  hierarchy.  Even  in
subordinate courts, there is huge pendency of cases.
14

1.18 As stated  above,  in  order  to  meet  this  contingency  substantial
increase  in the number  of judges  and  corresponding  infrastructure  is
required at the earliest. Even if the judges and class III and IV employees
are appointed, say, within three to six months basic infrastructure will
need time. However, the money should be not a problem. It should be
treated  as a developmental  work,  a work to provide justice  to all, a
principle enshrined in the Preamble of our Constitution.
1.19 An effort has been made in Gujarat State and Delhi to have some
evening courts. The same system can be introduced in other States as
well.
1.20 The constitutional promise of securing to all its citizens justice,
social,  economic  and  political,  as  promised  in  the  Preamble  of  the
Constitution cannot be realized unless the three organs of the State i.e.
legislature, executive and judiciary join together to find ways and means
for providing to the Indian poor equal access to its justice system.
1.21 Speedy trial is guaranteed under article 21 of the Constitution of
India. Any delay in expeditious disposal of criminal trial infringes the
right  to  life  and  personal  liberty  guaranteed  under  article  21  of  the
Constitution. The debate on judicial arrears has thrown up number of
ideas on how the judiciary can set its own house in order. Alarmed by the
backlog of inordinate delay in disposal of cases, Fast Track Courts or
Special Courts have to be constituted. Thus, Fast Track Courts are to
tackle the section 138 Negotiable Instruments Act cases as the graph of
15

such pendency is very high and alarming. It is high time to restore the
confidence of people in the judiciary by providing speedy justice.
1.22 It is not uncommon for any criminal case to drag on for years.
During this time, the accused travels from the zone of "anguish" to the
zone of "sympathy". The witnesses are either won over by muscle or
money power or they become sympathetic to the accused. As a result,
they turn hostile and prosecution fails. In some cases, the recollection
becomes fade or the witnesses die. Thus, long delay in courts causes
great hardship not only to the accused but even to the victim and the
State. The accused, who is not let out on bail, may sit in jail for number
of months or even years awaiting conclusion of the trial. Thus, effort is
required to be made to improve the management of prosecution in order
to  increase  certainty  of  conviction  and  punishment  for  most  serious
offenders. It is experienced that there is increasing laxity in the court
work by the police personnel, empowered to investigate the case.
1.23 Judiciary today is more deserving of public confidence than ever
before. The judiciary has a special role to play in the task of achieving
socio-economic goals enshrined in the Constitution while maintaining
their aloofness and independence. Judges have to be aware of the social
changes in the task of achieving socio-economic justice for the people.
Justice at easy reach
1.24 The  Indian  judicial  system  is  constantly  exposed  to  new
challenges, new dimensions and new signals  and has to survive in a
world in which perhaps the only real certainty is that the circumstances
16

of tomorrow will not be the same as those of today. The need of the hour
is  to  erase  misconception  about  the  Judiciary  by  making  it  more
accessible by utilizing the resources available to improve the service to
the public, by reducing delays and making courts more efficient and less
daunting.
1.25 Regarding  decongestion,  greater  responsibility  lies  on  the
shoulders of the Governments of States or the Central Government. They
are biggest litigants in the courts. They should approach the courts or
contest cases only if necessary and not just to pass on the buck or contest
for the sake of contesting. The time consumed in most of the cases by
Courts of Sessions is somewhat under control and most of the cases are
decided  in  a  reasonable  time-schedule.  Main  problem  is  about  huge
pendency in Magisterial Courts and the High Courts. It is absolutely
essential to have additional courts for specifically trying the complaint
cases filed under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. The
present state of affairs defeats the very object with which the provision
was inserted in the Negotiable Instruments Act. Further, large numbers
of petty offence cases should be taken out of the normal court channel to
be decided by the Special Magistrates by appointing retired officers as
Special Magistrates.
1.26 A speedy trial is not only required to give quick justice but it is
also an integral part of the fundamental right of life, personal liberty, as
envisaged  in  article 21 of the Constitution.  The Law Commission is
putting forth few suggestions to identify and remedy the causes of such
delays  in  this  Report,  of course,  after  identifying  major hurdles  and
impediments which cause delay in the disposal of criminal cases.
17

1.27 The  Law  Commission  of  India  is  of  the  firm  opinion  that
considering the alarming situation and the pendency of cases and the
constitutional  rights  of  a  litigant  for  a  speedy  and  fair  trial,  the
Government of India should direct the State authorities to set up Fast
Track Courts in the country, which alone, in the opinion of the Law
Commission, will solve the perennial problem of pendency of cases.
Integrity, virtue and ethics
1.28 The  term  integrity  when  applied  to  human  attributes  refers  to
honesty,  reliability,  purity,  trustworthiness,  incorruptibility,  sincerity,
honour, decency, etc. Mahatma Gandhi at one time said that “purity of
life is the highest and truest art”.
1.29 And in the words of Marcus Aurelius, “a man should be upright,
not be kept upright”. A person of integrity will do the right thing even
when nobody is watching. Mahatma Gandhi said that “the truest test of
civilization, culture and dignity is character and not clothing”.
Governance
1.30 The term ‘governance’ is derived from a Latin term that literally
means  steering.  It  refers  to  the  processes  and  systems  by  which  an
organization or society operates; the processes by which decisions are
made that define expectations, grant power, or verify performance.
1.31 The ideal concept of public officer, expressed by the words ‘a
public  office  is  a  public  trust’,  signifies  that  the  officer  has  been
18

entrusted with public power by the people; that the officer holds this
power in trust to be used only for their benefit and never for the benefit
of himself or of a few; and that the officer must never conduct his own
affairs so as to infringe the public trust.
1.32 Citizens have a legitimate expectation that the public servants will
serve  the  public  interest  with  fairness  and  manage  public  resources
properly  on  a  daily  basis.  The  increased  democratization  and
globalization has resulted in increased visibility of the public officials.
Critical questions are nowadays asked about the way in which cases have
been dealt with, the justice of the decisions, the exercise of discretions,
and the morals of public servants. Leaders are increasingly being called
upon to account for their actions by the communities affected by those
actions.
Anti-corruption
1.33 Corruption in reference to public office has been defined as the
abuse of power for purposes of private gain.
1.34 In  public  affairs,  there  often  arises  a  conflict  between  private
wealth  and  public  power.  This  is  often  the  result  of selfishness  and
greed. Mahatma Gandhi said that the earth provides enough to satisfy
every man’s needs, but not enough to satisfy every man’s greed. The
conflict  needs  to  be  mediated  upon.  Institutions  that  fail  to  mediate
between  private  wealth  and  public  power  run  the  risk  of  becoming
dysfunctional  and  trapped  by  wealthy  interests.  Corruption  is  one
19

symptom of such  failure  whereby personal  interests  overcome public
goals.
1.35 Fighting  corruption  is  one  of  the  facets  of  promoting  good
governance.  But  governance  issues  are  far  much  broader  than  anti-
corruption alone. For example, a public officer may be honest and yet
inefficient  or incompetent.  Efforts  to  promote good  governance must
therefore be broader than anti-corruption campaigns.
1.36 Article  14  of  the  ‘Basic  Principles  on  the  Role  of  Lawyers’
adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, Cuba, in 1990 states:
“Lawyers, in protecting the rights of their clients and in promoting
the  cause  of  justice,  shall  seek  to  uphold  human  rights  and
fundamental  freedoms  recognized  by national  and  international
law and shall at all time act freely and diligently in accordance
with  the  law  and  recognized  standards  and  ethics  of the  legal
profession.”
1.37 Continuing  professional  development  is  necessary  for  all  legal
practitioners,  State  law  officers  and  judicial  officers  to  improve  and
sustain their proficiency. There should be put in place mechanism for
refresher courses and attendance at them as a pre-condition for renewal
of practising certificates for advocates.
1.38 The Indian Constitution is the source of every law that was and is
prevalent  in  our  society.  The  Constitution  guarantees  to  all  Indian
citizens equal protection of public as well as personal rights. But these
rights are of no avail if an individual has no means to get them enforced.
20

The enforcement of the rights has to be through the courts, but judicial
procedure  is very complex,  costly and dilatory putting  the  poor  at a
distance from justice.
1.39 The  Britishers  established  the  current  pattern  of  legal  system
present in India today, after the establishment of the English rule in the
country. In the year 1857, the first step was taken in the direction of
imparting formal legal education in the country. The Britishers began
enacting  statutes,  after  the  revolt  of  1857,  which  resulted  in  the
introduction of a legal system that was moulded along the lines of the
legal system then prevailing in the United Kingdom with an exception to
laws pertaining to religious denominations in India.
Access to justice
1.40 Traditional  concept  of  "access  to  justice"  as  understood  by
common man is access to courts of law. For a common man, a court is
the  place  where  justice  is  meted  out  to  him/her.  But  since  the laws
enacted were in English and the proceedings of all the courts were highly
complicated,  confusing  and  expensive  for  the  Indian  public,  the
‘English’ illiterate Indian public found it difficult to get access to the
justice-delivery system. As a solution, the need to have lawyers was felt
as an effective mediator between the legal world and the common man.
Therefore, we can see that a lawyer in addition to being champion at the
various laws also has a social responsibility of helping the ignorant and
the underprivileged to attain justice. 
1.41 The State in contemporary scenario is welfare-oriented. It is one of
the most important duties of a welfare state to provide judicial and non-
21

judicial dispute resolution mechanisms to which all citizens have equal
access, for the resolution of their legal disputes and enforcement of their
constitutionally  guaranteed  fundamental  rights.  Poverty,  ignorance  or
social inequalities should not become barriers to it. 
1.42 Article 39A of the Constitution provides for equal justice and free
legal aid. The said article obligates the State to promote justice on a basis
of equal opportunity and, in particular, provide free legal aid by suitable
legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities
for securing justices are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic
or other disabilities. 
1.43 Lok Adalats, Nyaya Panchayats, Legal Services Authorities  are
also part of the campaign to take justice to the people and ensure that all
people have equal access to justice in spite of various barriers like social
and economic backwardness.
1.44 Large  population,  more  litigation  and  lack  of  adequate
infrastructure  are  the  major  factors  that  hamper  our  justice  system.
Regular adjudication procedures through the constant efforts of Legal
Services Authorities will act as catalysts in curing these maladies of our
system.
1.45 Disposal of legal disputes at pre-litigative stage by permanent and
continuous  Lok  Adalats  would  provide  expense-free  justice  to  the
citizens  of this  country. It  also saves  the courts  from additional  and
avoidable burden of petty cases enabling them to divert their court-time
to more contentious and old matters. Legal literacy and legal awareness
22

are the principal means to achieve the objective for ensuring equality
before law for the citizens of our country. 
1.46 Legal profession of the country, as we know it today, is more than
two centuries  old. We can legitimately expect that the future of this
profession  ought to be very bright, particularly in the context  of the
enormous strides  our country is making in various  fields  and human
rights awareness. Public interest has to be its motto and service in the
cause of justice its creed. Mahatma Gandhi was a barrister who practised
law without compromising truth. Abraham Lincoln said: "Discourage
litigation, persuade your neighbours to compromise whenever you can.
Point out to them how the nominal winner is often a real loser in fees,
expenses and time".
1.47 A stark reality that stares at our face is the fact that more than 70%
of the people of this country are illiterate. The noble objective flowing
from the Preamble of the Constitution and the earnest wish and hopes
expressed in the Directive Principles shall remain on paper unless the
people in this country are educated.
Alternate Dispute Resolution
1.48 With the march of time, new demands emerge, which sometimes
make the existing system outdated or non-functional, requiring it to be
replaced by a new one. Law should also respond to the demands of the
society.  The  alternate  dispute  resolution  methods  have  evolved  as  a
result of this vision.
23

1.49 The  first  avenue  where  the  conciliation  has  been  effectively
introduced and recognized by law is labour law, namely, the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947. Conciliation has been statutorily recognized as an
effective method of dispute resolution in relation to disputes between
workers and management. The only field where the courts in India have
recognized  Alternate  Dispute  Resolution  (ADR)  is  in  the  field  of
arbitration. Another area where ADR is recognized in India is family
law.  The  legislation  which  emphasizes  ADR  is  the  Legal  Services
Authorities Act 1987.   
1.50 Provisions have been made in the Legal Services Authorities Act
for settling cases through Lok Adalats; a Lok Adalat generally comprises
a judicial officer, serving or retired, a lawyer, and a person of a social
welfare association, preferably, a woman. Power has been given to Lok
Adalats  to  dispose  of  disputes  referred  to  them  by  arriving  at  a
compromise or settlement between the parties; awards of Lok Adalats
are deemed to be decrees of civil courts or orders of other courts or
tribunals; every award made by a Lok Adalat is treated as final and
binding on all the parties to the dispute, and no appeal lies to any court
against the award. 
Advantages of ADR
1.51 Advantages  of ADR are many - it is less  expensive, less  time-
consuming, free from technicalities vis-à-vis conducting of cases in law
courts, parties involved are free to discuss their differences of opinion
without any fear of disclosure before any law courts, and the last, but not
the least, there is no winning or losing for any of the parties involved; so,
24

their  grievances  are  redressed  without  causing  any  damage  to  the
relationship between them.
1.52 Another right and welcome step taken was the enactment of the
Consumer  Protection  Act  1986  (CP  Act)  for  settlement  of  consumer
disputes and for matters connected therewith. The aim of the CP Act is to
provide for an effective, inexpensive, simple and speedy redressal of
consumer grievances, which civil courts are not able to provide.   
1.53  The Family Courts Act 1984 (FC Act) was enacted to provide for
the establishment of Family Courts with a view to promote conciliation
in, and secure speedy settlement of, disputes relating to marriage and
family affairs and for matters connected therewith.  
1.54 The Law Commission of India in its 59th Report (1974) had also
stressed that in dealing with disputes concerning the family, the court
ought  to  adopt  a  humane  approach  different  from  that  adopted  in
ordinary civil proceedings, and that it should make reasonable efforts at
settlement before commencement of the trial.
Appointment of judges
1.55 In selecting persons for appointment as judges, every endeavour
should be made to ensure that persons committed to the need to protect
and preserve the institution of marriage and to promote the welfare of
children and qualified by reason of their experience and expertise to
promote  settlement  of  disputes  by  conciliation  and  counselling  are
selected. Justice in all its facets – social, economic and political – is to be
25

rendered to the masses of this country without any further loss of time –
the need of the hour. 
Three players in Judiciary
1.56 The first player is the Government. The Government is mostly at
fault by not filling up vacancies which they know well in advance. The
Government  fails  in  appointing  quality  judges  and  providing  proper
infrastructure, including the basic things like a good library, typists, etc. 
1.57 The  second  player  is  the  lawyers.  We  should  realize  that
adjournments, even if they are in favour of clients, are not in favour of
the system. In a number of regulatory cases, there is no real need for
appeals  or adjournments.  Given  the  huge  backlog  of cases,  practical
ways and means need to be thought of, to solve such problems. Ethics of
lawyers has also become questionable. There is a Bar Council that has to
look after ethics of lawyers, but it has rarely taken action against tainted
lawyers. Everything becomes customary and loses meaning. 
1.58 The  third  player, of course,  is  the  judges.  Unless  they display
work-ethics, no recommendations can be of use to them. Fairness, speed
and quality should be key values for the judiciary, as for all other sectors.
1.59 The Judiciary is under great pressure. We have about 10-11 judges
per  million  population  right  now.  The  Supreme  Court  has  recently
directed that we should have 5 times the number of judges we currently
have.1  
1 All India Judges’ Association v. Union of India, (2002) 4 SCC 247
26

Reforms
1.60 All reforms need to take place in an integrated manner. The police,
prosecution, lawyers and courts, must be thought of as being cohesive.
The topic of judicial reforms has of late become very important because
the  public  has  lost  faith  in  the  system.  Judicial  accountability  is
connected with the larger area of judicial reforms. Everyone is concerned
about the large delays in disposal of cases, and the agenda for judicial
reforms must first tackle the problem of this backlog. We have seen a lot
of Law Commission Reports and various suggestions - one of which is
the formation of tribunals to take away some of the workload of High
Courts, but still, High Courts are burdened with a large number of cases.
Increasing the manpower in judiciary is the need of the hour. Also, the
problem faced by the judiciary can be solved, if we have scientific data
about the cases that clog the dockets. 
Pendency
1.61 Pendency is a normal feature of any system but is assuming great
proportions in courts. This will necessitate courts to prescribe time-limits
for all cases. To deal with this, there can’t be one prescribed limit, but
the kinds of cases need to be identified and prioritized. So setting time-
standards is essential and it will vary for different cases, and also for
different  courts  depending  on  their  disposal-capacity.  This  will  be
necessary  to  assess  the  performance  of  the  courts  and  judicial
accountability.
Technology
27

1.62 We have modern technology, which facilitates us to collect a lot of
information and making it available to Chief Justices, so that they are
able to allocate their manpower efficiently. Digital techniques and tools
are at our disposal, to collect information from an entire database from
the time a case is instituted in a court of law to the final stages of appeal.
Building up a judicial database will enable us to assess the performance
of the courts as an institution, and the Chief Justices will be able to use it
to assess the individual performance of judges. This will go a long way
in identifying what the backlog is, what types of cases are clogging the
dockets, etc.
1.63 As a part of digital resource management, we have home pages
and websites, where judgments of courts can be instantly posted. At the
moment, it takes a long time for courts to give copies of judgments; with
being instantly posted on the home page, they will be easily and readily
available to everyone. This is an important step for using the technology
effectively, to expedite the process of judgments being accessible.
1.64  Now, digital technology offers us new packages like database, ERP
tools, court management practices – these will help in increasing the
productivity  of  courts;  video-conferencing  –  through  which  we  can
record evidence. There is, therefore, vast technology available for the
courtroom, for enhancing the quality of justice, and finding the truth -
after all, justice is the finding of truth. Coming back to accountability,
like any institution, judiciary is not devoid of vices, but still they are akin
to temples of justice. But still, corruption cannot be acceptable. How
does one deal with corruption?   Impeachment was thought to be the
28

remedy to deal with errant judges, but we found that it is not working
well; we have to find some internal institutional mechanism, a sort of
peer committee, enabling judges to deal with such issues. We are not
very sure that increasing number of courts and judges will ameliorate the
situation, unless there is a simultaneous productivity increase in courts!
We feel strongly about the issue!
1.65 Judicial reform, as is being looked at, is essential for the country’s
overall development, not just economic; in India, the problem is more
human  than  economic.  Ninety  per  cent  of  the  litigation  is  by  rural
people; parties are fighting for even half an acre of land; families are
being ruined. Therefore, there has to be an overall solution.
Computerization of lower courts
1.66 The government has proposed to computerize the lower courts in
future.  A  scheme  for  computerization  of  all  the  13,000  district  and
subordinate courts, prepared in accordance with the National Policy and
Action  Plan,  has  been  approved  by the  government  on  8th February,
2007  with  National  Informatics  Centre  (NIC)   as  the  implementing
agency.  The  coverage  of  the  project  includes  Information  and
Communication  Technology  (ICT)  enablement  of  all  the  district  and
subordinate  courts  and  upgrading  of  the  ICT  infrastructure  of  the
Supreme Court and all the High Courts.
1.67 The first phase of the project is being implemented in all the States
and Union territories at an estimated cost of Rs.442 crores. All the lower
29

courts in the country including the courts in the States of Chhattisgarh,
Madhya Pradesh,  Orissa  and  Uttar  Pradesh  have  been  taken  up   for
computerization in the first phase.
1.68 Court records can be digitized to improve the productivity and
efficiency of the courts. Computerization of the Registry of the Supreme
Court  has  had  its  beneficial  effects  in  slashing  down  arrears  and
facilitated scientific docket management.
 
1.69 E-filing  and  video-conferencing  by  dispensing  with  physical
appearance saves precious time and resources and makes justice more
easily accessible and a less expensive option.
Fast Track Courts
1.70 The government has already taken several initiatives on the path
of judicial reforms. 1562 Fast Track Courts have been set up which have
disposed of more than 18 lakh cases transferred to them. 190 Family
Courts, established in various parts of the country, have speedily settled
matrimonial disputes through reconciliation.
Reforms at the village level
1.71 The Gram Nyayalayas Bill has been enacted to set up more trial
courts at the intermediate Panchayat level. The welcome feature is that
the procedures have been kept simple and flexible so that cases can be
30

heard and disposed of within six months. It is also envisaged that these
courts will be mobile, to achieve the goal of bringing justice to people’s
doorsteps. Training and orientation of the judiciary, especially in frontier
areas  of  knowledge,  like  bio-genetics,  IPR  and  cyber  laws,  need
attention.
1.72 The Constitutional promise of securing to all its citizens, justice,
social,  economic  and  political,  as  promised  in  the  Preamble  of  the
Constitution, cannot be realized, unless the three organs of the State i.e.
legislature, executive and judiciary, join together to find ways and means
for providing the Indian poor, equal access to its justice system.
1.73 However, we are of the view that not an inch of change can be
brought  about  if  the  advocates  do  not  work  in  accordance  with  the
responsibility that is cast upon them by the Constitution. Every lawyer is
vested with the responsibility to foster the rule of law and dominance of
the Constitution.
1.74 Thus, it cannot be gainsaid that economic development and law go
hand in hand. We can’t think of economic progress, unless changing
needs of the society are supported by appropriate law. 
1.75 We need:
•Speedy justice
•Reduction in costs of litigation
•Systematic running of the courts
•Faith in the judicial system
31

1.76 The Indian Constitution provides a beautiful system of checks and
balances under articles 124(2) and 217(1) for appointment of Judges of
the Supreme Court and High Courts where both the executive and the
judiciary have been given a balanced role. This delicate balance has been
upset  by  the  2nd Judges’  case  (Supreme  Court  Advocates-on-Record
Association v. Union of India)2 and the Opinion of the Supreme Court in
the Presidential Reference (Special Reference No.1 of 1998)3. It is time
the original balance of power is restored. The Law Commission has in its
214th Report (2008) recommended accordingly.
1.77 The  above  recommendation  for  the  need  for  an  urgent  and
immediate review of the present procedure for appointment of judges is
further fortified by his forthright views expressed by Shri Justice J. S.
Verma,  a  former  Chief  Justice  of  India,  who  had  written  the  lead
judgment  in  the  2nd Judges’  case,  expressed  in  an  interview  to  the
Frontline Magazine published in its issue of October 10, 2008. When
asked: “You said in one of your speeches that judicial appointments have
become  judicial  disappointments.  Do  you  now  regret  your  1993
judgment?” Justice Verma responded: “My 1993 judgment, which holds
the field, was very much misunderstood  and  misused.  It was in that
context I said the working of the judgment now for some time is raising
serious questions, which cannot be called unreasonable. Therefore, some
kind of rethink is required. My judgment says the appointment process of
High  Court  and  Supreme  Court  Judges  is  basically  a  joint  or
participatory  exercise  between  the  executive  and  the  judiciary,  both
2 1993 (4) SCC 4413 1998 (7) SCC 739
32

taking part in it. Broadly, there are two distinct areas. One is the area of
legal acumen of the candidates to adjudge their suitability and the other
is their antecedents. It is the judiciary, that is, the Chief Justice of India
and his colleagues or, in the case of the High Courts, the Chief Justice of
the High Court and his colleagues (who) are the best persons to adjudge
the  legal  acumen.  Their  voice  should  be  predominant.  So  far  as  the
antecedents  are  concerned,  the  executive  is  better  placed  than  the
judiciary to know the antecedents of candidates. Therefore, my judgment
said that in the area of legal acumen the judiciary’s opinion should be
dominant and in the area of antecedents the executive’s opinion should
be dominant. Together, the two should function to find out the most
suitable (candidates) available for appointment.”
1.78 The views of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Law and
Justice which has recommended scrapping of the present procedure for
appointments and transfers of Supreme Court and High Court Judges are
of great relevance in this context. The Hindustan Times of October 20,
2008 reported: ‘The Law Ministry has agreed to review the 15-year-old
system after the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Law and Justice
recommended  doing  away with the  committee  of judges  (collegium).
Presently, the collegium decides the appointments and transfer of judges.
Interestingly, the recommendations come close on the heels of recent
cases of corruption against judges of the top courts in the country. Law
Minister  H.  R.  Bhardwaj  told  Hindustan  Times  that  the  House
Committee’s recommendation had been accepted, and an action-taken
report prepared by the Ministry would now be placed before Parliament.
“Collegium  system  has  failed.  Its  decisions  on  appointments  and
33

transfers lack transparency and we feel courts are not getting judges on
merit. (……) The government cannot be a silent spectator on such a
serious issue”, Bhardwaj said. The House Committee had said: “Through
a Supreme Court judgment in 1993, the judiciary wrested the control of
judges’ appointments and transfers. The collegium system has been a
disaster and needs to be done away with”. H. R. Bhardwaj, Minister for
Law  and  Justice,  said  “It  is  the  right  time  to  review  this  important
matter”. “There was no problem till 1993 when the judiciary tried to re-
write the Article of the Constitution dealing with appointments. They
created a new law of collegium which was wrong. In a democracy, the
primacy of Parliament cannot be challenged”, he said.’
1.79 Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, Member of Parliament and the
Chairman of the Department Related Parliament Standing Committee on
Personnel,  Public  Grievances,  Law  and  Justice,  in  its  28th Report
presented  to the Hon’ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2008,
has stated thus:
“I would like to conclude by saying that the Government should
expeditiously see to it that appointments of Judges in High Courts
and  Supreme  Court  are  done  in  a  transparent  way.  We  have
recommended in two ways: One is, we have to see to it that the
collegium  system has  to  be  done  away with.  Instead  we have
suggested  that  an  Empowered  Committee,  which  comprises
representatives  of  the  Judiciary,  the  Executive  and  Parliament,
should be set up. That  was our recommendation  in the  Judges
(Inquiry)  Bill.  And,  subsequently,  since  appointments  will  be
delayed, we have said that from the very beginning of identifying
the eligible persons, the various places of recommendations, be it
at the level of the High Courts, or, at the Governor’s level or at the
level of the Departments, and finally be the Supreme Court, should
be transparent, and this should be put up in the web site then and
there so that the person, who is going to occupy the Constitutional
34

place, is known to the public, and their background should be
allowed to be discussed by the public and, finally, it has to go
through the process of issuing warrant by the President of India.
But,  what  is  happening  presently  is  that  from  the  day  one  of
identifying the person till the issuance of the warrant, nothing is
known to anybody except to the persons who are involved in it.
Even the persons, who are identified and who are going to be
made as judges of the High Court or of the Supreme Court, may
not  know  about  it.  This  type  of  secrecy  is  not  good  for
democracy.”
1.80 It may be noted in this context that in every High Court the Chief
Justice is from outside the State as per the policy of the Government. The
senior-most Judges who form the collegium are also from outside the
State. The resultant position is that the judges constituting the collegium
are not conversant with the names and antecedents of the candidates and
more  often  than  not,  appointments  suffer  from  lack  of  adequate
information.
1.81 As  recommended  in  the  Law  Commission’s  214th Report,  two
alternatives are available to the Government of the day. One is to seek a
reconsideration  of  the  three  Judges’  cases  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme
Court. The other alternative is to enact a law restoring the primacy of the
Chief Justice of India and the power of the Executive in making the
appointments.
II. RECOMMENDATIONS
2.1 Hon’ble  Shri  Justice  Asok  Kumar  Ganguly,  a  Supreme  Court
Judge, in his article titled “Judicial Reforms” published in Halsbury’s
Law Monthly of November 2008 has suggested a few norms, which the
35

judges and lawyers must agree to follow very rigorously, in order to
liquidate the huge backlog. The suggestions are quoted below:
‘[1] There must be full utilization of the court working hours.
The  judges  must  be  punctual  and  lawyers  must  not  be
asking for adjournments, unless it is absolutely necessary.
Grant  of  adjournment  must  be  guided  strictly  by  the
provisions of Order 17 of the Civil Procedure Code.
[2] Many cases are filed on similar points and one judgment can
decide  a  large  number  of  cases.  Such  cases  should  be
clubbed with the help of technology and used to dispose
other such cases on a priority basis; this will substantially
reduce the arrears. Similarly, old cases, many of which have
become infructuous, can be separated and listed for hearing
and their disposal normally will not take much time. Same is
true for many interlocutory applications filed even after the
main cases are disposed of. Such cases can be traced with
the help of technology and disposed of very quickly.
[3] Judges must deliver judgments within a reasonable time and
in that matter, the guidelines given by the apex court in the
case of Anil Rai v. State of Bihar, (2001) 7 SCC 318 must
be scrupulously observed, both in civil and criminal cases.
[4] Considering the staggering arrears, vacations in the higher
judiciary must be curtailed by at least 10 to 15 days and the
court working hours should be extended by at least half-an-
hour.
[5] Lawyers must curtail prolix and repetitive arguments and
should supplement it by written notes. The length of the oral
argument in any case should not exceed one hour and thirty
minutes, unless the case involves complicated questions of
law or interpretation of Constitution.
36

[6] Judgments  must  be  clear  and  decisive  and  free  from
ambiguity, and should not generate further litigation. We
must remember Lord Macaulay’s statement made about 150
years ago.  
“Our principle is simply this – 
Uniformity when you can have it, 
Diversity when you must have it, 
In all cases, Certainty”
[7] Lawyers must not resort to strike under any circumstances
and must follow the decision of the Constitution Bench of
the Supreme Court in the case of Harish Uppal (Ex-Capt.) v.
Union of India reported in (2003) 2 SCC 45.
Things I know are easier written, than done and for all these
reforms, what is required is a lot of discipline and introspection
and a realization that without these reforms, the present system is
under  threat.  Both,  judges  and  lawyers,  have  to  change  their
mindsets. Unless our mental barriers to reforms are mellowed, all
doses of external remedies are bound to fail. We must remember
what Gandhiji said: “If you want to change anything, you be the
change”.’
2.2 We adopt the above suggestions and recommend accordingly.
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood) (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
              Member      Member-Secretary
37

Dr. Justice AR.
Lakshmanan
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)
Chairman, Law Commission of India
   ILI Building (IInd Floor),
         Bhagwandas Road,
         New Delhi-110 001
   Tel.   : 91-11-23384475
   Fax    : 91-11-23383564
                            11.8.2009
Hon’ble Minister Moily Ji,
In the Law Commission’s 230th report on “Reforms in the Judiciary – Some
Suggestions”, at para 1.37, it has been stated as under:-
“1.37  –  Continuing  professional  development  is  necessary  for  all  legal
Practitioners, State Law Officers and judicial officers to improve and sustain
their proficiency.  There should be put in place mechanism for refresher
courses  and  attendance  at  them  as  a  pre-condition  for  renewal  of
practicing certificates for advocates.” 
 
2. Since Advocates have to enroll with the State Bar Council concerned before
starting their practice as is the case with other professions like doctors, etc. coupled
with the fact that there is no provision in the existing statute for renewal of their
enrolment,   the second para of the said para would not apply to our Advocates.   In
fact, this was a citation culled out from: The Advocate – Magazine of the Law Society
of Kenya (para 28-43). This portion of the report under the heading “Themes and
Thoughts”  is  also  not  our  recommendation.  However,  in  order  to  avoid  any
controversy on the point, we have decided to delete the same. Accordingly, the second
part of the said para may be treated as withdrawn. 
With personal regards,
Yours sincerely,
(AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily,
Minister of Law & Justice,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi.  
38