 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
AMENDMENT OF CODE OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ENABLING RESTORATION OF
COMPLAINTS
Report No. 233
August 2009

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 233)
AMENDMENT OF CODE OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ENABLING RESTORATION OF
COMPLAINTS
Submitted  to  the  Union  Minister  of  Law  and  Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by Dr.
Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of
India, on  the 22nd day of August, 2009.
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of
three  years  from  1st September,  2006  by  Order  No.
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III  (LA)  dated  the  16th October,
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven part-
time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The  text  in  this  document  (excluding  the  Government
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or
medium provided that it is reproduced accurately and not
used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material  must  be
acknowledged as Government copyright and the title of
the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed
to the Member-Secretary and sent either by post to the
Law  Commission  of  India,  2nd Floor,  ILI  Building,
Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India or by email
to lci-dla@nic.in
 
5

Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan          
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI  Building  (IInd
Floor) 
Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi – 110 001
Tel. 91-11-23384475
Fax.   91-11 – 23383564
D.O. No. 6(3)/177/2009-LC (LS)                           August 22, 2009
Dear Dr Veerappa Moily ji,
Subject: Amendment of Code of Criminal Procedure 
Enabling Restoration of Complaints
I am forwarding herewith the 233rd Report of the Law Commission of
India on the above subject.
2. A criminal court has no power to restore a complaint dismissed in
default, as the accused stands discharged or acquitted depending on the case
being  a warrant-case  or a summons-case.  In order to  get  the  complaint
restored, a complainant, poor or rich, has to knock the door of the High
Court  under  section  482  of the Code of Criminal  Procedure  1973.  If a
Magistrate has the power to entertain a complaint and decide it on merits
after summoning the accused, he should also have power to restore it on
good or sufficient cause being shown and re-summon the accused to face
the trial on merits.
3. We  have  recommended  in  this  Report  appropriate  amendments  in
sections  249 and 256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 inserting
provisions  on the lines  of Order IX of the CPC, enabling restoration  of
complaints.
With warm regards,
                                                                                             Yours sincerely,
                                                                                        (Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
6

AMENDMENT OF CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
ENABLING RESTORATION OF COMPLAINTS
                                         CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION                                                   8 – 14
II. LAW COMMISSION’S 141ST REPORT               15
III. RECOMMENDATION                                          16
7

I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 It is a well settled law that a criminal court has no power like the one
which a civil court possesses under Order IX of the Code of Civil Procedure
1908  (CPC)  to  restore  a  complaint  dismissed  in  default,  as  the  accused
stands discharged or acquitted depending on the case being a warrant-case or
a summons-case. In order to get the complaint restored, a complainant, poor
or rich, has to knock the door of the High Court under section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (CrPC). If a Magistrate has the power to
entertain a complaint and decide it on merits after summoning the accused,
he should also have power to restore it on good or sufficient cause being
shown and re-summon the accused to face the trial on merits.
1.2 The relevant provisions of the CrPC are:
(i) Section 249 relating to warrant-cases -
“Absence  of  complainant.-  When  the  proceedings  have  been
instituted upon complaint, and on any day fixed for the hearing of the
case, the complainant is absent and the  offence  may be lawfully
compounded or is not a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in
his  discretion, notwithstanding  anything hereinbefore contained, at
any time before the charge has been framed, discharge the accused.”
(ii) Section 256 relating to summons-cases -
“Non-appearance or death of complainant.- (1) If the summons  has
been  issued  on  complaint,  and  on  the  day  appointed  for  the
8

appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto, to which
the hearing may be adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the
Magistrate  shall,  notwithstanding  anything  hereinbefore  contained,
acquit  the  accused, unless  for some reason  he  thinks  it proper to
adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day:
Provided  that  where  the  complainant  is  represented  by  a
pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution or where the
Magistrate  is  of  opinion  that  the  personal  attendance  of  the
complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate may dispense with his
attendance and proceed with the case.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply
also to cases where non-appearance of the complainant is due to his
death.”
1.3 Section 249 will not apply to a case in which the Magistrate tries an
accused  for  offences  that  are  non-compoundable  and  cognizable.  This
section applies only to offences that may be lawfully compounded or are
non-cognizable. Therefore, the Magistrate has no discretion to discharge an
accused when the offences are of serious nature. Chapter XIX of the CrPC
containing the procedure for trial of warrant-cases by Magistrates prescribes
two procedures, one for trial of cases instituted on police reports and the
other for trial of cases instituted on private complaints. The law-makers
have  excluded  non-compoundable  and  cognizable  offences  from  the
purview  of  section  249  because  for  more  serious  offences,  the  police,
generally, file charge-sheets.
1.4 With regard to offences that are compoundable and non-cognizable
where discretion is given to the Magistrate to discharge the accused for the
9

absence of complainant, the Magistrate may be vested with the power to
restore the complaint on file if sufficient cause is shown by the complainant
for his absence on the date of hearing.
1.5 There may be several reasons for the absence of complainant on the
date of hearing. One most important cause may be total bandh call given by
the political parties or hartal where transport is suspended completely, both
public and private. This is a genuine cause for absence of complainant from
appearing before court. Complainant on his way to court may suffer severe
setback necessitating hospitalization. He may suffer (a) heartache, (b) high
BP,  (c)  low sugar leading to coma or  (d) vertigo, etc. Death of a close
relation may be another sufficient cause. 
1.6 So in each case if the complainant shows sufficient cause for his
absence, the Magistrate may restore his complaint on file. The period may
be 15 days or 30 days from the date of discharge of the accused for moving
the application.
1.7 With  regard  to  trial  of  summons-cases,  under  section  256,  the
Magistrate shall acquit the accused if the complainant does not appear on
the  date  of  hearing.  The  proviso  to  section  256  says  that  where  the
complainant is represented by a pleader or by the officer conducting the
prosecution  or where the Magistrate  is  of the opinion  that the personal
attendance of the complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate may dispense
with his  attendance  and proceed  with  the case. Here also  there may be
sufficient reasons for the absence of complainant, examples of which have
been given in the earlier paragraphs. Under section 256, a sub-section may
be added to the effect that if the complainant shows sufficient cause for his
absence on the date of hearing, the Magistrate may restore the complaint on
10

file provided the application is filed within 15 days or 30 days from the date
of acquittal of the accused.
1.8 In the CPC Order IX, Rules 4, 8 and 9 read as under: 
(i) Rule 4 -
“Plaintiff  may bring  fresh  suit or  Court  may restore suit  to file.-
Where a suit is dismissed under  rule 2 or rule 3, the plaintiff may
(subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit; or he may apply
for an order to set the dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that
there was sufficient cause for such failure as is referred to in rule 2, or
for his non-appearance, as the case may be, the Court shall make an
order  setting  aside  the  dismissal  and  shall  appoint  a  day  for
proceeding with the suit.”
(ii) Rule 8 -
“Procedure  where  defendant  only  appears.-  Where  the  defendant
appears and the plaintiff does not appear when the suit is called on for
hearing, the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed,
unless the defendant admits the claim, or part thereof, in which case
the  Court  shall  pass  a  decree  against  the  defendant  upon  such
admission, and, where part only of the claim has been admitted, shall
dismiss the suit so far as it relates to the remainder.”
(iii) Rule 9 -
“Decree against plaintiff by default bars fresh suit.- (1) Where a suit
is  wholly  or  partly  dismissed  under  rule  8,  the  plaintiff  shall  be
precluded from bringing a fresh suit in respect of the same cause of
11

action. But he may apply for an order to set the dismissal aside, and if
he satisfies  the Court that there was  sufficient  cause for his  non-
appearance when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall
make an order setting aside the dismissal upon such terms as to costs
or otherwise as it thinks fit and shall appoint a day for proceeding
with the suit. … .”
1.9 When provisions have been provided to restore a suit which has been
dismissed on the ground of absence of plaintiff, similar provisions need be
provided under the CrPC also.
1.10 In the absence of such provisions under sections 249 and 256, the
complainants have to move the High Court under criminal revision where
the accused has been discharged or in appeal against acquittal where the
accused  has  been  acquitted.  By  adding  provisions  for  restoration  of
complaints, the burden on the High Courts will be lessened.
Inherent power of subordinate courts
1.11 The  subordinate  criminal  courts  have  no  inherent  powers.1 The
formula  “interest  of justice”  is  not  available  to  the  subordinate  criminal
judiciary beyond the frontiers of the statutory provisions and does not enable
entry  into  the  corridor  of  investigation.2 However,  courts  exist  for
dispensation of justice and not for its denial for technical reasons when law
and  justice  otherwise  demand.  Even  though  inherent  power  saved  under
section 482, CrPC is only in favour of High Courts, the subordinate criminal
courts  are  also  not  powerless  to  do  what  is  absolutely  necessary  for
dispensation  of  justice  in  the  absence  of  a  specific  enabling  provision
1 Tulsamma v. Jagannath, 2004 Cri. L. J. 42722 State of Kerala v. Vijayan, 1985(1) CRIMES 261
12

provided there is no prohibition and no illegality or miscarriage of justice is
involved. All the criminal courts are having such an auxiliary power subject
to restriction which justice, equity, good conscience and legal provisions
demand  provided  it  will  not  unnecessarily  prejudice  somebody  else.3 A
Division Bench of the Kerala High Court has in  In the matter  of State
Prosecutor4 held that the subordinate courts have the inherent power to act
ex debito justitiae (in accordance with the requirement of justice) to do the
real and substantial justice for which alone they exist. The absence of any
reference  to  any  other  criminal  court  in  the  said  provision  does  not
necessarily imply that such courts can in no circumstances exercise inherent
power.  Courts  may act  on  the  principle  that  every  procedure  should  be
understood as permissible till it is shown to be prohibited by law.
1.12 Section 482 of the CrPC closely resembles Section 151 of the CPC.
In order to seek interference under the said section three conditions should
be fulfilled: (1) the injustice which comes to light should be of a grave
character and not of a trivial character; (2) it should be clear and palpable
and not doubtful; and (3) there exists no other provision of law by which the
party aggrieved could have sought relief.5 
1.13 In Raj Narain v. State6 and In re, Biyamma7, it was held that a High
Court can revoke, review, recall or alter its own earlier decision in a criminal
revision and rehear the same by virtue of its inherent power reserved under
the said section. 
3 Madhavi v. Thupran, 1987 (1) KLT 4884 1973 Cri. L. J. 12885 Ram Narain v. Mool Chand, AIR 1960 All. 296; Janata Dal v. H. S. Chowdhary, AIR 1993 SC 8926 AIR 1959 All. 315 (FB)7 AIR 1963 Mysore 326
13

1.14 The word ‘process’ is a general  word meaning in effect anything done
by  the  court.  It  includes  criminal  proceedings  in  a  subordinate  court.
Therefore, power should  be  vested  in  the  subordinate  criminal  courts  to
restore the complaint which was dismissed by default with a view to secure
justice. Whenever the Magistrate is satisfied that it is necessary in order to
secure the ends of justice, he should be able to interfere with his earlier
order. The court which has the power to entertain a case and order notice and
decide the case on merits should also have the power to correct an obvious
error.
1.15 If a court finds that it delivered a judgment without hearing the party
who was entitled to be heard himself or through his counsel which was
necessary in the interest of justice, the court should be empowered to set
aside the judgement and grant rehearing of the matter. It is true that there is
no provision in the CrPC to the said effect. Nevertheless, in the interest of
justice and the independence of the Judiciary, judges and magistrates should
be at full liberty to discuss the conduct of persons before them either as
parties or as witnesses. While exercising this power, courts should bear in
mind that no person should be condemned without being heard.
1.16 However,  the  Supreme  Court  in  A.  S.  Gauraya  v.  S.  N. Thakur8
specifically ruled that the CrPC does not contain any provision enabling a
Magistrate to exercise inherent power to restore a complaint by revoking his
earlier order dismissing it for the non-appearance of the complainant. 
II. LAW COMMISSION’S 141st REPORT
8 (1986) 2 SCC 709
14

2.1 The 12th Law Commission of India in its 141st Report titled “Need for
Amending  the  Law  as  regards  Power  of  Courts to  Restore  Criminal
Revisional  Applications  and  Criminal  Cases  Dismissed  for  Default  in
Appearance” [1991] recommended, inter alia, amendment of section 256 of
the CrPC enabling restoration of a criminal case wherein the accused has
been  acquitted  for  non-appearance  of  the  complainant  where  there  was
sufficient cause for the non-appearance. A meritorious complaint cannot be
allowed to be thwarted only on the ground that the complainant was unable
to remain present, even though there existed good and sufficient cause for
such absence. 
2.2 The Law Commission in its aforesaid Report further recommended
amendment of section 482 of the CrPC for conferment of inherent powers
also on all subordinate criminal courts other than the High Court.  
15

III. RECOMMENDATION
3. We hereby recommend appropriate amendments in sections 249 and
256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 inserting provisions on the lines
of Order IX of the CPC, enabling restoration of complaints.
(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood)                                            (Dr Brahm A Agrawal)
             Member                                                                 Member-Secretary
16