 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
LEGAL REFORMS TO COMBAT 
ROAD ACCIDENTS
Report No. 234
August 2009

 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
(REPORT NO. 234)
LEGAL REFORMS TO COMBAT 
ROAD ACCIDENTS
Submitted to the Union Minister of Law and Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India by
Dr.  Justice  AR.  Lakshmanan,  Chairman,  Law
Commission of India, on  the 22nd day of  August, 2009. 
2

The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period
of three years from 1st September, 2006 by Order No.
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the 16th October,
2006, issued by the Government of India, Ministry of
Law  and Justice,  Department of Legal  Affairs,  New
Delhi.
The  Law  Commission  consists  of  the  Chairman,  the
Member-Secretary,  one  full-time  Member  and  seven
part-time Members.
Chairman
Hon’ble Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Full-time Member
Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
Part-time Members
Dr. (Mrs.) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr. K. N. Chandrasekharan  Pillai
Prof. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr. (Mrs.) Shyamlha Pappu
3

The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,
New Delhi-110 001
Law Commission Staff
Member-Secretary
Dr. Brahm A. Agrawal
Research Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay : Deputy Law Officer
Dr. V. K. Singh : Assistant Legal Adviser
Dr. R. S. Shrinet                 : Superintendent (Legal)
Administrative Staff
Shri Sushil Kumar : Joint Secretary& Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma : Assistant Library &
  Information Officer
4

The text of this Report is available on the Internet at:
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
©      Government of India
Law Commission of India
The text in this document (excluding the Government
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format
or medium provided that it is reproduced accurately
and  not  used  in  a  misleading  context.  The  material
must be acknowledged as Government copyright and
the title of the document specified.
Any  enquiries  relating  to  this  Report  should  be
addressed to the Member-Secretary and sent either by
post to the Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor, ILI
Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India
or by email to lci-dla@nic.in
5

Dr. Justice AR.Lakshmanan         
(Former  Judge,  Supreme  Court  of
India),
Chairman, Law Commission of India
ILI Building (IInd Floor) 
Bhagwandas Road,
New Delhi – 110 001
Tel. 91-11-23384475
Fax.   91-11 – 23383564
D.O. No. 6(3)133/2008-LC (LS)                                       August 22, 2009
Dear Dr Veerappa Moily ji,
Subject: Legal Reforms to Combat Road Accidents
I am forwarding herewith the 234th Report of the Law Commission
of India on the above subject.
2. India has one of the largest road networks in the world, of 3.314
million kilometers, consisting of National Highways, Expressways, State
Highways,  Major  District  Roads,  Other  District  Roads  and  Village
Roads. About 65 per cent of freight and 86.7 per cent passenger traffic is
carried by the roads. Roads are used not only by the motorized transport,
but also by the non-motorized transport as well as pedestrians.
3. More than 100,000 Indians are dying every year in road accidents.
More than a million are injured or maimed. Many years ago, a study
found that road accidents cost the country some Rs. 550 billion every
year. India’s share in world fatalities is increasing. So far, China topped
the list of most number of fatal road accidents and India finished a close
second. However, the latest statistics show that while China has managed
to decrease its fatalities, India has not learnt much. The total road length
of India is about 12 per cent of the total world road network, but India’s
percentage in road injury is 5.4 per cent of the world total.
4. Is it due to lack of apt provisions in our law that travel through
Indian  roads  is  a  tryst  with  Death?  This  crucial  question  has  been
engaging the attention of the Law Commission of India for quite some
time.
5. Driving  recklessly/dangerously,  non-observance  of  traffic  rules,
like  crossing  speed  limit,  jumping  red  light,  driving  without  driving
licence,  driving  by  untrained/disqualified  driver,  driving  by  minor,
driving under the influence of liquor, driving while talking on mobile,
6

driving without helmet, ill-health of vehicle and bad road infrastructure
are amongst the causes of road accidents.
6. In  view  of  the  above,  the  Law  Commission  prepared  a
Consultation Paper on this important subject taken up suo motu, with a
view to elicit views/suggestions/comments from all those concerned. It
was earlier thought that the Commission would hold a seminar on the
subject, but this idea could not materialize owing to paucity of funds.
However,  the  recommendations  in  this  Report  have  been  made  after
taking into consideration the responses received.
7. The  Law Commission  has  recommended  amendment in  section
304A of the Indian Penal Code to make the offence of rash and negligent
driving punishable with the maximum term of imprisonment of ten years,
instead  of  two  years  as  at  present  provided.  It  has  also  been
recommended that causing death of any person through driving under the
influence of drink or drugs should be punishable with the minimum term
of imprisonment of two years. We have also recommended various other
legal measures to combat road accidents.
8. This Report is the last of the 33 Reports submitted by the 18th Law
Commission, which is an unprecedented contribution on its part. I would
also  like  to  place  on  record  an  equally  unparalleled  outstanding
contribution made by Dr Brahm Avtar Agrawal, Member-Secretary, in
preparation of these Reports.
With warm regards,
                                                                                       Yours sincerely,
                                                                                  (Dr AR. Lakshmanan)
Dr M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister of Law and Justice, 
Government of India, 
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001
7

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
LEGAL REFORMS TO COMBAT ROAD ACCIDENTS
CONTENTS
                                                                                                       pp.
1. Perspective                                                                         9 - 12
2. Present law in India                                                          13 - 24
(i)  Indian Penal Code, 1860
     (ii) Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
      3.  Position in UK                                                                 25 - 31
                                                                
 4.  Previous Reports of the Law Commission of India        32 - 35
      and its recommendations
5. Pending Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2007         36 - 46
         
      6.  Proposed Road Safety and Traffic Management            47 - 63
Boards and National Road Safety Policy      
           
      7.  Pedestrians and Non-motorized Traffic                          64 - 76
 
 8.  Recommendations                                                           77 - 82
           
8

1. Perspective
1.1 India has one of the largest road networks in the world, of 3.314
million kilometers, consisting of National Highways, Expressways, State
Highways,  Major  District  Roads,  Other  District  Roads  and  Village
Roads. About 65 per cent of freight and 86.7 per cent passenger traffic is
carried by the roads.1 Motor vehicle population has recorded significant
growth over the years. India had 72.718 million registered motor vehicles
at the end of the fiscal year 2003-04. Compound annual growth rate of
the vehicle population between 1951 and 2004 was close to 11 per cent.
Two-wheelers and cars (personalized mode of transport) constitute more
than four-fifth of the motor vehicles in the country.2 Roads are used not
only by the motorized transport, but also by the non-motorized transport
as well as pedestrians.
1.2 According to Maruti Suzuki weblog, more than 100,000 Indians
are dying every year in road accidents. More than a million are injured or
maimed. Many years ago, a study found that road accidents cost the
country some Rs. 550 billion every year.3
1.3 According to ‘Down To Earth’ (Science and Environment Online),
ill-planned motorization kills one person every six minutes on India’s
roads. Road accidents in 1999-2000 cost India about 3 per cent of its
GDP. During 1970-2005, registered motor vehicles increased 50 times,
but  road  networks  grew  less  than  three  times.  Accidents  increased
fourfold; injuries and fatalities also shot up more than six times. Severity
of accidents – persons killed per 100 accidents – increased due to lack of
1 Department of Road Transport and Highway’s Annual Report 2007-08
2 National Road Transport Policy recommended by Thangaraj  Committee
3 http://www.marutisuzuki.com, visited 07.04.2008
9

footpaths,  cycle  tracks  and  traffic  measures  to  check  speed  where
motorized merges with non-motorized. In 2005, there were 439,255 road
accidents – 1,205 accidents daily – which killed about 95,000 people;
injuring more than 465,282. National and State Highways account for 5.8
per cent of the total road length, but account for 50 per cent of the total
accidents.  Other  roads,  with  94.2  per  cent  of  the  total  road  length,
witnessed 46.8 per cent of the total accidents. Bulk transport vehicles
(buses, trucks) make up 7.5 per cent of all registered vehicles, but caused
30 per cent of the accidents; about 38 per cent of deaths.4
1.4 The Pioneer has reported that the number of fatalities on Indian
roads in 2006-07 increased to 1,05,749. India’s share in world fatalities
is increasing. So far, China topped the list of most number of fatal road
accidents and India finished a close second. However, the latest statistics
show that while China has managed to decrease its fatalities, India has
not learnt much. The total road length of India is about 12 per cent of the
total world road network, but India’s percentage in road injury is 5.4 per
cent of the world total.5
1.5 According to the Indian Express, road accidents increased in the
country by 4.9 per cent from 2005 to 2006 and 20 per cent of the road
accidents were fatal – there was one fatality per 4.4 road accidents.6
1.6 A recent survey by the Central Road Research Institute reveals that
more than 90% pedestrians feel unsafe while crossing roads, while they
comprise more than 50% of road victims.7 
4 http://www.downtoearth.org.in, visited 23.05.2008
5 The Pioneer, New Delhi, 24.03.2008
6 The Indian Express, New Delhi, 24.04.2008
7 The Times of India, New Delhi, 27.06.2008
10

1.7 Is it due to lack of apt provisions in our law that travel through
Indian roads is a tryst with Death? This crucial question has been
engaging the attention of the Law  Commission of India for quite
some time. 
1.8 All the more so because despite  the directions  of the  Supreme
Court given to the Police and all other authorities entrusted with the
administration and enforcement of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and
generally with the  control of the  traffic8 and the  Delhi High  Court’s
Order dated  10.07.07  in WP (Crl)  878/2007 (to  be numbered by the
Registry) in regard to traffic safety, reckless driving by the blue line
buses on Delhi roads has not diminished.
1.9 The  Navbharat  Times has  reported  that  in  the  Annual  Press
Conference of Delhi Police, it was revealed that 8,270 road accidents
were recorded in 2007, in which 2,050 persons died. There were 376
road accidents involving blue line buses in which 118 persons died. The
notable feature was that 38 per cent were hit and run cases wherein the
vehicles involved could not be traced. Another notable feature was that
53 per cent of the persons who died in road accidents were pedestrians
and 28 per cent were two-wheeler drivers. 3.98 million  challans  were
issued  for  various  traffic  violations,  for  which  Rs.  980  million  were
recovered.9 
1.10 Driving  recklessly/dangerously,  non-observance  of  traffic  rules,
like  crossing  speed  limit,  jumping  red  light,  driving  without  driving
licence,  driving  by  untrained/disqualified  driver,  driving  by  minor,
driving under the influence of liquor, driving while talking on mobile,
8 M.C. Mehta v. Union of India AIR 1998 SC 190
9 Navbharat Times, New Delhi, 03.01.2008
11

driving without helmet, ill-health of vehicle and bad road infrastructure
are  amongst  the  causes  of  road  accidents.  We  may  also  note  the
following  description  of  the  chaotic  conditions  prevailing  on  Indian
roads, in the words of Hon’ble Mr. Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer:
“More people die of road accidents than by most diseases, so much
so the Indian highways are among the top killers of the country….
“Parking of heavy vehicles on the wrong side, hurrying past traffic
signals on the sly, neglecting to keep to the left of the road, driving
vehicles  criss-cross,  riding  scooters  without  helmets  and  with
whole families on pillions, thoughtless cycling and pedestrian gay
walking  with  lawless  ease,  suffocating  jam-packing  of  stage
carriages  and  hell-driving  of  mini-buses,  overloading  of  trucks
with perilous projections and, above all, policemen, if any, proving
by helpless presence that law is dead in this milieu charged with
melee – such is the daily, hourly scene of summons by Death to
innocent persons who take to the roads, believing in the bona fides
of the traffic laws.”10
1.11 In  view  of  the  above,  the  Law  Commission  prepared  a
Consultation Paper on this important subject taken up suo motu, with a
view to elicit views/suggestions/comments from all those concerned. The
recommendations  in  this  Report  have  been  made  after  taking  into
consideration the responses received.                    
2. Present law in India
(i) Indian Penal Code, 1860
2.1 The Indian Penal Code (IPC) provides the general penal code of
India, impliedly assuming the possibility of existence of special statutes
defining offences and prescribing punishments therefor, for example, the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in the present context.
10 Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab (1979) 4 SCC 719
12

2.2 Sections  279,  304A,  336,  337,  338,  IPC  are  relevant  and
reproduced below:
Section 279.  Rash driving or riding on a public way. “Whoever
drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public way in a manner so rash
or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt
or injury to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.”
Section 304A. Causing death by negligence. “Whoever causes the
death  of  any  person  by  doing  any  rash  or  negligent  act  not
amounting  to  culpable  homicide,  shall  be  punished  with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.”
Section 336.  Act endangering life or personal  safety of others.
“Whoever does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger
human life or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred and
fifty rupees, or with both.”
Section 337.  Causing hurt  by act endangering  life or personal
safety of others. “Whoever causes hurt to any person by doing any
act  so  rashly or  negligently  as  to  endanger  human  life,  or the
personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.”
Section 338.  Causing  grievous  hurt  by act endangering  life or
personal safety of others. “Whoever causes grievous hurt to any
person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger
human life, or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,
or with both.”
13

2.3 Rash or negligent act is an ingredient in all the above sections. A
rash act is primarily an overhasty act, opposed to a deliberate act, but it
also includes an act which, though it may be said to be deliberate, is yet
done without due deliberation and caution. In rashness, the criminality
lies in running the risk of doing an act with recklessness or indifference
to consequences. Negligence means breach of duty caused by omission
to do something which a reasonable man guided by those considerations
which ordinarily regulate conduct of human affairs would do or doing
something which a prudent or reasonable man would not do. Culpable
negligence is acting without consciousness that illegal or mischievous
effects will follow, but in circumstances which show that the actor has
not exercised the caution incumbent on him, and that if he had, he would
have had the consciousness. Generally, in the case of rashness, the guilty
person does an act and breaks a positive duty; in the case of negligence,
he does not do an act which he was bound to do, because he adverts not
to it. ‘Rashness’ conveys the idea of recklessness or the doing of an act
without due consideration; ‘negligence’ connotes want of proper care or
the  standard  of  conduct  which  a  reasonably  prudent  person  would
exercise in a similar situation. 
2.4 To be guilty of an offence under section 279, IPC the accused must
drive a vehicle in such a rash or negligent manner as to endanger human
life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person. Driving at a
high speed or non-sounding of horn by itself does not mean that the
driver is rash or negligent. Place, time, traffic and crowd are important
factors to determine rashness or negligence.
2.5 Section 304A, which was inserted in the IPC by Act 25 of 1870,
postulates  a  rash  and  negligent  act  entailing  death  of  another.  The
14

provisions of this section apply to cases where there is no intention to
cause death, and no knowledge that the act done in all probability would
cause death; it should not amount to culpable homicide. Section 304A is
directed at offences outside the range of sections 299 and 300, IPC.11
Section 279 covers only those cases which relate to driving on public
way endangering human life, while offence under section 304A extends
to any rash or negligent act falling short of culpable homicide. 
2.6 Rash  and  negligent  acts  which  endanger  human  life,  or  the
personal safety of others, are punishable under section 336 even though
no harm follows, and are additionally punishable under sections 337 and
338 if they cause hurt, or grievous hurt. Element of volition or intention
is foreign to the set of offences under sections 336 to 338, IPC. Offences
defined by these sections as well as section 279 are minor offences in
comparison with the offence under section 304A where death is caused
by a rash or negligent act.
2.7 Recently,  the  Supreme  Court  has  observed  that  if  a  person
willfully drives a motor vehicle into the midst of a crowd and thereby
causes  death to some person, it will  not be a case of mere rash  and
negligent driving and the act would amount to culpable homicide.12
2.8 Dealing with sentencing of a convict for offences under sections
279  and  304A,  IPC,  the  Supreme Court  in  Dalbir  Singh  v.  State  of
Haryana13 held:
“When automobiles have become death traps any leniency shown
to drivers who are found guilty of rash driving would be at the risk
11Naresh Giri v. State of M.P. 2007(13) SCALE 7 
12The Times of India, New Delhi, 14.11.2007 
13 (2000) 5 SCC 82
15

of further escalation of road accidents.  All those who are manning
the steering of automobiles, particularly professional drivers, must
be kept under constant reminders of their duty to adopt utmost care
and  also  of  the  consequences  befalling  them  in  cases  of
dereliction.   One  of  the  most  effective  ways  of  keeping  such
drivers under mental vigil is to maintain a deterrent element in the
sentencing  sphere.  Any latitude  shown  to them in that  sphere
would tempt them to make driving frivolous and a frolic.
…
13. Bearing in mind the galloping trend in road accidents in India
and the devastating consequences  visiting the victims and their
families,  criminal  courts  cannot  treat  the  nature  of  the  offence
under Section 304-A IPC as attracting the benevolent provisions of
Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act.  While considering
the quantum of sentence to be imposed for the offence of causing
death by rash or negligent driving of automobiles, one of the prime
considerations should be deterrence.  A professional driver pedals
the accelerator of the automobile almost throughout his working
hours.  He must constantly inform himself that he cannot afford to
have a single moment of laxity or inattentiveness when his leg is
on the pedal of a vehicle in locomotion.  He cannot and should not
take a chance thinking that a rash driving need not necessarily
cause  any accident;  or even if any accident  occurs it need not
necessarily result in the death of any human being; or even if such
death ensues he might not be convicted of the offence; and lastly,
that even if he is convicted he would be dealt with leniently by the
court.  He must always keep in his mind the fear psyche that if he
is convicted of the offence for causing death of a human being due
to his callous driving of the vehicle he cannot escape from a jail
sentence.  This is the role which the courts can play, particularly at
the  level  of  trial  courts,  for  lessening  the  high  rate  of  motor
accidents due to callous driving of automobiles.”
2.9 In Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab14, the Supreme Court had held:
“5.  Nevertheless,  sentencing  must  have  a  policy  of  correction.
This driver, if he has to become a good driver, must have a better
training  in  traffic  laws  and  moral  responsibility,  with  special
reference  to  the  potential  injury  to  human  life  and  limb.
14 Supra note 10
16

Punishment in this area must, therefore, be accompanied by these
components.  The State, we hope, will attach a course for better
driving together with a livelier sense of responsibility, when the
punishment is for driving offences.”
2.10 Very  recently,  the  Supreme  Court  upheld  the  sentence  of
imprisonment awarded to the driver of a bus convicted for offences under
sections 279 and 304A, IPC, following the above dicta.15  
(ii) Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
2.11 The  Motor  Vehicles  Act,  1988  (MVAct)  is  the  principal
instrument for regulating motor vehicles. Chapter II relates to licensing
of drivers of motor vehicles, wherein section 19 confers power on the
licensing  authority  to  disqualify  any  person  from  holding  a  driving
licence or revoke such licence, if he -
(a)   is a habitual criminal or a habitual drunkard; or
(b)  is  a  habitual  addict  to  any  narcotic  drug  or  psychotropic
substance; or
(c) is using or has used a motor vehicle in the commission of a
cognizable offence; or
(d) has, by his  previous  conduct  as  driver  of a  motor  vehicle
shown that his driving is likely to be attended with danger to
the public; or
(e) has  obtained  any  driving  licence  or  a  licence  to  drive  a
particular class or description of motor vehicle by fraud or
misrepresentation; or
15 B. Nagabhushanam v. State of Karnataka 2008 (7) SCALE 716
17

(f) has committed any such act which is likely to cause nuisance
or danger to the public, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, having regard to the objects of this Act; or
(g) has failed to submit to, or has not passed, the tests referred to
in the proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 22; or
(h) being a person under the age of eighteen years who has been
granted  a  learner’s  licence  or  a  driving  licence  with  the
consent in writing of the person having the care of the holder
of the licence and has ceased to be in such care.
2.12 We may now  note  the  provisions  of  sections  20  to  23  of  the
MVAct, extracts whereof are reproduced below:
Section 20. Power of Court to disqualify. “(1) Where a person is
convicted of an offence under this Act or of an offence in the
commission  of  which  a  motor  vehicle  was  used,  the  Court  by
which such person is convicted may, subject to the provisions of
this Act, in addition to imposing any other punishment authorized
by law, declare the person so convicted to be disqualified, for such
period as the Court may specify, from holding any driving licence
to drive all classes or description of vehicles, or any particular
class  or  description  of  such  vehicles,  as  are  specified  in  such
licence:
Provided  that  in  respect  of  an  offence  punishable  under
section 183 no such order shall be made for the first or second
offence. 
(2) Where a person is convicted of an offence under clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 132, section 134 or section 185, the
Court convicting any person of any such offence shall order
the disqualification under sub-section (1), and if the offence is
relatable  to clause  (c) of sub-section  (1) of section  132 or
section 134, such disqualification shall be for a period of not
less than one month, and if the offence is relatable to section
185, such disqualification shall be for a period of not less than
six months.
18

(3) A Court shall, unless for special reasons to be recorded in
writing  it  thinks  fit  to  order  otherwise,  order  the
disqualification of a person,-
(a) who having been convicted of an offence punishable
under section 184 is again convicted of an offence
punishable under that section;
(b) who  is  convicted  of  an  offence  punishable  under
section 189; or
(c) who  is  convicted  of  an  offence  punishable  under
section 192:
Provided that the period of disqualification shall not exceed,
in the case  referred  to in clause  (a), five  years, or in the  case
referred to in clause (b), two years or, in the case referred to in
clause (c), one year.
(4) A Court ordering the disqualification of a person convicted of
an offence punishable under section 184 may direct that such
person  shall, whether he has  previously passed the test  of
competence  to  drive  as  referred  to  in  sub-section  (3)  of
section 9 or not, remain disqualified until he has subsequent
to the making of the order of disqualification passed that test
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority.
….”
Section 21.  Suspension of driving licence in certain cases. “(1)
Where, in relation to a person who had been previously convicted
of an offence punishable under section 184, a case is registered by
a police officer on the allegation that such person has, by such
dangerous driving as is referred to in the said section 184, of any
class  or  description  of  motor  vehicle  caused  the  death  of,  or
grievous hurt to, one or more persons, the driving licence held by
such person shall in relation to such class or description of motor
vehicle become suspended,-
(a) for a period of six months from the date on which the
case is registered; or 
(b) if such person is discharged or acquitted before the
expiry of the period aforesaid, until such discharge or
acquittal, as the case may be.
….”
Section  22.  Suspension  or  cancellation  of  driving  licence  on
conviction. “(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section
19

(3) of section 20, where a person, referred to in sub-section (1) of
section  21,  is  convicted  of  an  offence  of  causing,  by  such
dangerous driving as is referred to in section 184 of any class or
description of motor vehicle, the death of, or grievous hurt to, one
or more persons, the Court by which such person is convicted may
cancel, or suspend, for such period as it may think fit, the driving
licence held by such person in so far as it relates to that class or
description of motor vehicle.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions  of sub-section (2) of
section 20, if a person, having been previously convicted of an
offence punishable under section 185, is again convicted of an
offence  punishable  under  that  section,  the  Court,  making  such
subsequent conviction, shall, by order, cancel the driving licence
held by such person.
….”
Section  23.  Effect  of  disqualification  order.  “(1)  A  person  in
respect of whom any disqualification order is made under section
19 or section 20 shall be debarred to the extent and for the period
specified in such order from holding or obtaining a driving licence
and the driving licence, if any, held by such person at the date of
the order shall cease to be effective to such extent and during such
period.
….”
2.13 Chapter  VIII  of  the  MVAct  deals  with  the  control  of  traffic.
Section 112 pertains to limits of speed and prohibits driving of a motor
vehicle or it being allowed to be driven in any public place at a speed
exceeding  the  maximum permissible  speed.  Rule  118  of  the  Central
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 provides for notified transport vehicles to be
fitted with a speed governor in such a manner that the speed governor
can  be  sealed  with  an  official  seal  in  such  a  way  that  it  cannot  be
removed or tampered with without the seal being broken.16 Section 113
16 The Karnataka High Court has  very recently directed the State Government to
ensure that no new public transport vehicles shall be registered in the State unless they
are fitted with speed governors and gave three months to owners to fit all old vehicles
(which have already been registered) with speed governors (vide  The Hindu, New
Delhi, 01.07.2008).
20

provides for limits of weight and limitations on use. Section 118 confers
power on the Central Government to make regulations for the driving of
motor vehicles. Accordingly, the Rules of the Road Regulations, 1989
have been made. Section 119 provides for the duty to obey traffic signs.
Section  129  provides  for  the  wearing  of  helmets.  Various  other
provisions are contained in Chapter VIII for regulation of traffic.
2.14 The  Rules  of  the  Road  Regulations,  1989  contain  detailed
provisions  regulating  driving  of  motor  vehicles,  like  keeping  left,
overtaking  prohibited,  caution  at  road  junction,  right  of  way  to
pedestrians, signals to be given by drivers, parking, visibility of lamps
and registration marks, lane driving, respecting stop sign on road surface,
distance from vehicles in front, no abrupt brake except for safety reasons,
no  projection  of  loads,  non-carriage  of  dangerous  substances  on  any
public  service  vehicle,  restriction  on  driving  backwards,  carrying  of
documents, viz., driving licence, certificate of registration, certificate of
insurance of the vehicle and in case of transport vehicle the permit and
fitness certificate also.
2.15 Chapter  XIII  of  the  MVAct  relates  to  offences,  penalties  and
procedure. Section 177 contains the general provision for punishment of
offences, which is available in the absence of any specific provision for
punishment applicable in a given case; the punishment is a maximum
fine of Rs. 100/- for the first offence and for the subsequent offence it is
only Rs. 300/-. Section 183 provides the punishment for contravention of
the speed  limits  referred  to in  section  112. Section  184  provides  for
punishment  for  dangerous  driving  and  section  185  for  driving  by  a
drunken person or a person under the influence of drugs. These sections
read as under:
21

Section  184.  Driving  dangerously.  “Whoever  drives  a  motor
vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case including the
nature, condition and use of the place where the vehicle is driven
and the amount of traffic which actually is at the time or which
might  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  in  the  place,  shall  be
punishable  for  the  first  offence  with  imprisonment  for  a  term
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence, if
committed  within  three  years of the  commission  of  a  previous
similar offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees,
or with both.”
Section 185.  Driving by a drunken person or by a person under
the influence of drugs. “Whoever, while driving, or attempting to
drive, a motor vehicle,-
(a) has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg. per 100
ml. of blood detected in a test by a breath analyzer, or
(b) is under this influence of drug to such an extent as to
be  incapable  of  exercising  proper  control  over  the
vehicle,
shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both; and for a second or
subsequent  offence,  if  committed  within  three  years  of  the
commission of the previous similar offence, with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may
extend to three thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.-  For the purposes of this section, the drug or drugs
specified by the Central Government in this behalf, by notification
in  the  Official  Gazette,  shall  be  deemed  to  render  a  person
incapable of exercising proper control over a motor vehicle.”
2.16 Section 184 deals with reckless driving dangerous to the public
having regard to all the circumstances of the case. Offence defined under
section 184 and the offence under section 279, IPC are essentially the
same. No person is supposed to drive a motor vehicle on any public way
22

in a manner which may endanger human life or is likely to cause hurt or
injury to any other person. The law casts a duty on every user of the road
or public way to exercise due care and caution while driving a motor
vehicle. The amount of care and caution required to be exercised by a
driver while driving on a public way would, of course, depend upon the
situation  and  circumstances  in  which  he  is  driving.  The  doctrine  of
contributory negligence has no application in criminal law. Contributory
negligence may be a factor for consideration in determining the sentence,
but it is not a defence entitling the accused to an acquittal.
2.17 Certain other provisions of Chapter XIII providing punishments
are: section 180: allowing unauthorized persons to drive vehicles; section
181: driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 (necessity for driving
licence)  or  section  4  (age  limit  in  connection  with  driving  of motor
vehicles);  section  182:  offences  relating  to  licences;  section  182A:
offences relating to construction and maintenance of vehicles; section
186: driving when mentally or physically unfit to drive; section 187:
offences  relating  to accident;  section  188:  abetment of offence under
section 184, 185 or 186; section 189: racing and trials of speed; section
190: using vehicle in unsafe condition; section 191: sale of vehicle in, or
alteration of vehicle to, a condition contravening the Act; section 192:
using vehicle without registration; section 192A: using vehicle without
permit;  section  193:  agents  and  canvassers  acting  without  proper
authority;  section  194:  driving  vehicle  exceeding  permissible  weight;
section  196:  driving  uninsured  vehicle;  section  197:  taking  vehicle
without authority; section 198: unauthorized interference with vehicle;
section  201:  causing  obstruction  to  free  flow  of  traffic.  Section  207
confers power on any police officer or other person authorized in this
behalf to seize and detain a motor vehicle, if he has reason to believe that
23

it has been or is being used in contravention of the specified provisions,
posing a serious threat to the public.
2.18 We may also note section 8B of the National Highways Act, 1956,
which provides that whoever commits mischief by doing any act which
renders or which he knows to be likely to render a national highway in
relation to whose development and maintenance there is an agreement,
impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with a fine, or with both. 
3. Position in UK
3.1 The  principal  enactments  relating  to  road  traffic  are  the  Road
Traffic  Act  1988  and  the  Road  Traffic  Offenders  Act  1988  (both  as
amended and extended by the Road Traffic Act 1991), the Road Traffic
(Consequential Provisions) Act, 1988 and the Road Safety Act 2006.
Nothing in these Acts authorizes a person to use on a road a vehicle so
constructed or used as to cause a public or private nuisance, or affects the
liability, whether under statute or common law, of the driver or owner so
using such a vehicle.17 Separate enactments govern the taxation, licensing
17 Halsbury’s Laws of England, 4th ed. Reissue (2000), vol. 40(1), Para 2
24

and  registration  of  all  road  vehicles  and  the  operation  and  special
licensing  of  goods  vehicles  and  passenger  vehicles.  There  is  also
legislation containing powers for controlling traffic, parking, speed limits
and other matters (see the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984).18
3.2 The following are certain of offences under the Road Traffic Act
1988:
Section 1.  Causing death by dangerous driving. “A person who
causes  the  death  of  another  person  by  driving  a  mechanically
propelled vehicle dangerously on a road or other public place is
guilty of an offence.”
 
Section  2.  Dangerous  driving.  “A  person  who  drives  a
mechanically propelled  vehicle  dangerously  on  a road  or other
public place is guilty of an offence.”
Section 2A. Meaning of dangerous driving. “(1) For  the
purposes of sections 1 and 2 above a person is to be regarded as
driving dangerously if (and, subject to sub-section (2) below, only
if)-
(a) the way he drives falls far below what would be expected
of a competent and careful driver,  and
(b) it would be obvious to a competent and careful driver
that driving in that way would be dangerous.
(2) A person is also to be regarded a driving dangerously for the
purposes of sections 1 and 2 above if it would be obvious to a
competent and careful driver that driving the vehicle in its current
state would be dangerous.
(3) In  subsections  (1)  and  (2)  above  “dangerous”  refers  to
danger  either  of  injury  to  any person  or of  serious  damage  to
18 ibid.
25

property; and in determining for the purposes of those subsections
what would be expected of, or obvious to, a competent and careful
driver in a particular case, regard shall be had not only to the
circumstances of which he could be expected to be aware but also
to any circumstances shown to have been within the knowledge of
the accused.
(4) In determining for the purposes of subsection (2) above the
state of a vehicle, regard may be had to anything attached to or
carried on or in it and to the manner in which it is attached or
carried.”
Section 2B. Causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving.
“A person who causes the death of another person by driving a
mechanically propelled  vehicle on a road or other public place
without  due  care  and  attention,  or  without  reasonable
consideration for other persons using the road or place, is guilty of
an offence.”
Section 3. Careless, and inconsiderate, driving. “If a person drives
a mechanically propelled vehicle on a road or other public place
without  due  care  and  attention,  or  without  reasonable
consideration for other persons using the road or place, he is guilty
of an offence.”
Section 3ZA. Meaning of careless, or inconsiderate, driving. “(1)
This section has effect for the purposes of sections 2B and 3 above
and section 3A below.
(2) A person is to be regarded as driving without due care and
attention if (and only if) the way he drives falls below what would
be expected of a competent and careful driver.
(3) In  determining  for  the  purposes  of  subsection  (2)  above
what would be expected of a careful and competent driver in a
particular case, regard shall be had not only to the circumstances
of  which  he  could  be  expected  to  be  aware  but  also  to  any
circumstances shown to have been within the knowledge of the
accused.
26

(4) A person is to be regarded as driving without reasonable
consideration  for  other  persons  only  if  those  persons  are
inconvenienced by his driving.”
Section 3ZB.  Causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified
or uninsured drivers. “A person is guilty of an offence under this
section if he causes the death of another person by driving a motor
vehicle  on  a  road  and,  at  the  time  when  he  is  driving,  the
circumstances are such that he is committing an offence under-
(a) section  87(1)  of  this  Act  (driving  otherwise  than  in
accordance with a licence),
(b) section 103(1)(b) of this Act (driving while disqualified),
or
(c) section  143  of  this  Act  (using  motor  vehicle  while
uninsured or unsecured against third part risks).”
Section  3A.  Causing  death  by  careless  driving  when  under
influence of drink or drugs. “(1) If a person causes the death of
another person by driving a mechanically propelled vehicle on a
road  or  other  public  place  without  due  care  and  attention,  or
without reasonable consideration for other persons using the road
or place, and –
(a) he  is,  at  the  time  when  he  is  driving,  unfit  to  drive
through drink or drugs, or
(b) he has consumed so much alcohol that the proportion of
it in his breath, blood or urine at that time exceeds the
prescribed limit, or 
(c) he is, within 18 hours after that time, required to provide
a specimen in pursuance of section 7 of this Act, but
without reasonable excuse fails to provide it, or
(d) he is required by a constable to give his permission for
laboratory test of a specimen of blood taken from him
under  section  7A  of  this  Act,  but  without  reasonable
excuse fails to do so,
he is guilty of an offence.
27

(2) For the purposes of this section a person shall be taken to be
unfit to drive at any time when his ability to drive properly
is impaired.
(3) Subsection  (1)(b),  (c)  and  (d)  above  shall  not  apply  in
relation to a person driving a mechanically propelled vehicle
other than a motor vehicle.”
Section 4.  Driving, or being in charge, when under influence of
drink or drugs. “(1) A person who, when driving or attempting to
drive a mechanically propelled vehicle on a road or other public
place,  is  unfit  to  drive  through  drink  or  drugs  is  guilty  of  an
offence.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1) above, a person who,
when in charge of a mechanically propelled vehicle which is on a
road or other public place, is unfit to drive through drink or drugs
is guilty of an offence.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) above, a person shall be
deemed not to have been in charge of a mechanically propelled
vehicle if he proves that at the material time the circumstances
were such that there was no likelihood of his driving it so long as
he remained unfit to drive through drink or drugs.
(4) The court may, in determining whether there was such a
likelihood as is mentioned in subsection (3) above, disregard any
injury to him and any damage to the vehicle.
(5) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be taken to
be unfit to drive if his ability to drive properly is for the time being
impaired.
….”
Section 5.  Driving or being in charge of a motor vehicle with
alcohol concentration above prescribed limit. “(1) If a person –
(a) drives or attempts to drive a motor vehicle on a road or
other public place, or
(b) is in charge of a motor vehicle on a road or other public
place, 
28

after consuming so much alcohol that the proportion of it in his
breath, blood or urine exceeds the prescribed limit he is guilty of
an offence.
(2) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under
subsection (1)(b) above to prove that at the time he is alleged to
have committed the offence the circumstances were such that there
was no likelihood of his driving the vehicle whilst the proportion
of alcohol in his breath, blood or urine remained likely to exceed
the prescribed limit.
(3) The court may, in determining whether there was such a
likelihood as is mentioned in subsection (2) above, disregard any
injury to him and any damage to the vehicle.”
3.3 As per Part I of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act
1988,  each  of  the  offences  of  causing  death  by  dangerous  driving,
causing death by careless or inconsiderate driving, and causing death by
careless driving when under influence of drink or drugs, is punishable
with maximum imprisonment of five years.  Each of the offences  of
dangerous  driving,  and  causing  death  by  driving  by  unlicensed,
disqualified  or  uninsured  drivers,  is  punishable  with  maximum
imprisonment of two years.  The offence of careless, and inconsiderate,
driving is punishable only with fine, but of the Level 5 on the standard
scale19.  Each of the offences of driving or attempting to drive when unfit
to drive through drink or drugs, and driving or attempting to drive with
excess alcohol in breath, blood or urine, is punishable with maximum
imprisonment of six months.  Each of the offences of being in charge of a
19 “standard scale” is a system whereby fines in legislation have maximum levels set
against a standard scale; then, when inflation makes it necessary to increase the levels
of fines, the legislators need to modify only the scale rather than each individual piece
of legislation.  The standard scale of fines is only for summary offences, as laid down
under section 37 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982; there are 5 Levels on the scale: the
amount of fine for Level 1 is pound 200; for Level 2 it is pound 500; for Level 3 it is
pound 1,000; for Level 4 it is pound 2,500; for Level 5 it is pound 5,000.
29

mechanically  propelled  vehicle  when  unfit  to  drive  through  drink  or
drugs, and being in charge of a motor vehicle with excess alcohol in
breath, blood or urine, is punishable with maximum imprisonment of
three months. Some of these offences are also punishable with fine in the
alternative or with both.
3.4 Other offences under the Road Traffic Act 1988 and other statutes,
include  offences  of  dangerous  cycling  on  a  road,  careless,  and
inconsiderate,  cycling  on  a  road,  cycling  on  a  road  when  under  the
influence of drink or drugs, motor racing on public ways, unauthorized
cycle races on public ways, parking heavy goods vehicles on the verge of
a road, driving or parking on cycle tracks, causing danger to road users,
leaving vehicles in dangerous positions on a road, causing or permitting
a dog without being held on a lead, wanton or furious racing or driving,
riding  or  driving  on  roadside  footways  and  tethering  animals  on  a
highway, non-observance of the rule of the road, and other offences in
relation  to  road  traffic  consisting  of  failure  to  observe  the  statutory
requirements  such  as  those  relating  to  the  wearing  of  seat  belts,
unroadworthy  vehicles,  unauthorized  protective  helmets  for  motor
cyclists,  excise  licences,   driving  licences,  insurance,  parking,  traffic
signs,  speed  limits,  public  service  vehicle  licences,  goods  vehicle
licensing and wrongful use of a disabled person’s badge.
3.5 Most  of  the  offences  concerning  road  traffic  are  summary
offences, punishable with different Levels on the standard scale, also
involving obligatory or discretionary disqualification (to hold or obtain a
licence), or obligatory endorsement of penalty points20 attributable to the
20 A penalty point is essentially a formal reprimand; its aim is to influence and improve
driver  behaviour.  Reaching  a  particular  number  of  penalty  points  leads  to
disqualification. Penalty points stay for a particular period only.
30

offence,  attracting  the  same, on  the  driving  record,  to  be  taken  into
consideration on subsequent conviction.  Certain road traffic offences are
dealt with by way of a fixed penalty rather than by way of prosecution.
4. Previous Reports of the Law Commission of India and
its recommendations
4.1 The 42nd Report of the Law Commission of India, submitted in
June,  1971,  examined  the  provisions  of  the  IPC,  and  its  relevant
paragraphs are reproduced below:
Para  14.8.  Section  279  amended. “Section  279  deals  with  the
offence of rash driving of a vehicle on a public way. We propose
to make the fine under this section unlimited by omitting the words
‘which may extend to one thousand rupees’.”
31

Para 14.9. New section 279A – Dangerously overloaded vehicles.
There  is,  however,  no  provision  corresponding  to  section  282
under which carrying passengers in a boat which is unsafe either
because of its condition or because of its load is an offence. A
similar provision should, in our opinion, be made for taking on the
road  an  unsafe vehicle, and  we suggest  the  addition  of a new
section 279A as follows:-
‘279A.  Driving unsafe or overloaded vehicle on a public
way. Whoever knowingly or negligently drives any vehicle
on a public way when that vehicle is in such a state or so
loaded  as  to  endanger  life,  shall  be  punished  with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.’.” 
Para 16.21. Section 304A and quality of negligence. “Section 304A
deals with homicide by a rash or negligent act. That the negligence
mentioned in the section is not of the same type as in civil disputes
has been made clear by judicial decisions. In civil cases, courts
insist  on  a  maximum  standard  of  care,  while  criminal  courts
require  minimum care. If the  minimum care  is  taken,  then  the
criminal courts would acquit the accused. It was suggested that
this judicial interpretation should be embodied in the section, e.g.,
by adding the words ‘so as to indicate a want of due regard for
human life’.”
Para 16.22. History of section. “The provision in Macaulay’s Draft
Penal Code was as follows:-
‘304. Whoever causes the death of any person by any act or
any illegal omission, which act or omission was so rash or
negligent as to indicate a want of due regard for human life,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or fine, or both.’
This clause was inadvertently or otherwise, left out in the final
draft. The present section 304A was subsequently inserted at the
instance of the then Law Minister, Sir James Stephen, by Act 25 of
1870. It was stated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons:-
‘The Code, as it stands, contains no adequate provision for
the punishment of what English lawyers call manslaughter
32

by negligence.  This  was  provided  for  in  the  draft  Code,
section 304, and the present Bill supplies the omission.’.”
Para 16.24. No clarification necessary. “… sections 336 and 337
refer to acts done ‘so rashly or negligently as to endanger human
life or the personal safety of others’. But obviously these or similar
words would not be adequate or appropriate for the purposes of
section 304A. We find it difficult to devise a satisfactory form of
words  which,  while  giving  effect  to  the  concept  of  ‘criminal
negligence’,  could  be  regarded  as  sufficiently  expressive  and
simple.  Judicial  decisions  have  fully  explained  the  scope  and
content of the section and on the whole, it seems best not to make
any change in the wording.”
Para 16.25. Punishment inadequate. “We are, however, of the view
that  the  present  maximum  punishment  for  the  offence  is
inadequate, and should be increased. This is desirable, in view of
the greater importance which this offence has assumed since the
section  was  inserted  due  to  the  wide  use  of  fast  moving
mechanically  propelled  vehicles  and  the  frequency  in  the
commission  of the  offence,  accompanied  by callousness  of  the
offender towards the victim; often there are cases tried under this
section which are very near to culpable homicide and deserve a
severe sentence.”
Para 16.26. Opinions received. “… in the views expressed on our
question as to the quantum of punishment under the Code, there
has been a strong demand for increase in the punishment under this
section.  The  suggestions  vary from three  years  to  seven  years.
There is also a suggestion to increase the period to seven years if
more than one death has been caused. … .”
Para 16.27.  Maximum punishment to be five years. “After taking
into  account  our  proposal  to  fix  the  maximum punishment  for
culpable  homicide  not  amounting  to  murder  at  ten  years,  we
recommend that the maximum punishment for causing death by
negligence may be half that period, namely, five years.”
Para 16.71. Sections 336 to 338 – Recommendation for increase in
punishment. “The punishment under sections 336 to 338 are not
adequate, and should be increased as follows:-
33

(i) Section 336: Substitute ‘six months’ for ‘three months’,
and  ‘five  hundred  rupees’  for  ‘two  hundred  and  fifty
rupees’.
(ii) Section 337: Substitute ‘one year’ for ‘six months’ and
omit  the  words  ‘which  may  extend  to  five  hundred
rupees’.
(iii) Section 338: Substitute ‘three years’ for ‘two years’ and
omit  the  words  ‘which  may  extend  to  one  thousand
rupees’.”
  
4.2 Clauses 116, 117, 123, 138, 139 and 140 of the IPC (Amendment)
Bill,  1972,  as  introduced  in  the  Council  of  States  on  11.12.1972,
contained the above suggestions of the Law Commission of India.
4.3 Clauses 118, 119, 127, 141, 142 and 143 of the IPC (Amendment)
Bill,  1978,  as  passed  by  the  Council  of  States  on  23.11.1978,
correspondingly carried the above changes; there was slight difference in
the text of new section 279A in that it not only sought to punish the one
driving a vehicle himself but also the one who permitted another person
to drive. In addition, clause 128 of the Bill inserted new section 304B
(relating to ‘hit and run’ cases) after section 304A in the IPC, which read
as under:
“Causing  death  or  injury  by rash  or  negligent  driving. ‘304B.
Whoever by rash or negligent driving of any vehicle causes the
death of any person or causes any injury which is likely to cause
the death of such person, the causing of such death not amounting
to culpable homicide, and drives or runs away without informing
any police station within a reasonable time, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.- Where the act constituting the offence under
section  304A  or  this  section  is  committed  while  under  the
34

influence of drink or drug shall be deemed to have been committed
in a rash or negligent manner.
Explanation 2.- In this section “vehicle” includes “vessel”.’
"
4.4 As the House of the People was dissolved in 1979, the Bill, though
passed by the Council of States, lapsed.
4.5 The 156th Report of the Law Commission of India, submitted in
August, 1997, examined the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978, and affirmed
the above amendments, except that new section 304B was recommended
to be inserted as sub-section (2) in section 304A because the number
could not be ‘304B’ in view of the amendment of the IPC by Act 43 of
1986 inserting section 304B relating to dowry death. 
5. Pending Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2007
5.1 The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2007 (Bill) was introduced
in the Council of States on 15.05.2007 with the objective to, inter alia,
enhance penalties, wherever considered necessary, for violation of the
provisions  of  the  MVAct  with  a  view  to  ensure  road  safety  and
discipline,  and  provide  for  civil  penalty  in  addition  to  the  existing
criminal liability.
35

5.2 Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert new sub-section (5) in section
21 of the MVAct, which reads as under:
“(5) Where the authority authorized to check the driving licence of
any driver, is satisfied after breath analyzer test or any other test as
may be prescribed by the State Government that the driver is under
the influence of alcohol, may suspend the driving licence on the
spot for a period not exceeding three months.”
5.3 Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to amend section 110 of the MVAct
with a view to empower the Central Government to also make rules for
design of the bodies for goods carriage and medium or heavy passenger
vehicles and the material to be used for such bodies, cabin design on a
bare chassis, the conditions for the purpose of licensing and regulating
the establishments for fabrication of bus or truck bodies on bare chassis,
the placement of audio-visual or radio or tape recorder type of device in
the transport vehicle, seating arrangement in public service vehicles and
the protection of passengers against the weather and any matter relating
to construction equipment, maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and
fitness of all categories of motor vehicle; the entry relating to ‘speed
governors’ is proposed to be substituted with ‘specifications of speed
governors’.
5.4 Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to amend section 111 of the MVAct
with a view to empower State Governments to also make rules regarding
installation of speed governors in transport vehicles and fog lights in
motor vehicles.
5.5 Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to amend section 113 of the MVAct
with a view to make the consignor or the common carrier, whosoever has
36

issued the documents in possession of the person in charge of the motor
vehicle, responsible for the overloading; where the goods carried belong
to more than one consignor, the responsibility for the overloading shall
rest with the common carrier who engaged the motor vehicle; the owner
of  the  motor  vehicle  or  the  driver  shall  be  responsible  for  the
overloading, where the motor vehicle with overloaded goods is operating
under the charge of such owner or the driver, as the case may be. The
expression “common carrier” is sought to be defined by inserting a new
clause (4A) in section 2 of the MVAct,  vide  clause 2 of the Bill, as a
person  engaged  in  the  business  of  collecting,  storing,  forwarding  or
distributing goods to be carried by goods carriages under goods receipt
or  transporting  for  hire,  of goods  from place  to place,  by motorized
transport on road, for all persons indiscriminately and includes a goods
booking  company,  contractor,  agent,  broker  and  courier  agency,  but
excluding the Government.
5.6 Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to substitute new section for section
161  of  the  MVAct  and  provides,  inter  alia, the  definition  of  the
expression “hit and run motor accident” in the context of payment of
compensation,  out  of  the  Solatium  Fund,  in  respect  of  death  of,  or
grievous hurt to, persons resulting from hit and run motor accidents. The
said expression means “an accident arising out of the use of a motor
vehicle  or motor  vehicles  the identity whereof  cannot  be  ascertained
inspite of reasonable efforts”. 
5.7 Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 177 of the MVAct
relating to general provision for punishment of offences, enhancing the
quantum of fine for the first offence from the present maximum of Rs.
100/- to a fixed Rs. 500/- and for the subsequent offence from the present
37

maximum of Rs. 300/- to Rs. 1,500/- subject to the minimum of Rs.
1,000/-.
5.8 Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to amend section 180 of the MVAct
providing punishment for allowing unauthorized persons to drive motor
vehicles, to enhance the quantum of fine from the present maximum of
Rs. 1,000/- to Rs. 2,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs. 1,000/-.
5.9 Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to amend section 181 of the MVAct
providing  punishment  for  driving  motor  vehicles  in  contravention  of
section  3  (necessity  for  driving  licence)  or  section  4  (age  limit  in
connection with driving of motor vehicles), to enhance the quantum of
fine from the present maximum of Rs. 500/- to Rs. 2,000/- subject to the
minimum of Rs. 500/-.
5.10 Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to amend section 183 of the MVAct
providing punishment for contravention of the speed limits referred to in
section 112, to enhance the quanta of fines prescribed under sub-section
(1)  relating  to  driving  at  excessive  speed  and  under  sub-section  (2)
relating to causing an employee to drive at excessive speed. Under sub-
section (1), the quantum of fine for the first offence is proposed to be
enhanced from the present maximum of Rs. 400/- to a fixed Rs. 500/- and
for the subsequent offence from the present maximum of Rs. 1,000/- to
Rs. 5,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs. 2,000/-. Under sub-section (2),
the quantum of fine for the first offence is proposed to be enhanced from
the  present  maximum of  Rs.  300/-  to  a  fixed  Rs.  500/-  and  for  the
subsequent offence from the present maximum of Rs. 500/- to Rs. 3,000/-
subject to the minimum of Rs. 1,500/-.
38

5.11 Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to amend section 184 of the MVAct
providing punishment for dangerous driving, to enhance the quantum of
fine for the first offence from the present maximum of Rs. 1,000/- to a
fixed  Rs.  1,000/-  and  for  the  subsequent  offence  from  the  present
maximum of Rs. 2,000/- to Rs. 5,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs.
2,000/-.
5.12 Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to amend section 185 of the MVAct
providing punishment for driving by a drunken person or a person under
the  influence  of  drugs,  to  enhance  the  quantum of  fine  for  the  first
offence from the present maximum of Rs. 2,000/- to a fixed Rs. 2,000/-
and for the subsequent offence from the present maximum of Rs. 3,000/-
to a fixed Rs. 3,000/-.
5.13 Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to amend section 186 of the MVAct
providing punishment for driving when mentally or physically unfit to
drive, to  enhance  the  quantum of fine  for the  first  offence  from the
present maximum of Rs. 200/- to a fixed Rs. 500/- and for the subsequent
offence from the present maximum of Rs. 500/- to a fixed Rs. 1,000/-.
5.14 Clause 58 of the Bill proposes to insert new section 187A in the
MVAct, which reads as under:
Section 187A. Liability of a person while driving a motor vehicle
in  certain  cases.  “(1)  Without  prejudice  to  the  provisions
contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, whoever drives a motor
vehicle in rash or negligent manner and causes injury to a person
or  damages  any property shall  be  liable  to penalty which  may
extend to five thousand rupees.
(2) The penalty realised under sub-section (1) shall be credited
to  the  Solatium  Fund  established  under  section  161A  in  such
manner as may be prescribed.”
39

5.15 Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to amend section 192 of the MVAct
providing punishment for using a motor vehicle without registration, to
enhance the quantum of fine for the first offence from the present Rs.
5,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs. 2,000/- to Rs. 10,000/- subject to
the minimum of Rs. 4,000/- and for the subsequent offence from the
present  Rs.  10,000/-  subject  to  the  minimum  of  Rs.  5,000/-  to  Rs.
20,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs. 10,000/-.
5.16 Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to amend section 192A of the MVAct
providing punishment for using a motor vehicle without permit or in
contravention of any of its conditions, to enhance the quantum of fine for
the first offence from the present Rs. 5,000/- subject to the minimum of
Rs. 2,000/- to Rs. 10,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs. 4,000/- and for
the  subsequent  offence  from  the  present  Rs.  10,000/-  subject  to  the
minimum of Rs. 5,000/- to Rs. 20,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs.
10,000/-.
5.17 Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to substitute new section for section
198 of the MVAct providing punishment for unauthorized interference
with a motor vehicle, to enhance the quantum of fine from the present
maximum of Rs. 100/- to Rs. 1,000/- subject to the minimum of Rs. 500/-
for tampering with brake or any other part of the mechanism of a motor
vehicle and to Rs. 2,500/- subject to the minimum of Rs. 1,000/- for
tampering with emission control device fitted by the manufacturer.
5.18 Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to amend section 200 of the MVAct
providing for composition of certain offences, to delete therefrom section
194  providing  punishment  for  driving  a  motor  vehicle  exceeding
40

permissible  weight,  and  to  insert  therein  section  192A  providing
punishment for using a motor vehicle without permit or in violation of
any of its conditions.
5.19 Clause 63 of the Bill proposes to insert new section 213A in the
MVAct, which reads as under:
Section  213A.  Notification  of  inspection  auditors  by  State
Governments. “(1) The State Government may, by notification in
the  Official  Gazette,  notify  such  experts  in  the  field  of  road
transport as it thinks fit for the purpose of carrying out audit of the
authorized testing stations set up under sub-section (2) of section
56.
(2) The  State  Government  may  make  rules  to  regulate  the
qualifications, powers and functions of experts notified under sub-
section (1).”
5.20 Significantly, the Bill proposes enhancement in the quanta of fines
only and the terms of imprisonment wherever prescribed in the MVAct
are  not  proposed  to  be  increased.  Deterrent  effect  is  sought  to  be
achieved through increases in the quanta of fines prescribed for various
offences under the MVAct.
5.21 The  Department-related  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on
Transport,  Tourism  and  Culture,  to  which  the  Bill  was  referred  for
examination and report on 17.05.2007, submitted to Parliament its 139th
Report  on  the  Bill  on  28.04.2008.  The  following  are  some  of  the
important observations/ recommendations of the Committee:
Para 13.2. “Clause 9 seeks … .”
41

Para 13.3. “The Committee notes that drunken driving is a major
cause of road accidents.  This malady needs to be dealt with a firm
hand. The Committee got suggestions from various quarters to the
effect that if a drunken driver commits an accident which results in
the  death  of  persons  the  former  should  be  dealt  under  the
provisions of culpable homicide not amounting to murder under
the  relevant  section  of  IPC.   The  Committee,  therefore,
recommends  that  the  Government  may  amend  the  necessary
legislations  to  include  the  deaths  due  to  drunken  driving  as
culpable homicide not amounting to murder.”
Para 13.4. “The Committee also recommends that if the drunken
driver commits an accident his action should not be construed as
mere ‘negligence’ rather it should be  treated as  a premeditated
commitment  of  a  crime  and  the  drunken  driver  should  be
punishable  under  relevant  provisions  of  IPC  depending  on  the
consequences of the accident.”
Para 20.2. “Clause 27 seeks … .”
Para  20.3.  “The  Committee  welcomes  this  amendment  as
installation of speed governors and fog lights are important safety
requirements.   The  Committee  hopes  that  this  Clause  once
legislated should be implemented systematically and the violators
of this provision should be punished heavily as over speeding is
one of the main causes for the rising number of accidents on the
roads.”
Para 31.2.  “Clause 50 seeks … .”
Para 31.3. “One of the stakeholders has suggested slab rates for
over  speeding  since  the  danger  increases  manifold  when  the
vehicle is driven at 90Km/ph or at 120 km/hr. Thus slab may be as
follows:
20% more than speed limit Rs.500
50% more than speed limit Rs.1000
100% and beyond cancellation of licence and held under
section 184 of Motor Vehicle Act.”
42

Para 31.4. “The Committee is also of the view  that to restrain
dangerous  driving  which  causes  human  and  financial  loss  the
above  slab  may  be  suitably  formulated  for  every  offence
prescribed  in  the  Motor  Vehicle  Act.   The  Committee  also
recommends that the slab may be revised annually in proportion to
the rate of inflation and the clause may be modified accordingly.”
Para 32.2. “Clause 53 seeks … .”
Para  32.3.   “The  recommendations  of  the  Committee  against
Clause  50  may  be  applied  in  this  Clause  also  with  necessary
modifications.”
Para 33.2. “Clause 54 seeks … .”
Para 33.3.  “The Committee notes that the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988,  does  not  contain  any provision  or  penalty related  to  the
usage of mobile phones by the drivers while driving.  However,
through  an  executive  order  the  Government  prescribes  the
penalties for the use of mobile phones while driving.  However,
the executive order is silent on the following issues:-
- Should the case be booked under section 184 of the
MVA?
- What  does  it  mean  ‘while  driving’  –  can  one  be
booked while waiting on a signal?
- Can hands free-phones be used?
- Are  two  way radio  sets  allowed  by taxi  users  and
other paramilitary and police organizations?”
Para 33.4. “At present, the offence of usage of mobiles will be
punishable under the category of dangerous driving vide Section
184 Motor Vehicles  Act.  The Committee feels that the Motor
Vehicles Act being a two decade old legislation could not have
envisaged  the  usage  of  mobile  phones  and  the  gravity  of  the
situation which causes large number of accidents.  The Committee,
43

therefore,  recommends  that  a  new  Section  should  be  entrusted
specifically for the usage of mobile phones while driving.”
Para 34.2. “Clause 55 seeks … The Committee’s recommendations
against Clause 9 may be applied in case of this Clause also with
necessary modifications.”
Para  34.3.  “It  was  submitted  to  the  Committee  by  the
representative of the Institute of Road Traffic Education that the
breath alcohol tests conducted on drunken drivers proved that they
were having alcohol level of 30 mg to 200mg and above in 100ml
of blood.  The more the quantity of alcohol makes the driver more
vulnerable to accidents.  The danger increases manifold when he
drives  at  90  km/hr  or  120  km/hr  compared  to  the  low  speed
driving.  The probability of accidents increase with the increase of
the speed of motor vehicle.  Higher the speed would mean higher
the risk of accidents and therefore should attract higher penalty.
The Committee feels that a singular penalty in such cases will not
serve  the  purpose.   The  Committee  recommends  the  following
slabs:
(i) 30-60 mg per 100ml of blood- a fine of Rs.2000/-
(ii) 60-150 mg per 100ml of blood- a fine of Rs.4000/-
and/or imprisonment; and
(iii) 150mg  and  above  per  100ml  of  blood  a  fine  of
Rs.5000/-  and  minimum  imprisonment  with  a
provision to cancel the driving licence.”
Para 34.4. “The Committee’s recommendations against Clause 9
may  be  applied  in  case  of  this  Clause  also  with  necessary
modifications.”
Para 35.2. “Clause 63 proposes … .”
Para  35.4.  “One  of  the  stakeholders  in  their  memorandum
submitted  the  Committee  has  stated  that  the  maintenance  of
vehicles in good condition is a requirement of law.  This area is
often overlooked as the pollution levels and the numbers of road
mishaps  would  suggest.   The  cut  throat  competition,  the  huge
44

burden  of  repayment  of  loans  and  the  inability  of  the
administration  to  properly check  each  vehicle  physically at the
time of issuance of certificate of fitness are some of the reasons
that can be attributed to the above. As a result accidents are on the
rise resulting in loss of life and property.  Further, the menace of
auto pollution is on the upswing.  Proper checks and control are
the need of the hour.”
Para 35.5. “The M.V. Act, 1988 provides scope for appointment of
“Authorized Testing Stations” for proper checking and testing of
all vehicles for the purpose of renewal of certificate of fitness.
They are supposed to install required machinery for this purpose
and also appoint qualified engineers for this purpose.  But, the
government  has  failed  to  implement  the  same  inspite  of  the
adequate manpower available at their disposal for the same job.”
Para  35.6.  “The  Committee  notes  that  almost  all  the  vehicle
manufacturers  are having  authorized dealerships  and authorized
workshops  in  almost  all  the  cities.   The  Committee  therefore
recommends that the manufacturers themselves can be asked to set
up shops for this purpose after obtaining the required licenses from
the concerned authority.  This will be a huge step towards safer
travel and transportation in this country.  This will also provide
scope  for additional  business  opportunities  and  scope for  fresh
jobs  and  employment  opportunities.   Adequate  staff  may  be
provided  for  testing  the  vehicles  and  the  staff  may  be  given
periodical training to test the vehicles.  Wherever, the Government
are unable to provide adequate staff, entrusting the work to vehicle
manufacturer may be thought of.  Hence, government must move
in this direction immediately.  The manufacturers themselves can
be  asked  to  set  up  shops  for  this  purpose  after  obtaining  the
required licenses from the concerned authority.  This will be a
huge step towards safer travel and transportation in this country.
This will also provide scope for additional business opportunities
and scope for fresh jobs and employment opportunities.”
Para 35.7. “The Committee recommends that the Government may
reconsider  Clause  63  after  carefully  scrutinizing  the  issues
involved and addressing the issues raised by the stakeholders since
this will authorize the State governments to have a panel of experts
in the field of road transport for the purpose of carrying out audit
45

inspection of authorized testing stations set up under section 56(2)
of the Act.”
Para 41. “Another aspect brought before the Committee by one of
the stakeholders is the insufficiency of the road signage.  They
have stated that the road sign has been updated by the Indian Road
Congress in 2001 but the First Schedule to the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 has not been amended to incorporate the changes.  This
has left a major vacuum in road user education, the driver training
as well as installation of signage as per law.  The Committee feels
that if the signages in the schedule are obsolete or not keeping
with the pace of the changing times, naturally there will remain a
serious handicap in driver training and education.  The Committee
also  notes  that  there  is  no  mention  of  road  marking  or traffic
signals in the first schedule.  The Committee feels that this is a
major shortcoming and recommends that the first schedule should
be amended with comprehensive signs and symbols, road markings
and  signals  as  per  the  recommendations  of  the  Indian  Roads
Congress.”
6. Proposed Road Safety and Traffic Management Boards 
and National Road Traffic Policy
6.1 The Committee on Infrastructure (COI) headed by Hon’ble Prime
Minister had approved in its third meeting on 13.01.2005, creation of a
Directorate  of  Road  Safety  and  Traffic  Regulation.  With  a  view  to
recommend  the  scope,  functions  and  nature  of  this  Directorate,  a
Committee  headed  by  Shri  S.  Sundar  (Sundar  Committee)  was
constituted  by  the  Department  of  Road  Transport  and  Highways  on
23.11.2005. The Sundar Committee submitted its Report in February,
2007, appending therewith a draft of “National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Act, 2007”. The long title of the proposed enactment reads
as under:
46

“An Act to provide for the establishment of National and State
level Road safety and Traffic Management Boards for the purpose
of orderly development, regulation, promotion and optimization of
modern and effective road safety and traffic management systems
and practices including improved safety standards in road design,
construction,  operation  and  maintenance,  and  production  and
maintenance  of  mechanically  propelled  vehicles  and  matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
6.2 The  following  clauses  of  the  proposed  enactment  need  to  be
perused:
Clause  2  (g).  ‘“Mechanically  Propelled  Vehicle”  or  “Vehicle”
means any mechanically propelled vehicle whether motorized or
non-motorized, adapted for use upon roads whether the power of
propulsion  is  transmitted  thereto  from  an  internal  or  external
source  and  includes  trailers,  cycles  and  cycle  rickshaws  but
excludes vehicles pulled by animals or humans.’
Clause  2(k).  ‘“roads”  means  all  roads  including  National
Highways, state highways, district roads, village roads and urban
roads which are open as public roads to Mechanically Propelled
Vehicles  and  includes  bridges,  flyovers,  overbridges  and
underbridges, but excludes all private roads and roads that fall in
cantonment areas.’
Clause 2(n). ‘“vehicle other than Mechanically Propelled Vehicle”
means all vehicles not being Mechanically Propelled Vehicles and
includes carts drawn by animals or humans.’
Clause  6.  Functions  of  the  National  Road  Safety  and  Traffic
Management Board. “(1) The  National  Board  shall,  in
relation to road safety and traffic management, have the following
powers and functions, namely:
(a) specify  minimum  design,  construction,  operation  and
maintenance standards for National Highways;
47

(b) specify  minimum  standards  for  establishing  and
operating trauma facilities and para-medical facilities for
dealing  with  traffic  related  injuries  on  National
Highways;
(c) conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor
compliance with the standards specified by it;
(d) make  recommendations  or  issue  guidelines  relating  to
design,  construction,  operation  and  maintenance
standards for roads other than National Highways.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
law for the time being in force and effect, the National Board shall,
in relation to Mechanically Propelled Vehicles, have the following
powers and functions, namely:
(a) specify the minimum safety requirements and standards
for  the  design  and  manufacture  of  Mechanically
Propelled Vehicles;
(b) specify  the  minimum  conditions  for  safe  usage  of
Mechanically  Propelled  Vehicles  including  but  not
limited  to  specifying  the  maximum  load  bearing  and
capacity limits;
(c) conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor
compliance with the standards specified by it;
(d) specify safety standards for vehicular traffic on various
types of roads including but not limited to schemes for
segregation  of  various  classes  of  Vehicles  in  separate
speed lanes and their right of way; 
(e) aid and advise the Central Government in determining
the changes, if any, required to any rules and regulations
for  training,  testing  and  licensing  of  drivers  of
Mechanically Propelled Vehicles; and
(f) aid  and  advise  the  Central  Government  in  matters
relating  to  or  arising  out  of  traffic  management  of
Mechanically  Propelled  Vehicles  for  the  purposes  of
ensuring road safety.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and
(2) above, the National Board shall have the following additional
powers and functions, namely:
(a) conduct or cause to be conducted research in different
spheres  of  road  safety  and  traffic  management  and
publish the findings thereof;
48

(b) establish  the  procedure  and  methodology  for  data
collection,  transmission  and  analysis  at  appropriate
levels, and define the role of different agencies within the
jurisdiction of National Board involved in the process;
(c) establish  procedures  and  centres  for  multi-disciplinary
crash investigation;
(d) make  recommendations  or  issue  guidelines  relating  to
safety  features  for  vehicles  other  than  Mechanically
Propelled Vehicles and for safe operating conditions for
such vehicles;
(e) make recommendations or issue guidelines for building
capacity  and  skills  in  the  traffic  police,  hospitals,
highway  authorities,  educational  and  research
organizations and other organizations dealing with road
safety and traffic management;
(f) promote  best  practices  in  road  safety  and  traffic
management, undertake road safety and traffic education
programs, and  conduct  campaigns  to  create awareness
amongst all sections of road users, children and students
on matters relating to road safety;
(g) recognize non-government organizations working in the
area of road safety and traffic management, and assist
them in promotion of efficient traffic management and
road safety;
(h) provide for the special requirements of women, children,
senior citizens,  disabled persons and pedestrians when
making regulations or recommendations or when issuing
guidelines  relating  to  road  safety  and  traffic
management;
(i) advise the Central Government on administration of the
provisions relating to safety as contained in Chapters II,
IV, V, VII, VIII and XIII of the Central Motor Vehicles
Act 1988 and the rules made thereunder;
(j) provide technical assistance and guidance to the State
Road Safety and Traffic Management Boards with a view
to promoting uniform road safety and traffic management
systems and practices throughout the country;
(k) enter into agreements with the state governments and/or
State Road Safety and Traffic Management Boards  on
behalf of the Central Government for the promotion of
road safety and efficient traffic management; and
(l) liaise with other agencies such as education boards and
institutions, Director-General of health services and non-
49

governmental  organizations  in matters  relating  to road
safety and traffic management.
(4) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of this
section 6 shall be construed or interpreted as conferring on the
National Board powers, functions and jurisdiction in respect of
matters  relating  to  public  order,  roads  other  than  National
Highways  and  vehicles  other  than  Mechanically  Propelled
Vehicles.
(5) The National Board may be a special or general resolution
delegate to the Chairperson or any other member of the National
Board or to any officer of the National Board, subject to such
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be stipulated, such of its
powers and functions under this Act (except powers under sub-
section  (3)  of  this  section  6  and  section  37  as  it  may  deem
necessary.
(6) The National Board shall exercise its powers and discharge
its functions in a transparent manner.”
Clause  11.  Functions  of  the  State  Road  Safety  and  Traffic
Management Board. “(1) Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the
Act, the State Board shall in relation to road safety and traffic
management on roads other than National Highways situate within
the  relevant  State  have  the  following  powers  and  functions,
namely:
(a) aid and advise the State Government, on matters relating
to or arising out of road safety and traffic management in
the State;
(b) coordinate road safety and traffic management functions
and implementation of measures relating thereto with the
State level  agencies  and departments  involved in road
safety and traffic management for the purposes of this
Act;
(c) specify  minimum  design,  construction,  operation  and
maintenance  standards  for  roads  other  than  National
Highways with due  regard  to the recommendations  or
guidelines of the National Board;
(d) specify  minimum  standards  for  establishing  and
operating trauma facilities and para-medical facilities for
dealing  with  traffic  related  injuries  on  all  roads  other
than National Highways;
50

(e) conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor
compliance with the standards specified under this Act
other  than  matters  relating  to  National  Highways  and
matters  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Central
Government;
(f) specify minimum safety requirements and standards for
the  design  and  manufacture  of  vehicles  other  than
Mechanically Propelled Vehicles with due regard to the
recommendations or guidelines of the National Board;
(g) recommend measures for enquiry into and redressal of
complaints  and  grievances  relating  to  road  safety and
traffic management;
(h) upon request of the National Board, conduct or cause to
be conducted surveys and audits to monitor compliance
with laws relating to road safety and traffic management
and  the  adherence  to  standards,  procedures  and
guidelines  specified  or  issued  by  the  National  Board
under this Act, and report the results of such surveys or
audits to the National Board;
(i) identify  and  promote  road  user  behavior  strategies,
capacity building measures, public awareness and road
safety and traffic management education;
(j) promote efficient procedures for accident investigation,
data  collection,  reporting  and  analysis,  in  relation  to
matters falling within its jurisdiction; and
(k) promote the provision of special requirements relating to
women, children, senior citizens, disabled persons and
pedestrians in matters relating to road safety and traffic
management on roads other than National Highways.
(2) The  State  Board  may  be  a  special  or  general  resolution
delegate  to  the  Chairperson  or  any  other  member  of  the  State
Board  or  to  any  officer  of  the  State  Board,  subject  to  such
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order
such of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem
necessary.
(3) The State Board shall exercise its powers and discharge its
functions in a transparent manner.
(4) In exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions, the
State Board shall conform to the regulations made by the National
Board under this Act and shall have due regard for the guidelines
issued by the National Board.”
51

Clause 28.  Advisory Committee. “(1) The Appropriate Board shall
by notification  establish  within  ninety days from the appointed
date,  a  committee  to  be  known  as  the  National  Advisory
Committee or the State Advisory Committee, as the case may be. 
(2) The National Advisory Committee shall consist of not more
than thirty-one members and the State Advisory Committee shall
consist  of not  more  than  twenty-one  members  to  represent  the
interests of road users, construction industry, transport industry,
automobile  manufacturers,  and  relevant  non-governmental
organizations and academic and research bodies.
(3) The  Chairperson  and  members  of  the  Appropriate  Board
shall be the ex-officio Chairperson and ex-officio members of the
National Advisory Committee or the State Advisory Committee, as
the case may be.
(4) The  National  Advisory Committee  or  the  State  Advisory
Committee, as the case may be, shall meet at least four times in a
year and its proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the
Regulations to be specified.”
Clause 29.  Objects of Advisory Committee. “The objects of the
National Advisory Committee or the State Advisory Committee, as
the case may be, shall be to advise the Appropriate Board on-
(a) questions of policy;
(b) matters relating to quality, continuity, reliability and
extent of road safety and traffic management; and
(c) protection of road user interest.”
Clause  30.  Penalties. “(1)  Whoever  fails  to  comply  with  the
regulations specifying the-
(i) design,  construction,  operation  and  maintenance
standards for National Highways; or
(ii) safety standards for the design or manufacture of any
Mechanically Propelled Vehicle,
shall be punishable by the National Board with fine which may
extend to Rupees ten lakh and where the contravention or failure is
a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to Rupees
three  lakh  for  every  month  or  part  thereof  during  which  such
52

failure or contravention continues after lapse of 60 (sixty) days
from the date of imposition of fine for the first such contravention
or failure:
Provided that no such fine shall be imposed on
(i) the operator or owner of whole or any part of any
National  Highway  for  contravention  of  any  such
regulation within a period of three years from the date
on which such regulation came into effect; and
(ii) the manufacturer of a Mechanically Propelled Vehicle
for  contravention  of  any  such  regulation  within  a
period  of  one  year  from  the  date  on  which  such
regulation came in effect.
(2) Whoever fails to comply with the regulations specifying the-
(i) standards  for  design,  construction,  operation  and
maintenance of roads other than National Highways,
or
(ii) safety standards for the design or manufacture of any
vehicle other than a Mechanically Propelled Vehicle,
shall be punishable by the State Board with fine which may extend
to Rupees  ten lakh and where the contravention or failure is a
continuing one, with further fine which may extend to Rupees one
lakh for every month or part thereof during which such failure or
contravention continues after lapse of 60 (sixty) days from the date
of conviction for such contravention or failure:
Provided that no such fine shall be imposed on 
(i) the operator or owner of whole or any part of any road
other  than  National  Highways  for  contravention  of
any  such  regulation  within  a period  of three  years
from the  date  on  which  such  regulation  came into
effect; and
(ii) the  manufacturer  of  a  vehicle  other  than  a
Mechanically Propelled Vehicle for contravention of
any such regulation within a period of one year from
the date on which such regulation came into effect.
(3) Whoever -
53

(i) fails to furnish the information required pursuant to
Section 7 or Section 12 or fails to grant or impedes
any  access  required  to  any  document,  record  or
information  or  to  any  premises  where  any  such
document, record or information is believed to be kept
pursuant to section 7 or Section 12; or
(ii) willfully  furnishes  or  causes  to  be  furnished  any
information or return which he knows to be false or
incorrect in material particulars,
shall  for  each  such  offence  be  punishable  by  the  Appropriate
Board with fine which may extend to Rupees one thousand and in
the case of a continuing offence to a further fine which may extend
to Rupees  five hundred  for each  day after the first  day during
which the offence continues.
(4) Without prejudice to the penalty that may be imposed under
sub-sections  (1)  and  (2)  above,  the  Appropriate  Board  may
recommend remedial action to the Appropriate Government.”
Clause 37. Power of National Board to make regulations. “(1)The
National Board may, by notification, make regulations consistent
with  this  Act  and  the  rules  made  thereunder  to  carry  out  the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Before notifying any regulations, the National Board shall
publish  a  draft  thereof  in  such  manner  as  it  may  deem  fit  to
provide an opportunity to persons affected or likely to be affected
by such regulations to make suggestions or objections and upon
receiving  such  suggestions  and  objections  within  the  period
stipulated  by  the  National  Board,  consider  the  same  before
notifying the regulations, with or without modifications.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) any  matter  which  is  required  to  be,  or  may  be,
specified  by  regulations  or  in  respect  of  which
provisions is to be or may be made by regulations for
the purposes of the National Board’s exercise of its
powers under section 6 of the Act;
(b) the time and places of meetings of the National Board
and the procedure  (including  quorum necessary for
54

the transaction  of business) to be followed at such
meetings under sub-section (1) of section 16;
(c) the  powers  and  duties  of  the  Secretary under  sub-
section (1) of section 18;
(d) the terms and conditions of the consultants appointed
under sub-section (4) of section 18;
(e) the procedure to be followed by the National Board
including  the  places  at  which  it  shall  conduct  its
business under sub-section (1) of section 16; and
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified  by  regulations  or  in  respect  of  which
provision is to be or may be made by regulations.”
Clause  43.  Power  of  the Appropriate  Government  to  suspend
application of regulations. “(1) If,  at  any  time,  the  Appropriate
Government is of the opinion that on account of grave emergency,
national  security or other  like cause  it  is  necessary to  keep  in
abeyance  any  or  all  regulation(s)  made  under  this  Act  by  the
Appropriate  Board,  the  Appropriate  Government,  may,  by
notification  in  the  Official  Gazette,  direct  suspension  of
application of such regulation(s) for such period, not exceeding six
months at a time, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) On the expiration of the period of suspension specified in
the  notification  issued  under  sub-section  (1),  the  Appropriate
Government may for reasons to be recorded in writing extend the
period  of  suspension  for  such  further  term,  not  exceeding  six
months at a time, as it may consider necessary.
(3) The  Appropriate  Government  shall  cause  a  notification
issued under sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances leading to such action and
the  reasons  for  such  action  to  be  laid  before  each  House  of
Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case  may be, at the
earliest possible opportunity.”
Clause 44.  Act to have overriding effect. “The provisions of this
Act  shall  have  effect  notwithstanding  anything  inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or
in any other instrument having effect by virtue of any other law
other than this Act.” 
55

6.3 While the Union Government is still examining the Report of the
Sundar Committee, the State of Kerala has taken the lead and brought on
its statute Book the Kerala Road Safety Authority Act, 2007 (Kerala
Act).  The  Kerala  Act  provides  for the constitution  of a Road Safety
Authority for implementation of road safety programmes in the State, for
the  establishment  of  a  Road  safety  Fund  and  for  matters  connected
therewith  and  incidental  thereto.  The  Transport  Commissioner  is  ex
officio the Road Safety Commissioner, who is a member and the Chief
Executive Officer of the Authority. The following sections of the Kerala
Act need to be perused:
Section 4.  Functions of the Authority. “The Authority shall have
the following functions, namely:-
(a) advising the Government on road safety policies;
(b) prescribing and enforcing road safety standards and
procedures;
(c) formulate and implement schemes, projects and
programmes, relating to road safety;
(d) co-ordinating the functions of all the agencies and
Government departments discharging the duties
related to road safety;
(e) implementing road safety awareness programmes;
(f) administration of the Fund;
(g) sanctioning expenditure for the implementation of
road safety schemes and programmes;
(h) sanctioning expenditure for road safety projects and
for purchase and installation of equipments and
devices connected with road safety;
(i) sanctioning expenditure for the conduct of studies,
projects and research on matters relating to road
safety;
(j) sanctioning expenditure for trauma-care programmes
or activities;
(k) sanctioning administrative expenditure of the
Authority;
(l) sanctioning expenditure on matters connected with
road safety measures;
56

(m) formation of self help groups, under the leadership of
the Authority for the rescue operation in the place of
accident;
(n) discharging such other functions, as may be
prescribed, having regard to the objects of this Act.”
Section 14.  Power to order removal of causes of accidents. “(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being  in  force,  where  the  Authority  is  satisfied  on  complaint,
report by any person or otherwise that –
(i) the act of any person or persons on a public road; or
(ii) the placement or positioning of any vehicle, animal,
object built without the approval of any recognized
administrative  authority,  structure  or  materials
including arches, banners, display boards, hoardings,
awnings,  tents,  pandals,  poles,  platforms, rostrums,
statues, monuments and other similar structures, on a
public road; or
(iii) the movement of animals or vehicles on a public road;
or
(iv) the  condition  of  any  tree,  structure  or  building
situated in the vicinity of a public road; or
(v) the entry or exit of any building or premise in the
vicinity of a public road,
is likely to cause accidents or causes obstruction to the free flow of
traffic or distract the attention or obstruct the vision of the driver
of  any  vehicle,  the  Road  Safety  Commissioner  may,  after
recording reasons thereof, direct the person concerned, either by a
general or special order, to take such measures within two months
as it considers necessary and such person shall be bound to comply
with the direction within such time, as may be specified by the
Authority.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
case of urgency, the Road Safety Commissioner may take such
action as may be necessary to prevent accident or obstruction, as
the case  may be, and recover the cost  thereof from the person
responsible, in such manner as may be prescribed.”
57

Section 15. Power to order works. “(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force, it shall be
lawful for the Authority to order any work or improvement on a
public road, as it considers necessary, to secure safety on such
roads  and  each  concerned  Government  department  or the  local
authority or any other authority shall be bound to carry out such
works or improvement within such time, as may be specified by
the Authority:
 
Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be issued
in  respect  of  any  highway  declared  as  such  under  the  Kerala
Highway Protection Act, 1999 (6 of 2000) except with the prior
consultation  of  the  highway  authority  of  the  respective  area
appointed under the said Act:
Provided further that it shall not be issued in respect of the
roads under the control of the Local Self Government Institutions
without  prior  consultation  with  the  respective  Local  Self
Government.
(2) It shall be the duty of every officer of the Government, local
authority or any other authority to act in aid of the Authority in
enforcing the orders under sub-section (1).”
Section  16.  Power  to recover  cost. “If any person on  whom a
written order is served under section 14 refuses or fails to comply
with the order, the Authority may take such action as to prevent
danger and ensure safety to the public and may recover the cost
with legitimate interest thereof from such person.”
Section 19.  District Road Safety Council. “(1) The Government
may, by notification  in the  Gazette,  constitute  a Council to be
called “the District Road Safety Council” in every district in the
State.
(2) … .
(3) The District Road Safety Council shall exercise such powers
and perform such functions, as the Authority may, from time to
time, delegate.”
58

Section 26. Punishment for failure to comply with the Authority’s
order. “(1) Whoever refuses or fails to comply with any order of
the Authority or the Road Safety Commissioner or any District
Road  Safety  Council  under  this  Act,  shall  be  punishable  with
imprisonment for a term of six months or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
(2) In the case of continuing offence a fine of one thousand
rupees  shall  be  imposed  for  each  day  for  which  the  offence
continues.”
Section 27.  Punishment for obstructing the Authority. “Whoever
obstructs the Authority, the Road Safety Commissioner, District
Road  Safety Council  or any officer of  the  Authority or of the
District Road Safety Council or any person employed or engaged
by them in the discharge of the functions under this Act, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term of maximum three years
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with
both.”
Section 28.  Compounding of offences. “Any offence punishable
under  section  26  may  either  before  or  after  the  institution  of
prosecution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and for
such  amount  as  the  Government  may,  by  notification  in  the
Gazette, specify in this behalf.”
Section 37. Power to give directions. “The Government may give
directions to the Authority in matters of policy of the Authority
and the Authority shall be bound to give effect to such directions.”
6.4 Significantly, section 215 of the MVAct mandates the constitution
of Road Safety Councils at the national and State levels and of District
Road  Safety  Committee  for  each  district  and  there  are  in  place  the
National Road Safety Council and State Road Safety Councils in some
States. This provision reads as under:
59

Road  Safety  Councils  and  Committees.  “(1)  The  Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
for the country a National Road Safety Council consisting of a
Chairman and such other members as that Government considers
necessary and on such terms and conditions as that Government
may determine.
(2) A  State  Government  may, by notification  in  the  Official
Gazette,  constitute  for  the  State  a  State  Road  Safety  Council
consisting  of  a  Chairman  and  such  other  members  as  that
Government considers necessary and on such terms and conditions
as that Government may determine.
(3) A  State  Government  may, by notification  in  the  Official
Gazette,  constitute  District  Road  Safety  Committee  for  each
district  in  the  State  consisting  of  a  Chairman  and  such  other
members  as  that  Government  considers  necessary  and  on  such
terms and conditions as that Government may determine.
(4) The  Councils  and  Committees  referred  to  in  this  section
shall  discharge such functions  relating  to the road safety
programmes  as  the  Central  Government  or  the  State
Government, as the case may be, may, having regard to the
objects of the Act, specify.”
6.5 The  Union  Department  of  Road  Transport  and  Highways  has
formulated a draft National Road Safety Policy (Policy) in consultation
with road safety experts and other departments. The same was placed
before the National Road Safety Council and has also been placed on the
said Department’s website21. The comments/suggestions received thereon
are under examination.22
6.6 The Policy notes that the number of road accidents and fatalities have
been growing in recent years, which call for concerted and multi-
disciplinary  preventive  and  remedial  efforts.  As  road  accidents
21 http://morth.nic.in, visited 17.06.2008
22 ibid.
60

involve roads, motor vehicles as also the human beings, the Policy
needs to address on a holistic basis, issues covering road engineering,
signage, vehicle design, education of road users and enforcement of
traffic safety measures. Safer road infrastructure, safer vehicles, safer
drivers, safety for vulnerable road users, road traffic safety education
and training, and traffic enforcement are, accordingly, included in the
goals.
6.7 The  Policy states  that  safety conscious  planning  and design  of
roads and road networks will be encouraged whilst undertaking new as
well as up-gradation and rehabilitation road schemes through application
of road safety audits.
6.8  The Policy notes  that without  vehicle  construction  regulations
governing  safety  standards  for  systems  such  as  braking,  lightening,
signaling there can be little control over the general safety of country’s
vehicle fleet. Steps will be taken to strengthen the system to ensure that
safety aspects are built in at the stage of design, manufacture, usage,
operation  and  maintenance  of  vehicles  in  line  with  prevailing
international  standards  in  order  to  minimize  adverse  safety  and
environmental  effects  of  vehicle  operation  on  road  users  and
infrastructure. 
6.9 The Policy states that the government will strengthen the system of
driver licensing and training to improve the competence and capability of
drivers.  The  manpower, both  quantitatively and  qualitatively, will  be
improved to test and evaluate the driving ability of all licence applicants.
Setting up of modern driving schools with adequate infrastructure and
61

tools in partnership with automobile manufacturers, other private sector
participants and NGOs will be encouraged.
6.10   The Policy notes that the road users found most vulnerable on
Indian roads from a road safety point of view are pedestrians, bicyclists
and  motorized  two-wheelers.  Special  provisions  for  people  on  foot
include regulations for pedestrian crossings, which give legal precedence
to pedestrians. However, it is the pedestrians seeking to protect their
lives, who almost invariably give way to motor vehicles. Another set of
vulnerable road users are the non-motorized handcarts, cycle rickshaws,
animal-drawn carts, etc. In India, there is high degree of heterogeneity
and no segregation of motorized and non-motorized traffic on roads. This
often leads to increased conflicts and thus reduced safety.  There is no
appropriate legislation to govern the behaviour of pedestrians and
non-motorized traffic on the roads.
6.11 The  Policy  states  that  the  government  will  encourage  all
professionals undertaking road design, road construction, road network
management, traffic management and law enforcement to attain adequate
knowledge of road safety issues. Inclusion of road safety awareness as
part of educational curricula for students of various age groups will be
encouraged.  Also,  training  programmes  for  various  specific  groups
involved  in  road  safety  management  tasks,  e.g.,  traffic  personnel,
highway engineers, school teachers, town planners, NGOs, etc. will be
planned, designed and implemented.
6.12 The Policy notes that enforcement of traffic legislation is aimed at
controlling road user behaviour by preventive, persuasive and punitive
methods in order to effect the safe and efficient movement of people and
62

goods. The primary objective of traffic law enforcement is the creation of
a deterrent to violators and potential violators of traffic laws and to raise
the level of compliance among all drivers and road users. Appropriate
steps to ensure that the enforcement authorities are adequately manned,
trained, equipped and empowered to carry out their function ensuring
safe road use and orderly traffic flow, will be taken.
7. Pedestrians and Non-motorized Traffic
7.1 We may first refer to the following provisions in the Rules of the
Road Regulations, 1989:
Regulation 11.  Right of way.  “The pedestrians have the right of
way  at  uncontrolled  pedestrian  crossings.  When  any  road  is
provided with footpath or cycle track specially for other traffic,
except with permission of a police officer in uniform, a driver shall
not drive on such footpath or track.”
Regulation 19.  Stop sign on road surface.  “(1) When any line is
painted on or inlaid into the surface of any road at the approach to
the road junction or to a pedestrian crossing or otherwise, no driver
shall drive a motor vehicle so that any part thereof projects beyond
that line at any time when a signal to stop is being given by a
Police Officer or by means  of a traffic  control  light  or by the
display of any traffic sign.
(2) A line for the purpose of this regulation shall not be less
than 50 millimetres in width at any part and may be either in white,
black or yellow.”
Regulation  22.  Traffic  Sign  and  Traffic  Police.  “A driver  of a
motor vehicle and every other person using the road shall obey:-
(a) every direction given, whether by signal or otherwise, by
a police officer or any authorized person for the time
being in charge of the regulation of traffic;
63

(b) any direction applicable to him and indicated on or by
notice,  traffic  sign  or  signal  fixed  or  operated  by  an
authority, competent to do so:
(c) any direction indicated by automatic signaling devices
fixed at road intersections.”                (underlining is
ours) 
7.2 There  is  no  central  legislation  comprehensively
governing/regulating  the  use  of  roads  by  the  pedestrians  and  non-
motorized traffic. It is left to the States to legislate thereon.
7.3  According  to  the  Delhi  Municipal  Corporation  Act,  1957,  all
roads  in  Delhi  vest  in  the  Corporation  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the
Commissioner of the Corporation to maintain, control and regulate them,
vide section 298. The definition of “vehicle” includes a carriage, cart,
van,  dray,  truck,  hand-cart,  bicycle,  tricycle,  cycle-rickshaw,  auto-
rickshaw, motor vehicle and every wheeled conveyance which is used or
is  capable  of  being  used  on  a  road,  vide  section  2(62),  and  the
Commissioner may, inter alia, prohibit vehicular traffic on any road so
as to prevent danger, obstruction or inconvenience to the public or to
ensure quietness in any locality, vide section 303.
7.4 The Delhi Municipal Corporation Cycle-rickshaw Bye-laws, 1960,
dealing  with  licensing  of  drivers  of  cycle-rickshaws  for  hire,  puts
conditions on a person applying for propelling a cycle-rickshaw,  vide
bye-law 5. The driver of a cycle-rickshaw should,  inter alia, know the
rules of the road and signals used by the drivers of other vehicles or by
the traffic police and drive with all care and attention and observe all the
rules  of the road; he should  not disobey any direction of any police
officer for the regulation of traffic; he should keep the lamp properly
lighted during the hours of lighting time; he should not propel a cycle-
64

rickshaw while intoxicated or make use of insulting, abusive or obscene
language. Bye-law 17 prescribes penalty for contravention of the said
provision in terms of paltry fine, i.e., fine which may extend to Rs. 50/-
and in the case of a continuing contravention, an additional fine which
may extend to Rs. 5/- for every day during which such contravention
continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
7.5 The  State  of  Karnataka  has  on  its  statute  book  the  Karnataka
Traffic Control Act, 1960 (KTCA), enacted for the control of traffic on
highways and public places in the said State.  The KTCA regulates the
use of roads by vehicles, other than motor vehicles, and animals.  The
following sections of the KTCA need to be perused:
Section 2. Definitions. “In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires, - 
(a) ‘animal’ means any elephant, camel, horse, ass, mule,
cattle, sheep or goat;
(b) ‘driver’ means in the case of a vehicle, the person in
charge or control of the vehicle for the time being,
and  in  the  case  of  an  animal,  any  person  driving,
leading, riding or otherwise managing or controlling
the  animal,  and  the  words  “drive”,  “driving”  and
“driven” shall be construed accordingly;
…
(h) ‘public  place’  means  a  road,  street,  way  or  other
place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which the
public have a right of access or over which they have
a right to pass, and includes  any place or stand at
which  passengers  are  picked  up  or  set  down  by  a
public vehicle;
 (i) ‘public  vehicle’  means  any  vehicle  used  or
constructed or adapted to be used for the carriage of
passengers or goods for hire or reward, other than a
motor vehicle;
…
65

                 (k)  ‘vehicle’ includes any wheeled conveyance drawn,
propelled or driven by any kind of power including
human, animal, motor, steam or electric power and
includes  any  barrow,  sledge,  plough,  drag  or  like
vehicle, but does not include a motor vehicle.”
Section  3.  Power  to  restrict  the  use  of  vehicles.  “The  State
Government or any authority authorized in this behalf by the State
Government, if it is satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of
public safety or convenience, or because of the nature of any road
or bridge, may, by notification, prohibit or restrict subject to such
exceptions and conditions as may be specified in the notification,
the driving of vehicles or animals either generally in a specified
area or on a specified highway or part of a highway, and when
such prohibition or restriction is imposed shall cause appropriate
traffic signs to be placed or erected under section 4 at suitable
places:
Provided that where any prohibition or restriction under this
section is to remain in force only for a period of one month or less,
notification thereof in the Official Gazette shall not be necessary.”
Section  4.  Traffic  signs.  “(1)  The  State  Government  or  any
authority authorized in this behalf by the State Government may
cause  or  permit  traffic  signs  of  any  size,  colour,  type  or
description, to be placed or erected in any highway or public place
for the purpose of bringing to public notice any prohibitions or
restrictions imposed under section 3, or generally for the purpose
of regulating traffic other than motor vehicle traffic.
…
(4) Any authority authorized in this behalf by notification by the
State Government may remove or cause to be removed any sign or
advertisement which is so placed in his opinion as to obscure any
traffic sign from view or any sign or advertisement which is in his
opinion  so  similar  in  appearance  to  a  traffic  sign  as  to  be
misleading.
(5) No person shall wilfully remove, alter, deface, or in any way
tamper with any traffic sign placed or erected under this section.
(6) If any person accidentally causes such damage to a traffic
sign as renders it useless for the purpose for which it is placed and
66

erected under this section, he shall report the circumstances of the
occurrence at the nearest police station, as soon as possible, and in
any case within twenty-four hours of the occurrence.”
Section 6. Duty to obey traffic signs. “(1) Every driver of a vehicle
or animal shall drive it in conformity with any indication given by
a  mandatory  traffic  sign  and  in  conformity  with  the  driving
regulations set forth in the Second Schedule and shall comply with
all directions given to him by any police officer for the time being
engaged in the regulation of traffic in any public place.
(2) In this section, ‘mandatory traffic sign’ means a traffic sign
included in Part A of the First Schedule or any traffic sign of
similar form (that is to say consisting of or including a circular
disc) displaying a device, word or figure and having a red ground
or border or any prescribed sign painted or marked on the road or
erected or displayed for the purpose of regulating traffic other than
motor vehicle traffic under sub-section (1) of section 4.”
Section 7. Signals. “The driver of a vehicle shall on the occasions
specified  in  the  Third  Schedule  make  the  signals  specified
therein.”
Section 8. Leaving vehicle or animal in dangerous position. “No
person in charge of a vehicle or animal shall cause or allow the
vehicle  or animal  to  remain at  rest  on  any highway in  such  a
position or in such a condition or in such circumstances as to cause
or is likely to cause danger, obstruction or undue inconvenience to
other users of the highway or public place.”
Section 9. Towing of person riding cycle. “No driver of a vehicle
shall tow a person riding a cycle and no person riding a cycle shall
allow himself to be towed by any other vehicle.”
Section 10. Leaving vehicle or animal unattended. “No person in
charge of a vehicle or animal shall allow such vehicle or animal to
stand or proceed on a highway or public place unless it is under
adequate control.”
Section 11. Duty of driver to stop in certain cases. “(1) The driver
of a vehicle or animal shall cause the vehicle or animal, as the case
may  be,  to  stop  and  to  remain  stationary  so  long  as  may  be
reasonably necessary,-
67

(a) when required to do so by any police officer in uniform,
or
(b) when the vehicle or animal is involved in the occurrence
of  an  accident  to  a  person,  animal  or  vehicle  or  of
damage  to  any  property,  whether  the  driving  or
management of the vehicle or animal was or was not the
cause of the accident or damage, and he shall give his
name and address and the name and address of the owner
of the vehicle or animal to any person affected by such
accident  or  damage  who  demands  it,  provided  such
person also furnishes his name and address.
(2) The driver of a vehicle or animal shall, on demand by a
person  giving  his  own  name and address  and  alleging  that  the
driver has committed an offence punishable under section 19, give
his name and address to that person.”
Section  12.  Duty  of  owner  of  vehicle  or  animal  to  give
information. “The owner of a vehicle or animal the driver of which
is accused of any offence under this Act shall on demand by any
police officer give all information regarding the name and address
of the driver which is in his possession or could by reasonable
diligence be ascertained by him.”
Section 13. Duty of driver in case of accident and injury to person.
“When any person is injured, or damage to property to the amount
of twenty-five rupees or more is caused as the result of an accident
in which a vehicle is involved, the driver of the vehicle or other
person in charge of the vehicle shall-
(a) take all reasonable steps to secure medical attention
for any person so injured and, if necessary, convey
him to the nearest hospital, unless the injured person,
or  his  guardian,  in  case  he  is  a  minor,  desires
otherwise;
(b) give on demand by a police officer any information
required  by  him  or,  if  no  police  officer  or  other
authority is present, report the circumstances of the
occurrence as soon as possible, and in any case within
twenty-four  hours  of the occurrence,  at  the nearest
police station, or, if he continues his journey after the
accident, at the next police station.”
68

Section 14.  Power to make rules for control of traffic. “(1) The
State Government may, after previous publication, by notification,
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of
this Chapter, and different rules may be made for different areas of
the State.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for-
(a) the  removal  and  the  safe  custody  of  the  vehicles
including  their  loads  which  have  broken  down  or
which  have  been  left  standing  or  have  been
abandoned on a highway;
(b) the use of weighing devices;
(c) the determination,  maintenance  and  management  of
parking places for the use of vehicles and animals and
the fees, if any, which may be charged for their use;
(d) prohibiting  the  use  of  foot-paths  or  pavements  by
vehicles or animals;
(e) subject to specified conditions the segregation to any
specified part of a highway of specified classes and
descriptions of vehicle or animal traffic;
(f) prohibiting or restricting the use of audible signals at
certain times or in certain places;
(g) regulating  the loading of vehicles  and in particular
limiting the loads carried in relation to the size and
nature of the tyres fitted;
(h) a  right  of  way  for  ambulances  and  fire  brigade
vehicles;
(i) prohibiting the use of devices designed to prevent the
rotation of any wheel of a vehicle;
(j) the control of animals likely to frighten other animals
or pedestrians;
(k) the control of children on highways;
(l) prohibiting the riding by more than two persons at the
same time on cycles other than cycles designed for the
purpose;
(m) prohibiting the riding of more than two cycles abreast;
(n) limiting the age of drivers of vehicles;
(o) the  inspection  of  loads  carried  on  vehicles  and
animals;
(p) the use of nose-ropes for animals;
(q) regulating  the  driving  of  vehicles  and  animals  at
night;
69

(r) regulating the use of highways by pedestrians;
(s) generally,  the  prevention  of  danger,  injury  or
annoyance to the public or any person, or of danger or
injury to property or of obstruction to traffic;
(t) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.
(3) The rules made under this section shall take effect on such
date as may be specified in such rules and such date shall not be
earlier than one month from the date of the publication of such
rules in the official Gazette.”
Section  15.  General  provision  regarding  construction  and
maintenance.  “Every  vehicle  used  on  a  highway  shall  be  so
constructed and maintained as to prevent danger or inconvenience
to persons using that vehicle and other road users.”
Section 16. Power to make rules for construction, equipment and
maintenance of vehicles. “(1) The State Government may, after
previous  publication,  by notification,  make rules  regulating  the
construction,  equipment  and  maintenance  of  vehicles  used  on
highways and public places, and different rules may be made for
different areas of the State.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
rules  may  be  made  under  this  section  governing  any  of  the
following matters either generally or in respect of public vehicles
of a particular class or description or in particular circumstances,
namely:-
(a) the width, height and length of vehicles;
(b) the size, nature and condition of wheels and tyres;
(c) brakes;
(d) lamps and reflectors;
(e) warning devices;
(f) the inspection of vehicles by prescribed authorities;
(g) regulating  the particulars  exhibited  on vehicles  and
the  manner  in  which  such  particulars  shall  be
exhibited.”
Section 17.  Power to make rules for control of public vehicles.
“(1) The State  Government  may, after previous  publication, by
notification,  make  rules  for  regulation  of  the  use  of  public
vehicles, and different rules may be made for different areas of the
State.
70

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
rules  may  be  made  under  this  section  governing  any  of  the
following matters either generally or in respect of public vehicles
of a particular class or description or in particular circumstances,
namely:-
(a) the  issue,  renewal,  modification  or  cancellation  of
permits and the transfer of permits from one person to
another;
(b) the issue, renewal or cancellation of driving licences;
(c) the issue of duplicate copies in place of permits and
driving licences mutilated, defaced, lost or destroyed;
(d) … 
(e) the  documents,  plates  and  marks  to  be  carried  by
public vehicles, the manner in which they are to be
carried and the language in which such documents are
to be expressed;
(f) the badges and uniforms to be worn by drivers;
(g) the  fees  to  be  paid  in  respect  of  permits,  driving
licences,  duplicate  copies  of  permits  or  driving
licences, plates, badges, and appeals preferred under
this Chapter;
(h) the production of permits and driving licences before
specified officers for purposes of inspection;
(i) the conduct of persons licensed to act as drivers of
public vehicles when acting as such and the conduct
of passengers in such vehicles;
(j) the limiting of the number of public vehicles or public
vehicles  of  any  specified  class  or  description  for
which permits may be granted in any specified area,
or on any specified route or routes;
(k) the fixing of maximum or minimum fares or freights;
(l) the maximum number of passengers or the maximum
quantity  of  goods  that  may be  carried  in  a  public
vehicle;
(m) the conditions subject to which passengers, luggage
or goods may be carried in a public vehicle;
(n) the construction and fittings of and the equipment to
be carried by public vehicles, whether generally or in
specified areas or on specified routes;
(o) the safe custody and disposal of property left in public
vehicles;
71

(p) the  conveyance  in  public  vehicles  of  corpses  or
persons  suffering  from  infectious  or  contagious
diseases or goods likely to cause discomfort or injury
to passengers and the inspection and disinfection of
such vehicles, if used for such purposes;
(q) the requirements which shall be complied with in the
construction  or  use  of  any  stand  or  halting  place,
including  the  provision  of adequate  equipment  and
facilities for the convenience of all users thereof, the
fees, if any, which may be charged for the use of such
facilities,  the  records  which  shall  be  maintained  at
such stands or places, the staff to be employed thereat
and the duties and conduct of such staff, and generally
for  maintaining  such  stands  and  places  in  a
serviceable and clean condition;
(r) requiring the person in charge of a public vehicle to
carry  any  person  tendering  the  legal  or  customary
fare;
(s) the inspection  of public  vehicles  including  animals
used to drive them;
(t) the records  to be maintained  and  the returns  to  be
furnished by the owners of public vehicles;
(u) the appointment, terms of appointment, jurisdiction,
control and functions of authorities for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this Chapter; and
(v) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.
(3) The rules made under this section shall take effect on such
date as may be specified in such rules and such date shall not be
earlier than one month from the date of the publication of such
rules in the Official Gazette.”
Section 18.  General provision regarding punishment of offences.
“Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule
made  thereunder  shall,  if  no  other  penalty  is  provided  for  the
offence, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend
to  ten  rupees,  or  if  having  been  previously  convicted  of  any
offence under this Act, he is again convicted of an offence under
this Act, with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.”
Section 19. Driving recklessly or dangerously. “Whoever drives a
vehicle or animal on a highway at a speed or in a manner which is
dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances of
72

the case including the nature, condition and use of the highway or
public place where the vehicle or animal is driven and the amount
of traffic which actually is at the time or which might reasonably
be expected to be in the highway shall be punishable on a first
conviction  for  the  offence  with  fine  which  may extend  to  one
hundred rupees and for a subsequent offence with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees.”
Section 20. Power to arrest without warrant. “(1) A police officer
in uniform may arrest without warrant,-
(a) any person who being required under the provisions of
this Act to give his name and address refuses to do so, or
gives a name and address which the police officer has
reason to believe to be false, or 
(b) any person concerned in an offence under this  Act or
reasonably suspected to have been so concerned, if the
police officer has reason to believe that he will abscond
or otherwise avoid the service of summons.
(2) A police officer or other authority arresting without warrant
the driver of a vehicle or animal shall, if the circumstances so
require, take or cause to be taken any steps he may consider proper
for the temporary custody of the vehicle or animal.”
Section  21.  Summary  disposal  of  cases.  “(1)  A  court  taking
cognizance  of  an  offence  under  this  Act  may  state  upon  the
summons to be served on the accused person that he-
(a) may appear by a legal practitioner and not in person,
or
(b) may by a specified date prior to the hearing of the
charge plead guilty to the charge by registered letter
and  remit  to  the  court  such  sum as  the  court  may
specify.
(2) Where an accused person pleads guilty under clause (b) of
sub-section  (1)  and  remits  the  sum  specified,  no  further
proceedings in respect of the offence shall be taken against him.”
SECOND SCHEDULE. DRIVING REGULATIONS.
73

“1. The driver of a vehicle or animal shall drive the vehicle or
animal, as the case may be, as close to the left-hand side of the
road  as  may be  expedient  and  shall  allow  all  traffic  which  is
proceeding in the opposite direction to pass him on his right hand
side.
2. Except as provided in regulation 3, the driver of a vehicle or
animal  when  passing  shall  drive  to  the  right  of  all  traffic
proceeding in the same direction as himself.
3. The driver of a vehicle or animal when passing may drive to
the left of a motor vehicle or a vehicle or an animal the driver of
which having indicated an intention to turn to the right has driven
to the centre of the road.
4. The driver of a vehicle or animal shall not pass a vehicle
travelling in the same direction as himself,-
(a) if  his  passing  is  likely  to  cause  inconvenience  or
danger to other traffic proceeding in any direction;
(b) where a point or corner or a hill or an obstruction of
any kind renders the road ahead not clearly visible.
5. The  driver  of  a vehicle  or animal  shall  not,  when  being
overtaken or being passed by any class of traffic, do anything in
any way to prevent the other traffic from passing him.
6. The driver of a vehicle or animal shall drive slowly when
approaching a road intersection, a road junction or a road corner
and shall not drive into or cross any such intersection or junction
until he has become aware that he may do so without endangering
the safety of persons thereon.
7. The driver of a vehicle or animal shall on entering a road
intersection, if the road entering is a main road designated as such,
give way to traffic proceeding along that road and in any other
case give way to all traffic approaching the intersection on right
hand.
8. The driver of a vehicle or animal shall, -
(a) when turning to the left, drive as close as may be to
the left hand side of the road from which he is making
the turn and of the road which he is entering;
74

(b) when turning to the right, draw as near as may be to
the centre of the road along which he is travelling and
cause the vehicle or animal to move in such a manner
that-
(i) so far as may be practicable it passes beyond,
and  so  to leave  on  the driver’s  right  hand  a
point formed by the intersection of the centre
lines of the intersection roads; and
(ii) it arrives as near as may be at the left hand side
of the road which the driver is entering.”
THIRD SCHEDULE. SIGNALS.
“1. When about to turn to the right or to drive to the right hand
side of the road in order to pass another vehicle or for any other
purpose, the driver of a vehicle shall extend his right arm or a whip
if carried, in a horizontal position to his right outside the vehicle or
otherwise so as to be visible from behind.
2. When the driver of a vehicle wishes to indicate to the driver
of a motor vehicle or a vehicle behind him that he desires that
driver to overtake him, he shall extend his right arm, or a whip if
carried, horizontally to his right outside the vehicle or otherwise so
as to be visible from behind and shall swing the arm or a whip, as
the  case  may  be  backwards  and  forwards  in  a  semi-circular
motion.”
75

8. Recommendations
8.1 Clauses  118,  119,  127,  128,  141,  142  and  143  of  the  IPC
(Amendment)  Bill,  1978,  as  passed  by  the  Council  of  States  on
23.11.1978, are reproduced below:
Clause  118.  Amendment  of section  279.  ‘In section  279  of the
Penal Code, for the words “which may extend to one thousand
rupees” shall be omitted.’
Clause 119. Insertion of new section 279A. “After section 279 of
the Penal Code, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
‘279A.  Driving unsafe or overloaded vehicle on a public
way. Whoever knowingly or negligently drives or permits
any person to drive any vehicle on a public way when that
vehicle is in such a state or so loaded as to endanger life,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or
with both.
Explanation.- In this section –
(a) “vehicle” includes any vessel; and
(b) “public way” includes any public water-way.’.”
Clause 127. Amendment of section 304A. ‘In section 304A of the
Penal Code, for the words “two years”, the words “five years”
shall be substituted.’
76

Clause 128.  Insertion of new section 304B. “After section 304A of
the Penal Code, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
‘304B.  Causing  death  or  injury  by  rash  and  negligent
driving. Whoever by rash or negligent driving of any vehicle
causes the death of any person or causes any injury which is
likely to cause the death of such person, the causing of such
death not  amounting to culpable  homicide, and  drives  or
runs  away without  informing  any police  station  within  a
reasonable  time, shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of
either  description  for a term which may extend  to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.- Where the act constituting the offence under
section 304A or this section is committed while under the
influence of drink or drug shall be deemed to have been
committed in a rash or negligent manner.
Explanation 2.- In this section, “vehicle” includes vessel.’.”
Clause  141.  Amendment  of section  336.  ‘In section  336  of the
Penal Code,-
(a) for the words “three months”, the words “six months”
shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “two hundred and fifty rupees”, the words
“five hundred rupees” shall be substituted.’
Clause  142.  Amendment  of section  337.  ‘In section  337  of the
Penal Code,-
(a) for the words “six months”, the words “one year” shall
be substituted;
(b) the words “which may extend to five hundred rupees”
shall be omitted.’
Clause  143.  Amendment  of section  338.  ‘In section  338  of the
Penal Code,-
(a) for the words “two years”, the words ‘three years” shall
be substituted;
(b) the words “which may extend to one thousand rupees”
shall be omitted.’ 
77

8.2 The Law Commission of India in its 156th Report, submitted in
1997, affirmed the above changes in the IPC, except that new section
304B was recommended to be inserted as sub-section (2) in section 304A
because the number could not be ‘304B’ in view of the amendment of the
IPC by Act 43 of 1986 inserting section 304B relating to dowry death. 
8.3 We reaffirm the changes in the IPC as carried out by clauses 118,
119, 127, 128, 141, 142 and 143 of the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978, as
passed  by  the  Council  of  States  on  23.11.1978,  subject  to  the
modifications suggested in the subsequent paragraphs.
8.4 The Law Commission of India now feels that even the maximum
term of imprisonment of five years in section 304A, IPC would not be
adequate on the touchstone of the theory of deterrence keeping in view
the present days’ practical reality and the same should be increased to ten
years (also for the proposed sub-section (2) thereof). It is also felt that the
offence under section 304A, IPC should be non-bailable.
8.5 Causing death of any person through driving under the influence
of  drink  or  drugs  should  be  punishable  with  the  minimum  term  of
imprisonment of two years.
8.6 Any second or subsequent offence under section 304A, IPC, if the
rash or negligent act involved is the act of driving other than driving
under the influence of drink or drugs, should be punishable  with the
minimum term of imprisonment of one year. 
78

8.7 The maximum term of imprisonment in section 279/ (proposed)
section 279A, IPC should be increased to five years and any second or
subsequent offence thereunder should be punishable with the minimum
term of imprisonment of six months.
8.8 Any  second  or  subsequent  offence  under  section  336,  IPC,  if
committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar
offence  and  the  rash  or negligent  act  involved  is  the act  of driving,
should be punishable with the maximum term of imprisonment of two
years.
8.9 Any  second  or  subsequent  offence  under  section  337,  IPC,  if
committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar
offence  and  the  rash  or negligent  act  involved  is  the act  of driving,
should be punishable with the maximum term of imprisonment of three
years.
8.10 Any second or subsequent offence under section 338, IPC, if the
rash or negligent act involved is the act of driving, should be punishable
with the maximum term of imprisonment of five years.
8.11 The  maximum  term  of  imprisonment  in  section  184,  MVAct
should be increased  to five years and that any second or subsequent
offence  thereunder  should  be  punishable  with  the  minimum  term  of
imprisonment of six months.
8.12 Roads are used not only by the motorized transport, but also by the
non-motorized  transport  as  well  as  pedestrians.   There  is  no
comprehensive Central legislation to effectively and holistically regulate
79

all kinds  of traffic  on the  roads.   The  Motor  Vehicles  Act, 1988  is
relatable to Entry 35 of the Concurrent List and the National Highways
Act, 1956 is relatable to Entry 23 of the Union List.  The subject-matter
of roads, traffic thereon, and vehicles other than mechanically propelled
vehicles falls under Entry 13 of the State List, and, therefore, outside the
purview of Parliament.  The Seventh Schedule of the Constitution will be
required to be amended for such a comprehensive Central legislation.
The  Law Commission  feels  that  there  is  a need  of  a comprehensive
Central road traffic law. 
8.13 There should be legal provisions in the MVAct for confiscation of
the vehicles fitted with LPG Cylinders (meant for home kitchen), and
arrest and prosecution of owners/drivers of such vehicles.
8.14 As an important part of the enforcement measures, there should be
compulsorily installed weighbridges at all points of entry and exit to and
from a city as well as toll collection centres to keep in check overloaded
vehicles.
8.15 As an important part of the enforcement measures, there should be
compulsorily installed  CCTV  Cameras  at all  vulnerable  points, to  be
determined by an expert committee, to curb traffic violations.
8.16 As an important part of the enforcement measures, there should be
a vigorous campaign on the electronic media, including Doordarshan, All
India Radio and private TV channels, through regular programmes and
debates so as to create awareness amongst the general public about the
imperative necessity to strictly follow traffic rules and regulations as well
as highlight the impact and consequences of rash and negligent driving.
80

8.17 As an important part of the enforcement measures, there should be
established,  through  public-private-partnership,  recognized  driving
training  schools  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  equipped  with
simulators,  and  obliged  to  follow  properly-devised  driving  training
modules and impart training at a nominal fee.
8.18 As an important part of the enforcement measure, rule 118 of the
Motor  Vehicles  Rules  1989  making  it  mandatory  for  the  notified
transport vehicles to be fitted with an irremovable or tamperproof speed
governor to be sealed with an official seal of the Transport Authority,
should be enforced more vigorously.
8.19 There should be no exemption of government vehicles from policy
of insurance against third party risk and section 146, MV Act should be
amended for the purpose.  
8.20 Measures  to  prevent  road  accidents  may  be  preventive,
precautionary and punitive.  There is no denying the fact that there is a
need of improved road-watch, surveillance and detection, effective and
holistic  regulation  of  all  kinds  of  traffic  on  the  roads  and  proper
deterrence.  For proper road safety and traffic management, focus should
not only be on drivers and vehicles, but also on behaviour of all kinds of
road-users, road infrastructure development and environmental concerns.
In causing road accidents, the cruellest culprit is satanic speed.
8.21 We recommend accordingly.
81

(Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
Chairman
(Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood)                               (Dr Brahm A. Agrawal)
                Member                                                    Member-Secretary
82