GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Conversion/reconversion to another religion - mode of proof 
Report No. 235
December, 2010
1

Justice P. V. Reddi      New Delhi
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)   Tele: 2301 9465
(R)
Chairman            2338 4475
(O)
Law Commission of India    Fax: 2379 2745 (R)
D. O.  No. 6(3)/185/2010 – LC (LS)                                            December 27, 2010
Dear Hon’ble Minister Dr. M. Veerappa Moily,
 Sub: Conversion/reconversion to another religion – 
mode of proof 
I am forwarding herewith the 235th Report of the Law Commission of India
on the above subject.
In a matrimonial appeal disposed of by the Kerala High Court, the question
was whether the wife who applied for divorce with mutual consent under Section
13B  of  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955  satisfactorily  proved  the  factum  of
conversion to Hindu religion. Inter alia, the Family Court held that the applicant-
wife who was Christian by birth has not established that she had converted herself
to  Hindu  religion  and  there was  no  adequate  proof  of  valid  solemnization  of
marriage as per Hindu customs and rites. 
The  High  Court  set  aside  the  said  findings  and  directed  de  novo
consideration  of  the  issue  after  giving  further  opportunity  to  the  applicant  to
adduce  appropriate  evidence.  The  observations  made  in  paragraph  15  of  the
judgment  are  extracted  in  the  opening  paragraph  of  the  enclosed  Report.  In
paragraph 16 of the judgment, the Registry was directed to forward a copy of the
judgment  to  the  Law  Commission  of  India,  drawing  the  attention  of  the
Commission to paragraph 15.
Office: I. L. I. Building, Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi – 110 001
Residence: 1, Janpath, New Delhi 110 011
2

E-mail: pv_reddi@yahoo.co.in
Accordingly, the subject was taken up by the Law Commission of India for
consideration.  After  I  assumed  the  office,  the  study  was  undertaken  and  a
consultation  paper  was  circulated  for  getting  the  views  of  the  public,  while
expressing the prima facie view of the Law Commission.  Certain representations
were received and the same have been adverted to at paragraph 15 of the Report.
The  Commission  after  due  deliberations  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  a
declaration followed by confirmation before a registering authority should not by
itself  be  treated  as  proof  of  conversion  and  secondly  it  would  be  highly
inappropriate to prescribe by way of legislation the details of ceremonies and
formalities to be gone through for conversion or the manner in which conversion
is to be proved in a Court of law.  At the same time, the Commission felt that the
suggestion of the High Court should be accepted to a limited extent so as to
afford opportunity to those who would like to have documentary evidence to
substantiate the plea of conversion. The Commission has made it clear that filing
of  declaration  and  recording  thereof should  not  be  an  indispensible  proof of
conversion. It should only be made optional so that the converted person will be
enabled to have documentary proof to establish conversion/reconversion as and
when necessary. The Commission has also made it clear that the documentary
proof ought not to be considered as conclusive proof in as much as the Court has
necessarily to go into the question whether conversion was true, and voluntary.
Accordingly, recommendations are made at paragraph 16 and 17 of the Report.
The Commission has expressed the view that in order to give effect to the simple
recommendation  which  does  not  conflict  with  any  law  in  force,  statutory
amendments to personal laws are not required. The Central Government can issue
appropriate instructions to the concerned authorities of the UTs and the States.
With regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
(P.V. Reddi)
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice
Government of India
New Delhi – 110 001
3

Re: Conversion/reconversion to another religion - mode of proof 
Introduction: Observations of Kerala High Court
1. A Division Bench of Kerala High Court, in a matrimonial case in
Betsy and Sadanadan Vs Nil (Mat Appeal No. 339 of 2009) while dealing
with a joint application moved by the parties for dissolution of marriage
under Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 examined the issue
whether in the absence of any specific procedure prescribed under pristine
Hindu law, custom and statute governing conversion, what the approach of
the court should be and whether there is a need for legislative intervention
so as to make the law simple and user - friendly. The High Court invited the
attention of the Law Commission to the observations made in paragraph 15
in order to address the need for legislation. It was observed thus by Justice
R. Basant in para 15 of the Judgment:
“We  must,  in  this  context,  note  that  the  stipulation  in  clause  (c)   of  the
Explanation  to  Section  2(1)  of  the  Hindu  Marriage Act  which  shows  that  a
conversion or re-conversion to Hinduism can take place and the absence of any
stipulations of law or specific recognized practices to facilitate such conversion is
causing  great  difficulties  to  the  parties.  It should  not  be  impossible  for  the
legislature to prescribe the methods by which a person without any difficulty can
effectuate  such  conversion.  He  should  not  be  left  before  courts  to  adduce
exhaustive evidence to prove such conversion. The law which recognizes such
conversion must also be in a position to prescribe how the parties, without the
necessity to  get involved  in  unnecessary and  time  consuming  litigations,  can
declare to the world such conversion. Appropriate stipulations of law appear to be
necessary on  this  aspect  in respect  of  conversions  to  and  from  all  religious.
Simple statutory stipulation applicable for all religions of filing of an affidavit of
solemn declaration before a registering (statutory) authority (who must give the
declarant  sufficient  time  to  dispassionately  contemplate  and  confirm  the
declaration) and  acceptance and recording of such reconfirmed declaration by the
4

authority in a register maintained under the statute for  that purpose after lapse of
a stipulated period and after calling for and hearing of objections if any of any
interested  party,  will  make  the  procedure  simple,  user  friendly  and  less
cumbersome. Such stipulations will save many a citizen like the petitioners herein
of the tedious obligation to get involved in time consuming and unnecessary legal
proceedings and litigation. Religious conversions may appear to many in Indian
mindset to be unnecessary, puerile and negation of the very concept of respect for
both religions as also the followers of such religion. But certainly, the freedom of
faith guaranteed the Constitution may not justify the negation of the right to
pursue the chosen faith, by conversion where necessary.”
The High Court observed that easy identification of the religion of a person
in the event of a controversy does not appear to be possible even with the
help of the decided cases The Bench then observed in paragraph 13 as
under:
“But the courts cannot throw their hands up. Resolve they must, in the event of
controversy or conscientious  and objective doubt (even when parties raise no
controversy) of the question whether there was conversion or reconversion to
Hinduism in a given case as asserted by the litigant. We are certain that it must be
possible for the court below with the help of the above guidelines, on the basis of
evidence presently available and further evidence that may be adduced, to decide
whether the first appellant has become a Hindu by conversion under explanation
(c) to Section 2(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act. We may broadly indicate that an
assertion  of  the  1st appellant  that  she  had,  prior  to  her  marriage,  embraced
Hinduism will have to be given due weight. She can explain the assertion and
satisfy the  court  that  the tests  indicated  above  have been  satisfied by her in
accepting conversion  to Hinduism. She  can prove the conduct  of having her
marriage with the 2nd appellant solemnized in accordance with Hindu religious
rites and ceremonies. She can certainly show before the court that she had, after
such conversion, been worshipping Hindu Gods. She can also adduce evidence to
show that after such conversion, she has held out to the world that she is a Hindu.
All these circumstances, if established, we find no reason why the uncontroverted
5

assertion of the appellant that the 1st appellant had become a Hindu by conversion
before marriage cannot be accepted and the marriage performed in accordance
with Hindu rites cannot be accepted as valid under the Hindu Marriage Act by the
Court below.”
With the aforesaid observations, the High Court remanded the Case to
the lower court and allowed the parties to adduce further evidence and also
to amend their pleadings, if necessary. 
2. The Law Commission of India with a view to address the limited
question whether a particular mode of proof of conversion as suggested by
the High Court should be statutorily prescribed , having made a preliminary
study and recorded its prima facie view, invited the views of public on the
said issue. Certain suggestions have been received which would be adverted
to at the appropriate stage.   
Freedom to profess and practise religion of one’s choice
3.    The  freedom  of  conscience  and  the  right  to  profess,  practise  and
propagate religion is enshrined in Art.25 of the Constitution. The equality of
all  religions  is  expressly recognized  by Art.25  thereby  emphasizing  the
cherished  ideal  of  secularism.  The  expression  ‘practice’  is  concerned
primarily with religious worship, ritual and observations.  Propagating the
religion connotes the right to communicate the religious beliefs to others by
expounding  the  tenets  of  that  religion.Of  course,  in  the  name  of
propagation, no one has a right to convert a person to another religion under
pressure or inducement (vide Rev. Stainislaus v. State of Madhya Pradesh,
AIR 1977 SC 908).  Religious practices are as much a part of religion as
religious  faith  or  doctrines  (vide   The Commissioner,  Hindu  Religious
Endowments,  Madras  v.  Shri  Lakshmindra  Thiratha  Swamiar  of  Shirur
Mutt, AIR 1954 SC 282).   The fundamental right to freedom of conscience
and the right to profess, practise and propagate a religion is subject to the
6

considerations of public order, morality and health.   Clause (2) of Art.25
preserves the power of the State to make a law regulating any economic,
financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with
religious  practice.   Art.26  gives  effect  to the  concomitant  right  of  the
freedom to manage religious affairs and this right is again subject to public
order, morality and health.  Articles 25 and 26 undoubtedly extend to rituals
also and not confined to doctrine.  It is well-settled that the freedom of
conscience and the right to profess a religion implies freedom to change the
religion as well. It is pertinent to mention that Art. 18 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights specifically lays down that the freedom of
conscience and religion includes freedom to change the religion or belief.
The right to freedom of conscience thus implies the individual right of a
person to renounce one’s religion and embrace another voluntarily.  
4. The change from one religion to another is primarily the consequence
of one’s conviction that the religion in which he was born into has not
measured up to his expectations – spiritual or rational.  The conversion may
also be the consequence of the belief that another religion to which he
would like to embrace would better take care of his spiritual well-being or
otherwise accomplish his legitimate aspirations.  At times it may be hard to
find any rational reason for conversion into another religion.  The reason for
or  propriety  of  conversion  cannot  be  judged  from  the  standards  of
rationality or reasonableness.
5. Any discussion  on  conversion  generates  thoughts  on  religion  and
religious faith.  There is no precise definition of religion. ‘Religion’, it is
said, is a matter of faith and belief in God is not essential to constitute
religion.  In Shirur Mutt case (AIR 1954 SC 282), Mukherjee, J made the
7

following  pertinent  observations  on  religion  and  Hindu  religion  in
particular:
“Religion is certainly a matter of faith with individuals or communities and it is
not necessarily theistic. There are well known religions in India like Buddhism
and Jainism which do not believe in God or in any Intelligent First Cause. A
religion undoubtedly has its basis in a system of beliefs or doctrines which are
regarded by those who profess that religion as conducive to their spiritual well
being, but it would not be correct to say that religion is nothing else but a doctrine
or belief. A religion may not only lay down a code of ethical rules for its followers
to accept, it might  prescribe rituals and observances, ceremonies and modes of
worship which are regarded as integral parts of religion and these forms and
observances might extend even to matters of food and dress.” ( para 18)
The saint and great philosopher Swami Vivekananda said:
“Religion as it is generally taught all over the world is said to be based upon faith
and belief and in most cases consists only of different sets of theories and that is
the reason why we find all religions quarrelling with one another. These theories
are again based upon faith and belief.”
` Sri M.N. Rao, former Chief Justice of  H.P.  High Court and presently
Chairman of National Commission for Backward Classes, after referring to
the above thoughts  in his article on ‘Freedom of Religion and Right to
Conversion’ (2003) made the following pertinent observations:
“Right to conversion connotes individual right of a person to quit one religion and
embrace another voluntarily. This kind of change from one religion to another
religion must necessarily be in consequence of one’s conviction that the religion
in which he was born into has not measured up to his expectations, spiritual or
rational. Sometimes it may also be the result of losing faith in one’s own religion
because of the rigidity of its tenets and practices. Sometimes one may even lose
total faith in the very concept of the existence of God and turn to Atheism. A
change of religion, a consequence of any of the above reasons, falls within the
ambit of the “Right to Conversion”. 
8

Conversion –nature of and essentials to be proved:
6. Conversion like a marriage is a solemn act.  Conversion from one
religion  to  another  has  far  reaching  consequences  –social  and  legal.  It
affects succession, marital status and also the right to seek elective office.
Divorce can be granted  on the  ground that the spouse  has  changed  the
religion  (vide  Section  13(1)(ii)  of  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act).  `Upon
conversion a person may be governed by a different personal law.  The right
to contest in elections from a constituency reserved from  SCs / STs might
be lost if the person who has changed the religion happened to be a member
of Scheduled Caste or Tribe.  Thus, the event of conversion is of critical
importance from the point of view of rights and disabilities of a convert.
7. Conversion  cannot  be treated  as  an  event  which  can  be  achieved
through a mere declaration – oral or writing. At the same time, no particular
formalities or ceremonies are required according to the law declared by
Supreme Court. In fact, no such ceremonies are specifically prescribed in
any religious texts or precepts, though certain ceremonies like ‘Suddhi’ (in
the case of Arya Samajists) and baptism (in the case of Christians) are gone
through in practice in some cases. Credible evidence of the intention to
convert followed by definite overt acts to give effect to that intention is
necessary. The subsequent conduct of the convertee is also important in
reaching the conclusion that a conversion in its true sense had taken place
and there was genuine conversion. The evidentiary facts which establish
conversion have been time and again stated by the Supreme Court, while
observing  that  no  specific  ritual  or  ceremony  is  required.  Satisfactory
evidence of conversion which has always been insisted upon by the Courts
is necessary especially when we hear plethora of complaints of manipulated
conversions for extraneous reasons or as a result of undue pressures. 
9

Views of the Commission on the crucial question and relevant case law:
8. In  the  Commission’s  view,  statutory  prescription  of  procedure  to
establish  conversion or nature of proof required is neither desirable nor
practicable. Normally, a statute does not deal with the details which lie
within  the  realm  of  appreciation  of  evidence.  Any  such  enumeration
touching on the quality of evidence to be adduced would result in more
complications. A declaration of the nature suggested  by the High Court
cannot be a substitute for the tests laid down in decided cases for entering  a
finding  of  conversion.  In  fact,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  High  Court
intended to say that the declaration followed by confirmation should be
treated  as  a  conclusive  evidence  of  conversion/reconversion.  The  High
Court  apparently  intended  that  the  declaration  followed  by  subsequent
confirmation  before  the  registering  authority  would  serve  as  weighty
documentary  evidence,  thereby  minimizing  the  scope  of  controversy.
There is another angle from which the said observations of the High Court
have to be viewed.  The declaration and registration thereof, if made the
only  mode  of  proof,  many  bona  fide converts  may  be  handicapped  in
proving  the  conversion  merely  by  reason  of  failure  to  adhere  to  the
procedure  of  registration.   Moreover,  a  question  may  arise  as  to  what
purpose will such a procedure serve, where there are objections from some
quarters – whether they be bona fide or mala fide?   Should it be left to the
Registration Officer to deal with those objections and record a finding?   Is
it proper for the Registration Officer to take a decision on the bona fides of
conversion  on  the  basis  of  facts  existing  at  that  initial  stage?    These
questions  defy a satisfactory answer  if  the  declaration  and confirmation
should be treated as the conclusive proof of conversion.
10

9. The High Court’s observation that the proof in respect of conversion
should be simplified and credible  documentary evidence could be made
available to those who are called upon to prove the factum of conversion is
not without merit. It stems from an anxiety to avoid prolonged litigation and
unnecessary controversies. But, the issue has to be viewed from a larger
perspective keeping in view the socio-economic conditions, the practical
difficulties in implementation and the spurious claims that are quite often
advanced. The Courts including Supreme Court have consistently held that
the law does not require any particular ceremony or ritual for conversion,
but what is necessary is a bona fide intention to convert to another religious
faith accompanied by conduct unequivocally expressing that intention. The
satisfaction of the Court on this aspect should necessarily be present and the
filing of declaration of conversion before a prescribed authority is one of the
important aspects that aids the Court in reaching such satisfaction, but that
should not be the sole criterion. 
10. It  has  been  held  in  a  number  of  decided  cases  including  the
pronouncements  of  the  Supreme  Court  that  no  particular  formalities  or
religious rituals or ceremonies are necessary to bring about conversion or
reconversion.   In the case of Punjabrao v. Dr. D.P. Meshram and others
(AIR 1965 SC 1179), it was observed that the presence of a Bhikku on the
occasion  of  a  function  held  for  conversion  of   Hindu  Harijans  into
Buddhism and compliance with particular rituals is not necessary; so also,
the  signature  of a  converted  person  in  a  register  for  conversion  is  not
obligatory.   In  Perumal  Nadar  (dead)  by  Legal  Representative  v.
Ponnuswami  Nadar  (minor) (AIR  1971  SC  2352),  the  principle  was
reiterated that no formal ceremony of purification or expiation is necessary
to  effectuate  conversion.   So  also  in  the  case  of  S.  Anbalagan  v.  B.
11

Devararajan and others (AIR 1984 SC 411), the Supreme Court examined
the legal position in regard to caste status on conversion or re-conversion to
Hinduism  and  held  that  no  particular  ceremony  was  prescribed  for  re-
conversion to Hinduism.  The Karnataka High Court observed in Sujatha v.
Jose Augustine (II (1994) Divorce & Matrimonial Cases 442) that to be a
Christian, one must truly profess the Christian faith and the fact that one has
undergone the ceremony of baptism may not by itself be sufficient to hold
that  he  or  she  has  become  a  Christian.   The  fundamental  thing  to  be
established  before  one  can  be  held  to  be  Christian  is  that  the  person
concerned truly believes in and professes the Christian faith. 
10.1  The test of conversion has been put thus by the Supreme Court in
Perumal Nadar v. Ponnuswami  (supra).
”A  person  may  be  a  Hindu  by  birth  or  by  conversion.  A  mere  theoretical
allegiance to the Hindu faith by a person born in another faith does not convert
him into a Hindu, nor is a bare declaration that he is a Hindu sufficient to convert
him to  Hinduism. But a bona fide intention to be converted to the  Hindu faith,
accompanied  by  conduct  unequivocally  expressing  that   intention  may  be
sufficient  evidence  of  conversion.  No  formal  ceremony  of  purification  or
expiation is necessary to effectuate conversion”. (para 6)
The Supreme Court also observed “in our judgment the finding of the
courts  below  that  Annapazham  was  converted  to  Hinduism  before  her
marriage to Perumal is amply supported by evidence.”
10.2 In  Kailash  Sonkar  vs.  Smt.  Maya  Devi (AIR  1984  SC  600)  the
Supreme Court while dealing with a case of reconversion adopted a similar
approach, as seen from the following observations:
“In our opinion, the main test should be a genuine intention of the reconvert to
abjure his new religion and completely dissociate himself from it.  We must
hasten to add here that this does not mean that the reconversion should be only a
ruse  or  a  pretext  or  a  cover  to  gain  mundane  worldly  benefits  so  that  the
12

reconversion becomes merely a show for achieving a particular purpose whereas
the real intention may be shrouded in mystery.  The reconvert must exhibit a clear
and genuine intention to go back to his old fold and adopt the customs and
practices of the said fold without any protest  from members of his  erstwhile
caste.” ( para 30)
It was further clarified:
“In order to judge this factor, it is not necessary that there should be a direct or
conclusive proof of the expression of the views of the community of the erstwhile
caste and it would be sufficient compliance of this condition if no exception or
protest is lodged by the community members, in which case the caste would
revive on the reconversion of the person to his old religion.” ( para 30)
10.3 We may also refer to the decision of Kerala High Court in  Sapna
Jacob, Minor vs  The State of Kerala & Ors (AIR 1993 Kerala 75)  - K.G.
Balakrishnan, J. (as he then was) after referring to the various authorities,
observed: 
“In order to prove that the petitioner was a member of the Hindu community she
must have established that there was a bona fide intention to be converted to the
Hindu faith accompanied by conduct or unequivocally expressing that intention.
It is true that no formal ceremony of purification or expiation is necessary to
effectuate conversion.  The petitioner is admittedly the daughter of a Jacobite
Christian. So by birth she is a Christian.   A convert must embrace Hinduism and
follow the cultural system and tradition of that religion and should take the Hindu
mode of life.  It may be true that the Court cannot test or gauge the sincerity of
religious belief; or where there is no question of the genuineness   of a person’s
belief  in  a  certain  religion,  the  court  cannot  measure  its  depth  or  determine
whether it is an intelligent conviction or ignorant and superficial fancy. But a
court can find the true intention of men lying behind their acts and can certainly
find from the circumstances of a case whether a pretended conversion was really a
means to some further end.  In the instant case, the petitioner’s mother after
marrying V.M. Jacob changed her name as Uma Jacob. The petitioner’s name  is
Sapna Jacob, admittedly a Christian  name.   There is  nothing  in   evidence
13

to show that the petitioner ever led a Hindu mode of life. The only ground on
which the petitioner claims the benefit of Scheduled Caste is that her mother is a
Scheduled Caste.” ( para 6 )
10.4 Similarly, in Rakheya Bibi vs. Anil Kumar ILR (1948) Cal. 119), the
Calcutta High Court observed that it is open to the Court to go into the
question whether the conversion was a bona fide one or a mere pretence. 
10.5 In recent case of M.Chandra vs. M. Thangamuthu and Another (2010)
9 SCC 712 the Supreme Court observed in para 42“it is a settled principle of
law that to prove a conversion from one religion to another, two elements
need  to  be  satisfied.  First,  there  has  to  be  a  conversion  and  second,
acceptance into the community to which the person converted.” 
10.6 In  the  case  of  Punjabrao  Vs  Dr.  D.P.  Meshram (Supra),  a
Constitution Bench of Supreme Court interpreted the expression ‘profess’ in
clause  3  of  the  Constitution  (Scheduled  Caste)  Order  1950.  The  said
provision contemplates that a person to be treated as one belonging to the
Scheduled Caste, should profess either Hindu or Sikh religion. In that case,
the  election  of  the  first  respondent  to  the  Legislative  Assembly  was
challenged on the ground that he embraced Buddhism and had ceased to be
a member of Scheduled Caste. The Election Tribunal upheld the contention
of the appellant and set aside the election. However, the High Court held
that conversion of first respondent to Buddhism had not been established
and therefore, upheld his election. The Supreme Court allowed the appeal
and  restored  the  order  of  the  Election  Tribunal  holding  that  the  first
respondent  had  ceased  to  be  Hindu  at  the  time  of  his  nomination  and
consequently ineligible to be a candidate for election from  a constituency
reserved for members of Scheduled Castes. The Supreme Court explained as
to what is meant by professing a religion.  The Supreme Court observed
after referring to the dictionary meanings of the word ‘profess’, “it seems to us
14

that the meaning ‘”to declare one’s belief in: as, to profess Christ, is one which we have
to bear in mind while construing the aforesaid Order because it is this which bears upon
religious belief and consequently also upon a change in religious belief.   It would thus
follow that a declaration of one’s belief must necessarily mean a declaration in such a
way that would be known to those whom it may interest.    Therefore, if a public
declaration is made by a person that he has ceased to belong to his old religion and has
accepted another religion he will be taken as professing the other religion. In the face of
such an open declaration it would be idle to enquire further as to whether the conversion
to another religion was efficacious”.( para 13)
In  that  case,  the  argument  that  no  Bhikku  had  officiated  at  the
function and that respondent No. 1’s name was not found in the register of
conversion to Buddhism and therefore, there was no satisfactory proof of
conversion was rejected. The decision shows that a declaration in public
renouncing his old religion and accepting another religion is an important
step in establishing the factum of conversion to another religion.   Another
equally important step as laid down in  Perumal’s case is the  bona fide
intention  to  convert  demonstrated  by  his/her  subsequent  conduct.  In
Punjabrao’s case, the Supreme Court was concerned with the import of the
expression ‘profess’ in the Presidential Order. 
11. Though no particular formalities  or ceremonies  are required to be
followed for the purpose of conversion, credible evidence of intention to
convert followed by subsequent conduct of the convertee is necessary in
reaching the conclusion that there was  genuine conversion. The convert
must embrace Hinduism (or another religion) and follow the cultural and
spiritual traditions and take to the mode of life of that religion. 
12. It may be noted that in some states, viz., Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh etc., the Freedom of Religion Acts
were enacted. The provision thereof prohibits forcible conversion. i.e., by
15

use of force, allurement or by fraudulent means and requires the person who
participates or takes part in the ceremony for conversion from one religious
faith to another should send the intimation to the District Magistrate either
in  advance  or  within  a  stipulated  period  after  the  event  of  conversion.
Failure to do so is an offence. Some enactments cast a duty on the person
who  is  converted  to  send  a  notice  to  the  District  Magistrate  within  a
stipulated period in a prescribed form and if he fails without sufficient cause
to comply with this requirement,  he is also punishable. Thus, the intimation
and the filing of declaration is a statutory obligation enforceable by law in
some  of  the  States.  However,  where  there  is  no  such  legislation,  the
Commission feels that the filing of declaration and registration should not
be made obligatory or indispensable mode of proof of conversion. Nor it is
necessary or desirable for the Parliament to step in and incorporate such a
provision in the Hindu Marriage Act and other laws. We are not concerned
here with the issue of forcible or induced conversions and remedial action to
be  taken  in  connection  therewith.  We  are  only  examining  the  limited
question  of  the  evidentiary  proof  required  to  establish  the  factum  of
conversion when a dispute arises. 
13. Viewed  in  this  light,  the  Commission  is  of  the  view  that  the
suggestion of the High Court deserves to be accepted to a limited extent so
as  to  afford  an  opportunity  to  those  converts  who  would  like  to  have
documentary evidence of declaration to substantiate the plea of conversion
as  and  when  required.  At  the  same  time,  the  filing  of  declaration  and
recording thereof should not be made obligatory and an indispensable mode
of proof of conversion, but it should only be made optional so that the
converted person will be enabled to have documentary proof to establish the
factum  of  conversion/reconversion  in  the  absence  of  other  reliable
16

documentary evidence. However, as stated earlier, such documentary proof
testifying  to  the  declaration  and  confirmation  made  by  the  converted
persons ought not to be considered as conclusive proof. The Court cannot
be  barred  from  considering  the  other  relevant  questions  such  as  the
voluntary nature of conversion and the subsequent conduct of the alleged
convert, whenever a dispute arises. Hence it is reiterated that the recorded
declaration  not  followed  by  objections  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  sole
criterion to establish conversion in a court of law, though it may be given
due weight by the Court in reaching the finding. 
14. The Commission would like to advert  to one more aspect. In regard
the compulsory registration of marriages, the Supreme Court in the case of
Seema(Smt.) Vs Ashwani Kumar (2006) 2 SCC 578, gave certain directives/
suggestions to the State Governments. However, it does not appear that the
States have taken any concrete measures in this regard. In the 211th Report,
the Law Commission has gone to the extent of recommending that the non-
registration  of  marriage  and  divorce  should  be  made  an  offence  and
secondly that no judicial relief shall be granted if the concerned marriage  or
divorce is not duly registered under the proposed Act. Presently, the Law
Commission  does  not  wish  to  offer  its  comments  on  those  suggestions
having  far-reaching  effects  because  the  issue  which  the  Commission  is
presently called upon to deal with is about conversions. If the registration of
marriage is made obligatory as per the directives of Supreme Court, or the
recommendations of the Law Commission, it does not necessarily follow
that conversion to another religion should also be compulsorily registered.
Conversion which is bereft of any particular formalities or  religious rites,
cannot be placed on the same pedestal as marriage which can be recognized
in law only if customary rites and ceremonies are gone through. Further, the
17

backdrop in which the compulsory registration of marriages was considered
necessary  in  societal  interest  is  not  applicable  in  all  fours  to  religious
conversions.  Maybe, as and when compulsory registration of marriage and
divorce  becomes  a  reality  and  adequate  machinery  is  put  in  place  to
implement  the  directives  for  registration  of  marriages,  the  question  of
recording/registration  of  conversion  could  also  be  considered.  At  this
juncture, the Commission does not propose to recommend, based on the
211th Report, to evolve a scheme for compulsory registration of conversions
as well where there is no such law in a State. 
Representations/views received and discussions thereon
15. Before  we  conclude  the  report  by  formulating  the  Commission’s
recommendations, we would like to consider the views expressed in the
responses  submitted  by  Kerala  Law  Academy  Law  College,
Thiruvananthapuram,  Revd.  Archbishop of Bhopal, the Catholic Church
Body  of  Madhya  Pradesh  and  certain  other  Christian
organizations/individuals of MP State. 
15.1 The  students  and  faculty of Kerala  Law Academy, after  intensive
discussion  submitted  a  report  under  the  caption  “Statutory  vacuum  for
effectuating   voluntary religious  conversion”. The report of Kerala Law
Academy  has  stressed  on  the  need  to  legislatively  prescribe  a  non-
cumbersome procedure for effectuating religious conversion. It has been
pointed  out  that  declaration  should  be  recognized  in  the  statute  as  an
effective  means  of conversion. Further,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  law
should  clearly  define  the  scope  and  ambit  of  conversion  ceremonies  in
effecting  conversion.  The  absence  of prescription  of specific  procedure,
according  to  them,  creates  a  legal  vacuum  in  the  area  of  religious
18

conversion which is not in tune with the constitutional guarantee of freedom
of conscience. 
15.2 We have already adverted to some of these aspects. The Commission
would like to reiterate that the declaration followed by confirmation should
not by itself be treated as proof of conversion and secondly it would be
highly  inappropriate  to  prescribe  by  way  of  legislation  the  details  of
ceremonies  and/or  formalities  to  be  gone  through  for  the  purpose  of
conversion or the manner in which by law the conversion has to be proved
in a court of law. Nebulous prescriptions ought to be avoided. Further, the
whole problem has to be viewed from the angle whether the conversion was
bona fide or genuine. The observance of the prescribed ceremony or the
declaration of the convert cannot give sanctity to the alleged conversion, if
the conversion is otherwise a ‘sham’ exercise or a pretence to achieve an
ulterior objective or the result of force or allurement. Freedom of conscience
is  in  no  way  infringed  by adopting  this  approach.  The  Commission  is,
therefore,  of  the  view   that  the  filing  of  declaration  or  the  proof   of
observance  of  certain  rituals  /  ceremonies  cannot,  having  regard  to  the
essence of conversion, be treated as conclusive proof of conversion. But, the
declaration followed by confirmation, as said earlier, serves as an important
piece of evidence in support of conversion.
15.3 Coming to the responses sent by the Rev. Archbishop of Bhopal and
the Christian Organizations of MP (which are almost on similar lines), the
following is the summary of the representations:
Cases  are  being  registered  against  Christians  on  the  allegation  of
effecting  conversion  by  force  or  allurement  and  the  fundamental
organisations have also been disturbing the prayer meetings.
19

Proper  guidelines  on  the  subject  of  religious  conversions  and  re-
conversions will help avoiding conflicts.   The law should be such as to
respect the conscience of the individual.   When the change of religion is a
conscious choice of an individual based on his belief in God, the law cannot
insist  on  obtaining  the  prior  permission  from the  District  Magistrate  to
change his or her religion.   It is only after the conversion  that it would be
appropriate  to  send  the  intimation  to  the  concerned  officer  of  the
Government.
15.4 Some of the points referred to above relate to the legal validity  of
certain  provisions  of  the  Freedom  of  Religion  Act  enacted  by  Madhya
Pradesh Legislature and the alleged high-handed action by the police under
the  said  Act  and  also  the  lawless  acts  of  the  people  of  certain  groups
opposed to Christanity.  These complaints cannot be looked into by the Law
Commission  as  it  is  not  within  the  scope  of  the  subject  taken  up  for
consideration.   They raise larger issues regarding the constitutional validity
of the provisions of the said enactment or distortions in applying the law or
the alleged lawless acts of certain persons.  These do not fall within the
domain of the Commission’s report.
15.5 As regards the other point raised, i.e. providing proper guidelines on
the subject of conversions/re-conversions, this aspect has already been dealt
with in the earlier paragraphs.
Recommendations
16. The Law Commission, therefore, proposes to formulate the following
recommendations:
1. Within a month after the date of conversion, the converted person,
if she/he chooses, can send a declaration to the officer in charge
of registration of marriages in the concerned area.
20

2. The registering official shall exhibit a copy of the declaration on
the Notice Board of the office till the date of confirmation. 
3. The said declaration shall contain the requisite details viz., the
particulars  of  the  convert  such  as  date  of  birth,  permanent
address, and the present place of residence, father’s/husband’s
name, the religion to which the convert originally belonged and the
religion  to  which  he  or  she  converted,  the  date  and  place  of
conversion  and  nature  of  the  process  gone  through  for
conversion.
4. Within 21 days from the date of sending/filing the declaration, the
converted  individual  can  appear  before  the  registering  officer,
establish  her/his  identity  and  confirm  the  contents  of  the
declaration. 
5. The Registering officer shall record the factum of declaration and
confirmation  in  a  register  maintained  for  this  purpose.  If  any
objections are notified, he may simply record them i.e., the name
and particulars of objector and the nature of objection. 
6. Certified copies of declaration, confirmation and the extracts from
the  register  shall  be  furnished  to  the  party  who  gave  the
declaration or the authorized legal representative, on request. 
17. Now, the question arises as to how the above recommendations could
be implemented.   It is clarified that in whichever State, there is a law
governing  conversion  such  as   Freedom  of  Religion  Act,  the  above
recommendations  do  not  apply.  The  question  then  is  whether  for
implementation of the said recommendations in other States, the enactment
21

of law by Parliament is necessary. The Commission is inclined to think that
a separate enactment or amendments to the respective personal laws is not
required to give effect to this simple recommendation having regard to the
fact that it does not go contrary to the existing provisions of law nor does in
any way impinge on the religious freedom or faith of any person.   Matters
relating to conversion/reconversion are  governed by the personal laws in
respect  of  which  Parliament  has  power  to  make  laws.  The  Central
Government  can  exercise its  executive  power  under Article  73  to  issue
appropriate instructions to the Union Territories. Similar communications
may be addressed by the Central Government to the States (where there are
no laws governing the conversion) to give effect to the recommendations set
out  supra.   The Governments concerned in their turn will have to issue
necessary  orders  to  the  Registration  officers.  That  can  be  done  by  the
Governments of UT and State Governments administratively. 
(Justice P.V. Reddi)
Chairman
 
   (Justice Shiv Kumar Sharma)                                                    (Amarjit Singh)
               Member                                                                                 Member
   (Dr Brahm Agrawal)
   Member-Secretary
22