GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF
INDIA
Court-fees in Supreme Court vis-à-vis Corporate Litigation 
Report No. 236
December, 2010
1

Court-fees in Supreme Court vis-à-vis Corporate Litigation
TABLE OF CONTENTS
  
  Page
No.
I.  REFERENCE                1-3
II. EARLIER REPORTS         4-6
III. EXAMINATION OF ISSUE FROM THE            7-13   
         CONSTITUTIONAL ANGLE (ARTICLE 14)
IV. CERTAIN DETAILS RELATING TO               14-17
CORPORATE LITIGATION
V. POSITION IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES          18
VI. EASIER ACCESS TO COURTS AND             19-24
COURT-FEE
VII. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS     25-29
APPENDIX                30-31
2

Justice P. V. Reddi               New Delhi
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)            Tele: 2301 9465 (R)
Chairman         2338 4475 (O)
Law Commission of India             Fax: 2379 2745 (R)
D.O. No.6(3)/75/2009-LC(LS)           Dated : December 27, 2010
Dear Dr. M. Veerappa Moily,
        Sub: Court-fees in Supreme Court vis-à-vis Corporate Litigation.
I  am  forwarding  herewith  the  236th Report  of  the  Law
Commission of India on the above subject. 
 Pursuant  to  the  observations  made  by  the  Department  -
Related  Parliamentary Standing  Committee on  Personnel,  Public
Grievances, Law and Justice in its 28th Report on the Supreme Court
(Number  of  Judges)  Amendment Bill,  2008,  the  Department  of
Justice requested the Law Commission of India to consider levying
higher court-fees on the corporate sector.  It was felt that in spite of
high  stakes  involved  and  the  long  time  taken  by  the  court  in
disposing of cases filed by the companies, very little court-fee is
realized  from  them.   Therefore,  the  Parliamentary  Standing
Committee suggested amendment of Supreme Court Rules framed
under Article 145, for levying ad valorem   court- fees on corporate
litigants.
Office: I. L. I. Building, Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi – 110 001
Residence: 1, Janpath, New Delhi 110 011
E-mail: pv_reddi@yahoo.co.in
3

As  the  observations  of  the  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  were
specially with reference to the corporate litigation in the Supreme Court, we
have examined primarily that issue in detail. It may be mentioned that the
Parliament is competent to levy court-fee only in respect of litigation in the
Supreme Court and Union Territories.
The Commission has taken the view that it would not be legally
permissible  nor practicable  to  levy  higher court-fee  only on  the
companies / corporates. The solution offered by the Commission is
to increase ad valorem   court-fee payable in respect of the appeals
(Civil) to the Supreme Court subject to a maximum of Rs. one lakh
or  so.  Presently,  the  maximum  stands  at  Rs.  2,000/-  and  this
maximum fee was prescribed by the Supreme Court Rules of 1950,
retained in the rules of 1966 and it remains unchanged till now.
Hence, the Commission  felt  that there is a need  to increase  the
maximum fee so that the high value appeals which are mainly filed
by the Companies, Firms, Trusts and AOPs under special Acts etc.
would  attract  higher  fee.  The  Commission  has  also  suggested
upward revision of minimum fee of Rs. 250/- as well as the fixed
court fee which again remains the same since the inception of the
Supreme Court. At the same time it would be reasonable to charge
only fixed court- fee (as enhanced) in respect of appeals that arise
from  High  Court’s  Judgments  in  Civil  matters  where  court  fee
would have been already paid on ad valorem basis both at the trial
and  appellate  stage.  Finally, the  Commission  has  suggested  that
instead  of  Parliament  enacting  any  legislation  straightway
superseding the rules framed by the Supreme Court, it would be
proper to address the Supreme Court for revision of court-fees as it
has remained static for nearly 60 years by now. The Supreme Court
may  then  constitute  a  Committee  and  go  into  the  question  of
revision. 
It has been made clear in the Report that the Court-fee should not be viewed as chief
source of revenue to run the courts and further in the case of  ad valorem court-fee, the
principle of prescribing a ceiling limit should be adhered to.   The Commission    has
also emphasized that the agenda of extending qualitative legal aid to
the common people and providing easier 
4

access to the Court has to be accomplished without linking it up
with the quantum of court fee. The legal aid mechanisms in force
in the Supreme Court and other courts have been referred to. 
Two earlier reports of Law Commission, namely, 189th report
and 220th report, have been referred to at the appropriate places.
In regard to Union Territories, a brief supplemental report will
be  sent  after  the  requisite  information  is  received  from  High
courts.
With regards,
    
                  Yours sincerely
                    ( P. V. REDDI )
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily,
Union Minister for Law & Justice,
Government of  India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi – 110 001.
5

I. REFERENCE 
1.1.1 Based on the comments made by the Department-Related
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Personnel,  Public
Grievances, Law and Justice in its 28th Report1 while considering
the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008,
the Department of Justice requested the Law Commission of
India2 to consider the issue of treating the Corporates separately
in the matter of payment of court-fee so that higher court-fee
may be demanded from the corporate sector on  ad valorem
basis. 
1.1.2 The Parliamentary Standing Committee was in favour of
levy  of  differential  court-fee  for  the  corporate  sector  and
accordingly, recommended3 that amendments be carried out in
the relevant rules in terms of Article 145 of the Constitution. 
Article 145  provides  that   subject to the provisions  of any
law made  by   Parliament,   the Supreme Court may from time
to time,       with the  approval of the President,   make  rules
for  regulating 
1 28th Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice on the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008” presented to the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2008. 2 Department of Justice’s Letter No. L-11018/1/2002-Jus dated 17.7.2009. The said letter inadvertently refers
to 21st Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on the ‘Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006’.3 Paragraphs 7.4 and 7.5 of the 28th Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
6

generally the practice and procedure of the Court, including
various  matters  specified  in  sub-clauses  (a)  to  (j).  The
Committee observed that the corporate and statutory bodies
have to pay only maximum court-fee of Rs.2,000/- for going to
Supreme  Court,  and  such  entities  make  use  of  the  judicial
infrastructure at the minimum expense and considerable time is
spent by the Supreme Court on the litigation by such corporate
bodies.   The  Committee  further  observed  that  the
corporate/commercial bodies have huge financial resources at
their disposal and invariably their disputes are worth crores of
rupees  and,  therefore,  it  would  be  reasonable  if  they  are
required  to  pay  court-fees  on  ad  valorem  basis  ranging
between 1% and 5% of the total value of the dispute.   The
Standing Committee further made specific reference to some of
the fiscal and other enactments viz. Customs Act, Central Excise
Act,  Income-tax  Act,  Consumer  Protection  Act,  MRTP  Act,
Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  Act, SEBI  Act,  under
which  the companies can file appeals to the Supreme Court by
paying  the  maximum  fee  of  Rs.2,000/-  which  is  grossly
inadequate.  The  Committee  pointed  out  that  the  additional
revenue generated by charging higher fee on corporate bodies
could be used by the State for fulfilling the directives laid down
in Article 39A of the constitution.   The Committee felt that by
increasing the court-fees on  ad valorem  basis, the Supreme
Court can add to its revenue manifold and the resultant revenue
7

could flow back to the judiciary in the form of higher grants.  
Further, it was observed that whereas the corporate/statutory
bodies are able to approach the Supreme Court by paying the
minimum amount of fee, the poor and ordinary citizens are
handicapped in having access to justice. 
1.2 The Table of court-fees (Parts I & II of Third Schedule)
appended to the Supreme Court Rules, 1966 is enclosed to this
Report (as Appendix).
8

 II - EARLIER REPORTS 
2.1 At the outset, it may be stated that the Law Commission
of India in its 189th Report (2004)4 recommended that having
regard to the devaluation of rupee and increase in inflation, the
rates of fixed court-fees as prescribed in Schedule 2 of the
Court-fees Act 1870 need to  be appropriately revised. It was
also observed that ad valorem court-fees need not be revised in
as much as the fee will be paid in proportion to the value of the
claim which in any event would reflect the enhanced value of
the claim after inflation.   That means, those  cases involving
high stakes will attract higher court-fees as a consequence of ad
valorem court-fee.   The recommendation was that in so far as
the Union territories not covered by their respective Acts are
concerned,  it  will  be  sufficient  if  the  rates  of  court-fee  as
prescribed in the Court-fees Act 1870 be enhanced keeping in
mind the devaluation of rupee over the years.   The present
Commission while reiterating the said views suggests that the
maximum  court-fee  wherever  prescribed  should  also  be
reasonably increased in view of  long passage of time and the
change of circumstances.   
4 Law Commission of India, 189th Report on “Revision of Court Fees Structure” (2004), pages 96, 112-113
9

2.2  The Law Commission in its 220th Report (2009)5 stressed
on the need to fix the maximum for the court-fees chargeable.  
In  this  context,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  in  Delhi  and  in
Chandigarh, there is no maximum prescribed.  
2.3  Before proceeding to address the crucial issue, we may
briefly recapitulate the position relating to the legislative powers
of the Parliament and the State Legislatures vis-à-vis court-fees.
The 189th Report has elaborately discussed this aspect and we
would like to quote the excerpts therefrom:   
“From the above entries, it is evident that the subject of
Court-fees, so far it relates to Supreme Court, falls under
Entry 77 of List I (Union List).  Court-fees in High Courts
and other Subordinate Courts, falls under Entry 3 of List II
(State List). 
 Entry 96 of List I, Entry 66 of List II and Entry 47 of List
III also deal with ‘fees’, but ‘fees taken in any Court’ is
specifically excluded in these specific entries.
(a) Law  on  Court-fees  payable  in  the  High  Court  and
subordinate Courts:  It is necessary to mention here that
the entry relating to the ‘administration of justice’, was
5 Law Commission of India, 220th Report on “Need to fix Maximum Chargeable Court-fees in Subordinate
Civil Courts” (2009), paragraph 3 “RECOMMENDATION”.
10

originally  in  Entry  3  of  List  II.  But  by  virtue  of  the
Constitution  (Forty-Second)  Amendment  Act,  1976,  the
said entry has been shifted to List III with effect from
3.1.1977.   Though  administration  of  justice  now  falls
under Entry 11A of List III, the subject of ‘fees taken in
any  court’,  which  may  be  said  to  be  related  to
administration of justice, does not fall under List III in
view  of  the  explicit  bar  under  Entry  47  of  List  III
mentioned  above.  The  effect  of  this  Constitutional
amendment  still  remains  the  same  i.e.  the  power  to
legislate  on  matters  of  court-fees  remains  in  the
competence of the State Legislatures, so far as the High
Courts and Courts subordinate thereto are concerned.   
      Thus, as far as Parliament is concerned, under Art.246
(1) read with Entry 77 of List I, it can enact a law relating
to Court-fees  which  is payable  in Supreme  Court, and
under Art.246(4) read with Entry 3 of List II, it can enact a
law for Court-fees payable in other Courts situated in any
Union  Territory.  But,  for  High  courts  and  other
subordinate  Courts  exercising  jurisdiction  in  any  State,
laws  relating  to  Court-fees  can  only  be  made  by  the
Legislature of a State as per Art.246(3) read with Entry 3
of List II.”
11

 III - EXAMINATION OF ISSUE FROM THE CONSTITUTIONAL
ANGLE (ARTICLE 14)
3.1 Now,  we  shall  address  the  question  whether  it  is
constitutionally permissible to prescribe a different and higher
court-fee  for  the  corporations.    The  fundamental  right  to
equality guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution does not
rule  out  reasonable  classification.   There  need  not  be  and
ought not to be uniform rates of taxation (or fee) applicable to
all classes of persons and to all the objects of taxation.  In fact,
it is a well - settled principle reiterated in a series of decisions of
the Supreme Court of India as well as the Constitutional Courts
of other countries that in matters of taxation, the Legislature
enjoys greater freedom of classification and its range of choice
is much wider.  We may in this context refer to the decision of
the Supreme Court in  P.M. Ashwathanarayana Setty and Ors.
Vs. State of Karnataka and Ors. (AIR 1989 SC 100) in which the
constitutional  validity  of  the  court-fees  enactments  of  three
States came up for consideration.  The Supreme Court observed
thus:
“….Though  other  legislative  measures  dealing  with
economic regulation  are not  outside  Art. 14, it is well
recognized that the State enjoys the widest latitude where
measures of  economic regulation are concerned.  These
12

measures for fiscal and economic regulation involve an
evaluation of diverse and quite often conflicting economic
criteria  and  adjustment  and  balancing  of  various
conflicting social and economic values and interests.  It is
for the State to decide what economic and social policy it
should  pursue  and  what  discriminations  advance  those
special and economic policies.  In view of the inherent
complexity  of  these  fiscal  adjustments,  Courts  give   a
larger discretion to the Legislature in the matter of its
preferences  of  economic  and  social  policies  and 
effectuate  the  chosen  system  in  all  possible  and
reasonable  ways.     If  two  or  more  methods  of
adjustments of an economic measure are available, the
Legislative preference in favour of one of them cannot be
questioned on the ground of lack of legislative wisdom or
that the method adopted   is not the best or   that there
were better ways of adjusting the competing interests and
claims. The legislature possesses the greatest freedom in
such areas.  The analogy of principles of the burden of tax
may not also be inapposite in dealing with the validity of
the distribution of the burden of a ‘fee’ as well.”  (para
30) 
After quoting the principles laid down in earlier cases, it
was observed:
13

“….The complexity of economic matters and the pragmatic
solutions  to  be  found  for  them  defy  and  go  beyond
conceptual mental models.  Social and economic problems
of a policy do not accord with preconceived stereotypes so
as to be amenable to pre-determined solutions.”  (para
31)
  Then, at para 32, it was pointed out that “the question
whether the measure of a tax or a fee should be ad valorem or
ad quantum is again a matter of fiscal policy.”   
3.2 In the case of  Income-tax Officer, Shillong vs. N.
Takin Roy Rymbai  (AIR 1976 SC 670) it was observed:
“….Nor the mere fact that a tax falls more heavily on some
in the same category, is by itself a ground to render the
law  invalid.  It  is  only  when  within  the  range  of  its
selection,  the  law  operates  unequally  and  cannot  be
justified on the basis of a valid classification, that there
would be a violation of Article 14.”  (para 24)
3.3 In  Ashwathanarayana  Setty’s  case,  the  Supreme  Court
upheld the constitutional validity of the Rajasthan and Karnataka
14

Court-fees  and  Suits  Valuation  Acts.  However,  a  particular
provision  in  Bombay  Court-fees  Act  was  struck  down  as
unconstitutional. The  reason  was  that  the  Court-fees  on
proceedings for grant of probate and letters of administration
ad valorem without the upper limit prescribed as in the case of
other  proceedings  was  discriminatory.  The  Supreme  Court
agreed  with  the  view  of the  High  court  that  there  was no
intelligible or rational differentia between the two classes of
litigations having rational nexus to the objective.   The Supreme
Court  noticed  that the party who was plaintiff in a probate
proceeding was called upon to pay a court-fees of Rs.6.14 lacs
whereas  if  it  were  a civil  suit  much  less  would  have  been
payable in view of the ceiling prescribed for the court-fees in the
suits.   The  Supreme  Court  approved  of  the  following
observations of the High Court:
“There is no answer to this contention, except that the
legislature has not thought it fit to grant relief  to the
seekers of probates, whereas plaintiffs in civil suits were
thought  deserving  of  such  an  upper  limit.  The
discrimination is a piece of class legislation prohibited by
the guarantee of equal protection of laws embodied in Art.
14 of the Constitution.   On this ground also, item 10
cannot be sustained.”  (para 36)
15

3.4 The Supreme Court also made an observation that the
prescription of high rates of court-fees even in small claims as
also without an upper limit in larger claims is “perilously close to
arbitrariness, an unconstitutionality”.
3.5 Classification for the purpose of taxation based on the
financial capacity has been held to be permissible classification
by the Supreme Court in certain other cases arising under the
Sales Tax and other tax laws.  
3.6 The  Commission  is,  therefore,  of  the  view  that  the
prescription of higher court-fees for corporate sector or any
other  category  of  litigants  will  not  per  se offend  any
constitutional  principle,  provided  that  there  is  reasonable
justification to treat them on a different footing. There must be
intelligible  differentia  to  support  the  classification.  The
Commission is clarifying this point because in an earlier report
(220th Report),6 there  was  a  passing  observation  that  there
should be some measure of uniformity of court-fees and there is
no justification for differential treatment of different suitors. The
issue in the present form has not been considered by the Law
Commission.  
3.7  However, the question would then arise as to why the
corporations should alone be subjected to higher rates of court-
6 Supra Note 5
16

fees  leaving  out  affluent  individuals  and  associations  of
individuals.   If capacity to pay more is the criterion, why should
there be a distinction between the corporations and equally if
not more prosperous other litigants?   In fact, this is one of the
considerations which weighed with the Law Ministers as far back
as 1984. The issue of rationalization of court-fee was examined
by  the  Committee  of  Law  Ministers  in  Oct.  1984  and  the
suggestion of differential court-fees for corporate sector was
turned down by the Committee with the following note:
“The Advocates General of Kerala and West Bengal were
of the view that there was no justification for extending
concessions proposed in the matter of court-fees to the
companies.  They further  said that  differential  rates of
court-fees could be prescribed for payment by individuals
and  corporate  bodies/companies.  They  felt  that  there
might not be any constitutional bar in doing so.( para
8.15)
Whether the suit is filed by an individual or a company,
the service rendered by the court is the same.  It may be
argued that companies/corporate bodies are in a position
to pay.  But so may be the case with several individuals. 
How  could  then  a  differential  rate  of  court-fee  be
justified?  Also, among companies, there may be strong
17

and  weak  ones.  There  may  be  differences  in  size,
financial  viability,  etc.  Again,  if  a  differential  rate  is
accepted, Government undertakings will also be covered.”
(para 8.16)
3.8 Another aspect that should be taken into account if the
companies as a class are to be chosen for special treatment is
the  need to provide lesser court-fee for companies which have
no substantial assets or do not make profits. It would be unjust
if all the companies which litigate in the courts are treated at
par irrespective of their financial position. If so, there must be
sub-classification  of  companies  and  two  sets  of  fee  made
applicable to them. This would make the court-fee structure
complex. 
18

               IV - CERTAIN DETAILS RELATING TO CORPORATE    LITIGATION 
4.1  Before  proceeding  to  discuss  the  alternative  option
available, the Commission would like to place on record certain
data/statistics  relating  to  the  Court-fee  revenue  and  the
corporate cases filed in the Supreme Court. The overall revenue
from the court-fees for the years 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-
10 is Rs. 119 lakhs, 128 lakhs and 133 lakhs, respectively. The
total  budgetary  allocation  to  the  Supreme  Court  during  the
preceding  year  (2009)  was  above  Rs.  100  crores.  The
Commission, after making some efforts, could obtain the details
of cases filed in two months, i.e., January  and February  2010
in order to identify distinctly the civil appeals (including those
relating to  taxation and other special Acts) instituted by the
companies/corporations.  The appeals attract the maximum fee
of Rs.2,000/-
4.2  The Special Leave Petitions (SLPs-Civil) registered in the
month of January 2010 were 2507 and those in February were
2187.  Out  of  them,  123  SLPs-Civil  in  January  and  185  in
February relate to private sector companies.  During the same
period, as many as 449 and 235 SLPs (Civil) were those filed by
public  sector  companies/undertakings.  Thus,  as  far  as
Companies other than PSUs are concerned, the average number
of SLPs (Civil) filed in a month works out to about 150 cases. 
19

Most of the cases filed by the companies including PSUs are
taxation matters and appeals under special enactments relating
to Telecom Disputes, Electricity Regulation, Consumer Disputes
etc. For the SLPs, a nominal fixed fee is charged as in the case
of  Writ  petitions  in  the  High  Courts.   When  the  SLPs  are
admitted after hearing, those SLPs will be converted into civil
appeals  and  for  civil  appeals,  the  maximum  fee  presently
chargeable  is  Rs.2,000/.   About  50%  or  more  SLPs  are
generally rejected at admission stage.  Thus, assuming about 70
or 80 cases of private sector companies are numbered as civil
appeals, the court-fees revenue presently being fetched from
the companies whose appeals are so entertained is to the tune
of about 1.60 lakhs per month (about 19 lakhs per year).
4.3 We shall notice the pattern of institution fee payable for the
appeals filed under  various special  Acts to the statutory
Tribunals such as CEGAT, ITAT, TDSAT, Electricity Appellate
Tribunal,  Consumer  Disputes  Appellate  Tribunal.    The
maximum fee is Rs.10,000/-.   However, for the appeals to
Securities  Appellate  Tribunal7 and  Competition  Appellate
Tribunal8, the maximum fee payable ranges between Rs.1.5
lakhs and Rs.3 lakhs, respectively with a minimum of Rs.
500 and Rs. 1000. Very few appeals under the said two Acts
are presently pending in the Supreme Court.  For appeals to
7 Rule 9(2) of the SecuritiesContracts (Regulation) (Appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal)Rules, 20008 GSR No. 387(E), Rule 4(2) of the Competition Appellate Tribunal (Form and Fee for filing an appeal and
fee for filing compensation applications) Rules, 2009 
20

the  High  Court  arising  out  of  ITAT’s  orders  (under  the
Income-tax  Act)  and  other  taxation  statutes,  the  fee
charged by the High Courts including the Delhi High Court is
nominal. At the stage of appeal to the Tribunal also, the fee
paid is quite small, as noted earlier.  In no State or Union
territory, the ad valorem court-fee is charged in respect of
appeals/references arising under taxation and other fiscal
enactments. Normally, the appeals arising under the said
enactments involve heavy stakes and they are mostly filed
by  companies,  trusts,  firms  and  societies.  The  other
category  of  appeals  which  involve  heavy stakes filed  by
companies and firms are those under the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.  As per the information received from
the Supreme Court Registry number of cases registered up
to October in the year 2010 under the said Act is 478. 
4.4.1 That there should be an upper limit or ceiling to the court-
fees charged is a generally accepted norm and that principle is
adopted in almost all the court-fees Acts including the Court-
fees Act of 1870. The absence of such ceiling, the Supreme
Court pointed out in Ashwathanarayana Setty’s case, would be
“perilously  close  to  arbitrariness”.  The  appeals  filed  by  the
companies in the Supreme Court should also be governed by
the said principle and it would not be proper and rational to
21

dispense with that principle in respect of any category of civil
appeals filed by the companies or others.
 4.4.2 Interestingly, the case of  Central Coal Fields Ltd. Vs.
Jaiswal Coal Co.  (AIR 1980 SC 2125) illustrates how the high
quantum of court-fee without maximum limit caused problems
to a PSU to file an appeal.  The Supreme Court observed, “if the
Central Government or its agent discovered that the court-fee
was disastrously back-breaking, one should have expected it, as
the promoter of inexpensive justice for the people, to undertake
uniform legislation reducing the scale of court-fees consistently
with economic justice and civilized processual jurisprudence...” 
(para 3)
4.5  The Commission  would  like  to restate  the  well-settled
principle that court-fee should not be viewed as the chief source
of  revenue  to  run  the  courts.  It  is  trite  that  the  cost  of
administration of justice, being a sovereign function essential to
the democratic system of governance cannot be evaluated in
terms of the court-fees generated.    Secondly, court-fee ought
not to be viewed as a means to check vexatious litigation.   
Even if a part of the litigation is vexatious, an abnormal increase
in the quantum of court-fee would cause hardship to genuine
litigants.    In  this  context,  the  Commission  would  like  to
mention that it is undertaking a separate study on the subject of
22

costs and appropriate amendments to Code of Civil Procedure
so that the court will be in a position to impose heavy costs on
frivolous and vexatious litigation.
V. POSITION IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES 
5  The Commission has noticed that no separate court fee
has been prescribed for the corporates in most of the foreign
countries including SAARC countries, United Kingdom, Canada,
etc.   However, in Australia9 and New South Wales, corporates
are liable to pay double the amount of court-fee payable by
other suitors in respect of certain matters.
9 Federal Magistrates Regulations 2000, Statutory Rules 2000 No. 102 as amended ,prepared by the Office of
Legislative Drafting and Publishing, Attorney-General’s Department, Canberra (Schedule 1) 
23

VI. EASIER ACCESS TO COURTS AND COURT-FEE 
6.1  Before  formulating  the  recommendations,  the
Commission  would  like  to  take  note  of  the  thinking  of
Parliamentary Standing Committee that the poor and indigent
litigants should have the access to Courts with least cost. In this
context, the Commission adds that irrespective of realization of
additional court-fee revenue from the corporate-appellants and
ploughing  back  that  meagre  revenue  for  the  purpose  of
extending assistance to the have-nots, there must be focus on
revisiting and refining the systems already in force to achieve
the desired objective of minimizing the cost to the poor litigants
and improving the quality of legal aid. Establishing cost-effective
and  hassle-free  access  to  justice  should  be  a  continuous
endeavour  on  the  part  of  the  Government  as  well  as  the
judiciary. Providing better and easier access to the courts – from
the lowest to the highest, and extending qualitative legal aid to
the common people who cannot afford the cost is a goal to be
achieved without linking it up with the quantum of court-fee.
This laudable agenda has to be tackled independently. 
6.2  We shall briefly advert to the relevant provisions of law
and mechanisms in place to extend legal aid and assistance to
the poor and economically handicapped persons and others.  In
the Code  of Civil  Procedure,  1908  Order  XXXIII  enables  an
24

indigent person to file a suit without payment of court-fee or
any fee for service or process.   An indigent person is defined as
one  who  is  not  possessed  of  sufficient  means  (other  than
property exempt from attachment) to pay the prescribed court-
fee.  Enquiry into the means of an indigent person has been
simplified by conferring that power in the first instance on the
chief  ministerial officer of the court.  Further, the court can
assign  a  pleader  to  an  unrepresented  indigent  person  in
accordance  with  the  rules  made  by  the  High  Court  in  this
regard.  In regard to appeals, a similar provision is there in
Order XLIV of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  enabling an
indigent person to file the appeal without payment of court-
fee.   Where  a  party  was  allowed  to  sue  or  appeal  as  an
indigent person in the court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred, no further enquiry in respect of the question whether
or not he is an indigent person shall be necessary, if the party
files an affidavit stating that he has not ceased to be an indigent
person since the date of the decree.  
6.3  The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 has amplified the
scope of legal aid to the poor and needy persons and created
statutory fora to extend the legal aid and services to the eligible
parties.  There is a National Legal Services Authority at the apex
level with the Chief Justice of India  as patron-in-chief and a
senior Judge of the Supreme Court as the executive Chairman.  
25

The  Supreme  Court  Legal  Services  Committee  headed  by
another  senior Judge  consists of ten members including the
Attorney  General,  the  officials  of  the  concerned  Ministries  /
Departments of Government  of India  and Advocates practising
in the Supreme Court.  The functions of the central authority
(NALSA) are specified in section 4 of the said Act.   The Act also
provides for the constitution of State Legal Services Authority,
High Court Legal Services Committee, District Legal Services
Authority and Taluk Legal Services Committees.  Each authority
is required to establish Legal Aid Fund.   The major component
of such funds are the grants given by the NALSA and State
Governments.  Further, considerable amounts are received by
these bodies by reason of the orders of the courts directing
remittance of costs to the credit of Legal Service Authority.   
The  Legal  Service  Authorities  in  a  majority  of  States  have
sufficient funds at their disposal, but, infrastructure is lacking in
many States.   With the allocation of substantial amounts to
Legal Service Authorities pursuant to the recommendations of
Thirteenth Finance Commission, the infrastructural facilities are
bound to improve.  
6.4.1  The persons entitled for legal services are specified in
section 12 of Legal  Services Authorities Act, 1987.     Under
section 12, every person who has to file or defend a case shall
be entitled to legal services under this Act if that person, is-
26

(a)  a  member  of  a  Scheduled  Caste  or  Scheduled
Tribe; (b) a victim of trafficking in human beings;  (c) a
woman or a child; (d) a person with a disability; (e) a
person under circumstances of undeserved want such as
being  a  victim  of  a  mass  disaster,  violence,  natural
calamities etc; (f) an industrial workman;  (g) a person in
custody,  including  custody  in  a  protective  home  or  a
juvenile home or psychiatric hospital; and (h)  in receipt of
annual income less than rupees 50,000/-.
6.4.2 As per section 13, these persons are entitled to legal
services provided that the concerned authority is satisfied that
such a person has a prima facie case  to prosecute or defend. 
6.5 The expression ‘legal service’ includes the rendering of
any service in the conduct of any case or other legal proceeding
before any court or other authority or tribunal and the giving of
advice on any legal matter.   The Supreme Court Legal Services
Committee as well as the other Committees at the High Court
and District levels maintain a panel of lawyers who are required
to give legal assistance to eligible persons specified in section
12.  Some of the matters pertaining to the parties who approach
the  Legal  Services  Authority/Committee  are  referred  to  Lok
27

Adalats also in order to ensure speedy justice.    The NALSA has
recently  framed  a  Scheme  for  Free  and  Competent  Legal
Services, 2010.  The procedure for approaching the Supreme
Court Legal Services Committee by the persons entitled to legal
aid is by and large hassle-free.   Lok Adalats are held regularly
under the auspices of Legal Service Authorities and Committees
at various levels.
6.6 As said earlier,extending legal aid and legal services has
not been and ought not to be made dependent on the court-fee
revenue raised.  Broadly speaking, the deterrent is not Court
fee. The real problem  for any litigant  especially an average
person who is not eligible for legal aid is the high cost of legal
fee and other expenses charged at the lawyers’ offices.  To
some extent, this problem is taken care of by the provisions of
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.   At the same time,
there are some problem areas which may have to be tackled by
the concerned Authorities/Committees under the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987 to realize the goal set out in Article 39A of
the Constitution.   The Law Commission is intending to take up
the  subject  of  legal  aid  and  services  in  order  to  make
recommendations  for  further  improving  the  existing  systems
after consulting the Judges/officials connected with NALSA and
Supreme  Court  Legal  Services  Committee.   The  Commission
would also like to mention that in the Supreme Court, the e-
28

filing of cases has been introduced which would obviate the
need of personal presence of the appellant/petitioner at the
time of filing the cases.    Moreover, the Supreme Court can
exercise its power under Order XLVII Rule 6 of the Supreme
Court Rules, 1966 to dispense with the payment of court-fee in
appropriate cases (though it is not specifically stated so in the
rules).  We  have  only  referred  to  these  aspects  in  order  to
highlight that the legal aid and assistance to the poor, needy
and vulnerable sections of the society is being extended by the
Supreme Court and other Courts without linking it up with the
quantum of court-fee and the same policy is being adopted by
the Government in sanctioning funds for legal aid.
29

VII. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
7.1  In the light of the legal and factual position discussed
above,  the  Commission  is  inclined  to  take  the  view  that
companies/corporations  alone  cannot  be  fastened  with  the
liability to pay higher court-fee, leaving apart similarly situated
category of litigants who do business.  At the same time, there
can be classification based on the financial capacity to bear the
burden of court-fee.  The financial capacity is broadly deducible
from  the  stakes  involved  or  the  value  of  subject  matter  of
appeal.  The  value  or  the  stake  of  appeal  can  be  broadly
correlated to the capacity of litigant.  The appellants in high
value appeals, mostly under the special Acts are companies,
firms, trusts or association of persons or even individuals who
can all afford to pay higher court-fee without any difficulty.  It
is, therefore, desirable that the upward revision of court-fee
should be undertaken not merely with reference to appellants
who fall strictly within the description of companies/corporations
but also other categories of suitors depending on the value of
the subject matter involved in the appeal.  This can be achieved
by prescribing ad valorem court-fee subject to the prescription
of ceiling at a reasonable level.  That means the higher the
stake,  the more the litigant has to pay within the maximum
limit.  In the case of ad valorem court-fee, the fee will be paid in
proportion to the value of the claim.  In fact, the Supreme Court
30

Rules adopt the  ad valorem classification, but, in view of the
paltry  ceiling  limit  of  Rs.2,000/-,  there  is  no  possibility  of
collecting  higher  court-fee  from  those  litigants  including
corporations  who  can  afford  to  pay  higher  court-fee.  The
Supreme Court Rules prescribe the court-fee of Rs.250 if the
“amount of value of the subject matter in dispute” is Rs.20,000,
or below.  For every Rs.1,000 in excess of Rs.20,000 the court-
fee payable is Rs.5 which works out to half percent. So far,
there is no problem. But, it stops at the ceiling of Rs.2,000
which was prescribed 60 years back i.e. from the inception of
the Supreme  Court10. The maximum court-fee has not been
revised  so  far.  It  may also  be  noted  that  where  it  is  not
possible to estimate the subject matter in dispute at a money
value or in other words, the appeal is incapable of valuation, the
fee remains at Rs.250 only.  There is every need to increase this
limit also. As stated earlier, the ceiling on ad valorem court-fee
prescribed decades back has to be enhanced manifold so that
the litigants who can afford to pay can bear more court-fee
depending on the value of the subject matter of appeal.  Such
litigants are mostly companies or other legal business entities. 
Thus, what is needed is an across the board increase of  ad
valorem court fee subject to a cap at a reasonable level.
7.2 The Commission is, therefore of the view that a re-look at
the present rules governing the court-fee in respect of appeals
10 The Supreme Court Rules, 1950 and 1966,, Third Schedule, Part II. Appellate Jurisdiction 
31

(Civil) filed in the Supreme court is highly desirable in view of
the long passage of time and the economic realities of the day. 
While the half per cent rate over and above Rs.20,000 can
remain (or it can be increased to one percent), it would be
reasonable to enhance the maximum court-fee at least to Rs.1
lakh.  That is to say, for the figure Rs.2,000 occurring in clause
(1) of the proviso to Sl. No. 2 of Part-II of the Supreme Court
Rules, Rs. 1 lakh (or more) needs to be substituted. This is
broadly our suggestion and we must state that the Commission
has  not  done  any  specific  exercise  to  determine  the  exact
quantum  as  the  Commission  feels  that  the  Supreme  Court
Committee  would  appropriately  delve  into  those  details. 
Further, the figure of Rs.250 which is the minimum payable as
well  as the  fee  of  Rs.250  specified  in  appeals  incapable  of
valuation  should  be  suitably  increased.  There  is  also  every
justification for increasing the fee for special leave petitions,
which is presently a small sum of Rs.250.  The net result will be
that  most  of  the  appeals  filed  by  the  corporate  and  other
business entities against tax / fee demands and other fiscal
liabilities and arbitration awards will come  within the net of
enhanced  court-fee  regime.  At the  same  time, it would be
rational  and  reasonable  to  charge  only  fixed  court-fee  (as
enhanced) in respect of appeals that arise out of High Courts’
judgments in civil matters, where court- fee would have already
been paid on ad valorem basis both at the trial stage and at the
32

appellate stage.  We may also mention that in case of individual
hardship,  the  appellant  concerned  can  always  approach  the
Supreme Court for exemption of court-fee.
7.3  The Commission, on taking a holistic view has recorded
its  broad  suggestions  for  the  enhancement  of  the  ceiling
prescribed in the Supreme Court Rules in relation to ad valorem
fee as well as fixed court-fee.  The proper and expedient course
would be to address the Supreme Court for suitable upward
revision of the prevailing court-fee keeping in view the long
passage of time and the heavy stake cases that are coming up
before the Supreme Court in relation to matters arising under
fiscal and other special enactments.  The Supreme Court may
perhaps  constitute  a  Committee  of  Judges  and  consult  the
Supreme  Court  Bar  Association,  if  necessary. As  the  rules
framed by the Supreme Court in regard to court-fee have been
in operation for more than half a century, it would be in the
fitness of things to leave the decision to enhance court-fee to
the Supreme  Court in  the first instance. It is desirable  and
proper that the Parliament  does  not straightway proceed to
supersede the Supreme Court Rules and prescribe the scales of
fee by itself through legislation. The 
33

Commission  is of the  opinion  that it  would be  proper  to
address the Supreme Court indicating the tentative views of
the  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  and  of  the  Law
Commission and suggesting an upward revision of maximum
as well as fixed court-fee in Part-II and in respect of such
other items in the III Schedule as the Court may consider
appropriate.
Union Territories
8. In regard to major Union Territories i.e.,  Chandigarh
and NCT of Delhi, the information sought from the High
Courts as regards the applicable schedule of court-fees
for suits, appeals, etc. is awaited. A brief supplemental
report will be submitted by the  Commission shortly, so
far as the UTs are concerned. 
[JUSTICE P.V. REDDI]
CHAIRMAN
[JUSTICE SHIV KUMAR SHARMA]        [AMARJIT SINGH]
      MEMBER       MEMBER
[DR. BRAHM A. AGRAWAL]
MEMBER-SECRETARY
New Delhi-110 001
Dated: 27.12.2010
34

Appendix 
TABLE OF COURT FEE (SUPREME COURT)
PART I
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
1. Filing and registering plaint          
250.00
2. Filing and registering written statement    50.00
3. Filing and registering set-off or counter-claim    50.00
4. Reply to a  counter claim    50.00
5. Examining and comparing document with the  original, for each folio  0.50
6. Reducing into writing or, where taken down in shorthand, 
transcribing the deposition of witnesses, for each folio.    0.62
7. Typed copies of transcript of depositions of witnesses for any Party-First 
copy, per folio   0.50
Carbon copies, per folio.    0.12
8. Petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution other than petitions for 
habeas corpus and petitions arising out of  criminal proceedings.  
50.00
35

PART II
APPELLATE JURISDICTION
1. Petition for special leave to appeal 250.00
[1(a) Consolidated process fee for intimating contesting respondents    10.00
2. Lodging and registering petition of appeal – where the amount of 
value of the subject-matter in dispute is Rs. 20,000 or below that sum 250.00
For every Rs. 1,000 in excess of Rs. 20,000  5.00 
    for every thousand rupees or part
thereof
In case, where it is not possible to estimate at a money value 
the subject matter in dispute 
Provided -
(1)that the maximum fee payable in any case shall not exceed Rs. 2,000 and 
(2) that where an appeal is brought by special leave granted by the court credit shall be
given to the appellant for the amount of court fee paid by him on the petition for
special leave to appeal.]
[3. Lodging of statement of case of caveat] 20.00
4. Application for review of judgement or order of court the same fee as was paid
on the 
      original proceedings 
36

[5.petiton of Appeal under Consumer Protection Act, 1986
250.00
37