 
 
  
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Compounding of (IPC) Offences 
 
Report No. 237 
 
 
 
December, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
Justice P. V. Reddi          New Delhi 
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)               Tele: 2301 9465 (R) 
Chairman                     2338 4475 (O) 
Law Commission of India                  Fax: 2379 2745 (R) 
 
 

2 
 
D. O.  No. 6(3)/196/2010 – LC (LS)                                       December 30, 2011  
 
Dear Hon. Minister Salman Khurshid ji, 
I am forwarding herewith the report of the Law Commission 
of India, on “Compounding of (IPC) Offences”. 
   As regards this subject, the Supreme Court, in two decisions 
referred to at page 1 of the report, suggested that Law 
Commission should undertake the exercise of identifying more 
compoundable offences.  The Department of Legal Affairs, in  its 
OM F. No. A-60011/63/2010-Admn. III (L.A.) dated 2 nd 
December, 2010, referred to the Order of Supreme Court and 
requested the Commission to take necessary action.  Further, the 
Home Secretary, in his D.O. letter No. 3/2/2006-Judl. Cell dated 
1
st September, 2009. Addressed to the Member-Secretary of the 
Commission, requested the Law Commission to examine the 
question of misuse of Section 498-A IPC and to suggest remedial 
measures.   
In Preeti Gupta Vs. State of Jharkhand [ (2010) 8 SCC page 
131), the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that a serious re-look 
of the entire provision (section 498-A IPC) is warranted by a 
legislation.  The Supreme Court deplored the tendency of several 
implications and exaggerated versions.  The Court observed:  “It 
is high-time that the Legislature must take into consideration the 
pragmatic reality and suitable changes in the existing laws”.  A 
copy of the judgment was directed to be sent to the Law 
Commission of India and to the Union Law Secretary for taking 
appropriate steps in the larger interest of the Society.  On receipt 
of this judgment, the Department of Legal Affairs, by its 
communication dated 2
nd December, 2010, requested the Law 
Commission of India to take further necessary action in view of 
the observations in the said judgment. 
Accordingly, the Commission has made an in-depth study 
and  identified  certain offences that can be added to  the  list  
Office: I. L. I. Building, Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi – 110 001 
Residence: 1, Janpath, New Delhi 110 011 
E-mail: pv_reddi@yahoo.co.in 
of compoundable offences under Section 320 Cr.PC.  In 
particular, the Commission has suggested that Section 498A IPC 
(husband or his relative subjecting a woman to cruelty) and 
Section 324 IPC (causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means), 
should be made compoundable with the permission of the Court. 

 
Notwithstanding  the observation of the Supreme Court in a short 
order passed in Ramgopal’s case, (vide p. 1 of the report), the 
Commission has taken the view that Section 326 IPC should 
remain non-compoundable.  The approach to be adopted vis-à-vis 
the compounding of offences has been discussed.    The summary 
of recommendations are found in the last two pages.   
It may be mentioned that the Commission had published a 
Consultation Paper-cum-Questionnaire on S. 498-A.  A number 
of representations have been received which are analyzed in 
Annexure 1-A.  In the Conferences with the judicial officers and 
lawyers also, this topic was discussed.  The pros and cons have 
been considered after extensive deliberations and the conclusion 
has been reached that S. 498-A should be made compoundable 
as suggested by the Supreme Court, but with the permission of 
the Court.  Certain safeguards have been suggested to dispel the 
apprehension that the wife will be coerced to enter into a 
compromise.  
The other aspects relating to 498A viz., whether it should 
be made bailable and what steps are to be taken to minimize the 
alleged misuse and to facilitate reconciliation will be the subject 
matter of a separate report which is under preparation. 
       
With regards and good wishes, 
    Sd. / 
                                                                     (P.V. Reddi) 
  Shri Salman Khurshid ji,  
  Hon’ble Union Minister for Law & Justice, 
  Shastri Bhavan, 
  New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOUNDING OF (IPC) OFFENCES 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION                  5 - 6 
2. SCHEME AND FEATURES OF COMPOUNDING            7 - 9 
OF OFFENCES UNDER THE CODE OF CRIMINAL  
PROCEDURE, 1973  
               
3. RELATED REPORTS OF THE LAW              10 -13 
COMMISSION AND THE LEGISLATIVE 
 CHANGES MADE 
 
4. APPROACH OF THE SUPREME COURT              14 - 15 
IN CERTAIN CASES 
 
5. COMPOUNDABILITY OF CERTAIN OFFENCES          16 - 33
           
 
6. RECOMMENDATIONS                34 - 35 
 
 
ANNEXURE 1-A ANALYSES OF REPLIES TO            36 
QUESTIONNAIRE 
  
 ANNEXURE 1-B LIST OF RESPONDENTS                    37 – 49 
 
 ANNUXURE 2 CONSULTATION PAPER-CUM-           50 - 62 
    QUESTIONNAIRE REGARDING 
SECTION 498A, INDIAN 
PENAL CODE 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
   
 

 
1. Introduction 
1.1 The Supreme Court of India in the case of Ram gopal vs. State of M.P .1  in a 
brief order, observed thus:  
“There are several offences under the IPC that are currently non-
compoundable. These include offences punishable under Section 498- A, Section 
326, etc. of the IPC. Some of such offences can be  made compoundable by 
introducing a suitable amendment in the statute. We are of the opi nion that the 
Law Commission of India could examine whether a suitable proposal can be 
sent to the Union Government in this regard.  Any such step would not only 
relieve the courts of the burden of deciding cases  in which the aggrieved parties 
have themselves arrived at a settlement, but may also encourage the process of  
re-conciliation between them. We, accordingly, request the Law Commission 
and the Government of India to examine all these aspects and take such steps as 
may be considered feasible”.  
 Again, the sa me learned J udges in an Order 2 passed later  in Crl. appeal No.  
433 of 2004 (Diwaker Singh vs. State of Bihar)  made similar observations which are  
extracted hereunder: 
 “Further, we are of the opinion that Section 324 IPC and many other offences    
should be made compoundable. We have already referred to the Law 
Commission of India and the Ministry of Law & Justice , Government of India 
our suggestion that suitable  amendments should be made in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure for making several offences whic h are presently treated as 
non-compoundable under Section 320 CrPC as  compoundable. This will greatly 
reduce the burden of the courts.   
   The Law Commission of India and the Ministr y of Law & Justice, 
Government of India may also examine this suggestion. The Law  Commission 
may also examine several other provisions of the  Indian Penal Code and 
other statutes in order to recommend that they may also be made compoundable 
even if they are presently non-compoundable.” 
 Pursuant to the se observations of the Supreme Court, the L aw Commission of 
India embarked on the task of identifying appropriate offences which could be added to 
the list of compoundable offences under Section  320 of the CrPC. The present exercise 
is only confined to the offences made punishable under Indian Penal Code. 
                                                           
1 2010 (7) SCALE 711 
2 Dated 18th August 2010 

6 
 
1.2 Compounding in the context of criminal law means forbearance from the 
prosecution as a result of an amicable settlement between the parties. As observed by 
Calcutta High Court in a vintage decision in Murray 3, compounding of an offence 
signifies “that the person against whom the offence has been committed has received 
some gratification, not necessarily of a pecuniary character, to act as an inducement of 
his desiring  to abstain from a  prosecution”.  The victim may have received 
compensation from the offend er or the attitude of the parties towards each other may  
have changed for good. The victim is prepared to condone the offensive conduct of the 
accused who became chastened and repentant. Criminal law needs to be attuned to take 
note of such situations and to provide a remedy to terminate the criminal proceedings in 
respect of certain types of offences.  That is the rationale behind compounding of 
offences.  Incidentally, the compounding scheme relieves the courts of the burden of 
accumulated cases.  The listing of offences compoundable is something unique to the 
Indian Criminal Law.  The State’s prosecuting agency is not involved in the process of 
compounding. 
1.3  Which offences should  or should not be made compoundable is always an 
enigma for the law -makers.  The problem has to be considered from different 
perspectives and the pros and cons are to be  weighed and a rational view has to be 
taken.   Broadly speaking, the offences which affect the security of the State or having a 
serious impact on the s ociety at large ought not to be permitted to be compounded. So 
also, crimes of grave nature shall not be the subject-matter of compounding.  The policy 
of law on compoundability of offe nces is complex and no straight jacket formula is 
available to reach the deci sion.  A holistic and not an isolated approach is called for in 
identifying the compoundable and non-compoundable offences.  The interest of victims 
of crimes and the  societal interest in the conviction of the offender often clash and this 
makes the job of  law-makers more complex.  That the Courts are flooded with cases 
and, therefore, more and more offences should be identified for compoundability is only 
a secondary consideration.  Primarily, what needs to be taken into account is the nature, 
magnitude and consequences of the crime.   
                                                           
3 (1894)21 ILR 103 at 112 

 
7 
2. Scheme and Features of Compounding of Offences under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
 
2.1 At present, there are 56 compoundable offences : 43 in the Table under  sub-
section (1) and 13 in the Table under sub-section (2) of Section 320. The compoundable 
offences dealt with by CrPC are confined to the offences punishable under Indian Penal 
Code.  The offences under other laws are not touched by Cr PC. The provisions of 
Section 320 CrPC are extracted below for ready reference:  
Section 320. Compounding of offences. –  
(1)The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal Code specified i n the 
first two columns of the table next following may be compounded by the persons 
mentioned in the third column of that table: - 
   Offence Section of the Indian 
Penal Code applicable 
Person by whom offence 
may be compounded 
   
 
(2)The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal Code specif ied in the 
first two columns of  the table next following may, with the permission of the Court  
(emphasis supplied) before which any prosecution for such offence is pending, be 
compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of that table: - 
   Offence Section of the Indian 
Penal Code applicable 
Person by whom offence 
may be compounded 
   
 
(3)When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such offence 
or an attempt to commit such offence when suc h attempt is itself an offence  or where 
the accused is liable under section 34 or 149 of the Indian Penal Code may be 
compounded in like manner. 

8 
 
(4)   (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an 
offence under this section is unde r the age of eighteen years or i s an idiot or a 
lunatic, any person competent to contract on his behalf, may, with the 
permission of the Court compound such offence. 
 (b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an 
 offence under this section is dead, the legal representative, as defined in  the 
 Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 of such person may, with the consent of  the 
 Court compound such offence. 
(5) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been  convicted 
and an appeal is pending, no composition for the offence shall  be allowed without 
the leave of the Court to which he is committed, or,  as  the case may be, be fore 
which the appeal is to be heard. 
(6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in  the exercise of its powers of revision  
under section 401 may allow any person to compound any offence  which such person is 
competent to  compound under this section. 
(7) No offence shall be compounde d if the accused is, by reason of a previous 
conviction, liable either to enhanced punishment or to a  punishment of a  different 
kind for such offence. 
(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the  effect of an acquittal 
of the accused with whom the offence has been  compounded. 
(9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section. 
2.2 An analysis of Section 320 reveals the following salient features:  
 No offence other than that specified in the Section can be compounded.  The 
offence can only be compounded by the persons specified in Col.3 of  the Table 
concerned and such person is the person directly aggrieved in the sense that she/he is 
the victim of the crime.  As a result of composition of the  offence under Section 320, 
the accused will stand acquitted of the offence of which he/she is charged and the Court 
loses its jurisdiction to proceed with the case.    Unlike in some of the provisions of  

 
9 
special laws, no one on behalf of the State is e mpowered to compound the offences.  
However, the public prosecutor may withdraw from prosecution with the consent of the 
Court, as provided for in Section 321 CrPC.   
2.3  Sub-section (3)  of Section 320 lays down the rule  that in respect of 
compoundable offences specified in the Section, the abetment or an attem pt to commit 
the offence is also  compoundable.  So also the composition can be applied to the 
accused who is liable for the offence constructively by virtue of Section 34 or Section 
149 of IPC. Then the composition of offence can be permitted by the High Court or a 
Sessions Court exercising revisional powers. Sub- section (5) provides that the 
composition can be allowed only with the leave of the Com mittal Court or Appellate 
Court during the pendency of committal or appellate proceedings.  
2.4 The Supreme Court made it clear in the case of Surendr a Nath Mohanty vs. 
State of Orissa 4 (a three judge bench decision) that  ‘For the compounding of the 
offences punishable under the Indian Penal Code, a complete scheme is provided under 
Section 320 of the Code  of  Criminal  Procedure, 1973.  Sub-section (1) of Section 320 
provides that the offences mentioned in the table provided thereunder  can be 
compounded by the persons mentioned in Column 3 of the said table. Further, sub-
section (2) provides that the offences mentioned in the table could be compounded by 
the victim with the permission of the Court.  As against this, sub- section (9) specifically 
provides that “no offence shall be compounded except as provided by this Section”. In 
view of the aforesaid legislative mandate, only the offences which are covered by table 
1 or 2 as stated above can be compounded and the rest of the offences punishable under 
Indian Penal Code could not be compounded’.  
 
 
 
                                                           
4 AIR 1999 SC 2181 

10 
 
3.   Related Reports of the Law Commission and the Legislative 
Changes Made 
3.1 In the old Criminal Procedure Code of 1898, Section 345 dealt with the 
compounding of offences.  Sub- section (1) thereof listed 22 offences under the IPC 
which could be compounded by the aggrieved party without the permission of the Court 
and Sub- section (2)  enumerated 32 other offences which m ight also be compounded, 
but with the permission of the Court.  The Law Commission, in its 41 st Report, 
addressed the topic of compounding of offences in Chapter 24.  According to the 
Commission, “…The broad principle that forms the basis of the present scheme  is that 
where the offence is essentially of a private nature and relatively not serious, it is 
compoundable”. The Commission was against the formulation of a general rule that all 
offences which are punishable with the maximum imprisonment  of three years or so 
shall be compoundable.  Though it had the virtue of definiteness, it would not be 
‘suitable’, it was pointed out.  The Commission rightly observed: “ It is, in our opinion, 
better to have clear and specific provisions such as those contained in secti on 345 than 
a general rule which is likely to lead to different interpretations”.  The Commission 
then rejected a suggestion that the law should be simplified requiring permission of the 
Court in every case instead of maintaining two classifications. The Commission was not 
in favour of liberally enlarging the list of compoundable offences.  The Commission 
rejected the suggestion to incl ude the offences under Sections  143, 147, 209, 210, 279, 
304A, 326, 347, 380, 456, 457 and 495 by observing that “Public peace, order and 
security are matters in which society is vitally interested and offences which jeopardize 
them ought to be suitably punished by the courts.”   It is doubtful whether all those 
offences referred to by the Commission (
vide paragraph 24.69) substantially affect 
public peace or security.  T he Commission then recommended that Section 354 of IPC 
(assault on woman with intent to outrage her modesty), Section 411 (dishonesty 
receiving stolen property), and Section 414 (assisting in the concealment or  disposal of 
stolen property), should be compoundable provided the value of property in relation to 
Sections 411 and 414 was not more than Rs.250.  However, the Commission expressed 
the view that the offence of unlawful compulsory labour punishable under S ection 374 
IPC should not be compoundable. The above recommendations of the Law Commission  

 
11 
i.e., the addition of three offences and the omission of Section 374 IPC from the list of 
compoundable offences were reflected in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.   
3.2 In the new Code of 1973, there were 21 offences  in the first T able and in the 
second Table, there were 36 offences making up the total of the compoundable offences 
57 as against 54 in the old Code. One offence i.e. Section 374 IPC, was omitted and 
three offences specified in  Sections 354, 411 and 414 were added to the l ist of 
compoundable offences in the Code of I973,  based on the suggestions of Law 
Commission (41
st Report). Further, in the new Cr PC, Section 500 IPC finds place in 
both the sub- sections/Tables of Section 320.  Defamation against the President, Vice -
President, Governor or a Minister in respect of his conduct in the discharge of public 
duties, if instituted on the complaint made by Public Prosecutor , is compoundable only 
with the permission of Court.  The other defamations are retained in Table I. 
 3.3 In the Code of Cr iminal Procedure (Amendment) Act of 2005 ( Act No. 25 of 
2005 effective from 23.06.2006), Section 324 IPC (causing hurt by dangerous weapons  
or means) , which by all relevant standards qualify as a compoundable offence , was 
omitted.  The Law Commission in its 154 th Report (1996) had recommended that the 
said offence (along with others) m ight be shifted to the Table under sub-section (1) so 
that it could be compounded without the Court’s permission.   However, the law 
Commission in its 177 th Report recommended its retention in the Table under Sub-
Section (2). But, without any good reason, the said offence was altogether omitted from 
the list of compoundable offences. With the deletion of Section 324 IPC by the 
Amendment Act of 2005, the number of compoundable offences stood at 56 i.e. 21 in 
the first Table and 35 in the second Table as against 57 (21+36) earlier. 
3.4 The next amendment Act relating to Cr PC was of the year 2009 (Act 5 of 
2009). The Tables forming part of Section 320 (1) and (2) underwent certain changes.  
In order to give effect to the recommendations of the Law Commission in its 154 th 
Report as well as 177 th Report, a number of offences in the second Table (falling under 
sub-section (2) of Section 320) were transferred to the first Table.  Further, the value of 
property stolen etc. as specified in relation to Sections 379, 381, 406, 407, 408, 411 has 

12 
 
been omitted.  Another important change that was made was the deletion of Section 354 
IPC from the list of compoundable offences. Section 354 (assault of wom an with intent 
to outrage her modesty) which was included in the Table under  Section 320 (2) of the 
new Code pursuant to the recommendation in the 41 st Report of the Law Commission 
was deleted by Act 5 of 2009.  Presently, it is no longer a compoundable offence.  
Section 312 IPC (causing miscarriage) was included in the Table under Section 320(2) 
as per the recom mendation made in the 154th Report. Thus, after the Cr PC 
(Amendment)  Act, 2008 (Act 5 of 2009)  which came into effect on 31 st December, 
2009, the number  of compoundable offences in Cr PC, 1973 stands at  56 i.e. 43 in the 
Table under Section 320 (1) and 13 in the Table under Section 320 (2).  
3.5 In the 154 th Report, there was a recommendation  of the Law Commission that 
the scope of sub- section (3) of Section 320 Cr PC should be amplified so as to include 
the cases of the accused who are constructively liable under Section 34 or under Section 
149 IPC.  This had been accepted by the Legislature and sub- section (3) was amended.  
In this context, we are presently  making the recommendation for making the offence of 
criminal conspiracy under S ection 120-B IPC as compoundable provided it relates to 
other compoundable offences and to amend sub-section (3) of Section 320 accordingly. 
3.6 There is one more important recommendation in the 154 th report of the Law 
Commission which we would like to advert to.  The C ommission in para 11 of Chapter 
XII observed thus:  
“It was also suggested by senior police officers at the various workshops that 
the Code of Criminal Procedure should empower  the investigating officer to 
compound offences, which are compoundable , at the investigation stage and 
make a report to the magistrate who will give  effect to the composition of such 
offences. This step will reduce the number of cases proceeding for trial at the 
threshold stage itself and relieve the court docket to a great e xtent.  In fact the 
National Police Commission in its Fourth Report had suggested that it would 
help quicker disposal of cases in the compoundable category if the procedure is 
amended to empower the police officers to take note of the desire of the parties  
for the compounding of offences from the stage of investigation and thereupon 
close cases and report the matter to the Court which will have the authority to 
pass initial order from the police report as in every other case in which the 
police submit their report.” 

 
13  
The Law Commission felt that such a provision will have a salutary effect and will 
check abuse by the police. 
3.7 In order to give effect to the recommendation of the National Police 
Commission, the 1994 (Cr PC) Amendment Bill proposed adding of sub-section (3A) 
to Section 173 of CrPC in the following terms:  
“If, however, in respect of offences enumerated in the Table in section 320, in 
the course of investigation, the person by whom the offence may be compounded 
under the said section gives a report in writing to the officer in charge of the 
police station expres sing his desire to compound the offence as provided for in 
the said section, the officer shall mention this fact in the police report prescribed 
in sub- section 2 (1) and forward the compounding report from the person 
concerned to the Magistrate who shall thereupon deal with the case under 
section 320 as though the prosecution for the offence concerned had been 
launched before the Magistrate.” 
However, this proposed amendme nt did not take shape, though t he Law 
Commission, in  its 177
th Report, reiterated the r ecommendation made in the 154th 
Report in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
4. Approach of the Supreme Court in Certain Cases 
4.1 As the offence under Section  326 IP C was not compoundable in law, t he 
Supreme Court having regard to the long lapse of time and settlement of the dispute 
between the parties reduced the sentence to already undergone three months’ 
imprisonment5.   Yet another appro ach adopted by the apex Court in dealing  with  the  
situations arising  from the amicable settlement arrived at between the  complainant and 
the accused in respect of a  non-compoundable  offence  was  to quash  the proceedings  
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.  The cases of  B.S. Joshi vs. 
State of Haryana 6; Nikhi l Merchant vs. CBI 7 and Manoj Sharma vs. State 8 are 
illustrative of this approach. 
4.2 In the first case of  B.S. Joshi, the accused were charged with  offences under 
Sections 498A and 406 IP C.  An a ffidavit was filed by the complainant wife that the 
disputes were finally settled and the accused and the victim pray ed for quashing the 
FIR. The High Court declined to exercise its inherent power under Sectio n 482 Cr.PC  
on the ground that power under the said Section cannot be exercised to quash the 
prosecution for non-compoundable offences even if the parties have settled the dispute.  
In appeal, the Supreme Court reversed the order of the High Court and held that the 
High Court in such cases can quash criminal proce edings/FIR/complaint in exercise of 
its inherent powers under Section 482.  The Supreme Court laid down, after discussing 
the case law on the subject: “We are , therefore, of the view that if for the purpose of 
securing the ends of justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary, Section 320 would not 
be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing”.  The Court, however, guardedly said: “It 
is, however, a different matter depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case 
whether to exercise or not such a powe r”.  In B.S. Joshi’s case, the Supreme Court  
justified the exercise of power under Section 482 to quash the pr oceedings to secure the 
ends of justice in view of the special fact s and circumstances of the case, even where 
the offences were non-compoundable.   
                                                           
5 Ibid. Also see Gulab Das vs. State of M. P. , 2011 (12)  SCALE 625 
6 (2003) 4 SCC 675 
7 (2008) 9 SCC 677 
8 2008 (14) SCALE 44 

 
15 
4.3 The principle laid down in B.S. Joshi’s case was cited with approval in the case 
of Nikhil Merchant vs. CBI  (supra). That was a  case in which charge -sheet was filed 
against the accused under Section 120-B read with Sections 420, 467, 468 and 471 IPC.  
Whereas the offence under Section 420 is compoundable, the offence of forgery was not 
compoundable.  The filing of charge -sheet by the CBI was preceded by a suit between 
the delinquent Company and the Bank in which a compromise was arrived at. P ursuant 
to that compromise, the appellant -accused who was one of the Directors of the 
company, filed an application for discharge from the criminal case. T hat application 
was rejected by the High Court.  The Supreme Court held:  “On an overall view of the 
facts as indicated hereinabove and keeping in mind the decision of this Court in B.S. 
Joshi’s case and the compromise arrived at between the Company and the Bank as also 
Clause 11 of the consent terms filed in the suit filed by the Bank, we are satisfi ed that 
this is a fit case where technicality should not be allowed to stand in the way in the 
quashing of the criminal proceedings, since, in our view, the continuance of the same 
after the compromise arrived at between the parties would be a futile exerc ise”. The 
Supreme Court thus quashed the proceedings by relying on the ratio of the decision in 
B.S. Joshi’s case.  The following pertinent observations were made at para 29: “Despite 
the ingredients and the factual content of an offence of cheating punishable under 
Section 420 IPC, the same has been made compoundable under sub- section(2) of 
Section 320 CrPC with the leave of the Court.  Of course, forgery has not been included 
as one of the  compoundable offences, but it is in such cases that the principle 
enunciated in B.S. Joshi case becomes relevant”.   
 The same course of action was adopted  in Manoj Sharma’s  case.
9 Very 
recently, the Supreme Court in Shiji @ Pappu vs. Radhika10 held that simply because an 
offence is not compoundable under Section 320 CrPC is by itself no reason for the High 
Court to refuse exercise of its power under Section 482 to quash the prosecution. 
 
                                                           
9  Ibid 
10 2010 (12) SCALE 588 

16 
 
5. Compoundability of Certain Offences 
5.1 Now, we shall consider the question of compoundability of certain specific 
offences.  
Section 498A, IPC 
5.2 Whether the offence  specified in Section 498A should be made compoundable, 
and, if yes, whether it should be  compoundable without or wi th the permission of the 
Court, is the two-fold question.  
5.3 Section 498A penalizes the husband or the relatives of t he husband for 
subjecting a woma n to cruelty.  The definition of cruelty as given in the Section is in 
two parts: 1) W illful conduct of such a nature that is likely to drive the woma n to 
commit suicide or to cause  grave i njury or dange r to life,  limb or health (mental or 
physical), 2) Harassment of the woma n with a view to coer cing her or her relatives to 
meet an unlawful demand for any property or valuable security. T hus the dowry related 
harassment as well as violent conduct on the part of the husband or his relations  by 
causing injury or danger to her life, limb or health, are comprehended within the scope 
of Section 498A. Quite often, the prosecution under  Section 498A IPC is coupled with 
prosecution under Sections 3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 as well.  
 5.4 Normally, if  the wife is prepared to condone the ill -treatment and harassment 
meted out to her either by reason of change in the attitude or  repentance on the part of 
the husband or  reparation for the injury caused to her, the law should not stand in the  
way of  terminating the criminal proceedings.  However , the argument that is mainly 
advanced against the compoundability is  that the dowry is a  social evil and the law 
designed to punish those who harass the wives wi th demand of  dowry should be 
allowed to take its full course instead of putting its seal of approval on the private 
compromises. The social consciousness and the societal interest demands that such 
offences should be kept outside the domain of out -of-court settlement, it is argued .  
There can be no doubt that in dealing wit h this aspect, the  impact of the crime  on the 
society and the degree of social harm that might resu lt, should be duly considered. At 
the same time, undesirable consequences that follow if compounding is not allowed,  

 
17 
ought to be kept in view because the social harm or societal interest cannot be 
considered in vacuum . A holistic and rational  view has to be taken .  W hile no 
impediments shall be placed  against the effective operation of  law enacted to curb a 
social evil, it should not be forgotten that the society is equally interested in promoting 
marital harmony and the welfare of the aggrieved women. A rational  and balanced  
approach is all the mor e necessary for the reason that other avenues are open to the 
reconciled couple to put an end to the criminal proceedings.  One such course is to file a 
‘quash’ petition under Section 482 of Cr PC in the High Court .  Whether it is necessary 
to drive them to go through this time consuming and costly process  is one pertinent 
question.  If a wife  who suffered in the hands of the husband is prepared to forget the 
past and agreeable to live amicably with the husband or separate honourabl y without 
rancor or revenge, the society would seldom condemn such move nor can it be said that 
the legal recognition of amicable settlement in such cases would  encourage the 
forbidden evil i.e. the dowry.  Section 498A should not be allowed to become  counter-
productive. In matters relating to family life and marital relationship , the advantage s 
and beneficent results that follow from allowing the discontinuance of legal proceedings 
to give effect to a compromise or reconciliation would outweigh the degree of social  
harm that may be caused by non-prosecution.  I f the proceedings are allowed to go on 
despite the compromise arrived at by bot h sides, either there will be little scope for  
conviction or the lif e of the victim w ould beco me more miserable.  In what  way the 
social good is achieved thereby?  We repeat that a doctrinaire  and isolated approach 
cannot be adopted in dealing with this issue.  The sensitivity of a family dispute and the 
individual facts and circumstances cannot be ignor ed. H ence, the Commis sion is not 
inclined to countenance the view that dowry being a  social evil, compounding should 
not be allowed under any circumstances. Incidentally, it may be mentioned that many 
offences having the potentiality of social harm, not mere ly individual harm , are 
classified as compoundable offences. Further, the gravamen of the charge under Section 
498-A need not necessarily be dowry -related harassment.  It may be ‘cruelty’ falling 
only within clause (a) of the Explanation and the demand of dowry is not an int egral 
part of that clause. 

18 
 
5.5 Another argument against compoundability is that the  permission to compound 
would amount to legal recognition of violence against women and that the factum of 
reconciliation cannot be a justifiable ground to legally condone the violence. The 
acceptance of such an argument would imply that the priority of law should be to take 
the criminal proceedings to their logical end and to inflict punishment on t he husband 
irrespective of the mutual desire to patch up the differences. It means – reconciliation or 
no reconciliation, the husband should not be spared of the impending prosecution and 
the punishment if any; then only Section 498A would achieve its objective. We do not 
think that  the objective of  Section 498A will be better achieved  by allowing the 
prosecution to take its own course without regard to the rapprochement that has taken 
place between the couple in conflict. As observed ea rlier, a balanced and 
holistic approach is called for in handling a sensitive issue affecting the family and 
social relations. Reconciliation without compounding will not be practically possible 
and the law sh ould not ignore the important event of reconciliation. The emphasis 
should not be merely on the punitive aspect of the law. In matters of this nature, the law 
should not come in the way of genuine reconciliation or revival of harmonious relations 
between t he h usband and estranged wife . Wisdom behind all prosecutions and 
punishments is to explore a judicious mix of deterrence, deprivation of liberty and  
repentance and reformation. Any emphasis on one aspect alone, as has been found in 
the working of harsh and cruel punishment regimes, may become a pigeonhole model. 
5.6 The other argument which is put forward against compounding is that hapless 
women especially those who are not much educated and who do not have independent 
means of livelihood, may be pressurized and coerced to withdraw the proceeding and 
the victim woma n will be left with no option but to purchase peace though her 
grievance remains unsolved.  However, this argument may not be very substantial.  The 
same argument can be put forward in respect of compoundable offences wherever the 
victims are women.  The safeguard of C ourt’s permission would, by and large, be a 
sufficient check against the possible tactics that may be adopted by the husband and his 
relations/friends.  The function of the Court in this matter is not a mere formality.  The 
Judicial Magistrate or Family Court Judge is expected to be extra -cautious and play an 
active role.  In this regard, the judge can take the assistance of a woman lawyer or a  

 
19 
professional counselor or a representative of Legal Services Authority and the woman 
concerned can be examined in his/her  chambers in the  presence of one of them .  
Alternatively, the  assistance of a lady colleague can also be sought for examining a 
woman victim in the  chambers.  Normally the trial Magistrate s/Judges are sensitized in 
gender- related issues in the course of train ing at the Judicial Academies. In cities like 
Delhi, Banga lore, Chennai etc. competent and trained mediators are involved in the 
process of bringing about an amicable settlement in ma rital disputes. Though the Court 
is expected to act with due care and caution in dealing with the application f or 
compounding the offence under Section 498A, we are of the view that it is desirable to 
introduce an additional safeguard as follows:- 
After the application for co mpounding an offence under S .498A of Indian 
Penal Code is filed and on interviewing the aggrieved woman, preferably in 
the Chamber in the presence of a lady judicial officer or a representative of 
District Legal Services Authority or a counselor or a close relation,  if the 
Magistrate is satisfied that there was prima facie a voluntary and genuine 
settlement  between the part ies, the Magistrate shall make a record to that 
effect and the hearing of application shall be adjourned by  three months or 
such other earlier date which the Magistrate may fix in the  interests of 
Justice. On the adjourned date , the  Magistrate shall again  interview the 
victim woman in the like manner and then pass the final order  permitting 
or refusing to compound the offence after giving opportunity of hearing to 
the accused.  In the interregnum, it shall be open to the aggrieved woman to 
file an application revoking her earlier offer to compound the offence on 
sufficient grounds. 
5.7 Accordingly, it is proposed to add sub- section (2A) to Section 320 Cr PC. The 
proposed provision will ensure that the offer to compound the offence is voluntary and 
free from pressures and the wife has not been subjected to ill -treatment subsequent to 
the offer of compounding.  Incidentally, it underscores the need for the Court playing an 
active role while dealing with the  application for compounding the offence under 
Section 498-A.  

20 
 
5.8 The other points  which deserve notice in answering the issue whether  the 
offence under Section 498A should be made compoundable, are the following:–  
5.8.1 The Law Commission of India in its 154 th report (1996) recommended 
inclusion of S . 498A in the Table appended to S ection 320(2) so that it 
can be compounded with the permission of the Co urt.  The related 
extracts from the Report are as follows:  
“Of late, various High Courts have quashed criminal proceedings in 
respect of non- cognizable offences because of settlement between the 
parties to achieve harmony and peace in the society.  For instance, 
criminal proceedings in  respect of offences under Section 406, IPC, 
relating to criminal breach of trust of dowry articles or Istridhan and 
offences under section 498A, IPC relating to cruelty on woman by 
husband or relatives of husband were quashed in Arun Kumar Vohra v. 
Ritu Vohra, Nirlap Singh v. State of Punjab.” 
5.8.2 In continuation of what was said in the 154
th Report, we  may point 
out that the apex court, in the case of B.S. Joshi vs.  State of Haryana 11, 
has firmly laid down the proposition that  in order to subserve the 
ends of justice, the  inherent power under S ection 482 CrPC can be 
exercised by the High Court to  quash the criminal   proceedings at    the 
instance of   husband and wife who   have amicably settled the matter 
and are desirous of putting end to the acrimony. The principle laid down 
in this case was cited with approval in Nikhil  Merchant vs. CBI 12.  
However, a coordinate Bench 13 doubted the correctness of th ese 
decisions and referred the matter for consideration by a larger Bench.  
According   to the referring Bench, the Court    cannot indirectly permit 
compounding of non-compoundable offences. 
5.8.3 The recommendation of  the Law Commission in the  154th Report 
 regarding Section 498A was reiterated in the 177th Report (2001).  The 
 Commission noted  that  over  the  last  several years, a number  of   
                                                           
11 Supra note 6  
12 Supra Note 7 
13 Gian Singh vs. State of Punjab [2010(12) SCALE 461]  

 
21 
representations had been received by the Law Commission from  individuals 
and organizations to make the said offence compoundable. 
5.8.4  Further, Justice Malimath Committee’s Report on Reforms of Criminal 
Justice System strongly supported the plea to make  Section 498 A  a 
compoundable offence.   The Committee observed:    
“A less tolerant and impulsive woman may lodge an FIR even on 
a trivial act. The result is that the husband and his family may be 
immediately arrested and there may be a suspension or loss of 
job.  The offence alleged being non- bailable, innocent persons 
languish in cust ody.  There may be a claim for maintenance 
adding fuel to fire, especially if the husband cannot pay. Now the 
woman may change her mind and get into the mood to f orget and 
forgive.  The husband may also realize the mistakes committ ed 
and come forward to turn  over a new leaf f or a loving and 
cordial relationship.  The woman may like to seek reconciliation. 
But this may not be possible due to the legal obstacles.  Even if 
she wishes to  make  amends by withdrawing the  complaint, 
she cannot do so as the offence is non-compoundable.  The doors 
for r eturning to family life stand c losed. She is thus left at the 
mercy of her natal family… 
This section , therefore, helps neither the wife nor the husband. 
The offence being non-bailable and non-compoundable makes an 
innocent person undergo stigmatization and hards hip. Heartless 
provisions that make the offence non -bailable and non-
compoundable operate against reconciliations.  It is therefore 
necessary to make this offence (a) bailable and (b) 
compoundable to give a chance to the spouses to come together.” 
Though this Commission is not inclined to endorse the entirety of 
observations made in the above passage, some of them reinforce  our   
conclusion to make it compoundable. 
5.8.5  The views of Malimath Committee as well as the  recommendations in 
the 154th Report of Law commission were  referred to with approval by 
the Department-Related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on 

22 
 
Home Affairs  in its 111 th Report  on the C riminal Law (Amendment) 
Bill 2003 (August 2005).  The Standing Committee observed thus: 
“It is desirable to provide a chance to the estranged spouse s to 
come together and therefore  it is proposed to make the offence 
u/s 498A IPC, a compoundable one by inserting this Section in 
the Table under sub-section(2) of Section 320 of CrPC”. 
5.8.6 The 128th Report of the said Standing Committee (2008)   on the Code 
of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 reiterated the 
recommendation made in the 111th Report. 
5.8.7  The views of Supreme Court and High Courts provide yet  another 
justification to treat the offence under Section 498A compoundable. 
The Supreme Court in a brief order passed in Ramgopal vs. State 
of M.P. observed that the offences under Section 498A, among others, 
can be made compoundable by introducing suitable amendment to law.  
The Bombay High Court 14,   as long back as in 1992, made a strong  
suggestion  to amend Section 320 of Cr PC in order to include Section 
498A within that Section.   
 In the case of Preeti Gupta vs. State of Jharkhand 15, the Supreme 
Court, speaking through Dalvir Bhandari, J. exhorted the members of the 
Bar to treat every complaint under Section 498A as a basic human 
problem and to make a serious endeavour to help the parties in arriving 
at amicable resolution of that human problem.   The Supreme Court 
then observed that the Courts have to be extremely  careful   and cautious 
in dealing with these complaints  and must take pragmatic re alities into 
consideration.  Further, it was observed: “Before parting with the case, 
we would like to observe that a serious relook of the entire provision is 
warranted by the legislation. It is also a matter of common knowledge 
that exaggerated versions of the incident are reflected in a large number 
of complaints. The  tendency of over implication is also reflected in a  
 
                                                           
14 Suresh Nathmal Rathi vs. State of Maharashtra (1992) Crl.L.J. 2106 
15  AIR 2010 SC 3363 

 
23 
very large number of  cases”.  The Supreme Court then made these 
observations:  “It is  imperative for the legislature to take into 
consideration the informed  public opinion and the pragmatic realities 
in consideration and make  necessary changes in the relevant 
provisions of law.  We direct the  Registry to send copy of this 
judgment to the Law Commission and to the  Union Law Secretary, 
Government of India who may place it before the  Hon’ble Minister for 
Law & Justice t o take appropriate steps in the   larger interest of the 
society”.  
5.9 Yet another factor that should be taken note of is the policy of  law in laying stress 
on effecting conciliation between the warring  couples.  The provisions in Section 
9 of the Family Courts Act, 1984  Section23 ( 2) of the H indu Marriage Act , 1955 
and Section 34(2) of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 impose an obligation on the court 
to take necessary  steps to facilitate re-conciliation or amicable settlement. 
5.10 It is worthy of note that in Andhra Pradesh, the State  Legislature  made an 
amendment to Section 320(2) of CrPC by  inserting  the following  in the 2nd Table. 
Husband or 
relative of 
husband of   a 
woman 
subjecting her 
to cruelty 
  498A The woman subjected to cruelty: 
Provided that a minimum period of 
three months shall elapse from the 
date of request or application for 
compromise before a Court and the 
Court can accept a request for 
compounding an offence under 
Section 498A of the Indian Penal 
Code provided none of the parties 
withdraw the case in the intervening 
period. 
 
  
The observations made by the High Court in various cases were taken into 
account while making this amendment.  The amendment came into force on 1.8.2003. 
 Our recommendation is substantially on the same lines. 

24 
 
5.11 The overwhelming views  reflected in the responses received by the Law 
Commission and the inputs the Commission has got in the course of deliberations with 
the members of District and Subordinate Judiciary, the members of the Bar and the law 
students is yet another reason persua ding us to recommend the amendment of law to 
make the offence under 498A compoundable with the permission of Court. The list of 
respondents from whom views have been received by the Commission is at Annexure 
1-B. An analysis of such views touching on the point of compoundability is furnished at 
Annexure 1- A.  The Consultation Paper -cum-Questionnaire on various aspects of 
Section 498-A published by the Commission is attached hereto as Annexure-2 
5.12 At the Conference with judicial officers including lady officers,  there was 
almost unanimous opinion in favour of making the  offence co mpoundable. The lady 
lawyers who were present at the Conferences held in Visakhapatnam, Chennai and 
Aurangabad  did not oppose the move.  At a recent Conference held with about  35 
Judicial Officers of various ranks at Delhi Judicial Academy, there was unanimity on 
the point of compoundability. However, some Judges expressed reservation  about 
allowing 3 months gestation period for passing a final order of compounding under 
Section 320(2) Cr PC. It was suggested that there should be some flexibility  in this 
regard and the 3 months’ period need not be strictly adhered to especially where there is 
a package of settlement concerning civil disputes as well.  Keeping this suggestion in 
view, the Commission has provided that in the interests of justice, the Magistrate can 
pass orders within a lesser time. 
5.13 The Law Commission is therefore of the considered view that the offence under 
Section 498A IPC should be made compoundable with the permission of the Court.  
Accordingly, in T able-2 forming part of Section 320(2)  of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, the following shall be inserted after the entry  referring to Section 494 a nd 
before the entry relating to Section 500:  
 
 
 

 
25 
Husband or relative of husband of   a 
woman subjecting her to cruelty 
  498A 
 
The woman subjected 
to cruelty. 
    
  Sub-section (2A) shall be added to Section 320 CrPC, as set out in paragraph 
5.6, page 17 supra. 
 
Section 324 IPC 
5.14 In our considered view, the offence under S ection 324 IPC (voluntarily causing 
hurt by dangerous weapons or means) should be made compoundable . The offence is 
punishable with imprisonment extending to three years and fine. Both in the old C ode 
as well as the new Code of 1973, the said offence as well a s the more serious offence in 
Section 325 were treated as offences compoundable with the permis sion of the court.  
The Law Commission in its 154 th and 177 th Reports recommended that these two 
offences together with several othe r offences may be shifted to the  Table appended to 
Section 320 ( 1) so that it can be compounded without the permission  of the Court.  
However, Sec. 324 was deleted from the list of compoundable  offences by the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act of 2005. The Commission has probed into the 
background in which this offence was deleted. At first blush, it appe ared that it was 
deleted by reason of an inadvertent error . But, it does not appear to be  so. In the Cr PC 
(Amendment) Bill of 1994, it was proposed that Section 324 IPC should be omitted 
from the Table under sub-section (2) of Section 320 CrPC. The apparent reason for such 
proposal was that the provision was likely to be misused by the accused by exerting 
pressure on the complainant to agree for composition. However, this reasoning is quite 
fallacious. For most of the compoundable offences, t he same argument can be 
advanced.  The proposal which was initiated by the Home Ministry during 1990s came 
to fruition in 2005 and by  the Cr PC (Amendment) Act of 2005, Section 324 was 
omitted from the list of compoundable offences. What was sought to be done in the year 
1994 or before, was thus accomplished in 2005.  It is interesting to note that within a 
year thereaft er, in the Code of Criminal  Procedure ( Amendment) Bill, 2006, Section 
324 was sought to  be reinducted into Section 320.  
It appears that what weighed with the 
Ministry in proposing the said amendment was the recommendation of the La w Commission to 

26 
 
include Section 324 in the Table  under Section320 (1) CrPC by transferring it from the 
Table under Section 320(2) .  Accordingly, Clause 30 of the Bill provided for this 
change.  However, the CrPC (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Act No.5 of 2009) shows that the 
said change was not approved by Parliament , and  Section 324 continues  to be a non-
compoundable offence. Such a step was taken pursuant to the opinion expressed by one 
of the Members of Rajya Sabha in the course of discussion.  
5.15.1 It is evident from the discu ssions in Rajya Sabha on the aforesaid CrPC 
(Amendment) Bill 200 6 on 18th December, 2008 that the proposal was dropped at the 
instance of a distinguished lady Member of Parliament.  We quote what the Hon’ble 
M.P said while participating in the discussion: 
‘I have moved amendments on some of these aspects.  The first one is 
this.  It is a very very important one.  It deals with section 324:  
voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.  It says, 
‘Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 334, voluntarily 
causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing, or 
cutting, or any instrument which, used as weapon of offence, is likely to 
cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance …” Now, we 
have had such cases.  Everybody knows this whole phenomenon of death 
by burning.  If you are going to bri ng section 324, which is often used in 
such cases, into a compoundable offence – - you are introducing it in the 
first table - - I think, it is going to be extremely unjustifiable.  Therefore, 
I urge upon the hon. Home Minister, please don’t do this and please 
remove this from the compoundable crimes’. 
5.15.2   This suggestion was agreed to by the Hon’ble Home Minister.  Accordingly, the 
move of the Government to re -introduce section 324 within the ambit of section 320 
CrPC failed. 
 
5.15.3    Perhaps, the argument of Hon’ble Member was concerned with the cases of 
bride burning. Causing hurt by means of fire  or heated substance is one of the 
components   of Section 324.   In   view of the   increased   incidence of     crime  

 
27 
 
of causing injury by means of burning wives, the offence should not be permitted to be 
compounded.  It could very well be that a case which would have otherwise resulted in 
death had ended up in the infliction of simple hurt.  But the degree of cruelty and the 
severity of the crime should be duly taken into account  and therefore the offender 
should suffer adequate punishment.  Further, the result of inclusion in Table 1 would be 
that even in cases where pressure is exerted on the victim woman to compromise , the 
prosecution will abate. This, in substance, seems to be the rationale behind the remark 
of the Hon’ble M. P.  
  
5.16 We have given anxious  consideration to this line of argument irrespective of the 
observation of the Supreme Court in Diwaker Singh’s case cited in para 1.1 above.  Still 
the Commission does not find a good and substantial reason for excluding Section 324 
IPC from the list of compoundable offences , though we find merit in the plea that it 
should find place in Table 2 under Section 320(2)  but not Table 1 under Section 320(1) 
Cr PC.  Cases of causing death or bodily injury to women by cruel husbands and their 
kith and kin almost invariably trigger prosecutions for the more serious offences under  
Sections 304-B, 307, 326 or Section 326  read with Section 509 IPC.    Section 324 IPC 
is hardly invoked in such cases.  Even if there are few prosecutions  under Section 324 
concerning women- complainants, that would hardly afford justification to deviate from 
the general scheme and purpose  of Section 320 Cr PC.  When there is justification to 
make it compoundable in a vast majority of cases, the rare situations should not make a 
difference.  Further, in order to take care of the apprehension which may hold good, if 
at all, in a few cases , it  is d esirable and appropriate to retain its original position in 
Table 2.  Irrespective of the cases of causing harm to women by means of burning or 
otherwise, taking an overall view, it is a fit case where the permission of the Court 
should be insisted  upon.  In cases of causing hurt to woman by burning, the court is 
expected to exercise restraint in granting permission.  The safeguard of the Court’s 
permission needs to be maintained in an offence of this nature.   
 

28 
 
 
5.17 Accordingly, we recommend that Section 324 IPC should be reinducted into 
the ambit of section 320 Cr PC and it should retain its original position in Table 2 
appended to sub- section (2) thereof.  Section 324 can remain in the company of 
Section 325 in Table 2 rat her than being shifted to T able 1 as per the recommendation 
contained in 154 th Report of the Law Commission. The  implications of shifting it to 
Table1 have not been considered by the Commission in that R eport. The observation of 
the Supreme Court in Diwakar Singh’s  case to make the offence under Section 324 
compoundable is, in our view, rests on a sound basis. 
 Section 326 IPC  
5.18 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means is punishable 
under Section 326 and Sections 320 and 326 are  extracted below for convenience of 
reference:  
320.  Grievous hurt . – The following kinds of hurt only are designated as 
“grievous”:- 
First -   Emasculation 
Secondly - Permanent privation of the sight of either eye. 
Thirdly -  Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear, 
Fourthly -  Privation of any member or joint. 
Fifthly -  Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers  of any 
member or joint. 
Sixthly - Permanent disfiguration of the head or face. 
Seventhly - Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth. 
Eighthly - Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be 
during the space of twenty days in severe bodily pa in, or unable 
to follow his ordinary pursuits. 
 
326.  Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means. - 
 Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily 
causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for shooting,  stabbing or 
cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause 
death, or by  means of fire or any heated  substance, or by means of any 
poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or  

 
29 
by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, 
to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be 
punished with imprisonment for life,  or with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
5.19 The offence under Section 326 is punishable with imprisonment for life or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 10 years and fine .  Voluntarily causing 
grievous hurt without using dangerous weapons or means has been a compoundable 
offence in the old Penal Code a nd this is so in the new Code  as well.  The offence 
under Section 325 IPC carries with it punishment  of 7 years or less.   None of the 
offences in the IPC which carr ies imprisonment above 7 years is made compoundable. 
The cardinal p rinciple is that the gravity of crime should be duly tak en into account.  
The accused covered by Section 326 has not only caused grievous hurt but acted in a 
cruel manner with a dangerous weapon without regard to the life and liberty of the 
victims.  The offence under Section 326 falls on the border line of the offence of 
attempting to commit murder (Section 307) or the offence under Section 304.  Violent 
acts such as causing disfiguration of head or face (by throwing acid, etc.) , 
emasculation, permanent privation of the eye sight or hearing and  destruction of the 
powers of any member o r joint are within the fold of S ection 326.  It is a very serious 
crime and the compromise between the victim and accused should not be recognized in 
law.  There are so many related offences following Section 326 i.e. Section 327 
(causing hurt to extort property), Section 328 (c ausing hurt by means of poison) and  
Sections 329, 330 and 331 (causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort 
property/confession), which are punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment 
extending up to 10 years.  None of these offences is  made compoundable. The 
legislative policy is clear  that such grave offences should not be  made compoundable.  
It is not  desirable to unduly stretch the net of compounding. The mere fact that some 
pendency in the Courts will be reduced if the offences are allowed to be compounded, 
is not a valid argument to justify enlargement of the list of compoundable offences so 
as to include even offences of very serious and grave nature which imperil the law and 

30 
 
order.  As said earlier, the law should have a cautious and balanced approach to the 
problem of compounding. 
5.20 We have said so much on Section 326 because of the solitary observation of the 
Supreme Court in the case of Ramg opal vs. State of M.P. that the offences like Section 
326 ought to be made compoundable.  There is no further discussion as the Law 
Commission and Law Ministry are required by the Court to give attention to the aspect  
of including more offences  in the list of compoundable offences.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Obviously, no law has been laid down and it is only a prima facie view expressed in 
passing.  The Supreme Court has appropriately left it to the decision of the 
Government and the  recommendation of the Law Commission. Incidentally, it may 
also be apt to refer to an earlier decision of the Supreme Court in Manoj Sharma Vs . 
State16.  It was observed as follows: 
 “There can be no doubt that a case under Secti on 302 IPC or other ser ious 
offences like those under Sections 395, 307 or 304B cannot be compounded and 
hence proceedings in those provi sions cannot be quashed by the H igh Court in 
exercise of its power under Section 482 Cr. P.C. or in writ jurisdiction on the 
basis of compromise.  However, in some other cases, (like those akin to a civil 
nature) the proceedings can be quashed by the High Court if the parties have 
come t o an amicable settlement even though the provisions are not 
compoundable.  Where a line is to be drawn will have to be decided in some 
later decisions of this Court, preferably by a larger bench (so as to make it 
more authoritative).” 
 5.21 The Commission is not in clined to disturb the well laid -out scheme of 
compoundable offences substantially and be guided primarily by the 
consideration to get rid of the cases on the Court’s docket. 
Other Offences under IPC 
5.22.1.1   Section 147 (rioting) punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 2 
years or with fine or with both:  Rioting is defined in Section 146. Using force or  
                                                           
16 2008 (14) SCALE 44 

 
31 
violence by an unlawful assembly or by  a member thereof, in prosecution of the 
common object of such assembly , constitutes the offence of rioting.  In Madhya 
Pradesh, there was an amendment in the year 1999 by which Section 147(rioting)  has 
been brought under Section 320(2) read with  the Table appended  thereto with  a 
proviso: “provided that the accused is  not charged with other  offence which is not 
compoundable”. The person against whom the force or violence is used at the time of 
committing an offence is the person competent to compound. 
5.22.1.2   The Commission is of the view that on the same lines, the offence of rioting 
under Section 147 of IPC can be made compoundable and it can be brought under the 
purview of Section 320(2).  
5.22.1.3  It may be pointed out that the Law Commission in its 41 st Report (1969) did 
not accept the suggestion to make certain offences including the one under Section 147 
IPC compoundable on the ground that in any matter affecting public peace, order and 
security, the person directly aggrieved by the offence should not be left with the option 
to compound the offence. This view  expressed long back needs a r elook. Rioting may 
not always disturb the public peace or order.  I t may be the result of a private dispute 
resulting in a scuffle or the said offence may have been committed in the course of 
some agitation by a motley crow d.  We are of the view that there is no harm in 
including Section 147 IPC within the ambit of Section 320(2) Cr PC with t he addition 
of the proviso.   The proviso will restrain compounding of  the offence under Section 
147, if some other serious crime is also committed. 
5.22.2 Section 380: Theft in dwelling house –  maximum punishment is 7 years ’ 
imprisonment and fine.  This offence may be made compoundable subject to the 
proviso that the value of property stolen is not more than fifty thousand rupees. 
5.22.3   Section 384:  Extortion – maximum punishment is 3 years of imprisonment or 
fine or both. 
5.22.4  Section 385: Putting a person in fear of injury (or attempting to do so) in order 
to commit extortion – maximum punishment is 2 years or fine or both. 

32 
 
5.22.5 Section 461: Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property – 
maximum punishment is 2 years’ imprisonment or fine or both. 
5.22.6 Section 489:  Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury – 
maximum punishment 1 years’ imprisonment or fine or both. 
5.22.7 Section 507:    Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication – 
maximum punishment is 2 years’ imprisonment in addition to the punishment provided 
for the offence  by the preceding Section i.e. S ection 506.  Section 506 consists of 2 
parts.  For i ntimidation falling within the first  part, the maxim um punishment is 2 
years’ imprisonment or fine or both.  The compounding  under S ection 507 can  be 
allowed in respect of criminal intimidation which falls within the first part.  Threat to 
cause death or grievous hurt is covered  by second part – punishable with 7 years of 
imprisonment and it is a serious offence  which is a source of considerable  harassment 
to the person affected.   Hence, the Commission feels that it should remain non -
compoundable. At present , Sections 506 and 508 are compoundable under Section 
320(1) read with Table 1. Section 507 can be made compoundable under section 320 
(1) to the extent it relates to the offence falling under the first part of Section 506.     
5.22.8 Having regard to the nature of offences already included within the ambit of 
Section 320 CrPC, there is no harm i n classifying the above -mentioned 7 offences also 
as compoundable offences.  They can be included in Table -1 ex cept Section 380 for 
which the permission of the Court should be required.  T he Court’s permission is 
desirable in view of the fact that quite a number of those who commit the said crime are 
habitual offenders.  
5.22.9 It needs to be mentioned that the prosecutions in respect of seven offences 
enumerated supra may not be many, excepting perhaps the one under S ection 380. Not 
many cases can be disposed of by the Courts if those offences are made compoundable. 
However, as stated earlier, reducing the pendency of cases is a secondary consideration. 
5.23.1 Before we part with the subject, we may recall what was said in  paragraph 3.5.  
Accordingly, we suggest that sub- section (3) of Section 320 Cr.PC may be amended so 
as to include the offence under Section 120-B  IPC.   The amended provision will, then,  

 
33 
read thus: “ when an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such 
offence or an attempt to commit such offence (when such attempt is itself an offence ) or 
a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence or where the accused is liable under 
section 34 or 149 of  the Indian Penal Code , may be compounded in like manner”. (the 
added words are shown in bold letters) 
 
5.23.2 It may be pointed out that criminal conspiracy is an independent offence 
punishable under Section 120- B.There are two sub- sections. The second sub- section 
speaks of criminal conspiracy other than the conspiracy to commit an offence 
punishable under sub- section (1).  The punishment provided under sub- section (2) is 
imprisonment for a maximum period of 6 months or fine or both. Sub-section (1) refers 
to criminal conspiracy to commit the offence punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of 2 years or mor e. The offender shall be 
punished in the same manner as if he had abetted such offence.  The benefit of proposed 
amendment will not be available if the main offence is not otherwise compoundable.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
6. Recommendations 
  
6.1 Broadly speaking, the offences  which affect the security of the State or hav e a 
serious impact on the society at large ought not to be permitted to be compounded. So 
also, crimes of grave nature sh ould not be the subject matter of compounding.  The 
policy of law on compoundability of offe nces is complex and no straight jacket formula 
is available to reach the decision.  A holistic and not an isolated approach is called for in 
identifying the compoundable and non-compoundable offences.   
6.2 That the Courts are flooded with cases and, therefore, more and more offences      
should be identified for compoundability is only a secondary consideration.   
6.3 In sub-section (3) of Section 320 CrPC after the bracketed words and before the 
words “or where the accused is liable”, the following words shall be added: 
 “or a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence”.  
6.4 Section 498A IPC should be made compoundable under Section 320(2) of Cr PC so 
that it may be compounded with the permission of the Court.  However, in order to 
ensure that the offer of composition is voluntary and free from pressures, it is proposed 
to introduce sub-section (2A) in Section 320 laying down the procedure for dealing with 
an application for compounding of an offence under Section 498A.  The said sub-
section (2A) is set out in paragraph 5.6 supra. 
6.5 Section 324 IPC should be made compoundable subject to the permission of C ourt.  
Accordingly, it shall be brought within the ambit of Section 320(2) CrPC. 
6.6 Section 326 IPC (causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons)  should not be made 
compoundable. 
6.7    The offence of rioting under Section 147 IPC should be made compoundable by 
including the same in the T able appended to Section 320 (2) Cr PC subject to the 
addition of proviso: “provided that the accused is not charged with othe r offence which 
is not compoundable”.  

 
35 
6.8  The following s ix offences in IPC may be made compoundable : Section 380 (theft 
in dwelling house) subject to the proviso that the value of property stolen is not more 
than Rs.50,000/-; Section 384 (extortion); Section 385 (extortion by putting a person in 
fear of injury); Section 461 (dishonestly breaking open receptacle cont aining property); 
Section 489 (tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury); Section 507  
(criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication) subject to the rider that 
compounding shall be confined to criminal intimidation falling within the first part of 
Section 506. 
 
 
(Justice P.V. Reddi) 
Chairman 
 
  
 (Justice Shiv Kumar Sharma)                                      (Amarjit Singh) 
               Member                                                                  Member 
 
  
 
(Dr Brahm Agrawal) 
Member-Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
 
Annexure 1- A 
 
The analysis of 338 replies to the Q uestionnaire on section 498A IPC regarding 
compoundability is as under: 
 Individuals Organisations Officials/Judicial 
Officers 
Compoundable 52(7 women) 6(3 women orgn) 123 (9 women) 
Non-compoundabale 21(4 women) 10 (6 women orgn) 6 
Non-compoundable 
and bailable 
11(1 woman) 6(2 women orgn) 0  
 
 Note: 
1. Individuals/organizations/officials   talking of repeal  and at the same 
time non -compoundability are 86 in number, implying thereby that 
instead of making it compoundable, it should be repealed altogether.  
Otherwise, the two ideas are not in harmony with each other. 
2. Regarding compoundability,  individuals/organizations/officials   
who have not given any comments on this aspect are 33(4 women)  
in number 
3. Only Repeal-1 
 
 
 
 
 

 
37 
Annexure 1 – B 
List of respondents to the Questionnaire regarding Section 498A,IPC 
(Compoundability) 
Individuals: 
S/Shri/Ms 
1.  Ms.Swati Goyal, Ahmedabad 
2.  Neeraj Gupta, Delhi 
3.  Vivek Srivastav, vivek_srivastav_in@yahoo.co.in 
4.  Sateesh K.  Mishra, Delhi 
5.  Kalpak shah, Ahmedabad 
6.  Samir Jha, sk_jha95@yahoo.co.in 
7.  Kharak Mehra, Nainital  
8.  Saurabh Grover, sgrover1973@gmail.com 
9.  Komal Singh, New Delhi 
10.  Kaushalraj Bhatt, Ahmedabad 
11.  Alka Shah, Ahmedabad 
12.  Saumil Shah, Ahmedabad 
13.  Trilok Shah, Ahmedabad 
14.   Alpak Shah, Ahmedabad 
15.   Bhavna Shah Ahmedabad 
16.   Kaushal Kishor & 27 other residents of  Visakhapatnam. 
17.   iamamit, iamamitb1976@rediffmail.com 
18.   Vishnuvardhana Velagala, vvrvelagala@gmail.com 
19.   Hari Om Sondhi, New Delhi 
20.   Kharak Singh Mehra, Nainital 
21.   Virag R. Dhulia, Bangalore 
22.   Ms Kumkum Vikas Sirpurkar, New Delhi 
23.   Gaurav Bandi, Indore. 

38 
 
24.   Gaurav Sehravat, gauravsehravat@gmail.com 
25.   Ashish Mishra, Lucknow 
26.   Umang Gupta, Rampur, Balia 
27.   Avadesh Kumar Yadav, Nagpur 
28.   T.R. Padmaja, Secunderabad 
29.   T.C. Raghawan, Secunderabad 
30.   C. Shyam Sunder, Hyderabad 
31.   Ms.  Shobha Devi, R. R Dt,  Hyderabad 
32.   A Nageshwar Rao, Hyderabad 
33.   Praveen Chand, Hyderabad 
34.   R.B. Timma Ready, Hyderabad 
35.   A. Venu Gopal, kadapa, Hyderabad 
36.   Ms.  Aditya, Hyderabad 
37.   B. Yudestel Lal, Hyderabad 
38.   Subramaniyam Catari, Hyderabad 
39.   A Sai Kiran, Hyderabad 
40.   S. Jagannath, Bangalore  
41.   Prasad Chuilal, Pune 
42.   Biswadeep Paul, Pune 
43.   Avinash D. Gune, Pune 
44.   Damodar Varde, Indore 
45.   Kedar Ambedakar, Pune 
46.   Sandesh V. Chopdekar, Pune 
47.   Devkant Varde, Pune 
48.   Sanjeet Gupta, Pune 
49.   Cedric D’Souza, Pune 
50.   Amandeep Bhatia, Pune 
51.   Arjun Singh Rawat, Pune    
52.   N.K. Jain, Ujjain  
53.   Raj Kumar Jain, Ujjain 
 

 
39 
54. Shashidhar Rao, Hyderabad 
55.   Mohammed Hidayatullah, Hyderabad 
56.    Chandra Shekhar, Hyderabad. 
57.    P. Sugunavathi, Hyderabad 
58.    V. David, Hyderabad 
59.    Reddy Vidyadhar, R.R. District, Hyderabad.    
60.    Eshwar Lal, R.R. District, Hyderabad. 
61.    A. Satyanarayana, Hyderabad 
62.    M.V. Rama Mohan, Hyderabad 
63.    K.V. Indira, Kerala 
64.    P. Raju, Bangalore 
65.    G.R. Reddy, Hyderabad 
66.    D.S. Nathaniel, Hyderabad 
67.    K. Sriram, Hyderabad 
68.    Rajneesh K.V. Hyderabad 
69.    M. V. Aditya, Hyderabad 
70.    P. Ranga Rao, Hyderabad 
71.    T.V. S. Ram Reddy, R.R. District, Hyderabad. 
72.    R. Rahul, Nizamabad 
73.    J.P. Sahu, Damoh 
74.    B. Vinod Kumar, Nizamabad 
75.    Ponviah Catari, Hyderabad 
76.    P.K. Acharya, Hyderabad 
77.    B. Yamuna, Chennai  
78.    J.Sarat Chandra, Anantpur 
79.    P.N. Rao, Amalapuram 
80.    K. Narasaiah, Hyderabad 
81.    K. Ramakrishna Rao, Rajamundry 
82.    D.N. Samuel Raj, Hyderabad 
83.    D.N. Lavaney, Hyderabad 
84.    V. Madhani, Secunderabad 

40 
 
85.    R. Rajashekhar Reddy, Hyderabad 
86.    P. Srirama Murthy, Hyderabad 
87.    K.L. Swapana, Rajamundry 
88.    Gauri Sankar, Hyderabad 
89.    L. Narsinga Rao, Hyderabad   
90.    Sushil Kumara Acharya, Hyderabad 
91.    D.N. Kerupavasam, Hyderabad 
92.    T. Ramesh, Hyderabad 
93.    P. Satish Kumar, Hyderabad 
94.    T. Srinivas, Nalgouda 
95.    M. Satish Kiran, R.R. District, Hyderabad 
96.    Parthasarathi, Secunderabad 
97.    Saraswati Devi, Hyderabad 
98.    A. Rangabyha, Hyderabad 
99.    T. Annapurna, R.R. District, Hyderabad 
100.  Saah Ali Ahmed, Secunderabad 
101.  A.Sai Nath, Hyderabad 
102.  S. Manasa, Hyderabad 
103.  Sameer Baksi, Kharagpur, West Bengal 
104.  Rumi Dey, West Bengal 
105.  Bhanu Dey, Kharagpur, W. Bengal 
106.  Suman Kr. Dey, Kharagpur, W. Bengal 
107.  Tinni Gaur, Jabalpur 
108.  Arun Yadav, Jabalpur 
109.  T. Salgu, Ujjain 
110.   Ashish Gupta, Ujjain   
111.   T. M. Kamran, Pune 
112.   Pushpal Swarnkar, Durg 
113.   Col. H. Sharma, Noida 
114.   Rana Mukherjee, Advocate, Hony. Secy, Bar  
41     

 
 Association, High  Court, Kolkata 
115.   Nagarathna A., Asstt. Professor Law, NLSIU,   
     Nagarbhavi,   Bangalore. 
116.   Raj Ghosal, Thane (W), Maharashtra 
117.   Pankaj R. Sontakke, Kandivali (E), Maharashtra 
118.   Ashish Agarwal, Vikhroli (W), Maharashtra 
119.   Savio Fernandez, Thane (W), Maharashtra 
120.   Anand M. Jha, Kalyan (W), Maharashtra 
121.    Sachchidanand Singh Patel, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra 
122.   Arghya Dutta, Nerul,  Maharashtra 
123.   Debabrata Bhadra,  Jamsedpur, Jharkhand 
124.   Vikas Jhunjhun wala, Worli, Maharashtra 
125.   Mukund Jhala, Singh Darwaza, Burdwan.W. Bengal. 
126.   Sandip De, Dombivalli (E), Maharashtra 
127.   Anurag Joshi, Thane (W), Maharashtra    
128.   Gayatri Devi, Sagar Road, Hyderabad 
129.   Ramesh Lal, Shalimar Bagh, Delhi. 
130.   Priyank Prakh, Manchester, USA 
131.   Katri Ram Venkatesh, Ranga Reddy,  Distt.Andhra    
     Pradesh 
132.   Sarath Chandra P., Panjagutta, Hyderabad 
133.   Subba Rao P., Panjagutta Hyderabad 
134.   V. Kamalamma, Chandanagar, Hyderabad 
135.    Dr. P. Sudhir, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh 
136.    S.N. Kumar, Hyderabad 
137.     K.V.N.S. Laxmi, Rajamundry 
138.     Manoj Kumar Sahu, Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad 
139.     K.S. Ram, Vijayanagar Colony, Hyderabad 
140.     M. Ram Babu, Janapriya Nagar Colony,  Ranga Reddy  
Distt. A.P.  
141.     Ram Prakash Sharma, Rohini, New Delhi 

42 
 
142.     Manju Yadav, Jabalpur 
143.     Teeja Yadav, Adhartal, Jabalpur 
144.      Chandra Yadav,Adhartal,  Jabalpur 
145.     Santosh Vishvakarma, Adhartal, Jabalpur 
146.     Ashutosh Yadav,Adhartal,  Jabalpur 
147.     Amitabh Bhattacharya, Wardha Road, Nagpur 
148.     Krishna R.K. V., aamele.law@gmail.com 
149.     Milap Choraria, Rohini, New Delhi 
150.     Anand Ballabh Lohani, Haldwani, Uttarakhand 
151.     Partha Sadhukhan, Hyderabad 
152.     Ramesh Kumar Jain, sirfiraa@gmail.com 
153.     Namadevan N., nama49@yahoo.com 
154.     Pronoy Ghose, Cachar, Assam 
155.     Sibi Thomas, Baruch, Gujarat 
156.      R.S. Sharma, Amity University, Uttar Pradesh 
157.     T. Gopala Krishna, Chichmagular 
158.     N.S. Mahesh, Bangalore, Karnataka 
159.     Shailaja G. Harinath, Bangalore 
160.     V.V. Lakshmanan, Ambattur, Chennai 
161.      Jayesh M. Poria 
162.      P. Rukma Chary, Bangalore 
163.      Deepak Kesari, Bangalore 
164.     Rajshekhar C.R., Bangalore. 
165.     N.H. Shiggaon,  Vignan Nagar, Bangalore 
166.     Ajay M.U. Electronic City, Bangalore. 
167.     Vardhaman Nair, Bangalore. 
168.     Krishna Murthy, Bangalore 
169.     Sashidhar CM, Vinayaka Extn. Bangalore, 
170.     Narayan  Kumar, Bangalore 
171.     Amjad F. Jamador, Belgam, Karnataka 
43 

 
172.     Mohd. Arshad, Ranganath Colony, Bangalore. 
173.     B.A. Pathan, Hubli, Karnatka 
174.     Pronoy Kumar Ghosh, Cachar, Assam 
175.    N. N. Suiggaon, Vignan Nagar,  Bangalore 
176.    Radhikanath Mallick, Kolkata, West Bengal 
177.    Maqsud Mujawar,  maqsud_max@rediffmail.com 
178.    Saroj Bala Dhawan, DLF Gurgaon, Haryana 
179.    Virag R. Dhulia, C.C. Raman Nagar, Bangalore. 
180.     Rahmatulla Sheriff, Ganga Nagar, Bangalore 
181.      Avinash Kumar, Main  HSR Layout,  Bangalore 
182.     Ramakrishna, ramkrishna.manpuri@gmail.com 
183.      Rajkumar,  Rohtak. 
184.      Ritesh Dehia, riteshndehhia@gmail.com 
185.      Viresh Verma, vermaviresh@gmail.com 
186.      Sudha Chouranga Chakrabatrti, Hoogly, West Bengal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
Officials/Judicial Officers. 
 
 
 S/Shri/Ms 
1.     Renchamo P. Kikon, IPS, DIG, Nagaland, Kohima, 
2.     Mrinalini Srivastava, Supdt. Of Police, CID, Gangtok, Sikkim. 
3.     M. M. Banerjee, Distt Judge, Birbhum, Suri. 
4.     Abhai Kumar, Registrar, High Court of M.P, Jabalpur.                                         
     (on behalf of Judicial officers, Traiing Institute) 
5.     Nungshitombi Athokpam, Dy. Legal Rememberancer, Govt.of Manipur.     
6.     Bimal N. Patel, Director, GLNU, Gandhinagar, Gujarat. 
7.     Vijay Kumar Singh, Distt. & Sessions Judge, Jammu. 
8.      Shrikant D. Babaladi, Distt. Judge Member, Karnataka, Appellate Tribunal,     
    Bangalore. 
9.     Bijender Kumar Singh, Distt. & Sessions Judge, Gopalgunj, Bihar. 
10.      PMS Narayanan, National Commission for Minority, Khan Mkt, New Delhi  
11.     R.K. Watel, Distt. & Session Judge, Reasi(J&K) 
12.     *Dy. SP(HQ), O/o DGP, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Port Blair. 
13.      *Principal Distt. & Sessions Judge, Kishtwar 
14.       S. N. Kempagoudar, Distt. Judge, Member, Karnataka Appellate Tribunal,  
     Bangalore. 
15.      Deepak Purohit, Supdt.  Of Police, D&NH, Silvasa. 
16.      Udayan Mukhopadhyay, Distt. & Sessions Judge, Purbi Medinapur. 
17.       *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Vaishali, Hajipur. 
18.      S.H. Mittalkod, Distt. & Sessions Judge, AIG-1, Govt. of Mizoram. 
19.      P.C. Lalchhuanawama, AIG-1 (for DGP), Govt. of Mizoram, Aizwal. 
20.      Prabhat Kumar Adhikari, Secretary (Law), A&N Admn., Port Blair. 
21.      *Pr. Secretary(Law-Legislation), Govt. of Himachal Pradesh. 
22.      L.M. Sangma, Secretary to Govt. of Meghalaya, Law Deptt.  

 
45 
23.      S. R. Dass, Asstt. I.G. Police(Pers), Govt. of Tripura, Agartala. 
24.      B.K. Srivastava, Secretary in charge, Law Deptt., Govt. of W. Bengal 
25.      Ranjit Kumar Baig, Distt. Judge, Malda, West Bengal. 
26.      Sanjit Mazumdar, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Malda, W. Bengal. 
27.      Anant Kumar Kapri,   Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Malda, W. Bengal. 
28.       Kaushik Bhattacharaya,  Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Malda, W. Bengal 
29.      Subodh Kumar Batabayal, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Malda, W. Bengal 
30.      Sanjay Mukhopadhyay, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Malda, W. Bengal 
31.      Sibasis Sarkar, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Malda, W. Bengal 
32.      Sabyasahi Chattoraj, Civil Judge (Sr. Divn.), Malda. 
33.      Thejegu-U-Kire, Dy. Legal Remembrancer to Govt of Nagaland, Kohima. 
34.      Ishan Chandra Das, Distt Judge, Burdwan. 
35.      *Inspector General of Police (HQ), Bihar, Patna. 
36.      Arindham Paul, DLR & Dy. Secretary, Law, Tripura. 
37.      *Home Secreatry, Chandigarh Administration 
38.      *Suptd. Of Police, Panaji, Goa. 
39.      Justice Amarbir Singh Gill, Chairman, Punjab State Law Commission,    
     Chandigarh. 
40.     *Addl. DG of Police (Crime), Punjab Chandigarh. 
41.      L.K. Gaur, Special Judge, CBI-9, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi. 
42.       M.K. Nagpal, ASJ/Special Judge, NDOS, South & South   East Distt., Saket     
     Courts, New Delhi. 
43.      Dr. Neera Bharihoke, ADJ-V, South Saket Court, New Delhi. 
44.      Sanjeev Kumar, Metropolitan Magistrate, South-Saket Court, New Delhi. 
45.     Chetna Singh, Metropolitan Magistrate, South- Saket Court, New Delhi. 
46.     Sandeep Garg, Metropolitan Magistrate, South- Saket Court, New Delhi. 
47.     Anu Aggarwal, Civil Judge, South- Saket Court, New Delhi. 
48.     *District & Sessions Judge, Ambala 
49.     S.S. Lamba, District & Sessions Judge, Rohtak. 
50.     *District & Sessions Judge, Fatehbad. 

46 
 
51.     *District & Sessions Judge, Rewari. 
52.     R.S. Virk, District & Sessions Judge, Gurgaon. 
53.    K. C. Sharma, District & Sessions Judge, Panipat. 
54.    *District & Sessions Judge, Kaithal. 
55.     * District & Sessions Judge, Jind. 
56.     Deepak Aggarwal, District & Sessions Judge, Jind. 
57.     D. N. Bhardwaj, District & Sessions Judge, Jind. 
58.     Dr. Chander Dass, Judicial Magistrate, Jind. 
59.     Praveen Kumar, Addl. Civil Judge (Sr. Divn.-cum-Sub-Divn. Judicial    
    Magistrate), Safidon. 
60.     Kumud Gungwani, Sub-Divn. Judicial Magistrate, Narwana. 
61.     Gurvinder Singh, Gill, District & Sessions Judge, Fatehgarh Sahib. 
62.     Raj Rahul Garg, District & Sessions Judge, Karnal. 
63.     *District & Sessions Judge, Bhiwani. 
64.     Narender Kumar, District  Judge(Family Court), Bhiwani. 
65.     Rajinder Goel, Addl. District & Sessions Judge, Bhiwani. 
66.     Rajesh Kumar Bhankhar, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bhiwani 
67.     Tarun Singal, Chief Judge (Jr.Divn.), Bhiwani. 
68.     Narender Singh, Chief Magistrate, Ist Class, Bhiwani. 
69.     Rajni Yadav, Addl. Civil Judge (Sr.Divn.) cum-Sub-   Divisional Judicial   
    Magistrate, Loharu.  
70.     Balwant Singh, Civil Judge (Jr.Divn.) cum -Sub-Divisional Judicial 
Magistrate, 1st class, Bhiwani. 
71.     Narender Sharma,  Sub-Divn. Judicial Magistrate, Charkhi Dadri. 
72.     A.S. Nayyar, Civil Judge (Jr.Divn.), Charkhi Dadri. 
73.     Parvesh Singla, Civil Judge, Charkhi Dadri. 
74.     Kuldeep Jain, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sonepat. 
75.     Sanjiv Kumar, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sonepat. 
76.     Gulab Singh, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sonepat. 
77.     Vivek Bharti, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sonepat. 
78.     Ritu Garg, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sonepat. 

 
47 
79.     Lal Chand, Civil Judge (Sr.Divn.)-cum-ACJM, Sonepat. 
80.     Madhulika, C.J.(J.D.)-cum-JMIC, Sonepat. 
81.     Ranjana Aggarwal, Addl. Civil.(Sr.Divn.), Sonepat. 
82.     Rajesh Kumar Yadav, C.J.(S.D.)-cum-JMIC, Sonepat. 
83.     Harish Gupta, Addl. Civil.(Sr.Divn.), Ganaur. 
84.     K.P. Singh, Addl. Civil.(Sr.Divn.), Gohana. 
85.     Sanjiv Jindal, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Narnaul. 
86.     Rajneesh Bansal, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Narnaul. 
87.     Sudhir Jiwan, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court, Narnaul. 
88.     Praveen Gupta, Addl. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Narnaul. 
89.     Chander Hass, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Narnaul. 
90.     *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Gurdaspur. 
91.     Chandigarh Judicial Academy, Dr. Virender Aggarwal, Director 
    (Academics), Chandigarh. 
92.      Rajesh Kumar Yadav, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, C.J.(JD)-cum-JMIC,  
          Sonepat. 
93.      * Distt. & Sessions Judge, Chandigarh. 
94.      *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sirsa. 
95.      *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Jhajjar. 
96.      *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Faridabad. 
97.      *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Yamuna Nagar at Jagadhri. 
98.      *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Panchkula. 
99.      *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Pehowa. 
100. Rajinder Pal Singh, Addl. Civil Judge (Sr. Divn.), Pehowa. 
101. Gurcharan Singh Saran, . Distt. & Sessions Judge, Shaheed Bhagat Singh 
      Nagar. 
102. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Rupnagar. 
103. Inderjit Singh, . Distt. & Sessions Judge, Jalandhar. 
104. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Ferozpur. 
105. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Kapurthala. 

48 
 
106. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Mansa. 
107. Amit Kumar Garg, Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Kurushetra. 
108. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Kurushetra. 
109. Manish Batra, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Kurushetra. 
110. Harleen Sharma, Civil Judge (Jr. Divn), Kurushetra. 
111. Sanjiv Kumar, Addl.  Distt. & Sessions Judge, Kurushetra. 
112. Sanjiv Arya, Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Kurushetra. 
113. Arun Kumar Singhal,  Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge, Kurushetra. 
114. Jagjit Singh, Civil Judge (Sr. Divn), Kurushetra. 
115. Amarinder Sharma, Civil Judge (Jr. Divn), Kurushetra. 
116. Raj Gupta, Civil Judicial Judge, Kurushetra. 
117. Anudeep Kaur Bhatti, Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Kurushetra. 
118. Akshdeep Mahajan, Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Mohindergarh. 
119. Narender Pal, Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Narnaul. 
120. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Hisar. 
121. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Amritsar. 
122. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Patiala. 
123. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Hoshiapur. 
124. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Ludhiana. 
125. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Bathinda. 
126. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
127. *Distt. & Sessions Judge, Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
128. Shri Hari S. D. Shirodkar, Under Secretary, Law Department, Govt. of Goa. 
129. Shri S. G. Marathe, Joint Secretary (Law), Govt. of Goa. 
130. Shri Pramod Kamat, Law Secretary, Govt. of Goa 
131. Shri Mangesh Kashyap, DCP (HQ), O/o  the Commissioner of Police, Delhi 
132.  Shri D. V. K. Rao, Under Secretary, M/o  of Women and Child Development. 
133. Shri T. Pachuau, IG of Police (Adm), Police Department, Govt. of Manipur. 
134. Shri S. Sivaiah Naidu, Registrar General, Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
135. Shri G. Rime, Deputy Secretary (Home), Department of Home and Inter State 
Border Affairs, Government of Arunachal Pradesh, Itanagar 
  

 
 
49 
Organizations: 
1.  Save India Harmony, (Shri B.K. Aggarwal, President),   
 Vishakhapatnam 
2.  SIFFMWB, (Shri S. Bhattacharjee) Kolkata 
3.  Vigilant Women Munch, (Secretary, Ms Suman Jain), Delhi. 
4.  National Family Harmony Society, President, (Shri P. Suresh),    
 Karnataka. & 41 others 
5.  Mothers and Sisters Initiative –MASI, (Mrs. Shalini Sharma),    
 General Secretary 
6.    Bharat Bachao Sangthan , (Shri Vineet Ruia), President ,         
Kolkata. 
7.   Pirito Purush Porishad, NGO, Kolkata 
8.   INSAAF, New Delhi. 
9.   All India Forgotten Women’s Association, Hyderabad. 
10.   Members of Million Women Arrested Campaign (org), FBD,         
  Haryana 
11.    KFWL,  Secretary,  (Ms. Aneetha AG), Kerala High Court               
Bldg, Kochi. 
12.   Lawyers Collective, (Ms. Indira Jaising), Jangpura Extn.,  New       
  Delhi.  
13.   Rakshak Foundation, Shri Sachin Bansal, USA. 
14.   AWAG, Ila Pathak, Ahmedabad 
15.   AIDWA, (Ms Kirti Singh), Legal Convenor, Advocate, Delhi 
16.   PLD ( Partners for Law in Development), Ms. Madhu Mehra , 
Ex. Director, New Delhi        
17.   Bharat Vikas Parishad (Shri Raj Pal Singla, President) , 
Chandigarh, Punjab  
 

50 
 
ANNUXURE - 2 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
Consultation Paper-cum-Questionnaire regarding Section 
498-A of Indian Penal Code 
1. Keeping in view the representations received from various quarters 
and observations made by the Supreme Court and the High Courts, the 
Home Ministry of the Government of India requested the Law Commission 
of India to consider whether any amendments to s.49 8A of Indian Penal 
Code or other measures are necessary to check the alleged misuse of the 
said provision especially by way of over-implication.     
2. S.498A was introduced in the year 1983 to protect married women 
from being subjected to cruelty by the husband or his relatives.  A 
punishment extending to 3 years and fine has been prescribed.  The 
expression ‘cruelty’ has been defined in wide terms so as to include 
inflicting physical or mental harm to the body or health of the woman and 
indulging in acts of harassment with a view to coerce her or her relations 
to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security.    
Harassment for dowry falls within the sweep of latter limb of the section. 
Creating a situation driving the woman to commit suici de is also one of 
the ingredients of ‘cruelty’.  The offence under s.498A is cognizable, non -
compoundable and non-bailable. 
3. In a recent case of Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand, the Supreme 
Court observed that a serious relook of the provision is warranted by the  

 
51 
Legislature. “It is a matter of common knowledge that exaggerated 
versions of the incidents are reflected in a large number of complaints.  
The tendency of over -implication is also reflected in a very large number 
of cases”.    The Court t ook note of the common tendency to implicate 
husband and all his immediate relations.    In an earlier case also -  Sushil 
Kumar Sharma v. UOI (2005), the Supreme Court lamented that in many 
instances, complaints under s.498A were being filed with an oblique 
motive to wreck personal vendetta.   “It may therefore become necessary 
for the Legislature to find out ways how the makers of frivolous 
complaints or allegations can be appropriately dealt with”, it was 
observed.    It was also observed that “by misuse of the provision, a new 
legal terrorism can be unleashed”. 
4. The factum of over-implication is borne out by the statistical data of 
the cases under s.498A.  Such implication of the relatives of husband was 
found to be unjustified in a large number of deci ded cases.  While so, it 
appears that the women especially from the poor strata of the society 
living in rural areas rarely take resort to the provision.   
5. The conviction rate in respect of the cases under s.498A is quite 
low.  It is learnt that on acco unt of subsequent events such as amicable 
settlement, the complainant women do not evince interest in taking the 
prosecution to its logical conclusion. 
6. The arguments for relieving the rigour of s.498A by suitable 
amendments (which find support from the observations in the Court 
judgments and Justice Malimath Committee’s report on Reforms of  

52 
 
Criminal Justice System) are:   Once a complaint (FIR) is lodged with the 
Police under s.498A/406 IPC, it becomes an easy tool in the hands of the 
Police to arrest o r threaten to arrest the husband and other relatives 
named in the FIR without even considering the intrinsic worth of the 
allegations and making a preliminary investigation.   When the members 
of a family are arrested and sent to jail without even the immediate 
prospect of bail, the chances of amicable re -conciliation or salvaging the 
marriage, will be lost once and for all.  The possibility of reconciliation, it is 
pointed out, cannot be ruled out and it should be fully explored.  The 
imminent arrest by the Police will thus be counter -productive.    The long 
and protracted criminal trials lead to acrimony and bitterness in the 
relationship among the kith and kin of the family.   Pragmatic realities 
have to be taken into consideration while dealing with matr imonial 
matters with due regard to the fact that it is a sensitive family problem 
which shall not be allowed to be aggravated by over -zealous/callous 
actions on the part of the Police by taking advantage of the harsh 
provisions of s.498A of IPC together with its related provisions in CrPC.    It 
is pointed out that the sting  is not in s.498A as such, but in the provisions 
of CrPC making the offence non-compoundable and non-bailable. 
7. The arguments, on the other hand, in support of maintaining the 
status quo are briefly: 
S.498A and other legislations like Protection of Women from 
Domestic Violence Act have been specifically enacted to protect a 
vulnerable section of the society who have been the victims of cruelty and  

 
53 
harassment.  The social purpose behind it will be lost if the rigour of the 
provision is diluted.   The abuse or misuse of law is not peculiar to this 
provision.   The misuse can however be curtailed within the existing 
framework of law.   For instance, the Ministry of Home Affairs can issu e 
‘advisories’ to State Governments to avoid unnecessary arrests and to 
strictly observe the procedures laid down in the law governing arrests.  
The power to arrest should only be exercised after a reasonable 
satisfaction is reached as to the bona fides of  a complaint and the 
complicity of those against whom accusations are made.  Further, the first 
recourse should be to effect conciliation and mediation between the 
warring spouses  and the recourse to filing of a chargesheet under s.498A 
shall be had only in cases where such efforts fail and there appears to be a 
prima facie case.  Counselling of parties should be done by professionally 
qualified counsellors and not by the Police.   
7.1 These views have been echoed among others by the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development.    
7.2 Further, it is pointed out that a married woman ventures to go to 
the Police station to make a complaint against her husband and other 
close relations only out of despair and being left with no other remedy 
against cruelty and har assment.  In such a situation, the existing law 
should be allowed to take its own course rather than over -reacting to the 
misuse in some cases. 
7.3 There is also a view expressed that when once the offending family 
members get the scent of the complaint, t here may be further torture of 

54 
 
the complainant and her life and liberty may be endangered if the Police 
do not act swiftly and sternly. It is contended that in the wake of ever 
increasing crimes leading to unnatural deaths of women in marital homes, 
any dilution of Section 498-A is not warranted. Secondly, during  the long–
drawn process of  mediation also, she is  vulnerable to  threats and  
torture.   Such situations too need to be taken care of.  
8. There is preponderance of opinion in favour of making the said 
offence compoundable with the permission of the court.   Some States, 
for e.g., Andhra Pradesh have already made it compoundable.  The 
Supreme Court, in a recent case of --*---, observed that  it should be made 
compoundable.  However, there is sha rp divergence of views on the point 
whether it should be made a bailable offence.  It is pleaded by some that 
the offence under s.498A should be made bailable at least with regard to 
husband’s relations.*
Ramgopal v. State of M. P. in SLP (Crl.) No. 6494 of 2010 (Order dt. July 30, 
2010. 
8.1 Those against compoundability contend that the women especially 
from the rural areas will be pressurized to enter into an unfair 
compromise and further the deterrent effect of the provision will be lost. 
9. The Commissio n is of the view that the Section together with its 
allied CrPC provisions shall not act as an instrument of oppression and 
counter-harassment and become a tool of indiscreet and arbitrary actions 
on the part of the Police.  The fact that s.498A deals with a family problem 
and a situation of marital discord unlike the other crimes against society at 
large, cannot be forgotten.   It does not however mean that the Police  

 
55 
should not appreciate the grievance of the complainant woman with 
empathy and understanding or that the Police should play a passive role. 
10. S.498A has a lofty social purpose and it should remain on the 
Statute book to intervene whenever the occasion arises.  Its object and 
purpose cannot be stultified by overemphasizing its potentiality  for abuse 
or misuse.   Misuse by itself cannot be a ground to repeal it or to take 
away its teeth wholesale.    
11. While the Commission is appreciative of the need to discourage 
unjustified and frivolous complaints and the scourge of over-implication, it 
is not inclined to take a view that dilutes the efficacy of s.498A to the 
extent of defeating its purpose especially having regard to the fact that 
atrocities against women are on the increase.  A balanced and holistic 
view has to be taken on weighing the pros and cons.  There is no doubt a 
need to address the misuse situations and arrive at a rational solution –  
legislative or otherwise. 
12. There is also a need to create awareness of the provisions especially 
among the poor and illiterate living in rural areas who face quite often the 
problems of drunken misbehavior and harassment of women folk.  More 
thanthe women,the men should be apprised of the penal provisions of law 
protecting the wom en against harassment at home. The easy access of 
aggrieved women to the Taluka and District level Legal Service Authorities 
and/or credible NGOs with professional counsellors should be ensured by 
appropriate measures.  There should be an extensive  and well -planned 
campaign to spread awareness. Presently, the endeavour in this direction 

56 
 
is quite minimal. Visits to few villages once in a way by the representatives 
of LSAs, law students and social workers is the present scenario. 
13. There is an all -round view that the lawyers whom the aggrieved 
women or their relations appr oach in the first instance should act with a 
clear sense of responsibility and objectivity and give suitable advice 
consistent with the real problem diagnosed.  Exaggerated and tutored 
versions and unnecessary implication of husband’s relations should be 
scrupulously avoided.  The correct advice of the legal professionals and 
the sensitivity of the Police officials dealing with the cases are very 
important, and if these are in place, undoubtedly , the law will not take a 
devious course.   Unfortunately, ther e is a strong feeling that some 
lawyers and police personnel have failed to act and approach the problem 
in a manner morally and legally expected of them. 
14. Thus, the triple problems that have cropped up in the course of 
implementation of the provision are:(a) the police straightaway rushing to 
arrest the husband and even his other family members (named in the FIR), 
(b) tendency to implicate, with little or no justification, the in -laws and 
other relations residing in the marital home and even outside the  home, 
overtaken by feelings of emotion and vengeance or  on account of wrong 
advice, and (c) lack of professional, sensitive and empathetic approach on 
the part of the police to the problem of woman under distress. 
15. In the context of the issue under consideration, a reference to the 
provisions of Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (for 
short PDV Act) which is an allied and complementary law,is quite apposite.    

 
57 
The said Act was enacted with a vie w to provide for more effective 
protection of rights of women who are victims of violence of any kind  
occurring within the family. Those rights are essentially of civil nature with 
a mix of penal provisions. Section 3 of the Act defines domestic violence in 
very wide terms. It encompasses the situations set out in the definition of 
‘cruelty’ under Section 498A. The Act has devised an elaborate  machinery 
to safeguard the interests of women subjected to domestic violence.  The 
Act enjoins the appointment of Protection Officers  who will be under the 
control and supervision of a Judicial Magistrate of First Class.  The said 
officer shall send a domestic incident report to the Magistrate, the police 
station and service providers.   The Protections Officers are required to 
effectively assist and guide the complainant victim and  provide shelter,  
medical facilities, legal aid etc. and also act on her behalf to present an 
application to the Magistrate for one or more reliefs under the Ac t.   The 
Magistrate is requiredto hear the application ordinarily within 3 days from 
the date of its receipt. The Magistrate may at any stage of the proceedings 
direct the respondent and/or the aggrieved person to undergo counseling 
with a service provider. ‘Service Providers’  are those who conform to the 
requirements of Section 10 of the Act. The Magistrate can also secure the 
services ofawelfare expert preferablya woman for the purpose of assisting 
him. Under Section 18, the Magistrate, after giving an opportunity  o f 
hearing to the Respondentandon being prima facie satisfied that domestic 
violence has taken place or is likely to take place, is empowered to pass a 
protection order prohibiting the Respondent from committing any act of 
domestic violence and/or aiding or abetting all acts of domestic violence. 

58 
 
There are other powers vested in the Magistrate including granting 
residence orders and monetary reliefs.    Section 23 further empowers 
the Magistrate to pass such interim order as he deems just and 
proper including an ex -parte order.    The breach of protection order 
by the respondent is regarded as an offence which is cognizable and non-
bailable and punishable with imprisonment extending to one year (vide 
Section 31).  By the same Section, the Magistrate is also empowered to 
frame charges under Section 498A of IPC and/or Dowry Prohibition Act. A 
Protection Officer who fails or neglects to discharge his duty  as per the 
protection order is liable to be punished with imprisonment (vide Section 
33). The provisions of the Act are supplemental to the provisions of any 
other law in force. A right to file a complaint under Section 498A is 
specifically preserved under Section 5 of the Act. 
15.1 An interplay of the provisions of this Act and  the proceedings under 
s.498A assumes some relev ance on two aspects: (1) Seeking Magistrate’s 
expeditious intervention by way of passing a protective interim order to 
prevent secondary victimization of a complainant who has lodged FIR 
under s.498A. (2) Paving the way for the process of counselling under  the 
supervision of Magistrate at the earliest opportunity. 
16. With the above analysis and the broad outline of the approach 
indicated supra, the Commission invites the views of the 
public/NGOs/institutions/Bar Associations etc. on the following points, 
before preparing and forwarding to the Government the final report: 
 

 
59 
Questionnaire 
1) a) What according to you is ideally expected of Police, on receiving the 
FIR alleging an offence u/s 498A of IPC?  What should be their approach 
and plan of action? 
  b) Do you think that justice will be better meted out to the aggrieved 
woman by the immediate arrest and custodial interrogation of the 
husband and his relations named in the FIR?  Would the objective of 
s.498A be better served thereby? 
2) a) The Supreme Court laid down in D.K. Basu (1996) and other cases 
that the power of arrest without warrant ought not to be resorted to in a 
routine manner and that the Police officer should be reasonably satisfied 
about a person’s complicity as well as the need to effect arrest.  Don’t you 
agree that this rule applies with greater force in a situation of matrimonial 
discord and the police are expected to act more discreetly and cautiously 
before taking the drastic step of arrest? 
 b) What steps should be taken to check i ndiscriminate and unwarranted 
arrests? 
3) Do you think that making the offence bailable is the proper solution to 
the problem?  Will it be counter-productive? 
4) There is a view point supported by certain observations in the courts’ 
judgments that before e ffecting arrest in cases of this nature, the proper 
course would be to try the process of reconciliation by counselling both 
sides.   In other words, the  

60 
 
 
possibility of exploring reconciliation at the outset should precede 
punitive measures.  Do you agre e that the conciliation should be the first 
step, having regard to the nature and dimension of the problem? If so, 
how best the conciliation process could be  completed with  utmost 
expedition? Should there be a  time -limit  beyond which  the police shall 
be  free to  act without  waiting for the outcome of conciliation process? 
5) Though the Police may tender appropriate advice initially and facilitate 
reconciliation process, the preponderance of view is that the Police should 
not get involved in the actua l process and their role should be that of 
observer at that stage?   Do you have a different view? 
6) a) In the absence of consensus as to mediators, who will be ideally 
suited to act as mediators/conciliators –  the friends or elders known to 
both the part ies or professional counsellors (who may be part of NGOs), 
lady and men lawyers who volunteer to act in such matters, a Committee 
of respected/retired persons of the locality or the Legal Services Authority 
of the District? 
b) How to ensure that the office rs in charge of police stations can easily 
identify and contact those who are well suited to conciliate or mediate, 
especially having regard to the fact that professional and competent 
counsellors may not be available at all places and any delay in initiat ing 
the process will lead to further complications? 
 

 
61 
7) a) Do you think that on receipt of complaint under S.498A, immediate 
steps should be taken by the Police to facilitate an application being filed 
before the Judicial Magistrate under the PDV Act so  that the Magistrate 
can set in motion the process of counselling/conciliation, apart from 
according interim protection? 
b)  Should the Police in the meanwhile be left free to arrest the accused 
without the permission of the Magistrate? 
c)  Should the inve stigation be kept in abeyance till the conciliation 
process initiated by the Magistrate is completed? 
 
8)Do you think that the offence should be made compoundable (with the 
permission of court)? 
Are there any particular reasons not to make it compoundable? 
9)Do you consider it just and proper to differentiate the husband from the 
other accused in providing for bail? 
10) a) Do you envisage a better and more extensive role to be played by 
Legal Services Authorities (LSAs) at Taluka and District levels in rela tion to 
s.498A cases and for facilitating amicable settlement?   Is there a need for 
better coordination between LSAs and police stations? 
b) Do you think that aggrieved women have easy access to LSAs at the 
grassroot level and get proper guidance and help  from them at the pre -
complaint and subsequent stages? 

62 
 
c)Are the  Mediation Centres in some States well equipped and  better 
suited to attend to the cases related to S,498-A? 
11) What measures do you suggest to spread awareness of the protective 
penal prov isions and civil rights available to women in rural areas 
especially among the poorer sections of people? 
12) Do you have any informations about the number of and conditions in 
shelter homes which are required to be set up under PDV Act to help the 
aggrieved women who after lodging the complaint do not wish to stay at 
marital home or there is none to look after them? 
13)What according to you is the main reason for low conviction rate in the 
prosecutions u/s 498A? 
14)(a) Is it desirable to have a Crime Against Women Cell (CWC) in every 
district to deal exclusively with the crimes such as S.498A?   If so, what 
should be its composition and the qualifications of women police 
deployed in such a cell? 
(b) As the present experience shows, it is likely that wherever a CWC is set 
up, there may be substantial number of unfilled vacancies and the 
personnel may not have undergone the requisite training.   In this 
situation, whether it would be advisable to entrust the investigation etc. 
to CWC to the exclusion of the jurisdictional Police Station? 
 
------ 
 