 
1 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Amendment of Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and 
Allied Provisions 
 
Report No. 238 
 
 
 
December, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
Justice P. V. Reddi          New Delhi 
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)               Tele: 2301 9465 (R) 
Chairman                     2338 4475 (O) 
Law Commission of India                  Fax: 2379 2745 (R) 
  

 
2 
 
 
D. O.  No. 6(3)/190/2010 – LC (LS)                                                      30th December, 2011 
Dear Hon. Minister Salman Khurshid ji, 
 The accompanying report relates to Section 89 of Civil Procedure Code.  
The Supreme Court observed in Afcons Infrastructure case (2010 8 SCC 24) 
that there are many drafting errors in Section 89 and suggested amendments 
to the Section which may be considered by Law Commission of India.  In order 
to remove the deficiencies in Section 89 which is a pivotal provision  for 
facilitating dispute resolution in civil matters and to make it more simple and 
straightforward, the Law Commission has proposed amendments to Section 89 
CPC as well as Order X Rules 1-A to 1-C.  Further, the amendment of Section 
16 of Court Fee Act has also been suggested.  The amended provisions as 
proposed are found at paras 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4 of the Report. 
 
With regards and good wishes 
Sd./                                                             
                                                                                            (P.V. Reddi) 
Shri Salman Khurshidji, 
Hon’ble Union Minister for Law & Justice, 
Shastri Bhavan, 
New Delhi. 
 
 
 Office: I. L. I. Building, Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi – 110 001 
Residence: 1, Janpath, New Delhi 110 011 
E-mail: pv_reddi@yahoo.co.in 
 
 
 

 
3 
 
Amendment of Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and Allied 
Provisions 
 
CONTENTS 
 
     Page No. 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION  5 
   
2. ANALYSIS OF SECTION 89 AND ITS SCHEME   6 - 10           
 
3. THE BACKGROUND TO SECTION 89    11 -13 
  
4. DRAFTING ERRORS IN SECTION 89 –     14 -17 
AFCONS INFRASTRUCTURE CASE 
 
 
5. CHANGES CONSIDERED BROADLY     18 -23 
 
 
6. AMENDMENTS PROPOSED     24 -27 
 
 
 
 
7. RECOMMENDATIONS      28 
 

 
4 
 
 
 ANNEXURE I     EXTRACT OF SECTION 73(1) of AC ACT AND 
SECTION 89 OF CPC    29 - 30 
 
ANNEXURE II          PARAGRAPHS 43 & 44 OF THE     
                 JUDGMENT IN  AFCONS  
                    INFRASTRUCTURE CASE    31 - 33 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1 The proliferation and pendency of litigation in Civil Courts  for a variety of reasons has 
made it impracticable to dispose of cases within a reasonable time. The overburdened judicial 
system is not in a position to cope up with the heavy demands on it mostly for reasons beyond its 
control. Speedy justice has become a casualty, though the disposal rate per-Judge is quite high in 
our country. The need to put in place Alternative Dispute Resolution (in short, “ ADR”) 
mechanisms has been immensely felt so that the courts  can offload some cases from their 
dockets. The ADR  systems have been very successful in some countries, especially USA 
wherein the bulk of litigation is settled through one of the ADR processes before the case goes 
for trial.  
1.2 Article 39A of the Constitution of India (enacted in 1976) enjoins that the  State shall 
secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity , 
and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes , to ensure that 
opportunities for securing justice are not de nied to any citizen by reason of economic or other 
disabilities. Thus, easy access to justice to all sections of people and provision of legal aid for the 
poor and needy and dispensation of justice by an independent Judiciary within a reasonable time 
are the cherished goals of our Constitutional Republic and for that matter, of any progressive 
democracy.  
1.3 In our country, arbitration and mediation have been in vogue since long. Arbitration was 
originally governed by the provisions contained in different enactments, including those in the 
Code of Civil Procedure. The first Indian Arbitration Act was enacted in 1899, which was 
replaced by the Arbitration Act, 1940 which in turn was replaced by the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act of 1996. The mediation of i nformal nature was being adopted at the village 
level to resolve petty disputes from times immemorial. Thanks to the innovative measures taken 
by the judiciary in some States, resolution of court  litigation through Lok Adalats became quite 
popular during 1970s  and ’ 80s. With the advent of Legal Services Authorities Act 1987, Lok 
Adalats and Legal Aid Schemes have received statutory recognition and become an integral and 
important part of the justice delivery system.  
 

 
6 
 
2. Analysis of Section 89 and its Scheme 
2.1 By the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act 1999, section 89 had been introduced 
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and it became effective from 01-07-2002. Section 89 of the 
CPC reads as under: 
“89. Settlement of disputes outside the Court .- (1)Where it appears to the court that 
there exist elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, the court shall 
formulate the terms of settlement and give them to the parties for their observations and 
after receiving the observations  of the parties, the court  may reformulate the terms of a 
possible settlement and refer the same for –  
a) arbitration;  
b) conciliation;  
c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat; or 
d) mediation  
 (2) Where a dispute has been referred- 
 (a) for arbitration or conciliation, the provisions of the Arbitration  and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration or 
conciliation were referred for settlement under the provisions of that Act; 
(b) to Lok Adalat, the court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat  in accordance 
with the provisions of sub- section (1) of section 20 of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 and all other provisions of that Act shall apply in respect of 
the dispute so referred to the Lok Adalat; 
(c) for judicial settlement, the court shall refer the same to a suitable institution or 
person and such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Adalat and all 
the provisions of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 shall apply as if the 
dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat under the provisions of that Act; 
(d) for mediation, the court shall effect a compromise between the  parties and 
shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.” 
  

 
7 
 
The objective of Section 89 is to ensure that the court makes an endeavour to facilitate 
out-of-court settlements through one of the ADR processes before the trial commences. 
 
2.2 The related provisions which were incorporated by the same amendment Act are those 
contained in Rules 1A, 1B and 1C of Order X, CPC, which are extracted hereunder: 
“1A. Direction of the Court  to opt for any one mode of alternative dispute 
resolution.—After recording the admissions and denials, the court shall direct the parties 
to suit to opt either mode of the settlement outside the  court as specified in sub -section 
(1) of s ection 89. On the option of the parties, the court  shall fix the date of appearance 
before such forum or authority as may be opted by the parties.”  
“1B. Appearance before the conciliatory forum or authority.– where a suit is referred 
under rule 1A, the parties shall appear before such forum or authority  for conciliation of 
the suit.”  
“1C. Appearance before the Court  consequent to the failure of efforts of 
conciliation.- Where a suit is referred under rule 1A  and the forum or authority to whom 
the matter has been referred is satisfied that it would not be proper in the interest of 
justice to proceed with the matter further, then it shall refer the matter again to the court  
and direct the parties to appear before the court on the date fixed by it.”  
2.3 With the introduction of these provisions, a mandatory duty has been cast on the civil 
courts to endeavour for settlement of disputes by relegating the parties to an ADR process. Five 
ADR methods are referred to in s ection 89. They are : (a) Arbitration, ( b) Conciliation, ( c) 
Judicial settlement, (d) Settlement through Lok Adalat, and (e) Mediation.  
 2.4 Arbitration as well as Conciliation are governed by the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 ( “AC” Act, for short) which superseded the previous Arbitration Act of 1940. The 
arbitration unlike conciliation is an adjudicatory process. Once a civil  dispute is referred to 
arbitration, the case will go outside the stream of the court  permanently and will not come back 
to the court. However, in contrast, a dispute referred to conciliation which is a non- adjudicatory 
process, does not go out of the doma in of the court-process permanently. If there is no amicable 
settlement, the matter reverts back to the court  which has to proceed with the trial after framing 

 
8 
 
issues. The reference to arbitration or conciliation is only possible if there is consent of the  
parties. In the absence of consent, the court  cannot on its own refer the parties to arbitration or 
conciliation. This legal position is no longer in doubt in view of the recent judgment of Supreme 
Court in Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Cherian Varkey Consturction Co. (P) Ltd.1  In the case of 
arbitration, if there is no pre -existing arbitration agreement, the parties to suit can agree for 
arbitration by filing a joint memo or application  and  the court   can then refer the matter to 
arbitration and such arbitration will be governed by the provisions of the AC Act. The award of 
the arbitrators is binding on the parties and is enforceable as if it is a decree of the court, in view 
of what has been said in section 36 of the AC Act.  If any settlement is reached in the arbitration 
proceedings, then the award passed by the arbitrator on the basis of such agreed terms will have 
the same status and effect as any other arbitral award, vide section 30 of the AC Act. 
 
2.5 When the matter is settled through conciliation, the settlement agreement shall have the 
same status and effect as if it is an arbitral award ( vide Section 74 of AC Act) and therefore it is 
enforceable as a decree of the court by virtue of section 36 of the AC Act. Similarly, when a 
settlement takes place before the Lok Adalat, the award of the Lok Adalat is deemed to be a 
decree of a civil court under section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (for short , 
“LSA Act”) and executable as such. 
   
2.6 The Supreme Court  observed in the case of Afcons Infrastructure (supra) : “As the court  
continues to retain control and jurisdiction over the cases which it refers to conciliations or Lok 
Adalats, the settlement agreement in conciliation or the L ok Adalat award will have to be placed 
before the court recording it and disposal in its terms”.  Whether or not such a course of action is 
really necessary, we shall discuss a little later. 
 
2.7 Coming to mediation, there is practically no difference between conciliation and 
mediation and quite often they are used as inter -changeable terms. Mediation is aimed at 
conciliation and conciliation has the elements of mediation. In the Dictionary of Modern Legal 
Usage by Bryan A. Garner, it is stated thus:  
 
                                                           
1 (2010) 8 SCC 24 

 
9 
 
“The distinction between mediation and conciliation is widely debated among those 
interested in ADR… Some suggest that conciliation  is ‘a nonbinding arbitration’, 
whereas mediation is merely ‘assisted negotiation’. Others put it nearly the opposite  way: 
conciliation involves a third party’s trying to bring together disputing parties to help them 
reconcile their differences, whereas mediation goes further by allowing the third party to 
suggest terms on which the dispute might be resolved. Still others reject these attempts at 
DIFFERENTIATION and contend that there is no consensus about what the two words 
mean- that they are generally interchangeable. Though a distinction would be 
convenient, those who argue that usage indicates a broad synonymy are most accurate”.  
2.8 It may be noticed that s ection 73 of the AC Act contemplates the conciliator suggesting 
the terms of settlement. Therefore, the point of distinction noted in the above passage does not 
hold good in India. According to Shri Justice R. V. Raveendran, former Judge, Supreme Court of 
India and author of the judgment in Afcons  Infrastructure case, where the conciliator is a 
professional trained in the art of mediation (as contrasted from a layman, friend, relative, well-
wisher, or social worker acting as a conciliator), the process of conciliation is referred to as 
mediation. In cases where the third party assisting the parties to arrive  at a settlement is not a 
trained professional mediator, the process is referred to as conciliation.
2 It is however necessary 
to point out that in many States, there are trained mediators including legal professionals a nd 
there are mediation centres managed by the Judiciary in few States. Mediation has emerged as a 
science now. 
  In Afcons Infrastructure case, the Supreme Court referred to the definition of mediation 
as given in the Model Mediation Rules, according to which “settlement by ‘mediation’ means the 
process by which a  mediator appointed by  parties or by  the  court ,  as  the  case  may be,  
mediates the dispute between the parties to the suit by the application of the provisions of the 
Mediation Rules, 2003 in Part II, and in particular, by facil itating discussion between the  parties 
directly or by communicating with each other through the mediator, by assisting  the  parties in 
identifying issues, reducing misunderstandings, clarifying priorities, exploring areas  of  
compromise,  generating opti ons  in an attempt to solve  the dispute and  emphasizing that it is 
the parties’ own responsibility for making decisions which affect them.” In short, mediation is a 
                                                           
2Justice R. V. Raveendran, “ Section 89 CPC:  Need for an Urgent Relook”, (2007) 4 SCC J23  

 
10 
 
process of dispute-resolution by which the mediator assists and persuades the disputing parties to 
arrive at an amicable settlement. 
2.9 Judicial settlement means a compromise entered by the parties with the assistance of the 
court adjudicating the matter or another j udge to whom the c ourt had referred the dispute. In 
Black’s Law Dictionary, “j udicial settlement” is defined as “the settlement of a civil case with 
the help of a Judge who is not assigned to adjudicate the dispute”.  
2.10  Referring to the inter -relation between s ection 89 and Order X Rule 1 A, the Supreme 
Court pointed out that th ere is no inconsistency. Section 89 confers the jurisdiction on the court  
to refer a dispute to an ADR process, whereas Rules 1A to1C of Order X lay down the manner in 
which the jurisdiction i s to be exercised by the c ourt. The scheme is that the court  explains the 
choices available regarding ADR process to the parties, permits them to opt for a process by 
consensus, and if there is no consensus, proceeds to choose the process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11 
 
 
3. The Background to Section 89 
3.1 Before proceeding further, we may refer to Statement of Objects and Reasons and Notes 
on Clauses attached to the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill initiated in 1997. 
Statement of Objects and Reasons: “3. (d) with a view to implement the 129th Report of 
the Law Commission of India and to make conciliation scheme effective, it is proposed to 
make it obligatory for the court  to refer the dispute after the issues are framed for 
settlement either by way of  arbitration, conciliation, mediation, judicial settlement or 
through Lok Adalat.  It is only after the parties fail to get their disputes settled through 
any one of the alternate dispute resolution methods that the suit shall proceed further in 
the section in which it was filed.”   
   Notes on clauses:  
“Clause 7  provides for the settlement of disputes outside the c ourt. The provisions of 
clause 7 are based on the recommendations made by Law Commission of India and 
Malimath Committee. It was suggested by Law Commission of India that the court  may 
require attendance of any party to the suit or proceedings to appear in person with a 
view to arriving at an amicable settlement of dispute between the  parties and make an 
attempt to settle the dispute between the parties amicably. Malimath Committee 
recommended to make it obligatory for the court  to refer the dispute, after issues are 
framed, for settlement either by way of arbitration, conciliation, mediation, judicial 
settlement or through Lok Adalat. It is only when the parties fail to get their disputes 
settled through any of the alternative dispute resolution methods that the suit could 
proceed further.  In view of the above, clause 7 seeks to insert a new s ection 89 in the 
Code in order to provide for alternate dispute resolution.” 
 
 3.2.1 129
th Report (1988) of the Law Commission of India: 
  The Law Commission recommended introduction of the Conciliation Court system which 
had been in vogue in Himachal Pradesh to deal with house rent/possession litigation as well as 
other litigations such as  disputes as to inherita nce/succession, partition, m aintenance and wills 
which are usually between near relations.  The Commission referred to Order XXVII R ule 5B of 
the CPC which bears the  heading “D uty of c ourt in suits against the Government or a public 
officer in arriving at a settlement” and then observed: “ Though rule 5B is limited in its 
application to a suit to which the Government or the public officer acting in his official capacity 

 
12 
 
is a party, it is tim e to expand the coverage of the method of resolution of disputes therein 
provided to all suits in civil courts , including the claim for compensation before the Motor 
Accidents Claims Tribunal.  Rule 5B provides that in a suit to which it applies, it should be the 
duty of the court  to make, in the first instance, every endeavour where it is possible to do so 
consistently with the nature and circumstances of the case to assist the parties in arriving at a 
settlement in respect of the subject matter of the dis pute.  Where the court  is of the opinion that 
there is a reasonable possibility of a settlement between the parties to the suit, the proceedings 
may be adjourned for such period as it thinks fit to enable attempts to be made to effect such 
settlement.  Rule 5B expects the court  before which the suit is pending to itself attempt to 
conciliate the dispute”.  The features of C onciliation Courts set up in Himachal Pradesh were 
then adverted to by the Commission.  The Commission, with a view to remove the diffic ulty 
experienced by the Conciliation Court  in H.P. , in cases in which the parties do not appear in 
person before the court , considered it necessary to introduce a provision in Order X of the CPC 
to the following effect: 
  ‘(i) The following may be added as  sub-clause (c) immediately after sub -clause (b), 
clause (i) rule 2 of Order X of the Code of Civil Procedure:  
 “may require the attendance of any party to the suit or proceedings, to appear in 
person with a view to arriving at an amicable settlement of t he dispute between 
the parties and make an attempt to settle the dispute between the parties 
amicably”.’ 
  ‘(ii) The following may be added as clause (3) immediately below clause (2) of rule 4 of  
                   Order X Code of Civil Procedure:  
“Where a party ordered to appear before the court in person with a view to 
arriving at an amicable settlement of the dispute between the parties, fails to 
appear in person before the court without lawful excuse on the date so appointed, 
the court may pronounce judgment against him or make such order in relation to 
the suit as it thinks fit”.’ 
 
3.2.2 With these additions, the Law Commission was of the opinion that the scheme will be 
very effective and must be made obligatory in all courts , while removing the limitations that are 
implicit in rule 5B of Order XXVII in the matter of application of the procedure to suits other 

 
13 
 
than those set out therein.  In fact, the scheme must apply to all suit s of a civil nature coming 
before the civil courts, it was observed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
14 
 
4. Drafting Errors in Section 89 - Afcons Infrastructure Case 
4.1. Section 89 enacted with a lofty objective has revealed manifest drafting errors which in 
turn gave rise to complexities in understanding its true scope and purpose. The Supreme Court  
aptly observed in Afc ons Infrastructure case that the correct interpretation and understanding of 
the provision has become “a trial judge’s nightmare”.  
4.2 The first and foremost incongruity (which has also been pointed out by the Supreme 
Court in Afcons case) is related to sub -section (1) of s ection 89, especially the words “shall 
formulate the terms of settlement” .  The sub- section requires the court  to formulate the terms of 
settlement and place them before the parties “for their observations ” and then reformulate the 
terms of a possible set tlement in the light of their  observations. A literal reading further shows 
that on such reformulation, the court  shall have to refer the dispute for one of the f ive ADR 
methods, which is really meaningless.  The language of s ection 73(1) of the AC Act has  been 
borrowed and practically transplanted into s ection 89 without appreciating the intended scope 
and purpose of section 89. As pointed out by the Supreme Court in Afcons  case, the formulation 
and reformulation of the terms of settlement by the court  is wholly out of place at the stage of 
pre-ADR reference.   At paragraph 16, the  Supreme Court extracted section 73(1) of the AC Act 
and section 89 of  the CPC ( Annexure I ) to highlight the absurdity and commented: “It is not 
possible for courts to perform these acts at a preliminary hearing to decide whether a case 
should be referred to an ADR process and, if so, which ADR process ”.  The Supreme Court 
further commented:  “What is required to be done at the final stage of conciliation by a 
conciliator is borrowed lock, stock and barrel into Section 89 and the court  is wrongly required 
to formulate terms of settlement and reformulate them at a stage prior to reference to an ADR 
process”.  The resultant situation has been graphically explained by the learned Judge s in the 
following words:   
“If the reference is to be made to arbitration, the terms of settlement formulated by the 
court will be of no use, as what is referred to arbitration is the dispute and not the terms 
of settlement; and the arbitrator will adjudicate upon the dispute and give his decision by 
way of award. If the reference is to conciliation/mediation/Lok Adalat, then drawing up 
the terms of the settlement or reformulating them is the job of the conciliator or the 

 
15 
 
mediator or the Lok Adalat, afte r going through the entire process of 
conciliation/mediation.  Thus, the terms of settlement drawn up by the court  will be 
totally useless in any subsequent ADR process.  Why then the courts  should be burdened 
with the onerous and virtually impossible, but redundant, task of formulating the terms of 
settlement at pre-reference stage?”   
  In this context, it may be mentioned that the Supreme Court  in Salem Advocates Bar 
Association  vs. UOI3  had equated the words “terms of settlement” to “summary of dispute s” in 
an apparent attempt to resolve the anomaly.  
4.3 “How Section 89 should be interpreted”, was the next question addressed by the Supreme 
Court in Afcons  case.  The learned Judge, after ref erring to the principles of interpretation in 
support of the proposition that the language of a statute can be modified in exceptional cases to 
obviate an anomaly, laid down the legal position thus:  
“Section 89 has to be read with Rule 1- A of Order 10 whi ch requires the court  to direct 
the parties to opt for any of the five modes of alternative dispute resolution processes and 
on their option refer the matter. The said Rule does not require the court  to either 
formulate the terms of settlement or make available such terms of settlement to the 
parties to reformulate the terms of possible settlement after receiving  the observations of 
the parties.  Therefore, the only practical way of reading Section 89 and Order 10 Rule 
1-A is that after the pleadings are complete and after seeking admissions/denials 
wherever required, and before framing issues, the Court wil l have recourse to Section 89 
of the Code. Such recourse requires the court  to consider and record the nature of the 
dispute, inform the parties about five options available and take note of their preferences 
and then refer them to one of the alternative dispute resolution processes.” 
4.4 Secondly, the Supreme Court very rightly exposed the other obvious drafting error in 
mixing up the terms “judicial settlement” and “mediation”.  The Supreme Court pointed out that 
in order to give proper meaning to s ection 89, the said two words should be interchanged.  
“Mediation” should find place in c lause (c) of section 89 (2) and “judicial settlement” should be 
transferred to c lause ( d) in place of “ mediation”.  Otherwise, as succinctly pointed out by the 
                                                           
3 (2005) 6 SCC 344 

 
16 
 
apex Court, the anomaly would persist.  This anomaly has been explained in the following 
words: 
“The first an omaly is the mixing up of the definitions of “mediation” and judicial 
settlement” under clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 89 of the Code. Clause 
(c) says that for“judicial settlement”, the court  shall refer the same to a suitable 
institution or person who shall be deemed to be a Lok Adalat. Clause (d) provides that 
where the reference is to “mediation” , the court shall effect a compromise between the 
parties by following such procedure as may be prescribed.  It makes no sense to call a 
compromise effected by a court,, as “mediation”, as is done in clause (d). Nor does it 
make any sense to describe a reference made by a court to a suitable institution or person 
for arriving at a settlement as “judicial settlement”, as is done in clause (c).” 
4.5 In tune with the above discussion, the Supreme Court  propounded the amendments in the 
following terms: 
“In view of the foregoing, it has to be concluded that proper interpretation of Section 89 
of the Code requires two changes from a plain and literal reading of the court . Firstly, it 
is not necessary for the court , before referring the parties to an ADR process, to 
formulate or reformulate the terms of a possible settlement.  It is sufficient if the court 
merely describes the nature of dispute (in a sentence or two) and makes the reference.  
Secondly, the definitions of “judicial settlement” and “mediation” in clauses (c) and (d) 
of Section 89(2) shall have to be interchanged to correct the draftsman’s error.  Clauses 
(c) and (d) of Section 89(2) of the Code will read as under when the two terms are 
interchanged: 
(c) for “mediation”, the court  shall refer the same to a suitable institution or 
person and such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Adalat and all 
the provisions of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) shall apply 
as if the dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat under the provisions of that Act; 
(d) for “judicial settlement”, the court  shall effect a compromise between the 
parties and shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.” 

 
17 
 
4.6 The Supreme Court  then declared:  “The above changes made by interpretative process 
shall remain in force till the legislature corrects the mistakes, so  that Section 89 is not rendered 
meaningless and infructuous.” (emphasis supplied) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
18 
 
5. Changes Considered Broadly 
5.1  In the light of the above observations , we are proposing amendments to s ection 89 as 
well as the allied provisions substantially similar to those suggested by the Supreme Court.  
5..2 The Chairman, in the company of some other learned Members tried to get respons es 
from the judicial officers at Visakhapatnam and Delhi whether they experienced or envisaged 
any practical difficulties in giving effect to the law laid down by the Supreme Court  in Afcons 
Infrastructure case.  Most of the judicial officers and even advo cates did not express any 
particular difficulty.  However, some have guardedly said that it is only in course of time, it will 
be known whether any problem would crop up in implementing the s ection in its altered form.  
This qualificatory statement was mor e with reference to the category of cases described as fit or 
not fit for adjudication by alternative methods.  The Commission is of the view that the view 
taken by the Supreme Court  on a careful analysis of the s ection in the light of its purpose and 
intendment is unexceptionable and meant to remove the ambiguity in s ection 89. It is high time 
that the section is recast on the lines suggested by the Supreme Court.  In other words, the judge-
made law has to be followed up by legislative action on the same lines. However, while recasting 
section 89, the Commission in the interests of clarity and aptness, has deviated a little from what 
has been suggested by the Supreme Court in Afcons Infrastructure case.   
5.3 We shall briefly advert to the areas of deviation  from the observations of the Supreme 
Court in the afore mentioned case.  Interchanging c lauses (c) & (d) , as indicated by the l earned 
Judge in Afcons case, will no doubt give some sense to the provisi ons as they stand now. 
However clause (c) dealing with mediation would still be inappropriate.  There is no particular 
reason nor rationale in treating the mediator as Lok Adalat and investing the status of Lok Adalat 
award to the agreement reached in the course of mediation.  A mediator  can only facilitate 
dispute resolution between the parties and draw up the terms of settlement arrived at.  It would 
be inappropriate to regard it as an award passed by Lok Adalat by means of a deeming fiction 
and in doing so there is no particular advant age.  In fact, the appropriate course has been 
indicated by the learned Judge at paragraph 39 of the judgment in the following words:      
“Where the reference is to a neutral third party (“mediation” as defined above)   on a court  
reference, though it will be deemed to be reference to Lok Adalat, as the court retains its control 

 
19 
 
and jurisdiction over the matter, the mediation settlement will have to be placed before the court  
for recording the settlement and disposal.”  Therefore, the more appropriate cou rse would be to 
require the mediator to submit the terms of settlement reached as a result of mediation to the 
court so that the court,  after due scrutiny, can pass a decree in accordance with the compromise 
arrived at between the parties.  Accordingly, w e propose to recast the provision relating to 
mediation.  Secondly , it is not necessary to provide that the award of Lok Adalat or the 
settlement arrived at through conciliation should be forwarded to the referring court   for  
passing  a  decree  on  the  same  lines,  notwithstanding  certain observations made by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in paragraph 38 of Afcons to the following effect:  “Though the 
settlement agreement in a conciliation or a settlement award of a Lok Adalat may not require the 
seal of approval of the court for its enforcement when they are made in a direct reference by 
parties without the intervention of court , the positi on will be different if they are made on a 
reference by a court in a pending suit/proceedings.  As the court continues to retain control and 
jurisdiction over the cases which it refers to conciliation, or Lok Adalat, the settlement 
agreement in conciliation or the Lok Adalat award will have to be placed before the court  for 
recording it and disposal in its terms.” As for the award of the Lok Adalat passed on the basis of 
agreed settlement, the award is deemed to be a decree of  a civil court by virtue of s ection 21 of 
the LSA Act.  The Lok Adalat is presided over by a retired or sitting judicial officer and further 
scrutiny by referring court would really be unnecessary. Further, if a provision is made in section 
89, the award of Lok Adalat should be made a decree of the court  concerned, it would introduce 
conflict with section 21.  So also, if the settlement agreement authenticated by the conciliator has 
to be transformed into a decree of the court , it would conflict with s ection 74 of the AC Act. 
Section 74 enjoins that the settlement agreement has the same status and effect as an arbitral 
award on agreed terms as if it is rendered by an arbitral tribunal under s ection 30 of the AC Act .  
To say that it shall have effect  as a decree of the civil court would not b e consistent with the 
existing p rovisions in the AC Act.  To avoid these complications, the Legislature need not 
necessarily take the course of action indicated by the Supreme Court.  Section 89 will serve its 
purpose even if the further step of passing a decree in terms of the award of Lok Adalat or 
conciliation agreement is not taken.  On enquiry from some District Judges/Secretaries, LSAs, 
the Chairman of the Commission has come to know that as per the existing practice, the referring 
court, on receip t of intimation from Lok Adalat, records the factum of settlement  leading to 

 
20 
 
award of Lok Adalat and closes the case in the presence of parties or their counsel.  No formal 
order or decree is being passed.  There could possibly be no objection in legitimizing such 
procedure.  We may clarify that “m ediation” being non-statutory stands on a different footing.  
The imprimatur of the Court is required to make it effective. 
Section 89 and Order X, Rule 1A – the Reference Procedure 
5.4 An important question discussed by the Supreme Court  is whether reference to ADR 
process is mandatory.  In this regard, before we advert to the views expressed by the Supreme 
Court in Afcons Infrastructure case, we may refer to what was said in Salem Bar  Assn.  case 
which considered the aspect of apparent conflict between the language of s ection 89 and Order  
10 Rule-1A.  This is what the learned Judges said:  
“The intention of the legislature behind enacting Section 89 is that where it appears to 
the court that there exists an element of a settlement which may be acceptable to the 
parties, they, at the instance of the court , shall be made to apply their mind so as to opt  
for one or the other of the four ADR  methods mentioned in the s ection and if the part ies 
do not agree, the court  shall refer them to one or the other of the said modes. Section 89 
uses both the words ‘shall’ and ‘may’ whereas Order X Rule 1- A uses the word ‘shall’ 
but on harmonious reading of these provisions it becomes clear that the use of the word 
‘may’ in Section 89 only governs the aspect of reformulation of the terms of a possible 
settlement and its reference to one of the ADR methods. There is no conflict. It is evident 
that what is referred to one of the ADR modes is the dispute whi ch is summarized 
in the 
terms of settlement formulated or reformulated in terms of Section 89.”  (underlined for 
emphasis) 
5.5    This is how the two provisions have been reconciled. The underlined words give rise to an 
element of ambiguity in understanding  the said observations. However, in Afcons  Infrastructure 
case, the Supreme Court clarified the legal position more aptly by stating thus: 
 ‘Section 89 starts with the words “where it appears to the court  that there exist elements 
of a settlement”.  This c learly shows that cases which are not suited for ADR process 
should not be referred under Section 89 of the Code. The court  has to form an opinion 
that a case is one that is capable of being referred to and settled through ADR process.  

 
21 
 
Having regard to the tenor of the provisions of Rule 1-A of Order 10 of the Code, the 
civil court should invariably refer cases to ADR process.  Only in certain recognized 
excluded categories of cases it may choose not to refer to an ADR process. Where the 
case is unsuited for reference to any of the ADR processes, the court will have to briefly 
record the reasons for not resorting to any of the settlement procedures prescribed under 
Section 89 of the Code. Therefore, having a hearing after completion of pleadings, to 
consider recourse to ADR process under Section 89 of the Code, is mandatory. But actual 
reference to an ADR process in all cases is not mandatory.  Where the case falls under an 
excluded category, there need not be reference to ADR process.  In all other cases 
reference to ADR process is a must’. 
5.6   Then, the Supreme Court went on categorizing the cases, considered suitable or not suitable 
for ADR process.  It was observed that the following categories of cases are normally considered 
to be not suitable for ADR process having regard to their nature: 
“(i) Representative suits under Order 1 Rule 8 CPC which involve public interest or 
interest of numerous persons who are not parties before the court . (In fact, even a 
compromise in such a suit is a difficult process requiring notice to the persons 
interested in the suit, before its acceptance). 
(ii) Disputes relating to election to public offices (as contrasted from disputes between 
two groups trying to get control over the management of societies, clubs, association, 
etc.) 
(iii) Cases involving grant of authority by the section after enquiry, as for example, suits 
or grant of probate or letters of administration. 
(iv) Cases involving serious and specific allegations of fraud, fabrication of  documents, 
forgery, impersonation, coercion etc. 
(v) Cases requiring protection of sections, as for exam ple, claims against minors, deities 
and mentally challenged and suits for declaration of title against the Government.  
(vi) Cases involving prosecution for criminal offences.”  

 
22 
 
5.7 The Supreme Court  also proceeded to enumerate the cases (whether pending i n civil 
courts or s pecial tribunals), suitable for ADR processes. Such cases are classified under five 
broad headings:- 
  (i) All cases relating to trade, commerce and contracts; 
  (ii) All cases arising from strained relationship, such as matrimonial cases; 
(iii) All cases where there is a need for continuation of the pre -existing relationship, such 
as disputes between neighbour and members of societies; 
  (iv) All cases relating to tortuous liability, including motor accident claims; and  
  (v) All consumer disputes. 
 
5.8 Having thus categorized the cases normally ‘suitable’ and ‘not suitable’ for ADR process, 
the Supreme Court  made it clear: “They are illustrative, which can be subjected to just 
exceptions or additions by the court/tribunal exercising its jurisdiction/discretion in referring a 
dispute/case to an ADR process”.  
 
5.9 The Supreme Court also clarified:  
“Neither Section 89 nor Rule 1- A of Order 10 of the Code is intended to supersede or 
modify the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 or the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987.  On the other hand, Section 89 of the Code makes it clear that two 
of the ADR processes – arbitration and conciliation, will be governed by the provisions 
of the AC Act and the two other ADR processes – Lok Adalat settlement and mediation… 
will be governed by the Legal Services Authorities Act. As for the last of  the ADR 
processes – judicial settlement… Section 89 makes it clear that it is not governed by any 
enactment and the section will follow such procedure as may be prescribed (by 
appropriate rules).” 
5.10 In this context, the ‘Summary’ given by the Supreme C ourt at paragraphs 43 & 44 of the 
judgment in Afcons Infrastructure case, is appended to this Report as ANNEXURE II. 
 

 
23 
 
5.11 At the same time, the apex Court  once again administered the caution that the procedure 
and consequential aspects referred to in paragraphs 43 & 44 are intended to be general guidelines 
subject to such changes as the court  concerned may deem fit with reference to special 
circumstances of a case.  The sum and substance of what the court  discussed elaborately is stated 
in paragraph 45 thus: 
 
“…Know the dispute; exclude unfit cases; ascertain consent for arbitration or 
conciliation; if there is no consent, select Lok Adalat for simple cases and mediation for 
all other cases, reserving reference to Judge–assisted settlement only in exception al or 
special cases.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
24 
 
6. Amendments Proposed 
 
6.1  In the light of the foregoing discussion, the Commission recommends the following 
amendments to the relevant provisions of CPC dealing with alternative dispute resolution  and 
section 16 of the Court-fees Act, 1870. 
 
6.2 The following shall be substituted in the place of existing s ection 89 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908: 
   “89: Settlement of disputes outside the court - 
1)  Where it appears to the court , having rega rd to the nature of the dispute involved in 
the suit or other proceeding that the dispute is fit to be settled by one of the non-
adjudicatory alternative dispute resolution pr ocesses, namely, conciliation, judicial-
settlement, settlement through Lok Adalat or mediation the court shall, preferably before 
framing the issues, record its opinion and direct the parties to attempt the resolution of 
dispute through one of the said processes which the parties prefer or the court determines.     
2) Where the parties prefer conciliation, they shall furnish to the court the name or names 
of the conciliators and on obtaining his or their consent, the court  may specify a time-
limit for the completion of conciliation.  Thereupon, the provisions of sections 65 to 81 of 
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, as far as may be, shall apply and to this effect, 
the court shall inform the parties.  A copy of the settlement agreement reached between 
the parties shall be sent to the court  concerned.   In the absence of a settl ement, the 
conciliator shall send a brief report on the process of conciliation and the outcome 
thereof.  
3)      Where the dispute has been referred:- 
a) for judicial -settlement, the Judicial Officer shall endeavo ur to effect a 
compromise between the parties and shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed;   
b) to Lok Adalat, the provisions of sub- sections (3) to (7) of section 20, sections 
21 and 22 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 shall apply in respect of 
the dispute so referred and the Lok Adalat shall send a copy of the award to the 

 
25 
 
court concerned and in case no award is passed, send a brief report on the 
proceedings held and the outcome thereof; 
c)   for mediation, the court shall refer the same to a suitable institution or person 
or persons with appropriate directions such as time -limit for completion of 
mediation and reporting to the court. 
(4) On receipt of copy of the  settlement agreement or the award of Lok Adalat,  the 
court,  if it  finds any inadvertent mistakes or obvious errors, it shall draw the attention of 
the conciliator or the Lok  Adalat who shall take necessary steps to rectify the  agreement 
or award suitably with the consent of parties. 
(5) Without prejudice to section 8 and other allied provisions of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, the court may also refer the parties to arbitration if both parties 
enter into an arbitration agreement or file applications  seeking reference to arbitration 
during the pendency of a suit or other civil proceeding a nd in such an event, the 
arbitration shall be  governed, as far as may be, by the provisions of the Ar bitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996.  The suit or other proceeding shall be deemed to have been 
disposed of accordingly”. 
6.3 The existing rule 1B of Order X of the Code of Civil Procedure, should be deleted. In the place of 
existing Rules 1-A and 1-C of Order X, the following rules shall be substituted: 
“1A. Direction of the court to opt for any one mode of alternative dispute resolution. -  
At the stage of framing issues or the first hearing of the suit, the court  shall direct the parties to 
opt either mode of the settlement outside the court  as specified in sub- section (1) of s ection 89 
and for this purpose may require the parties to be pers onally present and in case of non -
attendance without substantial cause, follow the procedure for compelling the attendance of 
witness.  The court shall fix the date of appearance before such forum or authority or persons as 
may be opted by the parties or chosen by the court.” 
 “1B  Appearance before the court consequent upon the failure of efforts of conciliation . - 
Where a suit is referred under rule 1A and the presiding officer of conciliation forum or authority 
or the person to whom the matter has been referred is satisfied that it would not be proper in the 
interest of justice to proceed with the matter further, in view of the stand taken by the respective 

 
26 
 
parties, it shall refer the case back to the court  who shall direct the parties to appear before i t on 
the date fixed and proceed with the suit.” 
6.4.1     Section 16, Court-fees Act, 1870   
There is one more provision regarding which the Commission would like to focus the 
attention of the Government. That is  section 16 of the C ourt-fees Act, 1870 , which was 
inserted by the same CPC Amendment Act by which s ection 89 was introduced.  Section 
16 which was thus added to the Court-fees Act reads thus:  
“16. Refund of fee.-   
Where the section refers the parties to the suit to any  one of the mode of settl ement of 
dispute referred to in s ection 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall 
be entitled to a certificate from the court  authorizing him to receive back from the 
collector, the full amount of the fee paid in respect of such plaint.”  
6.4.2 Here again, there is a clear drafting error which gives rise to conflict with s ection 21 of 
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.  The LSA Act provides that the court -fees paid in a 
case placed before the Lok Adalat shall be refunded in the manner provided under the Court -fees 
Act, 1870 only if a compromise or settlement has been arrived at between the parties.  However, 
Section 16 of the Court-fees Act, as the language stands, goes further and says that the court -fee 
is refundable merely on a reference by court  to any ADR process.  This would mean that 
virtually the court-fee paid in most of the suits will have to be refunded.  What will happen if the 
reference to conciliat ion, mediation or Lok Adalat does not end in a settlement and the parties 
come back to the court  for adjudication?  If the court -fees paid had already been refunded to the 
plaintiff when the reference was made, adjudication of the suit becomes free, there being no 
provision for collecting fresh court -fees.  Obviously such a situation would not have been 
intended. This aspect was highlighted by Shri Justice R.V. Raveendran in his lecture at NJA 
Bhopal
4.  The provision obligating the section to refund the ent ire court-fees paid on a mere 
reference is also liable to be abused by the plaintiff.  In fact, the Chairman of the Commission 
heard such reports from the District Judges in some parts of the country.  It was not intended by 
the Government (while introduci ng the Bill) or by the Legislature that the court -fees shall be 
refunded to the plaintiff  once the reference is made to ADR process, irrespective of its outcome 
                                                           
4 Supra Note 2 

 
27 
 
or the conduct of the plaintiff or petitioner.  We may, in this cont ext, refer to clause 35 of  the 
‘Notes on Clauses’ accompanying the CPC (Amendment) Bill, 1997. It reads as follows:  
  “Clause 35.- (Amendment to the Court-fees Act, 1870).  
The proposed amendment is consequential to the new s ection 89 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 proposed to be inserted vide clause 7 of the Bill so as to enable the 
party to claim refund of court -fee in case the matter in dispute is settled outside the 
section”.  
 
It clearly reflects the intention of the introducer of the B ill. However, the actual wording in the 
section is quite different.  It does not appear that any conscious departure was intended at the 
time of enactment of the provision.  It is clearly a case of draftsman employing the language 
which does not accord wit h the intention behind the c lause in the Bill.  It is, therefore necessary 
to amend the provision in the Court-fees Act, 1870 so as to bring it in conformity with section 21 
of the LSA Act, keeping in view the intendment and rationale of the provision.   I t may be 
mentioned that the Court -fees Act of 1870 (Central enactment) does not have application in all  
States. Almost all the States have their own court-fee enactments.  Section 16 is thus enforceable 
only in some Union Territories. However, some Judges, without being aware of this factual 
position, have been following s ection 16 of the C ourt-fees Act, though there is no similar 
provision in the State enactment.  Be that as it may, s ection 16 of the Court -fees Act, 1870, 
wherever it is applicable, needs to be suitably amended. 
 
6.4.3 In the place of the existing s ection 16 of the Court-fees Act, 1870, the following needs to 
be substituted: 
 
“Where the court refers the parties to the suit or other proceeding to any one of the 
modes of settlement of dispute referred to in section 89 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure and as a result thereof a compromise or settlement has been arrived at 
between the parties, the court-fees paid in such a case shall be refunded.”
  
 
 
 
 

 
28 
 
7.  Recommendations 
7 Section 89 of the Civil Procedure Code which provides for settlement of disputes outside 
the court is inappropriately worded, as pointed out by the Supreme Court  in the case of Afcons 
Infrastructure Ltd. v s. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) LTD. 5  The language adopted ha s 
created difficulty in giving effect to the provision.  Section 89 should be recast as indicated in 
paragraph 6.2.  Secondly, the allied provisions, namely, Order X, rules 1A to 1C need recasting.  
The proposed amendment of the said rules in Order X is set out in paragraph 6.3.  Thirdly, 
section 16 of the Court -fees Act, 1870 is required to be recast in order to ensure that unintended 
benefit does not go to the plaintiff.  The proposed amendment is set out in paragraph 6.4.3. 
 
 
(Justice P.V. Reddi) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
  (Justice Shiv Kumar Sharma)                                                    (Amarjit Singh) 
          Member                                                                    Member        
 
 
 
(Dr Brahm Agrawal)
 
Member-Secretary 
 
 
 
                                                           
5 Supra Note 1 

 
29 
 
ANNEXURE I 
EXTRACT OF SECTION 73(1) OF AC ACT AND SECTION 89 of CPC 
73. Settlement agreement.  
(1) When it appears to the conciliator that there exist elements of a settlement which may be 
acceptable to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement and submit them to 
the parties for their observations. After receiving the observati ons of the parties, the conciliator 
may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such observations. 
(2)… 
(3) … 
(4)…  
 
89. Settlement of disputes outside the Court. 
(1) Where it appears to the court that there exist elements of a settlement which may be 
acceptable to the parties, the court shall formulate the terms of settlement and give them to the 
parties for their observati ons and after receiving the observation of the parties, the court may 
reformulate the terms of a possible settlement and refer the same for- 
  
(a) arbitration; 
  
(b) conciliation 
  
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat; or 
  
(d) mediation. 
  
(2) Where a dispute had been referred- 
  
(a) for arbitration or conciliation, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration or conciliation were referred for settlement under 
the provisions of that Act. 
  
(b) to Lok Adalat, the court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat in accordance with the 
provisions of sub- section (1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 and all 
other provisions of that Act shall apply in respect of the dispute so referred to the Lok Adalat; 
  
(c) for judicial settlement, the court shall refer the same to a suitable institution or person and 
such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Adalat and all the provisions of the Legal 

 
30 
 
Services Authority Act, 1987 shall apply as if the dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat under the 
provisions of that Act; 
  
(d) for mediation, the court shall effect a compromise between the parties and shall follow such 
procedure as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
31 
 
ANNEXURE II 
PARAGRAPHS 43 & 44 OF THE JUDGMENT IN AFCONS INFRASTRUCTURE CASE 
“43. We may summarize the procedure to be adopted by a court under  section 89 of the Code as 
under: 
(a)    When the pleadings are complete, before framing issues, the court shall fix a 
preliminary hearing for appearance of parties. The court should acquaint itself with the 
facts of the case and the nature of the dispute between the parties. 
(b)     The court should first consider whether the case falls under  any of the category of 
the cases which are required to be tried by courts and not fit to be referred to any ADR 
processes. If it finds the case falls under any excluded category, it should record a brief 
order referring to the nature of the case and why i t is not fit for reference to ADR 
processes. It will then proceed with the framing of issues and trial. 
(c)     In other cases (that is, in cases which can be referred to ADR processes) the court 
should explain the choice of five ADR processes to the parti es to enable them to exercise 
their option. 
(d)     The court should first ascertain whether the parties are willing for arbitration. The 
court should inform the parties that arbitration is an adjudicatory process by a chosen 
private forum and reference to arbitration will permanently take the suit outside the ambit 
of the court. The parties should also be informed that the cost of arbitration will have to 
be borne by them. Only if both parties agree for arbitration, and also agree upon the 
arbitrator, the matter   should be referred to arbitration. 
(e)    If the parties are not agreeable for arbitration, the court should ascertain whether the 
parties are agreea ble for reference to conciliation which will be governed by the 
provisions of the AC Act. If all t he parties agree for reference to conciliation and agree 
upon the conciliator (s), the court can refer the matter to conciliation in accordance with 
section 64 of the AC Act. 
(f)    If parties are not agreeable for arbitration and conciliation, which is li kely to happen 
in most of the cases for want of consensus, the court should, keeping in view the 
preferences/options of parties, refer the matter to any one of the other three other ADR  
processes: (a) Lok Adalat; ( b) mediation by a neutral third -party facilitator or mediator; 
and (c) a judicial settlement, where a Judge assists the parties to arrive at a settlement. 
(g)   If the case is simple which may be completed in a single sitting, or cases relating to a 
matter where the legal principles are clearly settled and there is no personal animosity 
between the parties (as in the case of motor accident claims), the court  may refer the 
matter to Lok Adalat. In case where the questions are complicated or cases which may 

 
32 
 
require several rounds of negotiations, the court may refer the matter to mediation. Where 
the facility of mediation is not available or where the parties o pt for the guidance of a 
Judge to arrive at a settlement, the court may refer the matter to another Judge for 
attempting settlement. 
(h)   If the reference to the ADR pr ocess fails, on receipt of the report of the ADR forum, 
the court shall proceed with he aring of the suit. If there is a settlement, the court shall 
examine the settlement and make a decree in terms of it, keeping the principles of Order 
23 Rule 3 of the Code in mind. 
(i)   If the settlement includes disputes which are not the subject matter of the suit, the 
court may direct that the same will be governed by Sectio n 74 of the AC Act (if it is a 
conciliation settlement) or Section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (if it is 
a settlement by a Lok Adalat or by mediation which is a de emed Lok Adalat). If the 
settlement is through mediation and it relates not only to disputes which are the subject -
matter of the suit, but also other disputes involving persons other than the parties to the 
suit, the court may adopt the principle underlyin g Order 23 Rule 3 of the Code. This will 
be necessary as many settlement agreements deal with not only the disputes which are the 
subject-matter of the suit or proceeding in which the reference is made, but also other 
disputes which are not the subject matter of the suit. 
(j)   If any term of the settlement is ex facie illegal or unforceable, the court should draw 
the attention of parties thereto to avoid further litigations and disputes about 
executability. 
44.    The Court should also bear in mind the following consequential aspects, while giving effect 
to Section 89 of the Code: 
(i)     If the reference is to arbitration or conciliation, the court has to record that the 
reference is by mutual consent. Nothing further need be stated in the order-sheet. 
(ii)    If the reference is to any other ADR process, the court should briefly record that 
having regard to the nature of dispute, the case deserves to be referred to Lok Adalat, or 
mediation or judicial settlement, as the case may be. There is no need for  an elaborate 
order for making the reference. 
(iii)   The requirement in Section 89(1) that the court should formulate or reformulate the 
terms of settlement would only mean that court has to briefly refer to the nature of 
dispute and decide upon the appropriate ADR process. 
(iv)   If the Judge in charge of the case assists the parties and if settlement negotiations 
fail, he should not deal with the adjudication of the matter, to avoid apprehensions of bias 

 
33 
 
and prejudice. It is therefore advisable to refer cases proposed for j udicial settlement to 
another Judge. 
(v)     If the court refers the matter to an ADR process (other than Arbitration), it should 
keep track of the matter by fixing a hearing date for the ADR Report. The period allotted 
for the ADR proc ess can normally vary from a week to two months (which may be 
extended in exceptional cases, depending upon the availability of the alternative forum, 
the nature of case etc.). Under no circumstances the court should allow the ADR process 
to become a tool in the hands of an unscrupulous litigant intent upon dragging on the 
proceedings. 
(vi)   Normally the court should not send the original record of the case when referring 
the matter for an ADR forum. It should make available only copies of relevant papers to 
the ADR forum.  (For this purpose, when pleadings are filed the court may insist upon 
filing of an extra copy). However if the case is referred to a court annexed m ediation 
centre which is under the exclusive control and supervision of a j udicial officer, the 
original file may be made available wherever necessary.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 