s

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT

(THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952)

DECEMBER, 1962

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA: MINISTRY OF LAW

146 M of L—1


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,
5, Jorbagh, New Delhi—3,
Dated 26th December, 1962.
Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My Dear Mivister, ह

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Twenty-
Fourth Report of the Law Commission on the Commissions of
Inquiry Act, 1952.

2. The subject was referred by the Government to the Law
‘Commission under the circumstances mentioned in paragraph
३ of the Report, and was taken up in December, 1961 for
consideration. A draft Report was prepared and discussed at
the 37th meeting of the Law Commission held on the ath April,
1962. Certain points were reconsidered at the 38th meeting of
the Law Commission held on 5th May, 1062. In conformity
with the decisions taken at those meetings the draft Report
was revised.

3. The draft Report, as so revised, was circulated to State
Governments, High Courts, Bar Associations and also to
certain eminent Judges who, ag Chairmen of certain Commis-
sions appointed under the Act, had practical experience of its
working. The comments received on the draft Report were
considered by the Law Commission at the 42nd meeting held
on the 17th and 18th December, 1962, and the draft Report
was revised in accordance with the decisions taken at that
meeting and finalised.

4. Mr. Niren De was unable te attend the meeting of the
Commission at which the Report was finalised. The Report
has not, therefore, been signed by him. I am, however, autho-
rised by him to state that he concurs in the recommendations
made in the Report.


(ii)

5. My colleagues and I wish to record our appreciation of

the assistance we have received from our Joint Secretary &

Draftsman, Mr. 5. K. Hiranandani and Additional Draftsman,.
Mr. P. M. Bakshi.

Yours sincerely,
J. L. KAPUR.


REPORT ON THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952

CONTENTS
PARAGRAPH SuBJECT-MATTER
L Reference to Law Commission -
2 Genesis of existing Act
3. Analysis of the Act -
4. Purposes for which Act used
5. Analogous laws in other countries पु
6, Differences between English and Indian Acts
7. Defects and drawbacks of inquiries by Com-
missions . . : : :
8-9. Justification for our Act
190. Some general points examined
ii. Power of Government to appoint Commissions
suo motu
12. Contempt of Commission - पु न .
33. Application of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
Tq. Procedure of Commission . + न
15. Costs पु
16. Publication of Report पु पु
qe Assistance to Commission for purposes of investi-
gation पु मं
18. Detailed examination of Act . . : .
19. Section 3(z).—Relevant legislative entries
20. Section 3(1).—Constitutional validity .
था. Section 3(z).—Whether resolution should be by
both Houses of the Legislature
22. Section 3(1).—Possible overlapping in jurisdiction
between Central and State Govern-
ments’ Commissions
23-24. Section 3(7).--Scape of functions of the Com-
Mission . .
28. Section 3.—Fixing of time
26. Section 3,—Filling up of vacancies, etc.
27. Section 4.—Personal attendance of witnesses
28. Section s(z2) - .
29. Section 5(३)
30. Section 4.—Contempt of Commissions

Gili)

Paces

i112
12--13
13

13
13
1314
14

1g—15

Is—I6

6-17
17
7
17-718
18
1819
19-2०


PARAGRAPH

3.
32.
33.
34.
35+
36.
37.

APPENDIX

(iv)
SUBJECT-MATTER

Section 6.—Incriminating statements .
Section 6A (New) पु

Section 8 . . पु पु पु पु
Section 88 (New) 2 ww,
Section 12 : :

Other changes .

Appendices

APPENDICES

I—Showing the proposals in the form of draft
amendments to the existing Act.

APPENDIX II—Notes on Clauses

—Containing a statement showing the Commis-
sions appointed under the Act

24585

20—21
21
2r

2I1—22

22
22

23—26.
27—41

42-54


REPORT ON THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT,
1952

1. The circumstances in which the Commissions of
Inquiry Act, 1952, was referred to the Law Commission
may ve briefly stated. Section $42) of the Act authorises
a commission of inquiry to require any person to furnish
information useful for, or relevant to, the matters under
ingui ary. No penalty is provided in the Act for disobedience
to such a requisition, and the Press Commission, consti-
tuted under the Act, appears to have experienced some
difficulty in collecting the required information. Govern-
ment had, therefore, referred this matter to us for examina-
tion. Taking into account the importance of the Act and
the need for a proper system of inquiries, we have, instead
of confining ourselves fo the specific points referred to Us,

preferred to undertake a comprehensive examination of
e entire Act in the light of the working of the Act during
the last ter: years, the practice in other countries in relation
4o im (परम, and the vast thought-provoking literature on
the subject.

2. The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 was enacted
after due consultation with State Governments to facilitate
the setting up of commissions with requisite powers to
inquire into and report on any matter of public importance.
‘Government realised, on the basis of its previous experience,
that the expedient of promoting special legislation for
setting up a commission of inquiry each time the need for
it arose involved a tardy process which more often than
not ended in the witndrawal of the proposals for inquiry.
On the other hand Government felt convinced of the utility
of such inquiries as a means of arriving at a proper
appraisal of matters of public importance and of infusing
the confidence of the public in its administration and
eonduct. As the necessity for such inquiries was bound to
be a recurring one, it was felt advantageous to have an
enactment generalising the powers which commissions of
inquiry may exercise and leaving it to the Government to
constitute a commission as and when necessary. Such, in
ghort, is the genesis of the Commissions of Inquiry Act,

3. The Act is a short one, consisting of 12 sections.
Section 2 defines, inter alia, ‘appropriate Government’ to
mean the Central Government in relation to any matter
relatable to any of the entries in List I or List II or List IIT
in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, and the State
Government in relation to any matter relatable to any of
the entries in List If or List III in that Schedule. Under
section 3, a commission of inquiry for the purposes of
I gan inguiry ints any definite matter of _public
importance may be appointed by the ‘appropriate Govern-
ment’ of its cwn motion; but if a resolution in this behalf

Reference te

Law Com-
mission.

Genesia of
e
Act,

Analysis of
the Act.


Purposes for
which Act
used.

3

is passed by the House of the People or, as the case may
be, the Legislative Assembly of a State, it is obligatory on
the appropriate Government to appoint such a commission.
Where a commission is appointed by the Central Govern-
ment, a State Government cannot appoint a commission to
inquire into the same matter except with the approval of the
Central Government, and conversely, where a commission
18 appointed by a State Government, the Central Govern-
ment is barred from appointing another commission to
inquire into the same matter unless the Central Govern-
ment is of opinion that the scope of the inquiry should be
extended to two or more States. A Commission of Inquiry
may consist of one or more members. Section 4 confers
upon a Commission of Inquiry certain powers of a civil
court (९.9. summoning and enforcing the attendance of
witnesses and examining them on oath, etc). Section 5
empowers the ‘appropriate Government’ to confer some
additional powers on a Commission of Inquiry relating to
the production of information and seizure of books of
account or documents. Sub-section (4) of section 5 lays
down that a Commission of Inquiry shall be deemed to be
a civil court and when any offence as is described in
section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section
228 of the Indian Penal Code is committed in the view or
presence of the Commission, it may forward the case to a
magistrate for trial. Sub-section (5) of section 5 enacts
that any proceeding before a Commission shall be deemed
to be a judicial proceeding for the purpose of sections 193
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. Section 6 confers upon
persons giving evidence before the Commission protection
from prosecution except for perjury. Section 7 empowers
the ‘appropriate Government’ to dissolve a Commission
when its continuance becomes unnecessary. Under section
8 the Commission may regulate its own procedure subject
to any rules made by the ‘appropriate Government’. Section
9 contains the usual indemnity for action taken in good
faith and section 10 provides that members of a Commission
and other officers appointed by it to exercise functions
under the Act shall be deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of the Indian Penal Code. Under section 11
the provisions of the Act may also be made applicable to a
Commission of Inquiry set up by the appropriate Govern-
ment in the exercise of its executive power. Section 12
authorises the appropriate Government to make rules to
earry out the purposes of the Act.

4. The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 has been used
for a variety of purposes.! The inquiry which has received
the widest publicity under the Act was the “Mundhra
Inquiry” which led to the resignation of the then Finance
Minister. This inquiry, held by a Commission consisting
of a single member, the former Chief Justice of the Bombay

3866 Appendix III for a statement showing the Commissions
appointed under the Act.


3

High Court, Mr. M. C. Chagla, related to certain invest-
ments of the funds of the Life Insurance Corporation of
India alleged to have been improperly made.

5. Before taking up the examination of the Act it will Analogous
be useful to deal briefly with analogous laws in other other
countries and consider in some detail the English Tegis- countries,

Jation on the subject on which our Act is largely modelle

(a) In England, inquiries are held under the
Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act, 1921. Before
this Act was passed, inquiries were held by Com-
mittees of Parliament. An inquiry by a Committee
of Parliament suffered from one serious defect. A
Committee of Parliament is likely to be influenced by
political considerations. This is well illustrated by
the Reports of the Parliamentary Committee in the
Marconi case. The Act, however, does not exclude
inquiries by Parliamentary Committees. In some
cases, Committees of Parliament may still be appoint-
ed for making certain kinds of inquiries, particularly
inquiries the subject-matter of which is predominantly
political.

(9) In Australia, there is the Royal Commissions
Act, 190233. This is a general ‘Act relating to
inquiries by Royal Commissions. In view of certain
constitutional difficulties and the decision of the Privy
Council in the Colonial Sugar Refinery Company's
case’, it has been the practice of the Commonwealth
to enact special legislation empowering the setting up
of commissions of inquiry in relation to specific matters
and to incorporate the provisions of the General Act
therein (e.g. the Royal Commission Act, 1954, No. 2 of
1954, and the Royal Commission on Espionage Act,
1954, No. 28 of 1954).

(c) In Canada, the relevant Act in force is the
Inquiries Act, 1927.

(d) There does not appear to be any law analogous
to the English Act in force in the United States of
America. It appears that in that country, inquiries
are held by a Committee of the Congress. Committees
of the Congress to inquire into un-American activities
are well-known throughout the world. A Committee
of Congress has power to examine witnesses on oath
and to punish for its contempt?

(९) In Ceylon, inquiries are held under the
(Ceylon) Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1948.

1Attorney-General for Commonwealth v. Colonial Sugar Re-
finery Co. Lid. (1954) A.C. 287-17 CLR. 644 discussed in
Wynes, Leyislative etc, Powers in Australia (1956), page 490,
*Alan Barth, Government by Investigation, page 17.
140 M of L.—2


Differences

between the
English and
Tadian Acts.

Defects and
drawbacks
of inquiries
by Com-
missions.

4

6. As already mentioned, the Commissions of Inquiry
Act, 1952 is largely modelled on the English Act, but it
differs from it in certain respects. The Indian Act
empowers the Government to set up a Commission of
Inquiry suo motu. There is no corresponding provision in
the English Act. Under the English Act a resolution of
both Houses of Parliament is required for setting up a
Tribunal of Inquiry, while the Indian Act requires a
resolution of the House of the People only, or, as the case
may be, the Legislative Assembly of a State. The English
Act does not make the resolution binding on the Govern-
ment, although normally the Government would respect
the wishes of Parliament; but in India, the resolution of
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly is
binding on the Central Government or the State Govern-
ment, as the case may be. The English Act provides that
if any contempt of the Tribunal is committed, the Tribunal
can refer the matter to the High Court which will punish
or take steps for the punishment of the person guilty of
contempt in like manner as if he had been guilty of con-
tempt of the High Court. There is no such provision in
the Indian Act. The English Act expressly provides that
an inquiry shall generally be held in public. The Indian
Act leaves it to the Commission to hold its sittings in
public or in private. The Indian Act provides that where
any authority, by whatever name called, other than a
Commission appointed under the Act has been, or is set up,
under any resolution or order of the Government for the
purpose of making an inquiry into any matter of public
importance, the Government may direct that all or any
of the provisions of the Act shall be applicable to that
authority, There is no corresponding provision in the
English Act.

7. The working of the laws relating to inquiries by
Commissions or Tribunals in various countries has revealed
several defects and drawbacks.

First, in the absence of specific clear-cut provisions for
the purpose, there is a danger of inquiries being instituted
in relation to matters in which the remedies available
under the ordinary law are adequate and effective. Thus,
in England, in the famous Waters case an elaborate and
expensive inquiry was embarked upon to investigate into
allegations of a merciless assault by two constables on a
young boy. Indeed, one of the criticisms directed in
Parliament against the Bill leading to our Act was that it
did not precisely define the circumstances in which a
Commission may be set up.

Secondly, the powers usually conferred on Commissions
are felt to be rather draconian in practice. When the

1Para. § supra, opening sentence,


Waters case was debated upon in the House of Lords some
of the Members went to the extent of likening Tribunals
under the English Act to the Court of Star Chamber.
Similarly, in the course of the debates on our own Com-
missions of Inquiry Bill in Parliament the provisions as
to requisition of information and search of premises were
characterised by some members as drastic.

Thirdly, a Commission may virtually lead a person to
make self-incriminating statements. In regard to the
procedure adopted by the investigating committee of the
American Congress into the gambling activities of one
Nelson, Judge David Bezelon remarked caustically thus:

“Nelson’s freedom of choice has been dissolved in a
brooding omnipresence of compulsion. The Committee
threatened prosecution for contempt if he refused to
answer, for perjury if he lied and for gambling acti-
vities if he told the truth.”

Fourthly, inasmuch as a Commission may receive
hhearsay evidence at second-hand or third-hand, its findings
on the conduct of persons involved in the case may cause
irretrievable damage to those persons and may even ruin
them for life. In this connection, a passage from the speech
in the House of Commons of Sir Alfred Butt who was
involved in the “Budget Leakage Inquiry” in 1936 may be
quoted:

“I would ask right hon. and hon. Members to
visualise the position in which I now find myself,
I have been condemned, and apparently I must suffer
for the rest of my life from a finding against which
there is no appeal, upon evidence which apparently
does not justify a trial, and there is now no method
open to me by which I can bring the true and full facts,
before a jury of my fellow-men...... If any good
may come from this, the most miserable moment of
my life, I can only hope that my position may do some-
thing to prevent any other person in this country being
subject to the humiliation and wretchedness’ which
I have suffered, without trial, without appeal and
without redress.”

Finally, in a number of cases inquiries may not result
in any tangible results. Thus in England no prosecution
seems to have ever been launched as a result of a tribunal
of inquiry and the position seems to be hardly different
in our country.

1Parliamentary Debates, Lords, 1958-59, Vol. 216, pp. 454478.

2Parliamentary Debates, Commons (1958-59), Vol. 600, John
Waters (Tribunal of Inquiry), page 206.


Justfication
for our Act.

8. In the light of the foregoing diseussion' as to defects
and drawbacks of inquiries by Commissions, it becomes
pertinent to consider—

{1) Whether the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952
should at all be on the Statute Book?

(2) If so, what safeguards should be provided to
mitigate the rigour of the Act?

Our answer to the first question is in the affirmative. The
Lord Chancellor, Viscount Kilmuir, in his reply to the
debate in the House of Lords in the Waters case made a
spirited and vigorous defence of the English Act in the
following words?:—

“Let me state quite shortly the arguments for some
such procedure as the present. The sanction of the
public inquiry is necessary on occasions for the purpose
of maintaining a high standard of public administration
and, indeed, of public life. The modern system has
developed in consequence of the inadequacies of the
Machinery of inquiry by Select Committee on the one
hand and the limitations of the ordinary process of
law on the other...... The ordinary processes of law
are geared to a charge or claim brought by one person.
against another. They do not fit when it is necessary
to discover what has actually happened before the
responsibility of or between individuals can arise, and,
ac has been discussed earlier in this debate, there are
other fields, such as wreck inquiries, inquiries into
accidents, courts of inquiry in the Services and the
Committee of Privileges of the House of Commons,
where the inquisitorial procedure is a necessary con-
eomitant of their work. In all those cases the question
of discovering what has actually happened is of prime
importance...... After the true facts have been found
and stated it may be necessary to stigmatise conduct
which, although not a criminal offence or a civil wrong,
falls short of the requisite standards of our public life,
It may be necessary to kill harmful rumours which are
found to be unjustified. It may be necessary—and this
I am sure was very much in the minds of the Govern-
ment who introduced this measure—to restore public
confidence in public conduct and administration. These
ends may well be of such importance to the life of the
nation as to justify means which inflict hardship on
individuals,”

This seems to be a sufficient justification for an Act like
the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. The arguments set

out by the Lord Chancellor in defence of the English Act
apply equally to the Indian Act. It is true that in some

1Para. 7, supra,

Parliamentary Debates, 1-59, Ve
Tribunal’ pages #7.c pa" “oo 1958-59, Vol. 216, The Waters



7

cases, the Government does not take any action on the
report of a Commission of Inquiry. But that does not
mean that the inquiry has not been useful, The Com-
mission either exonerates the persons involved in the
inquiry or holds them guilty. In either case the inquiry
serves a useful purpose. In the first case, the inquiry sets
at rest some ugly rumours which led to the appointment
of the Commission. In the second case, the guilty persons
are exposed to the public eye. A prosecution is not the
only method of punishing persons who pollute the pure
springs of public administration. Many persons would
prefer to suffer a sentence in secret rather than face the
public with their dark deeds. The glaring publicity which
attaches to such inquiries is both its strength and its weak-
ness. Such publicity exposes the wrong-doers to the public
eye and there lies its strength. Sometimes, however, such
publicity results in unmerited mud-slinging on some
innocent persons who are denied the safeguards of the
ordinary judicial procedure to vindicate themselves and
there lies its weakness. But nc human system of justice
can be perfect. Cases of miscarriage of justice are not
unknown jn the ordinary courts of law.

9. As regards the second question, we feel that in a
matter like this, there should be a just balance between
the interests of the general public and_the rights of
individuals, vetween the elaims of the State and civil
liberties. The fundamental rights enshrined in our Consti-
tution will have little meaning if they can be trampled upon
by a law which, though conforming to the letter of the
Constitution, yet violates its spirit. In order that the
special procedure envisaged in the Commissions of Inquiry
Aet, i952 does net work any hardship on citizens, there
should be some safeguards, The great American Judge,
Mr, Justice Frankfurter has observed:*

“the history of liberty has largely been the history
of procedural safeguards.”.

We may again quote from the speeck of the Lord Chan-
cellor, Viscount Kilmuir, in the House of Lords in the
Debate on the Waters case in which he suggested some
safeguards*; —

“Parliament and the Government should be exceed-
ingly chary of using this procedure when another
remedy is open, for the inquiry may hopelessly pre-
judice subsequent proceedings. Yet, again, one has to
set against this difficulty the public asset of confidence
in the police or the civil service or the functioning by
Government which it may be vital to re-establish.

1S8ee para. 8 2 8 supra.

2“Government by Investigation" by Alan Barth, Chapter VI, on
“Self Incriminatien”, page 112,

3Parliamentary Debates, Lords Vol. 2/6 “The Water's
Tribunal”. Pp. 474-475, 477 and 478.


Some general
points exa-
smined.

Power of
Government
to appoint
Comunissieas
suo mati.

Contempt of

8

That ig the only sort of exception and I think that if
noble Lords consider it, they will be inclined to agree
...... The procedure should be invoked only for
weighty and important matters, for it is only then that
the sacrifice on the part of the individual can be fairly
demanded...... It will help if the Tribunal, when it
has to consider complicated matters, bears in mind
two points and has two objectives: first, to get cleared
what actually happened; secondly, as soon as it
appears possible that responsibility may rest on 8
particular person, to secure that this person should
have an opportunity of dealing with any point—I
repeat, any point—which may be thought to tell against
him.”

10. Having come to the conclusion? that the Commissions
of Inquiry Act with proper safeguards is a necessary piece
of legislation, we proceed to consider some general points
in relation to the Act.

वी. First, it has been suggested to us that Government
should not have the power to appoint a Commission of
Inquiry suo motu.? There is a great advantage if the
Government, before it appoints a Commission of Inquiry,
obtains a mandate from the Legislature. The obvious
advantage is that in such a case the responsibility for
determining whether a matter is a definite matter of
public importance will shift from the executive ta the
elected representatives of the people. On the other hand,
the disadvantage is that in an urgent case when the legis-
lature is not in session the Government will not be able
te act immediately (e.g., when there is an accident which
requires immediate investigation). Further, there may be
cases in which it may be necessary to observe the utmost
secrecy until certain facts have been ascertained by a Com-
mission of Inquiry. On the whole, we do not think a
change in the law is called for.

22. (1) Secondly, it has been suggested to us by Judges

Commission. who have presided over some Commissions of Inquiry that

the Commission should have power to punish for contempt.
16 seems that in the past, some members of Commissions
of Inquiry have been subjected to scurrilous attacks in
the press and elsewhere but the Commissions have not
been able to punish them. It is contended that no Com-
mission of Inquiry can effectively function if its authority
is flouted or irresponsible comments are made in the press
and elsewhere during the course of the inquiry on the per-
sonnel of the Commission or on the subject-matter of the
Inquiry. We are, however, faced in this matter with a
Constitutional difficulty. In the case of Dalmic v. Mr.

1Paras. 8-9. supra.
?Yfhis relates to section 3(1).


Justice Tendolkar and others,’ the Supreme Court has held
that a Commission appointed under the Act does not per-
form any judicial functions. In the words of the Supreme
Court,

“The Commission has no power of adjudication in
the sense of passing an order which can be enforced
proprio vigore. A clear distinction must, on the
authorities, be drawn between a decision which, by
itself, has no foree and no penal effect and a decision
which becomes enforceable immediately or which may
become enforceable by some action being taken. There-
fore, as the Commission we are concerned with is
merely to investigate and record its findings and
recommendations without having any power to enforce
them, the inquiry or report cannot be looked upon as a
judicial inquiry in the sense of its being an exercise of
judicial function properly so called...... »

(2) A Commission under this Act merely ascertains
facts. It does not decide any dispute. There are no parties
before the Commission. There is no ‘lis’. As Lord
Shawcross has said in the case of the analogous Tribunal
in England, “the procedure of the Tribunal is inquisitional
rather than accusatorial”,

In fact, it has already been held by the Nagpur High
Court in the case of Rajwade v. Hassan® that a Commission
appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, is
not a court within the meaning of section 3 of the Contempt
of Courts Act, 19523

(3) Article 19 of the Constitution guarantees to every
citizen the right to freedom of speech and expression, but
under clause (2) thereof it is open to the Legislature to
make a law imposing reasonable restrictions on such a
right in relation, among other matters, to contempt of
court. If, however, the Commission is not a court, the
relevant entry, namely, entry 14 of the Concurrent List,
will not be available to Parliament to make any such law.
The expression “court” in relation to contempt of court,
as it occurs both in article 19(2) and in entry 14 of the
Concurrent List, must be given its well-accepted meaning
and it would not, therefore, be open to Parliament to
convert what is a mere fact-finding body into a court for
the purpose of punishing contempt of it.

(4) We are aware that section 5(4) commences with
the words “The Commission shall be deemed to be a Civil
Court”. These words are intended to make it clear that
section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is attracted.

1(1959) S.C.R. 279, 293; A.LR. 1958 S.C. 538.

2A.LR, (1954) Nag. 71.

88९6 also Braj Nandan Sinha v. Jyoti Narain. (1959) 2. 8.08.
955 where it was held that a somewhat similar body appointed
under the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1950, is not a court
within the meaning of the Contempt of Court’s Act, 1952,



10

(5) While we cannot constitute the Commission into a
Court for the purposes of contempt, we feel at the same
time, that some provision should be made to protect
members of the Commission from irresponsible and
scurrilous attacks, Section 5(4) of the Act already
provides for the punishment of certain offences under the
Indian Penal Code committed in the view or presence of
the Commission, We think that a provision should be
made for Punishing persons who by spoken words or words
intended to be read, make or publish any statement or do
any other act calculated to bring the Commission or any
member thereof into disrepute. And such a provision
could be related to entries 1 and 2 of the Concurrent List.

71 will not be possible to go beyond this, and to make a
provision in wide terms on the lines of section 1(2) of the
English Act, sections 18 and 24 of the Royal Commission
on Espionage Act, 1954 (Australia), section 6—10 of the
Royal Commission Act, 1902—1933 (Australia), sections
1212) to 12 (4) of the (Ceylon) Commissions of Inquiry Act,
1948, or section 501) of the Public Inquiries Act, Alberta
(Canada), (R.S. Alberta 1955 Ch. 258). In our opinion,
such 8 provision which punishes contempt of the Com-
mission will he hit by clause (2) of article 19 of the
Constitution.

(6) We are aware that the offence of defamation is
already punishable under sections 499 to 502 of the Indian
Penal Code. But, in spite of such provisions, virulent
attacks have been made on Commissions and their mem-
bers~a fact to which our attention has been drawn by
several distinguished persons who had served on various
Commissions of Inquiry appointed under the Act. We
think that if the Act itself creates 2 specific offence of the
kind suggested, the attention of the public will be focussed
on the penal consequences of defamatory attacks on a
Commission or its members. We consider it unnecessary
to encumber the proposed provision with the various
Exceptions and Expls Hanations contained in section 499 of
the Indian Penal le, because we think that the clause,
without the Exceptions and Explanations, will be inter-
preted by the courts in a reasonable manner.

(7) At one stage, we were inclined to include, in the
new provision, acts likely to lower the authority of a
Commission or its members or to interfere with any of its
lawful processes. On further consideration, however, we
felt that the provisions in the Indian Penal Code, Chapter
X, sections 172 to 190, dealing with contempts of the
lawful authority of public servants, (which would be
attracted in the case of members of Commissions also, who
under the Act, are public servants,) would meet the
requirements of the ease. We, therefore, decided to Jeave
out those matters,

See Appendia I, section § (5) us proposed.


ii

13. Thirdly, it has been suggested to us that it should Application
be made clear whether . the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 4५, 25).
applies to proceedings before a Commission of Inquiry. dence Act,
The position in England under the Tribunals of Inquiry 1872.
(Evidence} Act, 1921 is stated by Keeton as follows':—

“In sifting the facts concerning the existence of
rumours giving rise to the inquiry, all evidence is
relevant and this part of the inquiry is simply fact-
finding. When the question of the involvement of a
particular person in a particular trensaction is under
consideration, however, the Tribunal restricts itself
to the facts admissible under the normal rule of
evidence.”

We recommend that the same practice should be followed
in our country also. We, however, do not recommend that
any statutory provision in this behalf should be made in
the Act, because such a rigid provision may defeat the
very object of the Act, namely, to find out the truth.

14. Fourthly, a question has been raised as to the Procedure of
manner in which the Act should regulate the procedure to Commission.
be followed. While the English Act empowers the Tri-
bunal itself to regulate its procedure, the Indian Act
leaves it to the Central Government to make rules for
regulating the procedure of a Commission of Inquiry and
subject to such rules the Commission of Inquiry may itself
settle its procedure. The question of the procedure to be
followed arose prorninently in the inquiry held in England
in 1936 into the budget leakage. The procedure was
finally settled? by Mr. Justice Lynskey in the inquiry held
in 1948.

In the Mundhra Inquiry earlier referred to®, Chagla,
C. J. indicated the procedure which he proposed to follow
in the following terms:—

“T will examine the witnesses who come before
the Commission. The Attorney-General will then
question them and supplement the evidence in any
manner that he thinks proper, Counsel who are
appearing for other interests will then have the right
of examining these witnesses and 1 wili finally put
any other question which I may think necessary to
the wimesses. It wilt be open to the counsel appear-
ing for the different interests to call for any evidence
they think proper, and after all the evidence is offered,
counsel may address me on the evidence.”

7 पद ७0०७, Trial by Tribunal (1960) Page 18.
2See Keeton; “Trial by Tribunal”, (1960) Pages 16-17.
3866 para. 4, supra.
140 M of L—3


Costs.

12

There are two rules' made under section 12 of the Act
which contain important provisions regarding procedure.
Rules 4 and 5 read as follows:—
“4, Tf, at any stage of the inquiry, the Commission—
(a) considers it necessary to inquire into the
conduct of any person, or
(0) is of the opinion that the reputation of
any person is likely to be prejudicially affected
by the inguiry,
the Commission shall give to that person a reasonable
opportunity cf being heard in the inquiry and to
produce evidence in his defence,

5. The Central Government, every person referred
to in rale 4 and, with the permission of the Commis-
sion, any other person whose evidence is recorded
under rule 3—~

(६) may cross-examine व witness other then a
witness produced by it or him;

(b) may address the court; and

(९) may be represented before the Commis-
sion by = legal practitioner, or, with the consent
of the Commission, by any other person,”,

We think thet since these rules embody the fundamental
principles of natural justice and safeguard the rights of
individuals, they should be incorporated in the Act itself?

In England, it has been suggested that instead of the
Attorney-General, who is intimately connected with the
Government, an independent counsel should assist the
Tribunal of Inquiry. We express no opinion or. this ques-
tion, but we see no reason why the highest law officer of
the Government cannot take an objective view of the
matter.

15. The fifth question raised relates to costs, which may
be examined from two aspects—
(८) costs of witnesses;
(9) costs of persons whose conduct is in question.

So far as costs of witnesses are concerned, we are suggest-
ing a provision in the rule-making section.” As regards
costs of a person whose conduct is in question, it is con-
tended that the State should pay his costs if he succeeds
and conversely he should be made to pay the costs if the
findings are against him, It is observed that ‘it seems
unfair that persons should either be put toa very

3886 rules 4 and 5, Central Commissions ot Inquity (Proce-
dure) Rules 1930, issued on the 7th May, 1960,

*See Appendix 1, section 8(1} to 8(3) as proposed.
sAppendix I, section 12 as proposed to be amended.


13

considerable expense of defending themselves or run the
Tisk of things going against them because they cannot
afford the costs’. It is further contended that the provision
about the payment of costs would act as some sort of a
brake on irresponsible, time-wasting and obstructive tactics.
‘This question has been raised in En; gland also, but, so far
as We have been able to gather, no final decision has heen
reached. Neither the English Act nor the Australian nor
the Canadian Act provides for costs. The reasons are not
far to seek. In any inquiry of the nature under considera-
tion which is held in the public interest, there are no
parties. The Tribunal is a purely fact-finding body and
does nat adjudicate upon the rights of any persons. In
these circumstances, we do not think that any provision
should be made in the Act in respect of costs.

16. Lastly it has been suggested that the Act should Publication
provide that the Report of a Commission of Inquiry should of Report.
be published as soon as it is submitted to the Government.
Whether a Report should be published or not will depend
upon the nature of the inquiry and the Report made to the
Government, There may be certain cases in which it may
not be advisable to publish the Report. We,. therefore,
think that this matter should be left to the discretion of
the Government. Where a Commission of Inquiry has
been appointed in pursuance of a resolution of the Legis-
lature, we have no doubt that the Report will be laid on
the Table of the Legislature. In other cases, we do not
think that a rigid provision should be made that the
Report should invariably be laid before the Legislature.
Whenever necessary, the Legislature will be able to assert
itself and beyond this it is not necessary to go.

17. The question as to the manner in which a Commis- Assistance
‘sion of Inquiry may be assisted in the matter of investiga- ‘to Commis-
tion may also be considered. In England, there is a ‘in for हु
‘Treasury Solicitor with a permanent staff who works wetigetion.
under the directions of the Tribunals constituted under
the English Act. The Treasury Solicitor performs the
functions of investigation which in a criminal case are per-
formed by the police. He sifts the facts and finds out what
witnesses should be examined and coilects other material
which will be useful ta the Tribunal. It has been suggest-
ed that a similar machinery should be set up in this coun-
try. We commend this suggestion to the Government.

‘The setting up of such a machinery will relieve the Com-
missions of Inquiry of a great deal of preliminary and
routine work over which it should not waste its time.

18. With these general observations we now proceed to Detailed
examine in detail the main provisions of the Act. Spemination

19. The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, falls under Section3(z)—~
entry 94, List 1 (Inquiries for the purpose of any of the Relevant
matters in List I} and entry 45, List TIT {Inquiries for the legislative
purposes of any of the matters in List II or List III), in र्िंक-


14

the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The two entries
between themselves cover inquiries into any aspect of the
matters included in any of the three legislative Lists, and
thus the scope of the matters which can be inquired into
by the Commission appointed under the Act is wide and
extensive.!

Section 3(7}- 20. Section 3 authorises the appropriate Government to
€ - appoint a Commission to inquire into any matter of definite
igre public importance. “And where the Central Government
v appointed a Commission to inquire into the affairs of
certain companies and firms in the interests of the investing
public, the constitutional validity of section 3 was challeng-
ed in the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Krishna
Dalmia earlier referred to.2 It was argued that Parliament
in authorising the appointment of a Commission of Inquiry,
and the Government in appointing a Commission had
arrogated to themselves judicial powers which do not in
the very nature of things belong to their respective
domains, which must be purely legislative and executive
respectively. This contention was negatived by the Court
on the ground that the Commission merely investigates
facts and records its finding, and even if it were to make
recommendations, it has no power to enforce them. An
inquiry before a Commission is not a judicial inquiry,
because no “judicial functions” properly so called are
exercised by it, and in the circumstances there could be no
question of usurpation by Parliament or the Government

of the powers of the judicial organs of the Union.

The second attack was based on the ground that the Act
conferred upon the Government an arbitrary and uncon-
trolled discretion as regards the appointment of a Com-
mission and was therefore void under article 14 of the
Constitution. This argument was also negatived by the
Court by pointing out that the power to appoint a Com-
mission is vested only in the Government and, further, such
an appointment can be made only where a definite matter
of public importance required to be looked into and not
for any other purpose,

Section 3 is therefore constitutionally proper.

इ०८७०४३(7)-- 21. We have discussed* elsewhere the question whether
Waether the power of the Government to appoint a Commission
resolution should be restricted to cases where a resolution in that
by both behalf is passed by the appropriate legislative authority,
Houses of and have come to the conclusion that it is neither necessary
the Legis- nor desirable to fetter the discretion of the Government
lature, in any way. On the other hand, while the existing Act,

1Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Mr. Justice SR, Tendolkar and
others, (1959) SCR, 279, 289; (1958), S.C.A, 754, 765; ALR, 1958

*Para. 19 supra.
$See para. 11, supra,


we

15

in our opinion, correctly provides that Government should
appoint ही Commission. if a resolution in that behalf is
passed by the appropriate legislative authority, we see no
justification for excluding the Council of States mae the
Legislative Council in States which have two chambers
from the purview of the section. The only reason given
for confining the power to pass resolutions to the House
of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies is the fact
that under the Constitution the Ministers are responsible
to these Houses. It was, however, conceded that if the
Council of States or the Legislative Council were to pass
a similar resolution, Government would be bound to give
the greatest possible consideration to it and it was extre-
mely unlikely that the resolution would not be given effect
to. On the whole, we think there is no justification for
making a distinction between the two Houses of the
Legislature wherever two Houses exist. We therefore
recommend that wherever the Legislature resolves that a
Commission of Inquiry should be appointed, the resolution
should be by both Houses of the Legislature.

22. Under section 3{1), read with the definition of Section 3(7)--
‘appropriate Government’ the power to appoint a Com- Possible
mission is given to,— overlapping

in jurisdic
(i) the Central Government, if the inquiry is in tion be

connection with any matter relatable to any of the tral and

matters enumerated in List I, List II or List III in the State

visto Govern-
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; mente’ Come

(i) the State Government, if the inquiry is in Missions.
connection with any matter relatable to any of the
matters enumerated in List II or List II.

It would be noticed that so far as List II and List III
are concerned, both the Central Government and the State
Governments can appoint a Commission of Inquiry. The
Act, however, eliminates any possible conflict or over-
lapping in jurisdiction by expressly providing that where
a Commission has been appointed to inquire into any
matter by the Central Government, no State Government
is to appoint another Commission to inquire into the san»
matter so long as the Commission appointed by the Centrar
Government is functioning except with the approval of
the Central Government. Conversely, where a Commission
has been appointed by a State Government to inquire into
any matter, the Central Government is also not to appoint
another Commission to inquire into the same matter so
Jong as the Commission appointed by the State Government
is functioning, unless the Central Government is of opinion
that the scope of the inquiry should be extended to two or
more States. Here, there is an omission, namely, the Act
does not indicate what is to happen if, after the appoint-
ment of a Commission by a State Government, the Central
Government decides that the Scope of the inquiry should
be extended to two or more States and accordingly appoints


16

a Commission. In our opinion, in such a situation the
Commission appointed by the State Government should
cease to function,’ particularly as the inquiry is to be made
into the same matter. We recommend that an express
provision in this behalf may be made.

Section 23. Section 3(1) states that the functions which can be
agar entrusted to a Commission are two-fold, namely,— हि
of Commis: (a) making an inquiry into any definite matter of

public importance, an

{b) performing such functions...... as may be
specified in the notification appointing the Commission.

24. (8) An argument was advanced in Ram Krishna
Dalmia v. Mr. Justice Tendolkar and others? that while
Parliament could make a law with respect to “inquiries”
under the relevant legislative entries, it could not make a
Jaw conferring a power to perform any function other than
the power to hold an inquiry. Further, it was contended
that the law which the appropriate legislature is empowered
to make under the relevant legislative entries relating to
inquiries must be with reference to inquiries for the
purpose of legislation and not for administrative purposes.
The Supreme Court rejected these arguments and pointed
out that an inquiry under the Act was not limited in its
scope or ambit to future legislative purposes. So far as
the expression ‘performing such functions’ was concerned,
it was assumed that such functions would be functions
necessary for or ancillary to the purposes of the Commis-
sion. It is desirable to make the position clear in the Act
and we recommend accordingly®

(b) In the above mentioned case, the notification
appointing the Commission, after directing an inquiry to
be made into the affairs of certain companies and firms
and after stating in detail the facts to be investigated,
called upon the Commission to inquire into and make
recommendations in respect of the following, among other
matters, namely (item 10), “any irregularities, fraud or
breach of trust or action in disregard of honest commercial
practices. in respect of the companies and firms whose
affairs are stigated by the Commission which may come
to the knowledge of the Commission and the action which,
in the opinion of the Commission, should be taken as and
by way of securing redress or punishment or to act as a
preventive in future cases”.

1The provision that when a State Commission is functioning
the Central Government should not appoint a Commission unless
the scope of the inquiry is to extend to two or more States was
not included in the Bill as originally introduced but was inserted
by the Select Committee.

21959 S.C.R. 279; 1958 S.C.A. 754; ALR, 1958 S.C. 538.
38९९ Appendix I, Section 3 (1) as proposed.


7

(०) It was held by the Supreme Court that, having
regard to the fact that the Commission had no judicial
powers and its report could only be recommendatory,
there was no point in the Commission making recommenda-
tions for any action “as and by way of securing redress or
punishment” regarding wrongs already done or committed
because the redress or punishment, if any, for such wrongs
has to be given or imposed by courts of law in their own
discretion and without being in any was influenced by the
view of any person or body, however august or high-
powered that person or body might be. Accordingly the
Court held that any recommendation about action to be
taken as and by way of securing redress or punishment
could not be said to be necessary for or ancillary to the
purpose of the Commission and such a direction to the
Commission was outside the scope of the Act. This, how-
ever, relates to the actual specification of the functions of
the Commission and does not require any amendment in
the Act.

25. In a case decided by the Andhra Pradesh High
Court! it was held that if the notification under section 3
appointing a Commission does not specify the time within
which the Commission has to complete its inquiry and if
the mistake is not rectified by a subsequent notification?
then, until the defeet is cured, the Commission is debarred
from functioning under the notification notwithstanding
the fact that the notification is not invalid. The Com-
mission, it was observed, would be in a state of suspended
animation. This decision shows that it is desirable that
the appropriate Government appointing a Commission
should specify the time within which the Commission is to
conclude its work. The Act, however, does not require any
amendment in this behalf. The only clarification we are
recommending* is that the period within which a report
is to be submitted may be extended from time to time by
notification.

26. Judging from the experience gained in the working Section 3—
of one or two Commissions of Inquiry, we consider it Filling up
desirable to provide expressly for the filling up of vacancies of vacancies.
or for an increase in the number of members whenever 1
the Government thinks it necessary or expedient to do so.

We recommend an amendment to section 3 in this behalf+

27, Section 4 authorises the Commission to summon and Section 4—
enforce the attendance of any person. It does not, how- Pirie a
ever, specify the territorial jurisdiction of the Commission of witnesses.
in this behalf, and consequentially, it may be argued that
the restriction under Order 16, Rule 19 of the Code of Civil

iWarayanadoss y. T. Neeladari Roo ALR. 1959, Andhra
Pradesh 148, 153.

Compare Ram Krishna Dalmia’s case 1959 $.C.R. 279, 912.

3868 Appendix I Section 3(4).

4866 Appendix 1, Section 3(3) as proposed.



Section 5९2५

Section 53)

18

Procedure, 1908, would be attracted, since, under section 4,
a Commission, in summoning witnesses, has the same
powers asa civil court. On this reasoning, a Commission
would not be competent to summon a witness residing at
a distance longer 1! fan 200 miles from its headquarters. We
consider that the limitation imposed on civil courts by this
rule should not apply to Commissions appointed under the
Act, in view of the different nature of the work assigned
to a Commission of Inquiry. We accordingly recommend,
that a Commission appointed under the Act should have
jurisdiction to summon a witness from any part of the
territories to which the Act extends. Rules under the Act!
will secure that necessary travelling and other expenses
are paid to witnesses who are summoned under the Act.

28. With reference to section 5(2) empowering a
Commission to require any person to furnish information
on a matter under inquiry, a question has been raised as
to whether the persons so required can be punished for
failure to give information, having regard, in particular,
to the decision? in Ali Mahomed v. Emperor.* In that case
the members of the Wakf Board had not been declared to
be public servants by the Act constituting the Board.
Further, the Act provided a separate punishment for failure
to furnish information. There is, however, no objection
to the position being clarified by stating in sub-section (2)
that any person required to furnish information shall be
bound to furnish such information, so as to attract the
penal provisions of the Indian Penal Code in this behalf.

It has been suggested that a specific provision should be
inserted in this sub-section (on the lines of section 175,
Criminal Procedure Code), to the effect that a person shall
not be required to disclose information w: Fich might
incriminate him. We may point out that the obligation to
disclose information under this sub-section is subject to
any privilege available under the law for the time being
in force, It would thus appear that no special privilege is
conferred by this section, but any privilege conferred by
any other law would be available under the sub-section.

29. Section 5(3) authorises the Commission or any
authorised gazetted officer to enter any building or place
where any books of account or other documents relating
to the subject-matter of the inquiry may be found and to
seize such books or documents, subject to the provisions of
sections 102 and 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898, in so far as they may be applicable. In Narayanadoss
v. T. Neeladri Raot already referred 10% an argument was

1866 Appendix I, section 12(2), as proposed.

2See Appendix I, Notes to 5. 5 (2) for detailed discussion.
872 LA. 226; ATR 1945 P.C, 4.

4A.LR. 1959 Andhra Pradesh, 148, 152.

2862 para. 25, supra.


19

advanced that this provision conferred an uncontrolled
and arbitrary power of entry and seizure on Commissions
of Inquiry in general. Further, in that case the Com-
mission had been appointed to inquire into the wide-spread
mismanagement of the properties of Hindu religious and
charitable trusts created for public purposes and it was
therefore contended that there was also a violation of the
fundamental rights guaranteed by articles 25 and 26 of the
Constitution. The Court pointed out that the sub-section
gave no such sweeping powers, but merely authorised the
Specified officers to enter buildings or places where the
relevant books or documents could be found, and the power
of seizure was hedged in by several restrictions or safe-
guards, including those contained in sections 102 and 103
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, It is not necessary
to disturb the section on this point.

30. (1) We have discussed elsewhere! the question as to S
the extent to which protection can be secured to Commis-
sions of Inquiry in respect of scurrilous and scandalous <f Commis:
attacks on them. Section 5 may accordingly be amended by sion
the insertion of a sub-section? making it an offence to publish
any statement or do any other act calculated to bring the
Commission or any member thereof into disrepute.

(2) Certain procedural questions have been raised in
connection with this offence. It has been suggested to us,
that in view of the status of the members of the Commis.
sion who generally include a Judge of a High Court or the
Supreme Court, the offence should be triable by a High
Court exclusively, It was further suggested that in the trial
of the proposed new offence the personal attendance of
members of the Commission should be dispensed with and
that an Exception should be made to section 200 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, which requires the examination
of the complainant. Further, it was suggested, the offence
should be triable as a summons case and a provision should
be made on the lines of the proviso to section 244(1) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 which confers on the court
a discretion to hear the complainant or not. We have given
careful consideration to all these suggestions. We feel that,
taking all the circumstances into consideration, the proce-
dure already prescribed in section 198B of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure. 1898, in respect of defamation of high dig-
nitaries of the State (including the President and the Vice-
President) and public servants generally, would be suitable
for this offence also. Section 198B of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898, provides that any offence falling under
Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (sections 499 to
502—-a group of sections relating to defamation) against
the President, Vice-President etc, shall be triable by a

+See paragraph 12, supra.

*See Appendix I, s. 5(5) as proposed,

140 Mof L—4


Section 6—

20

Court of Session. The section also lays down a special pro-
cedure for the trial of such offences. The Sessions Court
can take cognizance of the offence without the accused
being committed to it for trial, upon the complaint in
writing of the Public Prosecutor. The Court may also, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, refrain from examining
the person against whom the offence is committed. Since a
special procedure thus already exists for an analogous
offence, we feel that there is no strong case for creating a
new procedure by making the offence triable by a High
Court exclusively and thus laying down a different proce-
dure for more or less similar offences,

31. Section 6 provides that no statement made by a

fncriminating Person in the course of giving evidence before the Commis-

statements,

sion shall subject him to or be used against him in a crimi-
nal proceeding. In this connection, 2 question was raised as
to whether a person can claim protection under clause (3)
of article 20 of the Constitution at the time of answering a
question put to him and the Punjab High Court answered.
it in the affirmative', Subsequently, in a Supreme Court
decision*, it has been held by a majority that clause (3) of
article 20 applies only where at the time the statement is
made the person stands accused of an offence. Section 6
does not require any amendment from this point of view.

It has been suggested that the protection given by sec-
tion 6 to oral statements should be extended to documents.
In our opinion, there is a good deal of difference between
the spoken word and the written word. When dealing with
inquiries into matters of definite public importance, there
would appear to be very little justification for extending
protection to persons whose guilt is clear from any docu-
ments in their possession or custody. No doubt, if no such
protection is extended, such evidence may not be readily
forthcoming. One has therefore to balance the two consider-
ations. In any event, any protection given cannot be to the
same extent as is given by section 6 in the case of the spoken
word. The interests of a public inquiry would not be pro-
moted by the enlargement of such protection, and we find
that in many similar Acts no protection is afforded in rela-
tion to the production of documents.* In our country also,
the practice has been to treat the spoken word differently
from the written word, and to extend protection to the
latter only if on the merits of the case protection is needed.
Such protection has often been of a very limited or special

14 08% Berry & Co., vy. Mr. Vivian Bose, ILL.R. (1960) Pun. 416;
ALR. 1960 Pun. 86.

State of Bombay ए. Kathi Kalu, A..R. 1961 $.C. 1808.
"Section 21(3) Ontario Securities Act.
1960 (363), section 5]; the Evidence Act, (Canada)

7 S. 5). Both discussed in (1962) Can, Bar Journal,
February, 6, 12 to 15 (The Privilege against self incrimination).



21

nature On the whole, we think that the protection con-
ferred by section 6 does not require any enlargement.

32. In our opinion, it is desirable to make it clear in the
‘interests of trade that nothing in the Act shall render it
compulsory for any person giving evidence to disclose any
secret process of manufacture? We recommend that a new
section* be inserted to that effect.

33. (1) While discussing the procedure to be followed by
the Commission, we have recommended! the incorporation
of rules 4 and 5 (with suitable modifications) in the Act it-
self. We recommend that section 8 be suitably amended in
this behalf.

(2) As regards sittings of the Commission in public or in
private, the section leaves the matter to the Commission’s
discretion. Various suggestions have been made regarding
this provision. On the one hand, it is argued that inquiries
under the Act should always be held in public, since such
inquiries relate to matters of public importance.’ On the
other hand, it is argued that sometimes the inquiry relates
to a commercial concern and that the holding of such in-
quiries in public would be detrimental to the interests of
such concerns. Since no uniform rule can be laid down in
respect of all inquiries, and the question whether an inquiry
or any part thereof should be held in public or in private
will depend on the circumstances of each case, we think that
the best course would be to retain the existing provision,
which leaves the matter to the discretion of the Commission.
A Commission would consist of responsible persons, and can
be trusted to exercise its discretion in a reasonable manner.

34. Section 8 of the Act provides that the Commission
may act notwithstanding the temporary absence of any
member or the existence of a vacancy amongst its members.
We have already proposed* an amendment to section 3 of
the Act in order to make it clear that it is open to the
Government to increase the number of members on the
Commission at any stage of the inquiry or to fill any
vacancy. We now recommend,” that it may be made clear
that it is not necessary for the Commission to recommence
its inquiry if a change takes place in the constitution of the
Commission during the pendency of an inquiry, It may,

1Cf. Taxation on Income Cnvestigation Commission) Act, 1947;
Indian Election Offences and Inquiries Act, 1920; the Capital
Issues (Continuance of Control) ct, 1947. Contrast the general
provision in s. 130, Indian Evidence Act, 1872
ब्०्तीः The Royal Commission Act, Australia, 1902—1933, section

*See Appendix I, section 6A,

4866 para. 14, supra.

5See in this connection, a Private Member’s Bill introduced in
the Lok Sabha on 11-5-1962—to amend the Act (Bill No. 15 of
1962) (Shri D. C. Sharma),

886९ para, 26, supra.
7See Appendix I, section 8A,

Section 6A
(New).

Seetion 8.

Section 8A
(New>.


Section 12,

0 कटा
changes,

Appendices,

22

however, be provided that if the services of the Chairman
have ceased to be available, the Commission should not act
until a new chairman is appointed. Such a provision would
appear to be appropriate."

35. The rule-making section may be amended so as to ex-
pressly provide for two topics on which rules may be made,
namely, the association of persons with the Commission as
assessors and the payment of travelling and other expenses
to persons summoned to give evidence.

36. We have explained above the important changes
which we recommend. The other matters on which we have
recommended an alteration in the existing Act will appear
in the Notes on Clauses.’

37. In order to give a concrete shape to our proposals, we
have, in Appendix I, put them in the furm of draft amend-
ments to the existing Act.

Appendix II contains Notes on Clauses, elucidating, with
reference to the draft amendments in Appendix I, any points
that may require elucidation.

Appendix III contains a statement showing the Commis-
sions appointed under the Act.

1. Mr. JUSTICE J. L. KAPUR, Chairman.

2. G. 8. RAJAGOPAUL. 7

3. 10, BASU. ॥

4, K. G, DATAR. |

5. T. K. TOPE. i

“6. NIREN DE. J
8. छू. HIRANANDANT, Secretary.

New DELHI,

The 18th December, 1962.
‘Compare section 5 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
2See Appendix II,

*Mr. Niren De has been unable to sign the Report, but he con-
curs in the recommendations made thercin,

Members.



APPENDIX |

PROPOSALS AS SHOWN IN THE FORM OF DRAFT AMENDMENTS TO
THE EXISTING ACT.

(This is a tentative draft only)

Section 3

60 of 1952. For section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952
(hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), the follow-
ing section shall be substituted, namely: —~

“3. (1) The appropriate Government may, if it is of Appointment
opinion that it is necessary so to do, and shall, if a reso- Commission,
lution in this behalf is Passed by both Houses of Parlia-
ment or, as the case may be, by the Legislative Assembly
of the State, or, in the case of a State having a Legisla-
tive Council, by both Houses sf the Legislature of the
State, by notification in the cial Gazette, appoint a
Commission of Inquiry for the purpose of making an
inquiry into any definite matter of public importance
which shall be Specified in the notification, and perform-
ing such functions, being functions necessary or inci-
dental to the inguiry,. as may be so
specified...

Provided that where any such Commission has been
appointed to inquire into any matter—

(a) by the Central Government, no State Goy-
ernment shall, except with the approval of the
Central Government, appoint another Commission
to inquire into the same matter for so long as the
Commission appointed by the Central Government
is in existence;

(9) by a State Government, the Central Gov-
ernment shall not appoint another Commission to
inquire into the same matter for so long as the
Commission appointed by the State Government is
in existence, unless the Central Government is of

cease to exist.

(2) The Commission may consist of one or more
members appointed by the appropriate Government,
and where the Commission consists of more than one
member, one of them may be appointed by the appro-
briate Government as the Chairman thereof.

23
140 MofL—5


As to
fixation of
period. CF.
existing
8. 3(1).

24

(3) The appropriate Government may, at any stage
of the inquiry by the Commission—

(a) fill any vacancy which may have arisen in
the office of a member of the Commission. (whether
consisting of one or more than one member); or

(b) increase the number of members of the

Commission,

(4) The Commission shalt complete its inquiry and
make its report to the appropriate Governments within
such period as may be specified by the appropriate Gov-
ernment by notification in the Official Gazette, or within
such further period as that Government may by like

notification specify.
Section 4
To section 4 of the principal Act, the following Explana-

tion shall be added, namely: —

“Explanation.—For the purpose of enforcing the
attendance of witnesses, the local limits of the jurisdic-
tion of the Commission shall be the limits of the terri-
tories to which this Act extends.”.

Section 5
In section 5 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), after the word, figure and
brackets “sub-section (5)”, the words, "figures and
brackets “sub-section (6) or sub-section (7)” shall be
inserted;

(0) in sub-section (2), the following words shall be
inserted at the end, namely :—

“and any person so required shall be bound to
furnish such information.”.

(०) sub-section (5) shall be fe-numbered as sub-
section (7), and before that sub-section as so re-number-
ed, the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely: —

“(5) If any person, by words either spoken or
intended to be read, makes or publishes any state-
ment or does any other act which is calculated to
bring the Commission or any member thereof into
disrepute, he shall be Punishable with simple
imprisonment which may extend to two years or
with fine or with both,

(6) The provisions of section 198-B of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shal} apply in relation
to an offence under sub-section (5) as they apply in
relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (1)
of the said section 198-B, subject to the modification

5 of 1898,


25

that no complaint in respect of such offence shalt
be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the
previous sanction—
(8) in the case of a Commission or member
of a Commission appointed by the Central
overnment, of that Government;

(0) in the case of a Commission, or a mem- हि

1 ber of a Commission. appointed by the State

at Government, of that State Government.”. ro

4 Section 6A (New)
After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely :—

“GA. Nothing in this Act shall make it comp ul Secret pro-
sory for any person giving evidence before the Com- be dihied,
mission to disclose any secret process of manufacture.” “ee

Section 8

For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely,—

“8, (1) Tf, at any stage of the inquiry, the Commis- Procedure to
sion considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct be followed

"gon Or ६. int ‘ the Com-
of any person or is of opinion that the reputation of any PY the (०
person is likely to be prejudicially affected by the ™“"°™

inquiry, the Commission shall give to that person a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the inquiry
and producing evidence in his defence:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply
where the credit of a witnesses is being impeached,

(2) The appropriate Government, every person
referred to in sub-section (2) and, with the permission
of the Commission, any other person whose evidence is
recorded by the Commission,—-

(७) may cross-examine any person appearing

before the Commission. other than a person produce
ed by it or him as a witness;

(b) may address the Commission,

. (3) The appropriate Government, every person re-

ferred to in sb -section (1) and, with the permission of
the Commission, any other person whose evidence is
recorded by the Commission may be represented before
the Commission by a legal practitioner or, with the
permission of the Commission, by any other person.

(4) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act
and to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the
Commission shall have power to regulate its own proce-
dure (including the power to fix the places and times of
its sings and to decide whether to sit in public or in
private) a



Inquiry not
0 be inter-
rupted by
Teason of
vacincy or
change in
constitu~
tion,

26

Section 8A (New)

After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely: — » 8 30

“8A. (1) Where the Commission consists of two or
more members, it may act notwithstanding the absence
oj the Chairman or any other member or any vacancy
among its members:

Provided that, if the appropriate Government
notifies the Commission that the services of the Chair-
man have ceased to be available, the Commission shall
not act unless a new Chairman is appointed.

(2) Where during the course of an inquiry before a
Commission, a change has taken place in the constitu-
tion of the Commission by reason of any vaca: hav-
ing been filled or by an increase in the numb er of
members of the Commission or for any other reason,
it shall not be necessary for the Commission to com-
mence the inquiry afresh.”.

Section 12
In section 12 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (2)}—
@) after clause (a), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely: —

*(aa) the association with the Commission
as assessors of persons having special know-
ledge of any matter relevant to the inquiry, to
assist and advise it;”

(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shail
be inserted, namely,—
“(cc) the travelling and other expenses
payable to persons summoned by the Commis-
sion to give evidefice before it.”
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely :—

पूछ) Every tule made by the Central Govern-
ment under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament
while it is an session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in
two sucessive sessions and, ij, before the expiry
of the session in which it is so laid or the session
immediately following, both Houses agree in mak-
ing any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the tule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect. as the case may be; so,
however, that eny such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule.”,


APPENDIX II
Notes on CLAUSES
Section 3

It has been provided that where the appointment is to See »
be in pursuance of the resolution of Parliament or State Resolution of

Legislature, the resolution should be of both the Houses.) both Houses.
Necessary change has been made.

The general question of the Government’s power to
appoint a Commission suo motu has been dealt with.?

The notification constituting the Commission should Section 3(%
specify the matier to be inquired into. It is considered RM E00,
that the Act should contain an express provision on the .
subject. Necessary change has been made.

The reasons for making an amendment in respect of the Section 3(1)

words “performing such functions” have been already main_paras.
yords Performing
given, such func-
tions”.
There is a small verbal point in connection with section Section ३0%
3(1), main paragraph, which may be dealt with. sand within
such, tim
The appropriate Government can appoint a Commission
of Inquiry “for the purpose of making an inquiry into any
definite matter of public importance and performing such
functions and within such time as may be specified in the
notification.... ". The intention obviously is that the
inquiry should be completed within the specified time. In
order to make the intention clear, small verbal changes
have been made.

In section 3(1), main para, the words “the Commission 5. 3(1),
so appointed shall make the inquiry, etc.” have been omit- main para,
ted, because it is considered unnecessary to make any such Obligation

mandatory provision. i hele the
Section 3(1), proviso (a) has been brought in line with section a(n,
section 7 which uses the word “exists”. proviso (4).

A provision has been added to deal with the case where section 3(1),
after the appointment of a Commission by a State Govern- proviso (6).
ment, the Central Government decides to appoint a Com-
mission to inquire into the same subject.*

३866 the body of the Report, para. 21,
“See the body of the Report, para. 11.
3868 the body of the Report, para. 24(a).
4In any case, section 3(4) as proposed creates the obligation.
eo detailed reasons, see discussion in the body of the Report,
para, 22.

ar


Section 3(2).

Section 3(3),

Section 3(4),

General,

Section 50).

Section 5(2)-
Enforcement
of Commis-
sion’s orders
requiring

information,

28

As the word “exists” is used in section 7, the proviso
also has been framed in harmony with that use.

It has been made clear that the appointment of the
Chairman will be by the appropriate Government,

A new sub-section has been added to give the appro-
priate Government power to fill up vacancies or increase
the number of members.

The provision regarding conclusion of inquiry within
the specified period—at present contained in section 3(1)—
main para, has been embodied here. Power has been given
to the Government to extend the period in suitable cases.”

Some of the other important points relating to section 3
have been already discussed’

Section 4

An Explanation has been added to deal with the local
limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission in relation to
summoning a witness to attend in person. It broadly
follows section 74 of the Copyright Act, 1957 and section
92 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. Detailed
reasons have been already given,‘

Section 5

As new sub-sections are proposed to be added in section
5, consequential change has been made here.

Under section 5(2), a Commission has power to require
any person to furnish information on matters useful for
or relevant to the subject-matter of the inquiry. The sec-
tion is, however, silent as to the penalty to be imposed on
any person who does not obey a requisition for information
issued by the Commission thereunder, Nor does any
other section of the Act impose a penalty for such dis-
obedience,

A question has been raised whether section 178 of the
Indian Penal Code, under which a person “legally bound”
to furnish information on any subject to any public servant
and omitting to furnish such information, is punishable
with imprisonment up to one month or fine up to five
hundred rupees or both, may apply to a requisition made
under a special law. The decision of the Privy Council in
Ali Mahomed y. Emperor* may be seen on the point. In
that case, a question arose whether a person failing to
furnish information required by a Wakf Committee under

18९6९ the body of the Report, para. 26 for reasons,
2888 also the body of the Report, para, 25,

See the body of the Report, paras. 20 and 24(b) (०).
#See the body of the Report, para, 27.

SA.LR. 1945 PC. 147, 151.


29

section 3, Mussalman Wakf Act, 1923, as amended in Bom-
bay, could be proceeded against in the High Court for
contempt under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1926. The
objection taken was, that under section 2(3) of the Con-
tempt of Courts Act, the High Court could not take cogni-
zance of contempt of a subordinate court, where such
contempt is an offence punishable under the Indian Penal
Code. Tt was argued, that the failure to furnish the infor-
mation in question was an offence under section 176, Indian
Penal Code. This argument was rejected by the Privy
Council on the following chain of reasoning :

(i) Section 176 applies only where a person is
“legally bound” to furnish information;

(ii) 8 person is legally bound to furnish only what
is illegal for him to omit (section 43, latter half,
Indian Penal Code);

(iii) it is illegal for a person to omit only that
which is an offence (section 43, earlier half, Indian
Penal Code);

(iv) an offence is only that which is punishable
under the Indian Penal Code (section 40, Indian Penal
ode).

(Therefore, section 176 applies only to a failure which is an
offence under some section of Indian Penal Code).

The Privy Council observed that if no other section of
the Penal Code dealt with the matter, then, one must con-
clude that the particular crime, though punishable under
some other enactment, is not punishable under the Code,
and would not fall under section 176, Therefore, the High
Court was not prohibited from dealing with it under the
Contempt of Courts Act. To make the matter clear a pro-
vision on the subject has been added,!

The difficulty felt by the Press Commission has already
been dealt with?

New sub-sections are being inserted to deal with
matters bringing a Commission or its members into dis-
repute. This has been discussed in detail?

Section 6A

This is new and has been inserted to give protection
regarding disclosure of a secret process of manufacture,
Section 6D(1) of the (Australian) Royal Commission Act,
1902—1933, may be compared.*

3888 also the body of the Report, para, 28,
286९ the body of the Heport, para. 1,
3See the body of the Report, Paragraphs 12 and 30,
4See also the body of the Report, para. 82.


30

Section 8( 1)

This is new.’ It deals with the right of a person preju-
dicially affected to be heard. The new section is based ‘on
rule 4 of the Central Commissions of Inguiry (Procedure)
Rules, 1960 issued on the 7th May, 1960 with one departure
made from that rule. Where the conduct of any person is

ing and producing evidence should not apply, To require
opportunity for hearing in such cases would give rise to
collateral inquiries which would never end. That has been
made clear,

Sections 8(2) and 8(3)

These are new and have been added? to deal with
certain rights which are important enough to deserve a
place in the Act. They follow rule 5 of the Central Com-
missions of Inquiry (Procedure) Rules, 1960 issued on the
7th May, 1960, with verbal changes,

Section 8(4)

This represents existing section 8. Portion referring to
temporary absence or vacancy is being omitted, as an
elaborate provision on the subject is being proposed?

Section 8A

A new provision has been added 10 deal with cases of
vacancy or absence amongst the members of the Com-
mission.*

Sub-clause (1). —What is Proposed is that absence or
vacancy shall not invalidate the proceedings. Section 75)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as originally inserted
by the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Temporary
Provisions) Act, 1951 (40 of 1951) is more elaborate. Here
a simpler provision is preferred. [That section was as
follows :—

his office after such absence, the proceedings may be
continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which
he so rejoins.”]

Section 5(4), Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 has been
mainly followed.

1886 also para. 14 of the body of the Report,

2866 also the body of the Report, paras, 14 and 33.

3868 section 8A proposed to be inserted.

*See also the body of the Report, para. 34.



31

Sub-clause (2).—This is intended to deal with changes
in constitution. It is considered that in such cases it should
be permissible to continue the proceedings as they stand.

Section 12

Power to make rules regarding assessors and expenses
of witnesses has been added, as such a provision would be
useful.t

So far as rules made by the Central Government are
concerned, recent legislative practice has been to require
that the rule should be laid before each House of Parlia-
ment and should be subject to modification agreed to by
both Houses (or to annulment, if so directed by both
Houses). Consistently with this legislative practice, it is
desirable that a similar provision should be inserted in the
section under consideration also. Necessary amendment
has been proposed.*

1See the body of the Report, para. 35,

2The draft follows the usual provision as to laying of rules,
as found in recent Central Acts. The Law Commission is exa-
mining separately the General Clauses Act, and in that connec-
tion the qpestion of inserting in that Act a general provision
requiring ‘ing of rules before Parliament, is likely to receive
the attention of the Commission. The amendment suggested
above is, therefore, subject to any recommendations that the
Commission may make (while dealing with the General Clauses
Act) in relation to laying of rules before Parliament.


INDEX TO APPENDIX Ii]
8. No. No. in Name of appointing authority Pages
the file*
Part A

(Commissions of Inquiry set up by the Government of India)

व 110 Government of India—Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board) . .

2 136 Government of India— Ministry of In-~
formation and Broadcasting—Press
Information Brreau

3. 176 Government of India—Ministry of
Health : . पु पु

4 194 Government of India—Ministry of Com-
merce and Industry . ‘

4. 209 Government of India—Ministry of Com-
merce and Industry—-Department of
Company Law Administration -

Part B

(Commissions of Inquiry set up by the State Governments)

6. 112 Government of Kerala

ry Government of Gujarat

128 Government of Rajasthan .
9. 131 Government of Madhya Pradesh
ro. 147 Government of Maharashtra
१३ 21 Government of Andhra Pradesh
12. 214 Himachal Pradesh Administration

33

34

38

41

» ER

45
7
49
49
5०
37
37

tThe Statement is based on information supplied by various
Ministries and State Governments,

2The “S. No.” mentioned indicates the Serial Numbers in the
Law Commission's File.


APPENDIX III
Statement of Commissions of Inquiry set up under the 4०६
Part A

(Commissions set up by the Government of India)
Ministry or Ramways
(Railway Board)

Four Commissions of Inquiry were appointed under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 for the purpose of making
inquiries into the causes of the following Railway acci-
dents :—

(i) to the Down Passenger train No. 565 at mile
66/15-16 between Jadcherla and Mahbubnagar stations
on the Central Railway on the night of the 1st/2nd
September 1956;

(ii) to train No. 603 Tuticorin Express at mile
170/14-12 between Ariyalur and Kallagam stations on
the Villapuram-Trichinopoly (Chord) Line of the
Southern Railway at 5-30 hours on the 23rd November
1956;

(wi) to train No. 1 Down Bombay-Calcutta Mail
at mile 97/4 between Padli and Asvali stations on the
Tgatpuri-Bhusaval double-line section of the Central
Railway at 22-45 hours of 23rd November 1957; and

(iz) between No, 2-DU/Down Passenger train and
45 Up Delhi-Pathankot Janta Express at 4-17 hours on
1st January 1958 at Mohri station on the Dethi-Ambala
Section of the Northern Railway.

(Particulars are given below)

|
Date of Duration | Matter for which appointed | Remarks

appointment of — |
Commission
12-1956 7 20-12-1956 | For inquiry into the causes |
2012195 to of the Mahbubnagar i
24-I-1957 Accident, 1
|]
>12-1956 9-72-7956 For inquiry into the causes;
S12 1955 to of the Ariyalur Accident. i
29-12-1956 }
i

33


4

i

state of the Press
in India, its pre-
sent and future
lines of develop-
ment and in parti-
cular to examine: —

(@) the control,
management and
ownership and fina-
neial structure of
newspapers, large
and small, the perio-
dical press and news
agencies and feature
syndicates ;

Gi) the working
of monopolies and
chains and their
effect on the presen-
tation of accurate
news and fair views;

Gii) the effect of
holding companies,
the distribution of
advertisements and
such other forms of
external influence as

Mousrry or Raiways
_
Date of Duration Matter for which |
appointment of appointed Remarks
Commission
a 4-12-1957 For inquiry into the
to causes of the Iga-
! 27-1-1958 turi Accident.
23-1-1958 ; 23, 24, 2§ | For inquiry into the
land causes of the
1 27-1-1958 Mohri Accident.
and from
3-2-1958
to '
I7-2-1958
to
26-2-1958. |
MiNISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
Press Information Bureau
ag Upto The Press Commis- | As regards the
Press 31-7-1954 | sion was appointed | action taken on
Commission) ; tw enquire into the | the Commission’s

Report, a State-
ment was, laid on
the Table of Lok
Sabha on
30-5-1957 —_indi-
cating action
taken on the main
recommendations
of the Press Com-
mission. AS
the statement is
very lengthy, it is
not reproduced
here).

Some of — the
recommendations
were accepted.
The Newspaper
(Price and Page)
Act, 1956, was
enacted to reduce
differences due
to economic ad-
vantages, etc. The
Press and Regis-
tration of Books


35

Ministry or InroRMATION AND Broapcastine—contd.
Press Information Bureau—contd,

“pate of | Duraion | Mane mewn Do for which
appointed

Remarks

may have a bearing
on the development
of healthy journal-
ism ;

(i) the method of |
recruitment, training,
scales of remunera~
tion, benefits and
other conditions of
employment of work-
ing journalists, set-
Uement of disputes

ing them and
factors which influence
the establishment and
maintenance of high
Professional standards;

(v) the adequacy of
newsprint supplies
and their distribution
among all classes of
newspapers and the
possibilities of — pro-
moting indigenous

manufacture of @) |
newsprint ; (ii) print-
ing and composing

machinery and (is)
machinery for (a)
ensuring high stand-
ards of journalism
and (6) liaison between
Government and the
Press ; the function-
ing of Press Advisory
Cornmittees and
organisations of edi-
tors and working
journalists, etc. ;

(vi) freedom of the
Press and repeal or

amendment of laws |

Act, 1867 was
amended 10
provide for the
appointment of
the Press Re-
gistrar and other
matters. Rates
for telegraphs for
News agency mes-
Sages were re~
vised. Further
with a view to
extending the
provisions of the
Industrial — Dis-
putes Act to
working —journa-
lists, the Working
Journalists (Con-
ditions of Service
and  Miscellane-
ous Provisions)
Act, 1955, was
enacted.

Section 198B was
introduced in the
Criminal Proce-
dure Code — (re-

lating to defama-
tion of public
servants). The

Press (Objection-
able Matter) Act,
1951, was allowed

to lapse. Cer-
tain recommen-
dations were

brought to the
notice of the State
Governments, and
the recommenda-
tions relating
to privileges and
contempt of



26
Ministry or Inrormarion anp Broapcastinc—concld.
Press Information Bureau—concld.

|

Date of Duration Matter for which
appointment of appointed Remarks
Commission

not in consonance | Legislature were
with it ; and to make brought to the
recommendations notice of the var-
thereon, ious Legislatures,
Certain recom-
mendations were
not accepted.

Mintstry or Hear
23-§-1958 jOne ‘month | The inquiry into and | 1. The Kerala and
(Kerala from the teport on the follow- | Madras Food
and Madras date of; ing matters, and for Poisoning Cases
Food Poison- | which it that purpose could Enquiry Com-
ing Enquiry commences; take such evidence as | mission embarked
Commission) its in- | is considered neces- upon the enquiry
| quiry. sary :— on the 6th June,
Hl 19९8 and submit-
| (a) the circumstan- | ted its Report to
ces and the causes; the Government
| whereby the food or | of India on the
foodstuffs used in pre- sth July, 1958.
t paring the food came |
1 to be contaminated ; | 2. In the Report,
the Commission
(8) whether the; have der alia
: contamination could) made—
1 have been avoided or (@) their special
i | detected in time ; tecommendation
i about the — dis-
(०) the action, if posal of foodstuffs
any, taken by the| seized by the

person or  persons| Kerala State
concerned after de-! Government ; and
tection of such :

contamination to pre- (#) their general
vent further distri- | recommendations

bution of the conta-| in regard to the
minated food or food- steps to be taken
stuffs ; 10 prevent such

occurrences in
(4) whether there | future.

been any failure

in taking ‘adequate! 3. In so far as the

measures for the | special recom-

avoidance or timely | mendations are



aT,

Mistry or HeatrH—contd,

Date of Duration Matter for which
appointment of appointed Remarks
Commission
+ detection of such | concerned, they
contamination and | were accepted by
the person or persons the State Gov-

responsible for such |

failure, and

(e) the measures, to
be taken to safeguard
against similar occur-
rences in future.

ernment concern-
ed who took
necessary action
in the matter.

4. As regards the
fifteen gett

recommendations,
a Committee
consisting of the
representatives of
the Ministries of
C. & 1. Food and

\ Agriculture, La-

bour and = Em-
| ployment, Trans-
' port and
' Communications,
1 Railways, 5. हि, &

(on As Law,

Health, W. H. &
S., Finance and
Home Affairs
was constituted.
This Committee
made recommen-
dations for  (#)
short term meas-
ures and —(#)
long term meas-
ures.

Short term — meas-

ures :

Those insecticides
which are consi-
dered highly
toxic to man were
notified as
“Poison” under
the Poisons Act,
1919 by the Minis-
try of Home Aff-
airs. The State



Ministry or HeattH—concld.

Date of ‘Duration Matter for which
appointment of appointed Remarks

Governments were
also advised by
that Ministry to
take further action
under the Poisens
Act, 199... The
other short term
measures were
| taken by various
| Ministries — con-
cerned.

Commission

Long term meas-

| of
: i Food and = Agri-
1 1 culture were
|

requested to take
necessary action
to sponsor and
pilot a bill called
“Indian Pesticides
Bill” for regulat-
ing the manu-
facture, import,
storage, transport,
distribution, — etc.
of pesticides.

Ministry or CoMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

Date of Duration Matter for Action taken
appointment of which appointed| on the Report | Remarks
छः of the
Commission
of Inquiry

17-4-1954 17th April, | 1. The Planta- | Government’s
(Plantation 7954 to { tion Inquiry) decision on
Inquiry 15th Janu-| Commission the report of
Commis- ary, 1957. | was appointed | Plantation In-
sion). for making a | quiry Commis~
comprehensive | sion on Tea
inquiry into | was announced



6
Muusray or Comnanrce anv Inpustry—centd.

के of Duration of | Matter

appointment | Commission [which appointed

for

Action taken
onthe Report
of the
Commission
of Inquiry

the
coffee
rubber
tries.

and

mission
inquiry
lowing

(@)

amount
capital,

tively

@)

the met

rubber

tant

©

the economic
conditions and
problems of

2. In particular,|
prejudice to the;
generality of the!
foregoing _po-;
wers, the Com-
the course of the}
form the _fol-

tions, that is tol
say, TO—

1 separately —the|
and non-Indian,|
invested respec-|

coffee and ruber

\ plantations ;

production and
the costs of
! production of}
tea, coffee and}

different impor-
areas in India 3)

the present me-|
thods of finan-|

tea,
and
indus-

without|

was, in|
to per-
func-
ascertain|
of|

Indian

in tea,|

examine!
thods off

in the,

growing|

examine)

in the form of
a Resolution
published in
the Gazette of
India Extra-|
ordinary dated
the ist July,
1957. (it has
not been
reproduced, be-
ing lengthy).

Remarks

Some of
the recom-
Imendations
lof the
‘Commission
lwere accep
ited in
lprinciple,
for example,
Imaking fin-
ance ayail-
able to the
tea industry,
lavoiding ex-
lcessiv: use
lof = Indus-
trial ‘Tribu-
nals, regard
for the ne-
eds of wor-
ikers and
availability
of —build-
ing mater-
lials, while
[phasing the
implemen-
tation of the
Plantation
‘Labour Act,
jundertaking
of a study
iby the Tea



40
Ministry or Commence aNnp InpustRY—contd.
Date of Duration Matter for “ taken
of. which on the Report
| appointed of the Remarks
Commission.
| of Inquiry
cing tea, coffee} Board of
and rubber; cost data,
plantations ; ljorganisa-
ition of
(d) examine small gro-
the present me- lwers into
thods of marke-} |
ting tea, coffee! tives etc.
and rubber in- Certain re-
cluding ail the! commenda-
factors which tions conte-
affect the price implating
paid by the con- laction = by
sumer ; the State
\Govern-
() examine’ ments and
the possibilities| tthe indus-
of further ex-| try were
pansion and’ de-| brought to
velopment of, the notice
the tea, coffee! lof the State
| बात rubber Govern-
; ntation indus- ments or
tries. the indus-
ory. Certain.
3. On the conclu- lother = re~
sion of the en- |commenda-
quiry the Com- tions were
mission was to Inot accep-
make — recom- ted for rea-
mendations to! lsons given
Government on! lin detail in
the —_ measures| the resolu~
necessary : tion of the
Ist July,
(०) to secure’ 1957.
for the producer}
a fair price for]
his product and|
to the consumer|
fair price for
the article hi
buys;



41
Moustay or Commence AnD Inpustry—concld,

Date of Duration Matter for Action taken
appointment of which on the Report
Commission appointed of the Remarks
Commission
of Inquiry
|
(8) to enable!

the provision of|

nee for planta-|
tion industries ;

(c) to ensure,
suitable marke-|
ting —_arrange-| t
ments ; and

(4) to develop
and expand the
tea, coffee and
tubber _ planta-|
tion industries.

Department of Company Law Administration

1O-12-$6 [| 2 years ] To investigate’ The term
‘ sce Remarks)| into the हे of Commis-

of Dalmia Jain sion was ex-

group of com tended from

panies, time to time

[50 as to

expire on.

31-10-1962.



APPENDIX III

Statement of Commissions of Inquiry set up under the Act

Part B
(Comeissions set up by the State Governments)
KERALA
Date of | Duration Matter for
$. No. appoint- of which Remarks
ment |Commission appointed
3. (Rice | May May 1958 The Govern-
Inquiry to Feb, ment —appoint-
Commis- 1959. ed a Rice Deal
sion.) Inquiry Com-
mission in
May 1958 to
enquire into |

and report on
the following :—

@) whether
the purchase
of 5,000 tons
of rice by the
Kerala Gov-
emment from
Messrs. — Sri-
ramalu P.
Suriyanarayana
and Company,
Madras in Au-
gust-September,|
1957. was un-
justified, hav-
ing regard to
the food
situation in|
the State ? and

(४) whether
the purchase
resulted in
avoidable loss
to the State?



a

KeraLa—contd,
Date of Duration Matter for
S. No. appoint- of which Remarks
ment | Commission appointed
| |

2. (To in- | 2-8-1958 5: 2-8-1958 To inquire into| The Commis-
quire into | to police firing at | sion’s finding
a police 18-2-19§9. Chandanathopu. | was that the
firing.) ring was.

i justified.
| (0) the cir- ;
1 i cumstances

i ! which led to

/ the firing, and

i (i) whether

‘ the firing was

i justified under

| ; पी&.. circums-

tanices?

3. (To in- |22-11-1958 | 22-11-1958 | Toinquireinto | The Com-
quire into to firing at Mun-/} mission’s  find-
firing). 6-8-1959. nar Regicns, ing was that

A the firing was
justified.
(4 (To | 4-5-1961 | 4-5-1961 Suspected death|
inquire into to of Souri in

death in | 8-8-1961. Police lock up
police cus- at Ernakulam.
tody).

fut

(2) true facts
relating to
death;

Gi) to devise
means to pre-
vent such
incidents in

ure,

(i) Finding

was-—

Suicide एफ

hanging.

(iz) Recom-
mendation
was -

Construction
of lock
up should be
गा such a

manner that
there — should
not be any
loophole left
for 8. person



44
I ||||||
Duration ; है
S. No. appoint- of appointed Remarks
ment { Commission
however bent
| upon he might
be to commit
suicide to do
that.
5. (To ine 13-9-1961 | 13-9-1961 To inquire {| The
quire into to into the causes | sion has submit~
bus acci- T$-I-1962. | of the serious | ted its Report
dent), bus accident | and the same is
that occurred | under the con-
at Chettupuzha | sideration of
near Trichur and | Government.
to suggest mea-
sures to prevent
such accidents,
Guyarat
1
2. (To in- 5-8-1960 | From रे The Com
quire into 5-8-60 to | and report on— mission which
firing), 15-12-60 £.e.,| consisted, of
the date of G) the cir- { Justice R, B.
Report iz., cumstances in | Metha held the
133 days. which the police moring firing
Tesorted to firing | to be justified
on two occa- | but the afternoon
sions on the firing as un-
i2th July, 1960 justified,
j at Dohad
(Dist. Pan-
chmahals), and
Commission Gi) whether
ceased to! the firing and
exist from | their extent
13-7-1960 on each occa-
sion were
justified or

not?



45

Gusarat—coneld.

}

Date of | Duration | Matter for
S. No. appoint- of appointed
ment | Commission

Remarks

2. (To in- | 30-8-1960| Commission | To inquire into

quire into Ceased | 10 | and report on
8. killing exist from | whether the
incident). 1-6-1961. authorities con-

cerned took

sufficient mea-
Sures to avoid
i or prevent the
incidents in

which two

Miyanas were

Killed in the

court premises

at Halvad,

; on 5th July,

| 1960 and

whether there
was any negli-
gence on the
} part of the
i | officials == con-
) cemed in tak-
| ing adequate
Measures to
control and/or
to disperse the
ही crowd.

3. (To _in- [2g-11-1960| Report sub-| To inquire in-
quire into mitted on | to and report
firing). 8-3-61. on and in res-

pect of—

() the — cir-

{ cumstances in

{ . which the

| Police resort-

ed to firing on

2-10-60 at
Shill (Distt.
| Kaira), and

{ (it) the ques-
tion whether
the firing and
its extent
were justified
or not ?

The Commis-
sion could not
initially proceed
with its work as
a criminal case
in connection
with the — inci-
dent was pro-
ceeding. The
Sessions Judge
made certain ob-
servations in
his judgment
which had a bear-
ing on the terms
of reference of
the Commission.
In view of these
observations व
was not necessary
for the Com-
mission to
proceed with
its work and it
was therefore
wound up.

The Commis-
sion held — the
firing to be justi-
fied and Govern-
ment accepted
the said finding.

\
I छह


46
RasasTHan

Date of appointment

Duration of Commission | Matter for which
appointed

2th March, 1958 with
Shri K. N. Wanchoo,
Chief Justice, Rajas-
than High Court,
Jodhpur asthe

2nd March, 1959 to | To inquire into and
ith October, 1959. ' report about the fund
(The Commission | or valuables, like
submitted its report cash, jewellery, gold
on Irth October, and silver, in the pre-

sole member, (To 1959). mises of the temple

inquire into Nath- | of Shri Nathji at

dwara Temple 1 Nathdwara.

funds). |

॥
Mapaya PRabEsH

S. No. and Date of | Duration | Matter for which

name of the| appoint- 0 appointed Remarks
Commission | “ment | Commission

1, Commis- } 2-6-1957
sion of
Inquiry
with Shri
Justice
cP.

Bhutt, हु
Judge,

Madhya
Pradesh
Court as
its sole
tTmember.

2. Commis- ) 18-1-1958
sion of
Inquiry
with Shri
c. B.
Kekre,
District
Judge,
Chhind-
wara,

3 4 months To inquire into | The finding of
an

24{ the police | the Commission
days, firing on 26th | was that the
August, 1957 | police firing
at Raipur. was justified,
3 months | To inquire into Do.
and 16 | the police firing
days. on 12th Janu-

ary 1958, at
village” Khobi
(District Sur-
guja).



aT

Mapuya PrapesH—coneld.

! ]
8. No. and | Date of | Duration | Matter for which

name of the | appoint- | of appointed Remarks
Commission ment ,; Commission
3 i
नचचचच्लच्जज्ल्ल््नई i | _
i
Madhya |
Pradesh,
as its
sole
member.
3. Commis- | 6-3-1961 | 11 months | To inquire into
sion of and 22 | the disturbances
Inquiry days. which took
with Shri place in the
Justice districts of
Shiv Jabalpur, Sagar,
Dayal Damoh and
Shrivastva, Narsinmhapur in
Judge, February, 1962.
‘Madhya |
Pradesh
High
Court,
Gwalior
Bench, |
Gwalior, i
as its sole| |
member. | i
MAHARASHTRA
i 1
t. Commis- | 20-8-1960 | Three To inquire into | The Commission
sion of In-| months. the cases of the | submitted = the
quiry con- explosion which | Report on
sisting of occurred on the | sth November,
late Shri 8th July, 1960 | 1960, The
RS. in the Gas Hol- | Government _ac-
Bavdekar, ' der No. 4,  si- | cepted the find-
Judge of | tuated at Lal- | ings and recom-
the High t baugh, Bom- | mendations — of
Court, bay Gas Co. [| the Commis-
Bombay. Ltd., Bombay. | sion of Inquiry.
The Report
was released for
publication in



48

Manarasutra—contd.

S.No. and
name of the
Commission

Date of
appoint-
ment

Duration of
Commission

[Matter for which |

appointed

Remarks

2. Commis-
sion of
Inquiry
consisting
of Shri
T. S. Bil-|
grami,
Member,
Industrial
Court,
Bombay.

19-5-1961

Five months|

To inguire into
the causes of
the explosion
which occurred
on the 17th
March, 1961, in
the Sohanlal
Pahladrai Sol-
vent Extraction
Plant, Jalgaon.

December, 1960.

The Com-
mission sug~
gested the

measures to छह
taken to mini-
mise corrosion.
and prevent
such failure of
Gas holders,
and recommended
more inspections
of the internal
condition of
the sheeting of
holders. As this
statutory pro-

vision is to be-

made in the
Factories Act,.
1948, which is,
a Central Act,
the matter has
been taken up.
with the Gov-
ermmment of India,
Ministry of La-
bour and Emp-
loyment, New
Delhi.

The Commis-
sion _ submitted
the .Report in
October, 1961.
The findings and
the recommen-
dations have
been accepted
by Government,
‘The Report is not
so far released
for publication,
as the question
of taking action
in pursuance of”
the Report is
under cons-
deration.



49
ManarasuTra—contd,

1

S. No. fand | Date of | Duration of

Matter for which

name of the | appoint- | Commission appointed Remarks
Commission ment
Commis .
3. ~ (31-10-1958 From The Maha | The Commis-
sion of 31-10-1958 | Gujarat Pari- | sion of Inquiry
Inquiry * to shad erected a! was appointed
into the 16-§-1959 “Martyrs Me-| by the former
cases of morial? un- | Government of
Police’ H authorisedly in | Bombay. As a
firing at i Ahmedabad(now | result of bifurca~
Ahmeda- forming part | tion, Ahmedabad
bad जा of the | now forms part
the rath, Gujarat Strate) | of the present
13th and on the 8th | Gujarat State,
14th August, — 1958,
August, After the re-
1958, con-| moval by the
sisting of police of
Shri Jus- the unauthorised
tice S. P. structures on
Rotval, the morning of
Judge, 12th August,
High 1958, there
Court, was an out- |
Bombay. : break of —mob-
| Violence, in-
cendiarism, loot-
ing, etc,
in certain j
parts of Ahme-
dabad. Jn

quelling — these
disturbances, the
police op2ned
fire on the
Tath, 13th and
rgth August,
1958, which
resulted in
loss of life and
injury to some

| persons. The

former — Bom-

bay Govern- ;

ment there-
fore appointed
Shri 85. PB
Kotval, Judge,



30

Manarasutra—contd.

3. No. and
mame of the
Commission

Date of
appoint-
ment

Duration of
Commission

Matter for which
appointed

High Court,
Bombay, to be
the Commis-
sion of Inquiry
with the follow-
ing terms of
reference, viz. —

(a) to as-
certain the
circumstances
under which
the police
resorted to
firing on the
said dates ;

(8) to report
whether there
‘was an attempt,
direct or indi-
rect, on the
part of any
person or
political parties
to create, or
instigate others
to create dis~
order and to
indulge in
acts of  vio-
Jence, — incen-
diarism, _loot-
ing and des-
truction of
private and
public pro-
perty, in the
event of the
jocal  authori-
ties obstructing
the erection
of the  Me-
morials or
removing them
after erection ;



51
*“Manarasutna—contd,

Duration of
| Commission

|

!
|

Matter for which
appointed

Remarks

4 Commis-
sion of.
Inquiry
consisting
of |
Shri RS.
Bavdekar,
retired
Judge of
the High
Court at
Bombay.

24-7-7967

[Three months

i

() to de-
termine whe-
ther the firing
on the said
date was
justified or
not 5

(d) to re-
port on such
other matters
as may be
germane to
the above.
The Panshet
and = Khadak-
wasla Dams
in Poona Dis-
trict failed on
the 12th July,
1962, causing
thereby serious
damage to life
and property
in Poona "and |
certain villages
downstream of
the Panshet
Dam. A Com-
mission of
Inquiry con-
sisting of R. S.
Bavdekar, retired
Judge of — the
High Court
at Bombay,
was appointed
to inquire in-
to and report
on—

(a) the cau-
ses of the fail- |

ure of the

The
could not be
completed — be=
cause of death
of Shri R. 5.
Bavdekar.



52
Manarasutra—contd.
3. No. | Date of | Duration of | Matter for which
mame of the | appoint- | Commission appointed ~ Remarks
Commission ment

dams at

shet and.

Rhadakwasla on|

Jath July,

1961, and

} the — circum-

stances in

which such

i failure occur-
| red, and

H
(8) the ade-
quacy of the

action taken
by the various
authorities be-
fore, during
and immedia-
tely after the
disaster to
avert the same
or to mitigate

; the conse-
quences there-
of.

3. Commis--} 3-11-1961 | Upto the | The Commis- | The Report is

sion of In-| 3oth April, | sion of Inquiry | yet to be sub-
quiry con- 1962. consisting of | mitted to Gov-
sisting of Shri R.  S. | ernment.
Shri V.A. Bavdekar, could
Naik, not complete
Judge of the inquiry
the High about the
“Court at failure of the
Bombay. Panshet and
Khadakwasia
Dams on

account of the
premature
death of Shri
Bavdekar.
Government
therefore — ap-
pointed another



53

ManarasHTra—concld,

S.No, and | Date of | Duration of |Matter for which
name of the | appoint- | Commission appointed |
Commission ment |
tT

Commission of
Inquiry under
the Commis-
sions of वा
quiry Act, 1952
! consisting of
Shri Justice
Vv. A. Naik,
Judge of the
High Court at
Bombay to in-
quire into and
report on—

(a) the fail-
ure of the
Panshet and
Khadakwasia
Dams and the
i circumstances

in which such

failure oc
curred;

(8) the ade-
quacy of action
taken by the
various au-
| thorities — be-
fore, during
and imme
diately after
the disaster to
avert the same
or to mitigate
the conse-
quences there-
of,



54

ANDHRA PRADESH

|
Date of Duration of

appointment | Commission |

Matter for which
appointed

16-10-1961. 2 months
(To inquire into

affairs of one

concern).

HIMACHAL PRADESH ADMINISTRATION

20-1-1958 From
(To inquire into | 31-1-58
be to
73°58.

Inquiry into the
affairs of फट
Andhra — Hand-
loom — Weavers
Limited, Vijaya-
wada owing to
its mismanage-
ment, etc.

Fire Si) in

Shri i
Narain’s Temple
at Chamba.

The Commission
could not  sub-
mit its Report, as
stay orders were
passed by the
High Court of
Andhra Pradesh.

GMGIPND—TSS—140 M of Law (6164)—29-4-1963-—1,750

1