GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW
COMMISSION
OF 
INDIA
Costs in Civil Litigation 
Report No.240
MAY  2012
1

Justice P. V. Reddi                                                              New Delhi 
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India) Tele: 2301 9465 (R)
Chairman 2338 4475 (O)
Law Commission of India  Fax: 2379 2745 (R)
                                   9th May, 2012
Dear Minister Salman Khurshid ji,
I am forwarding herewith the report of the Law Commission of India on the  
“Costs in Civil Litigation”.  Pursuant to the observations made by the Supreme  
Court in three cases – Ashok Kumar Mittal (2009), Vinod Seth (2010) and Sanjeev  
Kumar Jain (2011), the Law Commission has taken an in-depth study and had  
interaction with the judicial officers and lawyers at the conference held in some of  
the States.   The Rules of various High Courts governing taxation of costs and  
advocate’s fee have been pursued.  Keeping in view the triple goals of (i) ensuring  
realistic and reasonable costs to the successful party, (ii) curbing false and frivolous  
litigation and (iii) discouraging unnecessary adjournments, the recommendations  
have been made.  To felicitate expeditious realization of costs pending appeals,  
amendments to law has been suggested.   As per the recommendations, certain  
legislative  changes in CPC have been proposed.  Amendments to Section 35A  
(compensatory costs for false and frivolous litigation), S. 95 (compensation for  
obtaining arrests, attachment, etc., on insufficient grounds), Order XXV (security  
for  costs),  Order  LXI  (appeals  from  original  decrees),  Order  XX,  Rule  6A  
(preparation of decree), have been suggested.  The need to revisit and update the  
Rules framed by the High Courts in so far as they relate to costs and advocate’s fee  
and to develop best practices in the matter of award of adjournment costs, etc., has  
been pointed out.  The observations of Supreme Court have been kept in view.  
The report is being sent to all the High Courts.  Amendments to CPC on the lines  
suggested needs to be addressed without loss of time.
With regards and good wishes
Sd./
                                                                                                     (P. V. REDDI)
Shri Salman Khurshid, M.P.
Hon’ble Minister for Law & Justice
New Delhi.
_________________________________________________
Office: I. L. I. Building, Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi – 110 001
Residence: 1, Janpath, New Delhi 110 011
E-mail: pv_reddi@yahoo.co.in
2

INDEX
Sl. 
No.
Particulars Page numbers
1. Introductory Remarks 4 - 6
2. ‘Costs’  –  definition  and  governing  
principles
6 – 12
3. Principles laid down and points highlighted 
in the decisions of Supreme Court
12 – 23
4. Provisions relating to costs under the CPC  
and the prevalent rules and practices and  
the suggested changes
23 – 29
5. The High Court Rules – an overview 29 – 32
6. Advocate’s Fee & Fee Certificate 32 – 39
7. Costs in Revisions 39
8. Section 35-A 39 – 48
9. Section 95 48 – 49
10. Section 35-B (Costs for causing delay) 49 – 51
11. Order XVII (Adjournment costs) 51 – 53
12. Order XXV (Security for costs) 53 – 54
13. Summary of Recommendations 55 – 57
14. ANNEXURE – I Costs in Civil litigation -  
Some  illustrative  cases  of  Supreme 
Court
58 – 65
15. ANNEXURE – II A.P. ADVOCATES’ 
FEE RULES, 2010
66 – 72
3

1. Introductory Remarks  
1.1 The subject relating to award of costs in civil matters has been taken up  
by the  Law  Commission  of  India  pursuant  to the  observations  made  by the  
Supreme Court  that the legal provisions relating to costs needs to be revisited by  
the legislature and the Law Commission.  The first case which it is relevant to  
mention in this context is that of Ashok Kumar Mittal vs. Ram kumar Gupta1. The 
second is the case of  Vinod Seth  Vs. Devinder Bajaj 2.  In another judgment  
rendered very recently 3, the Supreme  Court took note of various suggestions  
placed  before  the  court  by  the  Law  Commission  and  Sri  Arun  Mohan  (Sr.  
Advocate), and reiterated the need to consider appropriate changes in the relevant  
provisions including the rules of various High Courts.
1.2 This is what the Supreme Court said in Ashok Kumar Mittal’s case:
“9. The present system of levying meagre costs in civil matters (or no  
costs in some matters), no doubt, is wholly unsatisfactory and does not  
act as a deterrent to vexatious or luxury litigation borne out of ego or  
greed, or resorted to as a “buying-time” tactic.  More realistic approach  
relating to costs may be the need of the hour.  Whether we should adopt  
suitably, the western models of awarding actual and more realistic costs  
is a matter that requires to be debated and should engage the urgent  
attention of the Law Commission of India.”
1.3 Similar  views were echoed in  Vinod Seth’s  case. The Supreme  Court  
observed as under after discussing various aspects relating to costs:
“53. The lack of appropriate provisions relating to costs has resulted  
in  a  steady  increase  in  malicious,  vexatious,  false,  frivolous  and  
1 (2009) 2 SCC 656
2 (2010) 8 SCC 1
3 Sanjeev Kumar Jain Vs. Raghubir Saran Charitable Trust [JT 2011 (12) SC 435]
4

speculative suits, apart from rendering Section 89 of the Code ineffective.  
Any attempt to reduce the pendency  or encourage alternative  dispute  
resolution processes or to streamline the civil justice system will fail in  
the  absence  of  appropriate  provisions  relating  to  costs.   There  is  
therefore an urgent need for the legislature and the Law Commission of  
India to revisit the provisions relating to costs and compensatory costs  
contained in Section 35 and 35-A of the Code.”
1.4  Accordingly, the Law Commission took up for consideration the subject  
relating to award of costs in civil litigation.  While so, in yet another case, i.e.,  
Sanjeev Kumar Jain vs. Raghubir Saran Charitable Trust 4, the Supreme Court  
had to address the issues relating to costs.  The Law Commission felt that it  
would be appropriate to present its views before the Supreme Court and to assist  
the Court in the matter.  Accordingly,  written submissions which,  inter alia , 
contained specific suggestions were filed before the Supreme Court.  One of the  
Part-time Members of the Commission – Shri A. Mariarputham (Sr. Advocate) –  
assisted the court. Dr. Arun Mohan (Sr. Advocate, who was appointed as amicus 
curiae in  that  case)  also  rendered  considerable  assistance  to  the  court.  The  
learned  Judges of the  Supreme  Court extensively referred  to the  suggestions  
made by the Law Commission and the amicus, recorded their views broadly on  
the approach to be adopted in awarding costs or framing the rules governing costs 
and finally observed thus: “ We suggest appropriate changes in the provisions  
relating to costs contained as per paras 14-29 above to the Law Commission of  
India, the Parliament and the respective High Courts for making appropriate  
changes.”  It may be mentioned here that paras 14 to 22 deal with costs in civil  
litigation and the subsequent paras are about arbitration costs.
4 ibid
5

1.5 There is one more case decided by the Supreme Court recently i.e., the  
case of Ramrameshwari Devi vs. Nirmala Devi 5 in which also certain principles  
relating to costs were set out.  
1.6 The common thread running through all these cases is the reiteration of  
three salutary principles: (i) costs should ordinarily follow the event; (ii) realistic  
costs  ought  to  be  awarded  keeping  in  view  the  ever  increasing  litigation  
expenses; and (iii) the cost should serve the purpose of curbing frivolous and  
vexatious litigation.   It is worth quoting Justice Bowen in  Copper vs. Smith  
(1884).  He said:  “I have found in my experience that there is one panacea which  
heals every sore in litigation and that is costs”.
2. ‘Costs’ – definition and governing principles
2.1 Before referring to the principles / guidelines in those decisions in some 
detail, it would be apposite to advert to the concept of ‘costs’ and the general 
principles governing the award of costs.
2.2 “Costs” signifies the sum of money which the court orders one party to  
pay another party in respect of the expenses of litigation incurred. Except where  
specifically provided by the statute or by rule of Court, the costs of proceedings  
are in the Court’s discretion.6  
2.3 In Johnstone v. The Law Society of Prince Edward Island , 2 PEIR B-28  
(1988 ) the Canadian Court of Appeal speaking through McQuaid, J described  
costs in the following words:
5 (2011) 8 SCC 249
6 Halsbury’s Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol 12, P 414
6

“… the sum of money which the court orders one party  
to pay another party in an action as compensation for the  
expense of litigation incurred.  The definition continues  
to the effect that costs are awarded as compensation (i.e.  
reimbursement); there is, unlike damages, no restitutio in 
integrum, that is to say,  no concept  in costs, as there  
exists  in  damages,  that  the  injured  person  should  be  
placed, in so far as money can do so, in the same position 
as he occupied before the injury was suffered”.
2.4 The  principle  underlying  levy  of  costs  was  stated  succinctly  thus  in  
Manindra Chandra Nandi vs. Aswini Kumar Acharjya,  ILR(1921) 48 Cal 427 –  
a passage cited with approval by Supreme Court in Vinod Seth’s case:
“… We must remember that whatever the origin of costs might  
have been, they are now awarded, not as a punishment of the  
defeated party but as a recompense to the successful party for the  
expenses to which he had been subjected, or, as Lord Coke puts it,  
for  whatever  appears  to  the  Court  to  be  the  legal  expenses  
incurred by the party in prosecuting his suit or his defence.   ….  
The theory on which costs are now awarded to a plaintiff is that  
default of the defendant made it necessary to sue him, and to a  
defendant is that the plaintiff sued him without cause; costs are  
thus in the nature of incidental damages allowed to indemnify a  
party against the expense of successfully vindicating his rights in  
court and consequently the party to blame pays costs to the party  
without fault.   These principles apply, not merely in the award of  
costs, but also in the award of extra allowance or special costs.  
Courts are authorized to allow such special allowances, not to  
inflict a penalty on the unsuccessful party, but to indemnify the  
successful litigant for actual expenses necessarily or reasonably  
incurred in what are designated as important cases or difficult  
and extraordinary cases.”7
These observations were made at a time when S. 35-A of CPC was not  
there on the Statute book.
2.5 In P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s the Major Law Lexicon, 4 th Edn. At p. 1571,  
costs have been described as follows:
“Costs are certain allowances authorized by statute to reimburse  
the  successful  party  for  expenses  incurred  in  prosecuting  or  
defending  an  action  or  special  proceeding.   They  are  in  the  
7 Passage cited with approval by Supreme Court in Vinod Seth’s case
7

nature  of  incidental  damages  allowed  to  indemnify  a  party  
against the expense of successfully asserting his rights in Court.  
The theory upon which they are allowed to a  plaintiff is that the  
default of the defendant made it necessary to sue him, and to a  
defendant, that the plaintiff sued him without cause.  Thus the  
party to blame pays costs to the party without a fault.”
2.6 The provision for costs is intended to achieve the following goals,  
as pointed out by the Supreme Court in  Vinod Seth vs. Devinder Bajaj, supra
“(a) It should act as a deterrent to vexatious, frivolous  
and speculative litigations or defences.   The spectre of  
being made liable to pay actual costs should be such, as  
to make every litigant think twice before putting forth a  
vexatious, frivolous or speculative claim or defence.
(b) Costs  should  ensure  that  the  provisions  of  the  
Code,  the  Evidence  Act  and  other  laws  governing  
procedure  are  scrupulously  and  strictly  complied  with 
and that parties do not adopt delaying tactics or mislead  
the court.
(c) Costs should provide adequate indemnity to the  
successful litigant for the expenditure incurred by him  
for the litigation.   This necessitates the award of actual  
costs of litigation as contrasted from nominal or fixed or  
unrealistic costs.
(d) The provision for costs should be an incentive for  
each  litigant  to  adopt  alternative  dispute  resolution  
(ADR) processes and arrive at a settlement before the  
trial commences in most of the cases.   In many other  
jurisdictions, in view of the existence of appropriate and  
adequate provisions for costs, the litigants are persuaded  
to settle nearly 90% of the civil suits before they come  
up to trial.
(e) The  provisions  relating  to  costs  should  not  
however obstruct access to courts and justice.  Under no  
circumstances,  the  costs  should  be  a  deterrent,  to  a  
citizen  with  a  genuine  or  bona  fide  claim,  or  to  any  
person belonging  to the  weaker  sections  whose  rights  
have been affected, from approaching the courts.”
2.7 Manitoba  Law  Reform  Commission,  in  its  Report  on  “Costs  
Awards  in  Civil  Litigation”  sets  out  six  broad  goals  –  not  all  mutually  
compatible  –  that  costs  rules  should  strive  to  achieve.  The  first  goal  is  
8

indemnification: successful litigants ought to be at least partially indemnified  
against their legal costs.  The second is deterrence: potential litigants should be  
encouraged to think carefully before engaging the civil justice system to achieve  
their goals and should also be encouraged to refrain from taking unnecessary  
steps  within  that  system.   The  third  goal  is  to  make  costs  rules  easy  to  
understand and simple to apply.  The fourth is to encourage early settlement of  
disputes, and the fifth is to facilitate access to justice. The sixth and final goal  
the Commission considered important is flexibility: the rules must allow judges  
to ensure that justice is done in particular cases”.
2.8 The award of costs is generally not considered to be a penalty but  
a method used to reimburse the other party the expenses of litigation. However,  
the costs imposed on a party for indulging in frivolous or vexatious  litigation  
stand on a different footing. The general rule is that that the unsuccessful party  
would be ordered to pay the costs to the successful party.  Thus, the rule has  
been coined to “costs follows the event”, which means that the court will usually  
order that the loser of the litigation pays the winner’s costs.   However, the court  
has the discretion to award or not to award the costs.   As stated in Halsbury’s  
Laws of England, “This discretion must be exercised judicially; it must not be  
exercised arbitrarily but in accordance with reason and justice”. 8  
2.9 Under  the  Federal  Rules  of  Civil  Proceeding  (USA),  “costs  shall  be  
allowed as of course to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise directs.”  
In most of the States in US, attorney’s fee is not allowed as litigation cost.
2.10 There could be final costs and interlocutory costs.  
8 Para 15, Vol. 10, 4th Edn. (Reissue)
9

2.11 A bill of costs is a certified, itemized statement of the amount of  
the expenses incurred in bringing or defending a law suit/proceeding.   The  
charges/expenses claimed are taxed by the Court or its officer according to the  
procedural rules and set norms.
2.12 The basis of assessment of costs in UK has been explained thus in  
Halsbury’s Laws of England9:
“Where the court is to assess the amount of costs (whether  
by summary or detailed assessment) it will assess those  
costs on the standard basis or on the indemnity basis, but  
the court will not in either case allow costs which have  
been unreasonably incurred or are unreasonable in amount.  
Where  the  amount  of  costs  is  to  be  assessed  on  the  
standard basis, the court will only allow costs which are  
proportionate to the matters in issue and will resolve any  
doubt  which  it  may  have  as  to  whether  costs  were  
reasonably  incurred  or  reasonable  and  proportionate  in  
amount in favour of the paying party.  Where the amount  
of costs is to be assessed on the indemnity basis, the court  
will resolve any doubt which it may have as to whether  
costs  were  reasonably  incurred  or  were  reasonable  in  
amount in favour of the receiving party.  Where the court  
makes an order about costs without indicating the basis on  
which the costs are to be assessed, or makes an order for  
costs to be assessed on a basis other than the standard basis  
or the indemnity basis, the costs will be assessed on the  
standard basis.”
2.13 Part  44  of  the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  (CPR)  contains  
general  rules  about  costs  and  entitlement  to  costs.   The  rules  are  
supplemented by practice direction.  However, part 44 does not apply to  
the assessment of costs to the extent different provisions exist, for eg,  
Access to Justice Act, 1999 and the Legal Aid Act, 1988.  Further, the  
general rule that the unsuccessful party will be ordered to pay the costs  
of the successful party unless the court makes a different order does not  
apply to family proceedings.  
9 Para 22, Vol. 10, 4th edn., re-issue
10

2.14 The  circumstances  to  be  taken  into  account  when  
exercising the court’s discretion have been narrated in Halsbury’s Laws  
of England10 as follows:
“In deciding what order (if any) to make about costs, the court  
must have regard to all the circumstances, including:
(i) The conduct of all the parties;
(ii) Whether a party has succeeded on part of his case, even if  
he has not been wholly successful; and
(iii) Any payment into court or admissible offer to settle made  
by a party which is drawn to the court’s attention.
The conduct of the parties includes:
(a) Conduct before, as well as during, the proceedings and in  
particular the extent to which the parties followed any relevant  
pre-action protocol;
(b) Whether it was reasonable for a party to raise, pursue or  
contest a particular allegation or issue;
(c) The manner in which a party has pursued or defended his  
case or a particular allegation or issue; and
(d) Whether a claimant who has succeeded in his claim, in  
whole or in part, exaggerated his claim”.
2.15 An order for indemnity costs is intended to provide a party to  
litigation, when its costs are assessed, with recovery of all, or nearly all, its  
outlay in the litigation. Even the indemnity principle rests on the assumption that 
a winner cannot recover more than the costs he has incurred. Indemnity costs are  
simply a basis or formula for calculation of the actual costs. In the case of a  
standard order, the court will only allow costs which are proportionate to the  
matters and issues (vide R 44.2a). In an indemnity order, there is no requirement  
of proportionality at all. Usually, costs are awarded on indemnity basis, after one 
10 10th Vol. 4th Edn. at para 17
11

of the parties has behaved unreasonably e.g. in rejecting an offer of settlement or 
being dishonest,  ignoring Court’s orders and continuing with litigation despite  
the fact that the claim is clearly unjustified.  In other words, indemnity costs are  
quite often awarded for unreasonable conduct or abuse of process by resorting to  
vexatious or unmeritorious proceedings.
2.16 Lord Scott observed in Four -v- Le Roux [2007] UKHL 1 that  
“the difference between costs at the standard rate and costs on an indemnity  
basis is, according to the language of the relevant rules not very great.”    He  
proceeded to say:   “According to CPR 44.5(1), where costs are assessed on the  
standard  basis  the  payee  can  expect  to  recover  costs  “proportionately  and  
reasonably incurred” or “proportionate and reasonable in amount”; and where  
costs are assessed on the indemnity basis, the payee can expect to recover all his  
costs except those that were “unreasonably incurred” or were “unreasonable in  
amount”. It is difficult to see much difference between the two sets of criteria,  
save that where costs have been ordered on an indemnity basis, the onus must lie 
on the payer to show any unreasonableness criterion. The concept of costs that  
were  unreasonably  but  proportionately  incurred  or  are  unreasonable  but  
proportionate  in  amount,  or  vice  versa,  is  one  that  I  find  difficult  to  
comprehend.” 
2.17 Mr.  Riyaz  Jariwalla  (Solicitor)  explains:  “Indemnity  costs  are  
penal  in  nature  as  they  can  be  ordered  to  compensate  one  party  following  
another party’s wrongful conduct of proceedings. However, that compensation  
must never offend the spirit of the indemnity principle. The party recovering  
costs  must  never  recover  more  than  they  have  actually  spent.  It  should  be  
12

recognized  that  100%  recovery  of  costs  is  rare  but  the  indemnity  basis  of  
assessment will take a party nearer that percentage than the standard basis.”   
3. Principles  laid  down  and  points  highlighted  in  the  decisions  of  
Supreme Court:
3.1 Before we advert to the more recent decisions of the Supreme Court, it is  
appropriate to take note of the categorical observations made by a three Judge  
Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  2005  in  the  case  of  Salem  Advocate  Bar  
Association T. N.  Vs. Union of India11:
“Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that many unscrupulous  
parties  take  advantage  of the fact  that  either  the  costs are not  
awarded or nominal costs are awarded on the unsuccessful party.  
Unfortunately, it has become a practice to direct parties to bear  
their own costs.  In large number of cases, such an order is passed  
despite  Section  35(2)  of  the  Code.   Such  a  practice  also  
encourages filing of frivolous suits.  It also leads to the taking up  
of  frivolous  defences.   Further  wherever  costs  are  awarded,  
ordinarily  the  same  are  not  realistic  and  are  nominal.   When  
Section 35(2) provides for cost to follow the event, it is implicit  
that the costs have to be those which are reasonably incurred by a  
successful  party  except  in  those  cases  where  the  Court  in  its  
discretion may direct otherwise by recording reason therefor.  The  
costs have to be actual reasonable costs including the cost of the  
time spent by the successful party, the transportation and lodging,  
if any, or any other incidental cost besides the payment of the  
court fee, lawyer’s fee, typing and other cost in relation to the  
litigation.  It is for the High Courts to examine these aspects and  
wherever necessary make requisite rules, regulations or practice  
direction  so  as  to  provide  appropriate  guidelines  for  the  
subordinate courts to follow.”
3.2 Not much of progress has been made in the revision of relevant rules and 
regulations in the light of the observations made by the apex court.
3.3 In the case of Ashok Kumar Mittal (supra), the Supreme Court pointed out 
that the present system of levying meagre costs in civil matters (or no costs) in  
some matters, no doubt is “wholly unsatisfactory and does not act as a deterrent  
to vexatious or luxury litigation” or ‘buying-time tactic’.  The Court called for a  
more realistic approach vis-à-vis award of costs.  The Supreme Court referred to  
11 (2005) 6 SCC 344
13

two competing views, to cite, (i) the provisions in Sections 35 and 35A CPC do  
not affect the wide discretion vested in the High Court in exercise of its inherent  
power to award costs in the interests of justice, and (ii) though award of costs is  
within the discretion of the Court, it is subject to such conditions and limitations  
as may be prescribed and subject to the provisions of any law  in force and  
therefore, inherent powers contrary to the specific provisions of the Code viz.  
Section 35 and 35A etc., cannot be exercised.  This latter view was considered to  
be a “more sound view”.  Having said so, the following pertinent observations  
were made by the learned Judges: 
“Further, the provisions of section 35A seem to suggest that even  
where  a   suit  or  litigation  is  vexatious,  the  outer  limit  of  
exemplary costs that can be awarded in addition to regular costs,  
shall not exceed Rs. 3000/-. It is also to be noted that huge costs  
of the order of Rs. Fifty thousand or Rs. One lakh, are normally  
awarded only in writ proceedings and public interest litigations,  
and not  in  civil  litigation  to  which  Sections  35 and  35A  are  
applicable.  The principles and practices relating to levy of costs  
in administrative law matters cannot be imported mechanically  
in relation to civil litigation governed by the Code.”
3.4 The  view  which  was  considered  to  be  sound  in  the  above  case  was  
reiterated  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  latest  case  of  Sanjeev  Kumar  Jain. 
Adverting to the prefacing phrase in section 35 – “subject to …..”, the Court laid  
down that (“if there are any conditions or limitations prescribed in the Code or in  
any  Rules,  the  Court,  obviously,  cannot  ignore  them  in  awarding  costs”.)  
Further, in the same case of  Sanjeev Kumar Jain, the Supreme Court, in keeping  
with what was said earlier in Ashok Kumar Mittal , stressed the need to develop  
the practice of awarding costs in accordance with section 35 i.e., costs following  
the event and also giving reasons for not awarding costs.   Otherwise, it was  
pointed out, the object of the provisions for costs would be defeated.  Then, it  
was said:
“Prosecution and defence of cases is a time consuming and costly  
process.   A  plaintiff/petitioner/appellant  who  is  driven  to  the  
court, by the illegal acts of the defendant/respondent, or denial of  
a right to which he is entitled, if he succeeds, has to be reimbursed  
of  his  expenses  in  accordance  with  law.  Similarly  a  
defendant/respondent who is dragged to court unnecessarily or  
vexatiously, if he succeeds, should be reimbursed of his expenses  
14

in accordance with law.  Further, it is also well recognized that  
levy of costs and compensatory costs is one of the effective ways of 
curbing false or vexatious litigations.”
3.5 The next decision which deserves notice is the case of Vinod Seth (supra). 
The Court highlighted the deficiencies in the prevailing Rules and practices in  
regard to costs in civil matters:
“Section 35 of the Code vests the discretion to award costs in the  
property, and to what extent such costs are to be paid.  Most of  
the  costs  taxing  rules,  including  the  rules  in  force  in  Delhi  
provide each party should file a bill of cost immediately after the  
judgment  is  delivered  setting  out:  (a)  the  court  fee  paid;  (b)  
process fee spent; (c) expenses of witnesses; (d) advocate’s fee;  
and (e) such courts.  It provides that normally the costs  should  
follow the event and court shall have full power to determine by  
whom or out of what other amount as may be allowable under  
the rules or as may be directed by the court as costs.  We are  
informed that in Delhi, the advocate’s fee in regard to suits the  
value of which exceeds Rs. 5 lakhs is: Rs. 14,500/- plus 1% of the  
amount  in  excess  of  Rs.  5  lakhs  subject  to  a  ceiling  of  Rs.  
50,000/-. The prevalent view among litigants and members of the  
bar is that the costs provided for in the Code and awarded by  
courts  neither  compensate  not  indemnify  the  litigant  fully  in  
regard to the expenses incurred by him.”
3.6 The Supreme Court having noted that Section 35 of the Code does  
not impose any ceiling on the quantum of costs to be awarded, indicated that the  
object of Section 35 can be achieved by the following two measures: (i) Courts  
levying  costs following the results in all  cases (non-levy of costs should be  
supported by reasons); and (ii) appropriate amendments to Civil Rules of practice  
relating to taxation of costs to make it more realistic in commercial litigation.
3.7  Further, as regards Sections 35A and 35B, the Supreme Court made the  
following observations in Vinod Seth’s case:
“The provision relating to compensatory costs (section 35A of  
the Code) in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences  
has become virtually infructuous and ineffective, on account of  
inflation.  Under the said Section, award of compensatory costs  
15

inflation and vexatious litigation, is subject to a ceiling of Rs.  
3,000/-. This requires a realistic revision keeping in view the  
observations in Salem Advocate Bar Association (II) (supra).  
Section 35B providing for costs for causing delay is seldom  
invoked.  It should be regularly employed, to reduce delay.”
3.8  Now we shall refer to the latest decision in Sanjeev Kumar Jain (2011) . 
In that case, the Supreme Court was concerned with the question whether a sum  
of Rs.  45 lakhs awarded as costs by the High Court while dismissing an appeal  
preferred against an order vacating temporary injunction in an Injunction Suit  
was sustainable.  The said Suit was in respect of some commercial litigation.  The 
High Court took into account the Advocate’s fee said to have incurred in the  
Appeal by the Respondent.  This order of the High Court was set aside by the  
Supreme Court and the Hon’ble Court ordered that “the Appellant shall pay the  
costs  of  the  Appeal  before  the  High  Court  as  per  Rules  plus  Rs.  3000/-  as 
exemplary costs to the Respondent.”  It is relevant to take stock of the principles  
laid down in the judgment and its ratio.
3.9 The Supreme Court held in the case of  Sanjeev Kumar Jain (2011)  that 
the order of the High Court awarding heavy costs was unsustainable in the light  
of the existing provisions of CPC read with the Delhi High Court Rules dealing  
with award of costs in Civil Suits.  The Supreme Court referred to the relevant  
Rule that enjoins the Advocate fee to be taxed to the tune of an amount not  
exceeding the scale prescribed in the Schedule to Chapter XXIII.  The Supreme  
Court then clarified the legal position as follows:
“Therefore, the Court could not have awarded costs exceeding the scale  
that was prescribed in the schedule to the Rules.  Doing so would be  
contrary to the Rules.  If it was contrary to the Rules, it was also contrary  
to Section 35 also which makes it subject to the conditions and limitations 
16

as may be prescribed and the provisions of law for the time being in  
force.  Therefore, we are of the view that merely by seeking a consent of  
the parties to award litigation expenses as costs, the High Court could  
not have adopted the procedure of awarding what it assumed to be the  
‘actual costs’ nor could it proceed to award a sum of Rs.45,28,000/- as  
costs in an appeal relating to an interim order in a civil suit.  While we  
would  like  to  encourage  award  of  realistic  costs,  that  should  be  in  
accordance with law.  If the law does not permit award of actual costs,  
obviously courts cannot award actual costs.  When this Court observed  
that it is in favour of award of actual realistic costs, it means that the  
relevant Rules should be amended to provide for actual realistic costs.  
As the law presently stands, there is no provision for award of ‘actual  
costs’  and  the  award  of  costs  will  have  to  be  within  the  limitation  
prescribed by Section 35.”
3.10 The Supreme Court, while pointing out that the High Court misread the  
observations in Salem Advocate Bar Association, observed thus:
“All that this Court stated was that the actual reasonable cost  has to be  
provided for in the rules by appropriate amendment.  In fact, the very  
next sentence in para 37 of the decision of this Court is that the High  
Courts  should  examine  these  aspects  and  wherever  necessary,  make  
requisite  rules,  regulations  or  practice  directions.   What  has  been  
observed  by  this  court  about  actual  realistic  costs is  an  observation  
requiring the High Courts to amend their rules and regulations to provide  
for  actual  realistic  costs,  where  they  are  not  so  provided….The  
observation in Salem Advocates Bar Association  is a direction to amend  
the rules so as to provide for actual realistic costs and not to ignore the  
existing  rules.   The  decision  in  Salem  Advocates  Bar  Association is  
therefore of no assistance to justify the award of such costs.  The Rules  
permit costs to be awarded only as per the schedule.”
3.11  The learned Judges of the Supreme Court then proceeded to explain the  
concept of ‘actual realistic cost’ in the following words:
"The actual  realistic costs should have a correlation to costs which are  
realistic  and  practical.   It  cannot  obviously  refer  to  fanciful  and  
whimsical  expenditure  by parties  who have the luxury of engaging a  
battery of high-charging lawyers.  If the logic adopted by the High Court  
is to be accepted, then the losing party should pay the costs, not with  
reference to the subject matter of the suit, but with reference to the fee  
paying capacity of the other side.  Let us take the example of a suit for  
recovery of Rs.1 lakh.  If a rich plaintiff wants to put forth his case more  
effectively, engages a counsel who… charges Rs.1 lakh merely because it  
17

is a commercial dispute?  In a matter relating to temporary injunction,  
merely because the court adjourns the matter several times and one side  
engages a counsel by paying more than a lakh per hearing, should the  
other side be made to bear such costs?  The costs memo filed by the  
respondents show that Rs.45,28,000/- was paid to four counsels? If a rich  
litigant engages four counsels instead of one, should the defendant pay  
the fee of four counsels? ….. Even if actual costs have to be awarded, it  
should  be  realistic which  means  what  a  “normal”  advocate  in  a  
“normal” case of such nature would charge normally in such a case.  
Mechanically ordering the losing party to pay costs of Rs.45,28,000/- in  
an appeal against grant of a temporary injunction in a pending suit for  
permanent injunction was unwarranted and contrary to law.  It cannot be  
sustained.”
3.12 The Supreme Court then referred to the Model Case-flow Management  
Rules and the observation of the Court in Salem Advocate Bar Association  that 
the High Courts should consider making Rules particularly in terms of the said  
Model Rules.
3.13   The Supreme Court commented that the general impression that the  
court-fee relating to litigation is high  is not correct.  It was pointed out that  
except in the case of few categories of suits where court fee is  ad valorem,  in 
majority of the Suits/Petitions and Appeals arising therefrom, the court fee is a  
fixed nominal fee and that fixed fee prescribed decades ago has not undergone  
change.  The Supreme Court pointed out the need for a periodical revision of  
fixed court fee and commented on the meager court fee payable in the matters  
before  the  Supreme  Court.   The  Court  observed  that  the  costs  should  be  
commensurate with the time spent by the Courts atleast in commercial litigations.  
There is no reason why a nominal fixed fee should be collected in regard to the  
arbitration matters, company matters, tax matters, etc., which may involve huge  
amounts.  Then it was observed:
18

“While we are not advocating an ad valorem fee with reference to value  
in such matters, at least the fixed fee should be sufficiently high to have  
some kind of quid pro-quo to the cost involved.”
3.14 The need to revise the advocate’s fee provided in the Schedule to the  
Rules was stressed by the Supreme Court in the following words:
“Equally urgent is the need to revise the advocate’s fee provided in the  
Schedule  to  the  Rules,  most  of  which  are  outdated  and  have  no  
correlation with the prevailing rates of fees.  In regard to money suits,  
specific performance suits and other suits where ad valorem Court fee is  
payable, the advocate’s fee is also usually ad valorem.  We are more  
concerned with the other matters, which constitute the majority of the  
litigation, where fixed advocates’ fees are prescribed.  In Delhi, in regard  
to any proceedings (other than suits where the  ad valorem court fee is  
payable),  the  maximum  fee  that  could  be  awarded  is  stated  to  be  
Rs.2000/- and for appeals of the scale if that is payable to original suits.”  
(sic)
3.15  The approach to be adopted in providing for actual, realistic cost  
was further clarified as follows:
“The object is to streamline the award of costs and simplify the process of  
assessment,  while  making  the  cost  ‘actual  and  realistic’.   While  
ascertainment of actuals is necessary in regard to expenditure incurred  
(as for example travel expenses of witnesses, cost of obtaining certified  
copies etc.), in so far as advocates’ fee is concerned, the emphasis should  
be on ‘realistic’ rather than ‘actual’.  The courts are not concerned with  
the number of lawyers engaged or the high rate of day fee paid to them.  
For the present, the advocate fee should be a realistic normal single fee.”
3.16  The  Supreme  Court  then  made  a  significant  observation  that  “the  
schemes/processes for assessment of costs in some of the western countries may  
not be appropriate with reference to Indian conditions”.  It was then observed  
thus:
19

“The  process  of  taxation  of  costs  has  developed  into  a  detailed  and  
complex procedure in developed countries and instances are not wanting  
where the costs awarded has been more than the amount involved in the  
litigation itself.  Having regard to Indian conditions, it is not possible or  
practical to spend the amount of time that is required for determination of  
‘actual costs’ as done in those countries, when we do not have time even  
to dispose of cases on merits.  If the Courts have to set apart the time  
required for the elaborate procedure of assessment of costs, it may even  
lead to an increased in the pendency of cases.”
3.17 While stressing the need to provide for awarding realistic   advocate’s  fee  
by  amending   the  relevant   Rules periodically, a  serious fall-out of not levying  
actual, realistic cost has been expressed in the following terms:
“A litigant, who starts the litigation, after some time, being unable to  
bear the delay and mounting costs, gives up and surrenders to the other  
side or agrees to settlement which is something akin to creditor who is  
not able to recover the debt, writing off the debt.  This happens when the  
costs keep mounting and he realizes that even if he succeeds he will not  
get the actual costs.  If this happens frequently, the citizens will lose  
confidence in the civil justice system.”
3.18 The  Supreme  Court  quite  elaborately  dealt  with  ‘Costs  in  arbitration  
matters’ at paragraphs 23 to 29 of the judgment.  However, we are not delving  
into this aspect as it is more relevant to the proposed amendments to Arbitration  
and Conciliation Act, 1996 being considered by the Law Ministry.  
3.19   Then,  the  views  expressed  by  the  Supreme  Court  on  Section  35A  
(‘compensatory costs’) need to be taken note of. The relevant passage in the  
judgment (Sanjeev Kumar Jain vs. Raghubir Saran Charitable Trust ) is extracted 
hereunder:
“At present, the maximum that can be awarded as compensatory costs in  
regard  to  false  and  vexatious  claims  is  Rs.3,000/-.  Unless  the  
compensatory costs is brought to a realistic level, the present provision  
authorizing levy of an absurdly small sum by present day standards may,  
instead of discouraging such litigation, encourage false and vexatious  
claims.  At  present  Courts  have  virtually  given  up  awarding  any  
20

compensatory costs as award of such a small sum of Rs.3,000/- would not  
make much difference. We are of the view that the ceiling in regard to  
compensatory costs should be at least Rs.1,00,000/-.”
3.20 It may be noted at this juncture that in the written submissions  
made by the Law Commission before the Court, the Commission suggested the  
enhancement  of  ceiling  to  Rs.  1  lakh  and  also  suggested  certain  other  
supplemental directives that could be appropriately given while awarding costs  
under Section 35A.  We shall advert to those details hereinafter.
3.21 The other important observations of the Supreme Court vis-à-vis  
Section 35A are at paragraph 15:
15. We may also note that the description of the costs awardable under  
Section  35A  “as  compensatory  costs”  gives  an  indication  that  it  is  
restitutive rather than punitive. The costs awarded for false or vexatious  
claims  should  be  punitive  and  not  merely  compensatory.  In  fact,  
compensatory costs is something that is contemplated in Section 35B and  
Section  35  itself.  Therefore,  the  Legislature  may  consider  award  of  
'punitive costs' under section 35A.
3.22 Another recent case in which certain principles relating to award  
of costs have been laid down by the Supreme Court is that of Ramrameshwari 
Devi vs. Nirmala Devi 12.   The relevant observations of the Supreme Court are  
given below:
52 C. Imposition of actual, realistic or proper costs and or ordering  
prosecution  would  go  a  long  way  in  controlling  the  tendency  of  
introducing false pleadings and forged and fabricated documents by the  
litigants.  Imposition  of  heavy  costs  would  also  control  unnecessary  
adjournments  by  the  parties.  In  appropriate  cases  the  courts  may  
consider  ordering  prosecution  otherwise  it  may  not  be  possible  to  
maintain purity and sanctity of judicial proceedings.”
3.23  This is what the Supreme Court further said in Ramrameswari Devi’s case:
12 (2011) 8 SCC 249
21

54. While imposing costs we have to take into consideration pragmatic  
realities and be realistic what the defendants or the respondents had to  
actually incur in contesting the litigation before different courts. We have  
to also broadly take into consideration the prevalent fee structure of the  
lawyers and other miscellaneous  expenses which have to be incurred  
towards  drafting  and  filing  of  the  counter  affidavit,  miscellaneous  
charges towards typing, photocopying, court fee etc. 
55. The other factor which should not be forgotten while imposing costs is  
for how long the defendants or respondents were compelled to contest  
and defend the litigation in various courts. The appellants in the instant  
case have harassed the respondents to the  hilt  for four decades in a  
totally frivolous and dishonest litigation in various courts. The appellants  
have also wasted judicial time of the various courts for the last 40 years.
56. On consideration of totality of the facts and circumstances of this  
case,  we  do  not  find  any  infirmity  in  the  well  reasoned  impugned  
order/judgment.  These appeals are consequently  dismissed with  costs,  
which we quantify as Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs only). We are  
imposing the costs not out of anguish but by following the fundamental  
principle  that  wrongdoers  should  not  get  benefit  out  of  frivolous  
litigation.
3.24 The solitary observation in the last sentence quoted above may not  
be construed as a  carte blanche  to the courts to award any amount of costs  
irrespective of Section 35-A of the CPC read with the High Court Rules in a case  
considered to be a frivolous litigation.  The decision of the Supreme Court in  
Sanjeev Kumar Jain  as well as Vinod Seth’s case (supra) rules out the discretion  
of the civil courts to award costs even in a frivolous litigation without regard to  
the statutory provisions.  However, as far as the Supreme Court is concerned, the  
power to award appropriate costs, even much higher than what is contemplated  
by the provisions of CPC, can be traced to the plenary powers vested in the  
Supreme Court.  That is how the award of heavy costs by the Supreme Court in  
civil matters has been justified in Sanjeev Kumar Jain’s case.  The court clarified: 
22

“This Court, of course, in several cases has directed payment of realistic  
costs. But this Court could do so, either because of the discretion vested  
under the Supreme Court Rules, 1966 or having regard to Article 142 of  
the Constitution under which this Court has the power to make such  
orders as are necessary to do complete justice between the parties”.
4.     PROVISIONS RELATING TO COSTS UNDER THE CPC AND  
THE  PREVALENT  RULES  AND  PRACTICES  AND  THE  
SUGGESTED CHANGES
4.1 The core provisions concerning costs are to be found in Sections 35, 35A  
and 35B.  Order XXA and Order XXV are the other allied provisions which  
deserve notice.  We shall deal with them in seriatim:
4.2 SECTION   35   (“COSTS”)
(a) Costs under S.35 is aimed at reimbursement of reasonable litigation  
expenses to the successful party.  The cost to be awarded under various heads  
should be realistic and a just equivalent of the expenditure supposed to have  
been incurred by a litigant.
(b) Section 35 lays down  two principles  (1) the costs of an incident to all  
suits shall be in the discretion of the court. The court shall have full power to  
determine by whom or out of property and to what extent such costs are to be  
paid. (2)  where  the court  directs  that the  costs shall  not follow  the  event,  
specific reasons must be recorded by the court. 
(c) Section 35(1) provides that “subject to such conditions and limitations  
as may be prescribed and to the provisions of any law for the time being in force,  
the costs of and incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court”.  The  
sub-section further provides that the Court shall have full powers to determine by  
whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be paid.
23

(d) The sub-section (2) lays down:  “Where the Court directs that any  
costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall state its reasons in writing”.
Sub-section (2) is indicative of the legislative policy that ordinarily costs  
shall be awarded to the party who succeeds and if it is otherwise, the Parliament  
requires the court to  record reasons for disallowing costs.  Very often, the rule  
that costs should follow the event is observed in breach.  Many of the cases are  
disposed of either by saying  “no order as to costs”    or “parties to bear their  
own costs.”  When the Court, especially the superior costs, disallow costs or say  
‘no order as to costs’, reasons are seldom recorded.  Such cryptic directives do  
not contain anything which indicate the mind of the Court as to why costs are  
being disallowed.    There  are also instances where the High Courts and the  
Supreme Court have been directing costs to be paid to a body other than a party  
to the proceeding, for e.g., a charitable organization or legal services authority,  
which practice is disapproved in some judgments while in others it is so done.  
Judgments  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  wherein  costs  are  awarded  or  not 
allowed, do not give any indication of any underlying principle and no guideline  
or  rationale  can  be  deduced  therefrom.   The  illustrative  cases  which  go  to  
substantiate this contention are furnished in Annexure-I.
(e) Costs are intended to reasonably compensate a party to the litigation  
for the expenses incurred by him.  A party resorting to litigation to vindicate his  
rights or seeking redressal of the wrong done by the other side or a party dragged 
to court  unnecessarily should  be able  to recoup  at least  reasonable  expenses  
incurred by him when he succeeds in the case.  It implies that the quantum of  
costs awardable should be realistic and reasonably sufficient to cover the cost of  
litigation.  
24

(f) The Supreme Court, in Salem Advocate Bar Association vs. Union of  
India [(2005 6 SCC 344)], noticed that “unfortunately, it has become a practice  
to direct parties to bear their own costs ” and that wherever costs are awarded,  
ordinarily the same are not realistic and are nominal.  While referring to Section  
35(2), the Court expressed the view that “ when section 35(2) provides for costs  
to follow  the  event,  it is implicit  that the costs have  to  be those which are  
reasonably incurred by a successful party…[and that] costs have to be actual  
reasonable costs including cost of the time spent by the successful party, the  
transportation  and  lodging  if  any,  or  any  other  incidental  costs  besides  the  
payment of court fee, lawyer’s fee, typing and other costs in relation to the  
litigation. The Court observed that […] the High Courts should examine these  
aspects  and  make  requisite  rules,  regulations  or  practice  directions  so  as  to  
provide appropriate guidelines for the subordinate Courts to follow.”  
(g) In the said judgment, the Court referred to Model Rules for costs  
prepared by a Committee headed by the then Chairman of Law Commission.  
The ‘Model Rules’ are in the nature of guiding principles.  The relevant principle  
concerning the award of costs by trial Courts is as under:-
“8. Costs:-  So far as awarding of costs at the time of judgment is  
concerned,  awarding  of  costs  must  be  treated  generally  as  
mandatory  inasmuch  as  the  liberal  attitude  of  the  courts  in  
directing the parties to bear their own costs had led parties to file  
a number of frivolous cases in the courts or to raise  frivolous  
and  unnecessary  issues.   Costs  should  invariably  follow  the  
event.  Where a party succeeds ultimately on one issue or point  
but  loses  on  a  number  of  other  issues  or  points  which  were  
unnecessarily raised, costs must be appropriately apportioned.  
Special reasons must be assigned if costs are not being awarded.  
Costs should be assessed according to rules in force.  If any of  
the  parties  has  unreasonably  protracted  the  proceedings,  the  
Judge should consider exercising discretion to impose exemplary  
costs  after  taking  into  account  the  expenses  incurred  for  the  
purpose of attendance on the adjourned dates.” (Page 396)
25

The ‘model rule’ relating to first Appellate Court is as under:-
“7.  Costs. – Awarding of costs must be treated generally as  
mandatory inasmuch as it is the liberal attitude of the courts in  
not awarding costs that has led to frivolous points being raised in  
appeals or frivolous appeals being filed in the courts.  Costs  
should invariably follow the event and reason must be assigned  
by the appellate  court for not awarding costs.  If any of the  
parties have unreasonably protracted the proceedings, the Judge  
shall have the discretion to impose exemplary costs after taking  
into account the costs that may have been imposed at the time of  
adjournments.”  (Page 398)
(h) In Vinod Seth vs. Devinder Bajaj  (2010) 8 SCC 1, the Supreme Court  
dealt with the  need for reform in regard to costs.  In paragraph 45, the Court  
expressed the view that the absence of effective provisions for costs has led to  
mushrooming of vexatious, frivolous and speculative civil litigation.  This has  
been referred to in Para 48 (d) as one of the goals intended to be achieved by a  
proper provision for costs.  This  is reiterated again in Para 53 and the Court has  
expressed the view that the provisions for costs should be an incentive for each  
litigant to adopt Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) process and to arrive at a  
settlement even before the trial commences.  The Supreme Court while indicating  
that cost should provide adequate indemnity to the successful litigant for the  
litigation expenditure incurred by him for the litigation, which necessitates the  
award of adequate costs of litigation as contrasted from nominal or unrealistic  
costs, has also entered  a caution  that  provisions relating  to  costs should  not  
however obstruct access to courts and justice and under no circumstances, the  
costs should be a deterrent to a citizen with a genuine or bona fide claim or to a  
person belonging to the weaker sections whose rights have been affected, from  
approaching the Courts.  This overriding consideration should always be kept  
in view.
26

(i) In Sanjeev Kumar Jain’s case, the Supreme Court, at paragraph 8, held  
as under:
“8. Though, Section 35 does not impose a ceiling on the costs that could  
be levied and gives discretion to the Court in the matter, it should be  
noted that Section 35 starts  with the words “subject to such conditions  
and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of law for the  
time being in force”.  Therefore, if there are any conditions or limitations  
prescribed  in  the  Code  or in  any rules,  the  Court, obviously,  cannot  
ignore them in awarding costs.”
The Court in paragraph 9 observed that while award of realistic costs  
should be encouraged, it should be done in accordance with law.  The Court said:  
“as the law presently stands there is no provision for award of ‘actual costs’ and  
the award of costs will have to be within the limitation prescribed by Section  
35”.  In  para  10.1,  the  Court  clarified  that  “Section  35  does  not  impose  a  
restriction on actual realistic costs.  Such restriction is generally imposed by the  
Rules made by the High Court”.
(j)  Therefore,  to  ensure  that  actual/realistic  costs  are  awarded,  it  is  
necessary to make the required changes in the rules framed by the High Courts.  
It is very important that the existing Rules are suitably revised to ensure the  
award of realistic costs in compliance with the observations of the Supreme Court 
in Salem Advocates bar Association  case and the latest case of Sanjeev Kumar  
Jain.  The outdated/inappropriate rules still hold the field in many States, though,  
after  Salem Advocate Bar Assn. case , some High Courts did revise the rules.  
Further, the revised and pre-revised rules lack in clarity in many respects and  
they do not comprehensively address the relevant factors that ought to enter into  
ascertainment of costs.  We shall deal with this aspect in more detail a little later.  
The  Commission  feels  that  there  is  scope  for  further  refinement  of  rules  
especially in view of the principles laid down in Sanjeev Kumar Jain’s case.  
27

Moreover, the revision of rules including those relating to Advocate’s fee should  
be a regular and periodical exercise and due consultation with the members of  
Bar should be an integral part of such exercise.
4.2  ORDER XXA
(a)  Order  XXA  starts  with  the  phrase  “without  prejudice  to  the  
generality of the provisions of the Code relating to costs”.   Then, it proceeds to set  
out  certain  items  which  may  be  included  in  the  costs  to  be  awarded.   The  
enumerated  items  are  (i)  expenditure  (obviously,  legal  fees)  for  any  notice  
required to be given by law or otherwise, prior to the institution of the suit; (ii)  
expenditure on typing or printing of pleadings; (iii) charges for inspection of  
court record;  (iv)  expenditure  incurred  by the party for producing  witnesses,  
though  not summoned  through court;  and  (v) charges  incurred  for  obtaining  
copies of judgments and decrees to be filed with the memorandum of appeal.  As  
seen from the opening phrase – “without prejudice to the generality”, these items  
are by no means exhaustive.  The items set out in Rule 1 of Order XXA are by  
and large those items which may escape the attention of the rule making authority 
or the taxation officer of the court.  In  Salem Advocate Bar Association  case  
(supra), the Supreme Court adverted to certain items of costs including those set  
out in order XXA.  The following passage deserves notice:
“The costs have to be actual reasonable costs including the cost of the  
time spent by the successful party, the transportation and lodging, if any,  
or any other incidental cost besides the payment of the court fee, lawyer’s  
fee, typing and other cost in relation to the litigation.  It is for the High  
Courts to examine these aspects and wherever necessary make requisite  
rules,  regulations  or  practice  direction  so  as  to  provide  appropriate  
guidelines for the subordinate courts to follow.”
28

(b)  Obviously,  the  expression  “actual  reasonable/realistic  costs”,  an  
expression used in Sanjeev Kumar Jain’s case, supra, is meant to convey the idea  
that the costs should be based on actuals in regard to certain items and  secondly,  
the scale of costs awardable  should be realistic, not fanciful or meagre. The word  
‘actual’  ought  to  be  read  as  a  separate  word  and  not  descriptive  of  
‘realistic/reasonable costs’.  Otherwise, it would not make proper sense.  It may  
be mentioned  that the  same  expression has been repeated  in  Sanjeev Kumar  
Jain’s case (supra).  However, the Court explained that the “actual realistic costs  
should bear a correlation to costs which are realistic and practical.”  Further, it  
was clarified: “even if actual costs have to be awarded, it should be realistic  
which means what a normal advocate in a case of such nature would charge  
normally in such a case”.  The observation at paragraph 22 that “the object is to  
streamline  the  award of costs and simplify the  process of assessment,  while  
making the costs ‘ actual and realistic’ ”  gives an indication that the two words  
‘actual’ and ‘realistic’  are to be read separately.  For instance, it has been pointed 
out that as far as the advocates’ fee is concerned, the emphasis should be on  
‘realistic’ rather than ‘actual’.  This idea was further elaborated by stating thus at  
para 22.  “While ascertainment of actuals is necessary in regard to expenditure  
incurred (as for example, travel expenses of witnesses, cost of obtaining certified  
copies, etc.), in so far as advocates’ fee is concerned, the emphasis should be on  
realistic rather than actual”.  
5.  The High Court Rules – an overview:
(a) In  Salem Advocates Bar Association  case (supra), the Court, while  
broadly indicating the items of costs, mentioned “the cost of the time spent by the  
successful  party”  as  an  item  of  costs.  Presumably,  taking  clue  from  this  
observation, the Calcutta High Court amended rule 2 of Order XXA through a  
29

notification dated 7.12.2006. The rule practically reproduces the broad indicators  
set out in Salem Bar Case .  According to the substituted rule, the costs awarded  
shall be “actual reasonable costs”, “in getting a just relief or opposing a frivolous 
claim including the value of time spent by him.”  This is in addition to court fee,  
lawyer’s fee and reasonable expenses incurred towards transportation and lodging 
of such party and his witnesses.  Incidentally, it may be mentioned here that the  
use of the expression ‘frivolous’ is not quite clear.  Is it only in cases of frivolous  
defence that the value of time spent should be quantified and not otherwise?  The  
next sub-rule (b) casts an obligation on the Court to quantify these amounts while  
disposing of the suit  “not only in favour of the successful party but also to  
specify the amount of costs the unsuccessful party had incurred”.  The reason  
mentioned is that if the decree is reversed by the appellate court and costs are  
awarded in favour of the appellant, it will be convenient for the appellate court to  
make assessment of costs.  The reason given, though plausible, casts avoidable  
burden on the Court/Taxation officer.  In the year 2008, the Sikkim High Court  
framed the rule substantially similar to the new rule 2 framed by the Calcutta  
High Court.  However,  there is no provision similar to sub-rule (b) of rule 2  
framed by the Calcutta High Court.
(b) We may also refer to the amendment made by the Karnataka State to  
Order  XXA  with  effect  from  29 th December,  2006,  based  on  High  Court’s  
proposal.  Sub-rule (g) was added according to which “the cost awarded under  
sub-rule (a) to (f) shall have to be actual or reasonable cost incurred by the  
successful party including the loss of income during effective days of hearing,  
conveyance charges and lodging charges, if any”.  
(c) The fact remains that it is not too easy to ascertain the cost of the time  
spent on litigation or the loss of income in monetary terms.  The process of  
quantifying such costs will be complex. As observed by the Supreme Court in  
Sanjeev Kumar Jain’s  case (supra) at paragraph 12, having regard to the Indian  
conditions, it is not possible or practicable to spend the amount of time that is  
required  for  determination  of  actual  costs  as  is  being  done  in  the  western  
countries by specialized taxation officers.  It was observed: “If the courts have to  
set apart the time required for the elaborate procedure of assessment of costs, it  
30

may even lead to increase in the pendency of cases.”  The need to simplify the  
procedure for assessing the cost has been emphasized. In fact, even if a provision  
is made to assess such costs, the claims will be made only in a few cases, that too  
on a rough and ready estimate.  The investigation into genuineness of claim is  
fraught with difficulties and the matter will in all probability be placed before the  
court for determination.  However, a party who wastes his time and money to  
come to the Court will not be left without any relief. If adjournment is sought on  
tenuous and  unjustified grounds, the Court while granting adjournment,  has the  
discretion  and perhaps a duty to grant adequate costs, taking into account, inter  
alia, the valuable time spent by a party to attend the Court.  So also,  if the court  
comes to the conclusion that a party resorted to frivolous or vexatious litigation  
and unduly prolonged the litigation, the court has the discretion to award heavier  
costs (subject to the ceiling under section 35A).  It is doubtful whether by means  
of the rules, the time  spent for attending  the Court or income  lost could be  
quantified with reasonable certainty.  In any case, as said earlier, it would be a  
long  drawn  process  and  a  complex  exercise  which  our  overburdened  courts  
cannot undertake.  The purpose will be better served if during the progress of trial 
itself, the award of costs of substantial amount is resorted to if the party or his/her  
advocate seeks adjournments frequently or on feeble grounds.  In doing so, the  
cost of travel and loss of daily earning if any can be taken into account.
Common features:
(d)The  common  features  running  through  the  various  rules  governing 
taxation of costs and Advocate’s Fees Rules are that – (i) some or most of the  
rules are outdated; (ii) they are couched in  vague and complex language, lacking  
in clarity; and (iii) the scales of advocate’s fee as well as other elements of costs  
31

are  quite  low  judged by the  present  day  standards.   There  is  every need  to  
undertake thorough revision of the rules by the High Courts.  We have merely  
indicated  certain  aspects  broadly  for  drawing  the  attention  of  Hon’ble  High  
Courts as it is not proper to suggest uniform rules applicable to the entire country.
6.  Advocate’s Fee
6.1 The most important component of the cost is the advocate’s fee.  It is on  
this count, a party to the litigation is put to heavy expenditure which he will not  
be  in  a  position  to  recover,  if  the  status  quo in  regard  to  Advocates’/Legal  
Practitioners’ Fee Rules is maintained.
6.2 The scale of Advocate’s fee, as it presently stands, is quite low especially  
in regard to matters which do not admit of valuation or only notional valuation is  
shown for the purpose of court fee.  To this category belongs injunction suits,  
declaration of status, matrimonial disputes including guardianship matters and so  
on.  These matters involve high stakes and proceedings are long-drawn.  Even  
then, the  advocate’s  fee prescribed  does not satisfy  the  reasonable  standard  
criterion.  Further, even when the suit is valued for the purpose of court fee (ad  
valorem) , the advocate’s fee prescribed is not adequate and it needs to undergo  
upward revision in terms of percentage.
6.3 We may give certain illustrative examples of grossly low amount allowed  
under  the  head  of  “Fees  of  counsel’   ‘Advocate’s  fee’  as  well  as  apparent  
contradictions.  As per the Delhi High Court Rules framed under the antiquated  
Legal Practioners Act, 1879, the fee payable in the suit for recovery of  property,  
money, breach of contract or damages, “if the amount of value of property, debt  
or damages decreed” is Rs. 1 lakh, it is Rs. 6500, and the fee is Rs. 14,500/-if the  
32

amount or value is Rs.5 lakhs.  The maximum fee payable is fixed at Rs.20,000/- 
(vide Rule 1 of Part B of the Rules made by the High Court under the Legal  
Practioners’  Act).   The  advocate’s  fee  specified  in  the  Schedule  to  Chapter  
XXIII, “Taxation of Costs” forming part of the Delhi High Court (Original Side)  
Rules, 1967 is the same for “defended suits”.  The same Rules stipulate that in  
appeals, the fee shall be calculated at half the scale as in the original suits.   In  
suits for injuries to the person or character or where the pecuniary value of such  
injury or right cannot be exactly defined such as partition of joint property or  
other suits which cannot be satisfactorily valued, the maximum fee payable is Rs.  
5,000/-, the minimum being Rs. 500/- (vide Rule 2 of part B of the Rules framed  
under the Legal Practitioners’ Act). However, in Part (1) of the Chapter 6 of the  
Rules13 which bears the same heading “Fees of Counsel”, the quantum of fee  
specified is different, though the description of suits is substantially the same.  In  
miscellaneous  proceedings,  the  fee  prescribed  is  Rs.250/-  in  the  Court  of  a  
District Judge and Rs.48/- in the court of a Subordinate Judge.  In matrimonial  
proceedings, the maximum fee payable is Rs.1500/-.  In regard to expenses on  
witnesses, there is a stipulation that unless the sum is paid through court, they  
cannot be included in the cost awarded. In appeals, half of the fee applicable to  
the original suits is payable.   That means  the maximum  fee payable will be  
Rs.10,000/- irrespective of the value of the appeal.   The Delhi High Court Rules  
contains an interesting provision that fee of advocate/vakeel who is known to  
have dealings with dalals or other persons frequenting the railway station/sarai or  
other place as tout, no fee shall be allowed to a party who has engaged such an  
13 Rules relating to proceedings in the High Court of Delhi (volume V of High Court Rules and 
orders)
33

advocate. It appears that the High Court of Delhi is taking steps to revise the  
rules.
6.4 Reference  may  also  be  made  to  the  Civil  Court  Rules  framed  by  
Jharkhand High Court. Rule 426(i) says that the Advocate’s fee shall be in the  
discretion of Court.  Instead of a fixed percentage, for various slabs ranging  
between Rs. 5,000/- and Rs. 50,000/- maximum and minimum percentages are  
prescribed, which makes the job of the Court difficult at times.  The maximum  
advocate’s fee allowable is Rs.1550/- if the amount or value of the claim decreed  
or dismissed as the case may be is Rs.  Rs.50,000/-  and if it exceeds Rs. 50,000/-  
it is half per cent to one per cent.   That means if the value of the suit is Rs.10  
lakhs, the fee payable works out to about Rs.11,050/. The minimum fee to be  
allowed to an advocate is specified as Rs.10/- in contested cases and Rs.5/- in  
uncontested  cases.   The  maximum  hearing  fee  in  appeals  from  decrees  is  
prescribed to be Rs.10,000/- and for drafting the grounds of appeal, the maximum 
fee is Rs.500/-.  In appeals from orders and second appeals, the hearing fee is as  
low as Rs. 500/-.  In a matrimonial suit (defended suit), the fee payable for first  
day of hearing is Rs.500/- and thereafter it is Rs.250/-.  The process fee, copying  
charges, the witness allowance and the cost for obtaining the opinion of finger  
print expert are all prescribed at grossly low rates. The process fee is as low as  
Rs.3/- and 0.75 paise in the lowest court. . There is a rule which speaks of a  
salary of a Government servant being Rs.10/- per month.   The diet allowance for  
a witness is prescribed as Rs. 30/- per diem.  All this would disclose that even at  
the time of notifying the rules in 2001, the outdated/vintage rules governing costs  
including advocate’s fee are retained.
6.5 In  the  year  2010,  the  Andhra  Pradesh  High  Court  amended  the  A.P. 
Advocate Fees Rules. Serious effort was made to update the said rules so as to  
make  the  advocate’s  fee  in  various  categories  of  cases  quite  realistic  and  
reasonable, though there is scope to further revisit some of the rules.  A copy of  
the Rules is annexed to this report (Annexure-II).
6.6 The unfortunate litigants often wonder whether for the fee prescribed in  
some of the High Court Rules, a reasonably competent advocate can be engaged.  
34

The  Advocate’s  Fee  Rules,  barring  a  few  amendments  here  and  there  have  
substantially  remained  the  same  for  decades.   While  excessive  scale  of  
Advocate’s fee based on actuals or otherwise should be avoided,  the scales of fee 
presently  in  vogue  need  to  be  revisited  so  that  a  reasonable  and  realistic  
advocate’s fees structure can be put in place.  There is every need for periodical  
revision, once in five years or so, of advocate’s fee in consultation with the stake  
holders.  The standard of reasonably competent and fairly experienced advocate  
has to be applied while revisiting the rules governing the Advocate’s fee.
6.7 The rules prevailing in some  States allows a proportion of prescribed  
advocate’s  fee  as  Junior  Counsel’s  fee.   It  is  one-third  or  so  of  the  main  
advocate’s fee.  If such provision is not there in some of the Rules, it is necessary  
that the High Courts while reformulating the Rules should keep this aspect in  
view.  
6.8 As far as the Government Counsel’s fee is concerned, if the advocate’s  
fee payable by the Government or local authority or PSU under the agreement or  
rules or terms of appointment is less than the fee payable under the normal rules,  
the fee allowable ought to be restricted to the amount specified therein.  
6.9 It is also necessary to prescribe reasonable advocate’s fee for remanded  
cases and contested execution petitions as there are no such rules in some States.  
However, it is noted that in some of the rules, half the fee (payable in main suit)  
is prescribed for remanded cases and one-fourth fee in execution petitions.  Even  
here,  there is need to prescribe a minimum.
6.10 In cases where the value of the suit/appeal is only notional or incapable of  
valuation  (such  as  injunction  suit,  suit  for  declaration  of  status)   and  in  
matrimonial proceedings, the quantum of advocate’s fee  which at present works  
out to a very low figure, has to be increased.  A reasonable minimum fee has to  
be prescribed.  Injunction suits for infringement of patents, trade marks, etc., call  
35

for  enhanced  court-fee;  especially,  the  minimum  has  to  be  specified  having  
regard to complex nature of such cases.  
6.11 Wherever  fixed/maximum  advocate’s  fee  is  prescribed  in  respect  of  
certain categories of proceedings, the same needs to be enhanced suitably.  In  
respect of advalorem fee, the percentage prescribed needs to be increased if the  
suit value exceeds say, Rupees three lakhs.  Maximum should also be increased.  
This will take care of high value commercial and property litigation where high  
stakes are involved.
6.12 The advocate’s fee allowed in appeals against orders (AAOs,  CMAs or  
whatever name called) such as  the arbitration matters, matrimonial disputes, etc.,  
should also be suitably enhanced. 
6.13 It is desirable that a separate fee for drafting of pleadings including appeal  
memorandum should be prescribed/increased.
6.14 It is common knowledge that every litigant makes payment to advocate’s  
clerk.  Some times, the clerkage amount is collected along with the advocate’s  
fee.  Excepting in few States, clerkage is not specified as a component of costs.  It 
is just and proper that clerkage should be included as an element of costs and the  
allowable amount towards that item is spelt out in the rules or a guiding principle  
is evolved in this behalf.
FEE CERTIFICATE:
6.15 There are two problems which the Commission would like to point out in  
connection  with  the  filing  of  fee  certificate.   In  most  of  the  rules,  the  fee  
certificate is required to be filed within one week of the termination of the case as  
36

the decree has to be drawn up within 15 days from the date of the judgment as  
enjoined by Rule 6A of Order XX.  Rule 6 lays down that the Decree shall also  
state  the  amount  of costs incurred in the suit  and by whom or out of what  
property and in what proportions such costs are to be paid.  Rule 1 of Order XLI  
(dealing with appeals from original decrees) requires the memorandum of appeal  
to be accompanied by a copy of the judgment. The earlier requirement was that a  
copy of decree should be annexed to the memorandum of appeal.  The Law  
Commission in its 124th Report expressed the view that Order LXI, Rule 1 should  
be amended so as to dispense with the requirement of annexing certified copy of  
the decree and the appeal  be allowed to be filed by producing the operative part  
of the judgment along with the memorandum of appeal.  Presently, there is no bar 
to filing the appeal without the decree in which the costs have to be specified.  If  
so, the prescription of 15 days time under Rule 6A of Order XX needs to be  
revisited.  Accordingly, in rule 6A, the words ‘15 days’ may be substituted by  
the words ‘30 days’.   The reason is that it is common experience that the fee  
certificate is not filed in time or the bill of costs specifying the various expenses  
incurred by the party concerned is not filed promptly.  Quite often, the advocate  
for the party does not turn up before the taxing officer.  Delays in the filing of bill 
of costs with all the requisite details including the fee certificate has become a  
common occurrence.  Quite often, applications are filed seeking condonation of  
delay in filing fee certificate or other proof.  To tackle this problem, apart from  
extending the time for drafting the decree (as indicated above), it is desirable that  
High Courts frame a rule to the effect that the fee certificate shall be filed by both  
the advocates before the conclusion of arguments.  The Court should cause a  
verification  to  be  done  as  regards  the  filing  of  fee  certificate  at  that  stage.  
37

However, if any practical difficulty is pointed out by the learned advocate for  
complying with the rule, the court may allow the certificate to be filed within 15  
days from the date of judgment. It is also necessary to prescribe in the rule that  
the fee certificate should, inter alia, contain the Permanent Account Number of  
the advocate.
6.16 In this context, we may refer to section 118 of CPC which lays down that  
if the High Court considers it necessary that a decree passed in the exercise of  
original  civil  jurisdiction  should be executed  before  the  amount  of the  costs  
incurred in the suit can be ascertained by taxation, the Court may order that the  
decree shall be executed forthwith and that the decree so far as it relates to costs  
shall be executed as soon as the amount of costs are ascertained by taxation.
7.  COSTS IN REVISIONS:
A number of revision petitions against interlocutory orders, etc., are being  
filed in the High Courts either under Article 227 of the Constitution or Section  
115 CPC quite often to delay the proceedings.  Ordinarily, the costs awarded, if  
any, in such cases are quite nominal.  The rules in most of the States do not  
provide for assessment of costs in revision petitions.  It is necessary to prescribe  
appropriate guidelines for fixing the costs (including advocate’s fee) coupled  
with the prescription of minimum costs which can only be waived in exceptional  
circumstances.
38

8.  Section 35-A 
8.1 Section 35-A of the Code which was introduced in the year 1922, bears  
the heading “Compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims  
or defence  ”.    It provides that if any party objects to any claim or a  
defence, on the ground that it is false or vexatious, to the knowledge of  
the  party  by  whom  it  has  been  put  forward,  and  if  such  claim  is  
disallowed or abandoned or withdrawn, the Court may impose costs by  
way of compensation after recording reasons for its conclusion.  Clause  
(2) of the said Section places a limitation to the effect that compensatory  
costs  so  imposed  shall  not  exceed  Rs.  3,000/-.  The  earlier  limit  of  
Rs.1000/- was enhanced to Rs.3000/- by an amendment made in the year 
1976  w.e.f.  01.02.1977.   The  second  limitation  placed  is  that  the  
quantum of costs awarded under the Section shall not exceed the limits  
of pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court concerned. The first proviso to  
sub-section (2) places further restriction on the amount that could be  
awarded by way of compensatory costs by a Court of Small Causes etc.  
The  second  proviso  further  empowers  the  High  Court  to  limit  the  
amount which any Court or class of Courts is empowered to award as  
compensatory costs under this Section. 
8.2 As observed by Delhi High Court in National Textile Corporation Vs.  
Kunj Behri Lal (AIR 2010, Del. 199), frivolous litigation clogs the wheels of  
justice making it difficult for the courts to provide speedy justice to the genuine  
litigants.
39

8.3 Section  35-A  can  be  invoked  in  any  suit  or  proceeding  (including  
execution  proceeding).   However,  by   an  exclusionary  clause,  it  is  made  
inapplicable to an appeal or revision.
8.4 In the case of  Shiv Kumar Sharma vs. Santosh Kumari 2007 (8) SCC  
600 involving  disputes  relating  to  an  agreement  to  sell,  the  Supreme  Court  
invoked Section 35-A and directed payment of Rs. 50,000/- by way of cost. The  
Court declared -  In exercise of our discretionary jurisdiction under Article 142  
of the Constitution of India and having regard to the conduct of the defendant,  
we  direct  that  the  cost  shall  be  payable  by  the  appellant  in  favour  of  the  
respondent  in  terms  of  Section  35-A  of  the  Code,  besides  the  costs  already  
directed to be paid by the learned trial Judge as also by the High Court.  We  
direct  the  appellant  to  pay  a  sum  of  Rs.  50,000/-  by  way  of  cost  to  the  
respondent.” 
8.5 The reference to Section 35A is not clear as S.35-A does not, going by its  
plain language, empower the Court to award more than Rs.3,000/-.  There are  
some instances in which the High Courts directed ‘exemplary costs’ of more than  
the ceiling set out in Section 35 A even in civil proceedings.
8.6 In the case of  T. Arivanandam vs. T. V. Sathyapal 1977 (4) SCC 467  
relating to eviction proceedings, the Supreme Court adverted to Section 35-A and  
observed as under “The trial court in this case will remind itself of Section 35-A  
CPC and take deterrent action if it is satisfied that the litigation was inspired by  
vexatious motives and altogether groundless” (Para 6) .  In this case there were a  
number of proceedings at the instance of the tenant in an effort to remain in  
possession of the tenanted shop, even though there was an earlier order of the  
40

Court directing his eviction.  Whatever may be position in 1977, at the present  
juncture, S.35-A with its ceiling limit of three thousand rupees can no longer be  
considered a deterrent against frivolous litigation. 
8.7 The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Mittal Vs.  Ram Kumar  
Gupta 2009 (2) SCC 656  dealing with a case where the High Court imposed an  
exemplary cost of Rs. 1 lakh on the petitioner and Rs. 1 lakh on the respondent,  
on a finding by the High Court that both the sides were guilty of having lied on  
oath, observed that the limit prescribed under Section 35-A should be kept in  
view  by  the  Courts.   In  the  said  case,   the  Supreme  Court  also  adversely  
commented upon the practice of directing costs to be paid to Legal Services  
Committee etc. or to some non party Charitable Organisation.  The Court also  
made an observation that the principles and practices relating to levy of cost in  
administrative law matters cannot be imported mechanically into civil litigations  
governed by the Code of Civil Procedure.  
8.8 Inspite of the above, in Direct Tax Practioner Association vs. R.K. Jain  
2010  (8)  SCC  281,  the  Court  taking  a  view  that  the  petition  before  it  was  
frivolous in nature imposed a cost of Rs. 2 lakhs and while directing that out of  
the same, Rs. 1 lakh shall be paid to the respondent, and Rs. 1 lakh shall be  
deposited with the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee.
8.9 Earlier  also  in  Mahendra  Babu  Rao  Mahadik  &  Ors.  vs.  Subash  
Krishna Kanitkar & Ors. 2005 (4) SCC 99  the Supreme Court dismissed the  
appeal quantifying the costs at Rs. 50,000/- and directed that the same shall be  
deposited with the National Legal Services Authority.   There are other such  
similar instances.
41

The above two cases, however, arise out of Writ Petition(s).
8.10 In the matter of costs, the Courts dealing with civil suits, are bound by the  
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure and may not have any discretion to  
award costs other than in terms of the provisions of the Code.  Whether a High  
Court in exercise of its inherent powers could impose costs outside the provisions  
of the Code of Civil Procedure,  even in matters arising out of civil suits, is not  
completely free from doubt.  However, the Supreme Court in  Ashok Kumar  
Mittal vs. Ram Kumar Gupta & Anr. 2009 (2) SCC 656  observed that even  
though one view is that provisions of Section 35 and 35-A of the Code would not  
affect the wide discretion vested in the High Court in exercise of its inherent  
power to award costs in the interests of justice in appropriate  cases, the more  
sound view, however, is that the discretion of the Court to award costs is subject  
to  such  conditions  or  limitations  as  may  be  prescribed  and  subject  to  the  
provisions of any law for the time being in force and, therefore,  where the  
principles relating to cost are governed and regulated by Section 35 and 35-A of  
the Code, there is no question  of exercising  inherent  powers contrary to the  
specific provisions of the Code.
8.11 In Sanjeev Kumar Jain’s case also, the  Supreme court noticed in para 8  
that Section 35 starts with the words “subject to such conditions and limitations  
as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of law for the time being in force”  
and  then  observed:   “Therefore,  if  there  are  any  conditions  or  limitations  
prescribed in the Code or in any rules, the Court, obviously, cannot ignore them  
in awarding costs.”
42

8.12 The amount that could be awarded to a party to the litigation under Section   35-
A has no particular relation to the actual expenses incurred by that party.  The expression  
“compensatory”  is not, in fact, appropriate. These costs are  related to the false and  
frivolous nature of the plea raised in the proceeding by a party.  In effect, it penalizes the  
conduct of the party who has set up a false or frivolous  claim/plea and awards an  
additional amount under the head of costs. Viewed from another angle, the amount  so  
awarded  partakes  the  character  of  non-pecuniary  damages  as  it  provides  some  
recompense for the time and energy spent and mental agony suffered by the party who is  
dragged to the Court unnecessarily.  In that sense, it could be said that the costs are  
compensatory.  However, costs contemplated by Sec. 35-A are of greater amplitude.  It  
would,  therefore,  be  more  appropriate  to  describe  the  costs  under  Section  35-A  as  
‘exemplary  costs’  –  an  expression  used  by  Supreme  Court  in  Sanjiv  Jain’s  case. 
Punitive costs is another expression that can be used in view  of the amendments we are  
suggesting.  It may be stated that in the context of damages, the expressions “punitive  
damages” and “exemplary damages” are used as synonymous terms.  Punitive damages  
are damages over and above such sums as will compensate a person for his actual loss.  
On  the  same  analogy,  punitive  or  exemplary  costs  are  not  to  be  correlated  to  the  
expenses incurred by a party to litigation.  In fact, costs are considered to be in the  
nature of incidental damages allowed to the successful party to indemnify him against  
the  litigation expenses incurred.  In that  sense,  it would be  apposite to borrow the  
descriptive terminology applied to damages.
8.13 At this juncture, we may reiterate the pertinent observations of Supreme Court in  
Sanjeev Kumar Jain’s case at para 15:
“We may also note that the description of the costs awardable  
under Section 35A ‘as compensatory costs’ gives an indication  
that it is restitutive rather than punitive.  The costs awarded for  
false or vexatious claims should be punitive and not merely  
compensatory.  In fact, compensatory costs is something that is  
contemplated in Section 35B and Section 35 itself.  Therefore,  
43

the Legislature may consider award of ‘punitive costs’ under  
section 35A.”
8.14 Apart  from  awarding  additional  costs  in  the  nature  of  
exemplary costs to the party succeeding, the Courts should also be  
empowered  to  impose  punitive  costs  for  wasting  court’s  time  and  
resources by filing a frivolous or vexatious suit/proceeding or taking up 
a  defence  of  the  same  character.   The  amount  so  realized  should  
appropriately go to “Judicial Infrastructure Fund” to be created for this  
purpose.   Thus while raising the ceiling limit under section 35A, there  
shall  be  a  combination  of  two  factors,  that  is  to  say,  the  punitive 
element and the compensatory element in awarding costs subject to the  
overall ceiling prescribed. Accordingly, the Commission suggests the  
recasting of Section-35A.
8.15 The Supreme Court, in Vinod Seth vs. Devinder Bajaj 2010 (8)  
SCC  1,  observed in  paragraph  52   that  the  ceiling  of  Rs.  3,000/-  
requires  a  realistic  revision.  The  reason  obviously  is  that  the  said  
amount would hardly act as a deterrent against false and vexations suits 
and defences. The ceiling amount prescribed more than three decades  
back has lost its relevance and purpose.  In Sanjeev Kumar Jain , the 
Supreme Court observed that the ceiling of Rupees one lakh appears to  
be reasonable. In the written submissions of Law Commission  of India  
filed before the Court in that case, the same suggestion was made and  
the  Hon’ble  Court  has  apparently  endorsed  it.   This  suggestion,  
therefore,  deserves  to  be  acted  upon  and  section  35-A  has  to  be  
suitably amended.  Curbing frivolous litigation by imposition of heavy  
44

costs  is  a  well-recognized  norm  and  there  should  be  adequate  
legislative support for it.
8.16 It may be mentioned that at the conference of Judl. Officers and  
lawyers held at  various places, the subject of costs also came up for  
discussion. There was unanimous opinion that the ceiling  prescribed  
by S,35-A has to be raised substantially and further the quantum of  
costs should be realistic.
8.17 As  the  Section  stands  at  present,  compensatory  costs  under 
Section 35-A is awardable only if a party raises an objection that the  
claim  or  defence  or  any  part  of  it,  is  false  and  vexatious  to  the  
knowledge  of the party,  after  recording  its reasons.  The provision  
needs to  be suitably amended to additionally empower the Court on its  
own to award exemplary costs if the Court is satisfied that the claim or  
defence is false or vexatious to the knowledge of the party, irrespective  
of the other party making a specific claim in this regard.
8.18 In light of the foregoing discussion, the Commission is of the  
view that Section 35-A has to be amended to provide for the following:
(1) Ceiling limit of Rs. 3,000/- prescribed in the year 1976 needs to be 
enhanced to Rs. 1,00,000/-. 
(2) Out of the costs awarded under Section 35-A (maximum being Rs.  
1,00,000/-), part of the costs should be allowed in favour of the  
party who has been subjected to frivolous or vexatious litigation  
and   a  part  of  the  amount  of  costs  should  be  directed  to  be  
deposited in the Judicial Infrastructure Fund to be created by each  
High Court;
45

(3) The expression ‘exemplary’  should be substituted for the word  
‘compensatory’ wherever it occurs in Section 35-A.
(4) Every Court, on its own, even without an application from one of  
the parties, shall be empowered to award exemplary costs under  
section 35-A if the Court is satisfied that the claim or defence is  
false or vexatious to the knowledge of the party.  However, before  
passing such order, opportunity of hearing shall be given to the  
party against whom such order is proposed to be passed on the  
date of pronouncement of judgment.
8.19 Accordingly, Section 35-A  to be recast as follows:
(i) In  the  title  portion,  the  word  ‘compensatory’  to  be  
substituted by the words ‘additional and exemplary’.  The  
last  words  in  sub-section  (1)  i.e.,  “by  way  of  
compensation”  to  be  deleted  and  instead,  the  words  
“additional  and  exemplary  costs  subject  to  the  limit  
specified in sub-clause (2)” to be substituted;
(ii) The  following  Sub-sections  to  be  added  after  sub-
section(1)
1-A: The  Court,  irrespective  of  any  objection  taken  or  
application made by the party may,  subject to the same  
conditions as laid down in sub-section (1) and after giving  
an opportunity of hearing to the party affected, pass an  
order awarding additional and exemplary costs subject to  
the ceiling specified in the sub-section (2),
46

Provided that the party’s adverse socio-economic  
condition and the hardship that may be caused by imposing 
the  costs  under  this  sub-section  should  be  taken  into  
account by the Court while determining the quantum of  
costs.
1-B:  Out of the costs so awarded, part of the costs shall be  
ordered to be paid  to the party against whom the claim or  
defence of false or vexatious nature has been set up and  
part of it shall be ordered to be deposited in the Judicial  
Infrastructure Fund created under the orders of the High  
Court;
1-C:High  Courts may frame  Rules for the  creation  and  
administration  of  Judicial  Infrastructure  Fund  and  
notwithstanding that such Fund is not created, the Court  
may award costs under sub-section (1) to the party subject  
to frivolous or vexatious claim or defence.
(iii) Instead  of  “three  thousand  rupees”   in  sub-section(2)  
“rupees one lakh” to be substituted.  
(iv)   The first Proviso to sub-section may be omitted as it is no  
longer necessary. 
(v) In  Sub-section  (4),  for  the  expression  ‘  
compensation’, the word ‘costs’  to be substituted.
9.  SECTION 95
9.1 Section 95 of the Code provides that where, in any suit, an arrest or  
attachment has been effected or a temporary injunction has been granted under  
47

Section 94(c), if the Court is satisfied that the arrest, attachment or injunction  
was applied for on insufficient grounds or there were no reasonable or probable  
grounds for instituting the suit, on an application made by the defendant, the  
Court  could  award  a  reasonable  compensation  to  the  defendant  but  not  
exceeding an amount of Rs. 50,000/- or exceeding the limits of its pecuniary  
jurisdiction.  Prior to the amendment by Act 46 of 1999, w.e.f. 1.7.2002, the  
amount that could be awarded under this provision was “not exceeding Rs.  
1,000/-”.   Sub-section  (2)  of  Section  95  imposes  a  bar  on  any  suit  for  
compensation  in  respect  of  such  arrest,  attachment  or  injunction,  if  the  
provisions of Section 95 are invoked by the defendant and an order is passed by  
the Court.  The Supreme Court in Bank of India Vs. Lekhimoni Das   2000 (3)  
SCC 640 had an occasion to consider the scope of Section 95 and held that the  
scope of the said provision is very limited and is in the nature of summary  
proceeding and that it is  alternative to a suit; that what would be required to be  
established  in  a  suit  would  be  quite  different  from  adjudication  of  an  
application under Section 95; that if a party avails of remedies under Section  
95, the amount that could be awarded would be limited to the amount specified  
in the Section.  
9.2 To subserve the purpose of this provision, it is necessary to enhance the  
limit further by substituting the figure of Rs. 1,00,000/- in place of Rs. 50,000/-. 
In this connection, it may be recalled that the Commission has recommended  
supra  that  the  ceiling  under  section  35A  (costs  for  frivolous  or  vexatious  
litigation) should be enhanced to Rs. 1,00,000/-.  By parity of reasoning, it is  
just and proper to increase the ceiling under section 95 prescribed a decade  
back,  to Rs. 1,00,000/-
10.  SECTION 35-B: (“COSTS FOR CAUSING DELAY”)
48

10.1 In its 54th Report (1973), the Law Commission of India recommended the  
insertion of Section 35-B as follows:
“35-B.  The Court may, while passing an order for costs, make  
the party responsible for delay with reference to any step in the  
litigation,  pay the  costs  proportionate  to  that  delay,  whatever  
may be the ultimate event of the suit”.  
10.2 By the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act of 1976, Section 35-B  
was introduced which is substantially the same as suggested by the Commission.  
However, the ambit of S. 35 has been widened to include costs for obtaining  
adjournment for any reason.
10.3 Section 35-B of CPC empowers the Court to make an order requiring a  
party who is causing delay in the proceedings to pay to the other party cost which  
“in the opinion of the Court be reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party  
in respect of expenses incurred by him in attending the Court on that date fixed.”  
Section 35-B which is narrower that Section 35-A covers two situations:  one is  
where the party to the suit fails to take the step which was required to be taken  
under the Code on the date fixed, for e.g. not filing an application for bringing  
LRs on record, not filing written statement, not doing the needful to cause the  
service of summons or notice etc., not filing the documents ordered to be filed,  
not answering the interrogatories and so on.  Seeking an adjournment for taking  
such steps is a part of the first contingency.  The second one is obtaining an  
adjournment for producing evidence or “on any other ground”.  In either event,  
costs can be ordered by the Court.  Section 35-B requires reasons to be recorded  
for making such an order and further the cost should be such as would cover the  
49

expenses incurred for attending the Court.  Sub-section (1) of Section 35-B also  
contains an important provision which says that the payment of such cost on the  
date next following the date of such order shall be a “condition precedent”  to the  
further prosecution of the suit or the  defence as the case may be. This provision  
laying down an embargo on the further prosecution of the suit etc. has been  
construed by the Supreme Court in Manohar Singh Vs. B.S. Sharma (2010 1 SCC 
53).   In  that  case,  the  Supreme  Court  was  dealing  with  an  order  in  a  suit  
dismissing the suit for failure to pay the cost of Rs.5000/- by invoking Section  
35-B of the Code.  The High Court had taken the view that the provisions of  
Section 35-B were mandatory and if the costs levied were not paid  “the only  
course open to the Court is to disallow the prosecution of the suit”,  However, 
the Supreme Court interpreted the words  “further prosecution of the suit”  and 
“further prosecution of the defence” to only mean that if the cost levied was not  
paid, such defaulting party is prohibited from any further participation in the suit  
and it cannot be construed as one requiring dismissal of the suit as an automatic  
consequence of non payment of cost by the plaintiff. Taking the said view, the  
Court restored the suit and directed however that the plaintiff’s right to cross  
examine the defence witness concerned shall stand forfeited. The Court, at the  
same time, added a rider that “if the appellant-plaintiff tenders the costs with an  
appropriate application under Section 148 CPC, the trial court may consider his  
request in accordance with law.  Even if the Court extends the time for deposit,  
permits the plaintiff to pay the costs and prosecute the suit further, that will not  
entitle the plaintiff to cross examine DW-2” (vide para 13 (iii).   This judgment 
clarifies that the embargo laid down in Section 35-B  is not absolute and it is  
subject to Section 148 which provides for  enlargement of time up to 30 days in  
50

total.  The rigour of embargo laid down in Section 35-B has thus been softened.  
We are not here concerned with the larger question whether in the interests of  
speedy disposal of suit, Section 148 should be allowed  to be invoked. Suffice it  
to state at this juncture, that the Court even while exercising its discretionary  
power  under  Section  148  is  not  powerless  to  impose  costs  or  such  other  
conditions as may act as a check against further defaults.  Logically, the cost to  
be imposed while passing an order under Section 148 should be heavy cost.
11.  ORDER XVII (ADJOURNMENTS):
11.1 Closely allied to Section 35-B is Order XVII, Rule (2) of CPC which  
bears the heading “Costs of adjournment” we may quote sub-rules (1) and (2).
1. Court may grant time and adjourn hearing -   (1) The Court may, if  
sufficient cause is shown, at any stage of the suit, grant time to the parties  
or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the hearing of the  
suit for reasons to be recorded in writing: 
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times  
to a party during the hearing of the suits.
     (2) Cost of adjournment – In every such case the Court shall fix a day for 
the  further  hearing  of  the  suit,  and   shall  make  such  orders  as  to  costs  
occasioned by the adjournment or such higher costs as the Court deems fit.
11.2 This  is  a  general  provision  governing  adjournments  and  it  is  
complementary to section 35-B.  The costs contemplated under this provision  
need  not  necessarily  be  confined  to  the  expenses  incurred  by  the  party  for  
attending the court.  The expression “such higher costs as the Court deems fit” is  
51

significant.  The quantum of costs  under Order XVII, Rule 2, can be so fixed as  
to include advocate’s fee to a reasonable extent.  If a party is seeking repeated  
adjournments, naturally, heavy costs can  be awarded depending on the various  
relevant factors such as the over-all conduct of the party,  the stakes involved and  
so on. 
11.3 It is common knowledge and in fact it has come to the notice of the  
Commission through the inputs received at various conferences that the quantum  
of costs awarded by the Courts against a party seeking unnecessary adjournments  
are by and large meagre.  It may be couple of hundreds or even less in some parts  
of the country.
11.4  By awarding such meagre costs, the desired objective of discouraging  
adjournments is stultified.  It is desirable that the High Courts should  issue  
circular  instructions  to  the  judicial  officers  to  stop  the  practice  of  awarding  
minimal  or  meagre  costs   for  adjournments  and  to  award  reasonable  costs  
adequate enough to reimburse the expenditure that would have been incurred by  
the other party and it may, in appropriate cases, include  an estimated amount of  
advocate’s  fee.  The  District  Judges  shall  be  instructed  to  evolve  certain  
guidelines in this regard, if necessary after consulting the members of the Bar.  In  
the alternative, the High Courts while framing/revising the Rules may specify the  
minimum amount payable by the parties seeking adjournments.  If the request for  
adjournment is repeated, the costs should be higher than the minimum.  If both  
parties  seek  adjournments  which  could  have  been  avoided  by  exercising  
reasonable diligence  and care, the costs should be directed  to be credited  to  
Judicial Infrastructure Fund or to the District/Taluka/Mandal/Legal Aid Centres.
52

11.5 Further, it must be ensured that the costs are actually paid by the party  
seeking adjournments.  The receipt evidencing payment should be filed in the  
court or the costs should be paid to the other party (if present) in the court hall  
itself.   The  feasibility  of  costs  being  deposited  in  the  Court  may  also  be  
considered.  The modalities can be prescribed by the Rules framed by the High  
Courts or by evolving uniform practices.  The Commission is adverting to this  
aspect for the reason that reports have been received from the judicial officers  
and even from the  members of the Bar that reporting the payment of costs has  
become a farce and  quite often representation is made to the court that costs  
awarded have been received, though not actually received.
12.  ORDER XXV (SECURITY FOR COSTS)
12.1 Sub-rule (1) and (2) to the extent relevant are extracted hereunder:
1. When security for costs may be required from plaintiff . –  
(1)  At any stage of a suit, the Court may, either of its own  
motion or on the application of any defendant, order the  
plaintiff, for reasons to be recorded, to give within the time  
fixed by it security for the payment of all costs incurred  
and likely to be incurred by any defendant:
Provided that such an order shall be made in all cases in which it  
appears to the Court that a sole plaintiff is, or (when there  
are more plaintiffs than one) that all the plaintiffs are,  
residing  out  of  India  and  that  such  plaintiff  does  not  
possess or that  no one of such  plaintiffs  possesses any  
sufficient immovable property within India other than the  
property in suit.
53

(2)…………..
12.2 The effect of failure to furnish security is laid down in Rule 2: The scope  
and ambit of the Provision has been widened in the year 1956 by substituting new 
Rule 1 for the old rule.  The proviso to the present rule was the previous rule.  
Some States have amended this provision to cover cases in which the plaintiff is  
being financed by a non-party to the suit. It is not clear why only the plaintiff is  
required to furnish security for costs.  The rationale behind the exclusion of  
defendant  is  not  demonstrable.   Probably  it  was  based  on  the  then  existing  
situation.  The distinction between plaintiff and defendant is irrational at the  
present juncture.   Having regard to the present pattern of litigation, there is no  
reason why the security for costs should not be required to be furnished by either  
the  plaintiff  or  the  defendant  if  the  circumstances  exist  for  requiring  such  
security.  Hence, suitable amendment of Order XXV to include the defendant  
within the net of that Order XXV is desirable.  So also, the Proviso should be  
suitably amended to include the defendant therein.  
12.3 The allied rule relating to furnishing of security is Order XLI, rule (10).
13.  Summary of Recommendations:
54

(1) Costs  in  civil  suits/proceedings  should  be  such  as  to  curb  false  and  
frivolous litigation and to discourage adjournments on feeble grounds or  
for ulterior purpose.  Further, the costs to be awarded to a successful party  
should be realistic and reasonable and to this effect the rules in vogue  
should be revisited by the High Courts.
(2) The principle that costs should follow the event which finds statutory  
recognition in Section 35 of CPC ought to be given effect to by the Courts 
with all seriousness and the deviations should be rare. The recent decision  
of Supreme Court in  Sanjeev Kumar Jain  (2011, JT (12), 435) has laid  
stress on this aspect.  
However, the award of costs should not cause undue hardship to  
the parties who by virtue of their socio-economic circumstances may not  
have paying capacity.
(3) a) The rules framed by the High Courts in relation to costs especially the 
advocate’s fee should be thoroughly revised so as to accord with the  
principle  of  realistic  and  adequate  costs  [The  aspects  on  which  the  
Committee of the High Courts should focus their attention while revising  
the rules in this regard are discussed at various places, especially paras  
4.2, 4.3, 5 and 6.
b) The rules must be updated and language to be made simpler  so  as 
to impart clarity.  Unnecessary and outdated rules ought to be weeded out. 
55

The format of bill of costs needs  to  be  revised.   The  procedure  for  
filing fees certificate also needs a change.
(4) Adjournment costs should be sufficiently high and with a view  to  
ensure this, the High Courts may, by virtue of practice  directives  or  
circulars, lay down  guiding principles.  Uniformity in approach on the part  
of the trial judges in granting  costs  for  adjournments  ought  to  be  
developed.
(5) The following legislative amendments in CPC are suggested:
(i) Section  35A  (Compensatory  costs  for  false  or  vexatious  
claim/defence)   should be recast as set out in paragraph 8.19 to  
have a better check against false and frivolous litigation.  The thrust 
of the proposed amendment is to raise the ceiling from Rupees  
three  thousand  to  Rupees  One  lakh  and  creation  of  Judicial  
Infrastructure Fund into which part of the costs shall be ordered to  
be deposited;
(ii) Amendment of Section 95 (compensation for obtaining arrest, 
attachment etc. on insufficient grounds) in order to raise the ceiling  
limit of Rupees fifty thousand to Rupees One lakh vide paragraph 9.2.
56

(iii) Order XXV of CPC (Security for costs) should be so amended as to 
include the defendant within its purview;
(iii) In order to facilitate easy recovery of costs, Order LXI has  
to be   amended so as to make it obligatory to file proof of  
payment of costs before the appeal is entertained subject to  
the  discretion  vested  in the  appellate  Court  to  dispense  
with payment  to the extent of half the costs for special  
reasons.
(v) In Oder XX, Rule 6A(preparation of decree), the words ‘30 
days’ may be substituted for the words “15 days” so that  
sufficient  time  is  given  to  the  parties  to  claim  all  the  
admissible items of costs and the Costs Taxation Officer  
will be able to ascertain costs more satisfactorily.
Sd/
(Justice P. V. Reddi)
Chairman
             
Sd/   Sd/
(Justice Shiv Kumar Sharma) (Amarjit Singh) 
Member                          Member
57

            
Annexure-I
Costs in Civil litigation - Some illustrative cases of Supreme Court
 
Even though the Code of Civil Procedure contemplates award of costs as  
a  rule,  and  if  costs  are  not  awarded,  reasons  should  be  recorded,  no 
consistent principles could be seen from the judgments of the Supreme  
Court as to when cost could be denied to a party.  Even in cases where the  
court felt that exemplary costs are called for, the quantification of costs  
seems  to  be  ad  hoc  and  does  not  furnish  any  guidance.   There  are  
situations where the Court felt that the conduct of the parties to the suit in  
fact called for award of exemplary costs but actually did not impose any  
exemplary cost; even cost ordinary allowable was not awarded. 
For instance, see Amarendra Komalam Vs. Usha Sinha & Anr.  , (2005)  
11 SCC 251,  “For the forgoing reasons, the appeal succeeds. Though it  
is eminently  a fit  case for awarding exemplary  cost, we refrain from  
doing so.  No costs.”
Similarly in Gayatri De vs.  Mousumi Cooperative Housing Society Ltd.  
& Ors. (2004) 5 SCC 90 , even though the Court was of the view that it  
was a fit case for award of exemplary costs, eventually it did not even  
58

allow the cost which ordinarily the petitioner would have been entitled to,  
holding as under:-  “ The appeal  stands allowed.  Though this  case  is  
eminently a fit case to award exemplary cost, we, by taking a lenient view  
of the matter say no cost”.
Again, in Sumer vs. State of U. P. (2005) 7 SCC 220 , the Supreme Court 
held “Ordinarily a curative petition of this nature deserves dismissal by  
imposing exemplary cost on the petitioner, but in the present case, we  
refrain from imposing cost, considering that the petition arises out of a  
criminal appeal”.
In Dattaraj Nathuji Thaware vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors. (2005) 1  
SCC 590, even though the Court felt exemplary cost should be imposed,  
eventually refrained from imposing any cost, in so far as proceedings  
before the Supreme Court is concerned, observing as under:
“We would have imposed exemplary cost in this regard but taking note of  
the fact that the High Court had already imposed cost of Rs. 25,000/-, we  
do not propose to impose any further cost.” 
Similarly  in  Rajender  Singh  vs.  Lt.  Governor  Andaman  &  Nicobar  
Island & Ors. (2005) 13  SCC 289, the Court noticed that the petitioner  
had been unnecessarily harassed by the authorities, but however noticing  
that the High Court had imposed a cost of Rs. 25,000/- did not even allow  
the costs before it and disposed of the matter with an order, “No costs”.
In Ravinder Kaur vs. Ashok Kumar & Anr. (2003) 8 SCC 289  relating to 
disputes between land lord and tenant where the Court felt that the dispute  
raised by the tenant in regard to the identity of suit schedule property was  
only a bogey to delay the eviction, imposed an exemplary cost of Rs.  
25,000/-.
In State of Kerala vs. Thressia & Anr. 1995 supplement (2) SCC 449,  a 
matter arising out of a dispute between the landlord and tenant the Court  
felt that exemplary cost should be imposed on the State Government and  
imposed a cost of Rs. 10,000/- with a direction that it shall be collected  
59

from the officer concerned and  the counsel who recommended filing  of  
the Special Leave Petition.
In  Ram Awatar Agarwal & Ors. Vs. Corporation of Calcutta & Ors.  
(1999) 6 SCC 532  the Court, noticing that various proceedings, title suit  
etc. were filed by a party with a view to frustrate an order for demolition  
made  by  the  Corporation,  took  the  view  that  the  proceedings  by  the  
appellant  is  an  abuse  of  the  process  of  the  Court  and  in  these  
circumstances quantified the cost as Rs. 1 lakh.  
In Kabari Pvt. Ltd. Vs.  Shivnath Shroff and Ors. (1996) 1 SCC 690 , in 
relation to a suit which commenced in the year 1981 and was eventually  
decided  finally  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  year  1996  after  giving  
through  the  hierarchy  of  courts,   the  Court  while  awarding  costs  
quantified the cost at Rs. 10,000/- in each appeal.  It is not clear whether  
if  costs  as  per  provisions  of  CPC  were  to  be  claimed  by  the  party  
succeeding, the said party would have been entitled to the amount of costs  
so quantified.  
In Bhupinder Pal Singh vs. Director General of Civil Aviation & Ors.  
(2003) 3 SCC 633,  in a service dispute decided by a Single Judge and  
Division Bench of the High Court,  the Supreme Court while allowing the  
appeal, quantified the cost at Rs. 10,000/-. 
In Union of India & Ors. vs. Shaik Ali 1989 supplement (2) SCC 717  
involving a dispute relating to premature retirement, while setting aside  
the same, the Court quantified the cost as Rs. 3000/- even though the  
matter  involved  adjudication  initially  by  the  Central  Administrative  
Tribunal and thereafter by the Supreme Court.
In  Srinivasa  Cooperative  House  Building  Society  Ltd.  Vs.  Madam  
Gurumurthy  Sastry  &  Ors.  (1994)  4  SCC  675  involving  a  dispute  
concerning land acquisition, while holding that the Section 6 declaration  
was a colourable exercise of power, quantified the cost at Rs. 10,000/-  
even though the matter involved adjudication by the Single Judge, the  
Division Bench of the High Court and thereafter by the Supreme Court.
60

In Life Insurance Corporation of India vs. Shanta (2004) 13 SCC 748 , 
in a dispute relating to insurance, while dismissing the appeal filed by  
LIC,  the  Court  directed  cost  to  the  respondent   and  quantified  the  
litigation cost at Rs.25,000/-.
In  Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. Vs. Ozma Shipping Company &  
Anr. (2009) 9 SCC 159,  in a dispute relating to Marine Insurance of the  
value of Rs. 21.50 lakhs which culminated in proceedings in National  
Commission under the Consumer Protection Act and thereafter before  the 
Supreme Court, while dismissing the appeal of the Insurance Company,  
the Court quantified the cost at Rs. 25,000/-.
In  P.H. Dayanand vs. S. Venugopal Naidu & Ors. (2009) 2 SCC 323 , 
arising out of a suit relating to title, while dismissing the appeal taking  
note of the fact that the appellant had been prolonging the hearing of the  
suit,  the  Court  observed  that  “he  must  pay  and  bear  the  cost  of  1 st 
respondent.  Counsel’s fee assessed at Rs. 75,000/-“
In Mohinder Singh vs. State of Punjab & Ors. (2007) 10 SCC 724,  in a 
matter involving redemption of mortgage the Court dismissed the appeal  
with costs and provided, “counsels fee is assessed at Rs. 25,000/-“.
In Udyami Evam Khadi Gramodyog Welfare Sanstha Vs. State of U.P &  
Ors. (2008) 1 SCC 560 , taking a view that the appellant has resorted to  
legal proceedings over and over again, which amounted to abuse of the  
process of law while dismissing the appeal with cost, quantified counsel’s  
fee at Rs. 50,000/-.
In  Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. vs. Golden Chariot Airport  
and Anr. (2010) 10 SCC 422,  relating to proceedings under the Public  
Premises  (Eviction  of  Unauthorised  Occupants)  Act,  1971,  which  
proceedings were pursued initially before the Estate Officer and thereafter  
before  the  City  Civil  Court,  Mumbai  etc.  the  Court  noticed  that  the  
contesting respondent had taken inconsistent stands and prolonged several  
proceedings for more than a decade and imposed  “cost assessed at Rs.  
61

5,00,000/- (Five Lakhs)” and directed that it shall be paid to the Supreme  
Court Mediation Centre.  
It may be recalled  that the Hon’ble Supreme  Court in  Ashok Kumar  
Mittal vs. Ram Kumar Gupta & Anr. (2009) 2 SCC 656,  had expressed  
its displeasure about giving directions to deposit amounts with State Legal 
Services Authority, NGOs etc. 
In  Ali Jawad Ameerhanan Rizvi vs. Indo-French Biotech Enterprises  
Ltd. & Ors. (2000) 9 SCC 373,  in a proceeding challenging an order of  
the High Court whereby the High Court imposed a cost of Rs. 1 lakh  
while dismissing the writ petition, the Court noticed that on the findings  
arrived at by the High Court, there cannot be any doubt that the Court was  
justified in awarding the cost, but, however, reduced the same from Rs. 1  
lakh to Rs. 50,000/- while  maintaining the order of the High Court that  
the same shall be paid to the National Association for the Blind, who was  
not a party to the proceedings, a practice adversely commented upon in  
(2009) 2 SCC 656 (supra).
In Haryana Urban Development Authority vs. K.C. Kad (2005) 9 SCC  
469, in a dispute under the Consumer Protection Act relating to allotment  
of plots, the Court while awarding the cost before the Supreme Court  
quantified the same at a meager amount of  Rs. 500/- and directed that the  
same shall be paid to the Legal Aid Society of the Supreme Court.  This  
was a matter involving adjudication at various Consumer Fora. 
In Associated Construction vs. Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. (2008) 16  
SCC  128, involving  arbitration  proceedings  where  the  Court  felt  that  
Pawan  Hans  had  taken  advantage  of  a  beleaguered  contractor  and  
therefore the contractor is entitled to cost, however, quantified the same  
only at Rs. 10,000/-.
In India Cements Ltd. vs. Collector of Central Excise 1989 (2) SCR 715 , 
a matter under the Central Excise Act involving adjudication at the level  
of Appellate Collector,  Appellate Tribunal and thereafter the Supreme  
62

Court,  where  cost  was  directed  to  be  paid,  it  was  quantified  at  Rs.  
10,000/-.
In  Delhi  Electricity  Supply  Undertaking  vs.  Basanti  Devi  and  Anr  
(1999) 8 SCC 229,  noticing that there was a lapse on the part of Delhi  
Electricity Supply Undertaking in remitting the LIC premium on account  
of which the respondent had suffered, the Court while allowing the appeal  
with cost, quantified the same at Rs. 25,000/- whereas the amount which  
was to be paid by LIC to the respondent was specified as  Rs. 50,000/-  
with interest.
In Burn Standard Company Ltd. vs. McDeromott International Inc.  &  
Anr. (1991) 2 SCC 669,  dealing with Technical Collaboration Agreement  
and arbitration agreement, the Supreme Court taking the view that the  
conduct of the appellant was such as to tarnish the image and credibility  
of  our  entrepreneurs  abroad,  while  dismissing  the  appeal  with  cost,  
quantified the cost at Rs. 5,000/-. 
In Smt. Lata Kamat vs. Vilas (1989) 2 SCC 613  involving a matrimonial  
dispute, the Court quantified the cost as Rs. 2500/-.
In M.S. Patil (Dr.) vs. Gulbarga University (2010) 10 SCC 63,  covering 
appointment of the petitioner as a Reader in the University, the Court  
dismissed the appeal with cost and quantified the same at Rs. 50,000/-.  A  
perusal of the judgment would show that the Court felt strongly about the  
manner  in  which  interim  orders  were  obtained  and  the  petitioner  
continued in the post for about 17 years even though he was not entitled  
to the post. 
In  Union of India vs. R. Padmanabhan (2003) 7 SCC 270  involving  
dispute under the Rent Control Act, when appeal was dismissed, cost was  
quantified at Rs. 15,000/-.
In Bonder & Anr. vs. Hem Singh & Ors. (2009) 12 SCC 310,  on finding 
that the defendant did not have any case, either in law or equity, the Court  
allowed the appeal and quantified the cost to be paid by the defendant at  
Rs. 50,000/-.
63

In  Oswal  Fats  &  Oils  Ltd.  vs.  Additional  Commissioner,  
(Administration),Bareilly (2010) 4 SCC 728  the Court taking the view  
that  the  appellant  had not  approached  the Quasi  Judicial  and Judicial  
Forums, the High Court and the Supreme Court with clean hands and  
succeeded  in  securing  interim  orders,  directed  payment  of  cost  
quantifying the same at Rs. 2 lakhs.
In Sita Ram Bhandar Society, New Delhi vs. Lt. Governor, Government  
of  NCT,  Delhi  (2009)  10  SCC  501,  dealing  with  Land  Acquisition  
Proceedings, the Court taking a view that the pleas raised were frivolous  
in nature and meant  to frustrate  and delay an acquisition  which is in  
public interest, dismissed the appeals with costs which was determined at  
Rs. 2 lakhs.
In N.V. Srinivasa Murthy vs. Mariyamma (2005) 5 SCC 548 , the Court  
not only directed “cost incurred throughout by the respondents to be paid  
by the appellants”  and in addition directed that a further cost in the sum  
of  Rs,  10,000/-  to  be  paid  by  the  appellant  to  the  respondent  “for 
prosecuting  and prolonging  litigation  upto this  Court in a hopelessly  
barred suit”. 
In Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action & Ors. V. Union of India &  
Ors (1996)3 SCC 212, in a litigation involving a matter of public interest  
and spread over a period of six years, the court awarded a sum of Rs.  
50,000/-.
However, in Mohammad Mahibulla & Anr. V. Seth Chaman Lal & 
Ors. (1991) 4 SCC 529 where the litigation was dragged on and 
prolonged for ten years, the cost imposed was only Rs. 1000/-.
“We are inclined to agree with counsel for the respondents that this is a  
case  of  negligence  on  the  part  of  the  appellants  and,  therefore,  the  
respondents who have been dragged in these proceedings for about 10  
years should be compensated. We direct that the restoration of the appeal  
in  the  appellate  court  on  payment  of  appropriate  court-fee  shall  be  
subject to the further condition of payment by way of cost of Rs. 1000“  
(para 7)
64

In Union of India v. R.Padmanabhan (2003) 7 SCC 270, the Court 
while finding that the Government has been unreasonable directed as 
under:
“The respondent has been driven to unnecessary litigation by completely  
denying anything initially for all his efforts and had to face proceedings  
in this Court also. The Appellant will pay Rs. 15,000 for the costs of the  
respondent, while bearing their own costs.”
In State of Punjab & Ors. V. Bhajan Singh & Anr. (2001) 3 SCC 565,  
on  giving  a  finding  that  the  conduct  of  the  official  concerned  was  
responsible for the situation complained of, the Court directed the officer  
involved to personally pay the cost pr Rs. 25,000/-.
In Comptroller & Auditor General of India v. K.S.Jagannathan 
(1986) 2 SCR 17 the Court directed:-
“For the purpose of this appeal the Respondents have been compelled to  
come to New Delhi to appear before this Court time and again and also  
had to spend money on their board and lodging. The Appellants will  
therefore will pay to each of the Respondents a sum of Rs.1500/- by way  
of cost of this appeal.”   This was a case involving weaker sections of  
society and interpretation of certain constitutional provisions.
The above judgments which are merely a representative sample dealing  
with different situations and different subject matters ranging from family  
disputes, eviction proceedings, service disputes to commercial disputes,  
tax  disputes,  land  acquisitions,  etc.,  would  show  that  there  are  no  
discernible norms in regard to award of costs or quantification of costs  
and it so even in regard to  exemplary costs.  There are also instances  
where cost is directed to be paid to a person other than a party to the  
proceeding whereas in some judgments, the Court has deprecated and  
cautioned  against  such  practice.   Judgments  of  the  Court  seen  with  
reference to cost being imposed or cost not being imposed, do not give  
any indication of any underlying principle and no guidelines or norms can  
be s deduced therefrom.  Representative sample of judgments of apex  
Courts  only  reinforce  the  belief  that  at  present  award  of  costs  and  
65

quantum are a matter entirely in the discretion of the Court and that such  
discretion is being exercised without any discernible principles.  
66

ANNEXURE - II
A.P. ADVOCATES’ FEE RULES, 2010
[ROC No. 1004/S0/2007]
In exercise of the powers conferred by Article 227 of the Constitution  
of India and Section  34(1A) of the Advocates Act, 1961 the  High  
Court of Andhra Pradesh makes the following:
RULES
1. These rules may be called the Advocates' Fee Rules, 2010.
2. These Rules shall govern the fees payable as costs by any party in  
respect of the fees of his adversary's Advocate, upon all proceedings in  
the High Court or any Court subordinate thereto.
3. In these Rules unless the context otherwise requires:
(i) "Advocate"  includes a Pleader authorized to practice in Courts  
within the meaning of Advocates Act;
(ii) "District Court"  means and includes the highest Court in the  
district and any other Court equivalent to such Court within the  
meaning of the Civil Courts Act and includes the Courts of the  
Chief Judge, Additional Chief Judge of the City Civil Court and 
the Chief Judge and the Additional Chief Judge of the City  
Small Causes Court within the City of Hyderabad;
(iii) "Senior Civil Judge Court" includes the Courts of the Additional  
Senior Civil judge in the districts and in the City of Hyderabad  
includes the Courts of the Additional Judges, City Small Causes 
Court;
(iv) "Civil Judge (Junior Division) Court " includes  the Courts of  
the additional Civil judge (Junior Division) in the district and  
Assistant Judges in the City Civil Court.
PART - I
SUBORDINATE COURTS
In Small Causes Suits
4. In   all suits triable by Court of Small Causes, the fee shall be 10%  
of the amount claimed subject to a minimum of  Rs. 300/.
5. In all money suits, the fee shall be calculated at the rate of 10% of  
the claim involved in such suits when it does not exceed Rs.10,000/-.
67

6, In all such suits, referred to above when the claim involved exceeds  
Rs. 10,000/-, the fee  payable shall be calculated at the rate of 10% of  
the  claim  involved  on  the  first  Rs.   10,000/-  and  on  the  next  Rs. 
10,000/- at the rate of 7% and when the 'claim exceeds Rs. 20,000/- as  
above and on the next Rs.  30,000/- at the rate of 5% and on the balance 
at the rate of 3% of the claim on the balance:
Provided, however, that in all suits which are tried in batches of four 
suits or more and where evidence is recorded is common and the suits 
are disposed of by a common judgment, the fee payable shall be 1/3rd 
of the fee admissible under this rule in each suit.
7. In all suits where any declaration of title to any property is involved  
along  with  any  other  consequential  relief  such  as  possession  or  
injunction, the fee shall be fixed at the rate 10% of the total value of  
the property taken as the value for the purpose of Courts Fee and Suits  
Valuation Act,1956 or any such Act for the time being in force, subject  
to  a  minimum  of  Rs.  2,000/-  in  the  court  of  Civil  Judges  (Junior  
Division) and a minimum of Rs. 4,000/- in other Courts subject to a  
maximum of Rs. 1,50,000/-.
8. In all suits for recovery of movable property or its value and in all  
suits for maintenance and annuities, the fee payable shall be fixed in  
the same manner as in the suits for money subject to a minimum of Rs.  
1,000/-.
9. In all suits for bare injunction, the fee shall be fixed as in money 
suits subject to a minimum of Rs. 3,000/
10. In all suits for enforcement of an agreement of sale or any other  
relief under the Specific Relief Act, 1877, the fee shall be fixed as in  
suits for declaration of title to immovable property mentioned in Rule 7 
and any other suit for recovery of possession under a contract of sale or  
otherwise or for the recovery of money under such a contract shall be  
treated likewise.
11.  In  all  suits  relating  to  easement,  whether  any  compensation  is 
sought or not, the fee shall be fixed at 10% of the value of the claim  
mentioned in the plaint subject to a minimum of Rs. 2,000/- and, a  
maximum of Rs. 20,000-.
12.  All  suits  for  recovery  of  money  based  upon  accounts  shall  be 
treated as suits for the recovery of money for the purpose of these rules  
and the fee shall be fixed as provided for such suits herein.
13. In all suits for dissolution of partnership and for partition of joint  
family properties or administration suits, fee shall be fixed by the Court 
68

at  7%  of  the  valuation  subject  to  a  maximum  of  Rs.  25,000/-  
irrespective of the other reliefs claimed therein.
14.  In  all  other  suits  including  suits  relating  to  Trust  property  or  
property endowed and any other suit which was filed as an original  
petition initially but was subsequently converted into a suit as under  
the provisions of the Succession Act or Petitions filed for the grant of  
Probate of Letters of Administration, on such conversion into a suit,  
the fee shall be fixed at 7% of the value of the property involved or the  
Estate subject to a maximum of Rs. 25,000/-.
15. In all other original petitions relating to matrimonial causes, Land  
Acquisition  matters,  claims  regarding  Motor  Vehicle  Accidents,  
Claims under the Arbitration Act and grant of Succession Certificate or  
Letter of Probate the fee shall be fixed by the Court at not less than Rs.  
1,500/-and not more than Rs. 25,000/- at its discretion subject to the  
provision of Rule 18 below.
16. In all the above matters where the suit claims or petitions including  
original petitions mentioned above are settled out of Court or adjusted  
at any time before the judgment is pronounced or otherwise disposed  
of without contest, half of the fee shall be allowed.
17. All suits or other proceedings of a substantive nature which are  
dismissed for default shall be treated as money suits and the Court shall 
fix the fee payable to the other party at half the fee payable on contest.
18. In all original petitions whether it is matrimonial cause, or under  
the Succession Act or a claim under the Land Acquisition Act or under  
the Arbitration Act, if the said proceeding or petition is not contested,  
half of the fee payable otherwise shall be paid as fee under these rules.
19. Whenever any suit is re-heard on review, the successful party shall  
be entitled to hale of the fee taxable according to these rules in such  
suit and the same shall apply to any original petition named above.
20. In all appeals against any judgment, order or decree filed in any  
District Court, the fee shall be fixed in the same manner as in the trial  
Court  as  provided  above.  For  the  purpose  of  this  rule,  in  a  civil  
miscellaneous appeal, fee shall be calculated as in Rule 22 below.
21. In all execution petitions filed for the first time, the Court shall fix  
a fee which is of ½ the fee allowed in the suit or proceeding as the case  
may be under the above rules in case of contest and 1/4th in cases where 
there is no contest.
69

22.  In  all  interlocutory  applications  filed  in  any  suit  or  other  
proceedings including petitions filed by third parties and petitions for  
withdrawal of money deposited in Court either by any party to the suit  
or proceeding or by third party who is entitled  to such withdrawal  
(including the Income-tax Department) the Court shall fix a fee of not  
less than Rs.  250/- subject to a maximum of Rs. 3,000/-.
23. In the following special cases the fee shall be as noted below:
(a) (i) In Inter-pleader suits the fee to be given to the advocate for  
original plaintiff shall be one-fourth of the fee prescribed under  
Rule 5, subject to a maximum of Rs.1,500/-.
(ii) In suits under Order XXXVI and XXXVII of the First Schedule  
to the Code of Civil Procedure where leave to defend has not been  
granted the fee shall be half the fee prescribed under Rule 5, subject 
to maximum of Rs.1,500/-.
(b) (i) In declaratory suit where the subject  matter in respect of which  
relief claimed is capable of valuation, the fee shall be according to  
the  scale  prescribed  in  Rule  (5),  where  it  is  not  so  capable  of 
valuation, the Court shall fix a fee subject to a minimum of Rs.  
1,500/-  in  the  Court  of  Civil  Judges  (Junior  Division)  and  a  
maximum of Rs. 3,000/- and Rs. 2,000/- as the minimum and Rs.  
5,000/- in a Court of Senior Civil Judge or District Court.
24. In suit under Section 77 of the Indian Registration Act, the Court  
shall at its discretion fix a fee having or regard to the time taken in the  
case a minimum of Rs. 1,000/- and a maximum of Rs. 3,000/-
25. In all proceedings under the Insolvency Act, if the proceedings are  
contested, the fee shall be fixed not at less than Rs. 1,500/- and in case  
there is a contest the Court shall fix a fee of Rs750/-.
26. in all applications under the Andhra Pradesh Buildings (L.R and E)  
Control Act, and the appeals arising from any order thereupon    the fee 
Shall be fixed at not less than Rs. 2,000/- and not more than Rs. 5,000/-
27. In all election petitions, filed 'in Subordinate Court under any Act,  
the fee shall be fixed at not less than Rs. 2,000/- and not more than Rs.  
10,000/-.
28. In all suits not otherwise provided for and of whatever nature, the  
Court shall fix a fee of not less than Rs. 1,000/- and not more than Z  
5,000/-.
70

29. In all other cases the Court shall fix a fees of not less than Rs.  
1,000/- and not more than Rs.  5,000/-.
30. In all other proceedings under any Act and in any suit when any  
sum is claimed as damages, the Court shall fix the fee as in a money  
suit.
31. In all cases where the value of the claim exceeds Rs. 5,000/- and in  
all cases where an Advocate with standing of more than 15 years at the  
Bar is assisted by a Junior Advocate appealing along with him from the 
stage  of  pleadings,  an  additional  fee  calculated  at  1/3 rd of  the  fee  
allowable according to these Rules shall be fixed by the Court.
32. Where any suit is remanded on appeal and heard afresh in a Court  
subordinate to the High Court, half of the fee prescribed under these  
rules for the suit of the said nature shall be fixed.
33.  The  Court  of  Civil  Judge  (Junior  Division)  or  any  Court  of  
equivalent rank may grant adjournment on such teens as to costs not  
exceeding Rs. 200/- on any one occasion.
34. The Court of the Senior Civil judge or any  Court of equivalent  
rank may grant adjournment subject to such terms as it may think fit  
regarding costs not exceeding Rs. 300/- on any one occasion.
35. The Court of the District judge or any Court of equivalent rank may 
grant adjournment on such terms as it thinks fit regarding casts which  
shall not exceed Rs. 500/- on any one occasion.
36. In all matters tried by the Family Court under the Family Courts  
Act, no fee shall be fixed, provided however, that the Court may if it is  
of the opinion that any party had been put to great hardship before or  
during the pendency of the proceedings, direct the other party to pay  
costs  of  not  less  than  Rs.1,000/-  and  not  more  than  Rs.  5,000/-  
depending upon its discretion.
PART - II
HIGH COURT
37. The Rules framed as under shall regulate the fee payable to the  
Advocates appearing in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
38. In all appeals arising out of suits for money or any other suit or  
other proceedings decided by a Court subordinate to the High Court  
(including appeals under Clause 15 of the Letters Patents) the fee shall  
be fixed at the same rate as in the trial Court.
71

39.  The  fee  shall  be  fixed  at  half  the  amount  if  the  appeal  is  
uncontested at the time of the hearing or if the appeal is withdrawn  
before or during the hearing thereof or if the appeal is disposed of as  
infructuous, in all cases where costs are granted.
40. In all civil miscellaneous appeals filed in the High Court, the fee  
shall be fixed as in the lower Court in the proceedings from out of  
which such civil miscellaneous appeals arise.
41.  In  all  civil  miscellaneous  petitions  in  the  appeal  or  other  
proceedings the Court shall fix the fee payable to the successful party  
at a minimum of Rs. 500/- whenever costs are directed to be paid in  
such petitions.
42. Whenever a Counsel of more than 15 years standing at the Bar is  
assisted by a junior Counsel from the time when appearance is entered,  
an additional fee amounting to 1/3 rd of the fee payable to the Senior  
Counsel  shall  be fixed  by the  Court  subject  to  a minimum  of  Rs.  
1,000/-.
43. In all petitions under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of  
India  and  in  all  appeals  arising  therefrom  under  Clause  15  of  the  
Letters Patent, the Court shall fix such fees as it considers to be just,  
and proper and irrespective of whether the petition or appeal as the  
case may be, is allowed, dismissed or disposed of.
44. For the purpose of these rules, whether relating to the fee to be  
fixed in the Courts subordinate to High Court, or in the High Court, the  
amount of valuation of the claim shall be as set out in the plaint or  
Memorandum of Appeal or Cross Objections and in applications under  
Articles  226  and  227  of  the  Constitution  of  India,  it  shall  not  be  
necessary to set forth such valuation.
45. In all election petitions, filed in the High Court, fee shall be fixed at 
not less than Rs. 10,000/- for each contesting respondent.
46. In all civil revision petitions and second appeals, fee shall be at not 
less than Rs.1,000/-.
47. In all proceedings not otherwise provided for, the costs shall be at 
the discretion of the court.
48. The fee- payable in all cases shall be rounded off to the nearest ten  
rupees, four rupees or less being neglected and five rupees or more  
being shown as ten rupees.
72

49. The Court shall order separate sets of fee only in cases where the  
parties  advance  or  succeed  on  substantially  independent  grounds  
separate and specific to the party succeeding thereupon and only to the  
extent  of the  value  of the property or the amount  covered  thereby  
provided, however, the Court shall be at liberty to apportion amongst  
the parties the fee payable in case of each contesting party whenever it  
is considered desirable and in all such cases it shall not be necessary  
that the total amount of fee so granted may or may not aggregate to the  
fee payable if the matter had been decided as if one set of fee was to be  
fixed.
50. In matters not provided for herein, the fee payable shall be in the  
discretion of the High Court and nothing in these shall be deemed to  
reduce the jurisdiction of the High Court to grant exemplary costs.
51. Every Advocate shall produce a certificate that he has received the  
fee claimed in the suit or appeal within two weeks from the date of the  
judgment.
52. The rules relating to the fee payable in the High Court shall be  
deemed to be the fee payable according to the Appellate Side Rules of  
the High Court of judicature, Andhra Pradesh.
53. In all original side matters and Company Petitions and Applications 
and any other matters which may be brought up and tried, by the High  
Court as a suit, the fee shall be not less than the fee prescribed for a  
suit of similar nature in the trial Court and in all company petitions or  
other applications, the fee shall be not less than Rs. 5,000/- and not  
more than Rs. 25,000/-.
54. The Advocates' Fee Rules, 1990 are hereby repealed.
73