 
 
i 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW 
COMMISSION 
OF  
INDIA 
  
 
 
Passive Euthanasia – A Relook 
 
 
Report No.241 
 
 
 
AUGUST  2012 
  


 
 
ii 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
iii 
 
  


 
 
iv 
 
PASSIVE EUTHANASIA – A RELOOK 
 
I N D E X 
 
Sl. No. Title Page Nos 
1. Introduction 1-3 
2. Law Commission’s 196th Report 3-4 
3. Passive Euthanasia – How the Law Commission and 
Supreme Court viewed it 
  4-5 
4. The question broadly and our approach 5-7 
5. The Bill proposed by 17 th Law Commission and its 
features 
7-12 
6. Supreme Court’s decision in Aruna’s case (2011) 12-17 
7. Medical ethics and duty of the doctor 17-20 
8. Analysis by 17th Law Commission 20-23 
9. Legalizing euthanasia – the perspectives and views 23-26 
10. Whether legislation necessary? 27 
11. Passive euthanasia – issues discussed 27-34 
12. Palliative care 34 
13. Changes now proposed in the draft Bill 34-40 
14. Summary of Recommendations 40-42 
 Annexure – I (The Bill redrafted by the Commission) 43-49 
 Annexure – II (The Bill drafted earlier by17th Law 
Commission. 
50-65 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
Passive Euthanasia 
- A relook 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1 The word ‘Euthanasia’ is a derivative from the Greek word s ‘eu’ and 
‘thanotos’ which literally mean “good death”. It is otherwise described as mercy 
killing.  The death of a terminally ill patient is accelerated through active or 
passive means in order to relieve such patient of pain or suffering.  It appears 
that the word was used in the 17th Century by Francis Bacon to refer to an 
easy, painless and happy death for which it was the physician ’s duty and 
responsibility to alleviate the physical suffering of the body of the patient.  The 
House of Lords Select Committee on ‘Medical Ethics ’ in England defined 
Euthanasia as “a deliberate intervention undertaken with the express 
intention of ending a life to relieve intractable suffering ”. The European 
Association of Palliative Care (EPAC)  Ethics Task Force , in a discussion on 
Euthanasia in 2003, clarified that  “medicalised killing of a person without the 
person’s consent, whether non -voluntary (where the person in unable to 
consent) or involuntary (against the person’s will) is not euthanasia: it is a 
murder.  Hence, euthanasia can be voluntary only”. 
1.2 We are here concerned with passive euthanasia as distinct from ‘active 
euthanasia’.  The distinction has been highlighted in the decision of the 
Supreme Court of India in Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug vs. Union of India 1. 
Active euthanasia involves taking specific steps such as injecting the patient 
with a lethal substance e .g. Sodium Pentothal which causes the person to go 
in deep sleep in a few seconds and the person dies painlessly in sleep, thus it 
amounts to killing a person by a positive act i n order to end s uffering of a 
person in a state of terminal illness.  It is considered to be a  crime all over the 
world (irrespective of the will of the patient ) except where permitted by 
legislation, as observed earlier by Supreme Court.  I n India too , active 
                                       
1 (2011) 4 SCC 454 

 
 
2 
 
euthanasia is illegal and a crime under Section 302 or 304 of the IPC. 
Physician assisted suicide is a crime under Section 306 IPC (abetment to 
suicide)2.  Passive euthanasia, otherwise known as ‘negative euthanasia’,  
however, stands on a different  footing.  It invol ves withholding of medical 
treatment or withholding life support system for continuance of life e.g., 
withholding of antibiotic where without doing it, the patient is likel y to die or 
removing the heart–lung machine from a patient in com a.  Passive euthanasia 
is legal even without legislation provided certain conditions and safeguards are 
maintained (vide para 39 of SCC in Aruna’s case).  The core point of distinction 
between active and passive euthanasia as noted by Supreme Court is that  in 
active euthanasia, something is done to end the patient’ s life while in passive 
euthanasia, something is not done that would have preserved the patient’s life.  
To quote the words of learned Judge in Aruna’s case, in passive euthanasia, 
“the doctors ar e not actively killing anyone; they are simply not saving him ”. 
The Court graphically said “while we usually applaud someone who saves 
another person’s life, we do not normally condemn someone for failing to do 
so”. The Supreme Court pointed out that according to the proponents of 
Euthanasia, while we can debate whether active euthanasia should be legal, 
there cannot be any doubt about passive euthanasia as “you cannot prosecute 
someone for failing to save a life”.  The Supreme Court then repelled the view 
that the distinction is valid and in doing so , relied on the landmark English 
decision of House of Lords in Airedale case3, which will be referred to in detail 
later. 
1.3 Passive euthanasia is further classified as voluntary and non -voluntary.  
Voluntary euthanasia is where the consent is taken from the patient.  In n on-
voluntary euthanasia, the consent is unavail able on account of the condition 
of the patient for example, when he is in coma. The Supreme Court then 
observed:  
 
                                       
2 Ibid at 481 
3 Airedale NHS Trust vs. Bland (1993)1 All ER 821. 

 
 
3 
 
“while there is no legal difficulty in the case of the former, the latter poses 
several problems, which we shall address”. The Supreme Court was concerned 
with a case of non -voluntary passive euthanasia because the patient was in 
coma.  
2. Law Commission’s 196th Report 
 
2.1 The Law Commission of India , in its 196 th Report4, had in its opening 
remarks clarified in unmistakable terms that the Commission was not dealing 
with “ euthanasia” or  “assisted suicide” which are unlawful but the 
Commission was dealing with a different matter , i.e., “withholding life-support 
measures to patient s terminally ill and universally in all countries , such 
withdrawal is treated as lawful ”.  Time and again, it was pointed out by the 
Commission that withdrawal of life support to patients is very much different 
from euthanasia and assisted suicide, a distinction which has been sharply 
focused in Aruna’s case  as well. Aruna’s case  (supra) preferred to use the 
compendious expression – “passive euthanasia”.  
2.2 The 17th Law Commission of India took up the su bject for consideration 
at the instance of Indian Society of Critical  Care Medicine, Mumbai which 
held a Seminar attended by medical and legal experts .  It was inaugurated by 
the then Union Law Minister. The Law Commission studied a vast literature on 
the subject before the preparation of report. 
2.3 In the introductory chapter, the Law Commission also clarified:  
“In this Report, we are of the view that ‘Euthanasia’ and ‘Assisted 
Suicide’ must continue to be offences under our law. The scope of the 
inquiry is, therefore, confined to examining the various legal concepts 
applicable to ‘withdrawal of life support measures’ and to suggest the 
manner and circumstances in which the medical profession could take 
decisions for withdrawal of life support if it was in the ‘best interests’ of 
the patient. Further, question arises as to in what circumstances a patient 
                                       
4 Medical Treatment to Terminally Ill Patients (Protection of Patients and Medical 
Practitioners). 

 
 
4 
 
can refuse to take treatment and ask for withdrawal or withholding of life 
support measure, if it is an informed decision.” 
 
2.4 The following pertinent observations made by the then Chairman of the 
Law Commission in the forwarding letter dated 28 August 2006 addressed to 
the Hon’ble Minister are extracted below: 
“A hundred years ago, when medicine and medical technology had not 
invented the artificial methods of keeping a terminally ill patient alive by 
medical treatment, including by means of ventilators and artificial feeding, 
such patients were meeting their death on account of natural causes. 
Today, it is accepted, a terminally i ll person has a common law right to 
refuse modern medical procedures and allow nature to take its own 
course, as was done in good old times. It is well -settled law in all 
countries that a terminally ill patient who is conscious and is competent, 
can take a n ‘informed decision’ to die a natural death and direct that he 
or she be not given medical treatment which may merely prolong life. 
There are currently a large number of such patients who have reached a 
stage in their illness when according to well -informed body of medical 
opinion, there are no chances of recovery. But modern medicine and 
technology may yet enable such patients to prolong life to no purpose and 
during such prolongation, patients could go through extreme pain and 
suffering. Several such pat ients prefer palliative care for reducing pain 
and suffering and do not want medical treatment which will merely 
prolong life or postpone death.” 
 
2.5 As stated in Airdale’s case by Lord Goff: “It is of course the development 
of modern medical technology, and in particular the development of life -support 
systems, which has rendered such as the present so much more relevant than in 
the past”.  That observation made in 1993 in the case of a PVS patient applies 
with greater force to the present day medical scenario. 
3.  Passive Euthanasia – How the Law Commission & Supreme Court viewed it 
 
3.1 Passive Euthanasia has been advocated by the Law Commission of India 
in the 196 th Report both in the case of competent patients and incompetent 
patients who a re terminally ill.  In the case of incompetent patients, the 
attending medical practitioner should obtain the opinion of three medical 
experts whose names are on the approved panel and thereafter he shall inform 

 
 
5 
 
the Patient (if conscious) and other close  relatives.  Then he shall wait for 15 
days before withholding or withdrawing medical treatment including 
discontinuance of life supporting systems.  This 15 days’ time was 
contemplated with a view to enable the patient (if conscious) or relatives or 
guardian to move an original petition in the High Court seeking declaratory 
relief that the proposed act or omissio n by the medical practitioner / hospital 
in respect of withholding medical treatments is lawful or unlawful.  High Court 
will then give a final decla ration which shall be binding on all concerned and 
will have the effect of protecting the doctor or hospital from any civil or 
criminal liability.  The Supreme Court in Aruna’s case has put its seal of 
approval on (non -voluntary) passive euthanasia subject  to the safeguards laid 
down in the judgmen t.  In the arena of safeguards, the Supreme Court 
adopted an approach different from that adopted by the Law Commission.  The 
Supreme Court ruled in Aruna’s case that in the case of incompetent patients, 
specific permission of the High Court has to be obtained by the close relatives 
or next friend or the doctor / hospital staff attending on the patient.  On such 
application being filed, the High Court should seek the opinion of a Committee 
of three experts selected  from a panel prepared by it after consultation with 
medical authorities.  On the basis of the report and after taking into account 
the wishes of the relations or next friend, the High Court should give its 
verdict.  At paragraph 135, it was declared: “the above procedure should be 
followed all over India until Parliament makes legislation on this subject.”   
Earlier at para 124 also, the learned Judges stated “we are laying down the 
law in this connection which will continue to be the law until parliament m akes 
a law on the subject.”   
4. The question broadly and our approach 
  
4.1 The question now is whether parliament should enact a law on the 
subject permitting passive euthanasia in the case of terminally ill patients – 
both competent to express the desire and incompetent to express the wish or 
to take an informed decision.  If so , what should be the modalities of 

 
 
6 
 
legislation?  This is exactly the reason why the Government of India speaking 
through the Minister for Law and Justice has referred the matter to the Law 
Commission of India.  In the letter dated 20 April 2011 addressed b y the 
Hon’ble Minister, after referring to the observations made by the Supreme 
Court in Aruna’s case, has requested the Commission “to give its considered 
report on the feasibility of making legislation on euthanasia taking into account 
the earlier 196th Report of the Law Commission.” 
4.2 Before proceeding further, we must acknowledge the fact that the Law 
Commission before formulating its recommendations in its 196 th Report, has 
made an exhaustive study, considered the pros and cons of the issue and 
recorded its conclusions which were put in legislative framework.  Five years 
later, the Supreme Court of India in Aruna’s case  has rendered a landmark 
judgment approving passive euthanasia subject to certain safeguards and 
conditions envisaged in the judgment.  There was an elaborate reference to the 
legal position obtaining in other countries, the best medical practices and the 
law laid down in series of authoritative pronouncements in UK and USA.  Both 
the Supreme Court and Law Commission felt sufficient just ification for 
allowing passive euthanasia in principle, falling in line with most of the 
countries in the world.  The Supreme Court as well as the Commission 
considered it to be no crime and found no objection from legal or constitutional 
point of view.   
4.3 Unless there are compelling reasons – and we find none, for differing 
with the view taken by the apex Court and the Law Commission, the views 
deserve respect. At the same time, we had a fresh look of the entire matter and 
have reached the conclusion th at a legislation on the subject is desirable.  
Such legislation while approving the passive euthanasia should introduce 
safeguards to be followed in the case of such patients who are not in a position 
to express their desire or give consent (incompetent pa tients). As regards the 
procedure and safeguards to be adopted, the Commission is inclined to follow 
substantially the opinion of the Supreme Court in preference to the Law 
Commission’s view.  We have , however, suggested certain variations in  so far 

 
 
7 
 
as the preparation and composition of panel of medical experts  to be 
nominated by the High Courts .  Many other provisions proposed by the Law 
Commission in its 196 th Report have been usefully adopted.  A revised draft 
Bill has been prepared by the present Commis sion which is enclosed to 
this report.  We shall elaborate our views and changes proposed at the 
appropriate juncture.  
5. The Bill proposed by 17th Law Commission and its features 
 
5.1 We shall start our discussion by taking an overview of the Law 
Commission’s 196 th Report and the main features of legislation suggested by 
the Law Commission under the title -  “Medical Treatment to Terminally ill 
Patients (Protection of Patients and Medical Practitioners) Bill  2006” (vide 
Annexure – II). At the risk of repetition , we may mention that the main 
difference between the recommendations of the Law Commission (in 196 th 
Report) and the law laid down by the Supreme Court ( pro tempore) lies in the 
fact that the Law Commission suggested enactment of an  enabling provision 
for seeking declaratory relief before the High Court whereas the Supreme 
Court made it mandatory to get clearance from the High Court to give effect to 
the decision to withdraw life support to an incompetent patient.   The opinion 
of the Committee of experts should be obtained by the High Court, as per the 
Supreme Court’s judgment whereas according to the Law Commission’s  
recommendations, the attending medical practitioner will have to obtain the 
experts’ opinion from a n approved  panel of medical experts before taking a 
decision to withdraw/withhold medical treatment to such patient.  In such an 
event, it would be open to the patient, relations, etc. to approach the High 
Court for an appropriate declaratory relief. 
5.2 The 196 th Report o f the Law Commission stated the  fundamental 
principle that a terminally ill but competent patient has a right to refuse 
treatment including discontinuance of life sustaining measures and the same 

 
 
8 
 
is binding on the doctor, “provided that the decision of the  patient is an 
‘informed decision’ ”.  ‘Patient’ has been defined as a person suffering from 
terminal illness.  “Terminal illness”  has also been defined under Section 2 
(m).  The definition of a ‘competent patient’  has to be understood by the 
definition of  ‘incompetent patient’.  ‘ Incompetent patient ’ means a patient 
who is a minor or a person of unsound mind or a patient who is unable to 
weigh, understand or retain the relevant information about his or her medical 
treatment or unable to make an ‘informed d ecision’ because of impairment of 
or a disturbance in the functioning of the mind or brain or a person who is 
unable to communicate the informed decision regarding medical treatment 
through speech, sign or language or any other mode (vide Section 2(d) of t he 
Bill, 2006).  “Medical Treatment” has been defined in Section 2(i) as treatment 
intended to sustain, restore or replace vital functions which, when applied to a 
patient suffering from terminal illness, would serve only to prolong the process 
of dying and includes life sustaining treatment by way of surgical operation or 
the administration of medicine etc. and use of mechanical or artificial means 
such as ventilation, artificial nutrition and cardio resuscitation. The 
expressions “best interests” and “informed decision” have also been define d in 
the proposed Bill.  “ Best Interest s”, according to Section 2(b), includes the 
best interests of both on incompetent patient and competent patient who has 
not taken an informed decision and it ought not to be limited to medical 
interests of the patient  but includes ethical, social, emotional and other 
welfare considerations.  The term ‘informed decision’ means, as per Section 2 
(e) “ the decision as to continuance  or withholding or withdrawing medical 
treatment taken by a patient  who is competent and who  is, or has been 
informed about – (i) the nature of his or her illness,  (ii) any alternative form of 
treatment that may be available,  (iii) the consequences of those forms of 
treatment, and (iv) the consequences of remaining untreated”. 
5.3 At this junctur e, we may mention that this terminology – ‘informed 
decision’ has been borrowed from the decided cases in England (UK) and 

 
 
9 
 
other countries.  It broadly means that the lack of capacity to decide (inspite of 
consciousness of the patient) has precluded him fr om taking ‘informed 
decision’. though the patient might be conscious.  The said definition of 
‘informed decision’ can be best understood by reference to one or two 
illustrative cases cited by the Commission in the 196 th Report.  In Re: MB 
(Medical Treatment)5 – a Court of appeal decision rendered by Butler Sloss 
L.J., had this to say after considering the facts of that case:  
On the facts, the evidence of the obstetrician and the consultant  
psychiatrist established that the patient could not bring herself to undergo 
the caesarian section she desired because a panic –fear of needles 
dominated everything and, at the critical point she was not capable of 
making a decision at all. On that basis, i t was clear that she was at the 
time suffering from an impairment of her mental functioning which 
disabled her and was temporarily incompetent. (emphasis supplied) 
Furthermore, since the mother (pregnant lady) and father wanted the child 
to be born alive a nd the mother (the pregnant lady) was in favour of the 
operation, subject only to her needle phobia, and was likely to suffer long 
term damage if the child was born handicapped or dead, it must follow 
that medical intervention was in the patient’s best interests, with the use 
of force if necessary for it to be carried out. In these circumstances, the 
judge was right in granting the declaration. 
5.4 On the question of capacity to decide , the Court of Appeal quoted  Lord 
Donaldson in the case of Re: T (An Adu lt) (Refusal of Medical Treatment) – a 
1992 decision on the same point: - “The right to decide one’s own fate 
presupposes a capacity to do so. Every adult is presumed to have that 
capacity, but it is a presumption which can be rebutted. This is not a questi on 
of the degree of intelligence or education of the adult concerned. However, a 
small minority of the population lack the necessary mental capacity due to 
mental illness or retarded development (see, for example Re F (Mental Patient) 
(Sterilization)6. This is a permanent or at least a long term state. Others who 
would normally have that capacity may be deprived of it or have it 
reduced by reason of temporary factors, such as unconsciousness or 
                                       
5 1997 (2) FLR 426 
6 1990 (2) AC 1 

 
 
10 
 
confusion or other effects of shock, severe fatigue, pain or dr ugs used in 
their treatment.” 
5.5 In another case which is also a case of caesarian operation – Rockdale 
Healthcare Trust cited by Butler Sloss L.J., it was found that the patient was 
not capable of weighing up information that she was given as she was “in  the 
throes of labour with all that is involved in terms of pain and emotional 
stress”.   
5.6 Butler Sloss L.J. laid down inter alia the following propositions on the 
capacity of a woman to decide in the context of caesarian cases:   
“A person lacks capacity if some impairment or disturbance of mental 
functioning renders the person unable to make a decision whether to 
consent to or refuse treatment. That inability to make a decision will occur 
when (a) the patient is unable to comprehe nd and retain the information 
which is material to the decision, especially as to the likely consequences 
of having or not having the treatment in question; (b) the patient is unable 
to use the information and weigh it in the balance as part of the process  of 
arriving at the decision. If, as Thorpe J observed in Re C (above), a 
compulsive disorder or phobia from which the patient suffers stifles belief 
in the information presented to her, then the decision may not be a true 
one.”  
5.7 The Consultation Paper  of the Law Commission of U.K. has adopted a 
similar approach in dealing with the subject of “Mental Capacity” and this has 
been referred to by Butler S loss L.J.   The definition of ‘informed decision’ 
given in the 196 th Report of Law Commission of India i s almost on the same 
lines as what Butler Sloss L.J. said and the Law Commission of U.K. suggested 
in 1995. 
5.8 The Law Commission of India clarified that where a competent patient 
takes an ‘informed decision’ to allow nature to have its course, the patien t is, 
under common law, not guilty of attempt to commit suicide (u/s 309 IPC) nor 
is the doctor who omits to give treatment, guilty of abetting suicide (u/s 306 
IPC) or of culpable homicide (u/s 299 read with Section 304 of IPC). 
5.9 As far as (i) incompetent patients as defined above and (ii) competent 
patients who have not taken ‘informed decision’, a doctor can take a decision 

 
 
11 
 
to withhold or withdraw ‘medical treatment’ if that is in the ‘best interests’ of 
the patient and is based on the opinion of a body of three medical experts.  The 
‘best interest’ test, stated by the Law Commission, is based on the test laid 
down in Bolam’s case 7 - a test reiterated in Jacob Mathew’s case 8 by the 
Supreme Court.  The procedure for the constitution of the body of exper ts has 
been set out in detail.  The Director General of Health Services in relation to 
Union territories and the Directors of Medical Services in the States should 
prepare that panel and notify the same.  The requirement of maintaining a 
register by the doctor attending on the patient has been laid down in Section 8 
of the proposed Bill.  The register shall contain all the relevant details 
regarding the patient and the treatment being given to the patient, and should 
also contain the opinion of the doctor as to whether the patient is competent or 
incompetent, the views of the experts and what is in the best interests of the 
incompetent patient.  The medical practitioner shall then inform the patient (if 
he is conscious) and the parents or other close relativ es or next friend who can 
approach the High Court by filing a Original Petition which shall be heard by a 
Division Bench of the High Court ( vide Section 12 of the said Bill).  Certain 
procedural aspects relating to the hearing and disposal of the OP have b een 
laid down.  If no order of the High Court has been received within the period of 
15 days, it is permissible for the medical practitioner to withhold or withdraw 
further treatment pursuant to the decision he has already taken in the best 
interests of the patient.  However, he can continue to extend palliative care to 
the patient.  The Medical Council of India has been enjoined to issue the 
guidelines from time to time for the guidance of medical practitioners in the 
matter of withholding or withdrawing the medical treatment to competent or 
incompetent patients suffering from terminal illness ( vide Section 14).  The 
Law Commission, for the reasons stated in Chapter VII, under the heading 
“Whether advance directives (living will) should be allowed legal sa nctity in our 
country”, was not in favour of recognizing the advance medical directive even if 
                                       
7 {1957) 1 WLR 582 
8 (2006) 5 SCC 472 

 
 
12 
 
it is in writing.  The Commission observed that as a matter of public policy, 
such directive should be made legally ineffective overriding the common law 
right.  Accordingly, Section 4 was introduced in the Bill. 
6. Supreme Courts’ decision in Aruna’s case (2011) 
 
6.1 The case of Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug [(2011) 4 SCC 454] is the first 
case in India which deliberated at length  on ‘eut hanasia’. The Supreme Court, 
while making it clear that passive euthanasia is permissible in our country as 
in other countries,   proceeded to lay down the safeguards and guidelines to be 
observed in the case of a terminally ill  patient who is not in a position to 
signify consent o n account of physical or mental predicaments  such as 
irreversible coma and unsound mind.  It was held that a close relation or a 
‘surrogate’ cannot take a decision to discontinue  or withdraw artificial life 
sustaining measures and that the High Court’s a pproval has to be sought to 
adopt such a course.  The High Court in its turn will have to obtain the 
opinion of three medical experts. In that case,   Aruna Shanbaug was in 
Persistent Vegetative State (PVS for short) for more than three decades and the 
Court found that there was a little possibility of coming out of PVS. However, 
the Court pointed out that she was not dead.  She was abandoned by her 
family and was being looked after by staff of KEM Hospital in which she 
worked earlier  as staff nurse.  The C ourt started the discussion by pointing 
out the distinction between active and passive euthanasia and observed that 
“the general legal position all over the world seems to be that while active 
euthanasia is illegal unless there is legislation permitting it , passive euthanasia 
is legal even without legislation provided certain conditions and safeguards are 
maintained”.  The distinctive feature of PVS, it was pointed out, is that brain 
stem remains active and functioning while the cortex  has lost its functio n and 
activity.  The Supreme Court addressed the question when a person can be 
said to be dead.It was answered by saying that “one is dead when one’s brain 
is dead”.  Brain death is different from PVS.  Reference was made to American 
Uniform Definition of Death, 1980.  Then it was concluded: “ Hence, a present-

 
 
13 
 
day understanding of death as the irreversible end of life must imply total brain 
failure such that neither breathing nor circulation is possible any more”.  
6.2 After referring extensively to the opinions expressed in Airedale case, the 
Supreme Court stated that the law in U.K. is fairly well -settled that in the case 
of incompetent patient, if the doctors act on the basis of informed medical 
opinion and withdraw the artificial life support sys tem, the said act cannot be 
regarded as a crime. The question was then posed as to who is to decide what 
the patient’s best interest is where he or she is in a Persistent Vegetative State 
(PVS).  It was then answered by holding that although the wishes of the 
parents, spouse or other close relatives and the opinion of the attending 
doctors should carry due weight, it is not decisive and it is ultimately for the 
Court to decide as parens patriae as to what is in the best interest of the 
patient.  The High Co urt has been entrusted with this responsibility, following 
what Lord Keith said in Airdale case. The Supreme Court referred to the dicta 
in the  Court of appeal decision in J. ( A minor) (Wardship: medical treatment) 9, 
that the Court as a representative of sovereign as parens patriae will adopt the 
same standard which a reasonable and responsible parent would do . The 
same is the standard for a ‘surrogate’ as well.  But, there is no decision -
making role to a ‘surrogate’ or anyone else except the High Court, a s per the 
decision in Aruna’s case. 
6.3 Referring to the U.S. decisions and in particular the observations of 
Cardozo  J., the Supreme Court pointed out that the informed consent 
doctrine has become firmly entrenched in American Tort Law ( vide para 93 of 
SCC).  The logical corollary of the doctrine of informed consent is that the 
patient generally possesses the right not to consent i.e., to refuse treatment”.  
The court relied on the observation of Rehnquist C.J. that “the notion of bodily 
integrity has bee n embodied in the requirement that informed consent is 
generally required for medical treatment ”. The Supreme Court referred 
                                       
9 (1990) 3 All ER 930 

 
 
14 
 
extensively to Cruzan’s case10 , wherein the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed the 
view of the State Supreme Court that the permission to withdraw artificial 
feeding and hydration equipment to Nancy Cruzan who was in a PVS state 
ought not to be allowed.  It was observed that there was a powerful dissenting 
opinion by Brennan J. with whom two Judges concurred.  The Supreme Court 
then highlighted the fact that in Cruzan case, there was a statute of the State 
of Missouri unlike in Airedale case  (where there was none), which required 
clear and convincing evidence that while the patient was competent, had 
desired that if she becomes incompetent an d enters into a PVS, her life 
support system should be withdrawn. There wa s no such evidence in that 
case.  It was in that background, in Cruzan’s case, the Court’s permission was 
refused.    
6.4 Coming to Indian law on the subject, it was pointed out that in Gian 
Kaur’s case 11 , the Supreme Court approvingly referred to the view taken by 
House of Lords in Airedale case on the point that Euthanasia can be made 
lawful only by legislation.  Then it wa s observed: “ It may be noted that in Gian 
Kaur case although the Supreme Court has quoted with approval the view of 
House of Lords in Airedale case, it has not clarified who can decide whether life 
support should be discontinued in the case of an incompete nt person e.g. a 
person in coma or PVS.  This vexed question has been arising often in India 
because there are a large number of cases where persons go into coma (due to 
an accident or some other reason) or for some other reason are unable to give 
consent, and then the question arises as to who should give consent for 
withdrawal of life support”.  Then, it was observed: “In our opinion, if we leave it 
solely to the patient’s relatives or to the doctors or next friend to decide whether 
to withdraw the life s upport of an incompetent person , there is always a risk in 
our country that this may be misused by some unscrupulous persons who wish 
to inherit or otherwise grab property of the patient”.  
                                       
10 497 US 261 
11 (1996) 2 SCC 648 

 
 
15 
 
6.5 Proceeding to discuss the question whether life support system  (which is 
done by feeding her) should be withdrawn and at whose instance, the Supreme 
Court laid down the law with prefacing observations at paragraph 124 as 
follows: “There is no statutory provision in our country as to the legal procedure 
for withdrawing life support to a person in PVS or who is otherwise incompetent 
to take a decision in this connection.  We agree with Mr. Andhyarujina that 
passive Euthanasia should be permitted in our country in certain situations, and 
we disagree with the learned Attorney General that it should never be permitted. 
Hence, following the technique used in Vishaka 12 case, we are laying down the 
law in this connection which will continue to be the law until Parliament makes 
a law on the subject13:  
(i) A decision has to be taken to discontinue life support either by the 
parent or the spouse or other close relative or in the absence of any of 
them, such a decision can be taken even by a person or a body of 
persons acting as a next friend.  It can also be taken by the doctors 
attending the patient.  However, the decision should be taken bona fide 
in the best interest of the patient.  
In the present case, we have already noted that Aruna Shanbaug’s 
parents are dead and other close relatives are not interested in her 
ever since she had  the unfortunate assault on her.  As already noted 
above, it is the KEM Hospital staff, who have been amazingly caring 
for her day and night for so many long years, who really are her next 
friends, and not Ms. Pinki Virani who has only visited her on few 
occasions and written a book on her.  Hence, it is for KEM Hospital 
staff to take that decision.  KEM Hospital staff have clearly expressed 
their wish that Aruna Shanbaug should be allowed to live. 
  However, assuming that the KEM Hospital staff at some fut ure time 
changes its mind, in our opinion, in such a situation, KEM Hospital 
would have to apply to the  Bombay High Court for approval of the 
decision to withdraw life support. 
(ii) Hence, even if a decision is taken by the near relatives or doctors or 
next friend to withdraw life support, such a decision requires approval 
from the High Court concerned as laid down in Airedale case.  
 
                                       
12 Cause title & citation to be given  
13 Underlining ours 

 
 
16 
 
In our opinion, this is even more necessary in our country as we cannot 
rule out the possibility of mischief being done by relatives or others for 
inheriting the property of the patient”. 
  In our  opinion, if we leave solely to the patient’s relatives or to the 
doctors or next friend to decide whether to withdraw the life support of 
an incompetent person, there is always  a risk in our country  that this 
may be misu sed by some unscrupulous person who wish to inherit or 
otherwise  grab the property of the patient. 
 “We cannot rule out the possibility that unscrupulous persons with the 
help of some unscrupulous doctors may fabrica te material to show that 
it is a terminal case with no chance of recovery. In our opinion, while 
giving great weight to the wishes of the parents, spouse, or other close 
relatives or next friend of the incompetent patient and also giving due 
weight to th e opinion of the attending doctors, we cannot leave it 
entirely to their discretion whether to discontinue the lift support or not.  
We agree with the decision of Lord Keith in Airedale case  that the 
approval of the High Court should be taken in this connec tion.  This is 
in the interest of the protection of the patient, protection of the doctors, 
relatives and next friend, and for reassurance of the patient’s family as 
well as the public.  This is also in consonance with the doctrine of 
parens patriae which is well -known principle of law ”. (see p. 520 of 
SCC) 
6.6 Then Supreme Court explained the doctrine of ‘Parens Patriae’. 
 The Supreme Court then observed that Article 226 of the Constitution 
gives ample powers to the High Court to pass suitable orders on th e 
application filed by the near relatives or next friend or the doctors/hospital 
staff seeking permission to withdraw the life support to an incompetent 
patient. 
6.7 The procedure to be adopted by the High Court has been laid down in 
paragraph 134 (p. 522)as follows:  “When such an application is filed, the Chief 
Justice of the High Court should forthwith constitute a Bench of at least two 
Judges who should decide to grant approval or not. Before doing so the Bench 
should seek the opinion of a committee of three reputed doctors to be nominated 
by the Bench after consulting such medical authorities/medical practitioners as 
it may deem fit. Preferably one of the three doctors should be a neurologist, one 
should be a psychiatrist, and the third a physician. For this purpose a panel of 

 
 
17 
 
doctors in every city may be prepared by the High Court in consultation with the 
State Government/Union Territory and their fees for this purpose may be fixed. 
The committee of three doctors nominated by the Bench should carefully 
examine the patient and also consult the record of the patient as well as taking 
the views of the hospital staff and submit its report to the High Court Bench. 
Simultaneously with appointing the committee of doctors, the High Court Bench 
shall also issue notice to the S tate and close relatives e.g. parents, spouse, 
brothers/sisters etc. of the patient, and in their absence his/her next friend, and 
supply a copy of the report of the doctor's committee to them as soon as it is 
available. After hearing them, the High Court bench should give its verdict.  
 The above procedure should be followed all over India until Parliament 
makes legislation on this subject.” 
7. Medical ethics and duty of the doctor 
 
7.1 What is the duty of the doctor? Is he bound to take patient’s consent for 
starting or continuing the treatment including surgery or artificial ventilation 
etc? How is he expected to act where a patient is not in a position to express 
his will or take an informed decision?  These are the primary questions which 
come up for di scussion and these issues were addressed in Airedale and 
Aruna.   
7.2 In this context, two cardinal principles of medical ethics are stated to be 
patient autonomy and beneficence (vide P. 482 of SCC in Aruna’s case): 
1. “Autonomy means the right to self -determination, where the informed 
patient has a right to choose the manner of his treatment.  To be 
autonomous, the patient should be competent to make decision and 
choices. In the event that he is incompetent to make choices, his wishes 
expressed in advance in  the form of  a living will, OR the wishes of 
surrogates acting on his behalf  (substituted judgment) are to be 
respected.  
The surrogate is expected to represent what the patient may have decided 
had she/she been competent, or to act in the patient’s best interest. 

 
 
18 
 
2. Beneficence is acting in what (or judged to be) in the patient’s best 
interest. Acting in the patient’s best interest means following a course of 
action that is best for the patient, and is not in influenced by personal 
convictions, motives or other considerations……..” 
7.3 Both the Supreme Court as well as the Law Commission relied on the 
opinion of House of Lords on these aspects. The contours of controversy has 
been put in the following words by Lord Goff in Airedale case – “Even so, where 
(for example) a patient is brought into hospital in such a condition that, without 
the benefit of a life support system, he will not continue to live, the decision has 
to be made whether or not to give him that benefit, if available. That decision can 
only be made in the best interests of the patient. No doubt, his best interests will 
ordinarily require that he should be placed on a life support system as soon as 
necessary, if only to make an accurate assessment of his condition and a 
prognosis for the future. But if he neither recovers sufficiently to be taken off it 
nor dies, the question will ultimately arise whether he should be kept on it 
indefinitely. As I see it, that question (assuming the continued availability of the 
system) can only  be answered by reference to the best interests of the 
patient himself, having regard to established medical practice.  …….The 
question which lies at the heart of the present case is, as I see it, whether on 
that principle the doctors responsible for the tr eatment and care of Anthony 
Bland can justifiably discontinue the process of artificial feeding upon which the 
prolongation of his life depends ”. That question was dealt with in the following 
words: “It is crucial for the understanding of this question tha t the question itself 
should be correctly formulated. The question is not whether the doctor should 
take a course which will kill his patient, or even take a course which has the 
effect of accelerating his death. The question is whether the doctor should o r 
should not continue to provide his patient with medical treatment or care which, 
if continued, will prolong his pati ent's life . The question is sometimes put in 
striking or emotional terms, which can be misleading ”. To stay clear of such 
misconception, the right question to be asked and answered was stated as : - 
“The question is not whether it is in the best interests of the patient that he 

 
 
19 
 
should die. The question is whether it is in the best interests of the patient that 
his life should be prolonged by the continuance of this form of medical treatment 
or care.”  Then, it was observed: - “The correct formulation of the question is of 
particular importance in a case such as the present, where the patient is totally 
unconscious and where there is no hope wha tsoever of any amelioration of his 
condition.  In circumstances such as these, it may be difficult to say that it is in 
his best interests that treatment should be ended.  But if the question is asked, 
as in my opinion it should be, whether it is in his be st interests that treatment 
which has the effect of artificially prolonging his life should be continued, that 
question can sensibly be answered to the effect that it is not in his best interests 
to do so.” 
 The following words of Lord Goff touching on the duty and obligation of a 
doctor towards a terminally ill incompetent patient are quite apposite: 
“The doctor who is caring for such a patient cannot, in my opinion, be 
under an absolute obligation to prolong his life by any means available to 
him, regardl ess of the quality of the patient's life. Common humanity 
requires otherwise, as do medical ethics and good medical practice 
accepted in this country and overseas. As I see it, the doctor's decision 
whether or not to take any such step must (subject to his  patient's ability 
to give or withhold his consent) be made in the best interests of the 
patient. It is this principle too which, in my opinion, underlies the 
established rule that a doctor may, when caring for a patient who is, for 
example, dying of cance r, lawfully administer painkilling drugs despite 
the fact that he knows that an incidental effect of that application will be 
to abbreviate the patient's life.” 
7.4 Lord Goff then made a pertinent observation that discontinuance of 
artificial feeding in such case (PVS and the like) is not equivalent to cutting a 
mountaineer’s rope or severing the air pipe of a deep sea diver.  In  the same 
case, Lord Brown Wilk inson having said that the doctor cannot owe to the 
patient any duty to maintain his life where t hat life  can only be sustained by 
intrusive medical care to which the patient will not consent, further clarified 
the legal position thus : “If there comes a stage where the responsible doctor 
comes to the reasonable conclusion (which accords with the vie ws of a 

 
 
20 
 
responsible body of medical opinion), that further continuance of an intrusive life 
support system is not in the “best interests” of the patient, he can no longer 
lawfully continue that life support system; to do  so would constitute the crime of 
battery and the tort of trespass to the person.  Therefore, he cannot be in breach 
of any duty to maintain the patient’s life.  Therefore, he is not guilty of murder 
by omission”. 
7.5 These passages have been approvingly quoted by learned Judges of the 
Supreme Court in Aruna’s case.   
7.6 The observations of Lord Mustill in Airedale’s case which were quoted by 
Supreme Court are also relevant – “Threaded through the technical arguments 
addressed to the House were the strands of a much wider position, that it i s in 
the best interests of the community at large that Anthony Bland's life should 
now end. The doctors have done all they can. Nothing will be gained by going on 
and much will be lost. The distress of the family will get steadily worse. The 
strain on the devotion of a medical staff charged with the care of a patient 
whose condition will never improve, who may live for years and who does not 
even recognize that he is being cared for, will continue to mount. The large 
resources of skill, labour and money now  being devoted to Anthony Bland might 
in the opinion of many be more fruitfully employed in improving the condition of 
other patients, who if treated may have useful, healthy and enjoyable lives for 
years to come”. 
7.7 The negative effects of compelling a doctor to continue the treatment to a 
PVS patient till the end have thus been forcibly portrayed.   
8. Analysis by 17th Law Commission 
 
8.1 The Law Commission summarized Airedale’s case as follows:- 
 “The above judgment of the House of Lords in Airedale lays down a 
crucial principle of law when it says that withholding or withdrawal of life 
support to a dying patient merely amounts to allowing the patient to die a 
natural death and that where death in the normal course is certain, 
withholding or withdrawal of life support is not an offence. 

 
 
21 
 
If a patient capable of giving informed consent refuses to give 
consent or has, in advance, refused such consent, the doctor cannot 
administer life support systems to continue his life even if the doctor 
thinks that it is in the patient’s interest to administer such system. The 
patient’s right of self-determination is absolute. But the duty of a doctor to 
save life of a patient is not absolute. He can desist from prolonging life by 
artificial means if it is in the best i nterests of the patient. Such an 
omission is not an offence. The doctor or the hospital may seek a 
declaration from the Court that such withholding, which is proposed, will 
be lawful.” 
8.2 The Law Commission brought out two important aspects concerning 
passive euthanasia. First, the observations in Gian Kaur vs. State of Punjab 14 
which is a Constitution Bench decision. In that case the Supreme Court 
upheld the constitutional validity of both Section 306 and 309 of Indian Penal 
Code whereunder the abetment to  suicide and attempt to suicide are made 
punishable.  In the context of Section 306, the Supreme Court touched upon 
the subject of withdrawal of life support.  Airedale’s case was also cited in that 
judgment.  The Supreme Court reiterated the proposition t hat euthanasia can 
only be legalized by enacting a suitable law.  However, the distinction pointed 
out in Airedale between euthanasia which can be legalized by legislation and 
withdrawal of life support which is permissible in certain circumstances was 
recognized by the Supreme Court in Gian Kaur’s case. Another significant 
observation made in the same case while dealing with Article 21 of the 
Constitution is the following:- “These are not cases of extinguishing life but only 
of accelerating conclusion of t he process of natural death which has 
already commenced .  The debate even in such cases to permit physician -
assisted termination of life is inconclusive”.  That is how the Law Commission 
drew support from the dictum of the Supreme Court in Gian Kaur’s case. 
8.3 Another approach of the Law Commission is from the stand point of the 
“General Exceptions” contained in Indian Penal Code.  Some of these 
provisions were relied upon to demonstrate that the doctor acting on the basis 
of a desire expressed by the pati ent suffering from terminal illness or acting in 
                                       
14 supra, note 11 

 
 
22 
 
the best interest of a patient in coma or PVS state etc. shall not be deemed to 
have committed a crime.  After discussing the various ‘exceptions’, the Law 
Commission concluded as follows: “in our view Secti on 76 - 79 are more 
appropriate than Section 88 and there is no offence under Section 299 read 
with Section 304 of IPC”, Section 76 says that “nothing is an offence which is 
done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by 
reason of mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to 
do it”.   Section 79 enacts the exception as follows: “nothing is an offence 
which is done by any person who is justified by law or by reason of mistake of 
fact, and not by reason of mistake of law, in good faith believes himself to be 
justified by law in doing it.  
8.4 Section 76, it was clarified, was attracted to a case of withholding or 
withdrawal of medical treatment at the ins tance of a competent patient who 
decides not to have the treatment. Section 79, it was stated, applies to the 
doctor’s action in the case of both competent and incompetent patients.  Then, 
it was observed “in our view where a medical practitioner is under a duty at 
common law to obey refusal of a patient who is an adult and who is competent, 
to take medical treatment, he cannot be accused of gross negligence resulting in 
the death of a person within the above parameters.”   Likewise,  it was pointed 
out tha t in the case of an incompetent patient or a patient who is not in a 
position to take informed decision, if the doctor decides to withhold or 
withdraw the treatment in the best interests of patient, based upon the 
opinion of experts then such withholding o r withdrawal cannot be said to be a 
grossly negligent act. Section 304-A of I.P.C. will not therefore be attracted. 
8.5 The Law Commission relied on the decision of Supreme Court in Jacob 
Mathew’s case in which it was pointed out in the context of gross ne gligence 
under 304-A, that it must be established that no medical professional in his 
ordinary senses and prudence could have done or failed to do the thing 
which was attributed to the accused doctor. 

 
 
23 
 
8.6 At the same time, the Commission, by way of abundan t caution, 
suggested the introduction of a Section (Section 11) in the proposed Bill to the 
effect that the act or omission by the doctor in such situations is lawful.  On 
the point of criminal liability, the Law Commission also referred to the holding 
in Airedale (UK) and Cruzan (US) that the omission of the doctor in giving or 
continuing the medical treatment did not amount to an offence.  In this 
context, we may mention here that there is a criticism of the ‘act’ and 
‘omission’ approach adopted in Airdale’s case  in holding that no criminal 
offence is committed by the doctor by withdrawing the artificial life -prolonging  
treatment.  The omission involved therein, it was pointed out, did not amount 
to an offence.  Irrespective of this approach, the Law Commi ssion, in its 196 th 
Report, reached the conclusion that no substantive offence is made out and in 
any case the ‘general exceptions’ in IPC excluded the criminal liability of the 
doctors. 
8.7 Coming to civil liability in torts, the Law Commission after refe rring to 
Jacob Mathew  and Bolam relied on the proposition stated in Halsbury’s of 
England (4 th Edition, Volume 30, para 35) that if the doctor had acted in 
accordance with the practice accepted as proper by a responsible body of 
medical men skilled in that  particular art, even though a body of adverse 
opinion also existed among medical men, he is not guilty of negligence. 
9. Legalizing euthanasia – the perspectives and views 
  
9.1 The question of recognizing and legalizing euthanasia is being debated 
all over the world.  The views pro and contra  rest on  philosophical, moral, 
ethical and leg al perspectives.  Different views have emerged, some of them 
being extreme. In a  comprehensive Dissertation on  “Legislative Passive 
Euthanasia” presented by  Mr. Sayan Das 15, various view points have been 
discussed and vast literature on the subject including end – of – life care has 
                                       
15 an LLM student at Symbosis Law School, Pune, who has been guided by Dr. Shashikala 
Gurupur, Director of Law School & Member(P.T.) of Law Commission; sayandas@symlaw.ac.in  

 
 
24 
 
been referred to.  We are of th e view that r ational and humanitarian  outlook 
should have primacy in such a complex matter.  Now, passive euthanasia in 
the sense in which it has been described at the beginning of this report both in 
the case of competent and incompetent patients is being allowed in most of the 
countries, subject to the doctor acting in the best interests of the patient who 
is not in a position to express the will.  The broad principles of medical ethics 
which shall be observed by the doctor in taking the decision are the patient’s 
autonomy (or the right to s elf determination) and beneficence, which means 
following a course of action that is best for the patient uninfluenced by 
personal convictions, motives or other considerations 16. In Airedale’s case , 
Lord Keith observed that the hospital / medical pr actitioner should apply to 
the Family Division of High Court for endorsing or reversing the decision taken 
by the medical practitioners in charge to discontinue  the treatment of a PVS 
patient.   Such a course should be taken till a body of experience and p ractice 
has been developed, as pointed out by Lord Keith in Airedale’s case .   The 
course suggested by Lord Keith has been approved by our Supreme Court in 
Aruna’s case  and this salutary safeguard  has been implanted in our legal 
system now.  As far as act ive euthanasia is  concerned, lot of debate is still 
going on and there are “many responsible  members of our society  who believe 
that euthanasia should be made lawful, but as the laws now stand, euthanasia 
(other than passive euthanasia) is a crime in com mon law and it can only be 
made lawful by means of legislation” , as observed in Airedale’s case and 
reiterated by Law Commission (196th report). In India too, many from the legal 
and medical profession and academia have expressed the view that euthanasia 
should be legalized.  
                                       
16 See p. 482 of SCC in Aruna Shaunbaug’s case, supra. 

 
 
25 
 
9.2 V. R. Jayadevan pleads for ushering in an era of active euthanasia. The 
following pertinent observations made by him on the subject of legalizing active 
euthanasia may usefully be quoted17: 
“The trend of the decisions of both the US and English courts reveals that 
the common law systems continue to proscribe active euthanasia as an 
offence.  At the same time, many realize that active euthanasia is gaining 
relevance in the modern world.  The o bjections to legalizing active 
euthanasia are based on religious principles, professional and ethical 
aspects and the fear of misuse.  But, it cannot be forgotten that it was by 
overruling similar objections that abortion was legalized and later raised 
as an ingredient of the right to privacy.  It is submitted that just like 
abortion, the modern societies demand the right to assisted suicide.” 
He has cited many authorities in support of his view point. 
9.3 Passive euthanasia, subject to the observance of certain restrictions and 
safeguards, has been endorsed and recognized by the Supreme Court in the 
latest case of Aruna Shanbaug and in Gian Kaur’s case also, there is sufficient 
indication of its legality and propriety. The verdict in Airedale’s case has given 
a quietus to this controversy not only in U.K., but also in other countries 
where the ratio of the Judgment has been followed.   
9.4 It is relevant to mention in this context that t he Law Commission of 
India in a more recent report, i.e. in 210 th Report has recommended the repeal 
of Section 309 of Indian Penal Code so that the attempt to commit  suicide 
could be decriminalized. As long back as 1971, the Law Commission in its 42nd 
report pleaded for obliterating Section 309 from the Statute Book. The mor al 
and philosophical aspects were also considered in detail. In Aruna Shanbaug 
too, case the Supreme Court made a categorical observation:  
“We are of the opinion that although Section 309 of the IPC has been held 
to be constitutionally valid in the Gi an K aur case, the time has come 
where it should be deleted by Parliament as it has become anachronistic.  
A person attempts suicide in depression and hence he needs help rather 
than punishment.”   
                                       
17 V. R. Jaydevan, “Right of the Alive [who] but has no Life at all – Crossing the Rubicon from 
Suicide to Active Euthanasia” (2011) 53 JILI 437 at 471. 

 
 
26 
 
9.5 The Supreme Court recommended to the parliament to consider  the 
feasibility of deleting Section 309 from the Penal Code.  If Parliament in its 
wisdom gives effect to this recommendation, the case for legalizing euthanasia, 
even active euthanasia, would logically get strengthened.  There would then be 
no Section in any penal statute to regard it as a crime.  However, we need not 
go thus far in the case of passive euthanasia.  It is not a crime and there is no 
constitutional taboo.  Rational and humane considerations fully justify the 
endorsement of passive euthanasia.  Moral or philosophical notions and 
attitude towards passive euthanasia may vary but it can be safely said that the 
preponderance of view is that such considerations do not come in the way of 
relieving the dying man of his intractable suffering, lingering pain , anguish 
and misery.  The principle of sanctity to human life which is an integral part of 
Art. 21, the right to self determina tion on a matter of life and death which is 
also an offshoot of Art. 21, the right to privacy which is another facet of Art. 21 
and incidentally the duty of doctor in critical situations – all these 
considerations which may seem to clash with each other if  a disintegrated 
view of Art.21 is taken – do arise.  A fair balance has to be struck and a 
holistic approach has to be taken.  That is what has been done by the Law 
Commission of India in its 196 th Report and the Supreme Court of India in the 
very recent case of Aruna Shanbaug.  The landmark decision of House of Lords 
in Airedale’s case has charted out the course to recognize and legalise passive 
euthanasia even in the case of incompetent patient.  In Airdale, as seen earlier, 
the principle of best interes ts of the patient was pressed into service to uphold 
passive euthanasia in relation to incompetent patients and this in turn opened 
the doors for judicial determination for granting approval.  “The best interest 
calculus generally involves an open-ended consideration of factors relating to the 
treatment decision, including the patient’s current condition, degree of pain, loss 
of dignity, prognosis, and the risks, side effects, and benefits of each 
treatment.18” 
                                       
18 Development in Law – Medical Technology and the Law (1993) 103 HLR 1519 at 1651-25. 

 
 
27 
 
10. Whether legislation necessary? 
 
10.1 The path breaking judgment in Aruna Ramachandra and the directives 
given therein has become the law of the land.  The Law Commission of India 
too made a fervent plea for legal recognition to be given to passive euthanasia 
subject to certain safeguards.  The crucial and serious question now is, should 
we recommend to the Government to tread a different path and neutralize the 
effect of the decision in Aruna’s case and to suggest a course contrary to the 
law and practices in most of the countries of the world?  As we said earlier, 
there is no compelling reasons for this Law Commission to do so.  Our earnest 
effort at the present juncture, is only to reinforce the reasoning adopted by the 
Supreme Court and the previous Law Commission.  On taking stock of the 
pros and cons, this Commission would like to resta te the propriety and of  
legality of  passive euthanasia rather than putting the clock back in the 
medico-legal history of this country. 
11. Passive euthanasia – issues discussed. 
 
11.1 At the risk of repetition, we shall first deal with the case of a comp etent 
patient who is terribly suffering from terminal illness of grave nature.  What is 
the doctor’s duty and does the content of the right in Art. 21 preclude the 
doctor and the patient from facilitating passive euthanasia? 
11.2 The discussion in the fore going paras and the weighty opinions of the 
Judges of highest courts as well as the considered views of Law Commission  
(in 196 th report) would furnish an answer to the above question in clearest 
terms to the effect that legally and constitutionally, the patient (competent) has 
a right to refuse medical treatment resulting in temporary prolongation of life.  
The patient’s life is at the brink of extinction.  There is no slightest hope of 
recovery.  The patient undergoing terrible suffering and worst mental agony 
does not want his life to be prolonged by artificial means.  She/he would not 
like to spend for his treatment which is practically worthless.  She/he cares for 
his bodily integrity rather than bodily suffering.  She/he would not like to live 

 
 
28 
 
like a ‘ cabbage’ in an intensive care unit for some days or months till the 
inevitable death occurs.  He would like to have the right of privacy protected 
which implies protection from interference and bodily invasion. As observed in 
Gian Kaur’s case , the natural process of his death has already commenced 
and he would like to die with peace and dignity.  No law can inhibit him from 
opting such course.  This is not a situation comparable to suicide, keeping 
aside the view point in favour of decriminali zing the attempt to suicide.  The 
doctor or relatives cannot compel him to have invasive medical treatment by 
artificial means or treatment. If there is forced medical intervention on his 
body, according to the decisions cited supra (especially the remarks  of Lord 
Brown Wilkinson in Airdale’s case), the doctor / surgeon is guilty of ‘assault’ 
or ‘battery’.  In the words of Justice Cardozo 19, “ every human being of adult 
years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his own 
body and a s urgeon who performs an operation without his patient’s consent 
commits an assault for which he is liable in damages.”   Lord Goff in Airedale’s 
case places the right to self determination on a high pedestal.  He observed 
that “in the circumstances such as t his, the principle of sanctity of human life 
must yield to the principle of self determination and the doctor’s duty to act in 
the best interests of the patient must likewise be qualified by the wish of the 
patient.”  The following observations of Lord Goff deserve particular notice: 
“I wish to add that, in cases of this kind, there is no question of the 
patient having committed suicide, nor therefore of the doctor having aided 
or abetted him in doing so. It is simply that the patient has, as he is 
entitled to do, declined to consent t o treatment which might or would have 
the effect of prolonging his life, and the doctor has, in accordance with his 
duty, complied with his patient's wishes.”  
11.3 As noticed earlier, the line of thinking is the same in Gian Kaur – which 
aspect has been highlighted by Law Commission (in 196th report). 
11.4 To accede to the choice and volition of a competent patient in a state of 
terminal illness, far from being invasive of the fundamental right under Art.21 
                                       
19 In 211 NY 125, (1914) 

 
 
29 
 
(built on the premise that sanctity of life cannot be jeopardized), will be more 
conducive to the promotion of that right. This would be so, whether we 
approach ‘life’, and its definition or meaning from the natural law perspective 
or a rationalist or a positive law angle.  While life cannot be extinguished or its 
attributes decimated or taken away, provis ions of canvas of choice, when life’ s 
elements have ebbed away cannot be critiqued.  Even in respect of incompetent 
patient, as p ointed out earlier by refe rence to the various passages in the 
weighty pronouncements in our country, U.K., and U.S.A., the violation of 
Art.21 does not really arise when the decision to withdraw the life support 
measures is taken in the best interest  of the incompetent patient , especially 
when the evaluation of best interests is left to a high judicial body, i.e., the 
High Court. For instance, in case of dysfunctional bodily organs, or 
decapacitated limbs, decisions are taken to transplant or amputate in the best 
interests of the p atient.  Again, abortion laws, or Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy Laws, are similar instances of best interest concept.  
11.5 In Cruzan’s case (497 US 261), the US Supreme Court observed that the 
due process clause undoubtedly protected “the interests of a person in life as 
well as an interest in refusing life sustaining medical treatment.” 
11.6 What is the proper approach to the case of an incompetent patient, 
such as  a patient who may be in a PVS or irreversible coma ? Should 
(involuntary) passive euthana sia be allowed in his case?  Will the 
discontinuance of life -prolonging treatment by artificial measures result in 
violation of Art. 21?  Here again, we cannot adopt an abstract or disintegrated 
view of Art.21 and record the conclusion that the withdrawal of life-sustaining 
systems would automatically amount to violation of Art.21.   As stated by 
Hoffman L.J. in Airdale case20, the ‘sanctity of life’ and ‘respect for life’ should 
not be carried “to the point at which it has become almost empty of any real 
content and when it involves the sacrifice of other important values such as 
human dignity and freedom of choice”. 
                                       
20 supra, note 3 

 
 
30 
 
11.7 The fact that he is helpless, unconscious and uncommunicative – should 
it come in the way of  withdrawing life -support systems if it is considered to be 
in his best interests  and a rational person in his position, would most 
probably have  opted for withdrawal?   As the patient is not in a position to 
exercise the right of self -determination, should artificial life -support be thrust 
on him throughout the span of his short life?  Should he be in a worse position 
because he cannot express, communicate or take informed decision?  In this 
context, we may quote what the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in 
Supdt. of Belhcertown State School vs. Saikewicz21 pertinently observed: 
“To presume that the incompetent person must always be subjected to 
what many rational and intelligent persons may decline is to downgrade 
the status of the incompetent person by placing a lesser value on his 
intrinsic human worth and vitality.” 
 
11.8 This  statement was quoted by Lord Goff  approvingly  in Airedale case 
(vide pg 502 of SCC  in Aruna’s case ). Before referring to that passage, Lord 
Goff observed: “It is scarcely consistent with the primacy given to the pri nciple of 
self-determination in those cases in which the patient of sound mind has 
declined to give his consent, that the law should provide no means of enabling 
treatment  to be withheld in appropriate circumstances  where the patient  is in 
no condition to indicate, if that was his wish, that he did not consent to it”.  
11.9 It would be unjust and inhumane to thrust on him the invasive  
treatment of infructuous nature knowing fully well that the end is near and 
certain.  He shall not be placed on a worse footing than a patient who can 
exercise his volition and express his wish to die peacefully and with dignity. 
Had he been alive, what he would have in all probability decided as a rational 
human being?  Would it be in his best interest s that he should be al lowed to 
die in natural course?  These decisions have to be taken by the High Court as 
parens patriae  and this will be a statutory safeguard against arbitrary or 
uninformed decisions. In this context , the words of Lord Goff in Airedale are 
                                       
21 370 NE 2d 417 (1977)  

 
 
31 
 
pertinent: “Indeed if the justification for treating a patient who lacks the  
capacity to consent lies in the fact that the treatment is provided in his best 
interests, it must follow that the treatment may, and indeed ultimately should be 
discontinued  where it is no long er in the best interests to provide it”.  The right 
question to be asked, according to the learned Law Lord, “is not whether it is in 
the best interest of the patient that he should die. The question is whether it is in 
the best interests of the patient th at his life should be prolonged by continuing 
this form of medical treatment and care”. 
11.10 Compassionate medical care towards a terminally ill patient does not 
necessarily mean artificially prolonging the life which has started sinking and 
which cannot, by any objective standards, be maintained for long. Life support 
intervention far from helping to mitigate the suffering would rather add to the 
agony of a prolonged dying process.  The Commission is of the view that o n a 
reasonable interpretation, Article 21 does not forbid resorting to passive 
euthanasia even in the case of an incompetent patient provided that it is 
considered to be in his best interests, on a holistic appraisal. The doctors’ duty 
to make assessment a nd the High Courts’ duty to take stock of the entire 
situation are directed towards the evaluation of best interest  which does not 
really clash with the right to life content under Art.21. 
11.11  Article 21 of the Constitution of India injuncts against deprivation of 
life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. By 
the term ‘Life’, “ something more is meant than mere animal existence ”. “The 
inhibition agai nst its deprivation extends to all tho se limits and fac ulties by 
which life is enjoyed”, as observed by Field, J of the Supreme Court of US  in 
Munn v. Illinois 22 and this observation has been quoted by the Constitution 
Bench of the Supreme Court in Kharak Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh (1963) .  
The expression ‘procedure establish ed by law’, has been interpreted by the 
                                       
22 (1877) 94 US 113 at 142 

 
 
32 
 
Supreme Court in Maneka Gandhi’s case 23 to mean right and  just and fair 
procedure and not any sort of procedure.  The scope of Article 21 which was 
initially confined to arbitrary deprivation of life and personal libe rty, was 
extended to positive rights to enable an individual to live the life with dignity.  
In Gian Kaur’s case supra , the Constitution Bench of Supreme Court while 
upholding the validity of Section 309 of I.P.C. laid down the proposition that 
the right to life does  not include the “right to die”.  In this respect, it was 
pointed out that the analogy of the nature of rights in Article 19 of the 
Constitution e.g., freedom of speech include s the freedom not to speak, cannot 
be applied to the right  under Article 21.  The Court held that the right to 
death, if any, is inherently inconsistent with the right to life.  The Court 
however emphasized that right to life under Article 21 would include the right 
to live with human dignity upto the end of natural life which includes within 
its ambit a dignified procedure of death. In other words, the right to die with 
dignity is subsumed within the right to life.  It was further clarified that the 
right to die with digni ty at the end of life is not to be confused or equated with 
right to die an unnatural death curtailing the natural span of life.  As already 
noticed, there are significant observations of the Supreme Court in Gian Kaur 
case while considering the aspect of withdrawal of life support systems to a 
patient in PVS which were stressed in the 196 th report of Commission. Such a 
step in a situation in which the patient is beyond recovery and when the 
process of natural death has already commenced, was  placed on a di fferent 
footing than suicide, while considering the impact of Art. 21.  At this juncture, 
we may quote the pertinent observations of Constitution Bench in Gian Kaur’s 
case: “A question may arise, in the context of a dying man who is terminally ill 
or in a p ersistent vegetative state that he may be permitted to terminate it by a 
premature extinction of his life in those circumstances.  This category of cases 
may fall within the ambit of the ‘right to die’ with dignity as a part of right to live 
with dignity, when death due to termination of natural life is certain and 
                                       
23 AIR 1978 SC 597  

 
 
33 
 
imminent and the process of natural death has commenced.  These are not 
cases of extinguishing life but only of accelerating conclusion of the process of 
natural death which has already commenced”.  
11.12  Post Maneka Gandhi  (1978), law can deal with life and liberty of a 
person by or under a fair, just and reasonable procedure.  By a series of 
judgments of the Supreme Court, life has been construed at the material and 
physical level to include various components, understood to be essential for a 
dignified and wholesome existence.  The International Human Rights 
Documents identify and enumerate several entitlements which are 
acknowledged to be integral to a free and meaningful existence.  These 
entitlements are now considered to be indisputable elements of life and liberty.  
While the State or any other body is injuncted from denuding or depriving a 
person of all or any attributes of life possessed by him, the situation would be 
different when a person is disabled from the usua l enjoyment of a ny of the 
attributes of life by a conscious exercise of choices or volition.  The State or 
medical practitioner would not be accused of taking away the life when the law 
merely provides assistance to the patient to allow his life devoid of essential 
attributes to wane by withdrawal of medical care and procedures.  At any rate, 
the fairness and reasonableness of the procedure to be followed and the 
cautions to be exercised by the medical personnel and the High Court will 
negate a challenge to law based on violation of Art.21.  It must be noted that  
the State would not be depriving life  by sanctioning the proposed legislation 
but, as stated already, the proposed law would operate at a stage when a 
person has no life to be protected or to be pre served and has become an empty 
vessel devoid of v olitional capacity and wholesome attributes of life in the 
physical as well as philosophical sense.  In these circumstances, the State 
cannot be said to be taking  away anything, for there may exist nothing t o be 
taken away which the person concerned may decide to retain as necessary or 
relevant for one’s existence. What the State is forbidden from doing is 
interfering with the autonomy of a person when the autonomy makes sense. 
However, when the patient is no t in a position to make sense of his autonomy 

 
 
34 
 
and is not in a position  to wish death or prefer the life bereft of its basic and 
essential attributes, t he intervention by the judicial organ of the State to 
sanction passive euthanasia cannot be said to be ho stile to the concept of 
sanctity of life of the patient concerned.  The constitutional concern to prevent 
external invasions of human autonomy will not conflict with constitutional 
concern to aid benignly human autonomy in its frailest condition. 
12. Palliative Care 
 
12.1 Palliative care to the terminally ill patients beyond the stage of recovery 
is an allied aspect which needs to be taken care of by the Governments.  
Making palliative care affordable and free for the needy people, training of 
doctors and medical students in pain-treatment and palliative care are the 
needs of the day.  The medical profession  apart from giving effect to passive 
euthanasia where necessary  must ensure that the dying patient receive s 
proper care in a peaceful environment inside or outside the hospital.  There 
are reports that the hospitals find it dif ficult to procure morphine  and other 
pin-relieving drugs  which are regulated under  the Narcotics Drugs an d 
Psychotropic Substances Act .  The stumbling blocks in the way of palliative 
care have to be removed, if necessary, by changing the rules dealing wit h 
narcotic drugs.  There is every need for the Governments to frame 
Schemes extending palliative care to terminally ill patients undergoing 
grave suffering and pain.  The palliative care seems to be a neglected area at 
present.  This situation should not c ontinue for long.   It is needless to state 
that patients who are economically handicapped or those belonging to weaker 
sections of the society should come up for special focus in any such Scheme. 
13. Changes now proposed in the draft Bill 
 
13.1 In Section 2(d) – (definition of ‘incompetent patient’) the words “below the 
age of 16 years” are now added.   
13.2 Two changes are proposed to be made to Section 3.  One is to treat the 
informed decision taken by a patient above 16 years (but below 18 years) at 

 
 
35 
 
par with the decision taken by a competent patient subject to the condition 
that in such a case, the major spouse and one of the parents or major son or 
daughter of such patient has given consent for discontinuance of treatment. 
Having regard to the level of understanding and capacity of the present 
generation youngsters, it is considered appropriate to introduce this provision, 
subject to the additional safeguard of consent of spouse and parents so that 
such patients need  not have to experience the torment s of suffering for a 
longer period.   
13.3 Secondly, a 2nd proviso is added to Section 3 to make it obligatory on the 
part of the doctor to inform the spouse or close relation of the patient 
regarding the decision taken or request made by the competent pat ient and to 
desist from discontinuance of treatment for a period of three days thereafter.  
This time gap may be necessary for facilitating further deliberations among the 
patient and relations. 
13.4 Section 7 (renumbered as Section 4) 
(i) Omit the words ‘section 6’ and substitute ‘this Act’.   
(ii) Sub-section (2) of Section 7 (renumbered Section 4) shall be recast as 
follows:-  
The panel referred to in Sub -section 7 shall include experienced medical 
experts in various branches such as medicine, surgery, c ritical care 
medicine or any other speciality as decided by the said authority.   
(iii) Sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 7 (renumbered Section 4) may be 
omitted as this provision is either unnecessary or may unduly fetter the 
freedom of choice conferred  on the high medical authority of the Centre 
or the State.   
(iv) The following provision to be added as sub -section (3) to Section 4 (old 
Section 7):  
The Director General of Health Services may consult the Directors of 
Medical Services or the equivalent rank officers in regard to the 
composition of panel in order to ensure uniformity, as far as practicable.  

 
 
36 
 
In sub-section (5) of Section 7 (renumbered sub-section (4) of new Section 
4), the reference to ‘official Gazette’ to be omitted as it does not serve any 
useful purpose. 
13.5 Section 8 (renumbered Section 5) to be recast as follows: - The words ‘in 
a register’ occurring in sub-Section (1) of Section 8 may be omitted as they are 
not quite appropriate.  After clause (c) of Sub -section (1), the words “as to the 
expert advice received ….” to be omitted.  In view of the changes now suggested 
in the light of Supreme Court judgment, the said expression becomes 
irrelevant because the expert opinion has to be obtained by the High Court.  In 
their place, the words  ‘and the name of spouse or other close relation found to 
be with patient regularly’ to be substituted in the last para of Sub -section (1) of 
Section 8 (renumbered Section 5).  In Sub -section (2) of Section 8 (new Section 
5), instead of the word ‘decision’ the words “ need or otherwise ” has to be 
substituted.  Sub -sections (3) to (6) of Section 8 (new Section 5) are to be 
omitted as they are irrelevant in view of the main change suggested.   
13.6 In Section 11  (renumbered Section 8), clause (b) to be omitted and in 
the existing proviso occurring after sub -clause (ii) of Section 11 (new Section 
8), the words “Sections 5 & 6’  to be omitted and only Section 8 to be retained. 
The words “notwithstanding anything in any other law”  has also been added to 
the closing sentence of Section 11 [after clause (ii)].  This is by way of 
abundant caution.   
13.7 The most crucial change is with reference to Section 12 .  Section 12 
(renumbered as Section 9) to be substituted as follows:- 
 “Section 9 : Permission to be obtained from the High Court and the 
procedure 
  (1)  Any near relative, next friend, legal guardian of patient , the 
medical practitioner or the para-medical staff generally attending on the 
patient or the management  of the hospital where the patient has been 
receiving treatment or any other person with the leave of Court, may 
apply to the High Court for granting permission for withholding or 

 
 
37 
 
withdrawing medical treatment  of an incompetent patient or a 
competent patient who has not taken informed decision. 
 (2) Such application shall be treated as Original Petition and the 
Chief Justice of High Court shall assign the same to a Division Bench 
without any loss of time and the same shall be disposed of by the High 
Court as far as practicable within a month,   
  provided that a letter addressed to the Registrar -General or 
Judicial Registrar of High Court by any of the persons above mentioned 
containing all the material particulars seeking the permission under 
sub-section (1) shall be placed before the Chief Justice without delay and 
the letter shall be treated as original petition. 
 (3)  The Division bench of the High Court may, wherever it deems it 
necessary, appoint an  amicus curiae  to assist the Court and where a 
patient is unrepresented, direct legal aid to be provided to such patient. 
 4) The High Court shall take necessary steps to obtain the expert 
medical opinion of three expert medical practitioners whose names are 
found in the panel prepared under Section 4 or any other expert medical 
practitioner if considered necessary and issue appropriate directions for 
the payment to be made towards the remuneration of the experts. 
 (5) The High Court shall, having due regard to the report of pane l of 
experts an d the wishes of c lose relations or legal guardian  or in their 
absence such other persons whom the High Court deems fit to put on 
notice and on consideration of the best interests of the patient, pass 
orders granting or refusing permission or granting permission subject to 
any conditions. 
 (6) The medical practitioner or the hospital management or staff who 
in accordance with the order of High Court, withholds or withdraws 
medical treatment to the patient concerned shall, notwithstanding any 
other law in force, be absolved of any criminal or civil liability. 
13.8 The present Law Commission feels that it is safer and desirable to follow 
the procedure laid down by the Supreme Court in Aruna’s case so that the 

 
 
38 
 
High Court’s approval will be a condition precedent for stopping the life -
supporting measures.  The question of obtaining the opinion of panel of 
experts will arise only when the High Court’s approval is sought by the close 
relations, next friend or attend ing doctor/hospital.  The Supreme Court, 
following the dicta in Airedale and other cases, considered it appropriate to 
confer the parens patriae  jurisdiction on the High Court.  The Law 
Commission, (in its 196 th Report) also drew support from the English c ases 
decided by the highest courts in U.K. to provide for an enabling provision 
seeking declaratory relief in the High Court after the medical practitioner 
informs the relatives about the proposed discontinuance of life -sustaining 
treatment to the terminal ly ill patient based on the expert medical advice he 
obtained.  The present Commission is inclined to lean in favour of the view 
taken by the Supreme Court as it will allay the apprehensions expressed by 
the Court ( vide para 125 of SCC).  Further, when the  right to life dimension 
has to be addressed, it is desirable that the High Court undertakes the 
responsibility of weighing the pros and cons on the basis of expert medical 
advice, etc. and take an appropriate decision. In fact, one of the Members of 
the Commission, Shri Amarjit Singh, has also expressed the apprehension that 
having regard to the socio -economic conditions in our country , the greedy 
relations who are interested in the wealth of the critically ill patient may  stoop 
to malpractices with a nefa rious design to hasten the process of death.  The 
manipulations that could possibly be made by the greedy relations with the 
help of accommodative doctors has also been adverted to by the ld. Judges of 
the Supreme Court in Aruna’s case.  Keeping all these factors in view, we have 
deviated from the recommendation in the 196th Report, to this extent. 
13.9  There is a view point that the approach to the High Court may involve 
cost and the decision will get unnecessarily delayed.  Instead of that, the 
procedure suggested by the 17 th Law Commission would be a better 
alternative.  Though this point of view is not without force, on weighing the 
pros and cons, the Commission prefers the course adopted by the Supreme 

 
 
39 
 
Court in Aurna’s case .  At this stage, it cannot be  assumed that the 
proceedings in the High Court will get delayed.  Having regard to the time limit 
prescribed and even otherwise in view of the nature of the case and its 
sensitivity, the High Court will certainly give top priority to such matters.  As 
far as the cost is concerned, legal aid is available to women, disabled persons, 
SCs and STs and those in low income groups under the provisions of Legal 
Services Authorities Act.  Further, the High Court is enabled to act on the 
basis of a letter and the Cou rt can also appoint amicus curiae to assist the 
Court in the absence of any advocate for the petitioner. When the court is 
exercising parens patriae  jurisdiction, as said by the Supreme Court, the 
stakeholders will not suffer any handicap in terms of legal  assistance as the 
Court will ensure the same.  The experience will tell us if the procedure now 
envisaged is working alright and needs any change.  What all the Commission 
would like to say at this stage is that it is worth trying. 
13.10  However, we woul d like to enter a caveat in regard to the 
methodology suggested by the Supreme Court as regards the selection of the 
panel of experts. The Commission is of the view that the High Court should not 
be burdened with the task of preparation of panels of medica l experts from 
time to time.  The better and more expedient course would be as suggested by 
the Law Commission in its 196 th Report. The panel shall be prepared by the 
highest medical body of the Centre or the State.  Further, the composition of 
such expert  panel, i.e., which specialists are to be included in the panel or 
whether there should be more than one combination is best left to the Director 
General or Director of Medical Services who are expert officials.  Therefore, it is 
better that the Director G eneral / Director of Medical Services decides on the 
composition of panel and prepare a list of experts from different fields. The 
High Court will nominate the experts as per the panel prepared by the said 
authorities subject to the residual discretion to nominate any other expert in 
addition to or in the place of any expert. 
13.11  Secondly, the Hon’ble Supreme Court discussed at length the 
plenitude of jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 of the 

 
 
40 
 
Constitution to pass appropriate orders in the matter of dealing with cases of 
this nature.  In the English cases cited in the judgment of Supreme Court as 
well as the Law Commission’s earlier Reports, it is observed that the person 
concerned can approach the Family Division of the High Court for a 
declaratory relief. While a Writ Petition under Art.226 can be entertained by 
the High Courts by virtue of the judgment in Aruna’s Case till a legislation is 
made, it would be more appropriate to provide for a special remedy under the 
original jurisdiction of  the High Court.  As suggested in the 196 th Report, it is 
desirable to specifically provide for an Original Petition to cover this category of 
cases.  Incidentally, it will dispel plausible arguments on the maintainability of 
Writ Petition against private bodies or persons. Of course whether it is original 
petition or Art. 226 petition, the approach will be the same.  As specific 
jurisdiction is being invested with the High Court by a specific provision, the 
High Court will exercise jurisdiction under that special provision of the Act 
rather than proceeding under Art. 226.  At the same time, we have suggested 
the insertion of a provision under which even a letter addressed to the 
Registrar of the High Court can be taken cognizance of. 
13.12  The Commission i s of the view that a letter addressed to the 
Registrar General of High Court containing all the material particulars filed by 
those desirous of seeking the High Court’s  approval for the  proposed 
withdrawal of life support to an incompetent patient, shall  be treated as 
Original Petition without insisting on formalities.  The said letter shall be 
placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice and acted upon. 
13.13  Accordingly, the changes in Medical Treatment of Terminally ill 
Patients (Protection of Patients and  Medical Practitioners) Bill, 2006 are 
proposed by the present Law Commission in this report and the Bill, as 
modified and recast, is at Annexure – I. 
14. Summary of Recommendations 
14.1 Passive euthanasia, which is allowed in many countries, shall have legal 
recognition in our country too subject to certain safeguards, as suggested by 
the 17th Law Commission of India and as held by the Supreme Court in Aruna 

 
 
41 
 
Ramachandra’s case [(2011) 4 SCC 454)].   It is not objectionable from legal 
and constitutional point of view. 
14.2 A competent adult patient has the right to insist that there should be no 
invasive medical treatment by way of artificial life sustaining measures / 
treatment and such decision is binding on the doctors / hospital attending on 
such patient provided that the doctor is satisfied that the patient has taken an 
‘informed decision’ based on free exercise of his or her will.  The same rule will 
apply to a minor above 16 years of age who has expressed his or her wish not 
to have such treatment pr ovided the consent has been given by the major 
spouse and one of the parents of such minor patient. 
14.3 As regards an incompetent patient such as a person in irreversible coma 
or in Persistent Vegetative State and a competent patient who has not taken 
an ‘informed decision’, the doctor’s or relatives’ decision to withhold or 
withdraw the medical treatment is not final.  The relatives, next friend, or the 
doctors concerned / hospital management shall get the clearance from the 
High Court for withdrawing or withholding the life sustaining treatment. 
 In this respect, the recommendations of Law Commission in 196 th report 
is somewhat different.  The Law Commission proposed an enabling provision 
to move the High Court. 
14.4 The High Court shall take a decision a fter obtaining the opinion of a 
panel of three medical experts and after ascertaining the wishes of the relatives 
of the patient.  The High Court, as parens patriae  will take an appropriate 
decision having regard to the best interests of the patient.   
14.5 Provisions are introduced for protection of medical practitioners and 
others who act according to the wishes of the competent patient or the order of 
the High Court from criminal or civil action.  Further, a competent patient 
(who is terminally ill) refu sing medical treatment shall not be deemed to be 
guilty of any offence under any law.   
14.6 The procedure for preparation of panels has been set out broadly in 
conformity with the recommendations of 17 th Law Commission.  Advance 
medical directive given by the patient before his illness is not valid. 

 
 
42 
 
14.7 Notwithstanding that medical treatment has been withheld or withdrawn 
in accordance with the provisions referred to above, palliative care can be 
extended to the competent and incompetent patients.   
 The Governments have to devise schemes for palliative care at affordable 
cost to terminally ill patients undergoing intractable suffering.   
14.8 The Medical Council of India is required issue guidelines in the matter of 
withholding or withdrawing of medical t reatment to competent or incompetent 
patients suffering from terminal illness. 
14.9 Accordingly, the Medic al Treatment of Terminally Ill P atients (Protection 
of Patients and Medical Practitioners) Bill, 2006, drafted by the 17 th Law 
Commission in the 196 th Report has been modified and the revised Bill is 
practically an amalgam of the earlier recommendations of the Law Commission 
and the views / directions of the Supreme Court in Aruna Ramachandra case.  
The revised Bill is at Annexure I.  
 
 
 
[Justice (Retd.) P. V. Reddi] 
Chairman 
                   
 
    
[Justice (Retd.) Shiv Kumar Sharma]    [Amarjit Singh] 
         Member                            Member 
 
New Delhi 
11 August 2012 

 
 
43 
 
Annexure – I 
[Refer para 13.13 of the report] 
 
THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF TERMINALLY-ILL PATIENTS 
(PROTECTION OF PATIENTS AND MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS) BILL  
 A Bill to provide for the protection of patients and medical practitioners 
from liability in the context of withholding or withdrawing medical treatm ent 
including life support systems from patients who are terminally-ill. 
 BE it enacted in the Sixty Second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  – (1) This Act may be called the 
Medical Treatment of Terminally-ill Patients (Protection of Patients and Medical 
Practitioners) Act. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions. – Unless, the context otherwise requires – 
(a) ‘advance medical directive’ (called living will) means a directive given by 
a person that he or she, as the case may be, shall or shall not be given medical 
treatment in future when he or she becomes terminally ill. 
(b) ‘best interests’ include the best interests of a patient : 
 (i) who is an incompetent patient, or 
 (ii) who is a competent patient but who has not taken an informed 
decision, and 
 are not limited to medical inte rests of the patient but include ethical, 
social, moral, emotional and other welfare considerations. 
 (c) ‘competent patient’ means a patient who is not an incompetent patient. 
(d) ‘incompetent patient’ means a patient who is a minor below the age of 16 
years or person of unsound mind or a patient who is unable to – 
 (i) understand the information relevant to an informed decision 
about his or her medical treatment; 

 
 
44 
 
 (ii) retain that information; 
 (iii) use or weigh that information as part of the process of  making his 
or her informed decision; 
 (iv) make an informed decision because of impairment of or a 
disturbance in the functioning of his or her mind or brain; or 
 (v) communicate his or her informed decision (whether by speech, 
sign, language or any other mode) as to medical treatment. 
(e) ‘informed decision’ means the decision as to continuance or withholding 
or withdrawing medical treatment taken by a patient who is competent 
and who is, or has been informed about :- 
 (i) the nature of his or her illness, 
 (ii) any alternative form of treatment that may be available, 
 (iii) the consequences of those forms of treatment, and 
 (iv) the consequences of remaining untreated. 
(f) ‘Medical Council of India’ means the Medical Council of India constituted 
under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956). 
(g) ‘medical practitioner’ means a medical practitioner who possesses any 
recognized medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of 
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and who is enrolled 
on a State Medical Register as defined in clause (k) of that section. 
(h) ‘medical power-of-attorney’ means a document of decisions in future as 
to medical treatment which has to be given or not to be given to him or 
her if he or she becomes te rminally ill and becomes an incompetent 
patient. 
(i) ‘medical treatment’ means treatment intended to sustain, restore or 
replace vital functions which, when applied to a patient suffering from 
terminal illness, would serve only to prolong the process to dy ing and 
includes – 
 (i) life-sustaining treatment by way of surgical operation or the 
administration of medicine or the carrying out of any other medical 
procedure and 

 
 
45 
 
 (ii) use of mechanical or artificial means such as ventilation, artificial 
nutrition and hydration and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
(j) ‘minor’ means a person who, under the provisions of an Indian Majority 
Act, 1875 (4 of 1875) is to be deemed not to have attained majority.   
(k) ‘palliative care’ includes – 
 (i) the provision of reason able medical and nursing procedures for 
the relief of physical pain, suffering, discomfort or emotional and 
psycho-social suffering, 
 (ii) the reasonable provision for food and water. 
(l) ‘Patient’ means a patient who is suffering from terminal illness. 
(m) ‘terminal illness’ means – 
 (i) such illness, injury or degeneration of physical or mental 
condition which is causing extreme pain and suffering to the patients 
and which, according to reasonable medical opinion, will inevitably 
cause the untimely death of the patient concerned, or 
 (ii) which has caused a persistent and irreversible vegetative 
condition under which no meaningful existence of life is possible for the 
patient. 
3.  Refusal of medical treatment by a competent patient and its 
binding nature o n medical practitioners.  – (1) Every competent  patient 
including minor aged above 16 years  has a right to take a decision and 
express the desire to the medical practitioner attending on her or him:- 
 (i) for withholding or withdrawing of medical treatme nt to herself or 
himself and to allow nature to take its own course, or 
 (ii) for starting or continuing medical treatment to herself or himself. 
(2) When a patient referred to in sub -section (1) communicates her or his 
decision to the medical practitioner , such decision is binding on the 
medical practitioner, 
  Provided that the medical practitioner is satisfied that the patient 
is a competent patient and that the patient has taken an informed 
decision based upon a free exercise of her or his free will and,  

 
 
46 
 
  Provided further that in the case of minor above 16 years of age, 
the consent has also been given by the major spouse and the parents. 
(3) Before proceeding further to give effect to the decision of the competent 
patient, the medical practitioner shal l inform the spouse, parent or 
major son or daughter of the patient or in their absence any relative or 
other person regularly visiting the patient at the hospital about the need 
or otherwise of withholding or withdrawing treatment from the patient 
and sha ll desist from giving effect to the decision for a period of three 
days following the intimation given to the said patient’s relations. 
4. Authority to prepare panel of medical experts. (1)  The Director-General 
of Health Services, Central Government and t he Director of Medical Services 
(or officer holding equivalent post) in each State shall, prepare a panel of 
medical experts for purposes of this Act and more than one panel may be 
notified to serve the needs of different areas. 
(2) The panels referred to in sub -section(1) shall include experienced 
medical experts in various branches such as medicine, surgery, critical care 
medicine or any other specialty as decided by the said authority. 
(3) The Director General of Health Services may consult the Directors  of 
Medical Services or the equivalent rank officers in regard to the composition of 
panel in order to ensure uniformity, as far as practicable.   
(4) The panels prepared under sub -section (1) shall be published in the 
respective websites of the said authorities and the panels may be reviewed and 
modified by the authorities specified in sub -section (1) from time to time and 
such modifications shall also be published on the websites, as the case may 
be. 
5. Medical Practitioner to maintain record and inform patient, parent etc.  
The medical practitioner attending on the patient shall maintain a record 
containing personal details of the patient such as age and full address, the 
nature of illness and the treatment being given and the names of spouse, 
parent or major son or daughter, the request or decision if any communicated 

 
 
47 
 
by the patient and his opinion whether it would be in the best interest of the 
patient to withdraw or withhold the treatment. The medical practitioner shall 
inform the patient if conscious a nd the spouse, parent or major son or 
daughter of the patient or in their absence the persons regularly visiting the 
patient at the hospital about the need or otherwise of withholding or 
withdrawing treatment from the patient. 
6. Palliative care for compet ent and incompetent patients.  – Even though 
medical treatment has been withheld or withdrawn by the medical practitioner 
in the case of competent patients and incompetent patients in accordance with 
the foregoing provisions, such medical practitioner is no t debarred from 
administering palliative care. 
7. Protection of competent patients from criminal action in certain 
circumstances. – Where a competent patient refuses medical treatment in 
circumstances mentioned in section 3, notwithstanding anything contai ned in 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), such a patient shall be deemed to be not 
guilty of any offence under that Code or under any other law for the time being 
in force. 
8. Protection of medical practitioners and other acting under their 
direction, in relation to competent and incompetent patients.  – Where a 
medical practitioner or any other person acting under the direction of medical 
practitioner withholds or withdraws medical treatment in respect of a 
competent patient on the basis of the desire expr essed by the patient which on 
the assessment of a medical practitioner is in her or his best interest, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, such action of the 
medical practitioner or those acting under his direction and of the hospita l 
concerned shall deemed to be lawful provided that the medical practitioner has 
complied with the requirements of Section 3 and 5. 
9. Permission to be obtained from High Court and the procedure . - (1) Any 
near relative, next friend, legal guardian of patient, the medical practitioner or 
para-medical staff generally attending on the patient or the management of the 
hospital where the patient has been receiving treatment  or any other person 

 
 
48 
 
obtaining the leave of court,  may apply to the High Court having territorial 
jurisdiction for granting permission for withholding or withdrawing medical 
treatment of an incompetent patient or a competent patient who has not taken 
informed decision. 
(2) Such application shall be treated as original petition and the Chie f 
Justice of High Court shall assign the same to a Division Bench without any 
loss of time and the same shall be disposed of by the High Court as far as 
practicable within a month, 
 Provided that a letter addressed to the Registrar -General or Judicial 
Registrar of the High Court by any of the persons above mentioned containing 
all the material particulars seeking the permission under sub -section (1) shall 
be placed before the Chief Justice without delay and the letter shall be treated 
as original petition. 
(3)  The Division Bench of the High Court may, if deemed necessary, appoint 
an amicus curiae to assist the Court and where a patient is unrepresented, 
direct legal aid to be provided to such patient. 
(4) The High Court shall take necessary steps to obtain the expert medical 
opinion of three medical practitioners drawn from the panel prepared under 
Section 4 and any other expert medical practitioner if considered necessary 
and issue appropriate directions for the payment to be made towards the 
remuneration of the experts. 
(5) The High Court shall, having due regard to the report of pane l of experts 
and the wishes of close relations, namely, spouse, parents, major children or 
in their absence such other persons whom the High Court deems fit to put on 
notice an d on consideration of the best interests of the patient, pass orders 
granting or refusing permission or granting permission subject to any 
conditions. 
(6) The medical practitioner or the hospital management or staff who in 
accordance with the order of High  Court, withholds or withdraws medical 
treatment to the patient concerned shall, notwithstanding any other law in 
force, be absolved of any criminal or civil liability. 

 
 
49 
 
10. Confidentiality for purposes of section 9. – The Division Bench of the 
High Court may, whenever a petition under Section 9 is filed, direct that the 
identity of the patient and of his or her parents or spouse, the identity of the 
medical practitioner and hospitals, the identity of the medical experts referred 
to in Section 4, or of other  experts or witnesses consulted by the Court or who 
have given evidence in the Court, shall, during the pendency of the petition, 
and after its disposal, be kept confidential and shall be referred only by the 
English alphabets. 
11. Advance Medical Directiv es as to medical treatment and Medical 
Powe-of-Attorney to be void and not binding on medical practitioners. – 
Every advance medical directive (called living will) or medical power-of-attorney 
executed by a person shall be void and of no effect and shall n ot be binding on 
any medical practitioner. 
12. Medical Council of India to issue Guidelines.  – (1) Consistent with the 
provisions of this Act, the Medical Council of India may prepare and issue 
guidelines, from time to time for the guidance of medical prac titioners in the 
matter of withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment to competent or 
incompetent patients suffering from terminal illness. 
(2) The Medical Council of India may review and modify the guidelines from 
time to time.  
(3) The guidelines and modifications thereto, if any, shall be published on 
the website and a press release may be issued to that effect. 
 
  

 
 
50 
 
Annexure – II 
[Refer para 5.1 of the report] 
 
  


 
 
51 
 
 


 
 
52 
 
 


 
 
53 
 
 


 
 
54 
 
 


 
 
55 
 
 


 
 
56 
 
 


 
 
57 
 
 


 
 
58 
 
 


 
 
59 
 
 
 


 
 
60 
 
 


 
 
61 
 
 


 
 
62 
 
 


 
 
63 
 
 


 
 
64 
 
 


 
 
65 
 
 
