 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW 
COMMISSION 
OF  
INDIA 
  
 
 
 
Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial 
Alliances (in the name of Honour and Tradition): A Suggested 
Legal Framework. 
 
 
 
 
Report No.242 
 
 
 
 
 
AUGUST  2012 

 
 ii 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 iii 
 
 
Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances 
(in the name of Honour and Tradition): 
A Suggested Legal Framework 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
 
Sl. No. Title Page Nos 
1. Introduction 
 
1-4 
2. The dimensions of problem and the need for a separate law 
 
4-10 
3. Salient features of the proposed Bill 
 
10-13 
4. Autonomy of choices and liberty – a value to be protected 
 
13-16 
5. Whether ‘honour killing’ to be included in Section 300 
IPC 
 
16 
6. Burden of proof 
 
16-19 
7. Honour Crimes Bill: Responses and suggestions 
 
19-23 
8. Counselling and awareness 
 
23-24 
9. Registration of marriage 
 
24-25 
10. A recent Supreme Court Judgment, Re: Death sentence 
 
25-26 
11. Summary of Recommendations 
 
26-28 
 Annexure - I 
 
29-35 
 Annexure - II 
 
36-45 
 Annexure – III 
 
46 

 
 1 
 
Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances (in 
the name of Honour and Tradition): 
A Suggested Legal Framework. 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Pursuant to the discussion in the Parliament on a Calling Attention 
Motion and the assurance given by the then Union Home M inister that 
various aspects relating to “honour killing s” will be got examined, a reference 
was made to the Law Commission of India by the Ministry of Law and Justice 
in September 2009.  That is how the subject has been taken up for 
consideration.   
1.2 At the outset, it may be stated that the words ‘honour killings’ and 
‘honour crimes’ are being used loosely as convenient expressions to describe 
the incidents of violence and harassment caused to the young couple 
intending to marry or having married agains t the wishes of the community or 
family members.  They are used more as catch phrases and not as apt and 
accurate expressions. 
1.3 The so-called ‘honour killings’ or ‘honour crimes’ are not peculiar to our 
country. It is an evil which haunts many other soc ieties also.  The belief that 
the victim has brought dishonour upon the family or the community is the 
root cause of such violent crimes. Such violent crimes are directed especially 
against women.  Men also become targets of  attack  by  members  of  family  
of  a  woman with whom they are perceived to have an ‘inappropriate 
relationship’.  Changing cultural and economic status of women and the 

 
 2 
 
women going against their male dominated culture has been one of the causes 
of honour crimes.   In some western cu ltures, honour killings often arise from 
women seeking greater independence and choosing their own way of life.  In 
some cultures, honour killings are considered less serious than other 
murders because they arise from long standing cultural traditions and are 
thus deemed appropriate or justifiable.  An adulterous behaviour of wom an or 
pre-marital relationship or assertion of right to marry according to their 
choice, are widely known causes for honour killings in most of the countries. 
The report of the Special Rapporteur to U.N. 1 of the year 2002 concerning 
cultural practices in the family that are violent towards women indicated that 
honour killings had been reported in Jordon, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan, 
United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yemen and other Persia n Gulf countries and 
that they had also taken place in western countries such as France, Germany  
and U.K. mostly within migrant communities.  The report “ Working towards 
the elimination of crimes against women committed in the name of honour” 2 
submitted to  the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is 
quite revealing.  Apart from the other countries named above, according to the 
UN Commission on Human Rights, there are honour killings in the nations of 
Bangladesh, Brazil, Ecuador, India, Israel, Italy, Morocco, Sweden, Turkey 
and Uganda.  According to Mr. Widney Brown, Advocacy Director for Human  
                                                
1  http://www.unhchr.ch/huridocda/huridoca.nsf/e06a5300f90fa0238025668700518ca4/ 42e7191fae543562c1256 
ba7004e963c/$FILE/G0210428.pdf 
2  http://www.unhchr.ch/Huridocda/Huridoca.nsf/e06a5300f90fa0238025668700518ca4/985168f508ee799fc1256 
c52002ae5a9/$FILE/N0246790.pdf 

 
 3 
 
Rights Watch, the practice of honour killing “ goes across cultures and across 
religions”.  There are reports that in some communities, many are prepare d to 
condone the killing of someone who have dishonoured their family.  The 2009 
European Parliamentary Assembly noted the rising incidents of honour crimes 
with concern .  In 2010, Britain saw a 47 % rise of honour -related crimes.  
Data from police agencie s in the U K report 2283 cases in 2010 and most of 
the attacks were conducted in cities that had high immigrant populations.   
The national legal Courts in some countries viz., Haiti, Jordon, Syria, Morocco 
and two Latin American countries do not penalize me n killing female relatives 
found committing adultery or the husband s killing their wives in flagrante 
delicto.  A survey by Elen R. Sheelay 3 revealed that 20% of Jord anites 
interviewed simply believe that Islam condones or even supports killing in the 
name of family honour which is a myth. 
 1.4 As far as India is concerned, “honour killings” are mostly reported from 
the States of Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and U.P.  Bhagalpur in Bihar is also 
one of the known places for “honour killings”.   Even some inciden ts are 
reported from Delhi and Tamil Nadu.  Marriages with members of other castes 
or the couple leaving the parental home to live together and marry  provoke 
the harmful acts against the couple and immediate family members. 
1.5 The Commission tried to asce rtain the number of such incidents, the 
accused involved , the specific reasons, etc., so as to have an idea of the 
general crime scenario in such cases. The Government authorities of the 
                                                
3 Quoted in Anver Emon’s Article on Honour Killings. 

 
 4 
 
States where incidents often occur  have been addressed to furnish the  
information.  The Director (SR) in the Ministry of Home Affairs, by her  letter 
dated 26 May 2010,  also requested the State Governments concerned to 
furnish the necessary information  to the Commission . However, there has 
been no response  despite reminder .  But, from the newspaper reports, and 
reports from various other sources, it is clear that the honour crimes occur in 
those States as a result of people marrying without their family ’s acceptance 
and for marrying outside their caste or religion.  Marriages between the couple 
belonging to same Gotra (family name) have also often led to violent reaction 
from the family members or the community members.  The Caste councils or 
Panchayats popularly known as ‘Khap Panchayats ’ try to adopt the chosen 
course of ‘mo ral vi gilantism’ and enforce their dik tats by assuming to 
themselves the role of social or community guardians.  
2. The dimensions of problem and the need for a separate law 
2.1 The r ising incidence of commission of murders of persons marrying 
outside thei r caste or religion and other serious offences perpetrated or 
hostility generated against them and also causing harm to their close relatives 
or a section of the community on considerations of caste and ‘ gotra’ are 
matters of grave concern.  Those who may be directly involved in the actual 
commission of acts of violence or murder are either part of a community or 
section of the people and may also include members of the family concerned 
in the case of objected marriages.  Very often such incidents and offen ces are 
not even taken cognizance at the threshold.  The domineering position and 

 
 5 
 
strength wielded by caste combinations and assemblies, silence or stifle the 
investigating and prosecuting agencies.   In so far as the caste or community 
panchayats play a co nstructive role in addressing the common problem s 
concerning the society or amicably settling the disputes between the local 
inhabitants and families, dissuading the people from a criminal path, the 
mission and the work of these village elders and Panchayatdars can be 
commended; but, if they exceed their limits, as it is often  happening , impose 
their decisions in matters relating to matrimony and interfere with the 
legitimate choices of youngsters and indulge in acts of endangering their life 
and liberty, the law cannot remain a silent spectator in our progressive 
democratic polity wedded to cherished constitutional values.  
2.2 As said earlier, i ncidents involving grave offences committed against 
persons marrying or proposing to marry sagotras or outside t heir 
castes/religions are periodically reported.  It is learnt that number of cases go 
unreported for fear of reprisals or cascading effects.  The intervention of 
caste/community assemblies in the name of ‘Khap Panchayats’, ‘Katta 
Panchayats’  etc. in the occurrence of these offences and other related 
incidents involving serious life and liberty consequences, are frequently 
noticed.  Such assemblies gathered on caste /community lines assume to 
themselves the power and authority to declare on and deal with ‘objectionable’ 
matrimonies and exhibit least regard for life and liberty and are not deterred 
by the processes of administration of justice.  The penal law lacks direct 
application to the illegal acts of such caste assemblies . Innocent youth are 

 
 6 
 
harassed and victimized while such assemblies continue to wield unhindered 
authority and also seem to resist any suggestion of being subjected to any 
social control. 
2.3 The pernicious practice of Khap Panchayats and the like taking law into 
their own hands and pronouncing on the invalidity and impropriety of Sagotra 
and inter -caste marriages and handing over punishment to the couple and 
pressurizing the family members to execute their verdict by any means 
amounts to flagrant violation of rule of law and invasion of p ersonal liberty of 
the persons affected. 
2.4 Sagotra marriages are not prohibited by law, whatever may be the view 
in olden times.   The Hindu Marriage Disabilities Removal Act, 1946 was 
enacted with a view to dispel any doubts in this regard.  The Act exp ressly 
declared the validity of marriages between the Hindus belonging to the same 
‘gotra’ or ‘ pravara’ or different sub -divisions of same caste. The Hindu 
Marriage Act does not prohibit sagotra or inter-caste marriages.  
2.5 The views of village elders or  family elders cannot be forced on the 
willing couple and no one has a right to use force or impose far -reaching 
sanctions in the name of vindicating community honour or family honour.  
There are reports that drastic action including wrongful confinement, 
persistent harassment, mental torture,  infliction of  or threats of severe 
bodily harm  is resorted to either by close relations or some third parties 
against the so -called erring couple either on the exhortations of some or all 
the Panchayatdars or with their connivance.  Several instances of murder of 

 
 7 
 
one or the other couple have been in the news.  Social boycotts and other 
illegal sanctions affecting the young couple, the families and even a section of 
local inhabitants are quite often resorted to. All this is done in the name of 
tradition and honour. The cumulative effect of all such acts have public order 
dimensions also.  
2.6 In a recent case – Arumugam Servai vs. State of Tamil Nadu  [reported in 
(2011) 6 SCC 405], the Supreme Court strongly deprecate d the practice of 
khap/katta panchayats  taking law into their own  hands and indulging in 
offensive activities which endanger the personal lives of the persons marrying 
according to their choice.  In another case, Lata Singh vs.  State of U.P. (2006, 
5 SCC 475), the Supreme Court observed and directed as under:  
“This is a free and democratic country, and once a person becomes a 
major he or she can marry whosoever he/she likes. If the parents of the 
boy or girl do not approve of such inter -caste or inter -religious marriage 
the maximum they can do is that they can cut off social relations with the 
son or the daughter, but they cannot give threats or commit or instigate 
acts of violence and cannot harass the person who undergoes such inter -
caste or inter - religious marriage. We, therefore, direct that the 
administration/police authorities throughout the country will see to it that 
if any boy or girl who is a major undergoes inter -caste or inter -religious 
marriage with a woman or man who is a major, the couple ar e not 
harassed by any one nor subjected to threats or acts of violence, and any 
one who gives such threats or harasses or commits acts of violence either 
himself or at his instigation, is taken to task by instituting criminal 
proceedings by the police against such persons and further stern action is 
taken against such persons as provided by law. We sometimes hear of 
`honour' killings of such persons who undergo inter-caste or inter-religious 
marriage of their own free will. There is nothing honourable in su ch 
killings, and in fact they are nothing but barbaric and shameful acts of 
murder committed by brutal, feudal minded persons who deserve harsh 
punishment. Only in this way can we stamp out such acts of barbarism".  
 

 
 8 
 
2.7 Some proposals are being mooted pro posing amendments to Section 
300 I.P.C. by way of including what is called ‘Honour Killing’ as murder and 
shifting the burden of proof to the accused.  These proposals have been 
studied.   The views from various quarters at an informal level have also been  
ascertained.  After a preliminary examination of these and certain other 
models of law, the framework of proposed law has been prepared and annexed 
to the Consultation Paper.  The Consultation paper together with the draft Bill 
prepared is at Annexure II. The views of the public were invited with 
reference thereto.   We shall advert to the responses received and t he 
Commission’s views thereon.  The draft legislation has been slightly recast by 
the Commission after further consideration. The draft Bill now p roposed by 
the Law Commission is at Annexure I. 
2.8 The idea underlying the provisions in the draft Bill is that there must be 
a threshold bar against congregation or assembly for the purpose of objecting 
to and condemning the conduct of young persons of m arriageable age 
marrying according to their choice, the ground of objection being that they 
belong to the same gotra or to different castes or communities.  The 
Panchayatdars or caste elders have no right to interfere with the life and 
liberty of such young couples whose marriages are permitted by law and they 
cannot create a situation whereby such couples are placed in a hostile 
environment in the village/locality concerned and exposed to the risk of 
safety.  Such highhanded acts have a tendency to create social tensions and 
disharmony too. No frame of mind or belief based on social hierarchy can 

 
 9 
 
claim immunity from social control and regulation, in so far as such beliefs 
manifest themselves as agents of enforcement of right and wrong. The very 
assembly for  an unlawful purpose viz. disapproving the marriage which is 
otherwise within the bounds of law and taking consequential action should be 
treated as an offence as it has the potential to endanger the lives and libe rties 
of individuals concerned.   The objec t of such an assembly is grounded on 
disregard for the life and liberty of others and such conduct shall be 
adequately tackled by penal law.  This is without prejudice to the prosecution 
to be launched under the general penal law for the commission of offe nces 
including abetment and conspiracy. 
2.9 Given the social milieu and powerful background of caste combines 
which bring to bear intense pressure on parents and relatives to go to any 
extent to punish the ‘sinning’ couples so as to restore the community h onour, 
it has become necessary to deal with this fundamental problem. Any attempt 
to effectively tackle this socio -cultural phenomenon, rooted in superstition 
and authoritarianism, must therefore address itself to various factors and 
dimensions, viz, the n ature and magnitude of the problem, the adequacy of 
existing law, and the wisdom in using penal and other measures of sanction 
to curb the power and conduct of caste combines.  The law as it stands does 
not act either as a deterrence or as a  sobering infl uence on the caste 
combinations and assemblies who regard themselves as being outside the 
pale of law.  The socio -cultural outlook of the members of caste councils or 

 
 10 
 
Panchayats is such that they have minimal or scant regard for individual 
liberty and autonomy. 
3. Salient features of the proposed Bill 
3.1 We may broadly indicate the general lay -out and the main features of 
the proposed legislation.  Given the fact that the powerful  influence of the 
caste or community Panchayats and the aggressive role play ed by them in 
controlling the freedom of choice of the marrying couple is the root cause of 
honour related crimes, there must be a check on such unwarranted 
interference by the members of Panchayats. The couple marrying against the 
wishes of members of the  bodies like khap panchayats ought not to be driven 
to a state of insecurity and misery .  Their life and liberty is ‘endangered’ 
because they are exposed to threats and socio -economic deprivations. The 
close family members of the couple are also brought in to the picture to 
enforce the diktats of such informal body of panchayats / councils.  This is 
directly affecting the community and the family life in the villages, thereby 
posing a threat to social order and peace.  As there is a need to divest the 
panchayatdars or caste ‘elders’ of their self assumed hegemony and 
controlling influence  in these matters, this Bill has been thought of, on 
balancing various considerations. I t is proposed that there should be a 
threshold bar against the congregation or assembl y for the purpose of 
disapproving an intended marriage or the conduct of the young couple and 
this objectionable conduct of the panchayatdars should be brought within the 

 
 11 
 
purview of penal law . A preventive provision prohibiting such assemblies and 
penalizing the participation in such assemblies has also been introduced.  
3.2 Having rendered the convening and conduct of such assemblies 
unlawful and punishable under law, consequential penal provisions dealing 
with offences committed in relation thereto have b een proposed.  Two sections 
are proposed to be introduced, i.e., Section 3, which makes punishable the 
acts endangering liberty, which are also particularized in the Section.  The 
other Section, i.e., Section 4 would deal with criminal intimidation by the 
members of unlawful assembly or others to secure compliance with the illegal 
decision of the assembly.  Such acts of criminal intimidation which are 
punishable under the general law, i.e., the Indian Penal Code have been 
specifically introduced for the pur pose of meting out higher punishment to 
those members of unlawful assembly.  The  other penal provisions and the 
situations referred to above are not taken care of nor covered by the 
provisions of Penal Code.  At any rate, there is a room for doubt as regards 
the invocation of the provisions of IPC. However, the criminal acts other than 
those falling under the three penal provisions of the Act can still be dealt with 
under the provisions of the Penal Code including the provisions relating to 
abetment and con spiracy.  For instance, if a persons who is a party to the 
unlawful assembly has committed or abetted the commi ssion of an offence of 
grievous hurt against the targeted couple or one of them or their relatives, the 
IPC provisions will be attracted.  That is why Section 5 has been introduced to 
make it clear that the provisions of Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the proposed Bill 

 
 12 
 
are without prejudice to the provisions of IPC.  In order to have sufficient 
deterrent effect, mandatory minimum punishments have been pre scribed 
while taking care to see that such punishment has an element of 
proportionality.  Apart from these penal provisions, a specific section has been 
proposed to empower the District Magistrate or the SDM to take preventive 
measures and a further obliga tion is cast on them to take note of the 
information laid before them by the marrying couple or their family members 
and to extend necessary protection to them.  The officials are made 
accountable for the failure or omission on their part to take necessary steps to 
prevent unlawful assembly (caste panchayats, etc.) or to give protection to the 
targeted couple.  It has been provided that the offences shall be tried by a 
Court of Sessions in the District presided over by the Sessions Judge or 
Additional Sessi ons Judge as notified by the High Court.   The need for 
constitution of special courts can be reviewed at a later stage.  The offences 
are cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.   
3.3 The overlapping with the provisions of IPC has been, as far as po ssible, 
avoided. Though, at first look, it may appear that the offence of unlawful 
assembly is nothing other than what we find in Section 141 of IPC, it needs to 
be pointed out that the unlawful assembly of the kind contemplated by the 
proposed Bill does not strictly fall within the scope of the said section.  The 
ingredients of ‘unlawful assembly’ under the Indian Penal Code and the 
unlawful assembly contemplated by Section 2 of the proposed Bill are not the 
same.  Moreover, a punishment higher than that p rescribed for unlawful 

 
 13 
 
assembly under IPC has been prescribed under Section 2.  As regards Section 
4 dealing with criminal intimidation, as already clarified, this Section has 
been introduced with a view to provide for higher punishment in the case of 
acts of criminal intimidation by the members of unlawful assembly  within the 
meaning of this Bill .  Thus, the provisions of the proposed Bill coupled with 
those in IPC would, it is hoped, be effectively able to combat the menacing 
trend of dastardly actions an d drastic social sanctions directed against the 
hapless young couple and their families. 
4. Autonomy of choices and liberty – a value to be protected. 
4.1 The autonomy of every person in matters concerning oneself – a free 
and willing creator of one’s own choices and decisions , is now central to all 
thinking on community order and organization.  Needless to emphasize that 
such autonomy with its manifold dimensions is a constitutionally protected 
value and is central to an open society and civilized order. D uly secured 
individual autonomy, exercised on informed understanding of the values 
integral to one’s well being is deeply connected to a free social order.  Coercion 
against individual autonomy will then become least necessary. 
4.2 In moments and periods o f social transition, the tensions between 
individual freedom and past social practices become focal points of the 
community’s ability to contemplate and provide for least hurting or painful 
solutions.  The wisdom or wrongness of certain community perspecti ves and 
practices, their intrinsic impact on liberty, autonomy and self-worth, as well  
 

 
 14 
 
 
 
as the parents’ concern over impulsive and unreflective choices – all these 
factors come to the fore-front of consideration.  
4.3 The problem, however, is the menaci ng phenomena of repressive social 
practices in the name of honor triggering violent reaction from the influential 
members of community who are blind to individual autonomy.  How best to 
tackle it is the question.  In this context, the instrumentalist role of law to 
grapple with such situations assumes importance . The thought behind the 
proposals in this report is to bring to greater focus on the conduct which 
endangers life and liberty and to highlight the civilizing perceptions on liberty 
and autonomy. 
4.4 Social protection has consistently been the paramount goal of modern 
criminal law.  Criminal punishment typically achieves such protection 
through its capacity to motivate people to conform to socially acceptable rules 
of behaviour with threats of serious  penalties for non -conformity.  
“Punishment serves as a weapon which society uses to prevent conduct which  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 
 
harms or threatens to harm its interests ”4  The largest social interests or 
community values cannot be judged by a handful of influential perso ns whose 
beliefs are grounded in superstition and dogmas totally opposed to 
constitution and the laws. 
4.5 The self-styled Panchayats or assembly of people constitute a close knit 
section of people bonded by certain common perspectives and values.  Caste 
plays a pivotal role in this bondage.  Having regard to the hegemony and the 
social or political power available to these Panchayats, their dictates on 
questions of caste relationships, matrimony etc. are formidable.  Different 
caste groups have their own c ombinations.  While these assembly of people 
may be playing some role in protecting certain basic cultural mores, their 
deviant role in subjecting to peril the life and liberty of persons who do not 
conform to their views and values cannot be condoned and it needs to be 
directly tackled and necessarily subjected to the disciplines of law.  It would 
be unwise and socially incorrect to leave life and liberty of vulnerable people, 
at the mercies   of  dominant  and  authoritarian  caste  councils  and  such 
other  groups  whose  commands  and  decisions  cannot be easily ignored by 
the  family  and  community  members.  The  law should aim at counter -
acting the misdirected  power  and  domineering  position  of  the caste  / 
Community  Panchayats  in  so  far  as  they  act  as  centers  of coercion and  
                                                
4 See the Article “A more Principled approach to Criminalizing negligence: A Prescription for Legislature” by 
Garfield, Leshie Yalof, Associate Professor, Pace University School of Law (1998). 

 
 16 
 
intimidation.  Regard and respect for life, liberty and autonomy of persons 
need to be the larger focus and the perceived strength of such assemblies or 
combinations will have to be appropriately dealt with by law. 
5. Whether ‘honour killing’ to be included in Section 300 IPC: 
5.1 The Commission is of the view that there is no need for introducing a 
provision in Section 300 IPC in order to bring the so -called ‘honour killings’ 
within the ambit of this provision.  The existing provisions in IPC are adequate 
enough to take care of the situations leading to overt acts of killing or causing 
bodily harm to the targeted person who allegedly undermined the honour of 
the caste or community. The motive behind killing a pers on does not furnish 
real justification to introduce a separate provision in section 300, as is 
contemplated to be done under the proposed  Government’s Bill (as published 
in the newspapers).   Probably, the addition of such clause may create 
avoidable confusion and interpretational difficulties. 
6. Burden of proof 
6.1 Further, shifting the burden of proof on the basis of mere accusations of 
involvement in the serious offence of murder etc or abetment thereof is not 
desirable.   Such a move will be against th e cardinal principles of 
jurisprudence accepted and absorbed into our criminal justice system.  If 
burden of proof has to be shifted in such a case, logically, it will have to be 
done in a large number of other heinous crimes.  We find neither logic nor 
rationale in treating the accused in the so -called honour killing cases as a 
separate class in the matter of application of doctrine of burden of proof.  The 

 
 17 
 
difficulties in proof before a court of law may not by itself be a legitimate 
ground to deviate from  the well established canons of criminal jurisprudence.  
The evidence may not be forthcoming in many cases of ghastly murders and 
barbaric killings or the witnesses may be scared to speak against notorious 
criminals. A holistic approach is called for and a ny attempt to drastically 
expand the rigour of criminal procedure to cope up with ad hoc  situations 
may be counter -productive.  The introduction of such a drastic provision will 
be out of tune with the criminal justice system and the salutary principles we  
have accepted as part of it.    As an alternative to this, the Commission is of 
the view that an appropriate presumption of intention to commit the 
prohibited acts in clauses 3 and 4 of the proposed Bill, can be legitimately 
drawn against a member of an un lawful assembly.  Having regard to the 
natural course of human conduct and the authoritarian mindset of 
Panchayatdars, it is reasonable to think that they would not be content with 
merely taking a decision condemning the so -called objectionable marriage, 
but they would like to go further and give effect to the decision by acts of 
coercion and harassment if necessary.  The offensive acts done in the 
aftermath of the decision cannot be dissociated from their role and hegemony.   
The presumption to some extent  solves the problem arising from the difficulty 
in the identification of actual role that may be played by one or more members 
of the assembly and in securing evidence to implicate the guilty.  In such a 
situation, the presumption as envisaged by clause 6 will assume a significant 
role.   

 
 18 
 
6.2 Penal law handles proof of facts by direct and circumstantial evidence.  
Principles of inference and logic are involved in both modes of proof.  Statutes 
relating to evidence have engaged themselves in grappling with p roblems of 
natural non -availability or paucity of evidence in certain offence situations.  
Presumptions have usually emerged as a tool of logic to fill these gaps.  
Presumptions state cause -effect relationships in such circumstances.  Care 
must, however, b e taken to ensure that the causal link is not too remote or 
too thin. Presumptions generally do not affect the position of burden of proof 
but only shift the burden of evidence or the burden of persuasion.  The 
presumption which is eminently suitable in th e context of the present 
problem is the one incorporated in Section 6 of the proposed Bill.  It raises a 
presumption to the effect that the participants in unlawful assembly intended 
to commit and abet the offences punishable under Section 3 and 4 of the B ill 
in order to carry out the illegal decision taken by them.  Such presumption 
will supply an important link in the chain of evidence .  The presumption 
proposed to be introduced is as follows: 
      Every person participating in an unlawful assembly, shal l be 
presumed to have also intended to commit or abet the commission of 
offences under Section 3 and 4 of the Act. 
 
6.3 Thus, in respect of the overt acts under Sections 3 and 4, this 
presumption would be attracted . On a fair balance of various conflicting  
considerations, we feel that the presumption as above would be appropriate 
and effective. 

 
 19 
 
6.4 In the matter of burden of proof , the Commission feels that  the analogy 
sought to be drawn from the provisions of the Commission of Sati (Prevention) 
Act, 1987 i s not appropriate for more than one reason.  ‘Sati’ is a barbaric, 
deeply entrenched social evil which was prevalent in certain parts of the 
country.   The magnitude and seriousness of that evil cannot be compared to 
the problem on hand.  More important, t he offence of ‘Sati’ always remained 
an open affair with all the rituals and ceremonies attached to it and the 
persons actively participating therein could be identified without difficulty.   
The accusations in such cases are based on solid evidence. 
7. Honour Crimes Bill: Responses and suggestions 
7.1 As already stated, the Commission received responses from some State 
Governments, Law Universities and others.  The list of persons / 
organizations from whom responses have been received are given in Annexure 
III. The Commission appreciates the effort of West Bengal National University 
of Juridical Sciences in presenting a critical analysis of the provisions of the 
proposed Bill and putting forward important suggestions. The Commission 
has also looked into the  suggestions of Faculty of Amity Law School, Noida.  
None of the responses have opposed in principle, the Commission’s proposed 
recommendations and the draft Bill.  Some of those suggestions have been 
considered and changes to the extent considered appropr iate have been made 
in the draft Bill.   
7.2  One major suggestion is that relationships akin to marriage not 
prohibited by law should also be included in the meaning of the word 

 
 20 
 
‘marriage’ occurring in clause 2  of the draft Bill.  This means that live -in 
relationships should also be included and the protection of the law secured 
for persons in such relationships.  While on first flush, this suggestion may 
deserve acceptance, it is felt that bringing such relationship within the scope 
of th is law may unduly  dilute its efficacy and is likely to meet with 
resistance/and disapproval  from various quarters and dimensions.  As of 
now, the marriage laws of our country do not cognize live-in relationships as a 
form of marriage .  U nless a substantive law in the realm  of marriage deals 
with that question comprehensively, it is not advisable at this point of time to 
bring in such relationships within the scope of the proposed law, whose object 
is to strike at the root  of unwarranted interference of village assemblies even 
in relation to perfectly legal marriages and to generate important social 
perspectives on liberty rights and autonomy of individuals.  Another 
suggestion is that forced marriages at the instance of family members should 
also be brought within the net of the proposed law.  The problem of forced 
marriages has a different dimension as the members of khap panchayats and 
the like do not come into the picture there.  They can be effectively taken care 
of within the ambit of general penal law and Child Marriage s (Prohibition) Act.  
Further, it is felt that by enlarging the scope of the proposed law to include 
offensive conduct of individual family members / relatives, the integrity of the 
proposed law will be lost in so far as it aims to replace or substitute th e entire 
corpus of existing criminal law on the subject.   

 
 21 
 
7.3 Another comment that the criminalization of the acts of groups and 
focus on punishment by itself will not be able to abate the mischief and the 
prevention / protection aspects should also recei ve due consideration.  
However, it may  be seen that the proposed Bill as recast deals with all the se 
aspects Reining in the high-handed acts of caste assemblies within the pale of 
penal law with emphasis on deterrent element is a desideratum that needs to 
be given due priority to combat the existing evil. 
7.4 The National Commission for Women has drafted a Bill titled 
“Prevention of Crimes in the name of Honour and Tradition”.  The Bill is closer 
in thinking to the law proposed by the Law Commission.  It su ggests certain 
prohibitive and penal measures.  It provides for recording of declaration of an 
intended marriage by the couple concerned as a means of seeking protection  
apart from penalizing the acts of harassment etc. caused to the woman or her 
partner.  However it misses the necessity and desirability of the focus on 
directly dealing with unlawful assemblies and their vicious influences . 
Further, the offences under general law are also included in the said Bill .  
But, certain aspects contained in that Bi ll have been usefully incorporated in 
the proposed law.   
7.5 The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi through its 
Department of Home, has forwarded the comments of an officer of the Law 
Department.  The main point highlighted is that since th e subject of unlawful 
assembly stands covered by Section 141 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 
506 I.P.C provides for criminal intimidation, there is no need for the proposed 

 
 22 
 
law.  It further says that necessary amendments to the Code of Criminal 
Procedure should take care of the situation.  These views have been 
examined.  In fact, they have been considered and kept in mind while drafting 
the proposed law.  Section 141 I.P.C. fifth clause alone has some resemblance 
to the subject on hand.  However, the thrust of that clause is the conduct of 
subjecting - “any person to do what he is not legally bound to do or to omit to 
do what he is legally entitled to do”.  It is doubtful whether the unlawful 
assembly of the nature contemplated by the proposed Bill is covered under 
Section 141. That apart, the proposed law intends to deal with the conduct of 
local bodies or caste assemblies and to strike at the blind fury of such 
associations acting in disregard of liberty of persons.  A special class of 
unlawful assembly with a different punishment is, therefore, suggested as a 
measure of greater efficacy. In any event, Section 149 I.P.C. read wit h Section 
141 (which envisages f ive or more persons of ‘unlawful assembly’ acting in 
furtherance of common object) is not to be affected.  It would apply to 
situations other than those contemplated by the present law. Further, the 
above view failed to perceive the shift in perspectives and the need to intensify 
the focus, as already stated, to act in promotion of liberty and its  contours.  
The Commission is unable to share the view that the amendments to Cr.P.C. 
would be able to serve the intended purpose of the proposed law. 
7.6 The other response has come from the Government of Odisha (Law 
Department).  According to this opinio n, some overlap between Section 141 
and 149 I.P.C. and the proposed law is seen.  This misconception is again 

 
 23 
 
rooted in the conceptual misgivings.  It must be seen that  the provisions of 
this Act coupled with those in IPC can be simultaneously worked in so me 
areas and they can be complementary to each other. Care has also been taken 
to see that the offence dealt with under general criminal law are not, as far as 
possible, brought within the purview of the proposed law.  I t has been made 
clear that the p rovisions of this law are not in derogation of those in IPC , but 
will be in addition thereof.  However, the Commission would like to clarify that 
bringing the offence of criminal intimidation into the gamut of this law is to 
prescribe more severe punishment.  The Commission is of the view that 
instead of adding the same provision in IPC, it is better that this stand alone 
law dealing with honour crimes should contain such provision. 
7.7 One more response has come from the Law Department of Government 
of Madhya Pradesh. A part from suggesting the increase of length of 
imprisonment, it has been suggested that the ‘pardon’ shall be granted to an 
accused who is willing to depose as prosecution witness so that there would 
be better scope for conviction.  
8. Counselling and awareness 
8.1 Apart from legislation to effectively curb honour related crimes, it is 
equally important that the steps should be taken to organise counselling 
programmes for the village communities, for instance to explain to them that 
sagotra marriages are not oppose d to law, religion ‘sadachar’ or medical 
science.  I n the initial stages, social workers and volunteers may not be  in a 
position to accomplish this  task as there may meet stiff resistance and they 

 
 24 
 
may not able to build up much needed tru st.  The spiritual or religious 
leaders or respected elderly persons like retired  officials and political 
personalities, members of legal profession,  teachers, etc., can be requested to 
address the village gatherings and explain to them the real position a nd the 
need to shed superstition an d abominable practices.  S o also the services of 
medical practitioners of repute should be utilised by the official establishment 
to convince the people that the sagotra marriages do not have any adverse 
effects on the he alth and well -being of the couple or progeny.  Side by side, 
discourses on electronic media by respected persons  and scholars should be 
organised. Media too can play very useful role in shaping the mindset of the 
people concerned.  So also, the District an d Taluqa Legal Services bodies can 
undertake this task through appropriate means. 
9. Registration of marriage 
9.1 In order to avoid unnecessary hassles and harassment from external 
sources directed against the couple who are intending to marry and even their 
family members who would like to go according to their wishes, it is desirable 
that the procedure under the Special Marriage Act is simplified. The time gap 
between the date of giving notice of marriage and the registration should be 
removed and the e ntire process of registration of marriage should be 
expedited. The domicile restriction should also be removed. We are aware , 
that already an amendment is proposed to the Special Marriage Act by the 
Government of India by introducing a Bill in the Parliame nt.  It is, therefore, 

 
 25 
 
not necessary to make a detailed study and give specific recommendation on 
this aspect. 
10. A recent Supreme Court Judgment, Re: Death sentence 
10.1 Before we conclude this Report, we would like to refer to one recent 
decision of the  Supreme Court wherein a direction of far reaching 
consequences has been given by the Supreme Court while laying down the 
proposition that the so -called honour killing come s within the category of 
rarest of the rare cases deserving death punishment.   It w as observed “this is 
necessary as a deterrent for such outrageous, uncivilized behaviour.  All 
persons who are planning to perpetrate ‘honour killing’ should know that the 
gallows await them”.  This decision in Bhagwan Das Vs. State (NCT of Delhi ) 
[(2011) 6 SCC 396 ] as well as the decision in Arumugam Servai (supra) were 
rendered by the same Bench.  A copy of the judgment was directed to be sent 
to all the High Courts who shall circulate the same to all the Sessions Judges.  
Following this judgment, in the recent times, as seen from the newspaper 
reports, almost all the accused in the so -called honour killing murder cases 
were sentenced to death by the Sessions Courts in U.P. and Delhi.  With great 
respect, we are constrained to say that such a blanket direc tion given by the 
Supreme Court making death sentence a rule in “honour killings” cases, 
makes a departure from the principles firmly entrenched in our criminal 
jurisprudence by virtue of a series of decisions rendered by larger Benches of 

 
 26 
 
Supreme Court, for e.g. Bachan Singh Vs. State of Punjab 5  and Machhi Singh 
Vs. State of Punjab 6.  It is settled law that aggravating and mitigating 
circumstances should be weighed and it is only in very exceptional and rare 
cases, death sentence should be imposed.  Death  sentence, in other words, is 
a last resort.  Further, where there is more than one accused, the degree of 
participation and culpability may vary.  It is needless to emphasis that each 
case must be judged by the facts and circumstances emerging in that cas e.  
No hard and fast rule can be laid down in the light of the Supreme Court’s 
consistent approach towards death sentence vs. life imprisonment issue.  This 
judgment in the case of Bhagwan Das is bound to create uncertainty in the 
state of law and we are s ure that in the near future, the correctness of such 
proposition will be tested by a larger Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
11. Summary of Recommendations 
11.1 In order to keep a check on the high -handed and unwarranted 
interference by the caste assemblie s or panchayats with sagotra, inter-caste 
or inter -religious marriages, which are otherwise lawful, this legislation has 
been proposed so as to prevent the acts endangering the liberty of the couple 
married or intending to marry and their family members. I t is considered 
necessary that there should be a threshold bar against the congregation or 
assembly for the purpose of disapproving such marriage / intended marriage 
and the conduct of the young couple.  The members gathering for such 
                                                
5  (1980) 2 SCC 684 
6  AIR 1983 SC 957 

 
 27 
 
purpose, i.e., for co ndemning the marriage with a view to take necessary 
consequential action, are to be treated as members of unlawful assembly for 
which a mandatory minimum punishment has been prescribed. 
11.2 So also the acts of endangerment of liberty including social boyc ott, 
harassment, etc. of the couple or their family members are treated as offences 
punishable with mandatory minimum sentence. The acts of criminal 
intimidation by members of unlawful assembly or others acting at their 
instance or otherwise are also made punishable with mandatory minimum 
sentence.  
11.3 A presumption that a person participating in an unlawful assembly 
shall be presumed to have also intended to commit or abet the commission of 
offences under the proposed Bill is provided for in Section 6. 
11.4 Power to prohibit the unlawful assemblies and to take preventive 
measures are conferred on the Sub -Divisional / District Magistrate.  Further, 
a SDM/DM is enjoined to receive a request or information from any person 
seeking protection from the assembly  of persons or members of any family 
who are likely to or who have been objecting to the lawful marriage. 
11.5 The provisions of this proposed Bill are without prejudice to the 
provisions of Indian Penal Code.  Care has been taken, as far as possible, to 
see that there is no overlapping with the provisions of the general penal law.  
In other words, the criminal acts other than those specifically falling under 
the proposed Bill are punishable under the general penal law. 

 
 28 
 
11.6 The offence will be tried by a C ourt of Session in the district and the 
offences are cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable. 
11.7 Accordingly, the Prohibition of Interference with the Freedom of 
Matrimonial Alliances Bill 20___ has been prepared in order to effectively 
check the existing social malady. 
 
[Justice (Retd.) P. V. Reddi] 
Chairman 
                   
 
    
[Justice (Retd.) Shiv Kumar Sharma]   [Amarjit Singh] 
         Member             Member 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 29 
 
 
Annexure – I 
[Refer para 2.7 of the Report] 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE PROHIBITION  OF INTERFERENCE WITH 
THE FREEDOM OF MATRIMONIAL 
ALLIANCES BILL, 20__ 
A 
  
Bill 
 
         to provide for, in the interests of protecting 
individual liberty and preventing victimization,  
prohibition of unlawful assemblies and other 
conduct interfering  with the freedom of 
matrimonial alliances in the name of honour and 
tradition and for the matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto; 
 
    Be it enacted  by Parliament in the Sixty -second  
Year of the Republic of India as follows: - 
 
 
 
 1. (1) This Ac t may be called the Prohibition of 
Unlawful Assembly (Interference with the 
Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances) Act, 20__. 
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date 
as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates 
may be appointed for different States. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 30 
 
 
 2. (1) No person or any group of persons shall 
gather, assemble or congre gate at any time with 
the view or intention of condemning any 
marriage, not prohibited by law, on the basis that 
such marriage has dishonoured the caste or 
community tradition or brought disrepute to all 
or any of the persons forming part of the 
assembly o r the family or the people of the 
locality concerned. 
 
Explanation 1: ‘Marriage’ shall include a proposed 
or intended marriage. 
Explanation 2: The words ‘gather’, ‘assemble’ or 
‘congregate’ would include acting in concert 
through the use of any technologic al means or 
mediums. 
 
(2) Such gathering or assembly or congregation 
shall be treated unlawful and every person 
convening or organizing such assembly and every 
member thereof participating therein  directly or 
indirectly shall be punishable with imprisonmen t 
for a term of not less than six months but which 
may extend to one year and shall also be liable to 
fine up to ten thousand rupees. 
  
Unlawful 
Assembly. 
 3.(1)  The members of such unlawful assembly 
who in furtherance thereof  individually or 
collectively counsel, exhort or bring pressure 
openly or otherwise upon any person or persons 
to prevent or disapprove of the marriage which is 
objected to by the said members or to generate an 
environment  of hostility towards such couple or 
either of them or their relatives or supporters shall 
be deemed to have acted in endangerment of their 
liberty and such an act of endangerment shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a period of not 
less than one year and extending upto two years 
and fine extending to twenty thousand rupees. 
(2) Any other person acting at the instance of any 
member of unlawful assembly or otherwise 
Endangerment 
of Liberty. 

 
 31 
 
indulging in the acts of endangerment of liberty 
shall also be punishable likewise. 
Explanation: ‘Endangerment of liberty’  shall 
include the acts calculated to lead to social boycott 
or enforcement of social sanctions and in 
particular the following acts: 
(i)  Bringing to bear pressure on the couples or 
their family or relatives to leave the village 
or area of residence concerned; 
(ii)  Indulging in any conduc t which will 
impede or is likely to impede, access to 
markets, community facilities, places of 
worship or any other necessities of life. 
(iii)  Divesting or dispossessing the couple or 
their family of any land or property 
belonging to them. 
(iv)  Any other act of har assment whether 
physical or mental. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 
1860 
4.  Any member or members of an unlawful 
assembly or any other person acting at their 
instance or otherwise who, with a view to secure 
compliance with the illegal decision of th at 
assembly in relation to the marriage that is being 
objected to, indulges in criminal intimidation of 
the couple or either of them or their relatives or 
supporters shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term of not less than one year 
but which may e xtend to three years and shall 
also be liable to fine up to thirty thousand rupees 
provided that if the threat be to cause harm or 
injury of the description referred to in second part 
of Section 506 IPC, the maximum punishment 
shall extend to seven years o f imprisonment 
instead of three years and fine extending to thirty 
thousand rupees. 
Explanation: The expression ‘criminal 
intimidation’ shall have the same meaning as is 
given in section 503 of the Indian Penal Code. 
 
Criminal 
Intimidation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. The provisions in Sections 2, 3 and 4 shall 
be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions in the Indian Penal Code, and is 
further clarified that the specific offences under 
the above provisions shall be punishable under 
this Act, regardless of punishment for any 
corresponding offence under any other law. 
 
Provisions of 
IPC 
remain 
unaffected  
 6.      Every person participating in an unlawful 
assembly, shall be presumed to have also 
intended to commit or abet the commission of 
offences under Section 3 and 4 of the Act. 
 
Presumption. 
 7.  In the Representation of the People Act,1951, in  
section 8, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the 
following shall be inserted, namely :- 
 
“(d) any provision of the Prohibition of Unlawful 
Assembly (Interference with the Freedom of 
Matrimonial Alliances) Act, 20__.” 
Amendment of 
Act 43 of 1951. 
 8. Power to prohibit certain acts and the duty 
of authorities to take preventive measures. 
[a] The sub -divisional Magistrate or District 
Magistrate sha ll receive any request or 
information from any person or persons seeking 
protection from any assembly of persons or from 
members of any family who are likely to or who 
have been objecting  to any lawful marriage. 
[b] Where the SDM or District Magistrate 
receives information from any source that there is 
a likelihood of convening of an assembly openly 
or in secrecy to condemn as objectionable any 
marriage proposed or solemnized, he shall, by 
order prohibit the convening of such assembly 
Power to 
prohibit certain 
acts and taking 
preventive 
measures. 

 
 33 
 
and doing of any act towards the commission of 
any offence under this Act by any person in any 
area specified in the order. 
[c] The SDM or District Magistrate may take 
such steps as may be necessary to give effect to 
such order including giving appropriate 
directions to the police authorities concerned. 
[d] The SDM or District Magistrate shall also 
take such steps as may be necessary to ensure the 
safety of the persons targeted pursuant to the 
illegal decision taken by the unlawful assembly. 
[e] The SDM or the District Magistra te shall be 
in direct supervision of the protection and safety 
of the persons concerned. 
[f] Every official called upon to act in terms of 
the above provisions shall be accountable for their 
lapses, omissions or failures and the State 
Government shall prov ide for and take such 
action against them as may be deemed fit for their 
lapses, omissions or failure to act. 
 9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, all offences under 
this Act shall be triable by the Court of Sessions 
presided over by the  District and Session Judge 
or any other Sessions Court presided over by an 
officer of the rank of Sessions Judge or Additional 
Session Judge in the district concerned a s may be 
specified by the High Court in a notification.  
 
(2) The Court of Sessions so notified may take 
cognizance of any offence without the accused 
being committed to it for trial upon receiving a 
complaint of facts which constitutes such offence, 
or upon a police report of such facts. 
 
Trial of offences 
under this Act. 
 10. (1)  When trying any offence under this Act, 
the notified  Court of Sessions  may also try any 
other offence with which the accused may, under 
the Code, be charged at the same trial  if the 
offence is connected with such other offence. 
 
(2) If, in the course of any trial of any offence 
Power of 
Special Court 
with respect to 
other offences. 
 
 
 

 
 34 
 
under this Act, it is found that the accused person 
has committed any other offence under this Act or 
any other law, the  notified Court may convict 
such person also of such other offence and pass 
appropriate sentence authorized by that law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11. Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, all offences under 
this Act shall be cognizable, non - bailable and 
non-compoundable. 
 
Offences to be 
cognizable, 
non-bailable 
and non - 
compoundable. 
 

 
 35 
 
 
THE PROHIBITION OF UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY (INTERFERENCE 
WITH THE FREEDOM OF MATRIMONIAL ALLIANCES) BILL, 2011  
 
[An Act to deal with conduct endangering life and liberty of persons in 
matrimonial alliances] 
 
Statement of Objects and Reasons: 
 
 There has been a spurt in illegal intimidation by self appointed 
bodies for bringing pressure against Sagotra marriages and inter -caste, 
inter-community and inter -religious marriages between two consenting 
adults in the name of vindicating the honour of family, caste or 
community.  In a number of cases, such bodies have resorted to 
incitement of violence and such newly married or couples desirous of 
getting married have been subjected to intimidation and violence which 
has also resulted into their being hounded out of their homes and 
sometimes even murdered.   Although such intimidation or acts of 
violence constitute offences under Indian Penal Cod e, yet, it is necessary 
to prevent assemblies which take plac e to condemn such alliances  and to 
prescribe more severe punishment for such intimidatory or violent acts or 
acts imperiling the liberty of individual .  This Act is, therefore, enacted to 
nip the evil in the bud and to prevent spreading of hatred or incitement of 
violence through such gatherings.  The Act is designed to constitute 
special offences against such assemblies and is in addition to other 
offences under the Indian Penal Code.  
 
 

 
 36 
 
Annexure – II 
[Refer para 2.7 of the Report] 
 
Sub: Unlawful interference of Caste Panchayats etc.with marriages  
                   in the name of honour: A suggested legislative framework  
 
Consultation paper 
1. Incidents of murder and other grave offences committe d against 
persons marrying or proposing to marry sagotras or outside their 
castes/religions are periodically reported.  It is learnt that number of cases 
goes unreported for fear of reprisals or cascading effects.  The intervention 
of caste/community assem blies in the name of ‘Khap Panchayats’, ‘Katta 
Panchayats’  etc. in the occurrence of these offences and other related 
incidents involving serious life and liberty consequences, are frequently 
noticed.  Such assemblies gathered on caste lines assume to the mselves the 
power and authority to declare on and deal with ‘objectionable’ 
matrimonies and exhibit least regard for life and liberty and are not 
deterred by the processes of administration of justice.  The penal law lacks 
direct application to the illegal  acts of such caste assemblies and needs to 
be amended. Meanwhile innocent youth are harassed and victimized while 
such assemblies continue to wield unhindered authority and also seem to 
resist any suggestion of being subjected to any social control.  
2. The pernicious practice of Khap Panchayats and the like taking law 
into their own hands and pronouncing on the invalidity and impropriety of 
Sagotra and inter -caste marriages and handing over punishment to the 
couple and pressurizing the family members to ex ecute their verdict by any 
means amounts to flagrant violation of rule of law and invasion of personal 
liberty of the persons affected. 

 
 37 
 
3. Sagotra marriages are not prohibited by law, whatever may be the 
view in olden times.   The Hindu Marriage Disabiliti es Removal Act, 1946 
was enacted with a view to dispel any doubts in this regard.  The Act 
expressly declared the validity of marriages between the Hindus belonging 
to the same ‘gotra’ or ‘pravara’ or different sub -divisions of same caste. 
The Hindu Marriage Act does not prohibit sagotra or inter-caste marriages.  
4. The views of village elders or family elders cannot be forced on the 
willing couple and no one has a right to use force or impose far -reaching 
sanctions in the name of vindicating community hon our or family honour.  
There are reports that drastic action including wrongful confinement, 
persistent harassment, mental torture,  infliction of  severe bodily harm  is 
resorted to either by close relations or some third parties against the so -
called err ing couple either on the exhortations of some or all the 
Panchayatdars or with their connivance. Social boycotts and other illegal 
sanctions affecting the young couple, the families and even a section of 
local inhabitants are quite often resorted to. The c umulative effect of all 
such acts have also public order dimensions.  
5. In a very recent case – Arumugam Servai vs. State of Tamil Nadu  
[reported in (2011) 6 SCC 405], the Supreme Court strongly deprecated the 
practice of khap/katta panchayats taking law into their own  hands and 
indulging in offensive activities which endanger the personal lives of the 
persons marrying according to their choice.  
6. Some proposals are being mooted proposing amendments to Section 
300 I.P.C. by way of including what is calle d ‘Honour Killing’ as murder 
and shifting the burden of proof to the accused.  These proposals have been 
studied.   The views from various quarters at an informal level have also 

 
 38 
 
been ascertained.  After a preliminary examination of these and certain 
other models of law, a broad framework of proposed law to deal with the 
situation has been prepared and annexed herewith. The views of the public 
are invited with reference thereto. 
Draft Legislation (enclosed) 
7. The idea underlying the aforesaid provisions is  that there must be a 
threshold bar against congregation or assembly for the purpose of 
discussing on and objecting to the conduct of young persons of 
marriageable age marrying according to their choice, the ground of 
objection being that they belong to th e same gotra or to different castes or 
communities.  The Panchayatdars or caste elders have no right to interfere 
with the life and liberty of such young couples whose marriages are 
permitted by law and they cannot create a situation whereby such couples 
are placed in a hostile environment in the village/locality concerned and 
exposed to the risk of safety.  Such highhanded acts have a tendency to 
create social tensions and disharmony too. No frame of mind or belief 
based on social hierarchy can claim immun ity from social control and 
regulation, in so far as such beliefs manifest themselves as agents of 
enforcement of right and wrong. The very assembly for an unlawful 
purpose viz. disapproving the marriage which is otherwise within the 
bounds of law and taki ng consequential action should be treated as an 
offence as it has the potential to endanger the lives and liberties of 
individuals concerned.(Italic part has been added by Hon’ble Chairman)  
8. The proposed law is not in derogation of the provisions of Indi an 
Penal Code which can take care of various offences of serious nature 

 
 39 
 
perpetrated by the members of caste panchayats in prosecution of their 
unlawful objective. 
9. The Commission is prima facie of the view that there is no need for 
introducing a provisio n in Section 300 IPC in order to bring the so -called 
‘honour killings’ within the ambit of this provision.  The existing 
provisions in IPC are adequate enough to take care of the situations leading 
to overt acts of killing or causing bodily harm to the tar geted person who 
allegedly undermined the honour of the caste or community. The motive 
behind killing a person does not furnish real justification to introduce a 
separate provision in section 300, as is contemplated to be done under the 
proposed Bill (as p ublished in the newspapers).   Probably, the addition of 
such clause may create confusion and interpretational difficulties.  
10. Further, shifting the onus on to the accused facing accusations of 
involvement in the serious offence of murder etc or abetment  thereof is not 
desirable.   Such a move will be against the cardinal principles of 
jurisprudence accepted and absorbed into our criminal justice system.  If 
burden of proof has to be shifted in such a case, logically, it will have to be 
done in a large nu mber of other heinous crimes.   A holistic approach is 
called for and any attempt to drastically expand the rigour of criminal 
procedure to cope up with ad hoc  situations may be counter -productive.  
The introduction of such a drastic provision needs to be avoided.   As an 
alternative to this, the Commission is of the prima facie  view that a 
presumption could be raised in respect of commission of the prohibited acts 
in clauses 3 and 4 of the proposed Bill, if he or she is a member of an 
unlawful assembly convened for the purpose of discussing and condemning 
the perfectly legal conduct of a young couple – married or intending to 

 
 40 
 
marry. This is necessary having regard to the fact that the task of 
identification of roles that may be played by one or more members  of 
assembly, is difficult to accomplish as the eyewitnesses may not be willing 
to depose and the circumstantial evidence will not be strong enough to 
implicate the guilty.   In such a situation, the presumption as envisaged by 
clause 6 will assume a significant role. 
 
11. In this context, the Commission feels that the analogy sought to be 
drawn from the provisions of the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 
1987 is not appropriate for more than one reason.  ‘Sati’ is a barbaric, 
deeply entrenched social ev il which was prevalent in certain parts of the 
country.   The magnitude and seriousness of that evil cannot be compared 
to the problem on hand.  More important, the offence of ‘Sati’ always 
remained an open affair with all the rituals and ceremonies attach ed to it 
and the persons actively participating therein could be identified without 
difficulty.   The accusations in such cases are based on solid evidence.  
 
 The Law Commission of India would like to receive responses to 
this Paper preferably within 4 wee ks which can be sent post or email at lci-
dla@nic.in. 
  
The website of Commission http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in  
Postal Address: LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 2nd Floor,  The Indian Law 
Institute Building (Opp. Supreme Court), Bhagwandas Road, New Delhi - 110 001 
Fax: 23383564 

 
 41 
 
 
 Annexure to Consultation Paper 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE PROHIBITION  OF UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY 
(INTERFERENCE WITH THE FREEDOM OF 
MATRIMONIAL ALLIANCES) BILL , 2011 
A  
Bill 
 
         to provide for, in the interests of protecting individual 
liberty and preventing victimization,  prohibition of unlawful 
assemblies aimed at interference with the freedom of 
matrimonial alliances in the name of   honour and tradition 
and for the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; 
 
    Be it enacted  by Parliament in the Sixty -second  Year of 
the Republic of India as follows: - 
 
 
 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Unlawful 
Assembly (Interference with the F reedom of Matrimonial 
Alliances) Act, 2011. 
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different States. 
 
Short title, extent 
and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. (1) No person or any group of persons shall gather, 
assemble or congregate at any time with the view or intention 
to deliberate on, or condemn any marriage, not prohibited by 
law, on the basis that such marriage has dishonoured the 
caste or community tradition or brought disrepute to all or 
any of the persons forming part of the assembly or the family 
or the people of the locality concerned. 
Unlawful 
Assembly. 

 
 42 
 
 
Explanation: ‘Marriage’ shall include a proposed or intended 
marriage. 
 
(2) Such gathering or assembly or congregation shall be 
treated as an unlawful assembly and every person convening 
or organizing such assembly and every member thereof 
participating therein s hall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term of not less than six months but which may be 
extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine up to ten 
thousand rupees. 
  
 3. Any member of an unlawful assembly who alone or in 
association with other such members counsels, exhorts or 
brings pressure upon any person or persons so as to prevent, 
or  disapprove of the marriage which is objected to by the 
said members of the unlawful assembly, or creates an 
environment of hostility towards such couple or either of 
them or their relatives or supporters, shall be deemed to have 
acted in endangerment of  their  liberty and such  an act of 
endangerment  shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term of not less than one year but which may exte nd to two 
years and shall also be liable to fine up to twenty thousand 
rupees. 
 
Endangerment of 
Liberty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 1860 
4. (1) Any member of an unlawful assembly who, with a 
view to secure compliance with the illegal decision of that 
assembly in relation to the marriage that is being objected to, 
indulges in criminal intimidation of the couple or either of 
them or their relatives or supporters shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term of not less than one year but which 
may extend to three ye ars and shall also be liable to fine up 
to thirty thousand rupees provided that if the threat be to 
cause harm or injury of the description referred to in second 
part of Section 506 IPC, the maximum punishment shall 
extend to seven years of imprisonment in stead of three years 
and fine extending to thirty thousand rupees. 
 
Explanation: The expression ‘criminal intimidation’ shall 
have the same meaning as is given in section 503 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 
 
Criminal 
Intimidation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. The provis ions in Sections 2, 3 and 4 shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the provisions in the 
Indian Penal Code. 
 
Provisions of IPC 
remain unaffected  

 
 43 
 
 6.      In a prosecution under section 3 or section 4, if it is 
found that any accused person part icipated or continued to 
participate in an unlawful assembly, the Court shall presume 
that he intended and decided to take all necessary steps to put 
into effect the decision of unlawful assembly including the 
commission of acts referred to in Sections 3 and 4. 
 
Presumption. 
 7.  In the Representation of the People Act,1951, in  section 
8, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following shall be 
inserted, namely :- 
 
“(d) any provision of the Prohibition of Unlawful Assembly 
(Interference with the Freed om of Matrimonial Alliances) 
Act, 2011.” 
 
Amendment of Act 
43 of 1951. 
 8. (1) Where the Collector or District Magistrate receives 
information that there is a likelihood of convening of an 
unlawful assembly, he shall, by order, prohibit the convening 
of a ny such assembly and doing of any act towards the 
commission of any offence under this Act by any person in 
any area specified in the order. 
 
(2)  The Collector or District Magistrate may take such steps 
as may be necessary to give effect to such order, in cluding 
giving of appropriate directives to the police authorities. 
 
(3)  The Collector or District Magistrate shall also take such 
steps as may be necessary to ensure the safety of the persons 
targeted pursuant to the illegal decision taken by the 
unlawful assembly. 
 
Power to prohibit 
certain acts. 
 9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, all offences under this Act shall be 
triable by a Special Court constituted under a notification 
issued in the official gazette and the special court shall be 
presided over by an officer of the rank of Sessions Judge or 
Addl. Sessions Judge.  
 
(2) The State Government shall in consultation with the High 
Court constitute one or more Special Courts for the trial of 
offences under this Ac t and every Special Court shall 
exercise jurisdiction in respect of the whole or such part of 
the State as may be specified in the notification. 
 
Trial of offences 
under this Act. 
 10. (1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any offence, 
without the ac cused being committed to it for trial, upon 
Procedure and 
power of Special 

 
 44 
 
receiving a complaint   of facts which constitute such 
offence, or upon a police report of such facts. 
 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Special 
Court shall, for the purpose of the trial of any offence, have 
all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such 
offence as if it were a Court of Session, so far as may be, in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure for trial before a Court of Session. 
 
Court. 
 11. (1)  When trying any offence under this Act, a Special 
Court may also try any other offence with which the accused 
may, under the Code, be charged at the same trial if the 
offence is connected with such other offence. 
 
(2) If, in the course of any trial of any offence under this Act, 
it is found that the accused person has committed any other 
offence under this Act or any other law, the  Special Court 
may convict such person also of such other offence and pass 
any sentence authorized by this Act or such other law for the 
punishment thereof. 
 
Power of Special 
Court with respect 
to other offences. 
 12. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, all offences under this Act shall be 
cognizable, non- bailable and non-compoundable. 
 
Offences to be 
cognizable, non -
bailable and non - 
compoundable. 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 

 
 45 
 
 
Annexure to Consultation Paper 
 
         Prohibition of Interference with Matrimonial  
 Alliances In The Name of Honour and Tradition Bill  
 
Statement of Objects and Reasons 
 There has been a spurt in illegal intimidation by self -appointed bodies for 
bringing pressure against Sagotra marriages and inter -caste, inter-community and 
inter-religious marriages between two consenting adults in the name of 
vindicating the honour of family, caste or community.  In a number of cases, such 
bodies have resorted to incitement of violence and such newly married or couples 
desirous of getting married have been subjected to intimidation and violence 
which has also re sulted into their being hounded out of their homes and 
sometimes even murdered.  Although such intimidation or acts of violence 
constitute offences under the Indian Penal Code, yet, it is necessary to prevent 
assemblies which take place to condemn such all iances.  This Bill is therefore, 
proposed to nip the evil in the bud and to prevent spreading of hatred or 
incitement to violence through such gatherings.  The Bill is designed to constitute 
special offences against such assemblies, in addition to other of fences under the 
Indian Penal Code. 

 
 46 
 
Annexure – III 
[Refer para 7.1 of the Report] 
 
List of respondents who responded on the Consultation Paper on Unlawful 
Interference of Caste Panchayats etc. with marriages in the name of honour: A 
suggested legislative framework. 
  
1. Government of Mizoram, Home Department.  
 
2. Renu Mishra, Programme Co-ordinator, AALI. 
 
3. Pradeep Singh, New Delhi. 
 
4.       Dr. Tarunabh Khaitan, Fellow in Law, Christ Church, Oxford. 
 
5.       Dr. Surajit C. Mukhopadhyay, Registrar, The W.B. Na tional 
University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkatta. 
 
6.       Government of Madhya Pradesh, Law & Legislative Dept., Bhopal 
 
7.       Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, Home Dept., 
New Delhi 
 
8.       Government of Odisha, Law Dept. 
 
9.       Maj. Gen. Nilendra Kumar, Director, Amity University, Amity Law 
School, Noida, Uttar Pradesh. 
 
10.   Government of Maharashtra, Law & Judiciary Dept., Mumbai. 
 
11.   Government of Sikkim, Home Dept., Gangtok. 
 
12.   Government of Manipur, Law & Legislative Affairs Dept. 
 